

PRICE ONE SHILLING.
PHILIPS’
EMIGRANTS’ GUIDE
TO
AUSTRALIA,
CONTAINING
THE FULLEST PARTICULARS RELATING TO THE RECENTLY-
DISCOVERED GOLD-FIELDS, THE GOVERNMENT REGU-
LATIONS FOR GOLD SEEKING, ETC.
WITH A NEW MAP OF THE GOLD-FIELDS,
thv ra&mk tJimwertrs af Mr. ffargnm*, Mr* Jimi&r,
i&H). tr, C&ri'fy «nrf
BY JOHN CAPPER
fcATK tumit Of SUM "PIUMKM'






PHILIPS’
EMIGRANTS’ GUIDE
TO
AUSTRALIA,
CONTAININU
Tilt) mifiLKST PAimoiIIiAUH KMLATIKG TO TUN UKOKNTU
DLSCOVKItMI) OOUI-FIMLDS, TUN (iOVHUNMNNT lIKOIL
NATIONS FOB, IiOLU MISHKIN 0, MTO,
WITH A NEW MAP OF THE GOLD-FIELDS,
CmjipWflßjtf the recent Dhcovcvics of Mr. Itarsrai'cs s M\\ Hunter,
Jin'. U r . Clark, anil others*
BY JOHN CAPPER,
I.ATH BOlTOtt Olf Till 2 u BMIOftANTS' JOUttMAL.”
LI VEIIP 0 0 L :
CUSOUOffi PIIIL I P AND SON.
LONDON : J. a. BISHOP.
JOHN MKNZU3H, IUMNBUUUH. W, I4OKKUTNON, IHIIIMK.
i{. nrni’iTN and po., ppahnow.
[HK2.


PREFACE.
Tnu intcnso interest taken by almost every class of society
in all that relates to Australia and the doings, or rather
“ diggings ” of its colonists, renders any attempt at dif-
fusing practical information upon such matters, at once
important and acceptable. Hence in sending forth the
present “ Guido to the Australian Colonies ” it is felt that
little if any apology, or explanation, is needed.
The majority of the present generation may easily re-
member the “great South Laud” as containing bid, one
or two small penal settlements, —as a remote region of
desert, unfriendly soil, difficult; of access, oll'eriug no
inducements to settlers, and tempting none but the must
wretched to visit its shores. It was, in fact, at no further
date than thirty years since a plane of crime, of chains
and stripes, a vast Jail in the wilderness, a criminal lazar-
liouae at the antipodes, a voyage to which was as much
dreaded, as would have been a trip to Siberia or Russian
Tartary. The same generation that remember all lids,
now regard that country, and justly so, as a laud flowing
with something better than “milk and honey,”—a region
rich beyond exaggeration in gold, copper, and limber, —
prolific to profusion iu its yield of corn, wool, wine, and
oil, —teeming with safe and commodious harbours for ship-
ping,—-with endless regions of richest grass-lands and
fertile grain-soil,—with vast forests of valuable woods
n


sufficient to supply all the world with shipping for the next
dozen centuries, and, above all this, blessed with a
climate so admirably adapted to the human frame, that
in most parts of the country the profession of a medical
man is a poor and nnneeded ono.
The marvellous tales of boundless wealth, of unceasing
prosperity, of unexampled progress, read almost like some
story of enchantment from the “Arabian Nights.” Yet
they are all true. The bountiful hand of the Creator has
lavished on that "Land of the South” riches more abun-
dant, more diversified, than those found in the onco glo-
rious regions of Mexico and Peru. Fortunately for the
prosperity and happiness of those colonies, the great
crowning discovery of the gold regions was not made until
the many other sources of wealth had been opened up
and developed; so that instead of proving a pregnant
source of evil, as in the case of the Spanish American
settlements, it bids fair to aid in the development of the
more solid advantages of the Australian continent.
Impressed with the important character of the subject,
the compiler of this " Guide” has entered on his task with
a desire to lay before the reader all that is really worthy
of being known, divested of every particle of unnecessary
matter, and within a convenient space. In doing this he
has endeavoured to adopt a terse and simple style, winch
it is hoped may prove intelligible to the most humble
capacity,—to the youngest of the intending emigrant’s
family.


CONTENTS,
I'llfiC.
CHAPTER I.
sketch of Tins obeat Australian land, its features
AND ITS lUSTOIIY • 7
CHAPTER 11.
NEW SOUTH WALKS, ITS BISI3, PKOOEESS, AND PRESENT
CAPABILITIES, WITH A FULL ACCOUNT OF ITS (lOI.D-
-CHAPTER 111.
SOUTH AUSTHAI.IA, ITS CONDITION AND PROSPECTS FOB
CAPITALISTS AND LABOURERS 31
CHAPTER XV.
VIOTOIIIA, Oil TOUT PHILLIP, ITS RAPID OUOWTII AS A HIIAZ-
INO COLONY, AND lIS MARVELLOUS COLD BEOIOHH . . 17
CHAPTER V.
WHO SHOULD KSIIOUATIi, AND HOW ; WITH A FHW WOIIDH
TO THOSE WHO HAD HIJTTIiB REMAIN AT HOME . . . 5'J
CHAPTER VI.
GENERAL INFORMATION TO EMIGRANTS OF AU, CLASSES I
Till! OUFIT, —THE PASSAGE, —THE ABBIVAL .... 70
CHAPTER VII.
LIFE AT THE COLD DIOUINOH. BIiIJUIBBMKNIS OF A DMIWEB,
WITH THE lIOVKBNMBNT BULKS AND WiIIUI.ATIONH IN
FOUOE AT THE OOLD-FIELDS 70


THE EMIGRANTS’
GUIDE TO AUSTRALIA.
CHAPTER I.
SKETCH OF THE GREAT AUSTRALIAN LAND, ITS FEATURES
AND ITS HISTORY.
Bbi'oiib proceeding to any details respecting the separate
colonies of Australia, it will bo well to place the reader
in possession of a general knowledge of the vast tract of
land on which they arc situated, the more especially, since
in many respects they strongly resemble cacli other, so
that an outline of the natural features of the whole will
stand good for them individually.
The island-continent, or, ns it has been termed, tho fifth
quarter of the globe, which bears the general name of
Australia, is tho centre, and by far tho largest, of a group
of islands laying between the South Pacific and the Indian
Oceans. They arc situated to the south-east of Asia, and
hence arc called collectively, Austral-Asia.
Australia proper is not only the largest of these lands,
bul, with the exception of the four quarters or continents
n 2


of tho world, the most oxtousive of any known tracts. 11
will be found on the lower right side of the map of the
world, between 10° and 40° of latitude south of the equa-
tor, and 118° and 15‘F of west longitude. By looking at
the map accompanying this, it will be at once seen bow
compact in form, though irregular, is this enormous island;
its very irregularities, too, are an advantage, for they form
most commodious harbours for large ships. The greatest
breadth of Australia is, from cast to west, a little south
of the Tropic of Capricorn, whore it measures 2700 miles,
while at the wider part, north and south, the distance is
about 2000 miles.
The actual contents of this country are, therefore, little
less than throe millions of square miles, not far short of
the size of Europe, and quite ten times the extent of
Canada. Some of our readers may perhaps form a more
perfect idea of its size, if we say that it contains about
two thousand millions of square acres of laud. We do
not by any means intend to signify that in Australia there
is this vast number of acres ready for the plough or the
scythe. In every country, even as we (hid here, there are
largo tracts of laud unprofitable, or partly so; in short,
barren soil or rooky hills. The Australian continent has its
Salisbury Plains, its Grampian Hills, and its peaty swamps,
some of considerable extent; yet, if wo allow for nil those,
one-half of tho whole extent of country, we shall still have
left for profitable use, regions fully twelve l imes as largo
as Great Britain and Ireland, a country quite wullloieut to
give ample means of support to all tho unemployed popu-
lation of (ho mother land for centuries vci to come.


Of the interior of Australia, that is beyond five hundred
miles from the sea coast, but little is as yet known, except
where an exploring party has ventured to make what is
termed the overland journey from Adelaide to Sydney.
The description, therefore, now given must be understood
as applying to the regions bordering the coasts for five or
six hundred miles inland.
Beautiful as is the scenery, diversified with ranges of
lofty hills, far-sproading forests, and numerous rivers, the
size of these is far less than might have been expected
from the extent and richness of the country. The forests,
though containing trees of far greater size than any in
England, and little inferior to the largest growing in the
wilds of America, are yet not nearly so dense, nor so
extensive as most of those on the western continent.
The mountain ranges, in no instance, reach to a greater
height than about 6500 foot, whilst but few are more than
0000 feet above the level of the sea, most of them being
considerably lower.
The rivers are small generally, and uncertain in their
course, very few of them being navigable for many miles;
and from the nature of the country, through which they
take their course, liable to floodings during the rainy
season, and extreme shallowness in the dry months. The
principal rivers are the Maoquarrie, the Hawkesbury, the
Hunter, the Hastings, the Nepean and the Darling on
the east coast: the Swan on the west ; and the Murray,
the Mnrmmbidgee, the Hiiidmarsh, aud the Glenelg on
the south. These yield abundance of cod, eels, and perch,
as well as of fish known only by native names. Along the
n 3


coasts tiro found many very excellent fish, .such as oysters,
Whitehall, lobsters, &c., whilst some of the waters, in (he
vicinity of the shore, contain whales and seals in autlieieul
abundance to give employment to many vessels,
In birds the country is extremely rich, many of them
being of groat beauty, especially the parrots and eoeka-
toos. Moons, eagles, hawks, magpies, crows, ami other
birds common to European (dimes arc in abundance; there
is also the emu, a bird closely resembling the ostrich.
Water fowl are rather scarce.
Although the horse, sheep, goat, pig, and other animals,
have been introduced from Europe with the most success-
ful results, the animals indigenous to the country are lew
and of little value; these are the kangaroo, the opossum,
the wild dog, and the rat. The same remarks will apply
to the eatable fruits natural to the soil; they are very few
and scarcely worth mention; yet every fruit and vegetable
known to temperate and tropical climates lias been intro-
duced and cultivated to great perfection, so favourable are
the soil and climate.
Unlike most warm countries there arc very few reptiles;
snakes are neither numerous nor venomous; the guano is
a harmless creature. The most troublesome visitors to
the settlers are the mosquitoes and while ants; the bile of
the former being painful to many persons, whilst the latter
are destructive to clothing, and even furniture.
As regards climate, being so much nearer the eipiator
than this country, Australia is of course considerably
milder; inasmuch as it lays to the smith of the lino, the
seasons are the reverse of ours, that is to say, our summer


time is tlioir winter, whilst their summer is from Novem-
ber to the end of January. The winter season of those
colonics is, however, a very different affair to our own,
seldom lasting longer than three months, and «rot often
cold enough to require fires, except at some of the hill
stations, where alone snow is over known to remain on
tho ground. Extending as this region does over so many
degrees of latitude, it must be evident that those settle-
ments us far south as Port Phillip enjoy a cooler tempera-
ture than those to tho north, or nearer tho lino, suoh as
Swan lliver, or tho northern portion of New South Wales.
In South Australia, which may bo said to possess a me-
dium temperature, the average extremes of heat and cold
are 100 degrees in January, and 48 degrees in June; tho
medium temperature of the mild mouth of April being 05
degrees.
We have already mentioned tho forests of this land.
Tho woods which are there found arc peculiar to tho cli-
mate and soil; yet, although widely differing in nature
from, are in no way inferior to the timber of European
countries. Many trees are of giant growth, without a
branch from the trunk for fifty or sixty feet: these are
very durable and strong, and arc not only most useful for
every description of house building and furniture making,
but admirably adapted to all purposes of ship-building,
In minerals, as is now well known, Australia is moat
rich, inferior to no country in tho world. Until the recent
discoveries of extensive gokl-liclds, copper was the ore in
greatest abundance and of most value. This was ohiolly
found in South Australia, whore there arc some most


valuable mines, yielding princely revenues to llm proprie-
tors, and giving promise of (lie same success lor many
years to come. Iron mid coal have lieeu found, hut nut
extensively worked. There arc also one or two mines iff
load in South Australia, but at present of doubtful value.
Of the gold regions we, shall speak more in detail when
dwelling upon the resources of each separate settlement,
in future chapters.
The outline of the discovery and colonization of Austra-
lia may be thus briefly staled. The world was lirst made
acquainted with the existence of laud in (hut region by
some Dutch navigators, who named it New Holland: no
settlement was, however, made by them; and eventually,
after Captain Cook had visited and reported upon it (o
the British government, possession was taken of it in ihe
name of Great Britain, and the lirst settlement effected
there in the year 17S8. This was for the purpose of con-
fining and employing convicted criminals from the mother
country, whore, the prisons wore, becoming inconveniently
full. The importation of large numbers of prisoners into
the country, whoso labour was to be made of use In any
who would employ them, free of charge, soon attracted
settlors beyond those who accompanied the lirst emigrants,
and spreading around in all directions wherever a line (.rant
of well-watered country presented itself, lids imported
population rapidly throve and increased. The convict
system worked apparently so well, that about (ho year
1803 a second settlement for prisoners was funned on the
island, situated to the south of Australia, known as Van
Pieman’s Land, and, eventually, all criminals sentenced to


a term of punishment exceeding five years wore despatched
to thcso places, culled "'Penal Holtlcmonta.”
In tins maimer the punishment of offenders against the
laws has led indirectly to tho establishment, of what pro-
mises to be the most flourishing and enduring of our colo-
nies; mid although, of late years the presence of a largo
number of emmets in the principal towns has been folt
as au evil, and the system more Hum onoo loudly protested
against, there can ho no denying that it was in the first
instance, and indeed all along, by “convict labour” that
Now South Wales attained its present thriving position.
The home government, yielding to the solicitations of the
colonists, have recently modified this system, and it is
expected that before many years there will no longer bo a
convicted eriminal from the parent land within its limits.
l,u the other settlements of South Australia, Port Phillip
or Victoria and Western Australia, convicts have never
been introduced, although the settlers of the latter place,
feeling a continued scarcity and dearness of labour, have
recently petitioned to have one or two ship loads of con-
victs sent to them.
The individual progress of each of the colonies wo are
treating of, will bo told under the respective chapters to
which they licking; it may suffice lo observe here that by
au ant of parliament passed in 1850, they had the advan-
tages of a constitutional form of government bestowed
upon them, although Hie nomination of Hie governors mid
chief ollicers still remains in Hie hands of the crown. The
local legislature will now lie formed on nearly the same
basis ns that of this country. Hie qualification for a repre


scnlative or a voter, being of course modified to suit ilm
present position of lliosc settlements. Every nude possess
mg afrccliold estate of the- value of it Kill, free of till en-
cumbrances, or in the occupancy of a dwelling-house worlb
JilO a year, or holding a pasture-license lo a like value, is
entitled to vote within his district for a member of the
local parliament. In addition lo these assemblies there
arc municipal corporate bodies, or town commits, for Ihe
management of district business, auoh as the repair of
roads and bridges, lighting of streets, police, Me., all of
which arc formed on similar foundations, and with like
powers to such bodies in this country.
Throughout all the Australian colonies, Ihe Clmreli of
England is recognized as the stale religion, bishops for the
various dioceses having been appointed, with llm usual
establishments. At the same time, nil oilier forms of
Christian worship are not only tolerated Iml aided by
annual grants of money by the local governments.
As tho sales of all crown or public lands are now regu-
lated by one uniform scale, it may not be amiss to state, in
this place how they arc conducted, as Urn same remarks
will apply to all tho colonics. These public sales are ap-
pointed to bo held quarterly, or at oilier regular periods;
all lands intended to be put up for sale must, be first
properly surveyed, and a plan of them exposed to public
inspection, as well as advertised, for throe months pre-
viously. Lauds arc classified under three distinct heads,
more in regard to their position than their actual qualify.
The first class includes all town lota, or ground within llm
boundary of any town existing, or about to bn built. Tim


second class are called suburban lots, comprising such
land as lays ■within five miles of the nearest point of the
town lots. The third class includes all land not coming
within the meaning of the other two classes. The lowest
price at which any land of the poorest quality can be sold
is one pound per acre; but the governor has the discre-
tion of putting up suburban and town lots at as much
above that rate as he pleases. Snob lands as these can
only be sold by public auction, but it is allowed to dispose
by private sale of all third class or country lots, having
been once offered at auction, and remaining unsold; yet
still, at not less than the upset price of one pound per
acre. At snob private sales, the purchase-money must he
paid at once in full; hut at public auctions it is allowed
to pay a deposit of ten per cent., and the remainder within
a month.
There is, however, another system as regards the appro-
priation of waste or unoccupied crown land, which requires
some notice. This is what is termed the “squatting”
system, so called because holders of cattle locate them-
selves upon land beyond the surveyed districts, with no
right, and liable to he at any time dispossessed of their
territory. The origin of this system was in the unwise
raising of the lowest price of crown land from five shillings
to twenty, which took place in 1841. By the new order
of land sales, it was settled that one-half of the proceeds
of suoli sales should be set aside to give free passages to
labouring emigrants from the mother country, and in this
way it was argued, that hut ten shillings were paid for the
land, and ten shillings towards a free emigrant. Be this


as it may, the immediate effect was disastrous to (Im
iiuauees of the colony, for instead of JA'ilH),ooo a year from
tho sale of lauds, us had been the, ease before the rise, in
the price, hut a few thousands were derived, (lie amount
being in ISdrl only £7,403. Indirectly Hus ell’cel of Ibis
was to cause many small slump-farmers to drive their eat I b;
to unoccupied land, and, erecting n temporary but for
shelter, allow their herds to pasture so long as (lie grass
sufficed, when they removed further. These men would
gladly have paid live shillings an aero fur sueh laud as (hey
required, hut, on tho new terms, they preferred taking
their sheep-mug for nothing. So rapidly did this system
of “squatting” spread, especially in the two older eolo.
idea of Now South Wales and South Aimtndia, that
the local authorities felt compelled to take steps either (o
stop such proceedings, or to legalize and regulate I hem.
Tho former course was soon found to he impraelieable,
and, therefore, it was ordered that in future, licenses for
certain extents, at fixed rales, should he granted. The
particular mode of doing this varies in the different settle,
monts, and may, therefore, bo better noticed under their
proper chapters, hereafter.
The following table of the ordinary length of passage
by sailing vessels, between Adelaide, the capital of South
Australia, and other parts of the world, may prove, inti*
resting and serviceable to the emigrant.
lihom Liverpool to Tort Adelaide SW days.
„ Loudon to „ ill) „
„ Glasgow to „ ()(5 „
„ Gape of 6, Hope „ Hi „


From Mauritius to Port Adelaide 38 days.
„ Ceylon to „ 35 „
„ Calcutta to „ 45 „
„ Hong Kong to „ 23 ~
„ Sydney to „ 8 „
„ Port Phillip to „ 4 „
„ Launceston to „ 5 „
„ Swan River to „ 6 ~
Between Sydney and the north and south coast, as well
as Hobart Town, there are now regular steamers plying
two or three times a week with passengers and cargo.
From Adelaide to Melbourne a packet sails monthly, with
small traders plying at frequent intervals. From Adelaide
to Sydney and Melbourne there is also a fortnightly over-
land post despatched.


GHAPTER II.
HEW SOUTH WALES, ITS RISE, PROGRESS, AND PRESENT
CAPABILITIES, WITH A FULL ACCOUNT OF ITS GOLD
FIELDS.
Tins, tho oldest as well ns the moat extensive mul
populous of all the Australian colonics, deserves our first
notice.
The reader will And it occupying tho eastern or right
hand side of the map, below tho dotted line which marks llm
Tropic of Capricorn. It reaches in fact from the fitith deg.
of south lat. along the coast to Capo Howe, and westerly
to the 141st deg, of cast long,, when! it meets the, north-
eastern boundary of the province, of fciimlh Australia;
thence it rims due smith until it readies the river Murray,
which forms the boundary line, between it and (he new
Province of Victoria, formerly Port Phillip; to rape 1 lowe
the lino is straight from tho most easterly brunch of this
river. Pi extent the colony contains about 3(lll,(|(Hl,t|(JU
acres, of which 6,000,000 havo been sold by the crown to
private parties. Mly ono-ME of the remainder, or one
hundred and fifty millions of aorta, havo been occupied as
sheep-walks, either with or without license. The length
of sea-ooaat from Capo Howe on the south, to Wide Day


on tlio north, is alwut 000 miles, possessing many excel-
lent, lays well adapted for anchorage ground for vessels of
large size..
Sydney, the capital and sent of government, is situated
on tlio hanks of Sidney Gove, an inlet within Fort Jack-
son, a largo and safe hay, capable of holding hundreds of
ships at all seasons. This hay contains many morn such
coves or harbours as that on which Sydney is built, each
admirably adapted for sites of trading towns as large ns
the present capital. The first penal settlement was made
a, little (o the South of Sydney, at a plane, the name of
■which has long been connected with every thing vile and
terrible, —Botany li.iy. Kelly in the present century, a,
few settlers located on the hanks of Sydney Cove, allured
by ilti admirable position, and from that time Us onward
progress has boon must rapid. It now extends a length
of two miles along the shores of tho hay, presenting an
elegant and uniform appearance that could scarcely bo
excelled by that of any English town of similar sizu.
.Not only has it a number of beautiful buildings, hut tho
long ranges of warehouses, factories, and private stores,
give the city an air of .European civilization not looked
for by the newly-arrived. It has also its Theatre and
Hyde Park, and is surrounded at short distances by many
pleasant suburban villa residences. Viewed from the
direction of the sea, Sydney wears a most pleasing and
busy aspect. The long ranges of stono warehouses and
roomy wharfs, that fringe tho water side, tho towering
church spires, tho luxuriant foliage of many graceful
trees, the distant Surrey Hills, the thickly-studded waters


swarming with sailing waft and steam vessels, the rushing
crowds on shore, all tend to impress the stranger most
favourably with the beauty and importance of this Aus-
tralian capital. Tim population of Sydney at the present
moment amounts to over fifty thousand souls. There are
carried on within its limits, and also at: some of the adjoin-
ing towns, tlio processes of distilling, brewing, sugar refin-
ing, soap and candle making, cloth manufacturing, I aiming,
snuff malting, glass working, porcelain making, sidling and
meat preserving, iron and brass founding, &c. The wants
of the colonists have caused tho introduction of all descrip-
tions of public vehicles, such as omnibuses, cal is, stage
coaches, vans, &o.
Following at some distance behind Sydney, is Para-
matta, standing at the extremity of the deepest inlet of
Port Jackson, and sixteen miles from the capital, with
which there is a regular communication by laud anvater.
It contains about seven thousand inhabitants, anil is plea-
santly as well as conveniently situated. It contains some
very good public and private buildings, and is the country
residence of the governor during several months of the
year; the houses are mostly built in extensive gardens or
meadows, and the country adjoining is well covered witli
timber. Windsor, a town distant about, twenty-one miles
from the last named, contains about three thousand in-
habitants : it is built on an eminence of one hundred feet
above tho level of the Hawkesbury, a river running dose
by it, and which from its vicinity to the lllno Mountains,
is often liable to severe and destructive inundations.
Liverpool is a rising town on the banks of George’s Haver


distant from Sydney about twenty miles: having but little
business within itself, it is chiefly enriched by the con-
stant traffic going on between the capital and thu fertile
sheep districts in the south-west. Bathurst, not long
since an obscure township, on the north-west of Sydney,
from which it is distant some ICO miles, is now rapidly
rising in importance, from its vicinity to the gold fields of
Ophir, and promises to be, at no very distant date, a for-
midable rival to tho scat of government. Tho greater
part of the distance to these tempting regions tho travel-
ler will find along a tract in no respects inferior to the
bust turnpike roads in this country. Towards thu latter
part of tlie journey, tho way is up an ascent, across a
country at once broken and wild, and not very accessible
to heavily-laden vehicles. At present, the newly-added
portions of-tlie town of Bathurst are of a mere temporary
character, looking mure like sheds than houses; hut they
will, no doubt, bo shortly replaced by suitable and per-
manent buildings.
The communication throughout this colony is by sailing
craft and steam boats along the entire iino of sea coast;
tho latter plying likewise to Hobart Town and Fort Phillip
with great regularity. Inland, however, the traveller has
to trust to his own resources, except on some few lines,
such as those to Windsor, Liverpool, and Bathurst, to
which places coaches regularly ply. In all directions,
however, for a distance of a Impaired miles and upwards,
there exist most excellent roads, originally tho work of
convicts, and indeed now maintained by similar labour.
New South Wales received its name from its apparent


similarity to the southern portion of Wales, though in
many parts it is far morn fertile) mul covered with more
abundant verdure. Away in the distance, may he wn the
formidable range of hills called the Blue Mountains, with
other lower anil nearer ridges, mostly running in out
direction, from north to south. In the valleys stretching'
for hundreds of miles along the base, and far between
these high ranges, are to ho found pasture lands of the
richest description, with considerable! tracts of soil well
adapted to grain culture. Rich as the soil is, however,
the colony promises to be more especially adapted to sheep
feeding than the plough. The samples of wheat, barley,
and oats grown there, and shown in the Great Exhibition,
took a high position as compared with those of other
countries; still the greater success attending the rearing
of sheep for them tallow ami wool, gives a decided pre-
ference to that occupation. There would appear to he
something peculiarly suitable in the climate of Australia
to the perfect growth of a fine quality of wool; and in no
part of the colony does there appear to bo any signs of
failure in this respect, though wry many of the present
sheep farmers commenced operations with a ¥Ol7 trifling
amount of knowledge of their occupation.
Pasturage licenses are taken out for “ runs ” varying
from one to thirty thousand acres of land, and in many
instances sheep-owners have crossed the boundaries of the
colony in search of pasture grounds for their numerous
flocks. The rapid progress made in the comparatively
new branch of industry, that of boiling down the fat of
animals for shipment home, may be gathered from the


facli that the value of the tallow exported in 1849 was
above £200,000. The quantity of wool shipped in the
period amounted in value to £1,000,000, The stock of
cattle is thus stated in the census returns; horses, 1X3,895 ;
sheep, 10,063,041 ; horned cattle, 1,752,852; pigs, 70,875.
There are now about 360 establishments for boiling
down the fat of slaughtered animals, and at these jdaces
there were hilled, in 1849, a million and a half of sheep,
and nearly two hundred thousand horned cattle.
The soil produces not only the finest wheat, hut Euro-
pean vegetables and fruits, equally with figs, pine apples,
mangoes, and, in short, all .the trophies! productions of the
east. The vine thrives with the greatest rapidity, and the
wine produced is of good quality, similar in character to
those of the Ehine and some parts of Prance. In 1848
the quantity made was nearly a hundred thousand gallons,
the produce of 875 acres of land. The mulberry is readily
cultivated, and silk produced with the utmost ease, and
considerable profit.
The shipping port is, of course, Sydney, where large
vessels can lay alongside the wharfs and take in their car-
goes. The export trade of the colony is in the hands of
a number of thriving commercial firms, who will either
purchase the wool, tallow, or other produce, from the
owners, or ship it home, making liberal advances of cash
in the meantime, until the goods are sold.
It may easily be seen, from what wo have already said,
that the production of wool and tallow forms the principal
industry of the colonists of New South Wales; the other
articles produced are mostly for use on the spot. It
02


Mows, therefore, that the hulk of the population scattered
throughout the settlement must he sheep-owners mid
shepherds, with a good proportion of other farm servants.
Agricultural labourers are, in faot, what are in chief
demand; such mechanical artboms, as may he required,
are needed hut in small numbers, ami not of any great
skill; the work of carpenters, bricklayers, coopers, &e.,
being preferred in a rude and hasty way, with very few
exceptions. Indeed tho labourers employed on a sheep
farm or “ run ” are expected,ami are obliged to make them-
selves generally useful with most tools; the shepherd
becomes a carpenter and joiner; the drayman adds to hi»
occupation that of wheelwright, blacksmith, and farrier;
whilst the farmer himself generally contrives to handle
every kind of tool that is needed on the establishment.
Each sheep-walk, in faot, becomes a little world within
itselfj independent of all external help, save from the
nearest town, to which it looks, at certain periods, for
supplies of European or country-made goods or imple-
ments. Some of these farms are hundreds of miles from n
town, in which case a journey for supplies is but seldom
made, the principal articles being brought up on the return
of tho drays from carrying tho wool to market, or for
shipment to England. A short description of one of these
sheep establishments may suffice as an account of them all.
The dwelling and its outhouses are built on the moat
central part of tho “run, I 'whether it be of one thousand
or ten thousand acres; care being always taken to place
it near to an abundant supply of wood and water, os tho
former is always in requisition for repairs, as well as for


the construction of furniture, stores, &o. Water is not
only needed for the use of tho family in domestic ways,
but it it most essential to'the farmer, as giving him the
means of well washing his largo flocks of sheep before
shearing them, a process, tho importance of which cannot
bo too highly estimated, as, on the cleanliness and bright-
ness of tho wool, so much of its marketable value depends.
If the farm ho a largo one, the pools, paddocks, and wool
houses, will have a most imposing effect, especially when,
as is generally the case, they are kept in good order.
The pools are of running water, and in these tho sheep
are placed, previous to the removal of their wool, and well
hand-washed by the proper farm servants; from this they
are conducted to tho drying paddocks, where they remain
for a few days, and then, being taken to tho shearing or
wool-house, their beautifully white coats are removed with
the utmost expedition, generally without being separated
in tho fleece. Tho wool is stored in a separate building,
where there are largo wooden or iron screw presses for
compressing it into a small compact body, in bags holding
from 2(50 to 4001b5., in which state it is ready to be con-
veyed to market without any further preparation. These
operations are all necessarily conducted about tho dwelling
of the toner, and under his own personal direction.
Should tho establishment he a large one, as is usually tho
case, the proprietor will bo aided by an overseer, and
sometimes two, whose duty consists in superintending
every kind of work in hand. In the shearing season
there is little else going on, but at other times tho distance
of tho flocks from tho homestead renders it a laborious


task to superintend the condition of tin* wlioli*. The out-
stations or huts for the shepherds in charge of the flocks,
are at least five miles apart from eaeh otlier, in various
parts of the “run;” the nearest of them will lie quite
four miles from the dwelling-house of the farmer. At
each of those stations is placed a hut-keeper, whose duty
consists in taking charge of tho station, mid preparing
the morning and evening meals of tho two shepherds
located there. Frequently tho hut-keeper will he the
wife of one of tho shepherds. The lloeks of sheep) in
olmrgo of these men will vary from a thousand to fifteen
hundred sheep each: the daily routine of these men's lives
may ho thus summed up. Breakfast is (hushed at a very
early hour, and immediately tho two, shepherds take their
departure with thuir docks in different directions, varying
their road each day so as to como upon fresh grass us often
as possible. Thoy proceed very slowly, allowing the, sheep
to graze on their way, well spread over the ground; hy
noon, having proceeded perhaps six miles, they will halt
for the day. The shepherd then rests himself hmeath the
nearest tree, opens his pack-wallet, lights a “ hush five,”
makes tea, and proceeds to enjoy a “hush dinner” of
mutton, damper, and tea; tho damper consisting of a
kind of plain cake baked in the embers of a wood (ire, and
peculiar to this part of tho world. A rvst being thus
ai&rded to both animals and their conductor, the journey
homewards is commenced as slowly as before, but by a
different road, and the station is generally reached by, or
shortly after sun-down; tho flock is then secured in the
fenced yard, first being counted, and the shepherd, usually


pretty weary of the day’s work, gladly partakes of tho
bountiful meal prepared for him by tho hut-keeper.
When a married couple resides at one of these stations,
there will bo a great deal of comfort and homo-like neat-
ness about tho place; flowers will bo cultivated; the door-
way prettily swept and arranged; the rooms in good order,
with perhaps a small library, and a few pictures against
tho walla, telling strongly of homo feelings and homo
habits. These men arc paid from £ls to £25 a year,
according to ability, locality, &o, with weekly rations of
lOlbs. meat, lOlbs. flour, 2lbs. sugar, and a Jib. of tea.
The hut-keeper, whether male or female, draws tho anno
rations, hut somewhat less pay than tho shepherds.
A cattle farm differs from a sheep-walk only in this,—■
that tho animals are, not usually kept at out-stations, but
aro mustered every night in tho sheds and yards of tho
farm, and are in charge of stockmen, who drive thorn out
and homo, well mounted on good nags. One of those
establishments, therefore, will bo larger, and wear a more
bustling air at morning and evening than will tho dwellings
of tho sheep-owner.
Many of these cattle farms aro not only very extensive
but exceedingly profitable; and tho settlors, especially
those who are married, make themselves as comfortable as
it would bo possible to do in any part of the old country.
A thriving form-house will possess as elegant furniture,
and as prettily kid-out garden, as any villa in an English
county, with large orchards and vineyards, yielding fur
more than can bo consumed on the spot. A dairy, pig-
stye, stabling, and poultry,yard, all impart to the Ausslrn


ban farm ii home-liko air of rural jn'onpi ritv, not to fa*
mistaken. It is by nn means a rave oeuunvuiv tor u
young man commencing with ft capital ul' it thousand
pounds, to make it ten times that amount in less than flu'
same number of years; but snob mu only bo muvinplishud
by habits of industry and perse.veranre. The iudiiVereul
or the pleasure-seeker, must not export to do better there
than elsewhere; indeed, bo will not sueeeed at ail,"—
though, having mice surmounted his first dillleultics, ami
brought his establishment into good working order, with
a steady lot of overseers and stock keepers or shepherds,
under him, he may, as time wears on, take things more
easily and indulge in reasonable recreation.
In the previous chapter wo have alluded to the remark-
able healthiness of the entire Australian land: all that
portion which is included within the three colonics treated
of in this work, certainly enjoys a degree of temperature,
aided by cool refreshing hreuy.es, bright skies, mid pure
atmosphere, which together render it a most desirable
residence for invalids.
New South Wales, although rather wanner than Vic-
toria, is in no respects less healthy than the other colo-
nies, It is no unusual thing to find persons attaining the
age of a hundred years, and instances have been known
where 125 years have been reached with unimpaired acti-
vity. So pleasant is the air, oven at night, that to sleep
in a field, beneath a tree or a bush, so far from being con-
sidered a hardship or attended with risk, is often preferred
to any shelter. Having thus dwelt upon the leading
agricultural and social,features of life in New South Wales,


we will devote a short space to an account of the regions
of “ Ophir,”—the gold diggins of Bathurst.
At the identical period of 1851, that is to say in the
first week of the monlh of May, in which the Great In-
dustrial Exhibition of England was inaugurated, the first
discovery of the gold-field of Bathurst was made by Mr.
Hargreaves, and reported to the local government. For
ages to come, doubtless it will be recorded as facts inti-
mately connected with the onward progress of the civilized
world, that the Crystal Palace of Industry and the Gold
Mines of Ophir were opened during the self same week.
Whilst thousands in this country were pouring with eager
curiosity to share in the world’s wonders as exhibited at
the “ World’s fair ” in Hyde Park, crowds, as numerous,
as eager, as enthusiastic, were rushing, at the Antipodes,
to the new wonders suddenly exhibited to them almost at
their very doors.
The existence of gold in the huge ranges of granitic
mountains met with in Australia, had long been predicted
hymen of science, who found the formation and age of
those rocks similar to the ranges in California and the
gold mountains of Russia. More than this, pieces of the
precious metal had been found by shepherds at various
times, who, however, never disclosed the spot whence they
brought them ; and it was not until the month of May,
last year, that it became known what a prolific yield of
gold might be obtained within two days’ journey of Syd-
ney, Bathurst, which is the chief town of the district of
that name, is situated about 120 miles to the north-west
of Port Jackson, the road to it running through Para


niatt.T and Penrith, and fur uw than bull' the distance in
capital order. The lay of country is throughout very
uneven) consisting of ranges of bills, mom or loss lofty
and reeky, interspersed with long and fertile valleys of
pasture ground. In the immediate neighbourhood of
Bathurst and the Blue Mountains, on the west side, with
other bluff ridges of granitic reel,a strefetimg far away
in the distance. Thence to Summer Hill Preek, down
in the Wellington Plains, is comparatively an easy journey
for horse travellers, hut rough enough for vehicles. The
gold fields have been as yet confined to one or two locali-
ties, the first diggiriH at Hummer I tilt Creek being all
but exhausted and abandoned for the new mid richer fields
at the foot of the long ranges of hills running through
Frederick's Valley, and distant from Bathurst, about
thirty miles. The assemblage of persons at these fields
rapidly rose to fifteen thousands, and by this time is,
doubtless, as high as twenty thousands. The only restric-
tion upon the right of search for gold consists in a month-
ly fee to government of thirty shillings, for which payment,
a license is granted to all who apply! persona known to
have been in employ are mpiired to produce a certificate
of discharge from their last employer, with a view to cheek
desertion of service as much or possible', To tint Xltli of
November, the amount paid into tho colonial treasury lor
licenses was *20,000, being for a period of about five
months. In tho first hasty rush or scramble to “ Ojihlr”
few persons went prepared in a proper manner for either
work or abode. A spade, a orow-har, or pick,—in short,
any tool that came first to hand was deemed sufficient;


■whilst no extra clothing or very few supplies of food were
taken, and henoo, in a very short time, great sufferings
wore endured by the majority of diggers. Provisions,
lodging, and clothing rose to a fearful price, and ninny
wore unable to procure the least shelter during the heavy
rains which set in by June. The high prices, however,
soon drew large supplies of every necessary; and by the
latest advices from that part of the country, (January
12,) it appears that buildings of all sorts wore being
rapidly erected for the accommodation of diggers in tho
immediate neighbourhood of the gold fields, as well us
a number of houses and stores in Bathurst, which is
fast becoming a town of much importance. The local
government has despatched a party of police, under the
direction of a magistrate, to preserve order at the diggings 5
and with a view to secure tho safe conveyance of the pro-
ceeds of tho gold-fields, a carriage, called “tho (Kohl
Coach,” has been established, to leave Bathurst for Syd-
ney twice a week, tinder the escort of seven men and a
suporintendant, all well armed. In place of tho miserable
contrivances of saucepans, basins, buckets, old hats, &«.,
with which tho first parties went to work at separating
tho ore from tho sand and atone, proper cradle-apparatus
is now to ho had in abundance both at Sydney and Bath-
urst ; and, in addition to this, several mining companies
have been formed for tho purpose of working tho soil by
machinery, as is being done on a large scabs in California.
The original discoverer of the precious metal, Mr.
Hargreaves, had, on tho 12th December, returned to Syd-
ney, from a further inspection of tho country, to tins north
n


and west of Bathurst, extending for about a thousand
miles; and It was believed that he had reported to the
government the existence of regions, equally rich in gold,
to a far greater extent than any yet known.
The same advices inform ns that gold has lawn dis-
covered at a place called “ Lord Joint’s Swamp," a few
miles from Moruton Bay, in the northern sea coast of tho
colony, and that the settlers there had mot to devise tins
best means of turning tho discovery to good account.
The creeks in which the ore is said to ho found, lie within
half a mile of tho carriage road from Tenterden to War-
wick, an advantage possessed by none of thu other Isolds.
This total amount of gold shipped frosts Sydney, to the
month of January, was £460,608, all to this country.
The diggers sell the produce of their labour on tho spot,
or at Sydney, at about £3 the ounce; in a few cases tho
gold is shipped on account of tho diggers, who draw
against it, through the bank, at tho rate of BBs. per ounce,
and 10 per cent, discount.
The scale of wages paid in this colony previous to the
gold discoveries wore at the following rates, though, of
course, they will bo much higher whilst the gold diggings
are in operation Shepherds and stock-keepers £22 to
£26 a year, with dwelling and rations. Hut-keepers £3
less. Farm servants, male, £2O to £24; female, £l2 to
£2O a year, with rations. Sawyers £2 to £2 10s. a week.
Blacksmiths, masons, carpenters, coopers, joiners, and
bricklayers, sa. to Qs. a day. Bootmakers 4s, to 6s. a day.
Price of provisions beef, 2Jd. to Bd.; mutton, 2d. to
2Jd.; flour, £l4 par ton, best,—£l2 seconds. Bread,
6d. per 4 lbs.


CHAPTER III.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA, ITS CONDITION AND PROSPECTS FOR
CAPITALISTS AND LABOURERS.
The province of South Australia was founded in the
year 183 G, under a special act of parliament, which gave
powers to a board of commissioners to raise funds by the
sale of the lands, and provide free or assisted passages to
emigrants of a certain description, out of a portion of the
proceeds, the remainder to bo appropriated to tho support
of the local government; in this way the now colony was
to ho no expense to the mother country, Tho crown
reserved tho right of nominating tho governor, and tho
lowest price of the country lots of land was fixed at twolvo
shillings per aero, hut afterwards raised to ono pound; at
tho same time it was undertaken that in no ease were con-
victs to be sent to the colony, a stipulation which has been
rigidly adhered to.
Looking at the map of Australia tho reader will find
this province distinctly kid down next to, and on tho left
or west side of Victoria or Port Philip. It will bo per-
ceived that the district is marked out by throe boundary
lines, forming, with the sea coast, a figure very nearly
squaro in shape. Tho measurement of the province shows


the surface contents to be about 300,000 square miles,
or about 102 millions of square awes. It docs nut seem
very largo, as seen on the entire map of Australia, yet it is
in reality twice the size of Great Britain ami Ireland, three
times as large as Prussia, find quite eight times the size
of Portugal.
The sea coast of this colony, although not so extensive
as that of other settlements, is still about 800 miles in
length, and contains some very fmo gulfs anil bays, easy
of access, and safe, ns harbours for large vessels, Mid-
way on the const will bo found Gulf Spencer, on the oast
or Victoria side of which is Gulf Saint Vincent. Both of
these are very large, especially the former j hut the latter
is the most valuable, as containing several fine and safe
harbours, and from having Kangaroo Maud at its entrance,
which serves as a breakwater to the waves of the Southern
Ocean, On the right side of Gulf Saint Vincent will bo
found a bay called Port Adelaide, whore ships unload or
take in cargoes, and land passengers for the capital,
Adelaide, distant seven miles, by a good carriage road.
The lay of the oountx'y and general features do not differ
materially from those of the former colony, except that
the mountains are not so extensive nor so lofty, and that
there is a greater abundance of land adapted for tillage,
than 5a found in New South Wales or Victoria. In like
manner the climate bears a great similarity to that of the
other settlements. The greater part of this province la
nearer the line than Victoria, and consequently somewhat
warmer during the summer months j on the other hand its
settled portion is further from tire tropica than tho greater


part of the Sydney territory. During the months of
December and January, the thermometer will sometimes
stand aa high as 105 degrees, yet this temperature is not
felt more than 85 degrees would be in this country, owing
to the greater purity of the atmosphere, and the continual
cool sea breezes. Indeed, so pure is the air of South
Australia, that persons who have been for many years
suffering from coughs and diseased lungs in England,
rapidly recover after their arrival in that healthy climate.
The only complaint known there is opthalmia, at certain
times of the year, caused by the prevalence of dry hot
winds, bearing with them particles of sand. The quantity
of rain which falls annually at Adelaide is twenty inches,
being one inch less than the yearly fall in London. The
lowest degree of cold known is 48°, between June and
August; a white frost is occasionally seen early hi the
morning, but ice is never found,
None of the mountains here are above 3000 feet, at
their loftiest summits, —most of them much lower; the
Mount Lofty and Blinder's Ranges are the principal
amongst them, The general face of the country may bo
described as gently undulating, and dotted at intervals
with knolls and patches of majestic trees, scarcely to ho
called forests: it wears, on the whole, an English park-
like appearance, with occasional tracts of brushwood, or
barren land. Vast plains of fertile soil abound, ready for
the plough, requiring no clearing from trees or underwood.
These tracts arc described as consisting principally of light
sandy loam, of a bright red colour, resting on a limestone
rubble. It is the continual decomposition or breaking up,
I) 2


as it were, of this limestone bottom which renders the
other portions of the soil so highly fertile as they are
proved to be. On the face of many hills of slight eleva-
tion, a fine brown loam is met with in abundance, and of
from three to five feet in depth. At the base of those
hills is found a fine reddish loam, resting at a depth of
twelve or eighteen inches, on a limestone bed, and admira-
bly adapted to the culture of tho vine and olive, both of
which have been already introduced, and reared with con-
siderable success. It has been estimated that about one-
third of the entire land in this colony is poor soil, tho re-
mainder consisting of about equal parts of soil adapted
for tillage or pasture.
The colony is scarcely so fortunate in its supply of
water as in other respects; and the rivers, even to the
principal one, the “Murray,” are little else than pools
and streams during one half of tho year. Still tho settlers
do not appear to suffer from this, and never fail in ob-
taining sufficient supplies of this necessary element by
sinking wells. Mr. Dutton, ono of the oldest colonists,
in his work on South Australia, speaks thus of the water
supply!—“For about five months in tho year all our
creeks—" rivers ” par tteocllenee—axo running with deli-
cious water; after the rainy season is over, the natural
ponds formed in tho hods of the rivers and creaks afford a
never-failing and abundant supply; anti, with few excep-
tions, you may always rely on getting water by sinking
wells at from 20 to 100 feet, at from many places under
20 feet. In some parts of the colony the water has, to
the new-comer, a somewhat disagreeable and brackish


taste, owing to the alluminous nature of the sub-soil. It
is, however, a well-established fact, that there is nothing
unwholesome in thisj indeed, I have myself become so
accustomed to the taste of it, that after a lengthened stay
in the country, upon returning to Adelaide, I almost pre-
ferred the slightly brackish water I had been drinking in
the country to the fresh spring water out of the torrent.
Cattle and sheep flourish amazingly on this water, and are
very fond of it.”
The principal river is the "Murray,” stated to have a
course of about fifteen hundred miles. Its outlet is over
a tract of low swampy ground into Lake Alexandria, a
large body of water to the south-east of the capital. This
river is deep in some places, and for about two hundred
miles is as wide as the Thames at London bridge. Govern-
ment, anxious to bring about the navigation of this stream,
has offered a premium of £IOOO to any party who shall
first run a steamer on the lower portion,
The native fruits peculiar to this part of Australia, are
the raspberry, the blackberry, and a kind of cherry, very
palateable in. taste. Here, as elsewhere, all the European
and tropical fruits and vegetables have been successfully
cultivated.
The timber, of winch there is abundance of a large size,
though seldom very thick together, is chiefly of a useful
kind: the best are the blue, white, and red gum, the
stringy-bark, the box, the forest oak, the pine, the cedar,
the wattle, and tea-tree.
The animals, birds, and fish are similar to those enu-
merated in the chapter on New South Wales, and call
for no further notice.


Rich as is South Australia in its soil ami timber, the
mineral wealth brought to light within the last ten years
has far outstripped all other sources of profit. To Mr.
Dutton and Captain Bagot belong the merit of first dis-
covering the existence of copper ore. These gentlemen
bought SO acres of land for one pound an aero, which was
subsequently valued at £30,000, and has sines been
worked to enormous profit as the Kapunda copper mine.
This was situated in a low sterile tract of scrubby land,
between Adelaide and the river Murray. Other discoveries
quickly followed; but the most valuable mine, the “Burra-
Burra,” was situated a hundred miles to the north of
Adelaide, in the vicinity of the Razor-back Mountains.
The land containing this rich property was purchased by a
company formed for the purpose in 1845, with shares of
£5 each; so prolific was the yield, that in 1848 nearly
16,000 tons of copper ore were shipped, the produce of
this mine. Within eighteen months of commencing opera-
tions, a dividend was declared of fifty per cent,, and in the
following year of two hundred per cent. : the gross gain
to this time having amounted to about three thousand per
cent. / Iron has also been found of good quality; and
more than one lead mine is in course of being worked.
As yet, however, the more highly-prized metal has not
been discovered, at least in any quantity to merit atten-
tion. Already the effect of the copper mining upon the
prosperity of the colony has been most marked: large
numbers of miners and other operatives have been intro-
duced into the place, and the neighbourhoods of the mines
present at the present time, a busy, animated scene. So


rich arc some of these spots, that the oro is dug out at
the surface in as pure and solid a state as though just
from the smelting liouso; some specimens of native copper
ore, as dug up, were shown at the Great Exhibition,
which contained fully 05 per cent, of pure metal. More
recently, companies have been formed for the purpose of
smelting the ore on tho spot, and, by thus shipping the
pure metal only, avoiding tho cost of freight upon so.
much refuse matter,
Originally of primary consideration, but now second to
mining operations in value to capitalists, are the occu-
pations of farming and stock-breeding. From all that has
yet been ascertained of the resources of this portion of
Australia, it would appear that whilst tho raising of wheat
and other grains may ho more profitably carried on boro
than in the other settlements, the quality of tho wool
produced is not equal to that of tho Victoria district.
The cultivation of grain has steadily progressed, in spite
of the greater attraction of raining operations: tho extent
of wheat in cultivation has risen from 4000 to 80,000 acres:
that of barloy from 800 to 8000 acres. Thera are at
present about 00,000 acres in grain culture, of which
noarly one-half are in the Adelaide district. Tho average
depth of ploughing is said to be eight inches: the usual
yield thirty bushels tho acre, The time for sowing wheat
is from the middle of April to tho middle of Juno.
Tho following extract from tho evidence of Mr. M'Laron,
given before tho committee on emigration, in 1847, may
servo to show tho capabilities of this colony for tho pro-
duction of grain :—« Tho South Australian Company sold


450 quarters of wheat in the month of November, 1845,
at 70s. a quarter, in the London market, when the cur-
rent price of good English wheat was about 605. ; and at
the same time there were three or four quarters of South
Australian wheat which had been sent home for seed sold
at 965., when English wheat was selling generally at about
60s. They had an agricultural show some time ago in
Adelaide; and the weight of the prize wheat for the first
and second prizes exceeded sixty-six pounds the bushel;
and when the South Australian Company weighed out those
450 quarters, they paid freight for it at the rate of sixty-
four pounds weight per bushel for the whole cargo: I
paid it myself.”
Oxen are recommended for the plough in preference to
horses; and the rougher and stronger the plough the bet-
ter. One of the immediate consequences of the scarcity
of labour during the copper mining mania, was the appli-
cation of machinery to reaping, thrashing, and winnowing
the wheat, which processes were performed most effectu-
ally by a moveable apparatus, without removing the straw
from the ground on which it grew. The machinery con-
sists of a sort of comb, which, as the apparatus moves
forward, seizes the adjoining ears, and holds them until
the grains are beaten out, when the ears fall back again,
and the chaff is blown away by a fanner attached.
Sheep farming is earned on here much as in New
South Wales, except that there are, perhaps, more small
farmers here; whilst the system of renting runs of pasture
land from the crown or large proprietors, has been
rather more general, especially with the small owners.


Licenses are granted for periods not exceeding 14 yenrs*
at the rates of £1 per square mile for first-class land, 15s.
for second-class, mid 10s. for third quality j the lessee to
be at liberty to cultivate a reasonable portion for grain,
vegetables, &c., for the use of his family and servants, hut
not for purposes of trade. The rent to bo paid yearly in
advance, default of which annuls the lease. The crown
reserves the right at any time of selling any land ao let, at.
six months’ notice, the lessee being paid the value of any
buildings, &o„ put up by him. Last year those licenses
extended over 12,C00 square miles.
Sheep are not liable in these settlements to the fatal
attacks of catarrh, which prove so destructive elsewhere 5
at the same time they are subject to scab and foot-rot, the
latter chiefly from pasturing on damp runs, and, it is said,
easily cured by a removal to a dry, elevated station. Per-
haps the worst enemy to the sheep is the native dog, which
is powerful and active enough to do much mischief at
night, and calk for constant vigilance on the part of the
shepherds and hut-keepers. The grass, diming the cool
and rainy seasons, grows very luxuriantly, one acre suf-
ficing to feed four sheep j hut in the dry months, more
than four acres are needed for the support of one sheep:
hence the necessity for largo tracts of pasturage.
The progress made in the land sales, and the shipments
of produce to other ports, are the best indications of tins
steady prosperity of the colony. In 1848, the enclosed
land amounted to 125,043 acres; in 1840, this was
138,710 acres; in the latter year, 60,007 acres of public
land were disposed of,— making in all, to that time,


055,580 acres. There were 885,018 sheep and 51,540
horned cattle within the province. The shipments of
wheat amounted, in 1840, to 14,407 qvs,, IH>< l hour to
1024 tons; the exports of tallow being 5571 ewt., mid of
wool 2,841,1311b5.
Next to sheep-farming the breeding of cattle is the
most lucrative, and perhaps the wisest pursuit, provided
the settler makes himself first acquainted with all matters
relating to the occupation. A careful selection of stock,
with a steady keeper or two and a trusty overseer, will
generally ensure a return of twenty to twenty-live per
cent. Leas than three or four hundred head will scarcely
yield so good a profit, as the smaller number requires as
much overlooking as a large herd. Sumo of tho South
Australian stock-holders lead a very comfortable life, re-
siding within or near the capital, and only visiting their
lands three or four times during the year; but to do this
with safety, the proprietor must bo an experienced hand
himself, with good servants in charge of his property, or
he may suffer most serious loss during hia absence. Tho
wages of shepherds and stockmen in this colony range
somewhat higher than in that of New South Wales,
For the comfort of such intending emigrants as may
not have yot given any attention to sheep or cattle rear-
ing wa add this extract from a very interesting work on
Australian farming, as it shows that, in seeking employ-
ment in the southern colonies, none need despair who
possess energy“ In the bush Ore shepherd class con-
sists of the most heterogeneous materials. Within ten
miles of tho place whore I lived, X remember as shepherds


ono apothecary, one lawyer’s clerk, one counting-house
clerk, three sailors, one tailor, one Jew, one Portuguese
sailor, one native of Ceylon, one Australian black, one
barman, ono gentleman’s son brought up to no business,
ono New Zealand merchant who had been burnt out, and
a second Portuguese who could not understand a word of
English; ono person, lato a lieutenant in the Honourable
East India Company’s service, and one gipsy. These par-
ties were all either shepherding or hut-keeping; and the
gentleman’s son, tho Jew, and the barman made the best
shepherds of tho lot. A few miles further off, at a friend’s
station, there wore a blapk fiddler and a dancing-master.
A large sheep-owner told rne that he would sooner take a
sailor who hardly knew the head from tho stern of a sheep,
or a clerk who had been in an office all his life,, than an
English-bred shepherd. The one class, he said, would
obey orders, and bo afraid of losing the sheep; the other
always thought they knew better than their master.”
The settled portions of South Australia have, been
divided into counties in the following manner:—on the
east of Gulf Saint Vincent, the counties of Adelaide,
Gawler, Stanley? Light, Hindmarsh, Russel, Sturt, and
Eyre; at Port Lincoln, Elinder’s County, and on the south-
eastern side, Grey and Robe. Each of these divisions
contains its villages, with regular settled labourers, either
in the employment of stock-owners, or else engaged as
draymen or artizans.
Having thus given an outline of the agricultural and
mining interests, the sketch must be made complete by
some notice of the Capital of the Province, and its inhabi-
£


tanks. Adelaide, the sent of government and chief town,
is situated upon the banks of tho river Torrens, a rather
insignificant stream, which divides tho town into North
and South Adelaide; tho former being about 300 acres in
extent, the latter 700 acres. Tho government-house, tho
barracks, and tho various public offices and works, arc
situated in South Adelaide, whilst tho northern division,
comprises a large number of stores and private dwellings.
The town has a pretty and regular appearance, more so,
indeed, than any other in Australia, Tho official buildings
have been put up with great care, especially the govern-
ment-house, a largo structure of white hard freestone.
It contains a theatre, mechanics’ institute, public library,
savings’ bank, besides several insurance companies, and
one or two commercial banka.
Among the many manufactories in the capital and its
neighbourhood are two boiling-down establishments, fifteen
breweries, five candle manufactories, four coach builders,
twenty-five flour mills—fifteen steam, eight wind, and two
water; two foundries, four machine factories, two malt-
sters, one organ-building establishment, seven tanneries,
four copper-smelting works, five printing*offices, and three
boat and ship-building establishments. There are seven
newspapers published, of which one is a daily paper.
Throughout the colony there are not leas than twenty
churches, as well as several of the Scotch Presbytery, and
Roman Catholics, besides many chapels belonging to the
various Christian denominations. In the neighbourhood
of Adelaide, a college has been built, and is placed under
the supervision and direction of tho Bishop of tho Diocaae.


There are eighty-ono public day-schools and forty-five
Sunday schools, at which about six thousand children
attend.
At Port Adelaide there are two large well-built wharfs
for the convenience of shipping, as also a custom-house.
The port is connected with the city by an excellent road,
along which omnibuses and other public conveyances ply
regularly, Recently however, it has been determined to
lay down a railroad for the conveyance of ores and produce
for shipment at the port. A light-vessel lays off tho,
entrance of the creek, and a steam-tug is always in readi-
ness to tow vessels from the outer roads to the anchorage.
Here, as in Sydney and other towns of Australia, there
is a thriving business done, very much in the European
style. Traders and others work quite as hard as at home,
though with a more profitable result; many of the dealers
and merchants have added to their ordinary occupations
that of stock-owner, mine proprietor, or farmer. Of
course the new vigour imparted to the trade of the colony,
by the copper mines, has been felt generally by all classes;
there is, however, less opening, in the way of trade or
commerce, for n*ew arrivals, than in almost any other
direction. Still less is there need of young men, as clerks,
shopmen, professors, school-masters, or such kind of per-
.sons, unless, indeed, they are able and willing to take to
stock-tending, or farming, or handle a minor’s tool, deep
in the bowels of the earth.
Tho following rates of wages may be depended on as
current, by tho latest advices from Adelaide; should,
however, any change take place it will certainly be in


favour of the labourer, rather than against him, in conse-
quence of the extraordinary rush to the gold-fields draining
the towns and farms of a great portion of their hands.
Shepherds and stock-keepers, £25 to £3O a-year, with
dwelling and rations. Hut-keepers, £2l to £2(l a-year,
with dwelling and rations, Mate farm servants, £2O to
£2G a-year,with rations; female ditto, £ls to £22 a-year,
with ditto. Miners, 355. to 425. a-wcek, besides tribute
money. Sawyers, £2 to £3 a-wcek. Carpenters, black-
smiths, coopers, and journeymen engineers, (Is. to 7a. a
day. Bootmakers, ss. to 75.. Bricklayers and masons.
Os. Cd. to 7s. a-day. Joiners and cabinet makers, Os.
a-day.
Price of provisions, according to the last advices, of
January the 10th:—beef, 2Jd. to 3d.; mutton, IJd. to
2d.; bread, sd. per 41b.; potatoes, Gs. to Os. per cwt,;
flour, £ll per ton.
Cattle market :—Bwes, 4s. Od. each; wethers, sa. Gd;
lambs, 2s. (Id.; fat bullocks, £3 to £4; draught horses,
£lO to £25; hacks, £5 to £ls.


CHAPTER IV.
VICTORIA, OR PORT PHILLIP, ITS RAPID GROWTH AS A
GRAZING COLONY, AND ITS MARVELLOUS GOLD REGIONS,
The Port Phillip settlement, or, as it was at one time
called, “Australia Felix,” was formed into a distinct
colony in 1850, under the name of the Province of Vic-
toria, with a local government and legislature. This dis-
trict is the most southern point of the great Australian
continent, opposite Van Diemen’s Land, from which it is
separated by hut 200 miles of water, called Bass’s Straits.
Its boundary line has been laid down as extending from
Oape Howe, in a straight line, to the nearest point of the
river Murray, along which it thence goes to the eastern
boundary of South Australia, and thence southerly to the
sea coast. It is divided into twenty-three counties, and
contains fifty-one millions of square acres, one million of
which have been surveyed for sale, and 60,000 acres,
already sold.
This fertile tract of country appears to have bean known
to the graziers of New South Wales as long since as
1827; no permanent settlement, however, was made until
1835, when a number of graziers from Van Dieman’s
Land, removed their flocks and herds to that locality, and
B 2


obtained largo tracts of pasture ground from the natives
living there. The climate) pasturage, and locality, went
found so well adapfed to farming purposes, that the little
colony rapidly increased, and soon drew the attention of
the authorities of Sydney to it .• during the following year
magistrates and other officials woro appointed, and sur-
veyors sent, who laid out the town of Melbourne.
Victoria has a coast extending six hundred miles, with
bays not excelled by any in that part of the world. The
principal and most extensive harbour is Port Phillip, a
bay extending inland for a circuit of thirty miles, with a
narrow entrance. On the north-east side is Hobson’s Hay,
a safe anchorage ground, into which runs the river Yarra-
Yarra, and affording water carriage, by small craft, to
Melbourne. On the western side of this extensive inlet
is Korio Bay, the harbour to Geelong, the second town
of the colony. On the western side of the settlement is
Portland Bay, a very fine harbour for shipping, and the
constant resort of whaling ships, who find active employ,
ment in the neighbourhood i a town has been forming for
some time, and bids fair to become a place of some
importance. A short distance to the eastward of Port
Phillip we find Port Western, also a safe harbour, and
containing some small islands within it.
The principal mountains are the Wavagong, or Austra-
lian Alps, rising to about 6000 feat, and running nearly
north and south, on the eastern portion of the province! on
the western side are the Grampian and the Pyrenees
ranges, of considerable elevation. The chief rivers are
the Glenelg, the Murray, the Hume, and the Yarra-Yarra:


these are several hundred miles in length, though naviga-
ble for not more than half that distance by vessels of 200
tons. Several smaller rivers exist.
All accounts agree in representing the scenery as most
picturesque, and the soil has the moat fertile to be met
with: the richest tracts appear to lay between the. sea
const and the base of the mountain ranges, a distance of
some fifty or sixty miles, the entire length of which con-
sists of vast plains of rich grass, gently undulating, here
and there lightly wooded, and well watered by numerous
streamlets from the high lands. The country stretching
westward from Geelong to Portland Bay, of about 150
miles in length and from ton to thirty miles in breadth,
consists almost entirely of rich alluvial plots of deep brown
loam, generally destitute of timber. This is admirably
adapted for tillage or for cattlo: sheep fed on it are apt
to be attacked by foot-rot. Between Melbourne and Gee-
long, and between the latter and the Brisbane ranges,—
from the river X-lopldns eastward, and from the Pyrenees
in the north, running easterly,—all these tracts, contain-
ing perhaps 880 miles, are composed of brown loam and
light reddish clay, mixed with sand, with few if any trees,
but yielding a luxuriant nutritious grass, and well watered.
All these are admirably adapted for sheep-runs. The tract
laying at the south eastern extremity of the colony, and
known as Gipp’s Land, containing about 320,000 square
acres, is also exceedingly rich in grasses, water, and fine
timber. Being near the coast, and not far from the
mountain ranges, there is never any deficiency of rain felt.
The natural productions of this part of Australia do not


differ from those mentioned in the last chapter, with the
exception of the mines; the absence of which is, however,
abundantly compensated for by the discovery of coal of a
fine quality near Port Phillip Heads, on the south-eastern
coast, where also a few specimens of copper and load have
been picked up. But greater than all arc the recent mar-
vellous gold-fields, excelling in richness not only those of
“ Ophir,” but the finest diggings of California. Of these,
however, we shall treat in their proper place.
Melbourne, the seat of government, as already stated,
is built on the banks of the river Yarra-Yarra, and distant
from Hobson Bay about eight miles, Although little more
than a dozen years have passed sines the only signs of
civilization here were a few tents and some flocks of sheep,
there is now a population in the town alone of 20,000, the
province altogether containing fully 00,000, before the late
gold discovery. There aro now upwards of two thousand
houses in Melbourne, of stone or brick, besides three thou-
sand of -wood. It has an elegant government house, of
Portland stone, substantial custom-house, . several churches,
two branches of Australian banks, a savings’ bank, a thea-
tre, an insurance office, and long ranges of handsome ware-
houses. Perhaps the most striking object here is “ Prince’s
Bridge,” an elegant structure, spanning the Yarra-Yarra,
by a single arch of ISO foot, and costing Vic-
toria has been formed into a see, the bishop of which has
his residence in the capital. Melbourne, also, has a hihle
society, an educational society, a temperance society, and
a harmonic society: there is, also, a Port Phillip steam
navigation company.


A regular communication in kept up with other ports
by moans of Hailing and steam vessels,™-tlm run to Laun-
ceston occupying but two days, that to Adelaide about
five.
The second town in Victoria is Geelong, though it bids
fair to rival the capital at no distant time. It lies on the
western side of tho bay of Port Phillip, and contained hy
the last accounts about 10,000 inhabitants. Shipping can-
not anchor nearer than within ton miles, for want of depth
of water, yutin spite of this disadvantage, tho export trade
hero is fully equal to that of Melbourne. Tho position of
Geelong is remarkably picturesque, with beautiful park-
liko scenery immediately about it, and the Pyrenees tower,
mg in the distance, now the attractive land-mark to the
gold diggings. The other towns are Portland, Belfast,
and Port Albert, as yet but in their infancy. The colony
possesses cloven periodicals, of which three arc daily
papers,
In no colony has tho progress boon so remarkably rapid
as in Victoria, a sure indication of which -may ha gathered
from the trade and cattle returns. In 1838, two yea.ni
after tho first flock was landed, the sheep numbered
nearly 200,000. In 1861, tho live stock in tho province
amounted to five millions sheep, 1(1,600 homes, and
300,000 horned cattle, Two years ago, ha imports of
British goods was to tho value of MTU,B3I, and it# ship ,
ments of produce, chiefly wool and tallow, to X766,3aii.
So that this colony, of only 14 years'standing, actually
purchases as much Briush mcrahandtiw as do®* the large
kingdom of Spain, or one-fourth m much m the empire of


Russia, with its.sixty millions of inhabitants. Tims wo
sea how valuable are these new settlements to onr manu-
facturers, our merchants, and our ship-owners.
As yet the chief occupation here has been sheep-farm-
ing, for which, undoubtedly, the climate and pasturage
offer the most alluring prospects. Ten years since the
sheep in the colony numbered 500,000; at present the
shipments of wool, in one year, amount to twelve millions
of pounds weight. The weight of an ordinary sheep, in
this colony, is about 60 lbs,, and it is reckoned that a
farmer obtains from each animal about 2J lbs. or 3 lbs. of
wool, and 20 lbs. of good tallow; this latter trade is fast
rising into importance. There are now a dozen boiling-
down establishments, in which fully 180,000 nnimals are
annually slaughtered, producing 360,0001b5. of good tallow.
At Melbourne.there are also candle and soap works 5 and
meat is now salted and preserved fresh for shipping, to a
considerable extent.
A better idea of the sort of success which awaits the
industrious sheep-farmers Cannot be given than by
quoting some examples, cited by Mr. Poster, a gentleman
recently from the colony: he speaks of “ a family who, in
1838, came over to Port Phillip with 3000 sheep from
Van Dieman’s Land: they are now possessed of stock
equivalent to 75,000 sheep.” A second case is that of
“ a man, formerly an overseer of theirs, who now has one
of the best stations in the land, on which he has 15,000
sheep.” Another instance of success is that of « one of
the earliest settlers, who commenced with 100 ewes: ho
is now said to be in the receipt of £4OOO per annum. An,


■overseer of his, who saved a little money, has at present
a station and 7000 sheep. A third, who also commenced
with 100 sheep, is now a very wealthy man, with many
thousands of sheep and cattle, and considerable landed
property. A fourth, who invested £I2OO about twelve
years ago, lately, during his absence in England, had
£3OOO per annum remitted, from his agent in the colony,
who at the same time increased his stock. A fifth, who
commenced with £3OO, sold his stock in four yews for
£2300.” The system of farming differs in no way from
that followed in the other settlements. The farms and
stations are os much scattered over the face of the country
as any where else. Stock-keeping is, perhaps, mors com-
mon here than in the neighbouring colonies; and horse-
breeding is both a gena-al and profitable occupation,
though requiring much longer experience than mere cattle
rearing.
If the cultivation of corn has hitherto been neglected
for the apparently more attractive occupation of sheep-
rearing, it cannot he from any doubts of the success that
must attend the former. The province contains hundreds
of square miles of the finest alluvial land, lightly timbered
and abundantly watered; in short, all but ready for the
plough. As an instance of the extreme fertility of the
land in this province, it may be mentioned, that wheat
growing near the volcanic remains often reaches the height
of seven feet, and as much as seventy bushels of grain
are taken from an acre. Oats yield ninety, and Indian
com one hundred bushels, the aero. So favourable is the
climate, and so rich the soil, that besides the finest sam


pies of grain, the vine, the olive, tobacco, mulberry, cotton,
coffee, and indigo may all be grown to advantage. Already
there are several hundred acres of land laid out ns vino
yards, which have produced 5000 gallons of good light
wine and 500 gallons of brandy in one year. The sale of
land and leasing of cattle-runs are conducted on the same
principle as in the colonies already treated of.
Six months from the date of the discovery of gold in
the Bathurst country, it was announced that the precious
metal was to be found in great abundance at no further
distance from Melbourne than some eighty odd miles.
No sooner was this fact made known, than the excitement
throughout the colony became intense; thousands flocked
to the tempting regions, situated at Mount Alexander,
near the river Loddon, leaving their occupations to telco
care of themselves. Ships’ crews, shepherds, artisans,
government clerks, policemen, all deserted their employ,
and sought their fortunes at the “diggings.” A short
experience served to show the marvellous richness of the
newly-found gold regions. The precious metal was not
dug with sand and quartz, in fine grains or small particles,
but was met with in solid pieces, many of several ounce.s
weight, quite pure, and not a few of some pounds in
weight. There appears to have been nothing Mice these
diggings in Ballarat, nor even in famed California.
Shortly after the discovery of this first region, a second
field was found at Bathurst, on the Gleelong side of tho
country: this bids fair to outshine the finding's at the
Mount, and wonderful have been the reports of the yield
of pure gold at this last spot.


At the dale nf out lust udviees, viz., .Tumiury 27th, a
third discovery was wmoumfod, promising even greater
tilings lliau Ballarat. Tim following extract from the
M'dhmmf Art/tm describes its locality:—“lt is situated
around Lake Omen, at Iho foot of the Australian Alps, near
which flows the river Milt a Milln, wliich has its source
from Urn Snowy Mountains, Tim llrnr. Mr. Clarke, wJ(io
tuts been on a prospecting tour, under Iho auspices of the
Sydney government, arrived at the spot find at mine pro-
nounced the important geological foot, that the district of
Lake Omen is the, niiifriv of the Australian gold-fluid, from
whence, hus flowed the tturiferous deposits of Mount Alex-
ander and the Other giihl regions now so celebrated for
their grand results.”
Amongst other large masses of the precious metal, it
appears that a nugget of gold weighing 8711)9, Boz, had
been found nt Mount Alexander, hy a labouring man
Anmed dunes; it is of irregular form, shout the size of an
average font, and composed mil indy of pure gold. A fow
grains of siuul are embedded in its surface, but not suill-
cient to nmounl to anything hut the merest fraction of its
weight.
In ram of the local papers wo dud mi instance of extra-
ordinary success attending digging for no longer a period
than ten days. Tim journal says:—“Mvc men put up
the, other night at mi inn in Geelong, who have, just re-
turned from the. celebrated Mount Alexander. They ori-
ginally came, from Adelaide to try their fortunes nt the,
wonderful mines nf Victoria, and in ten days they turned
out the astonishing quantity of two hundred and forty-
F


nine pounds nine, ounces of pure gold! 2.5K1S ounces of
gold, valued at £!! 10s, per ounce,—which value will nut
he considered ton high, when it is known that the men am
going to take the gold home themselves,—gives a total of
JBIO/IS2 IQs., making each of the ilve men’s shares equal
to £2,01)11 10a. for ten days' work.”
flu consequence of the gold excitement, labour had
necessarily risen to a great height, shepherds and others
demanding £SO to £(H) a year to remain with their mas-
ters. hears had been felt for the wool crop, just then
coming to hand; shearers had been paid £1 a day, and
by dint of these prices and great ed'orls it was believed
that little if any wool would he lost. About 20,(100 per*
sons arc reported to have arrived in the colony from neigh-
bouring settlements, attracted by the gold ummuls, I?y
careful estimates made up to the early part of January,
it seems that fully a million sterling in gold had been
brought in from the two great diggings in Victoria, of
which £570,000 had been shipped. The, quantity brought
into Melbourne in the, last work of mtr advices was IS,OHO
ounces, the greater part from Mount Alexander; this was
valued at £1150,000. Tim system of granting licenses for
the privilege of digging fur gold, on the payment of a
monthly fee in advance, is adhered to here, as in Bathurst,
though it was said the amount was to lie doubled.
Alluding to the value and business done in gold, the
Melbourne Gold Circular says:—"The, ruling price of gold
at the commencement of tins week was 00a. per ounce,
but towards tho middle it fell to 80s. It afterwards rallied,
and left oft at 605., many sellers holding for a further ad*


vnucc of sixpence. Thoro hna boon whipped to-day in
Sydney, by tho S/i<tinrnok, upwards of 2(1,000 minces of
gold, and it is supposed Hint tho Statesman, which is to
sail on Wednesday next, will lake about 50,000 ounces to
Loudon,
Tho same paper gives the following information as to tho
rales at which gold could bo shipped to this country, and
drawn against by bills of exchange through tho banks
there: —“Exchange on Loudon on drafts against gold at
dOs. per mince, by tho English banks, 1) per cent, discount;
and by tho bank of Now South Wales 555. per ounce, and
10 per cent, discount. Ercights ono-ludf per cent, on GOs.
per ounce, with 10 per cent, primage.”
In speaking of tho labour market, it would not be fair
to the intending emigrant to put forward tho recent wages
asked and given at Melbourne and tho vicinity, in conse-
quence of the rush to the “ diggingsthose prices can
bo but temporary; probably by this time even, the groat
influx from the neighbouring colonies, not less than many
eases of disappointment driving back diggers, will have
tended to throw more bands in the way of employers, and
so have restored wages to something nearer their fair and
permanent standard. Tho table appended will, however,
give tho reader a very good idea of what may bo reckoned
upon for some lime to come; and those, it may bo scon,
are tempting enough, and generally higher than in Now
South Wales or South Australia.
Seale of wages, per annum, in tho Victoria districts, as
by tho latest advices previous to tho gold discovery:—
Married couples, without family, with rations, £'ls to £SO;


ditto, with family, £4O to £45; shepherds, with rations,
£3O; lint-keepers, £2l) to £2S ; general useful servants,
with rations, £3O to £4O; Imlluck drivers, do., £4O to £SO,
or 20s. to 355. per week; gardeners, £3!) to lUt; cooks,
£BS to £44), or 14a. to 18a. per week; hush carpouters,.
£BS to £4O; carpenters, £SO to £6O, nr 20s. to 2.55. per
week; grooms, £35 to £4O; stork-keepers, £BO to £BS
milkmen, £2B to £80; reapers, 2 In. per awe, and lotions;
stackers, 30a. to 355. per week, and rations; horse-shows
and wheelwrights, 20s. per day.
female servants, per annum Thorough servants, £!()<
to £35; housemaids, £lO, to £2O; cooks, £2O to £32;
laundresses, £lB to £22; nursemaids, £l3 to £ls; nur-
sery governesses or needlewomen, £ls to £lB.
Provisions ore usually at about Adelaide prices ; hut,
awing to the great influx of strangers, and the excessive
demand for the necessaries of life, everything was greatly
enhanced in value: the, following must, therefore, bn given,
as the last quotations, on January 87th.
flour, £lO to £2l pur ton; bread, la. <ld. per libs.;
beef, Sa. per 10011».; fat sheep. Os, fid. each; wethers,
4a. to 6s. each; working bullocks, £1) to £11) 10s. per
pair; horses, dray and harness, £SO to £BO the act; hacks,
£1(1 to £2.0 each.


CHAPTER V .
WHO SHOULD EMIGRATE, AND HOW, WITH A FEW WORDS
TO THOSE WHOHAD BETTER REMAIN AT HOME
. Tho four nlmplcra, which liavo preceded this, were com-
paratively an easy task for our pen, requiring little beyond
what any person, devoting sufficient time to tho subject,
might achieve. Our work has us yet been one of descrip-
tion only. A more difficult, and at the sumo time, a more
serious task is now before us, that of giving advice,
advice too, which may ho sought by and Muonoo tho
future destinies of thousands.
The strong contrast presented liy the present condition
of tho population of Lids country, and of the Australian
colonics, leads us to look to the cause of that vast differ-
ence, and the inferences to be drawn therefrom. On this
side the water the great want is room for the growing
population, which is increasing in a faster ratio than does
employment. To attempt to describe tho hardships
endured by tho “struggling classes” of this country, as
well as of those still lower in tho smile of wretchedness,
tho " sinking classes,” would bo a needless work. Tho
cry on this side the great ocean is "givens food or wo
perish!” Tho prayer in the southern laud is "give us
p 3


labour or we are lust: give us labour ami wo will give food
in abundance.” Machinery bus been vailed at ns the
prime cause of much of tbo present distress of tho
labouring classes: it is accused of throwing out of employ,
incut thousands of workers in all trades. Wo are no t now
about to discuss such questions, but will be contented by
assuring our readers, however it may be, that this same
machinery is daily creating enormous demands cm tbo
industry of the colonies: tbo more, wool, cotton, tallow,
and oil they produce, the more it will consume, giving
to those workers across tbo seas what they so much need
in exchange, cheap manufactures.
In this country, boiling over ns it is with hungry
millions; with jails, poor houses, and gin palaces, staving
us in the faoo on nil sides, it is no matter for wonder that
so many should desire to leave it, and that out of the
many, not a few are but ill adapted to struggle in a now
and distant country. Those who arc thinking of emi-
grating should first endeavour to ascertain whether they
possess any of the qualifications needed to make them
successful colonists: and hero wo must observe that wo
arc considering the question of emigration as a rural affair
altogether: wo arc leaving out of consideration the various
trades and professions carried on in tho town, and which
are muck the samo as in this country, treating only of a
country life.
“ Who, then, should emigrate F” Those who wo can
advise to take this atop arc, perhaps, a larger class than
may at tot sight ho expected. It must be borne in mind,
that although we have given the rates of pay earned by


carpenters, masons, wheelwrights, and such like callings,
that these are not the labourers mostly in requisition iu
ordinary times; although at the present moment, and for
some time to come, there will bo a demand for snob, con-
sequent on the rush that has been made to the gold-fields
by people of all classes in those colonies. The hands most
generally iu demand, and likely to bn so for a long period
to come, arc shepherds, stock-kcopors, sheep-shearers,
farm labourers, and female servants. Hat when we name
those, wo are not to bo understood as meaning only those
brought up from their childhood to such occupations; mi
the contrary, as we have stated in a previous chapter, the
gentleman’s son or the sailor will often make a bolter
Australian shepherd than your Suffolk peasant.
The man who will go out to the southern colonics,
having no capital hut his labour, with stout arms and a
stout heart, with no old-world prejudices hanging about
him, determined to work with a will, and to adapt himself
to the new country and its ways,—such a man, and ns
many of such as please to go, will bo sure to find what ho
socks and what ho cannot get hero, —certain and constant
employment at more than ample wages. Ho will find
ready and liberal employersj good pay and rations, on
which ho may become as fat as any yeoman of the olden
time; a climate so favourable to health that medicine is
all hut unknown, and the death of a young person a most
rare occurrence; no taxes, no rent; and with need of so
few clothes as to render their cost a matter of little mo-
ment. Should the intending emigrant bo married, so much
the. better, provided the wife be frugal and industrious:


such a helper will not only be no expense, but she will
actually often cam nearly us much as the husband.
Children, too, which in this country are so frequently
looked upon us iuontubrauocs to the struggling man, us
dead weights around his progress, are there ao many
valuable assistants to tho farm settler, be he in what
capacity ho may. In that land of promise, children, from
being, as in the old world, burthens and sorrows, become
truly blessings, and realise tho scriptural saying, " Happy
is ho who hath his quiver full of them.” Children of ten
or eleven are of tho utmost use in tending sheep, whilst u
lad of fourteen is quite as good ns a man either as shep-
herd, stockman, or hut-keeper. In tho bush there are as
yet no schools, and in this respect children will lay under
a disadvantage, though not more so than in many parts of
England; and doubtless the day is not far distant when
throughout many rural districts of tho Australian conti-
nent tho means of regular education will bo provided.
We have said, lot any one sock employment in Australia,
who possesses a stout heart and .stout limbs, who, in Cant,
is not afraid of work, and so surely ns ho seeks will he
find. Wo do not caro to inquire what he has been,
whether his life has boon passed within largo smoke,y cities,
or, in tho pleasant country: if ho has whistled at tho
plough, or toiled at tho loom, all that we bargain for, as
needful for tho formation of on Australian peasant, ia
ability and readiness to do his duty, That duty will not
prove a very hard one, lighter by far than most occupa-
tions hero. To rise at break of day, to stroll in charge of
a thousand sheep till noon, then rest an hour or two, and


iit'tor that, gently home again to tea and sleep, js surely
not so terrible a lifo as thousands are ncuuslomcd to
in “memo England:” the healthiness of the olimato,
abuiuhmeo of good food, freedom from all world-oares,
soon have their due effect upon the half-starved weaver,
the pale mechanic, tins dyspeptic, citizen, who each become
transformed into the. ruddy, deck, and cheerful bushmau.
When we. say that it mailers not what a man has lean
to form tin emigrant, wo must ho understood us speaking
only of such as are intending to go out on their own
resources. Such os have not the means of providing a
passage, and look to doing so by the aid of the govern-
ment funds for emigration, must first ascertain whether
they come within this rules hud down by the commissioners
for the selection of emigrants. In furnishing free passages
to the colonics, it is door that the commissioners must
either take the emigrants indiscriminately as they offer
themselves, or proceed to make some sort of selection
from the crowds who apply for passages. The former
course would ho unfair to tho sober industrious labourer,
who would thus Caro no hotter than tho most abandoned
character, ami would ho equally hurtful to tho colonies:
on tho other hand, if selection is to ho made, it must ho
regulated by sumo sort of rules; those rules are always
framed in conformity with tho wishes and wants of tho
colonists, expressed through tho governors of tho various
settlements; for it must ho remembered that tho “Emi-
gration Eirnd” is supplied by tho colonists themselves,
being part proceeds of laud purchased by them. Tiro rules
laid down by the Commissioners of .Emigration, as to tho


ages, (ratios, and occupation of parties required in (ho
colonics tiro drawn up according' to the wants of each
colony in every year, and arc to bo seen on application at
their London office, No. It, I’ark Street, Westminster,
or at their various depots and agencies at Liverpool, Ply-
month, Glasgow, Lublin, Londonderry, Cork, Galway,
Waterford, Sligo, Donegal, IloU'ast, and oilier places
throughout the kingdom. It may bo hero observed, that
the classes of persona most likely to obtain I'reo passages
in this way are married agricultural labourers of all kinds,
rlicir wives and families, women of tho working class,
married mechanics and artisans, their wives and families,
with a certain proportion of single men of each descrip-
tion. Tho fullest inquiry will bo made as to the character
and fitness of each applicant, who must fill up a printed
form of application, to bo obtained at tho various emigra-
tion offices, attested by two respectable householders, a
Burgeon, and tho clergyman or magistrate of tho town or
village in which the intending emigrant resides, as well as
by tho emigration agent of tho district. No ice or pay-
ment is required to ho made until the applicant bo ap-
proved of by tho commissioners, when sums, varying from
one to ak pounds, will bo required from each emigrant,
according to their ages and callings; the. married agricul-
turists under 15 years of ago paying hut one pound each;
married mechanics two pounds; and those between 15
and 50 paying five and six pounds respectively,
These payments are not office-fees, nor in part payment
of passage-money, but arc required as guarantees that the
emigrants will bo ready by tho time appointed, As a set


off against Huso small sums, Mm emigrants have Iho usi'
on tlm voyage out, of new nmiiresses, holsters, blanket s,
mul counterpanes, canvas hags In cmiliiin linen, &e., knives
ami forks, spoons, metal plains, and drinking mugs, which
articles will ho given after arrival in ilm oniony to the
emigrants who have behaved well on the voyage. It must
he homo in mind that the commissioners provide passages
for none hut such as arc going out to labour for hire;
and that single men, unless agricultural labourers, are not.
taken unless forming part of a family j neither can young
women under 18, unless with their family, or in charge of
some near relative.
The rides thus laid down, and so strictly adhered to,
mast of necessity exclude very many desirous of seeking
employment in the colonies; for hundreds and thousands
of single men, neither agriculturists nor mechanics of the
kind required, yet able and willing to turn their energies
honestly and soberly to farm work in the colonies, are not.
entitled to the benefits of the government emigration fund.
Hundreds of young single women, too, would gladly find
their way to the south, to hotter their hard lot; did they
hut see the way to do so. Persons such as these must look
to their own energies, to their ability to save up by dint
of economy, sufficient to provide a passage and outfit, or
at least a portion of such amount. Some may have friends
who will aid with their contributions, to ho repaid after a
time: many, however, will, doubtless, bo unable to pro-
cure such assistance, and to such the best and only advice
wo can give is to apply to the secretary of the “ Paraily
Colonization Loan Society,” in Bueklcrsbury, London, or


to Mrs. Chisholm) the originator of the association, at
No. 8, Charlton Orescent, Islington. .This society is
formed for the purpose of aiding respectable persons of
all classes desirous of emigrating, by means of loans, to
be repaid after their arrival in the colony, without interest.
The rules and regulations of this body are most excellent,
and cannot fail to ensure the objects intended. All per-
sons in the humbler ranks of life about to emigrate, even
though not requiring any money-aid, will do well to put
themselves in communication with this society, and, if
possible, attend some of the family group meetings, held
previous to the sailing of such ships as are chartered by
the association. Small farmers, traders, or others, having
families, and desirous of ensuring the most comfortable
accommodation on their voyage, are strongly advised to
take their passage in any of the vessels chartered by tho
society, as there is generally cabin-room, ol- intermediate
space, not occupied by the emigrants of this body.
Beyond the more labouring man who goes out to offer
his services for hire, there is another class of persons very
likely to open this little work for information as to their
own case :we allude to men of some small moans. Until
quite recently the towns of the several colonies have been
abundantly supplied with shops, stores, and establishments
for the sale of all that is required hy a civilized commu-
nity, and had we written some few months since, wo
should have decidedly cautioned all persons looking to
such callings to remain where they are. Now, 'however,
that the astonishing gold-fields have not only drawn so
many from the towns, but attracted far larger populations


to all parts of those favouml seillemenls, the oa.sc i.s
widely different, ( aml we feel no hesilalion in saying dial,
there is a fair opening at Balhnrsl, Melbourne, (ieehmg,
and at the various gold stations, for store-keepers of
various kinds, who will realise good, if not handsome,
profits. To do any good, such emigrants should go out at
onee, taking with them (heir families, every member of
which will prove of inestimable value.
Tlui small farmer, having moderate means and a grow-
ing family, who finds himself going hack in the, world year
by year, with sma.ll prospects for bis daughters beyond
the milk-pail and the poultry-yard, or for Ins sons beyond
the plough and the hog-trough, such a man, if industrious,
sober, and frugal, cannot do belter than turn sheep-farmer
in the Australian lands, always hearing this in mind, that
bo must leave behind him all prejudices as to old modes
and habits, and determine to adapt himself to the customs
and usages in practice in (lie. colonies.
Next to tin’s class of emigrants will ho the, non-pro-
fessional fanning emigrant, Urn young gentleman, the
lawyer, the clerk, having perhaps £l OOO to £l5OOO, but
no knowledge whatever of the, culling ho is about to follow.
Nor such there, is an equal prospect of doing well, on the
one condition that ho goes out determined to work:
that ho geos out without any stock of kid gloves, or
pomatums, or novels. What his mode of proceeding, on
arrival, should be, wo will point out in the following
chapter.
We do not attempt to address ourselves to the monied
emigrant, the, man of £lO,OOO and upwards; he will not
o


Ije likely to seek or take our advice, and wo prefer
reserving our space to more useful purposes.
Having thus told the reader "who should emigrate,” it
may not be out of place if we say a few words as to those
who should not.
Young unmarried women, unacquainted with any kind
of farm or agricultural occupation, would be of little use
in a new colony, where there are few if any openings for
such professions as governesses, milliners, &c. The dmw-
ing-room accomplishments of singing, dancing, painting,
and crochet, would stand no shadow of a chonco against
the highly-prized virtues of churning, baking, preserving,
cheese-making, and similar matters. Tho possessors of
only such as the former qualities had better not incur tho
expense of outfit and voyage; better to be disappointed
at home and amongst friends, than in a far-off country,
away from kith and kin. Young men, accustomed to ft
feather-bed existence, who have no idea of turning their
hands to any thing, or of roughing it in tho hush, who
imagine that something easy and lucrative will bo sura to
turnup where labour is at such a high premium, those too,
wo warn against leaving their old fire sides. Australia is
no fitting place for such.
Mechanics and artificers who are in good and regular
employment, will do wisely to pause ore they incur the,
cost of so long a voyage, and consider whether it may not
be prudent to let well alone. We would sny the same
precisely, to all young men in business or in official employ,
who are paying their way, and in a fair way to do
moderately well. There are, of course, exceptional cases,


such iis when a trader ov mechanic may bo thriving in his
occupation, and yol, uni. son Ins way to provide I’m*, or
give Mure employment to, n growing family, or his
Jioaltlnnny require, the bland healing of the soft Australian
climate, or it may bo the wife, or soiao of the family may
need this.
In all our remarks in this chapter, wo have taken no
account of the gold diggings, and of the persons who
should venture out in quest of the, precious metal, as we,
intend to dwell especially upon that subject in our con-
cluding chapter.


CHAPTER VI.
GENERAL INFORMATION TO EMIGRANTS OF ALL CLASSES.
THE OUTFIT :—THE PASSAGE:-THE ARRIVAL
Haying fully determined upon emigrating to Australia;,
and if by the aid of the government funds, having been
accepted, the emigrant should muster all Ids or Ilnur
possessions in the shape of personal effects, and sco that
none be retained but such as arc indispensable to colonial
life, either in town or in "the bush,” ns the interior is
called. Any thing beyond actual requirements is not only
needless, but really a serious hindrauoo and heavy expense,
for it must bo remembered that, unless the settler intern in
to locate in a sea-ooast town, ho may have to journey ft
hundred or two of miles over a rough toilsome country,
where every additional pound weight is an additional
burthen.
As regards clothing, the points to consider, for tho
permanent stock, are utility and durability: any thing for
mere show would be worse than useless. Let msu, for
instance, avoid all sorts of fancy waistcoats, dandy boots,
or costly cravats and tics: let women shun the idle
vanities of silks and satins^, of laco and ribbons, of runny
flounces and fashionable bonnets; and lot both men null


women forgot that there arc mi«h lliinga in (ho world as
kid gloves, liwondor water, tmtl toilet tables. Hooka are.
difficult of transport from their woigiil, ami though uot
to he discarded, should lie few and select. There is one
book, t!m Imuk, which we should hope no emigrant family
would ho without, for in a country whore, the presence of
a clergyman must necessarily bo of rare occurrence, if
uot uu impossibility, the household will stand in far more
need of Us soothing iulluenw; a book or two of instructive
tides, should (Imre he children, and, if possible, a few
volumes of sliuidard English literature, with a few lighter
for the wife, ivill he quit u sufficient. As for works on
agriculture, cattle, dairies, gardening, cookery, and such
like, they are worse than uaele.su, they but serve to mis-
lead ; the, heat book to study all such matters from is that
of practical experience,
We would also caution the emigrant, unless he bo a
trader, against taking out any kind of " venture * as it is
called, any goods on speculation. Ho will find such things
entail an infinity of trouble and vexation, and in all proba-
bility disappointment. Ho had hotter leave all such
matters to those who understand them, and who have time
and experience to hoot.
The mechanic or artisan will always do right to take
with him such tools ns he requires in his occupation, and
if ho has the ready means to spare, a few extra things in
that way. Every one, indued, who is likely to go into
“ the bush ” to rough it, would do well and wisely to have
by thorn a tool or two for emergency, and, of course,
learn to use them, though only in a rough way. Thu
g 2


cockney shopman, or clerk, or weaver' will find that to facf
able to chive a nail, or saw a board, or fell a tree, or lay
a brick, will prove of infinite greater benefit to Mm thaw
any book knowledge.
To those intending to emigrate under favour of the?
government funds, we need say nothing hero as to outfit,
passage, &o.; we have told them where to apply, and
who will be received; all else they can learn at the office
of the commissioners. To such, however, as from circum-
stances cannot avail themselves of that opportunity, it
will bo well to give some idea of the necessary stock o f
clothing for the voyage. In doing this we may remark to
all classes and grades of emigrants, that it is id-ways
desirable to take with them, for use on ship-board, every
article of apparel at all fit for use, however old and shabby,
and so economise their regular stock for colonial wear.
This applies especially to hoots and shoes, any thing in the
shape of which is quite good enough for ship use, as the
salt water spoils all it touches.
Each passenger, whether steerage or intermediate, is
allowed to, take baggage to the extent of twenty cubic
feet, free of expense, and which is quite sufficient for
most persons. The regulation regarding passengers’ lug-
gage is, that only one box or hag he allowed breach sleep-
ing berth, sufficient to contain a month’s clothing, at the
end of which time they have access to their chests in the
hold, replacing the clothes used by clean. In this way
every emigrant should he provided with two chests, one
large and one small, or one canvas hag, the large chest
being painted, and having their names distinctly marked
on them.


Tins following list of articles fur mi oullU for a married
couple, contains as few filings us I,hoy could well go with;'
of course Uio more they can udd (he killer, as It is nut
possible! to wash im the voyage, unions if, lie a few very
wmill things, the supply of water being limited to throe
quarts a day. Ifor (lie wile:—throe cotton dresses, one
pair stays, four petticoats, sixteen chemises, two Humid
peltieuats, twelve pairs eottou stockings, four pairs black
worsted ditto, six night dresses and caps, sis pocket hand-
kerchiefs, four handkerchiefs for the nock, sis caps, two
hmmets, cloak and shawl, one pair hoots, two pair shoos,
and eight towels, i’or Hie. husband:—two fustian jackets,
waistcoats, and trousers, three pairs canvas trousers, one
over-coat, two fell hats, one Scotch cap, sixteen striped
shirts, two Guernsey shirts, twelve pairs cotton half hose,
four pairs worsted hose, six handkerchiefs, eight towels,
two pairs boots, and one pair shoes, strong hut not heavy.
Children in like proportion. The family will also require
a iloek mattress and holster, one pair blankets, one cover-
let, sis pairs cotton sheets, two or three table cloths, six
pounds yellow soap, three pounds merino soap, motal
wash-hand basin, knives and forks, one quart tin hook-pot,
one coffee pot, comb and brush, besides a supply of string,
sewing materials, tape, buttons, &a, Should a little extra
means ho at command. Id. it ho expended in laying in
small supplies of calicoes, brown hollaud, camlet, lino can-
vas, &o. ; and it will always bo desirable that the wife
makes as many of her clothes on board ship as possible,
as the occupation servos to pass away many an otherwise
idle, heavy hour.


A superior class of emigrants, men of a few hundreds,
may lake (In; Mowing as a suflWent list for the voyage ;—
three dozen regatta shirts, common, to he used Ural} one
doamhest regatta shirts; six best, white shirts, for town;
twelve pairs drawers, cotton thread ; three dozen pairs
socks, cotton or angola; six pairs worsted socks; six pairs
shoes or hoots, strong Iml not heavy; one (doth cap; 0110
straw hut and one i'et hut, as you generally lose one or
two overheard; a south-wester; one pilot-cloth coat; two
body coats, alpaca; six blouses ; two pairs doth trousers 5
three pairs alpaca ditto; ten pairs while ducks; a large,
canvas clothes bag; a horse-hair or cocoa-nut llbto mat-
tress 5 a pair of 40a. blankets; eight pairs of sheets; a
coverlet; a cabin ■wash-basin and table; a pair of .ship
chest of drawers; a looking glass, combs, brushes, &o. ;
a ship cabin candle lamp, with 1011 m. composite candles 5
(libs, soap; some marine soap, all packed in chests or in the
drawers; with tapes, buttons, sewing thread, needles, &e,
¥or the hush ho will require, in additiontwo pairs
moleskin trousers, strapped inside all the way down; four
pairs moleskin trousers; twelve, Morentiue shirts; six
pairs boots, strong 'Wellingtons or tmelo jacks; one, mon-
key jacket; two shooting coats: one drab greatcoat., like
a soldier's, loose made; a pair or two of tho best spars,
plated; twelve, coarse silk pocket handkerchiefs ; a good
head-stall snaffle bridle,—-the saddle had better bo bought
in tho colony, also saddlebags.
Tho above calculations are nil based upon a voj'ngo of
four months; for although tho usual time occupied by
good vessels is not more than 00 to 05 days, it would not
bo prudent to arrange the outfit on that soldo.


'Passengers an- divided iuln Dure kinds-- .cabin, inter-
mediate, and alei'rage. Tin* UrM r! e-. hudmV.s all Dm
poop anil aim cabins between decks, Such passengers
taka their meals with (lie captain and ullieev.s in the middy,
ami iu'ii provided wllli indiiuili’d fresh meat, poultry, beer,
wine, <W. Tim win id’ payment varies necm'ding In Dm
liddi! fund,sited mid size of (la* cabin, ranging from .tfl) lo
JJ IO mil'll person; families being charged Iras.
Intermediate passages nisi from ,i'i."i lit £JS, according
lo diet ing and sixc. of ship, Tint iti'i'inmmidaliim eonsials
in cabins linilt up in a temporary manner between dunks,
aliwd, .S fuel by 0 feel, with four nr six sleeping berths in
midi, though JVmr is ampin Air lint .sjiaro. Tint die! mg of
this t'liisa is lived ueimrding to a cei'lain scale, cmmislinp
nf hncf, pork, preserved fresh meal, Ilnur, biscuits, raisins,
rice, pease, preserved pnl aloes, lea, cnllae, sugar. Initial',
tta., with Divan quart* nf water daily, (looking and moss
utensils, and sometimes bedding, are included in Dio shove
charges.
Tim slccragn is Ilia lowest class, and for these only
sleeping places are. put up on either aidu of the lower
deck; (hough for married people sopnmlo bertha urn
erected, Bedding is sound imert added, and always cook-
ing and mass utensils. The scale of dietary for those
differs only from the former in being a little less in
ipuiutily.
Too mnah cure cannot he taken in the aolceUon of a
ship commanded by a respectable man and a good sailor,
for on this much of the comfort of a voyage depends,
llespeotablo old-established ship-brokers are the best par


tics to apply to; and the vessel with live greatest height
between docks, and altogether the largest, should bo se-
lected.
To young settlers, especially married people, who avo
desirous of making their small capital go us far as possible,
wo would say avoid the coal; of cabin, or even intermediate
passage; engage, a space between decks at Hie steerage
price, $2O to $lB each, and employ the ship’s carpenter
to run up a little cabin, lilting it np with a few useful
things, siusk as a common liltcv, tin wash basin and jug,
two quart hook-pots, one pint ditto, tin plates and dishes,
knives and forks, tea and coffee pots, small water-jug,
and a ship caudle-lamp. Before sailing every thing should
bo safely lashed to prevent their rolling about and doing
mischief. In addition to the. above, a supply of provisions
will bo found acceptable, as the ship’s dietary may not bo
such as the emigrant and his wife have been accustomed
to; say 1 owt. of flour, 1 owl;, of potatoes, a few pounds
of tea, coffee, and cocoa; some candles, a hundred eggs,
greased and packed in salt, some suet, butter, cheese,
and biscuits; a dozen or two tins of preserved provisions,
a side of bacon mid a couple of bams, with a little wiuo
mid some bottled beer. The whole of the above might bo
bad for about $2O, which, added to the cost of the steer-
age passage for a couple, say fell), will not amount to
more than the cost of a single cabin passage.
To show the necessity existing for duo caution to bo
exercised by emigrants when semiring a passage, tho
following extract from a letter is given: it is from a settlor
at Melbourne, just received by his friends in Banff:—"An


emigrant should, if possible, see his skip, choose his berth,
mul make, kin bargain personally, or by n confidential
friend. Trust nothing In owners or llieir agents, I would
not believe, one. word (Uni limy would say. Just tnke tlm
skip wo came out with, For example. In Ike, printed kills
she was said to ho jflOO tons Imrllicn; site was in reality
under COO ions. {Shu was said to bo lilted up witk patent
ventilators, which, on examination, I found la lie an old
sank will) tlm bottom out 1 Tko agent told ns tke very
morning we wont on board that tko skip was fitted up
witk all sorts of hatha—-cold, warm, and shower—which
would he such a grand thing for children. Well, after
being a few weeks at sen, I began to wonder where tko
baths wore, as I could sec them nowhere. At last the
captain was asked, “ Where are the balks P ” “ Ok,” was
tke reply, “there is an old cask up at tko foroeastle, which
any of tko sailors will fill for a consideration 1 ” When I
mentioned what the agent had said, ho laughed, and said,
“Do you really believe all that a skip’s agent says P ”
adding, “there never was a bath in this skip.”
Wo would advise every emigrant to find himself some
regular occupation during Ike voyage for some portion
of the day, especially before and after dinner. By so
managing, the remainder of the day will bo found to pass
away pleasantly and rapidly 5 and if all acted on this
suggestion, there would bo fewer unpleasantnesses oc-
curring on the outward voyage, than often take place.
On arriving in the colony, whichever it may happen to
be, the government emigrant will be provided with shelter
and rations for a short time, until he can obtain employ


meut, failing which, ho will ho placed on tho public works.
Those who go out on their own resources will, however,
.seldom remain long without (hiding .some one willing to
employ them. The host (hue to arrive in Australia, is
between tho months of November ami ‘February, as,
during that period, tho sheep-farmers and stoek-hohlors
como down to tho towns with their drays of wool, or howls
of cattle for sale, mid are prepared to hire and take back
with thorn fresh supplies of labourers with their luggage.
Emigrants should be,wave, of lingering in the towns,
where they can do little more, than waste their substance.
Should there bo no farmers in from the hush at the time
of arrival, let the labourer start off in quest of it; should
ho have a family, they may bo left in charge of any re-
spectable party with other fresh settlors. He will bo
sure to find work at uo great distance, and, at any rate,
always a shelter and a meal at night, with a hearty wel-
come.
Small capitalists intending to turn farmers cannot do
better than deposit their means in one of the luniks for a
year, whilst they look about; them, with a view to pick up
information us to country, mode of life, cattle, and many
other matters), Nothing should bo entered upon rashly,
especially tho purchase ot cattle, which should never ho
done until a run or a farm be secured. It may oven bo
worth while, before settling down, to pay a visit overland
to one of the neighbouring colonies, just to see how they
manage matters. Some months spent in this way,
amongst shepherds and stockmen, with a peep at a sheav-
ing and boiling-down establishment, will be time well
spent, and never regretted,


CHAPTER V .
LIFE AT THE GOLG DIGGINGS. REQUIREMANTS OF A
DIGGER, WITH THE GOVERNMENT RULES AND REGU-
LATION IN FORCE, AT THE GOLD-FIELDS.
Having in previous chapters described the localities of
the. gold-fields of New Smith Wales and Victoria, wo shall
now describe them wilh more mimileuess, and lay before
the. reader such further details as may enable him to form
a correct estimate of a “Lite at the Diggings.”
It will be, scarcely necessary to dwell upon the pecu-
liarities of each pavl ienlur "gold-field;” a picture-of one
will stand as a perfect representation of them all; for
though their positions be different, the lay of the precious
metal, and the. mode of proceeding varies in no respect in
the mines of Ophir from those in the rich fields of Balla-
rat or Mount Alexander, The following sketch, therefore,
must be taken ns applying to each and all of the present
known "gold diggings;” it la from the pen of a corres-
pondent of one of the local papers
"It certainly was the most extraordinary sight X ever
beheld. Imagine a valley, varying in width from one hun-
dred to five hundred yards, enclosed on .either side by high
ranges of hills, thickly timbered. Through the middle of
it


this valley there winds a rapid little stream, or ' creek,’
ns it is termed hero. On the banka of the creek, and
among the trees of the surrounding ranges, wore clus-
tered touts, bark huts formed after the native fashion
with houghs of trees, and every kind of temporary habita-
tion which could ho put up in the course of au hour or
two. Some idea may bo formed of the number of touts
and other habitations, when I say that there wore then at
least five thousand men at work within a space of about
half a mile up the creek. All these had collected together
in a few weeks; for it was only in the latter end of August
that gold was first found in tins out-of-the-way forest
valley.
"In consequence of the regulation as to space to be
occupied by each minor, the workings worn concentrated
in a small part of the hill, where the gold was chiefly to
be found. This spot was perfectly riddled with holes, of
from eight to sixteen feet square, separated by narrow
pathways, which formed the means of communication be-
tween each hole and the creek, A walk about this honey-
comb of holes was most amusing. The whole place
swarmed with men; some at work in the pits; others
carrying down the auriferous earth to ho washed in the
creek, in wheel-barrows, hand-barrows, sacks, mid tin
dishes on their heads. In some of the holes I even saw
men digging out hits of gold from between the stones
with a table-knife,
“ Busy as this scene wm, I think the scene at the creek
was busier. Both banks, for half a mile, were lined with
men, hard at work washing the earth in cradles. Each


cradle employs three men; and all Uio cradles are placed
close to one another, at intervals of not more than a yard.
The noise produced hy the incessant ‘rock-rock’ of these
cradles was like that of an immense factory. This, to-
gether with continual hammering of a thousand picks, and
the occasional crashing fall of immense trees, whoso roots
had been undermined by some mole of a gold-digger, made
a confusion of sounds of which you will find it difficult to
form a just idea.”
The modes of operating of course vary with the moans
at the command of those employed. One man may bo
scon poking amongst the rocks with a small pick and a
“prospecting pan,” in quest of a now working. Ho
takes a little of the sand or soil upon his pan, end inspects
it closely, separating the particles carefully with his clasp-
knife, whore ho is not near water, and then ho blows off
the dust to discover the groins of gold. This is the primi-
tive method, of course, in all countries, of collecting it,
and pursued only in this instance of "prospecting,” or
when the labourer prefers working singly, with the
chances of being rewarded with a lump of gold that will
repay his loss of time in digging and turning over tho
sand when there is none. These processes will, before
long, he much improved; for already companies have boon
formed for tho purpose of working the Australian gold-
fields hy means of machinery, tho staff of which are hy
this time on their way.
Tho cradle, already mentioned, is a groat improvement
on. tho "prospecting” hand-working process; it consists
of a machine precisely similar ,to the well-known hahy


rocker, only nix or eight feet long, without the arched
covering tit tlio head, whore there is a grilling or .sieve to
prevent the coarse stones from falling into the bottom of
the cradle. At the foot is an opening, through which a
current of water is passed, carrying oil' the lighter earthy
matter and leaving the sediment, of sand and gold. This
is taken out and left to dry, when the sand is blown away,
and the gold, being of greater specilio gravity, is left
behind. In this mode of working, it requires four persons
to manage the machine syslemalieidly; one digger to raise
the sand, another carrying it to the grating of the, cradle,
a third to rock or shako it violently, and a fourth to pour
on water.
Continuing our description of the diggings, from the
source previously intimated,, we. find tins following night
scene : —‘'Strange as was (ho appearance of the place, by-
day, it was still stranger at night. 'Before every tent was
a lire; and in addition to this general illumination, there
was not unfroquoutly a special one, the accidental burning-
down of some tent or other. These Hl,tie, conflagrations
produced splendid effects j the bright glare suddenly light-
ing up the gloomy masses of trees, and Dm groups of wild-
looking, diggers. Noise, 100, was a prominent feature of
‘ Ballarat by night,’ h’rmu dusk till eleven, p.in., there
was .a continuous discharge of (iro-arnm; for almost every
one brought some kind of weapon with him to Die diggings.
Then there was a baud which discoursed by no means
eloquent music, nino-louths of the score being monopolised
by the drum:”
"Wo learn that the conduct of the diggers is exemplary.


Most of them (lease, from labour on (lie Sunday, mul sjmml
tlmt day ns they would a])eiul it if tliey were in (own.
The first kef; of apirils (nkeu into mi Amdralimi gold-field
had Us head punched mil. by (lie, miners; and government
has since assisted them in the endeavour to repress the use
of stronger stimulants than wine, or beer, it is related,
also, of n man who, being drunk, had dropped a bottle
which contained bis gold, that ho had the bottle and its
contents duly restored to him by the finder, who took
sonic trouble to find him. How great is the contrast be-
tween ilie orderly behaviour of the diggers at the gold-
fields in Australia and the disorders of California. There
are few fields, wo are, told, at which a miner might not
have Ids wife and family; if he could provide aeoommoda*
tion for them, they would ho as safe, ami meet with just as
much respect, as if they lived in their own house in town.
Speaking of the eager anxiety of every capable person,
to bo np and away to the gold regions, a correspondent
says“ Every available vehicle has been called into requi-
sition, from a bullock dray to a wheel-barrow; and no
small surprise was created the other day by the appearance
of a man driving before him the last-mentioned vehicle,
containing his provisions and swag which lie had wheeled
from Ashby to the Buninyong gully in two days and a half.
Tho man appeared quite fresh, and as indifferent as the
wheelbarrow itself. Another brought his cradle (to
separate the gold) from New Town on his back, and tho
only complaint that ho made was, that he was detained
when leaving New Town, by a short gentleman in black,
with a white neck-tie, who accused him of running away
ii 3


with liis pulpit, but wlm after examining its'
construction, anil bade (ha man (foil .speed—ami cm lie
aped, through mire and mud, bog and quagmire, until bo
reached the diggings, whore it is hoped such perseverance
will meet a fitting reward.”
The gold mania was spreading far and wide at the date
of our lust despatches from Australia; amongst other
complaints of the scarcity of hands in all the towns, wo
find one of the editors writing thus; —“ In some, of the sub-
urban villages, the male, population has almost completely
disappeared. The proportion of the sexes is reversed.
Women and children are the only representatives of whole
streets of families. The licensed victuallers are off almost
in a body. Fabulous sums arc being quoted us the price,
of loads of wood mid water. Lighter-men demand B 1 a
day. Tho shops of general dealers are. bore, and there
shut up, Tho steamers bring passengers at tho rate of
seventy a day, but ns all these start immediately for tho
diggings, they arc of no avail in replenishing tho popula-
tion. Staid plodding citizens and retired capitalists cannot
resist the infection, and saddle their horses, ami are off
just to have n peep. How lung we, shall be able to bring
out the. Dotty Advertiser and the sixteen-page Melltyeueer
twice a week, is bard to tell. One of our compositors
wont to have a look at tho diggings, and returned In four
days with a four-ouuoo nugget and two ounces in dust,
(dust as large as split peas.) Should the worst como to
the worst, wo have a little press that wo can pack in a
whod-barrow, and with that wo can go tho way of till Jlcsh,
to the Ballarat diggings.”


: The preceding account of (he, scarcity of labour, is
cmilirmcd by u killer frmii a resident at Mtdhminm In a
(Wain! iii tliis emiidry, mmived Iml. a week since ; in Him
it is h( all'll that “ the f*old discoveries have unhinged
society here altogether. Many have given up business,
shut their slaipss, ami gums In the diggings, Shoemakers,
tailors, wrigbls, blacksmiths, ami all other trades urn at
a great loss for men to parry on I heir Imsinesa; the con-
aequeuee is, (hat wages are up, and every thing rising in
price. A pair of bouts which I could have, bought three.
\voeks ago for ISh., would now cost £2, and almost every
thing else in like proportion, A friend of mine last week
offered a blacksmith £1 per week of wages, ami was
refused; the nmu Ims gone to (lie diggings. There are
only two men in the shop of the. individual referred to,
mid he could employ twenty. One firm could employ just
iiow upwards of fifty men, such as black,smiths, millers,
Cartwrights, fmnulcra, finishers, and labourers. Many-
other establishments in town are equally destitute.
Another firm has stopped this week for want of hands;
the. foreman of their millers had £3 per week, with a free
house, Jive, and water, but he has resigned all and gone to
the diggings. Gome here, wo have plenty of room, plenty
of food, plenty of money; if you do not choose to dig
for gold in the bush, you can work for it in the town.
Wo require men of all trades, the only qualification is,
that they bo able and willing to work.” '
■ Vast indeed lias been the golden harvest already reaped
by the first workers in those marvellous fields; manyliavo,
within a few weeks, laid the foundation of fortunes, and


from nil that wo learn, there is abundance for thousands
of diggers for years to conic. The precious metal is found
in all sorts of positions, sometimes in the “ matr «■,” as
it; is called, being in solid lumps of pure ore, weighing
from mi ounce to many pounds weight: the alluvial gold
is called “ gold dust,” yet much of it is found ns large as n
split pen; this latter is chiefly found by the washing pro-
cess. Further accounts nro received here of some most
extraordinary instances of good fortune, such, for instance,
ns tho finding of one hundred weight of pure gold which
lately happened nt or near Bathurst. Alluding to this,
a local paper says, "Bathurst is mad again; tho delirium
of golden fever has returned with increased intensity.
Mon moot together, staro stupidly nt one another, mid
wonder what will happen next. Every body lias a hundred
times seen a hundred weight of flour: a hundred weight
of sugar is an everyday fact; hut a hundred weight of
gold is a phrase scarcely known in the English language.
It is'beyond tho range of our ordinary ideas; a sort of
physical incomprehensibility; but that it is a material
existence, our own eyes boro witness. This magnificent
mass was accidentally discovered by an educated aboriginal
in tho service of Dr. Kerr; who, while keeping his
master’s sheep, had his attention attracted to something
shining on a block of quarts, and breaking off a portion
with his tomahawk, this hitherto-hidden treasure stared
him in tho face.”
The discovery, however, of "nuggets” weighing ouo
or more pounds is by no means a rare occurrence, at tho
same time it must not be concealed that very many of tho


miners do not obtain more id. this work limn (bey might
by any oilier ordinary occupation, mul Ibis 100 after labour
of the most severe and trying kind.
Wc will now speak of the regulations laid down by the
loeal authorities for the issuing of licenses to dig for gold,
and in doing so we must remind the render (lint by law all
mines of gold, and all gold in its natural place ol deposit,
whether oulbo lands of the crown or of private individuals,
belong by prerogative to the crown. And whoever digs ou
the waste lauds of the erowu in scareli of gold metal or
ore, without having lieeu first duly authorised, is liable to
lie prosecuted both criminally and civilly. The loeal
governments of New South Wales mid Victoria have,
however, laid down regulations hy which parties may
obtain the necessary authority to dig for gold. To dig
for tdlamtl gold, whether ou public or private lands, a
monthly license is necessary, for which the charge is
£lloa. To obtain matrix gold a written permission from
the commissioner of the district is also requisite 5 security
for the payment of a royally of ten per cent, for gold
found on crown lands, ami five per cent, for that found ou
private lands, must be given. In order further to facili-
tate the operations of individuals, the Governments of
New South Wales and Victoria have undertaken to convey
gold from the diggings to Sydney and Melbourne, at the
charge of one per cent, on the value of the gold, say
£3 da. per ounce for washed gold, and £3 Bs, per ounce
for gold obtained by amalgamation. The allowance of
land for each license was arranged as follows 9 feet
frontage to the stream to each parly of two persons; IS


feet to eaoli party of three persona; 18 foot to cadi party
of four persons; 31 feet to caoli party of five persons,
and 31 feet to each party of six persons. Where there is
no frontage to a stream, 20 feet square am to he allowed
to each party of throe persons.
A license of £llos. was also necessary for every eight,
square feet of ground occupied by diggers for their tents
and horses.
The above, of course, refers to crown lauds. When
gold is found on tho lands of private parties, as has
already been the ease, tho government s till require licenses
to ho taken out for tho privilege of digging there, as on
crown lands, tho proprietors, at tho same time, claiming a
payment for tho exorcise of tho said right. Parties
having gold on their estates have laid down rules by which
miners may know on what footing they may search for tho
precious ore. One miter, from tho vicinity of the Bath-
urst diggings, says,—“l understand that Dr, 801 l is
allowing parties to take up claims on this creek on tho
following terms, which appear very reasonable, Any num-
ber of men may take a claim of tho usual dimensions, by
paying £6 for the first mouth, COs. for tho second, and
2Ss, for tho third. Of course they will have to take go-
vernment licenses for each man, but tho private arrange-
ment is for tho party.”
Wo learn in another quarter that others are noting on
the same plan, with additional regulations, tending to tho
promotion of good order and rootitudo of conduct. Tho
following extract speaks volumes, and it is to bo hoped
the good example may ho followed by many;-—“Wo r«-


forrod before to I,lm regulations issued before by Mr. Bad-
gory, under which bo grants licenses to search for and
dig gold on his property. We then gave some of the
more important; they arc now printed and posted in the
most conspicuous parts of the town and neighbourhood.
One of these regulations, wo are glad to see, provides that
the proprietor reserves to himself the right of refusing to
issue or renew a license to any person who shall have been
' convicted of any crime, or breach of the law, or shall
conduct himself at the diggings in a disorderly or riotous
manner, or offend against decency.’ ”
From all that has been said in the previous pages, it
must bo obvious that, to a certain class, the prospect
held out by the Australian gold diggings is of a most
alluring character. There is but little doubt, Unit to the
date of tbe latest intelligence, brilliant as bad been the
findings, tbe threshold of these wonderful places had only
been entered; treasures of greater magnitude awaited the
seekers, and wo shall not bo surprised to learn that the
groat mountain chains of the South Land contain within
them gold that shall occupy the labours of thousands for-
mally years to come.
Yet ii; by no means follows as a matter of course, that
nil those who seek will find. Already, in the first scram-
ble for fortune, hundreds have turned back from the gold-
fields, ill or exhausted, unable to face the hardships apd
privations of such a life of toil. It is no child’s ghtf to
bo digging for a dozen hours, up to the knees in water,
exposed to cold winds and perhaps a pelting rain; it is no


slight thing to sloop in a cloth teal, no a leafy hul, a few
inches from damp cold ground, ns scores have, already
found.
None hut such as Imre heen accustomed to handle Urn
spade, or In do similar work, should venture out as a
“digger.” Those who are strangers In hard work should
go out satisfied to take the place of such as have left their
colonial employ for the diggings; and they may depend
that by quietly settling to such occupations as shepherd-
ng or stock-keeping, by no in nans laborious, they will lie
laying the foundation of future prosperity and happiness
more certainly than by rushing in the crowd to the allur-
ing gold-fields. But he his choice which,it may, let him
determine to act at mice,—the sooner he is away the
better■: let him follow the advice of Lady Macbeth to her
guests,
“ Nut to stand upon the order of (heir going,
.lint go at om:e.”
o. Tirrup ANT> MON, I»RTNtKNS, SOUTH fIASTMfi BTUKKT.


PHILIPS’ CHEAP
MAPS FOR EMIGRANTS.
' r'v t: ' .\j oa isl„yt, cofoon’d, or Two .
'• - ' '>‘ v f“ r.w, for the jmkct,
A NEW MAP
nt‘ 'fm;
GOLD-WELDS OF AUSTRALIA
<»■> A
Ml Hi,. uw«t Hi' Mr. Hakhiuvus,
Ut'vn u, Jim, CI.AHK, nml mliw-Sjin Uio Aurlfi.Tcma
4h-\ Mr!;/ nr/m’ vhr nnd prior,
A
GENERAL MAP OF AUSTRALIA,
rrt u*i: w tn i*mir KomuiKH, an» ijontainino
ml tm; uterhsr
J A«l r /a ?A - 4* sf b>* r.fi Hi ti fuxtuhfc jurat for $r juwk<:t t
A K«nt'« «f Hup* MprriMly (tdApiod for the uao of Emigrants,
TMUCJK GNU BMIX-LtWO BACH.
au&tkaua,
mw SOUTH WAWS K VAN
PITMAN 8 UNO-
HW SfMUNO.
UNITED STATES,
CANADA, NOVA SCOTIA,
NtW DHUNSWIOK. &o.
EMIGRANTS’ MAP OF 1 THE
WORLD.
r ar- •» mu maps.
