

The
British Broadcasting Corporation.
OPERA LIBRETTO
PHILEMON AND
BAUCIS
(GOUNOD)
TO BE BROADCAST ON JUNE 17th, 1927
The words are reprinted from the
Ascherberg, Hopwood and Crew,
Ltd., edition of “Philemon and
Baucis," by kind permission of
Messrs. Ascherberg, Hopwood and
Crew, Ltd.
Printed by THE CORNWALL PRESS LTD., Garden,
London, S.E.I and published by THE BRITHISH BROADCASTING
CORPORATION, Savoy Hill, LOndon W.C.z.


18 th March, 19*7.
Dear Sirs,
Having been in trouble for a long time with a four-valve set, I was
advised to try one of your SUPER-RADIO high tension batteries.
I am pleased to say the effect of this trial has been remarkable.
It has changed my set altogether, the only difficulty now being to restrain
the power.
I thank my friend for his advice.
Yours faithfully.
36 Cells
SiERt
SSigED
eJs±s
A
Cat. No. 1035.
50 Volts
(Nominal)
DIMENSIONS (including lid) SJxSIxS) ins. high.
MAXIMUM ECONOMICAL DISCHARGE RATE, 20 milliamperas.
WEIGHT, 20 lbs.
PRICE .. .. £1 fs. od. each.
Descriptive Catalogue No. 650 on application.
SIEMENS BROTHERS & CO. LTD.,
WOOLWICH, 5.E.18.


P.M. Emission
corrects
z* —^
IV pt W i
w
Summer Time losses
The long light evenings brought by the
change to Summer Time need not reduce
the volume of your radio reception or
cause you to lose the programmes of
more distant stations.
By using valves that have a huge
emission an abundant reserve of power
is available to compensate for the
weakening of incoming signals.
This is where Mullard P.M. Valves with
the wonderful P.M. Filament stand
supreme. Their gigantic P.M. Emission
is a huge source of power that has been
proved by National Physical Laboratory
Test to be constant and lasting.
Make your radio the pleasure and not
the failure of Summer Time by using
Mullard P.M. Valves with the wonderful
P.M. Filament.
Mullard
THE-MASTER, - VALVE
Advt. The Mullard Wireless Service Co., Ltd.,
Mullard House, Denmark Street, London, W.C.2.


NOTES.
THE COMPOSER.
It was in London that Gounod had his first success as a composer, a
prophetic omen of the popularity his work was to achieve in this country
In 1851, parts of his Messe Solennelle for solo voices, chorus, organ and
orchestra, were given at one of Mr. Hullah’s concerts, and aroused much
interest in the English Press ; the Athenaeum spoke of the composer as
“ a poet and musician of a very high order.” Gounod was then already in
his thirty-third year—an age at which some of the great masters had already
established claims to immortality—and had written music of some importance
long before. Enjoying a sound school and university education in the
classics, before entering on his musical studies at the Paris Conservatoire,
he won the second Prix de Rome there in 1837 with a Cantata on the story
of Mary, Queen of Scots, and her Italian minstrel, Rizzio, Two years later
he gained the first Prix de Rome, and accordingly went to Italy for further
study. Roman influence was responsible for the production, among other
works, of two Masses, one for three voices and orchestra, the other for three
voices unaccompanied : it gave him a lifelong interest in the music of the
Church, an interest which not only went hand-in-hand with his devotion to
opera, but influenced it in ways which are easily traced.
It was the theatre—-at once the shortest and the surest way to success
in Prance—which occupied him for many years after his London success in
1851, though amid the operas which he produced in the next decade he
found time to compose several symphonies and some sacred music for the
men’s voices of the Orpheon Society : he was its conductor from 1852 till
1860. His earlier operas, containing though they do passages and isolated
numbers of real beauty and merit, achieved no great success : it was “ Faust ”
which, in March, 1859, raised him to the front rank of contemporary com-
posers. “ Philemon and Baucis ” was his next opera. Composed at first for
the theatre at Baden as a one-act piece, it -was rewritten in. three acts for
the Theatre Lyrique, and produced there in February, 1860. A later revision
made it the two-act work which we now know.
For some years Gounod lived in England, appearing in London at the
Philharmonic, the Crystal Palace, and other concerts. He founded a Choir
which at first bore his own name, becoming afterwards the Albert Hall
Choral Society and eventually the Royal Choral Society. In 1875 he returned
to Paris, and continued his industrious career as composer for the stage.
During his last years, however, he devoted himself with zeal and fervour
to the Church, following up an ideal of dramatic-religious music which began
with Berlioz. All the distinction which France can accord to her sons came
to him in generous measure, and his death at Saint Cloud in 1893. at the
ripe age of seventy-five, was mourned not only as a national loss, but as a
loss to the whole world of music.


The Loudspeaker of
DISTINCTION
which definitely im-
proves with age.
The Very Soul of Music.
CELESIWH
REALISTIC -
Guaranteed 12 months.
BriliTl
Model A 3,
A GREAT TRIBUTE
The A 3 Celestion Radiophone here illustrated was ex-
clusively selected trom all other loudspeakers for supplying
uilicial music in the “ Village of New Ideas ” at Olympia,
'i his same model gives exquisite results when used with
an ordinary 2-Valve Receiver. Us price is £7 .10. 0.
although uiher Celestions are obtainable from £5 .10 0,
FIRST ON MERIT.
Apply for a demonstration and particulars
CELESTION RADIO CO. (B)
29-37, HIGH STREET,
HAMPTON WICK,
KINGSTON-ON-THAMES.
’Phone Kingston 2474.
All Celestion Pro-
ducts gladly demon-
strated at Celestion
Co.’s showroom,33,
Villiers St., Char-
ing Cross, Strand
’Phone; Gerrard 0397
THE STORY.
The tale is taken from the classic mythology. The Phrygians have
incurred the displeasure of Jupiter and he comes down from Olympus himself
to deal with them. He insists on Vulcan accompanying him. The order
must be obeyed, but Vulcan complies with a very bad grace, leaving his
underground smithy unwillingly, and hating the storm, of Jupiter’s creation,
which they have to face on earth. Ever since his unlucky wooing of Venus,
too, Vulcan dreads the derision with which he is met in the upper world.
The song with which he gives vent to his bad temper, with its effective
suggestion in the accompaniment, of the rhythmic clank of the anvil, is one
of the best known and most popular pieces in the opera. Even for Jupiter
the storm proves to be rather overpowering, and the two gods are forced to
take shelter in the humble cottage of the aged couple Philemon and his
wife Baucis. So kindly are they received, and so hospitably used, that
Jupiter rewards the old people by giving them back their youth.
The effect is startling. The bent and withered Baucis emerges as a
bright-eyed winsome girl,- and Jupiter’s susceptible heart is at once smitten
by her charms. He makes no secret of his admiration, until she, fore-
seeing disaster from Phflemon’s jealousy, begs the god to make them old
once more. Jupiter, however, decides to leave them as they are, and the
happy couple begin their wedded life anew.
The text of the vocal numbers is printed by courtesy of Messrs.
Ascherberg, Hopwood and Crew, Ltd.


M
&
-r
THEY BRING THE MUSIC NEARER
THEY MARE THE MUSIC CLEARER
and yet they are no dearer
than any other valves. Cosmos Valves are valves of
sheer musical virtuosity. Sure, exquisitely sensitive and
sympathetic, they give your set a new soul.
They are wonderful musicians, the Cosmos Valves, and
keep their youth, knowing no fatigue. From Electrical
Dealers everywhere.
SHORT PATH
RADIO VALVES
for ail circuits
METRO-VICK SUPPLIES. LTD., Metro-Vick House,
155, Charing Cross Road, London, W.C.2.
&
w


VERY music
"f v _ —J* w a l « 1-
lover who “listens
in” wants good
reproduction, and for
good reproduction it
is absolutely necessary
to have a really good
loud speaker such
as the Amplion.


PHILEMON AND BAUCIS
An Opera in Two Acts
English words by
JOSEPH BENNETT.
Music by
CHARLES GOUNOD
DRAMATIS PERSONAS.
Baucis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Soprano
Philemon .. .. .. .. Tenor
Jupiter .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Bass
Vulcan .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Baritone
INTRODUCTION PASTORALE.
ACT I.
Scene : The interim' of the cottage, of Philemon and Baucis.
Scene I.
Duel.—Philemon and Baucis.
“ EVENING SHADES NOW ARE FALLING.”
Philemon, and Baucis —Evening shades now are falling
And nightingale is calling,
To our home in peace we come.
Evening shades now are falling
And nightingale is calling,
To our home in peace we come—
To our dear home.
In peace we come.
Philemon —No more for us the mazy dances !
Baucis —We’re not so blithe as once we were !
Philemon amd Baucis —He truly wise.
Life’s joy enhances
Who patiently old age doth bear.


Philemon —Each season in its train is bringing
Both dear delights and ills we fear.
Rands —When summer days afar are winging
Rest we resigned to winter drear.
Philemon —Eor life is sweet while love remaineth,
Bauds —And we can love though we are old.
Philemon and Bauds —Thus my heart still its bliss retaineth.
Till in death I shall fold my hands ;
Thus my heart still its bliss retaineth,
Till in death I shall fold my hands.
Philemon —So we, regret nor envy knowing,
Leave the gay dance and merry lay.
Philemon and Bauds —Leave the gay dance and merry lay
To those whose hearts with youth are glowing.
Happy maidens, happy maidens,
And swains so gay.
Bauds —Once, like them I lived in singing ;
Philemon —Through life’s fair garden did I rove ;
Bauds —Carolled I as through air winging,
Like the songsters of the grove.
Philemon —Strangely moved with new horn feeling,
I blissful, trembled at thy voice.
Bauds —Love’s god then, upon me stealing,
One day fixed for aye my choice ;
Philemon —When our wedding bells were pealing
Never more did man rejoice.
Philemon and Baucis —lmage dear and cherished
Of sweet pleasures that perished 1
0 memTy of past days,
Of morning’s lustrous rays !
Upon our spirits beaming,
Give back, as to our youth,
Give once more to our happy hearts
Their first love and truth.
Philemon —Dear Baucis.
Bauds —Dear Philemon.
Philemon —How lucky for us that we had no hand in the young
folks’ wild doings : the laws of Olympus used to be re-
spected ; nowadays one sees youth in its blindness,
outraging the gods on the very threshold of their altars.
What I am afraid of is that Jupiter will lose patience
with their blasphemies. And Mercury can be in no
mood to forgive the insult they put upon him.


Baucis —What insult *
Philemon— The heavenly messenger came down among us a little
while ago, disguised as a mere mortal. He came, it was
said, to see for himself the wickedness of the people of
this country, so that he might bear faithful report on
high to the master of the gods. At the sound of their
sacrilegious clamour, in front of the profaned altar, he
let his just wrath break forth ; then, hunted, assailed
on all sides by that crowd of madmen, he was seen to
disappear in a cloud, promising terrible vengeance.
Baucis —Merciful heaven, we are undone.
Philemon —The impious spirit of the age had soon effaced all memory
of these dread happenings ; their hearts free of all mis-
giving, the crazy people make sacrifice but to their own
pleasures ! [Sound of voices and instruments heard with-
out.] Listen, ’tis the choir of Bacchantes passing close
by our threshold. [Both arise and listen.]
Chorus. —“ DAUGHTERS OF ATHOR.'
Daughters of Athor, wild Bacchantes,
Hands join and dance in merry round.
Follow the choir of Corybantes,
Hark, the clashing cymbals resound !
The wolves and panthers hiding
Amid the forest drear
Our voices hear,
And venture from their dens confiding
For warnings what care we !
Our god shall pleasure be !
Ah ! daughters of Athor, wild Bacchantes,
Follow the choir of Corybantes,
Hark, the clashing cymbals resound !
Join hands, and dance in merry round,
Join hands, follow the choir of Corybantes,
And dance in merry round.
Philemon —May their impious festival but run its course without
our aid, and may Jupiter have mercy upon them. As
for us, dear wife, we are safe beneath the care of our
household gods. Let us drive away unseemly fears,
and rejoice to find ourselves once more in this place,
where hand in hand, we may be happy, loving one another
as of old.
Baucis —Dear Philemon, night is at hand : ’tis the hour for our
evening meal. Let thy faithful servant prepare the
table for the repast. Do thou meanwhile set alight the
lamp and make a little fire on the hearth, to shed its glow
on our happiness together. I leave thee but a moment.


Scene 2.
The Stobm.
Philemon (alone) —Go, dear better-half, faithful comrade of my
passing days—go ; age has not yet so withered my strength
but that I may still bear my part in the household tasks :
and if ever danger threatened thW, thy old Philemon
would defend thee like any youth of twenty years ! [He
lights a lamp, and stoops to revive the fire on the hearth.
Holding of wind is heard, and rain falling on the roof of
the oottage .] But the sky is hid behind dark clouds !
The wind howls in anger, and rain pours through the roof
of my poor house ! Whence comes this sudden tempest ?
[Knocking is heard on the door of the cottage .] Someone
knocks. Let us open. [Opens the door. Jupiter and
Vulcan are seen on the threshold . j
Scene 3.
Trio- — Jupiter, Vulcan and Philemon.
“ STRANGERS TO THIS PLACE.”
Jupiter —Strangers we to this place,
And by storm overtaken,
Of thee some food and shelter
We humbly implore.
Philemon —Good sirs, you’re welcome here
By fortune not forsaken,
No trav’llor I allow to pass my open door,
Jupiter —The day is quickly ending,
And night comes on apace,
Give, on our faith depending,
Beneath thy roof a place.
Vulcan —Our way we should be wending,
Though in such sorry case,
But I on thee attending,
Obey cheerfully.
' Philemon —Enter and I attending
Obey cheerfully.
Guests whom a god hath sent me
A welcome must receive.
And naught would e’er content me
If my door they should leave.
Jupiter —-The god who here hath sent me
Hath left me not to grieve
And now shall well content me
If thy door me receive.
Vulcan —When I as guest present me,
If rudely bidden to leave,
How can my fate content me,
I turn away and grieve.


Philemon —Ah, see !
The fire will burn, the wood is quickly smoking,
Lay aside now your cloaks, how they’re dripping with rain !
And then to warm your limbs you surely must be fain.
Vulcan —I was mad,
I was mad,
To leave my forge, my god-head cloaking.
Curses light now on Boreas,
On Bolus and on thee !
Philemon —The gods with rev’rence treat, or soon their victim he.
Jupiter ( laughing) —My comrade press not hard on,
He’s in strange mood to-night.
Jupiter himself would pardon
Such a slight.
Philemon (to Vulcan)— Watch o’er thy tongue then,
(To Jupiter) And thou, contentedly be seated
(I wish t’were palace hall),
The fire is burning bright,
And the room will soon be heated,
Contentedly be seated,
(I wish t’were palace hall)
Baucis I now will call.,
r Guests whom a god hath sent me, etc.
Jupiter —The god who here hath sent me, etc.
Vulcan —New life the warmth hath lent me,
New vigour I receive,
Such welcome hath unbent me
And now no more I’ll grieve.
Scene 4.
Jupiter —Well, well! Master Vulcan, dost begin to recover from
thy evil humour ? See, here is a decent old fellow, opening
his door to us without knowing who we are ; his kindly
welcome should console us a little for the confounded
insolence of his neighbours. But for him we might
have had to spend the night out here in the wind ; Boreas,
obedient to my command, had drenched us piteously
under the floods of his avenging rain.
Vulcan —Could we not have waited until some shelter was offered
us before unloosing on the air that accursed storm of
which we ourselves were the first victims ?
Jupiter —I wished to see whether Mercury had deceived us, or
whether the people of these parts were all as wicked as
he said they were. It was to put their charity to the
test that I appeared before them in this wretched guise.


Vulcan —And all wo got thereby way to shiver for two hours in
this wretched village, wandering aimlessly from house
to house to see ourselves kicked out everywhere like
foul beggars.
Jupiter ( laughing ) —’Tis thy sour old face has earned us our un-
kindly welcome : ’pon my soul, I am tempted to forgive
them when I look on it.
Vulcan —Could’st not have left me in peace amid my forges of
Etna ?
Jupiter —What ! Can’st not spend an hour away from thy cyolops.
and resign thyself with a good grace to bear me company
—me, the master of the gods ? Curses on thy boorish
ways ! Ever since that silly quarrel with Mars, thy place
at our Olympean table has been empty. Dost never
leave thy caves and thy hammers ? Wo see thee no more
hr Olympus.
Vulcan -So can I escape thy banter : my own ways suit me best.
Couplets. — Vulcan.
“ WHERE HEAVY HAMMERS LOUD RESOUND.”
Vulcan —Where heavy hammers loud resound
And furnace fires are roaring loudly,
In mine own empire underground
I bear myself at ease and proudly,
A sov’reign ruler there I’m found !
But when above I visit,
The anguish is exquisite,
To know myself a fright,
Deformed and black as night.
Laughingly all behold me,
Whispering low, sharp ears told me ;
Fair Venus him well served,
He hath his fate deserved !
Much more they may decry me,
But far away I hie me,
And that is why I seldom roam,
Preferring much to stay at home.
In the caves where day’s never seen
Of mighty hosts I’m lord and master,
Grim giants black and fierce I ween,
Who toil where fires burn fast and faster.
There I reign serene, I am King !
When Juno, Queen, I visit,
The anguish is exquisite,
To know myself a fright
Deformed and black as night.
Laughingly she doth behold me,
Whispering low, sharp ears have told me ;


Fair Venus him well served,
He hath his fate deserved !
Much more they may decry me,
But far away I hie me,
And that is why I seldom roam,
Preferring much to stay at home.
Jupiter —Mercury refused to come with me ; he needs must rest
on high, to recover from the fatigues of his last journey
to Earth : I thought of thee as a substitute.
Vulcan —Much obliged ! The job is not to my liking, and it is
no business of mine to avenge his injuries.
Jupiter —Fie ! Dost not see that an affront to one of us insults
the whole of Olympus ? Wouldst take sides openly
against him, and abandon him without defence to the
taunts of these insolent mortals, nursing that eternal
jealousy of thine, to punish him for having won his way
to the good graces of Venus ?
Vulcan —Leave Venus alone, I beg, or I go back to my furnaces.
Arietta.- — Jupiter.
“HA ! HA ! MERCURY.”
Jupiter ( holding him back) —Ha ! Ha !
Mercury, when idle,
When he sees Cyprian fair,
Falls in love then and there 1
0 ’tis naught I declare ;
Thy anger bridle,
Show thou dost not care ?
Come, Vulcan, come 1
Come, Vulcan, come !
Thou should ’st all sorrow scorning,
And blithe as summer morning,
All sorrow scorning,
Be gay and debonair,
Thy spirits light as air.
Venus heeds not wifely duty
And fickle like all her kind,
Why be surprised at that ?
Since ’twas with careless mind
1 drew from out the sea the Queen of Love and Beauty,
In snow-white flake of foam brought shoreward by the wind,
Why. be surprised at that 1
Come, Vulcan come!
Thou should’st all sorrow scorning,
And blithe as summer morning,
Be gay, and debonair,
With spirits light as air.
Vulcan —Silence ! Someone is coming.


Scene 5.
Baucis Philemon sends me to you : he has chosen for your repast
the ripest fruits from our orchard, and here is our own
goat's milk that 1 wished to bring you with my own hands.
Jupiter -What a sweet little old lady it is, to bo sure !
Vulcan -A pretty supper wo are like to have !
Baucis —Alas, heaven has brought you to the home of poor folks !
But little as we have, it is yours. Use it freely.
Vulcan —Many thanks ! [He goes and sits down in a corner.]
J upiter Take no notice of my comrade's ill humour. The grief of
unrequited love hath soured his nature, and nothing avails
to turn his thoughts from the memory of a certain
disgrace. . . .
Vulcan (coming up to Mm, with a limp) —Can’st think of no other
subject of conversation ?
Baucis —His limp no doubt is the result of some old wound ?
Jupiter ( laughing ) —’Tis a recent wound of which I spoke. But
let us leave the subject which seems to vex him. Tell
me, I beg, thy name, and who thou art.
Baucis —My name is Baucis, and my husband is called Philemon.
Jupiter And this humble cottage is your whole estate ?
Baucis- Wo live here in happiness : our wants are satisfied.
Jupiter What kindly god granted you that blessing f
Baucis A god all-powerful Love.
Jupiter Love ! You can call upon him still in your old age ?
Baucis —Truly.
Melodrama.—Baucis.
My heart is not ungrateful, nor has time made me forget the
happy hours I owe. to him. When summoned to depart
from these walls might be written ; The fire of love, fanned
by desire’s strong breath, here joined their hearts in one
through life till death, nor time nor change could their
affection move. And Clotho smiled as she their life's
web wove. With cheerful hearts, all other aid unasked,
their fields they tilled nor wearied of the task; Them-
selves alone their little kingdom made, where none might
enter lest the charm should fade. ’Twas anxious care
which other’s welfare sought, that gave to each the
wrinkled brow of thought ; At last sweet friendship
came to passion’s aid, and purest loved lived on ah
undismayed.


Jupiter —So, the years have passed without changing your hearts :
you come together, still hand-in-hand, to the end of your
days ?
Baucis —Yes, and, for my part, knowing but one regret.
Jupiter —What one ?
Baucis —That of not being able to begin the journey anew !
Jupiter —In the arms of the same spouse ?
Baucis —And along the same happy paths.
Romance. — Baucis.
“AH ! IF I COULD EEGAIN MY BEAUTY.”
Baucis —Ah ! if I could regain my beauty ;
He his form to graces restore !
To thank the gods were sweetest duty
Would they give us youth as of yore.
0 sweet spring!
Fair the sky above me !
Brightly the day ever shone !
Philemon as of old would love me.
Still would I adore Philemon,
Philemon as of old would love me,
Still would I adore Philemon.
Through the woods and through meadows fragrant,
Him lld seek the whole live long day
Afar lld wander,
Love’s own vagrant,
And weary not though long the way.
His dear name to the heights above me,
Loud I’ld call, while Echo replied.
Philemon as of old would love me,
1 adore Philemon.
Jupiter —Here he comes. [Philemon enters with a basket full of
fruits.]
Scene 6.
Philemon —Baucis, help me to set on the table these fruits, and
this jug of clear, fresh water which I have drawn myself
from the spring nearby.
Vulcan (aside) —Delicious draught for two thirsty gods!
(Baucis and Philemon prepare the table.)
Jupiter (approaching Vulcan) —These are kindly folk that my
wrath ought to spare ! Come, Vulcan, smooth out that
frown from thy face, and try to do justice to this homely
meal. The hour for punishment is not yet.
Philemon —The table is laid.


Quartette.- please von, sirs, take yopb places.”
Please you, Sirs, take your places ;
We comply with glad faces,
And accept this repast:
Thanks for food here at last.
No nectar { they } can offer >
No viands rich and rare ;
Only goat’s milk | ® y | proffer
In its freshness past compare ;
With fruits to ripeness won
By kisses of the sun.
FINALE.
Quartette. —“ come saddest op all.
Jupiter ■ —Come, saddest of all topers,
Let limpid water tempt thee,
’Twill satisfy the thirst that’s on us still.
Baucis —But see, the vessel’s now quite empty !
Jupiter —‘Twill fill again, at my command.
Baucis —What dost thou mean ?
Jupiter {holding mil his cup) ---Pour out, I tell thee !
Bands (pours from the jug: wine flows and refits the cup) O what
marvej !
Philemon —o what wonder !
See, see, that flow of wine !
Vulcan —Which you will soon confess a beverage divine.
Philemon —But how atone for my neglecting ?
How could I be such guests expecting ?
Jupiter—Be not alarmed, my friends, lay your fears to rest
The gods have sent us here to work their high behest,
And to punish the impious men who offended.
But you obey their will.
Best you then in peace, well defend you.
Fear ye naught that shall chance in the terrible day.
Baucis and Philemon —o say, 0 say, on whom destruction falleth
And for whose lives high heaven calleth
To satisfy its anger fierce ?
Vulcan —Young and old both shall fall,
’Neath the bolts of the angry Jove
Within this land who’re dwelling.


Baucis —Mercy!
Philemon —o grant them grace.
Jupiter —Listen now ! Listen now
Awful thunder and lightning shall fall on the land ;
Adieu, now ’tis coming ;
You, rest you now in peace.
Now he yours happy dreams
On Earth a heav’n restoring
Sleep is sent from the gods,
Casts a spell o’er your senses,
Through the night heed nor hear the voice of tempest roaring.
Sleep well! Sleep well 1
All —O'er mind and feeling
Slumber is stealing,
On mine eyes now it seems to dwell!
Jupiter —To-morrow you shall know
When all the sky is glowing
With morning’s brightest ray
And a splendour untold.
How heav’n itself revenges,
How full it’s goodness flowing.
Sleep well! Sleep well!
All —Darkness is falling,
Slumber is calling,
Deepens now the wondrous spell.
Jupiter —Sleep well! Sleep well! Sleep well !
[Philemon sinks dawn upon a stool. Baucis slips, down, at his
feet. They fall asleep). The storm is heard outside. Jupiter
takes Vulcan away.]
ACT 11.
Scene.- —The cottage is changed into a palace. Philemon and
Baucis are seen asleep. They have become young again during their
sleep. Day begins to break.
Entr’acte, Chorus, and Dance of Bacchantes.
Scene 1.
Arietta. —Baucis.
“ PHILEMON, HE STILL WOULD LOVE MB.”
Baucis (sleeping ) —Philemon, ah, he still would love me,
I would still adore Philemon.
[The song of birds is heard without: Baucis awakes.}


Becit.
Birds are singing, and morning dawneth !
Sweetest past, ’tis in vain that I conjure thy beauty !
Ah ! Love no longer knows my name ! [ Looking round her.]
But what see I ? Or am I dreaming of a palace superb, fit
dwelling for the gods,
Where stood but yesterday our own paternal home ?
How then to find our humble cottage ?
Where am I ? [She sees Philemon]
A young man—and asleep ! [She drains near and looks at him.]
Sweet memories confused,
Of long past days wake now within me.
My heart doth it deceive ?
That face ! Can I believe it ?
’Tis he ; ’tis Philemon !
Then do I dream no more ?
Oh ! what youthful ardour fires me ?
What new sense of life now is mine ?
And what hope awakes in my spirit ? [She runs to a mirror
of polished metal, holds it up and looks at her reflection.]
Ah ! I am young again !
Youth is returned and I may still be lov’d !
Ah ! . . . 0 what bewild’ring emotion ! Youth is mine once
again !
My soul is in commotion
With a joy that’s pain ! [Approaching Philemon.]
Sleep my love enthralleth *
But my tender voice,
Though so soft it calleth
Wakes him to rejoice.
Duet --Philemon and Baucis.
Baucis —Philemon ! Philemon ! Dost thou hear ?
Philemon ( awaking ) —W T ho now calls me ?
[Seeing Baucis and rising.] What god hath hither led thy
steps, youthful maiden I
Baucis —What god ? Then lam not more lovely ?
Or must I with forgetfulness charge thy false mem’ry ?
Can it be that thou know’st me not ?
Philemon —My Baucis was like thee in flush of youth and springtime.
Baucis ( handing him the mirror.) —Ah ! when my Philemon beheld
her bright eyes shining
In the light of young love,
’Twas thus bis soul was stirr’d.
Now know I Philemon did close resemble thee I
Philemon (after a moment’s hesitation)— Baucis 1


Baucis (falling into his arms) —Ingrate ! my heart inspir'd by love’s
quick vision,
Had not waited to hear thy voice,
But at once recognis’d him whom it loveth.
Lo ! ’tis the master of gods,
Tis Jupiter the mighty.
Who hath changed our abode to a palace superb, and hath
made bloom again
In our sight dim and failing the sweet spring of the years that
were vanished, forgotten ;
’Tis thus of hospitality he pays the price.
Philemon —o Jupiter ! Why on us bestow all this splendour ?
What availeth so great a wealth ?
Our desires are fulfill’d,
And we have all we need,
Receiving back our youth and love's keen pleasure !
Passion’s dearest sign !
Warm with love’s devotion !
How thy sweet emotion
Makes a man divine !
[He clasps Baucis in a passionate embrace.]
Baucis —Passion’s dearest sign !
Warm with love’s devotion !
How thy sweet emotion
Makes a man divine !
Passion’s dearest sign !
With love’s ardour burning
Me to goddess turning,
Making man divine !
, Philemon - 0 thou dearest treasure,
Thou smile of the spring.
I envy no man,
For ’tis youth bringeth pleasure !
1 envy no king,
For youth bringeth pleasure !
Philemon and Baucis —Passion’s dearest sign !
Warm with love's devotion
Me to goddess turning,
\ Making man divine !
Philemon —Dear Baucis, life begins again for us with all its joys
and hopes.
Baucis —Great heavens, to what new country are we transported ?
What hands have transformed our poor cottage to a
palace ? What has become of the misfortunes which
Jupiter’s wrath was to hurl upon the people while we
slept ? Alas, dreaming of their unhappy lot, I am almost
ashamed of ours, and hardly dare to say, “ I love thee.”


Philemon —Ah, say again that blessed word which makes all our
happiness, which shall be the reward of all our toil. How
many forgotten joys it awakes in me —how many emotions
known long ago and once more new. Dost thou not feel
as though that word had won a charm that it never had
before ; how sweet to say, more sweet to hear ; and
around us, as though to the voice of a god, all nature
keeps silence to listen.
Baucis ( smiling ) —So Philemon finds me beautiful ?
Philemon —More beautiful than ever, and I swear it by this kiss.
Baucis —Well, then, since thou would’st have a kiss, come and take
it; I give it thee if thou can’st catch me.
{She frees herself and rum off.]
Philemon —Ah, coquette !
Scene 2.
Vulcan {appearing on the threshold) —Ah, gently my friend ! Art
become again so young ?
Philemon ( turning towards Mm and kneeling on the ground ) —Ah, my
lord, what god have I to thank ?
Vulcan —Keep thy thanks. ’Tis not I who would ever expose an
honest man to perils which he has once passed through,
unharmed and unashamed.
Philemon ( rising ) —Is it then thy companion to whom I owe my
thanks ?
Vulcan —Ho will tell thee himself whom thou hast to regard as thy
benefactor. But if would’st have my advice, give thanks
to none until thy wife be once more old.
Philemon—l see thou dost not know my Baucis, Sir. But since
I am no longer needed hero, give me leave to rejoin her.
Vulcan —Thou art in love with her ?
Philemon —As deeply in love as she is beautiful; and if I may offer
a wish for thee, dear guest, ’tis to find a like happiness
with a wife who is like her, and whose loyalty would
never expose thee to the accidents thou seem’st to fear.
Vulcan— Thanks ! [ Philemon goes.]
Scene 3.
Vulcan —Everyone seems to have joined in a conspiracy to remind
me of my misfortune, and these wishes of Philemon touch
me more than the mockery of Jupiter.


Jupiter [entering) —Hallo, Vulcan, are our good people satisfied ?
Hast seen them ? What do they say to their changed
state 1
Vulcan —I have met only the husband ;he seemed to mo to be
very much in love.
Jupiter —Indeed ? lam delighted at the news. Before we ascend
again to Olympus, I would myself take part in their
happiness. But I can scarce believe that our Baucis
has become so charming that her husband must speak
of it, and the memory of her wrinkles—
Vulcan —Hold on ! There she is running away from Philemon, and
hiding behind a clump of myrtles. Can’st see her ?
Jupiter —Oh, oh !
Vulcan —Ah, ah !
Jupiter —Dost realise that she is terribly pretty, Vulcan ?
Vulcan■ —Well, indeed, and so, I see, dost thou.
Jupiter —l did not know I was giving such a treasure to our
Philemon.
Vulcan —And thou art burning to take it from him again ?
Jupiter —l vow to thee that since Alcmena no beauty has touched
my heart so deeply.
Vulcan —Remember, lord, that Philemon is thy host.
Jupiter —Good ! Remember thyself that his supper was detestable.
Vulcan —Amazingly so ! I understand that after having punished
the guilty, it is sweet to thee to bestow happiness.
Jupiter (looking out) —Look, Vulcan, what grace—what youth.
Vulcan —Yes, I see what part thou would’st take in their happiness.
Couplets.
Jupiter. —“ venus’ self is less enchanting.”
Jupiter —Venus’ beauty is less enchanting,
Such charms against my peace conspire ;
There bloom the graces, none are wanting
Treasures fair that the gods desire.
Amor’s voice I obey, which tameth Jupiter,
Like Endymion.
Though Philemon my passion shamath,
The like befell Amphytrion !
My design then shall be completed,
Why should not earthly spouses hear the mocking laugh tha +
hails the cheated ?
’Tis known among the gods, I fear !


So, heedless whom ray love defamelh,
To the end will I press my suit.
Though Philemon my passion shameth,
The like befell Amphytrion.
Vulcan —But there ! I can see that Philemon is not going to oateh
her.
Jupiter —Listen, Vulcan, thou must do mo a service.
Vulcan —Speak on, my lord.
Jupiter —Take Philemon away.
Vulcan —There’s a pretty errand to give one ! Am 1 then to go
poaching on Mercury’s preserves ?
Jupiter —Mercury trespassed indeed on thine.
Vulcan, I obey, if it were but to escape from thy jesting. Besides,
I should not mind seeing Philemon’s pride a little
humbled ; he is too cock sure of the loyalty of his wife.
Jupiter —Baucis has just disappeared behind a bush. Follow me,
and take charge of the husband while I go and meet
the wife. Come ! [They go out.]
Scene 4.
[Baucis comes in, running, and slops on the threshold.]
Air. — Baucis.
“ FULL SURE HE CANNOT TRACE ME.”
Recit.
Baucis ( running in and halting on the threshold) —Full sure he cannot
trace me!
Ah ! Philemon, my dear !
He who striveth is blest.
Seek, ere thy arms enlace me !
And here I’ll woo repose by all the winds caress’d.
O, Nature sweet and tender !
Gardens fair, blossoms gay,
Where streams are'gently murm’ring,
Ye gentle zephyrs that sport and play,
How glows the scene more brightly,
’Neath love’s kindling ray !
The birds among the branches
So lightly come and go
While fountains softly welling,
With their silv’ry voice are telling
Love stories as they flow.
0, Nature sweet and smiling !


Gardens fair, blossoms gay,
Where streams are gently murm’ring.
Ye gentle zephyrs that sport and play,
How glows the scene more brightly,
’Neath love’s kindling ray ! [She stops lb listen.']
But hark ! Now my name he is calling,
The voice full well I know,
Baucis cruel this provoking
From a faithful spouse love cloaking ?
[She comes forward, laughing.]
In these arms, all my charms admiring.
Art the bliss of a kiss desiring ?
In this hour be love’s pow’r inspiring.
Tho’ a kiss soft and tender
I seem unwilling thee to yield,
Archly coy in love’s sweet field
’Tis thine to force surrender.
Ah ! ... In these arms, etc.
[Jupiter reappears at the hack. J
Scene 5.
Jupiter —Baucis!
Baucis ( turning round ) —Thou, my lord.
Jupiter —’Tis I, happy in seeing that time has so well obeyed me,
and that the graces have emptied their treasures to make
thee beautiful.
Baucis - All powerful god, whom tho other gods obey, art thou
then
Jupiter —Master of the world who would gladly give Ids power and
glory for that kiss which Baucis promised Philemon.
Baucis (kneeling)- —Jupiter!
Duet.—Baucis and Jupiter.
“ KNEEL NOT TO MB.”
Jupiter —Kneel not to me in humble duty,
See love’s warm light shines full on thee ;
’Tis enough that thou hast beauty,
The equal of the gods to be ; [raising her]
Come, lift thine eyes as nothing fearing,
For who can their sweeet charm withstand ?
Let me serve with zeal endearing,
Her whose beauty came from my hand.
Baucis (moving away from Jupiter) —My lord !
Jupiter —Baucis, 0 say what strangest feeling
Drives thee thus aw'ay from me ?


Baucis —Oft I’ve heard,
Oft I’ve heard thy thunders pealing.
And should not I have fear of thco '(
Jupiter —As lover I cap hut adore thee ;
0 forget, what for thee I disdain.
Baucis— 0, my lord, stoop’st thou to implore me !
Jupiter —No, to raise thee on high to reign !
. Baucis ! Baucis ! for one short day !
0 my Baucis, he thy young heart forgetting
Ties that bind thee,
Ties that bind thee to a spouse too dear.
’Tis Jupiter who kneels imploring,
But for a day his prayer hear.
Baucis (aside) —0 Philemon think not my vow I'm breaking,
Dream not my constant heart is thee forsaking ;
Thyself alone, thyself alone 0 Philemon I prize,
Have then no fear my vow I’m breaking.
But it is sweet to see awaking,
Love for me in god-like eyes.
[Turning to Jupiter .] But my lord,
0 reflect! ’gainst one thou art conspiring
Who was thy host but yester eve,
And open’d wide his door thy ease and rest desiring.
Jupiter —Full payment did he not receive ?
Baucis (smiling)— Far beyond all his wish ;if my restored beauty
Should e’er his loving spirit grieve,
Wand’ring from the pathway of duty.
Jupiter (passing an arm about her waist) —Young love beneath his
wings will hide thee,
0, do my word believe, —
Baucis (freeing herself )—My lord ! My lord !
Jupiter —What deadly harm shall I to him be doing.
If I desire a single kiss ?
Baucis —For fear that Jupiter
Be more and more requiring,
1 dare not him deny that bliss. [Jupiter embraces Baucis .]
I 0, Philemon, think not my vow I’m breaking, etc.
) Jupiter —For one short day,
* 0, my Baucis, be thy young heart forgetting, etc.
[Jupiter is once more embracing Baucis. Philemon appears on the
threshold and stands there stupefied.]


Scene 6.
Philemon —What do I see ?
Baucis {hurriedly freeing herself from Jtmiter) —Philemon !
Jupiter {aside) —The husband ! Confound Vulcan !
Philemon —Baucis lets herself be kissed by my guest!
Baucis {whispering ) —Hush ! If thou knewest
Philemon —l wish to know nothing.
Jupiter— Dost misunderstand, my friend ? I had no thought to
offend ; I did but rejoice with thy wife over the return of
her youth and beauty that she owes to the favour of the
gods.
Philemon —The gods might well have spared me such a service.
Baucis {whispering)— Have a care, I tell thee. ,
Philemon —l see. Thou wast also rejoicing, wast not ? And if I
am not mistaken, the favour of the gods was about to
plunge us into a pretty kettle of fish.
Jupiter —Are these thy thanks ?
Philemon ■ —Troth, my lord, since thou art their envoy, thou mayest
tell the gods in my name that they had better chosen one
less prompt than thee to rejoice.
Baucis {whispering) —Unhappy man !
Jupiter —Thou’rt but a rude and clumsy fellow, a jealous one, who
knows not how such things should be taken.
Philemon—l take them as they are.
Jupiter— Give thanks, then, to thy wife, because she loves thee,
otherwise
Philemon —Very well.
Jupiter {passing in front of Philemon) —I say no more. [Softly, to
Baucis ] I shall come again.
Philemon —What is his wish ?
Jupiter —’Tis enough ! [Going.] Impertinence !
Philemon —But
Jupiter —Clown !
Philemon —I
Jupiter —Jealous fool. [He goes.}


Scene 7
Philemon —Thou seest that I owe him thanks for the honour he has
done me in kissing my wife.
Baucis —Foolish one, hast not seen the signs which I made thee ?
Philemon —l understood thy signs quite well ; those of thy treason
are clear enough, and I have no more eoncecn with it.
Baucis —Even with the master of the gods 1
Philemon —What !
Baucis Tis even he whom thou hast insulted.
Philemon —What dost say ? Jupiter !
Baueu— Himself. Thou must know that he thought me pretty,
and that my good looks asked pardon for thy rudeness.
Philemon {to himself) —Jupiter ! lam lost!
Baucis —l am grateful for the trust thou hast in me, and know well
to recognise it.
Philemon —Thou didst not wait until I showed it, it seems to me,
to earn it.
Baucis —Is it so great a crime, after having missed it so long, to
find pleasure in hearing that I am beautiful ?
Philemon—No harm in the compliment, if kisses had not followed it.
Baucis —Could I refuse Jupiter ?
Philemon —Ah ! by Hercules ! If thou wilt grant all that ho
demands——
Baucis —A wise husband leaves it to his wife to manage these
affairs ; ’tis folly for us to quarrel over it.
Philemon —Marvellous ! Wilt end by proving that I am wrong
and thou art right ?
[Vulcan enters and'inlerposes himself between themj
Scene S.
Trio. — Baucis , Philemon and Vulcan.
WHY THIS STRIFE ? ”
Vulcmi (to Baucis) —Why this strife ? Tell me now.
(To Philemon .) —Why this strife, answer thou.
Philemon (pointing to Baucis) —She hath deceived me sadly.
Baucis —He’s jealous, I declare.
Vulcan —0 fie ! make peace and gladly
Be again
Loving pair. Fie !


Philemon —In past years thy devotion
Was mine and mine alone.
Baucis —Thou hadst not then, I own.
Of gross offence a notion.
Vulcan —Ah, what! content of yore,
And can a single matter
Cause all this fuss and clatter
At sixty years and more ?
Philemon —Why did the gods deceive me ?
Why with a fell design
Of my grey hairs bereave me,
And, taking them, not leave me
The peace that then was mine ?
Baucis —Nay, but cannot one still be charming,
And honour keep unstain’d ?
Nay, but cannot one be charming !
Say what’s the sin alarming.
If I the chief of gods inspire with love unfeign'd ‘
Vulcan —Cause of true love ever harming,
Venus ne’er the false disdain’d,
Earth’s daughters sooth are charming,
But false as she the best that e’er in beauty reign’d.
Philemon —Gone for aye the thought heart warming
Of a love all restrain’d.
Alas ! the sin alarming,
When now I see my faithful heart by her disdain’d !
Baucis —Nay, but cannot one, etc.
< Philemon,— Gone for aye, etc.
Vulcan —Heart of true love, etc.
Baucis (to Philemon) —Enough, enough, your anger stifle,
Learn from the gods in things of love ;
They say that up above
A matter of this sort is but the merest trifle.
Philemon —And what is that to me ?
What if Venus be flighty ?
I do not choose to walk in high Olympian ways.
Vulcan —All right! all right! not a word will I say.
(To Baucis) —Pray you be calm and quiet,
Pray you be calm,
Why let your passions riot ?
The gods themselves are sometimes overwrought
And feel more jealous than they ought.


Baucis —So let it be ! it’s naught regarded,
■Tis business none of mine if Vulcan’s an ass !
Vulcan —All right! all right! not a word more shall pass
So for my kindness am I well rewarded.
Philemon and Baucis —Let the dwellers in the sky
. Be or not as we are ever,
Follow their example high !
That becomes us never.
Vulcan —-Up to heav’n your eyes turn
There behold what we are ever,
From the gods a lesson learn
And refuse it never.
/ Baucis and Philemon—Vet the dwellers in the sky, etc.
1 Vulcan —Up to heav’n, etc.
Philemon —The gods ! I confront them and defy them ! [He
smashes the household gods, seizes the little statue of
Jupiter and hurls it at the feet of Vulcan .] Let them
avenge the outrage on them.
Ba ucis - - Philemon !
Philemon ( repelling her) —Farewell, I give thee up to Jupiter.
[He goes out.)
Scene 9.
Vulcan (replacing the little statue of Jupiter on the altar)— What a
blessing to be a god of metal!
Baucis —He leaves me ! He hears me no more ! Alas, if he
abandons mo there is nought for me but to die.
[She lets herself fall upon a stool.]
Vulcan —Good ! The love of the great Jupiter will console thee
for the loss of thy spouse.
Baucis ( rising ) —The love of Jupiter ! Oh, heaven, ’tig that love
which has undone me.
Vulcan —If I may judge by Philemon’s jealousy, ’tis not that which
thou wert saying to him.
Baucis— l did nought but defend my little flirtation, I swore to
him,' —this beauty, so long lost, I did but try its power, as
a child plays with a weapon and hurts itself—but my
heart has never ceased to be Philemon’s, and now I know
that he is more dear to me than ever.
Vulcan (aside) —She weeps, by my faith, real tears!


Baucis —Why did I not throw myself at his feet. One word of
mine would have soothed his anger. Alas ! 'Tis the
first time that I have known him vexed with me ; all our
life before was nought but an exchange of tenderness ;
’tis myself who have destroyed my happiness.
Vulcan (aside) —Poor thing ! Venus never spoke like that. [Aloud.]
Listen, Baucis, thy grief moves me, and if it is sincere,
I make it my task to bring thee back thy husband.
Baucis —Ah, ray lord, what kindly god have I to
Vulcan —T)o not ask my name ; I am a god, ’tis true, but a soyry
one. Trust in me and dry those tears.
Baucis —Then shall I bring my offerings to the unknown gods ?
Vulcan —Yes.
Baucis —ln restoring Philemon to me, thou giv’st me back more
than life.
Vulcan (sighing) —’Twas never Venus who [He goes out.]
Scene 10.
Baucis (gathering up the pieces of the broken household gods ) —Oh,
powerful gods, whose images Philemon has broken, let
your wrath fall only upon me ; for ’tis I alone who am
guilty.
Jupiter (entering) —What is this slaughter of the gods ?
Baucis —Oh, heaven ! forgive me, lord.
Jupiter —l understand. Thy spouse has been here ? I have just
seen him hurrying away, throwing all round him the most
furious looks. He could do no more for love of thee,
Baucis, and for love of thee, I pardon him.
Baucis (aside) —What am I to say to him ?
Jupiter —But what do I see ? Thou hast been weeping ? Ah,
Baucis, what would I not give to wipe away those tears.
Baucis (aside) —Ah ! —An idea !
Jupiter —These eyes can promise me no hope ? Am Ito be treated
more harshly than a husband who vexes thee ?
Baucis —I I’esist no more, my lord, and since thou lovest me, my
eyes will give thee all the hope thou dreamest, if only
first thou wilt promise to grant me one request.
Jupiter-- Speak, Baucis. To gain such a prize there is nought I
would not do ; thou hast but to form a wish to see i (
granted.


Bauds I may not doubt the word of my lord Jupiter, but I demand
of him an oath to ask no more of my heart than it is right
for me to grant liiih.
Jupiter —Tis done, I swear it.
Baucis —By the Styx ?
Jupiter —By the Styx ! f ßaucis kneels before him.] What wilt
thou, Baucis ?
Baucis— I redress my wrongs towards my husband, my lord.
Jupiter —What wouldst thou ?
ROMANCE and FINALE.
“ THOUGH OUB, YEARS WERE MANY.”
Baucis —Though our years were many
Our hearts then forgot
The burden of time and trouble,
Happy was our lot.
And I owe to gifts perfidious,
Only bitter cares.
Give me back my wrinkles
And my lost grey hairs.
[ Vulcan and-Philemon appear at the hack and wait there.]
Jupiter (raising Baucis ) —What dost thou ask of me, Baucis. Hast
taken leave of thy senses ?
Baucis —’Tis old age can bring us
Blessings from above.
Affection pure and tender,
The peace of wedded love.
It is that love shall safely guide as
Through remaining cares ;
Give me back my wrinkles
And my lost grey hairs.
Philemon (aside) —What says she ?
Vulcan and Jupiter —With her charms enraptur’d,
Jupiter himself is captured.
Jupiter— o, Baucis ! well thou know’st I love thee !
Baucis—o, make me old again
Then talk to me of love.
Philemon {rushing to Baucis)— Baucis !
Baucis (Jailing into his arms) —Philemon, ah !


The next Opera of this series is “ LES CLOCHES DE CORNE
VILLE ” (Planquette) and will be broadcast in July.
Jupiter {in threatening tone ) —My revenge ?
{To Baucis, smiling) But no, thy grace my ajiger all subdueth,
Never slialt thou be harm’d by me.
I’ll not withdraw the gift,
The gift thy charms reneweth
Still he young, dear Baucis.
No more love’s sun shines brightly !
But by the Styx I swear to thee
I’ll not again invoke that stream so lightly.
Baucis —o, felicity entrancing
Once again delight our days !
Baucis, Philemon, Vtilcan and Jupiter —
Again upon us beaming,
The joyous years in store ;
Make bright with young love’s gleaming,
As in glad days of yore.
[Philemon and Baucis fall upon their knees. Jupiter and Vulcan
stay a moment on the threshold to stretch out their hands to
them in token of fareivell and of protection.]
END.


QMf i •
Is caused by Obstructions inside the Battery that stop
the Free flow of Electric current in circuit, Permanently
reducing Voltage. Always lowering Efficiency- In
modern Car and Wireless Batteries the Permanent
obstruction are the many Wood Separators used —“to
retain the active materials (Paste) in thin Plates.” This
definite statement for the necessity and use of Wood
Separators is made in the April issue, 1926, of the
“ Chloride Chronicle.”
Another serious disadvantage is caused by the closely
cementing together the Plates with many Wood
Separators hindering the necessary dissipation of the
Generated Gas Bubbles that form in Layers on the
faces of the Plates on charge and discharge, and these
undispersed Gas bubbles create Abnormal Internal
Resistance.
luytiyUlAuit
Hou>?
NO WOOD SEPARATORS REQUIRED TO HOLD THE PURE LEAD PASTE
IN ANY TUNGSTONE PLATES
There always is free unhampered flow of Electric
Current in circuit.
ALWAYS GIVING HIGHER VOLTAGE INCREASED AMPERAGE EFFICIENCY
Independently fixing of each Tungstone Plate with
ample space provided between and round them permits
the Electrolyte to freely circulate.
All internal obstructions being entirely eliminated, the
Layers of Generated Gas bubbles, formed on charge
and discharge, are dispersed as quickly as they are
created, therefore Internal resistance cannot be other-
wise than Negligible.
TUNGSTONE LOW TENSION CHARGES and DISCHARGES EASIER and QUICKER
BECAUSE THERE IS NEGLIGIBLE INTERNAL RESISTANCE.
TUNGSTONE High Tension 60 Volt Battery 3 a.h. is sold in the United Kingdom on monthly payments
over extended period. Apply for particulars. Further interesting information on points of this
advertisement are to be found on pages 58, 59, and 67 to 73 of the illustrated Booklet ” Photography
tells the Story " which will be sent free on application to the T.A.47
TUNGSTONE ACCUMULATOR CO.. LTD., St. Bride's House. Salisbury Square, London E.C.4


the Ope ra
tone
*
rfp
m
Jt
&
\0
NN
vet*
*1
N,
spt*
NOTICEABLY improve
■N
m
14 lAfb
U
You have never before had such a reservoir of power in
any high tension battery as you will find when you use
the LISSEN New Process Battery. You can draw on
it tor hours at a stretch —the longest operatic pro- ,
grammes will not affect it in the slightest degree.
An ordinary battery deteriorates if the programme is
long and reproduction suffers in consequence, but the
Lissen battery will energise your circuit and give to
your loud-speaker an entirely new power and fresh,
truthful tones and make it reproduce the musical
complexities of a great opera faithfully and faultlessly.
The reason for this rests with the new Lissen process
of manufacture and the unique combination of chemicals
known only to LISSEN. The results of the new
LISSEN process ate now talked about far and wide,
because everybody who has the LISSEN New Process
Battery has noticed the improved power and tone in
their loud-speaker.
And price is no longer an obstacle to your possessing it.
By reason of the new LISSEN policy of direct-to-
retail shop distribution big wholesale profits have
been entirely cut out, and by asking retail friends to
accept less discount and LISSEN themselves making a
similar sacrifice in profit as well in the hope of bigger
sales, this fine battery (which was first intended for
sale at 13/-) was sold until recently for 10/6 and again
has been reduced to 7/11.
It is obtainable at all good dealers. Ask for Lissen New
Process in a way that shows you tvill take no other, and
if you meet with any difficulty in obtaining it order direct
from factory, no postage will be charged. Mention usual
dealer’s name and address, please. Or can be sent C.O.D.
7/11 (previously 10/6).
68 volth. Connect two batteries in series if more than
66 volts are required.
LISSEN LIMITED, 62-72, FRIARS LANE. RICHMOND, SURREY.
Managing Director ; —Thomas M. Cole. L>
Vl/Sty
pn °c«v>”
