

PHONETIC TRANSCRIPTION
AND TRANSLITERATION
PROPOSALS OF THE
COPENHAGEN CONFERENCE
APRIL 192 s
OXFORD
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
1926


.
(:|f V»B3«« W ;|]
;\/A ,/V /


PHONETIC TRANSCRIPTION
AND TRANSLITERATION
PROPOSALS OF THE
COPENHAGEN CONFERENCE
APRIL 1925
OXFORD
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
1926


Sections 1-28 have been drawn up
by Otto Jespersen; section 29
Holder Pedersen.
Printed in England at the Oxford University Press
By John Johnson Printer to the University


hll«
COPENHAGEN CONFERENCE
April 1925
PHONETIC TRANSCRIPTION AND
TRANSLITERATION
j. History and Composition of the Conference
SCHOLARS have often felt the desirability of having one
single system of phonetic transcription and of transliteration of
foreign alphabets instead of the prevailing chaos, in which each
phonetician thinks himself justified in using his own personal
system, many writers even using different systems at different
periods of their lives. This is not the place to give an account
of the various systems used hitherto, or of the various attempts
at solving the problem ; it may be sufficient briefly to refer to
such essentially different solutions as those contained in
Lepsius’s Standard Alphabet , Sweet’s Sound Notation (re-
printed in Collected Papers ), Jespersen’s chapter ‘ Lautschrift ’
in Phonetische Grundfragen , W. Perrett’s Peetickay y and
V. Forchhammcr’s ‘ Weltlautschrift ’ in Die Grundlage der
Phonetik , not to forget the activity of the Association Pho-
ndtique Internationale under the directorship of Paul Passy,
assisted (since 1907) by Daniel Jones.
In 1922 the question of phonetic transcription and of trans-
literation was brought before the meeting of the Union
Academique Internationale in Brussels by Jespersen and
Salverda de Grave, who thought that this union of learned
societies in many countries might perhaps be instrumental in
bringing about some unity in these matters. At the meeting
of the same body in 1923 Rozwadowski and van Wijk were
charged with the preliminary preparations, and they sub-
sequently, in 1924, sent out a circular letter to about one
hundred scholars in various countries, asking their opinions as
to which of the existing systems seemed to them the best, and
as to the best way of getting out of the present unsatisfactory


state of things in this matter. Unfortunately, however, the
answers received were so widely divergent and partly so
indefinite that nothing could be built on them.
At the meeting in May 1924 it was therefore agreed that
it would be a good thing if a not too numerous body of
competent scholars, representing as many different groups of
languages as possible, could meet together personally and
discuss the problems thoroughly viva voce , in order, if possible,
to arrive at some unity system of transcription and translitera-
tion. The meeting, it was thought, should take place in
a neutral country. Fortunately, the Danish Rask-orsted Fund
for the promotion of international scientific co-operation
granted a sum sufficient to pay hotel expenses and the greater
part of the travelling expenses for those members of the Con-
ference who were not residents of Copenhagen. A list of
scholars to be invited was drawn up by Jespersen and Holger
Pedersen under the active co-operation of Meillet and Olaf
Broch, the selection being made not according to the nation-
ality of the scholars, but according to their special competence,
so as to have the principal groups of languages (Indo-
European, Semitic, African, Far-Eastern, American) repre-
sented as well and as fully as circumstances allowed.
Fortunately nearly all the scholars invited were able to
come to Copenhagen, the only exceptions being Professor
Streitberg of Leipzig, whose health did not allow his travelling,
and Professor Meillet of Paris, who had at first promised tc
come and who throughout had shown the greatest interest in
our plans, but who was ultimately prevented from attending.
In their stead we had the pleasure of seeing Professors Sommer
and Vendryes.
Before the meeting of the Conference two lists were sent
out to the members, one prepared by Jespersen and giving
a synopsis of the phonetic transcriptions of the Association
Phonetique Internationale, of the Swedish and Danish Dialect
Reviews, of Lepsius, of the French Dialectologists, and of the
American Anthropological Association, and another prepared
by Holger Pedersen and giving the principal signs of the
best-known systems of transliteration. Professor Daniel Jones


had kindly sent a number of pamphlets and books showing
the application of the system of the Association to a variety
of languages.
The following scholars were members of the Conference
and were present at all the meetings:
Olaf Broch, Professor in the University of Oslo, author of
Slavische Phonetik , &c.
Carl Brockelmann, Professor in the University of Breslau,
author of Grnndriss der vergleichenden Grammatik der semi-
tischen Sprachen , &c.
Otto Jespersen, Professor in the University of Copenhagen,
author of Lehrbuch der Phonetik , &c.
Daniel Jones, Professor in University College, London,
author of English Phonetics , &c.
Bernhard Karlgren, Professor in the University of Goteborg,
author of Etudes sur la Phonologic chinoise , &c.
Carl Meinhof, Professor in the University of Hamburg,
author of Grundriss einer Lautlehre der Bantusprachen , &c.
Holger Pedersen, Professor in the University of Copen-
hagen, author of Vergleichcnde Grammatik der keltischen
Sprachen , &c.
Jan Rozwadowski, Professor in the University of Krakdw,
author of Plistorical Phonetics of the Polish Language , &c.
Ferdinand Sommer, Professor in the University of Bonn,
author of Handbuch dcr lateinischen Laut- und Formen-
lehre, &c.
William Thalbitzer, lecturer in the University of Copen-
hagen, author of A Phonetical Study of the Eskimo Lan-
guage, &c.
N. van Wijk, Professor in the University of Leiden, author
o {Die baltischen und slavischen Akzent- und Intonatzonssys-
teme, &c.
J. Vendryes, Professor in the University of Paris, author of
Le Lang age, &c.
At most of the meetings Mr. Blessing Dahle, a Norwegian
missionary native of Zululand, was present and was able to
give most welcome information about Zulu sounds.


The meetings were held in the University of Copenhagen
from the 20th till the 25th of April 1925, each day from 9.30
or 10 a.m. till 1 p.m. and from 2 p.m. till 3 or 3.30 p.m.
The following report does not give the discussions them-
selves, but aims only at presenting in a systematic order the
results arrived at.
2. Task of the Conference
The task of the Conference was purely scientific. It did not
aim at devising alphabets to render it possible for natives of
various uncivilized countries to write down their own languages
in a practical way; still less, of course, to influence the spell-
ings of languages already provided with a received orthography.
Nor could it be our task to give advice as to the most practical
notation to be used in schools for teaching foreign languages.
It is hoped, however, that in course of time, when the Copen-
hagen system of transcription has been adopted in scientific
descriptions of various languages and dialects, it will influence
the way in which new native languages will be written down
for practical purposes, thus rendering possible more exact and
more uniform notations than many of those used up to now, in
which it is very often possible to trace habits of denoting
sounds which are peculiar to the European nation most
influential as a colonizing power in the part of the world con-
cerned (English, Dutch, &c.).
The Conference also deemed it outside of its province to
give prescriptions for the way in which, for instance, Russian
proper names should be transcribed popularly, in newspapers,
translations of novels, histories, &c. Here each nation gener-
ally follows its own idiosyncrasies, and the same name thus
figures in Italian newspapers as Cicerin, in French as Tchilehd-
rine> in English as Chic her in , in Danish sometimes as Tsjit-
sjerin or Tjitjerin , &c. It is possible mathematically to
calculate in how many ways the simple name of the Russian
writer Chekhov may be written, for the initial sound (sound-
group) is rendered according to circumstances as C7z, Tch> C }
Tsch } Tsj\ Tj y Czy the middle consonant as ch , kh, h, k , x,


and the final sound as v, f y or ff. It would certainly at the
present moment be impracticable to attempt influencing the
general public in various countries in such matters, and things
must, therefore, be left in the present chaotic condition until
the knowledge of the fundamental principles of phonetic
science has spread in wide circles.
The task of the Conference was twofold. It had to provide
a system of phonetic transcription of the sounds actually
occurring in any language or dialect to be described scientifi-
cally without any regard to the way in which such languages
or dialects may have been hitherto written down ; and then,
on the other hand, to indicate the best way in which Oriental
and other alphabets should be transliterated in Roman type,
without any regard to the manner in which words are actually
pronounced in the languages concerned. It is obvious that
this really constitutes two different problems, for in conse-
quence of the original deficiencies of all alphabets, as well as of
subsequent historical developments, the same letter in some
ancient or modern script may very well stand for more than
one sound, and yet we must have a means of transliterating it
everywhere in the same way, both where we have reliable
information as to its actual pronunciation and where that is
excluded by the nature of the case.
Nevertheless, though thus transcription and transliteration
are necessarily two different things, they must be harmonized
as far as practically possible. If the same sign is used in the
two spheres, this should be done in such a way as not to create
wrong impressions ; thus, if in phonetic transcription a dot
under a letter is used to denote retroflex articulation (§ 15), the
same dot should not be used in other meanings (aspiration,
syllabic function, emphatic pronunciation) in transliterating
foreign alphabets ; similarly in other cases, where previous
systems have often sinned from want of foresight or of know-
ledge.
With regard to both transcription and transliteration the
members of the Conference were conscious that they could do
no more than give advice to the learned world : they have no
means of enforcing their systems on anybody, but they hope


that the reasons given below for the selection of signs will
seem convincing in most cases, and that, even where this is not
the case, future phoneticians and transliterators will in the
interests of unity adopt the signs here recommended, wherever
it is typographically possible.
As for the terms used below in the phonetic sections, it is
worth stating expressly at the outset that they should be
everywhere understood as purely descriptive of sounds as
actually produced, and not as implying any definite historical
development. If, therefore, a sound is spoken of as palatalized,
this refers exclusively to the physiological way of pronouncing
it and does not imply that it has been historically developed
from a non-palatalized sound through a process of palataliza-
tion. An ‘ advanced [a] ’ means simply an [a] articulated
more forward, nearer to the teeth and lips, than the ordinary
[a], but this may historically be the result of a retraction
from a still more forward sound, just as in speaking of a voiced
sound there is no implication that the sound has at any
previous time been voiceless.
3. What to Denote
It is a simple consequence of the multiplicity of human
speech sounds, and the infinite variety in which they occur in
all the languages of the earth, that it is quite impossible to
provide separate signs for all possible nuances of sounds.
One must always be prepared for the possibility, in dealing
with a new language or dialect, of coming across sounds or
shades of sounds or combinations of sounds which have never
before been described, and any system of phonetic transcrip-
tion that is meant to be general must therefore provide for
extensions in various directions. In other words, our system
must have a certain elasticity.
In this connexion it will be well to mention the distinction
first made by Sweet between a ‘ narrow ’ and a ‘ broad ’ nota-
tion : in the former a great many nuances are indicated as
exactly as possible ; in the latter many nuances are left out so
as to make the writing and printing and reading as easy as


possible; this can to a great extent be done without injuring
the scientific value of the transcription, because there are in
each language many things which can be implied in a broader
notation as following from the whole phonetic structure of the
language : they need, therefore, only be stated once for all in
the introductory remarks. Thus the same letter [t] may be
used in French and in English though the sounds denoted are
really different, in French unaspirated, in English aspirated,
and in French formed with the tip of the tongue more forward
than in English, It is unnecessary in connected specimens of
either language to remind the reader of such general character-
istics of the sounds each time these occur.
This naturally leads us to a distinction to which Daniel Jones
more than any one else has drawn attention, the distinction
between r sounds ’ and ‘ phonemes A phoneme is defined as
a family of sounds which from an objective point of view may
be regarded as distinct, but which are felt naturally by the
speakers of a certain language as identical, because they are
not used to keep words apart. Thus it may be said that in
English the [k] of key and the [k] of car are two different
sounds, as they are formed in different points of the palate, but
they are members of the same phoneme, because the different
formation is never used with distinctive value, but follows
automatically from the character of the vowel to be pronounced
after the consonant. A non-syllabic [i] and a consonant [j]
formed with strong friction at approximately the same place in
the mouth are certainly different sounds, which it requires
only a little practice to hear as such, but there are probably
very few languages which would use them as two phonemes
serving to keep otherwise identical words distinct from one
another. Distinctions which in one language are of great
importance and which cannot there be disregarded without
seriously impeding the intelligibility of words and sentences
(distinctions of tone, for instance, or of quantity of vowels or
consonants) may in another language be considered as non-
existent : while, therefore, in the former language they must
be always carefully indicated, it would be absurd to mark
them in the latter.


Such considerations as these should be constantly borne in
mind in judging the transcriptions proposed in the following
pages.
4. What Signs to Employ
The Copenhagen Conference took it for granted that the
basis of the system to be recommended must be the ordinary
Latin alphabet, and not systems like Bell’s (or Sweet’s)
‘ Visible Speech But how to supplement the obvious
deficiencies of the Latin alphabet? It is not difficult to devise
supplementary signs which can be easily written by means of
pen or pencil, but when it comes to printing them difficulties
arise which have to be taken into account. These typo-
graphical difficulties were felt so strongly by A. J. Ellis (who
had in his youth, together with Isaac Pitman, experimented
a good deal with modifications of Latin letters) that in his
‘Palaeotype’ system, employed in his great work on Early
English Pronunciatum (London, 1869 ff.), he refrained from
using any sign that was not found in ordinary printing-offices,
making extensive use of such devices as small capitals, italics,
letters turned upside down, &c., and in many cases having
recourse to digraphs or even trigraphs like [nhw] for single
sounds. Similar principles, only with the exclusion of digraphs,
were carried out in the elaborate system of the Swedish phone-
tician F. Wulff (in Huitihne Congrh des Oriejitalistes , 1889,
and other publications), in which Greek letters turned upside
down, sometimes with the most unexpected values, and other
similar devices are most ingeniously employed, but with the
same general result as with Ellis’s system, that the effect on
the eye is most unpleasant, and that it is extremely difficult
to remember the value in which each sign is used. It seems,
therefore, now to be the universal impression among phone-
ticians, that the advantage of not having to cut and found
new types is bought too dearly in such systems, and that it is
necessary to some extent to have new types, which will have
to be specially cut for those printing-offices which want to
print works on phonetics. Only it is necessary to have regard
to the cost of having such new types cast, and their number


accordingly should be reduced as much as is consistent with
the purpose for which the alphabet is destined.
With regard to the extension of the Latin alphabet there
may be said to be two different schools, both of which were
represented at the Conference: their methods will here for
shortness sake be designated as A and B.
The adherents of A prefer what might be called monotypes y
letters so devised that they look as one undivided whole and
can as a rule be written as such without lifting the pen from
the paper. This principle is carried out with greatest con-
sistency in J. A. Lundell’s Swedish dialect alphabet (.Lands-
indlsalfabet), which has been used for a variety of other
languages than Swedish, among others by Buergel Goodwin
and B. Karlgren. Another alphabet of the monotype class is
the well-known one used by the Association Phon&ique
Internationale (Ass. Ph.), which is less systematic than
Lundell's, but whose letters are more similar to ordinary
letters than the composite types used by Lundell.
The adherents of B make an extensive use of diacritical
marks (dots, strokes, circles) above or below the ordinary
letters, the resulting phonetic signs being thus built up in two
or even three stories seemingly independent of one another.
One of the best-known systems of this type is Lepsius's
Standard Alphabet , which has been extensively used even in
quite recent times (though with some extensions and modifi-
cations) by C. Meinhof and other students of non-European
languages, but less frequently in transcriptions of European
languages.
The Conference did not decide one-sidedly in favour of one
or the other of these rival systems, but chose in an eclectic
spirit for some sounds a monotype notation (A), for other
sounds diacritical marks (B), giving even in some cases prefer-
ence to neither system, but allowing signs of both to be used
as alternatives, so as to leave the decision to the individual
taste of each scholar or to the resources of his printer.


5. General Principles
One of the main objects of the Conference was to do away
with the worst of those ambiguities which are caused by the
same sign being used for totally different purposes by various
scholars. In such cases the ambiguous sign should either be
totally discarded, or else, if it is retained, its meaning should
be settled unambiguously, so that any other use of the sign
should be discountenanced.
One example is a small circle under a letter, e.g. [n] : this
is used extensively by comparative philologists to denote
syllabic function, but by the Ass. Ph. to denote what is prac-
tically the very opposite, namely voicelessness. If, therefore,
we see a word transcribed [vatn], it is impossible at once to
know whether the last sound is to be pronounced voiced and
syllabic, or voiceless and non-syllabic—as a matter of fact, the
former is the Swedish, and the latter the Icelandic, form of
what is etymologically the same word, meaning ‘water’.
Here the Conference decided in favour of the former value of the
circle under a letter (§ 10). Other signs of double employment,
with regard to which it was important to arrive at an agree-
ment, are [n’], [n'], and [nj, see below. One of the worst
offenders in this respect is the letter [c], which has been used
in transcriptions and transliterations for many different pur-
poses : it was therefore thought advisable to discard this
letter altogether from our phonetic system.
Another difficult letter is [y], which is used now for the
round front vowel in Fr. bu , now for the not-round central
Russian vowel in ty [tu], now for the consonant in E. youngs
&c; This consonant in other systems is denoted by the letter
[j], but that letter, on the other hand, is used by some to
denote the initial sound in Fr. jamais, and by others the
initial sound-group in E .jam. The ambiguity of [j] may be
to some extent obviated if we follow Lundell and write the
letter without the dot, thus [j]. Now it is evident that those
who use the letter [y] for the consonant cannot at the same
time have it as a vowel, hence there is a certain interdepen-
dence between various signs, as seen in the following table, in


E. joung .
■ j
y
i, j
Fr. b u
• y
u
Fr. tout .
. u
*\1
u
which the first column shows the system of the Ass. Ph.,
the second that of the French dialectologists, who use the
letter [u] for the vowel in Fr. bn , and have therefore been
obliged to coin a new letter for the vowel in Fr. tout ; the
third column shows how it is possible to avoid all ambiguity
caused by the letters [y, j]
The signs selected should as far as possible form a consis-
tent system, the same modifications or diacritics being used
everywhere with the same signification. It is difficult to carry
this principle through to the fullest extent, on account of the
unsystematic character of the basis itself, the Latin alphabet;
and one member of the Conference, Daniel Jones, held the
opinion that for some purposes, at any rate, it was preferable
that the signs should be unsystematic, as long as they were
easily written and looked well when printed : thus he preferred
the signs of the Ass. Ph. [c, j] to the more systematic
symbols preferred by the rest of the Conference, see § 16.
Phonetic signs should be as easy to remember as possible.
This is to a great extent effected if they form a consistent
system ; but even apart from the greater ease of remembering
systematic signs it is possible within certain limits to devise
signs which by their very shape suggest the sound or modifi-
cation of sound which they are meant to stand for. Examples
will be found in some of the following paragraphs.
Practical considerations very often played a role in the
deliberations of the Conference ; thus when it was thought
unwise to deviate too much from what scholars, whether
students of Indo-European or other languages, were already
accustomed to seeing and employing, and when, on the other
hand, regard was often taken to what would be practical from
the point of view of printers. These object to having too
many signs over and under letters, as letters with such diacritics
will in general have to be cast as so many separate letters, and
thus present practically the same difficulties as new ‘ mono-


types’, even if they may perhaps be written more easily.
Semitists complain that very often the dots and strokes used in
their transcriptions tend to disappear in printing, even where
they have been clearly visible in the last proof. Therefore
the Conference advocate the indication of such things as quan-
tity and stress by means of symbols to be placed by the side
of the sound symbols instead of above or below the letters.
On the contrary, the majority of the Conference thought
it of minor importance to devise signs which would look
pleasing and harmonious in printed connected texts: this
consideration may to a great extent be left to the type-founders,
while it was our business to create something which could be
safely recommended from a scientific point of view.
6. Transcription and Transliteration
It was recommended to distinguish phonetic transcription
from transliteration by inserting the former in square brackets
[ ] and the latter in round parentheses with a small circle f
thus leaving the common round parentheses ( ) for the ordinary
use to denote what may or may not be left out. Words or
single letters from the ordinary spelling should be printed
in italics (‘ kursiv ’).
The following paragraphs 7-28 deal exclusively with Tran-
scription.
7. Quantity
The Conference recommend to place the sign for length
after the sign for the sound itself, and to use the following
signs for the various degrees of quantity :
[a’] for long,
[a.] for half-long,
leaving short unmarked. Extra-long may be denoted [a* •].
This method of marking length is preferable to placing
signs like [ ] and [ w ] above the letters, as these signs easily
come into collision with other signs placed above letters to
indicate shades of sounds. There is this advantage in making
signs for quantity independent of the sound symbols them-
selves, that it allows of greater freedom in the shaping of these,


whether monotypes or letters with diacritics be preferred.
Moreover, it is easy to indicate wavering or uncertain length,
as in G. glas [gla(')s].
It seemed preferable to use [•] as in Jespersen’s books in-
stead of [:], which has been used hitherto by the Ass. Ph.; the
latter is sometimes printed in such a way that it may easily
be mistaken for a separate letter, [ma:nd] for instance being
apt to be misread as [malnd]. Besides, [*] and [.] seem a con-
venient means of denoting full- and half-length: cp. the fol-
lowing section.
8. Stress
It is recommended to place stress-marks outside (not above)
the letters for the sounds themselves. The best place is before
the beginning of the stressed syllable, and the following signs
are recommended:
['] for strong stress (full stress),
[,] for half-strong (subordinate) stress,
weak syllables being unmarked. For extra-strong stress ["]
or a heavier stroke ['] may be used.
These signs may be used for sentence stress as well as for
stress within particular words.
As regards the place in which to put stress-marks, various
systems were discussed and rejected by the Conference,
besides that of placing some sign above the vowel-letter,
which has already been mentioned. In many dictionaries
and other books (chiefly popular ones) the stress-mark,
generally in the form of an acute accent, is placed after the
vowel of the stressed syllable; this has the inconvenience
that in many cases it separates sounds that have to be pro-
nounced closely together, as in E. address, empty, if transcribed
[odre's, e'mpti] ; note also the difficulty with diphthongs : is
E. behind to be written [bihai'nd] or [biha'ind]? It is not
much better to place this mark, as is sometimes done, after
the whole syllable, thus [bihaind'j, for it is not always easy to
decide where the syllable ends, and one may hesitate between
writing [em'pti], [emp'ti] and [empt'i] for E. empty. The
best system evidently is to mark the beginning of the stressed


syllable, but this should not be done, as Sweet did in some
of his early books, by placing a mark after the initial sound
(he wrote, for instance, [akoun] for E. alone), as this again
separates sounds that belong naturally together, but by
placing the mark before the initial sound of the strong
syllable, as Sweet did later and is done now by many
phoneticians. The stress-mark then acts as a warning to the
reader: here you have to begin a strong syllable !
The Conference, however, agreed that the system followed
up to now by the Ass. Ph. of writing e.g. [a'tempt, bi'haind]
has the practical inconvenience of misleading all those who
have been accustomed to the system of most dictionaries, and
who will therefore be tempted to think that the acute accent
means stress on the preceding vowel. Such misunderstanding
is avoided by using the upright stroke, which by the very
unusualness of its form warns the reader that the indication
of stress is not the customary one. There are the two
additional advantages that we gain a natural sign for secondary
stress by placing the same small upright stroke below, as in
E. epidemic [ ,epi 'demik], and that the acute and grave accents
may be utilized to indicate rising and falling tones in accord-
ance with the shape of the signs themselves.
Note also the natural way in which the two possible pro-
nunciations of combinations such as that of E. at all are
indicated, the more solemn [ot'o*!], and the more familiar
[o'to-l] ; cp. also at home [ot'houm, a'thoum, a'toum] and the
similar shiftings which must have taken place in G. allein
[al'ain, a'lain], as well as in E. alone, Dan. alene , &c.
9. Tone
The use of tones (pitch accents, ‘ musical ’ or chromatic
accents, intonation) is so complicated, and presents so many
divergencies from language to language, that it is impossible
to devise any single system for their denotation which would
be applicable to all languages. The Conference recommended
that a straight line [~] be used for a level tone, a slanting
stroke like ['] (‘ acute ’) for a rising tone, and another like [']
(‘grave’) for a falling tone; these signs may, of course, be


combined in various ways: [ A ] for rising-falling, and [ v ] for
falling-rising. Further, the place of the signs in a high,
middle, or low position may be utilized, if necessary, to
denote tones as high-level, mid-rise, low-level, &c., &c., and
[~] may be used for a waving tone-movement.
In spite of this general recommendation, no objection was
raised to the continued use of the signs ['] and ['] in the
signification fixed by tradition among Norwegian and Swedish
scholars for the two tone movements in those languages which
often serve to distinguish words (‘ single ’ or ‘ monosyllabic ’,
and ‘ compound ’ or * dissyllabic s tone).
10. Syllabic and Non-syllabic
No sign for the function in a syllable is required either for
a vowel used as the ‘top * of a syllable (used syllabically) or
for a consonant used in a non-syllabic function ; but signs are
often required for the opposite function.
A small round circle under the letter was unanimously
adopted 1 to denote that a consonant acquires the syllabic
function (becomes top of the syllable), e.g. [n, I]. This sign
has been used by nearly every student of comparative Aryan
(Indo-European) grammar, further by Lepsius, in Finno-
Ugrian languages, &c., and therefore deserves being preferred
to other signs sometimes used for the same function, e.g.
[n, n, -n, ’n].
For non-syllabic function of a vowel a half-circle under the
letter has similarly been used very extensively, and was
adopted by the Conference, e.g. [i, y].
It should be noted that in connected writing the ordinary
rules of syllabification often render it unnecessary to indicate
these functions expressly; thus combinations like [hidn] and
[main] in English can only be read as [hidn] and [main].
11. Voice and Voicelessness
Many of the ordinary letters imply either voice or voice-
lessness in the sound they usually denote: thus on the one
1 Though Jones did not vote.


hand [m, n, z, a], on the other hand [s, p, h]. The Conference
discussed the possibility of having one and the same sign to
be used as a kind of shift-key, making what is usually voiced,
voiceless, and inversely what is usually voiceless, voiced; but
this idea, however ingenious, was rejected as being apt to lead
to confusion. It was consequently thought advisable to devise
two signs, one for turning an otherwise voiced sound into the
corresponding voiceless one, and the other for the inverse
change, namely
(i) [ v ] under the letter, e.g. [n] for voiceless n, [l] for
voiceless 1, &c,, and
(2) [ O J or [,] under the letter, thus [h] or [h] for voiced h.
The former sign was chosen because it might represent the
position of the vocal chords when removed from one another,
the latter because it gives a picture of the position of the
vocal chords when approached to one another so as to make
vibrations possible.
As already remarked, the sign [ o ] for voicelessness, e.g. in
[n], used hitherto by the Ass. Ph., was rejected for this
purpose, because it has been used extensively as a sign for
syllabic function and was retained in that signification by the
Conference. The digraphs [hm, hi] sometimes used for voice-
less sounds may be practical in some cases, but can only be
considered makeshift substitutes for signs like [m, I].
12. Nasalization
Two signs are in use for nasalization, one a wave-line above
the letter as in Portuguese, e.g. [a], and the other a hook
below to the right as in Polish, e.g. [3]. The Conference
preferred the latter sign, because it was thought convenient to
leave the place above letters open for indications of tone-
movements, where a wave-line may be required in some
languages, and for other modifications ; cf. § 27 on ["].
13. Labialization and Unrounding
For labialization (lip-rounding) the sign [ w ] under the letter,
e.g. [n, I], was recommended : it recalls the letter w.
The same sign may exceptionally be applied to a vowel-


letter, though in most cases the rounded vowels have separate
alphabetical signs.
For unrounding of rounded vowels the inverse sign [„] may
be used, e.g. [u].
14. Dental
It seemed necessary to have a sign for an articulation by
which the upper front teeth are really touched—dental in the
strictest sense —and for this the sign [ n ] recalling the shape
of a tooth was thought appropriate, e.g. [t] for a stop
articulated with the tip of the tongue against the teeth, distinct
from the more usual alveolar [t].
15. Retroflex
This is the best name for sounds often called cerebral,
cacuminal, supradental, or inverted. They are produced by
curving the tip of the tongue backwards so as to point it
towards the arch of the palate.
For these consonants the Conference adopted two systems
of notation as equally good, viz.
(A: monotype) [t^U 7^
(B : diacritics) [t d n 1 s z].
The former are Lundell’s signs, the latter those almost
universally used by comparative linguists.
It was not considered necessary to have separate signs tor
the two degrees distinguished by Lundell and others in
Swedish and Norwegian dialects {‘supradental’ and ‘cacu-
minal’), as these variants seem never to be used as distinct
phonemes in the same language : in Norwegian the former
sounds occur in educated and the latter in vulgar speech in
the same words and combinations.
16. Palatal
The two classes of sounds described as palatal and palatal-
ized, and the best ways of denoting them, were very fully dis-
cussed by the Conference, as the problems connected with these
sounds bristle with difficulties.


First, as to the sounds themselves. It was considered very-
important indeed to distinguish as sharply as possible between
the two classes of sounds, the physiological formation of which
is essentially different, though in the practice of many phone-
ticians they are not always kept apart.
In the formation of a palatal sound the active organ is the
upper surface (‘ front’) of the tongue, which articulates against
the hard palate, while the tip of the tongue is passive, generally
lying immediately behind and touching the lower teeth. For
a palatal stop there is thus contact (closure) between the hard
palate and that part of the tongue which, in the state of rest,
lies just beneath it, and correspondingly with the other
palatals. After a long discussion, in which various possibilities
of denoting this series of sounds were exhaustively reviewed,
the Conference came to the conclusion that the best signs for
them were monotypes (ligatures) containing a loop as in the
ordinary written form of j (not a hook as in the printed form
of the same letter), thus— [j cj Jg f
A special difficulty arises because of the similarity between
the sign here used for the palatal nasal [g] and the sign [g]
which is used by a great many scholars to denote the back
sound of E. long, G. lang; but this did not seem a decisive
argument against the form adopted, and the great majority
of the Conference were against the form used by the Ass. Ph.
[p], which reminds one too much of a common written
form of p.
Daniel Jones raised the objection that [j] and [cj] were not
really modifications of [t, d], but totally independent sounds,
and should not, therefore, be denoted by letters recalling [t, dj;
nor could he attach any importance to the consideration
which carried weight with the other members, that it was
desirable to have the whole series of these sounds denoted
systematically by the same modification of ordinary letters:
he preferred the signs of the Ass. Ph., viz. [c j A p9, Zf],
in spite of their unsystematic character, chiefly because they
looked well in print, and had proved easy to manage in the
practice of the Ass. Ph. But the other members of the
Conference disapproved these signs, more particularly [X] and


[c], the latter also because it seems indispensable in translitera-
tions of foreign alphabets with the value of the affricate [ts].
It is of course possible to have similar signs framed on
[k, g], as a basis for varieties lying between Jj, <J] and ordinary
[k, g], namely [ls, s].
17. Palatalized
Palatalization may be defined a modification (of a sound
articulated elsewhere) which is produced by raising the ‘ front ’
of the tongue towards the hard palate without touching it
completely. A palatalized [t] thus retains the closure formed
by the tip of the tongue, while that part of the tongue which
is behind the tip is raised in a manner not found in the
ordinary [t]; correspondingly with other palatalized sounds.
As this modification can take place with all, or most, speech
sounds, the Conference did not think it advisable to have
monotypes in this case, but preferred a diacritic mark which
could be applied to any letter, viz.
[''j, to be placed either above the letter, e.g. [n], or imme-
diately after it, e.g. [n", p", t"]. This sign is meant to remind
the reader of the palatal arch.
The Conference thus rejected various signs for palatalization :
(1) an acute accent above the letter, e.g. [n], which can easily
be mistaken for a tone mark ; (a) [ v ] as in [n], to which the
same objection is applicable ; (3) [’] after the letter, as in
[n*, I’] ; this sign must be reserved for the glottal stop ; (4) [y]
after the letter, e.g. [ny, ly] : this is inexact, as it produces the
impression that we have to do with two consecutive sounds
instead of one single sound ; besides, this designation is
objectionable on account of the ambiguity always inherent in
the letter y.
On the other hand no serious objection was raised to the
proposal to indicate various nicer shades of palatalization by
means of a vowel-letter as index, thus e.g. [t 1 , t e ], which
seemed allowable as a substitute in some cases for [tT].
As palatal and palatalized sounds are very often confounded,
the Conference thought it important expressly to ask future


investigators in each separate case clearly to indicate, by
means of an unambiguous description, to which of the two
classes the sounds of the language concerned belong.
18. The sh-sounds
The physiological analysis of the presents very
great difficulties, and it would be well if future investigators
indicated as accurately as possible the exact formation of such
sounds. Two chief varieties must, in accordance with what
has already been said, be denoted in the following way:
'/j] if the articulation is decidedly palatal (a subdivision
of dorsal articulation), and
[g, if the articulation is decidedly retroflex (with the tip
of the tongue pointing upwards and backwards, a subdivision
of the so-called * coronal * articulation).
But as the acoustic effect of these two varieties is closely
similar, it was thought practical by the side of these exact
signs to retain the customary signs
[J 3 jj (without a loop), or, if preferred, [s, z],
to be used more loosely as a kind of non-committal signs,
where a writer is not quite clear as to the exact method of
formation, or where the sound is neither pronouncedly palatal
nor retroflex, though possessing the same hollow character
which distinguishes the ‘hush-sounds’ from ‘hiss-sounds’.
19. Fricatives ( Spirants)
In order to get a consistent system of signs for this im-
portant class of sounds, the Conference recommended the use
of Greek letters as follows:
[(f), /3] for bilabial sounds. (Instead of the Greek form
the Russian form $ may be used by those who are afraid of cf>
being mistaken for 0).
[9, 5] for point (dental) sounds. (The shape of the latter
with a straight stroke above, 5, is preferred to 5).
[x, y] for velar (postpalatal) sounds. (The letter x may be
used instead of x).


The Conference thus pronounced against the use of crossed
letters like [b, d], which have often been used, but which cannot
be made into a comprehensive system; a crossed p and t for
the sounds here denoted [s, £] seemed impossible, and
a crossed printed g is not good on account of the usual shape
of that letter, though [g.] is not so bad. The use of the two
signs [3, o], as in the Ass. Ph., did not find favour, partly
because one of the corresponding signs was taken from Old
Norse (Old English), the other from Greek, partly because
the sign [o] for the voiceless sound seemed inferior to the
other Greek form £, because it reminded one rather of a vowel-
sign like 0.
For the labio-dental fricatives the ordinary Latin letters
[f, v] were adopted as a matter of course. Similarly there
could be no doubt with regard to
[w] for the rounded bilabial voiced fricative with raising of
the back of the tongue, as in E. we. The corresponding
voiceless sound can, of course, be written [w] (§ 11), but it was
thought convenient also to have the widely used sign
[hj] for this sound.
For the palatal (prepalatal) voiced consonant the letter [j]
without the dot was adopted (cf. above, p. 1 3, on the ambiguity
of the letter j with a dot, and § 10 on the relation between the
real consonantal [j] and non-syllabic [j]). For the voiceless
consonant corresponding to [j] (G. ch in ich) no sign was
provided in the deliberations of the Conference; but the sign
seems convenient, as the consonant may be looked upon
as a kind of palatal [x].
30. Velar
With regard to [k] and [g] there can be no doubt, but it is
not easy to settle the matter for the corresponding nasal.
The Conference pronounced in favour of the sign [ra], because
it allows subsidiary marks above and below the line better
than the other signs [q, q, qJ, which otherwise seem un-
objectionable and equally employable. All these forms are
in use, and may be considered variants of the same letter.


21. Post-velar
For the post-velar consonants, articulated against the lower
part of the soft palate (and the uvula), a consistent system of
signs is obtained by the use of small capitals, thus
[k, g, n, r], and Greek capital letters for fricatives [X, F] ;
[q] however was admitted as an alternative to [k].
In the same way [l] may be used for a side-consonant
(lateral) in which the back of the tongue articulates against
the soft palate without the tip of the tongue being at all
active. This is different from the ordinary ‘ hollow 1 pro-
duced with the tip of the tongue in the usual place for the
ordinary [l], from which it differs by having a greater distance
between the sides of the tongue and the cheeks, and by
a hollow in the front part of the tongue, which necessitates
the raising of the back of the tongue, and thus produces an
[u]-like resonance ; this ‘ hollow 1 ’ may be written [i].
22. Glottal ( Laryngal)
The following signs were adopted :
[’] glottal stop (‘ fester Einsatz ’).
[h] and ['], two degrees of h-sounds; [th] strongly and [t'J
weakly aspirated [t].
ft] ° r [h], voiced h, see above, § u.
[h], the Semitic h with strong pressure.
[ e ], Arabic ain.
23. R-sounds
It seemed impracticable to provide separate signs for all
variants found in existing languages, but the following were
recognized as the main types :
[r], point-r, generally with trill; it is of course possible to
denote variants by means of diacritics, [r] retroflex, [f] or (V']
palatalized.
[f], the Gech sibilant r-sound.
(XI (printed forms [*u, 1]), various r-sounds in the back of


the mouth, but if the sound is distinctly post-velar (uvular)
the letter [r] should be used in accordance with the recom-
mendation in § 2i,
24. Affricates
In most cases simple combinations of two letters will be
sufficient, e.g. [ts]; but where the joining is particularly
close, so that the ear may hesitate between the impression of
one sound and of two sounds, it will be convenient to have the
two letters joined into one type, e.g. [ts]. It may often be
practical to write, e.g., [tf] or instead of the physiologically
more exact notation with joined [£s] or [jj].
25. Non-exploded stops
Non-exploded stops should be denoted by adding a small
square above after the consonant sign, e.g. [t°].
26. Clicks
Clicks should be denoted by adding a small triangle to the
letter for the corresponding ordinary sound, e.g. [t] or [t A ],
The signs used by Lepsius and others (c, q, x, |[, !, +, O)
are quite unsystematic, and must be rejected.
27. Vozvels
The notation of vowels proved one of the most difficult
tasks of the Conference, because languages differ very much
from one another, and small nuances in articulation, which in
one language are utterly unimportant, may in other languages
be distinctive. It is also in the present stage of phonetic
science very difficult, not to say impossible, to give objective
descriptions of vowels which are sufficiently precise to ensure
an exact recognition of the vowel intended. Much must,
accordingly, be left to future research and to each individual
investigator.
Daniel Jones explained to the Conference his system of


‘ Cardinal Vowels *, in which he has aimed at fixing a certain
number of vowel articulations, which may be used as starting-
points for descriptions of any vowel-sounds actually occurring
in various languages. These cardinal vowels are not chosen
arbitrarily from definite languages, but they are selected on
physiological and acoustic grounds. Cardinal vowel No. i
(i) is the vowel which has the tongue in the highest and most
forward position. Cardinal vowel No. 5 (a) has the tongue in
the lowest and most backward position. Cardinal vowels 3 (e),
3 (e), and 4 (a) are selected as being three front vowels such
that the degrees of acoustic separation between each pair of
consecutive vowels are approximately equal. Cardinal vowels
6 (o), 7 (o) and 8 (u) are back vowels with lip-rounding, chosen
so as to continue the series of equal degrees of acoustic separa-
tion, Cardinal vowel No. 8 (u) is not determined by any
physiological consideration, as will be seen from the following
diagram :
The tongue positions of cardinal vowels 1, 4, 3, and 8 have
been established by means of X-ray photographs, and if a dot
be placed to represent the highest point of the tongue in each


1
(No.IJ\' -—■—Russia a bi
eV \(No. 6.)
(No H\ \o
Setr \ ywo.7.)
r , , YNo3N \^No.
Enniish vowel la. Cat \ y '
a> $ct
/ /Vo.4.) fNo-5.j
case these dots will be found to be geometrically related
approximately as follows:
For the purpose of practical language study, it is convenient
to join these points by straight lines, and place the remaining
cardinal points between [i] and [a], and [a] and [u], as shown
in the following diagram :
English vowel in
Any one wiio knows the cardinal vowels can obtain a very
good idea of the sound of a foreign vowel if he sees the dot
corresponding to it placed on the appropriate spot on the
diagram, and has also instructions as to the position of the
lips. Thus, a foreign learner who knows the cardinal vowels
can get a very good idea of the sound of the English vowels
in ‘ set ’ and * cat ’ if he knows that the first is approximately
half-way between cardinal vowels a and 3, and the second is


approximately half-way between cardinal vowels 3 and 4.
Similarly it is possible for an Englishman wishing to learn the
Russian h to know that the normal value (without a following
‘ soft' consonant) is about two-thirds of the way from cardinal
vowel No. 1 (i) to cardinal vowel No. 8 pronounced with un-
rounded lips. (See above diagram.)
This system was criticized by some members who thought
that it was not sufficient to have two intermediate points
between the highest and the lowest vowels, as some languages
(Swedish, Chinese, &c.) distinguished three stages (Sw. se,
hjdhtiy bdra , and correspondingly in the o- and o-series).
The Conference left the use of monotype vowel-letters, such
as those of the Ass. Ph., free as optional denotations of vowels,
among these [a] for E. uin cut. But the use of [a] and [a]
for distinct vowels was criticized on the score that compositors
and others were accustomed to look upon a as the printed
(Roman) form corresponding to the written form a , and that
the latter shape was also used as the italic (‘ kursiv ’) form of
a, without any separate significative meaning being attached
to it.
But by the side of such monotype letters for vowels it was
thought indispensable to have diacritic marks for two modifi-
cations, viz. advancing from a back position towards a front
position (thus for a horizontal movement), and for close and
open varieties (thus a vertical or up-and-down movement) ;
cp. also the diacritics for lip-rounding and unrounding,
above, § 13.
For advanced vowels the use of one or two dots above the
letter was adopted, one dot being used for the central (mixed)
vowels, and two for the front vowels in the rounded series,
thus
[u] for the high-mixed-round vowel (the two varieties in
Swedish and Norwegian hus were not provided with
separate signs), and
[U] for the high-front-round vowel in Fr. bu, G. iiber . By
this use of the letter [iij the ambiguous letter [y]
may be avoided ; cf. above, p. 1 2.


By a consistent use of these two diacritics we have the two
series:
Central: Front:
u
d
and correspondingly for the not-round vowels
To the signs h -J after the letter for advanced and retracted
positions it was objected that it is difficult to remember
which is to mean advanced and which retracted, and that in
print these signs often look as separate letters for whole
sounds. The same objection applies to t - 1 - for lowered and
raised positions.
The signs thus adopted provide for the most important
classes of vowels, with the exception of the not-round central
(mixed) vowels, which cannot be denoted in the same way as
the corresponding round vowels by means of the dot indicating
advanced articulation, as no single letters are found for not-
round back vowels. For the high vowel of this series no
better sign was found than the Russian [bi], as neither i (in
which the two dots must then be taken in the directly opposite
meaning to that of ii), nor 1 (i turned upside down), nor b or b
were thought particularly good, for various reasons. For the
mid-central vowel the sign [a] is used almost universally,
though not always for exactly the same vowel-sound—it may
be used with a certain latitude for sounds nearly in the centre
of the vowel-system—and correspondingly [3] (e turned
upside down) may be used for the low-central vowel, thus
giving the series:
For vertical varieties two systems of diacritic marks under
the letter were recommended without the Conference taking
definitely sides for either of them, namely:


(i) the old Lepsius system [.] for close, and [_] for open
articulation. The dot is used in the same signification in
Romanic philology, where the open variety is indicated by
a hook [f] —which has too close a similarity to the sign which
the Conference adopted for nasalization (§ 12) —and
(a) a new system [<] for close and [>] for open articulation.
In favour of these signs it was mentioned that the signs are
used in their mathematical signification, [<] meaning less, and
[>] more aperture than in the unmodified letter.
Some members of the Conference objected to the use of the
dot as above in the Lepsius system, that the same sign had
already been employed with consonant letters for the retroflex
articulation, and that there might be use for the same sign
with the same value for vowels articulated with the tip of the
tongue pointing upwards (sometimes written, e. g„ [a r ] or [a]).
But other members did not attach much importance to that
objection, and thus the choice was left open between
[e] and [e] for ‘ close e ’,
[e] and [e] for ‘ open e ’, &c.
28. Arrangement of Tables of Sounds
It was unanimously agreed that it was preferable to arrange
tables of sounds with the labial consonants, front vowels, &c.,
on the left-hand side, and the sounds formed in the back of the
mouth on the right-hand side.
29. The Transliteration of Non-Latin Writing
For the transliteration of non-Latin writing, linguists are
recommended to conform, as far as possible, to the system of
phonetic script adopted by the Conference. Linguists are
also specially recommended to use this system as a basis in
cases where the introduction of any new sign is involved.
Of course it should not be forgotten that the choice of signs
for the transliteration will be frequently determined by non-
phonetic considerations. Thus, in the transliteration of the
writing of imperfectly known languages, in which the alphabet


is derived from the Greek alphabet, one must often be guided
by the alphabetic identity. For this reason the Lycian,
Etruscan, Oscan, and Umbrian sign corresponding to the
Greek £ is often transcribed by z although it indicates in all
these languages an affricate [ts] and not a [z] ; and one tran-
scribes in the same way the corresponding sign of Venetian,
which represents a pronunciation [d] or perhaps [s], An
analogous procedure may perhaps even be natural in cases
where an alphabet of non-Greek origin is concerned. Thus it
is known that Sieg and Siegling in transcribing Tokharian (the
writing of which originates from the Indian alphabet) have
taken particular care to indicate without ambiguity the
alphabetic correspondence (zud, ka —[wo], [ko] ). And what
strikes one particularly is that in transcribing the less known
languages which employed the Assyrio-Babylonian cuneiform
writing (Elamite, Vannic, Mitanni, Hittite, &c.) the most
prudent course is to follow mechanically the transcriptions in
use for Assyrio-Babylonian, without any phonetic interpreta-
tion. Thus, one will write in Hittite za, zi , &c., without
regard to the fact that the Hittites doubtless pronounced
them [tsa], [tsi], &c.
Similar reasons have determined the uniform transcription £
for the Russian and the Serbian in spite of the considerable
difference in pronunciation. In this case there is, combined
with alphabetic considerations, the wish to indicate etymo-
logically identical sounds in the same form, a wish that may
even be legitimate in many other cases, when it is a question
of making a phonetic rather than a historical comparison
of languages.
Finally, the general rule for transcription will always be, in
normal cases, to render a given letter of the original writing in
one way only. This rule will, however, bring about many
phonetic inexactitudes, the avoidance of which should not be
attempted. Thus, one uniformly transcribes by b , d y g the
Gothic occlusives and spirants, &C. 1
1 In all the above, I am speaking of ordinary transcription, of which
the sole purpose is to replace the original script. If, however, for any
special reason, it is desired to indicate the exact phonetic value of these


Apart, however, from all the circumstances which can
legitimately bring about a non-phonetic transliteration, it is
hoped that transliteration will be more and more influenced by
the system of phonetic script adopted by the Conference.
Transcriptions up to the present regarded as usual may be
provisionally permitted, which, without being in accordance
with the system, are not in direct conflict with the recom-
mended signs. Thus one may quite well provisionally permit
the traditional transcription of Sanskrit (as found in the
Grammar of Wackernagel, or with the g, preferred by French
linguists to the s, or with other small variations), and one may
accept the usual transcriptions of the Slavonic languages,
using the Cyrillic alphabet. On the other hand, signs directly
in conflict with the phonetic system adopted by the Conference
should be avoided. Thus one should not transcribe the
Semitic emphatics by /, d , &c., these letters having quite
another significance in the system of the Conference (but one
may of course employ, without coming into conflict with our
system, most of the other transcriptions hitherto used in
transcribing Semitic languages).
The toleration now recommended will have the result that
divergences of transcription between the different systems will
only disappear gradually. It is hoped, however, that they
will finally be abolished, and that the system of phonetic
script adopted by the Conference will contribute to this
desirable result.
non-phonetic transcriptions or of the original writing, it is recommended
that the system of phonetic script adopted by the Conference be
made use of.


■u
3 1508 00002220 7


j I o |
sJ I
r o f^r
Oxford University Press
London Edinburgh Glasgow Copenhagen
New York Toronto Melbourne Cape Town
Bombay Calcutta Madras Shanghai
Humphrey Milford Publisher to the University
