

PHOTO-ENGRAVING
PHOTO-LITHO
AND
COLLOTYPE
W.T. WILKINSON
LONDON
HAMPTON, JUDD & Co.


Collotype Print Waterlow & Sons Ltd, Finsoury, London.
“OUR RIVER.”


PHOTO-ENGRAVING,
PHOTO-LITHO
AND
COLLOTYPE,
A
PRACTICAL MANUAL
BY
W. T. WILKINSON.
FOURTH EDITION,
HAMPTON, JUDD & Oo„
14, DUKE STREET, ADBLPHI, LONDON, M'.O,
1890. "


ENGLAND EROS., PRINTERS,
28, CHARLES STREET, ROYAL CRESCENT, ROTTING HILL,
LONDON, WV


TABLE OF CONTASTS.
PART I.
Zino Etching in Line.
PA ms
Chapter I.—Photographic Apparatus. ... ... ... 1
Chapter ll.—Wet Collodion Process,—Preparation
of Chemicals. ... ... ... ... 6
Chapter lll.'—Wet Collodion Process.—
Photographic Manipulations. 17
Chapter IV.—Negatives on Dry Plates 24
Chapter V.—Printing on Zinc in Albumen. 28
Chapter Vl. ~ ~ ~ 30
Chapter Vll.—Printing on Zinc in Bitumen. . . ..40
Chapter Vlll.—Zinc Etching from Transfers 44
Chapter IX.—Etching in Line 49
PART 11.
Photo-Engraving in Hale Tone.
Introduction (11
Chapter I. —The Screen. ... ... 64
Chapter ll.—The Grained Negative. 6B
Chapter lll.—Half-Tone Printing on Zinc. 68
Chapter IV.—Etching Half-Tone Prints on Zinc. ... 72
Chapter V.— Re-biting Half-tone Zino blocks 7ft
Chapter Vl.—Other methods of making type blocks. ...
Swelled Gelatine Process ... ... ... 79
Line blocks for Photographs. .. ... 81
Wash out Process ; ...! I, ... • 88


PART 111.
.Photo-Lithography in Line.
Chapter I.—Apparatus &o. 87
Chapter ll.—Sensitizing &o. —Photo-litho Transfer Paper 92
PART IY.
Photo-Lithography in Half-Tone.
Chapter I.—Photo-Lithography in Half-tone 101
Chapter ll.—Grained Transfer Paper. .. 103
Chapter lll.—Husband's Papyrotint Process. ... .. 10(3
PART Y.
Collogeaphiq Printing.
Collotype ■ 113
Chapter I.—Preparing the Collotype Plale 114
Chapter ll.—Sensitive Collotype Mixture ... 117
Chapter lll.—Presses &0., Collotype ... ••• ... 121
Chapter IV.—Printing from the Collotype Plate 124
Chapter Y.—Printing Collotype Plates upon a Litho Machine 128
Chapter Vl.—Photo-lithographio Transfers from Collotype
Plates ... 133
APPENDIX.
The Nitrate of Silver Bath ■ .. 139
Stripping Collodion Films ... ... 145
Half-tone Negative for Collotype upon Dry Plates ... 146
The Reversing Mirror i 153
Preparation and care of Holler .. ... ... ... 158
The Ruled Sheet ... ... ... 158
Table op Contents.


PREFACE.
|||HIS book is neither a translation, nor a pot pourri of
crude ideas, mixed up indiscriminately more
with an aim to mystification, than of giving practical
information. Every method and formula, herein given, is
the result of years of careful practice and study, and is used
exactly as printed by the author in his every day work.
Methods and formulas however, are comparatively useless,
except suitable apparatus and appliances be provided.
The elements of success are three, viz., suitable apparatus,
careful practice, and reliable formulae. The student must
provide the first two, the third being provided herein by
Yburs Faithfully,
W. T. WILKINSON.


PART I.
PHOTOGRAPHIC MANIPULATIONS, &C.


PHOTO-ENG-RAVING ON ZINC, IN LINE, AND IN
HALF TONE.
CHAPTER I.
npiie foundation of success in any photo-mechanical pro-
cess, is a good and suitable negative, and this can only be
produced with good apparatus, and in well arranged work-
rooms, therefore the first care of the student must be to
provide these necessaries before beginning to work ; the
common plan of starting with improvised tools being sure to
end in failure.
A good lens is indispensable, and if purchased from a
good English maker is sure to be satisfactory.
The best type of lens for this work, is either a rapid
rectilinear, or a triplet. The triplet lenses are obsolete, and
can only be obtained second hand, but when such lenses bear
the name of either Dallmeyer or Eoss, they may be purchased
with confidence, as no better instruments can be obtained.
The rapid rectilinear is a doublet, and is sold under
various names given by opticians to cheap foreign lenses,
and which beginners should have tried by an expert before
purchase, as the proportion of good lenses, suitable for copy-
ing, is extremely small.
B


Lenses bearing the names of Dallmeyer, Swift, Wray,
or Beck, or the Rapid Symmetricals of Ross, are always
reliable, and guaranteed ; wide angle rectilinears may be
used for copying, but those below 12 x 10, are of such
•short focus, that the camera is apt to obstruct the light, and
cause the picture to be unevenly illuminated.
The single landscape leases, and portrait or petzval lenses
will distort the lines, and must not be used.
In ordinary photography, the lens is fitted direct in the
front of the camera, but, for making negatives for photo
zincography, a mirror is placed behind the lens, which re-
flects the image upon the sensitive plate, this mirror is a
piece of perfectly fiat glass, coated with a film of pure silver,
highly polished. This mirror is mounted in a box at an
angle of 45 degrees, the base of the box being made square,
so that the lens can be pointed either side-ways, or towards
the floor, this last position being very handy when copying
out of a book, or in a room not well illuminated.


The size of the mirror will depend upon the diameter of
the lens, for a lens the diameter of which is two inches, the
mirror must he 5J x 2| inches, if 3 inches, 7 + 4 inches ;
the cost of these mirrors is one shilling per square inch,
silvered ready for use, to this must he added the cost of the
box which is from 15 to 80 shillings.
Great care must be taken of the mirror, the silver surface
being easily tarnished, remove it from the box each evening,
warm slightly, and wrap up in a piece of velvet also warmed,
so as to drive away the damp, warm slightly before using
also, full directions as to the general management and re-
silvering of the mirror will be found in the Appendix.
The camera must be strong and rigid, the bellows 'ex-
tending to a sufficient length to allow a picture being copied
same size, i. e., the camera must extend a little over twice the
focal length of the lens used to cover the largest plate, a
camera for plates 24 by 18 must extend 6ft. 6ins., for plates
15 by 12, 4 feet; and for plates by 6d, 80 inches.
Cameras purchased for copying should not be fitted with
a swing back, it being totally unnecessary, but small cameras,
intended for occasional out-door work, will require a swing
back.
The dark slide must be well made, and quite light tight,
for indoor work the single slide being preferable, in fact for
the wet process it is most imperative.
The stand for the copying camera, must be strong and
rigid, fitted with castors running upon rails fixed on the floor
at right angles to the easel upon which the drawing or plan
is fixed fox copying. The stand must be quite level, as it is
B 2


absolutely necessary that the camera, and original be perfectly
parallel, small cameras should be fixed upon the stand by a
screw, or else in putting in the dark slide there is a danger
of moving it, do not try to use a tripod stand for copying.
The easel is placed so as to be perfectly parallel with the
camera, and painted a dead black, with two white lines upon
it, intersecting in the centre, these lines being divided, and
marked into inches and half inches from the centre, the
centre of the board to exactly correspond with the centre of
focussing screen. The easel must be placed in such a position
that the whole of it is evenly illuminated from above, as well
as from the side ; a good size for the windows, lighting the
studio being 8 feet wide. Where the formation of the
room is such that no side light can be provided, a skylight
8 to 13 feet square, will answer admirably.
The floor of studio must be firm, as any vibration during
exposure of plate in the camera will be fatal.
The dark room in which the sensitive plate is manipulated,
will require great care in its preparation, as, whilst not dark
'in the visual sense, it must be in a chemical sense, the light
admitted into it being filtered through a medium that
deprives it of its chemical qualities ; for wet collodion or the
slow dry plates used for photo-zincography, the window of
dark room may be covered with three thicknesses of golden
fabric, a yellow calico sold for the purpose. This fabric
must be fixed over the window in such a manner as to quite
prevent any white light obtaining access to the room.
In front of the window a sink with waste pipe must be
fixed, this sink should be about 30 by 24. A good supply
of water is indispensable, the tap being placed at ohe side,


an india rubber tube being attached thereto, carried to the
ceiling from which it is suspended, the other end of tube
terminating in a rose and reaching to about six inches above
the sink. The negative when being washed is placed upon
a small stool three inches high standing in the sink. Pro-
vide as much bench and shelf room as possible, so as to keep
the solutions from being splashed into one another.
The dark room must be kept entirely for the process of
negative making, as the after processes of printing on zinc,
and etching, cause so much dust, and deleterious fumes, as
to speedily derange the chemicals used.
For successful work, it is imperative that the work rooms
be kept at an even temperature all the year round, a good
average being 60 degrees. If cold and damp, it is almost
impossible to get good results. The dark, and works rooms
must be provided with large clean towels, that the hands
can be kept clean, and finally these rooms must be kept per-
fecting clean, as nothing will sooner cause failure than dirty
and dusty workrooms.
CHAPTER II.
Wet Collodion Process, Preparation of the
Chemicals.
A] EG-ATIYES for printing on zinc may be made by
the wet collodion, or the dry gelatine method ; for regular
every day work the wet collodion process will be found the
cheapest, the dry process being best when only an occasional
negative is required ; as to quality, when ordinary care and


judgment are exercised, and the proper dry plates are used,
there is no difference.
In the dry process, the plates are purchased ready for use.
The various manipulations necessary to produce a negative
upon a dry plate will he described in a subsequent chapter;
this being devoted to the preparation of the chemicals for
working the wet collodion process.
The Collodion.
Methylated Spirits of Wine (pure) 30 ounces.
Methylated Ether '720 ... ••• 40 ounces.
Schering’s Cellodine ... ... locates.’
Gut the cellodine into thin strips, or, if it be hard, break it
up in a clean mortar, soak in the ether until soft, then add
the spirits of wine ; when dissolved, this forms the collodion.
The lodized, is composed of
Bromide of Zinc ... ... 150 grains.
lodide of Zinc ... ... 350 grains.
Methylated Spirits of Wine 10 ounces.
When the salts are dissolved, filter, and add to the collodion.
The filtering is best done by placing a pledget of cotton
wool in the neck of a glass funnel, and passing the iodizer
through it, laying a glass plate over the funnel to prevent
evaporation.
The iodizer being added to the collodion, shake up
thoroughly, and allow to stand for a week to settle, then
decant into convenient sized bottles for using ; this collodion
is ready for use in a week, and will improve with age up to
6 months, after which time it should.be mixed with new.


Beginners will perhaps find it advantageous to buy their
collodion at first, in which case, Mawson and Swan’s collo-
dion made for photo.-litho. work will suit them. The
collodion is sent out in two solutions, which must be mixed
in proportions of three parts collodion to one of iodizer, ohe
mixture being well shaken, and allowed to stand a week to
ripen. When so iodized, this collodion will keep good for
three mouths, after which it should be mixed with freshly
iodized; as sent out, the two solutions keep for a long time.
When coating plates with collodion, it is not a wise plan
to pour the surplus from the plate back into the bottle from
which it aves poured, but to pour it into another, kept handy
for the purpose, the contents of which, are, at the end of the
day’s work, emptied into the stock bottle, after such a quan-
tity as is sufficient for next day’s consumption, has been
decanted into the pourer.
The best bottle from which to pour the collodion upon
the plate is the tall capped bottles sold by the dealers as
collodion pourers.
The Silver Bath.
The Silver Bath is a most important factor in the produc-
tion of good negatives, and must be compounded with care,
and used with skill.
To make it, dissolve 6 ounces of nitrate of silver in 10
ounces of water, add 10 drops of iodized collodion, shake
up well, then add 70 ounces of water, and let it stand all
night ; then filter through a pledget of cotton wool, packed
loosely into the neck of a glass funnel, into a clean bottle oi
jug, such bottle or jug being kept solely for use with the
silver bath, as also the glass funnel ; then add one dram of
nitric acid, and let stand all night before trying.


The bath holder may be an upright vessel of the ordinary
pattern, with a dipper with which to lower the plate into the
solution ; or it may be a flat dish, with a cover, to keep out
light and dust, and using a silver hook to lift the plate from
the solution ; if the former shape be chosen, let the dipper
be of glass, porcelain, silver wire, or of wood, soaked in melted
paraffin, but on no account of ebonite, as such a dipper will
cause spots, and derange the bath sooner or later.
If a flat bath be used, the best form is that introduced by
Mr. H. J. Burton, principal operator of the Autotype Com-
pany, which is a wooden dish lined with asphaltmn, hanging
on a cradle, the lower end being a well to hold the solution ;
in this form of bath, the plate after sensitising, is drained
thoroughly, before taking it out, which is a great convenience,
as not only is the silver solution saved, but the dark, slides
will last much longer.
The Bath solution made up as above will be the right
strength for work, but as every plate sensitised therein takes
away its modicum of silver, after a certain time it must be
strengthened, as it is essential for the production of good
work that the solution be kept at a proper strength. The
best way of doing this, is to add a dram or two of a satura-
ted solution of nitrate of silver, after each day’s work has
been done, and if a solution be worked in a flat bath, it will
be as well to pour it into a jug and filter it before using
again ; with an upright holder, this filtering will only
require to be done about once or twice a month, as any par-
ticles of dust, &c., subside, and have not the same chance of
falling upon the film as in a flat bath, but the addition of
the silver solution should be made, and the solution well
stirred up with the dipper.


11l course of time, a silver bath will get contaminated
with organic matter from various causes, and will also get
supersaturated with ether and alcohol, and also with lodo-
Bromo-uitrate of zinc, and will either refuse to work, or only
yield imperfect films, and thin images, in which case the best
plan will be to take 20 ounces of the solution, dilute-it with
clean water 60 ounces, filter, add 6 ounces of nitrate of silver
and again filter, when a new bath will be the result.
The silver in the rejected portion of the old bath should
be precipitated as a chloride, by the addition of a solution of
common salt, the precipitate dried, and sent to the refiner,
together with the ashes of the filtering papers, blotting paper
used to drain the plates upon, or to wipe the backs of the
plates, after leaving the bath, and before putting into dark
slide.
The Nitrate of Silver Bath, may be made up with dis-
tilled water, if pure, that is, if the water is bona-fide distilled,
and not merely from waste steam ; if this cannot be guar-
anteed, the best plan will be to get a gallon of tap w’ater,
dissolve in it one ounce of nitrate of silver, then add satura-
ted solution of bicarbonate of soda, until it show r s an alkaline
reaction to litmus paper, then place the lot in white glass
bottles and expose to the action of light for three or four
days, during which time the solution will first of all turn
black, and then will gradually become quite clear, the organic
matter—which, if not removed, would have caused trouble—
falling in a black mass to the bottom.
' Now filter the purified water and use it for compounding
the Nitrate of Silver Bath, but do not use it for any other
purpose.


' The strength of a Nitrate of Silver Bath, for line work,
should, be 30 grains of nitrate of silver to each ounce of
water, and should not be allowed to fall below twenty-five.
Be sure and keep all funnels, bottles, and dishes used for
the silver bath, separate and distinct,from all others, and
never use them for any other purpose.
The Developing- Solution.
First of all purchase 7 lbs. of commercial sulphate of iron
(copperas) put this into a gallon jug, fill up with boiling
water (clean) stir up with a clean rod, at short intervals for
3 or 4 hours, then allow to stand until the sediment settles,
and the top portion of solution is clear and bright, then de-
cant as much as possible into a bottle or bottles, and label
“ Saturated solution of Iron,” then again fill up the jar with
boiling water, stir until as much is dissolved as possible, so
as to be ready by the time the stock in the bottle is exhausted,
repeating the process until all the crystals are dissolved ;
then wash out the jar, rejecting the residue, and begin again.
But bear in mind, that unless there are crystals left in the
solution after each addition of hot water, it will not be satu-
rated, therefore before taking the solution into use, be sure
there are undissolved crystals in the jar.
For use, take of—
Saturated Solution of Iron ... 10 ounces.
Acetic Acid 4 ounces.
Water ... 70 ounces.
Methylated Spirits of Wine —1 ounce to sas required.
In the above solution, the alcohol is added to enable the
developer to readily assimilate with the sensitive film., and


the quantity requisite, varies with the age of silver bath, or
to be more correct, with the quantity of plates sensitised
therein. At first, little or no alcohol will be required, but
after a number of plates have been sensitised, the developer
refuses to flow evenly, and seems as though it wants to run
over the edges of the plate ; this is a sign that more alcohol
is required, and when more has been added, the developer
will flow evenly as before, but when 80 ounces of developer
require over 4 ounces alcohol to make it flow, it is a pretty
sure sign that the bath wants re-making.
The developer is applied to the plate after expbsure from
a straight lipped cup, or glass measure, which should be
kept for the exclusive use of this solution, as the mixture of
any of the other solutions with it, will at once counteract its
working power.
The Fixing or Clearing Solution.
Cyanide of Potassium 3 ounces.
Water 20 ounces.
This solution is highly poisonous, both in solution and
vapour, so ought to be kept in an upright holder, the plate
being lowered in the solution on a dipper ; keep the solution
well covered up, so as to prevent evaporation as much as
possible.
After being in use a little time, this solution will get weak,
and should be strengthened by the addition in the evening,
of a lump or two of Cyanide, and then stirred up with the
dipper in the morning : the negative must not be left in
this solution too long, or the density of the film will be im-
paired, but must be removed, and well washed, directly all
the yellow iodide has been dissolved.


The Intensifies, No. 1.
Water 80 ounces.
Chloride of Ammonium ... 2 ounces.
dissolve, then add—
Bichloride of Mercury ... 2 ounces.
dissolve, and filter.
No. 2.
Liquor Ammonia - 880 ... 5 ounces.
Water ... 20 ounces.
Solution No. 1 is best kept in an upright holder, as if
kept in a flat dish there is always a danger of cutting the
skin with the glass plate, and getting the mercurial poison
into the system.
No. 2 is kept in a well stoppered bottle, and only suffi-
cient for each plate, withdrawn as required.
Another method of intensifying for those who object to
the use of mercury, is to bleach the negative in a solution
of—
Ferrid Cyanide of Potassium |
Red Prussiate of Potash ... j S ‘
Nitrate of Lead ... ... 4 parts.
Water 80 parts.
dissolve, and filter—
When the plate is . bleached, wash thoroughly under the
tap, taking care that the edges and corners of the film are
washed, as well as the centre, then flood with a sufficient
quantity of—-
Nitric Acid ... 1 ounce.
Water 80 ounces.


allow this to remain on a few seconds, wash, and flood with
sufficient quantity of—
Sulphide of Ammonium ... 1 part.
Water 5 parts.
which will at once turn the film an intense black ; wash
and flood with the Nitric Acid Solution, and again wash :
then the negative is put away to dry.
This method of intensifying is cheaper than the other
and, if the washes of acid between, and after, the other two
solutions are carefully done, and the stench of the sulphide
not objected to, then there is little or no difference in the
results, but if the acid washes are omitted, or the sul-
phide has not been kept corked, and is consequently not
fresh, then there is a great danger of a brown stain upon the
lines which is more or less fatal to getting a good print on
zinc.
Protecting the Collodion Film.
A Collodion film when dry, is very delicate, and, except
for line work in the hands of an expert—will require pro-
tecting. This is usually done by slightly warming (when
quite dry) in front of a fire, and then pouring over a suffic-
ient quantity of thin spirit varnish, which, after the super-
fluous varnish is drained off, is dried by again holding in
front of the fire; the spirit varnish answers perfectly for
ordinary work, but for printing upon metal for relief blocks
it will be best to use a Benzole varnish, such as sold by|
dealers, for protecting the films of glass positives, or of.
Ferrotype pictures, and used cold.


But the best plan of all, is to use a water varnish, made
by dissolving half an ounce of Borax in a quart of boiling
water, then adding, a few pieces at a time (stirring mean-
while) 1 pound of ordinary shellac ; if the quantity of borax
named, does not suffice to make all the shellac dissolve, add
more, a grain at a time, until the shellac is dissolved, now
add half an ounce of white sugar, then allow to cool and
filter.
When the negative is washed for the last time, allow it to
drain, then flood with the- above solution, and let it dry.
This will be found a quicker, cleaner, and more satisfactory
method of protecting the delicate film, than the spirit varnish.
The Glass Plate.
The glass used as a support for the collodion film should
be thin flatted crown, of the best quality, the negatives as
a rule, not being required again, after once the zinc is
etched, the film is washed off, and the glass used again
which cannot be done so often if the glass is of bad quality ;
flatness is a sine qua non, as it has to be subjected to heavy
pressure between a ziuc plate, and the front glass of printing
frame.
As a good and suitable negative is the foundation of suc-
cess in the subsequent processes, so is a properly cleaned
glass plate the foundation of a successful negative ; unless
the glass is chemically clean, the collodion film will either
be stained or marked, or it will split off in drying, therefore
care and attention are requisite, even in preparing a piece of
glass for the reception of the film of collodion ; care is es-
pecially requisite, as the want of it cannot be seen until all
the operations have been gone through, the labour and time
being thrown away.


There are two methods of cleaning the glass plate, one
method quite mechanical,-the other a mixture of the mechan-
ical and the chemical, both are good, the second being per-
haps the best, as it is simple and more certain.
In the first method, the glass, when new, merely requires
polishing with a clean wash leather kept for this purpose
only.
The best way of doing this is to cover a flat board 24 by
18, or thereabouts, with a good American cloth, glazed side
out, a plate laid out upon this will not slip about when being
polished.
Both sides and edges of the plate must be well cleaned, as
one of the most prolific causes of derangement of the silver
bath, is from organic matter introduced therein, by imper-
fectly cleaned glass plates.
One side of the plate, if gently rubbed with the thumb
nail, will be found smoother than the other, this being the
suitable side for the support of the collodion film; this side
is’polished with a leather until, upon breathing gently upon
it the film of moisture is quite free from marks or streaks,
not only in the centre, but at the sides and corners.
It is absolutely necessary that the plate be chemically
cleaned all over, else the film of collodion, upon drying, will
split, and the negative be spoilt.
When the plate is clean, an edging about an eighth of an inch
wide of india-rubber, dissolved in benzole, is run all round
the edge, by means of a small camel hair brush, tied to a
stick, the end of stick being level with point, of brush, the
stick acting as a guard against the brush going too far from
the edge.


In the second method, the new glass plate is soaked an
hour ,or two in a mixture of 5 ounces of common spirits of
salts (Hydrochloric Acid) in 80 ounces of water, both sides
of the plate are rubbed with a rag, then well washed
under the tap, and put into a dish of clean water, when all
the batch have been so treated, they are taken out singly,
again well rubbed on both sides with another rag, again well
washed, then the smoothest side having been selected, it is
flooded with a mixture of albumen and water, twice, draining
the surplus into the sink each time of flooding ; the plate is
then placed upon a rack to drain and dry ; the drying being
effected in a hot current of air, free from all dust.
The albumen mixture is composed of white of one egg
well beaten up either with a stick, a fork, or an egg beater,
then dilated with 40 ounces of water, and ten drops of
Liquor Ammonia added, and again beaten up, it is 'then
very carefully filtered through cotton wool, and used as
above.
In placing these plates, so coated with albumen, upon the
drying racks, care must be taken to face the coated sides all
one way, as when dry there is nothing to indicate to the eye
which is the back, and which the front.
These albumenized plates, when dry, should have the
backs cleaned with a cloth, or a leather, before using, so as
to clear away any albumen, which may have got there
dining coating.
Albumenized plates stored in a dry place will keep good
for months, and do not require any edging -with india-rlibber,
as the most horny collodion film will not split off a properly
albumenised plate.


Glass plates that have been used, and not varnished, are
freed from the films by being immersed in a mixture of
Hydrochloric acid and water for a few hours, then washed
under the tap, and well rubbed with a rag, then put into
clean water, from which they are taken singly and coated'
with albumen, or they may be allowed to dry, and then pol-
ished by means of the w T ash leather, &o.
Plates that have been varnished with spirit varnish, must
be soaked in a hot solution of washing soda, until the film
floats off, then wash well under the tap, rubbing with a rag
and immerse in the acid as above.
CHAPTER III.
Photographic Manipulations.
'“pHE chemicals being prepared, they must be placed in a
dark room, the collodion bottle should be placed on a
convenient shelf close to the door, and on bandy peg hang
a broad camel or badger hair brush, for dusting the clean
plate, just previous to coating with collodion ; which brush
must be kept for this purpose only, and not used for any-
thing else, upon any pretence whatever. The Silver Bath
must be kept, both in use, and out of use, in some convenient
corner, where there is no risk of getting any other chemical
splashed into it. Bor a bath holder, a deep 15 by 12 por-
celain or papier machie dish, provided with a wooden or
stout cardboard lid, should be provided, and this dish must
always be thoroughly washed, and wiped dry with a clean
wet leather (kept for the purpose), both before use and after,
pouring the silver solution back into its bottle or jug.
The developer should be placed on a shelf, on the right of
sink, the developing cup close to.
c


The Fixing or clearing solution should be kept in an
upright bath of glass, porcelain, or ebonite.
The intensifier No. 1 may be kept in a flat dish, or an
upright holder, at discretion, but if in a flat dish, the solu-
tion should be poured back into its bottle, after each day’s
work.
Intensifier No. 2 being kept in a stoppered bottle close to
the sink.
The water varnish also is kept in a bottle or jug handy for
use.-
On a shelf close to the collodion, the polished or albumen-
ised plates may be stacked close together, with the clean or
prepared side facing the wall.
A pneumatic holder for attaching to the back of the plate
during the operation of coating with collodion will be found
very handy.
Of course it is thoroughly understood that there is a sink
in the dark room, and also water laid into the sink, as a good
supply of water is indispensable.
Then again, the window through which the light is trans-
mitted, must be covered with a non-actiuio medium, such as
two thicknesses of golden fabric, or one of canary medium ;
do not stint the amount of light, but have as much as pos-
sible, as long as it is noil-actinic.
Everything being in readiness, we will now proceed to
make a line negative, reserving a description of half-tone
work to the proper place.
Now to begin work : wash the bath holder thoroughly,
and wipe it dry, then pour into it sufficient silver solution to
make the depth about half an inch, dust the inside of cover,


and put it over the dish; now take a clean glass plate, if it
he polished, see that it is edged.with iudia rubber, and if
albumenised, be sure and clean the back —and attach to a
pneumatic holder, then with a broad camel, or badger hair
brush (kept for the purpose only), remove any particles of
dust, first on back of plate, then on the front; now hold the
plate in a horizontal position, and pour upon the plate, to-
wards the right hand corner furthest away from the body, a
little more collodion than it is judged will be sufficient to
cover the plate, let the collodion run to the corner, then in-
cline the plate to the left, and the collodion will run into the
upper left hand corner, now by inclining towards the body,
the collodion will flow into the lower left hand corner, and
from thence it is guided into the funnel placed in the bottle
prepared for its reception ; dining the time that this surplus
is draining, the plate must he gently rocked sideways, so
chat the lines formed by the collodion in draining, are merged
into each other, leaving the film quite homogeneous ; as soon
as the collodion ceases to drip, release plate from pneumatic
holder, and touch the lower ridge of collodion, and when
firm, close the door of dark room, remove the lid from the
hath holder, then—holding the plate in the left hand—with
the right hand raise the bath holder as far as possible with-
out risking any of the silver solution running over the side
of dish resting on bench, now lay the plate (with the collo-
dion side up) on the bottom of dish, then drop the plate into
the solution, and at the same time lower the end of dish held
up by the right hand, which will cause the silver solution to
flow in one even wave over the collodionised surface. This
operation must he done with dexterity, as if the silver solu-
tion does not flow in an even wave, the film will be marked,
and in the case of a half tone negative, the image will be
spoilt, therefore it is necessary to see that the plate and dish
C 2


are lowered simultaneously, so that the solution goes over the
collodion film in one steady wave.
The plate will require au immersion of about 3 minutes
for proper sensitising, and this interval—the Bath being cov-
ered up to prevent the access of white light—may be utilized
to give the final adjustment to the camera, and to see that
the drawing or print to he copied is properly in focus.
Use a medium Diaphragm iu the lens for focussing, and
examine the image all over before deciding that it is sharp ;
focus by preference about half-way between centre of picture
and the edges, and when after moving rack to and fro until
the proper sharpness is obtained, take out the. Diaphragm,
and substitute the smallest sent out with the lens, or if the
picture to be taken be small, and from a large original, then
the second or third smallest may be used,
Now remove the focussing screen from the Camera, (note
that tire ground side of glass has been next the lens) and
place the cap upon the lens, close the door of the dark room,
open the dark slide, see that the proper carrier is in it, then
raise the plate from the bath slowly, using a silver wire hook
for the purpose, and if the solution flows evenly over the
film, the plate is ready, but if on the contrary the solution
flows greasy, then again lower the plate, and rock the dish
gently for a minute or two. The film being fully sensitized,
the plate is carefully lifted out of the solution, both hands
holding the plate in such a manner as to avoid touching the
film, allow the solution to drain from the plate as much as
possible, then lean the plate against the wall, the lower end
resting upon a pad of clean blotting paper, or papier-Joseph,
wipe the back of plate as dry as possible, which will prevent
stains and keep the dark slide from rotting by the action of
the silver solution.


The plate being grained, lay a piece of thin filtering paper
in each lower corner of carrier, so that the plate will rest
upon the filtering paper, which will catch any further drain-
ings from the film, and be a safeguard against stains.
Now lay the plate face down in the carrier of dark slide,
close the door and fasten it.
The dark slide is now carried to the Camera., and inserted
in the grooves previously occupied by the focussing screen,
taking notice that the sliding shutter is next the inside of
camera ; when pushed quite home, cover the back with the
focussing cloth ; pull out the shutter when the plate is ready
for the exposure.
The time of exposure will vary very much with the time
of the year, and with the amount of light falling upon the
object being photographed ; the exact time can only he found
out by actual practice, hut the operator in time, by observa-
tion, will be able to guess it pretty correctly.
In taking the cap off the lens, be sure that the camera is
not shaken, else the picture will be spoilt.
The exposure being made, close the sliding shutter, remove
the slide to the dark room, and close the door, lay the dark
slide (with sliding shutter down) upon the bench, open the
hack shutter, and placing pneumatic holder in centre of
plate, lift it out of the carrier.
Take the plate to the sink, and holding it face up in the
left hand, take the developing cup in the right, and with a
quick motion pour over the plate sufficient developer to
cover the whole film; the developer must go all over the film
in one even wave, any hesitation in this will result in a stain;
pour upon the film only sufficient to cover it, and be careful
to spill as little as possible into the sink, or else the image


will be thin, on account of the absence of free silver washed
off by the wave of developer.
Now rock the plate gently, so as to keep the developer
flowing to and fro over the film (but keep it there, don’t
spill it off) and the image will soon appear, faint at first, but
growing-gradually darker, the black lines of diawing being
white and the white paper black, and if the development be
continued too long, the lines will eventually be veiled, there-
fore as soon as the finest details are out and well defined,
place the plate under the tap and allow the water to well
sluice the film all over ; as soon as properly washed, which
can be seen by the water flowing evenly over without greasy
looking hues, hold the negative up in front of window, and
examine for spots or stains, as if there be any present that at
all interfere with the picture, at once reject the negative,
placing it in a pan filled with water to be washed off at
leisure, and start afresh.
The negative being satisfactory, give it another rinse under
the tap, and place it in the Cyanide Bath, where the unaltered
iodine will speedily be dissolved, then it is withdrawn, and
well washed under the tap, and whilst the water is washing
over the front, rub the back with the fingers or a sponge, and
then turn the plate over and allow the water to wash the
back also, it is now ready for-immersion in Intensifier No. 1,
where it remains until the film is bleached almost white,
when it is thoroughly washed, drained, and flooded with a
small quantity of Intensifier No. 2, which will attonce turn
the film to an intense black, or if the action does not pene-
trate through to back of film, continue the application until
it does, again wash, then place the negative on a rack to
drain, and when the water ceases to drip), food the plate
twice with the filtered water varnish, then place the negative
on the rack to dry.


When the negative is dry, it is ready for printing on zinc ;
the negative may be varnished with a Benzole varnish, sold
by the dealers under the name of positive or Ferrotype var-
nish. Negative varnish may be used, but unless very thin,
it is apt to be sticky, and render the negative easily marked
by the heavy pressure it is subjected to in the printing frame.
Now lay the finished negative, face down upon a piece of
clean white paper, when, if it is a good one, all the details of
the original will show through, clear and distinct, but if any
of the details are missing or veiled over, the negative will
not do, and another must be made.
This process does not always work satisfactorily, but with
care and cleanliness no serious fault should arise.
Sometimes the bath may give what are called foggy
images, which is indicated by a veil over the hues, which
can often be wiped off with a pledget of cotton wool, in
which case the addition of h a dram of nitric acid to the
80 ounces of solution, thoroughly mixing this up, and a rest
for a few hours will thoroughly end the difficulty. If the
dark room window be not of the proper color, fog also will
ensue, therefore the non-photographic experimentalist had
better’ call in the aid of a professional photographer, in case
of any difficulty in getting clear negatives.
At the end of each day’s work, the silver solution should
be carefully poured into the jug or bottle, and allowed to
stand all night, then in the morning, just before using, it
should be filtered. The dish also must be carefully washed
out and put away in a corner where it has no chance of
being splashed into.
In the Appendix will be found a chapter devoted to the
full management of this important factor, in the production
of a good wet collodion negative.


CHAPTER IV.
NEGGTIVES ON DEY PLATES.
The object of this chapter is to teach how negatives are
made upon dry plates from drawings, in line, dot, or stipple,
(washed drawings, or ordinary photographs being unsuitable)
for printing fr mi on zinc, for subsequent etching in relief.
In the original drawing, the lines are black on a white
ground, in the negative this is reversed, the lines being
white, or transparent, and the ground black, or opaque, or
nearly so ; a perfect negative having absolutely clear lines,
with jet black ground, but, owing to many causes, the ground
cannot always be got ,quite opaque; this is not very impor-
tant, the clear lines however can easily be obtained, and are
absolutely necessary, any veil orf og, upon them, being suffici-
ent to spoil the negative.
In the wet process, the sensitive plate must be prepared
and finished within a short time, as they do not keep, and
cannot be prepared in advance; dry plates are purchased
ready for use, and will keep any reasonable length of time, if
shielded from light and damp. Dry plates are sold in boxes
containing one dozen, in the following standard sizes—
Quarter Plate If + 3*
Half Plate + 4|
Whole Plate 8i + 6*
10 + 8
12 + 10
15 + 12
Larger or intermediate sizes being prepared to order
These boxes must not be opened except in the dark room,
as the slightest exposure to even the faintest ray of white
light is sufficient to utterly spoil them.


For negatives, suitable for printing upon zinc, the ordinary
dry plates of commerce are perfectly useless , and nothing hit
failure and waste can attend their use. The plates to be
used are England’s Rapid Chloride, and Mawson and Swan’s
Photo Mechanical, these plates yielding as good results as
wet collodion.
The dark room must be roomy and well lighted, the
window being covered with 3 or 4 thicknesses of golden
fabric; so long as the light is non-actinic too much cannot be
admitted, and it is absolutely necessary, to have sufficient
light to see the progress of the developement.
The above alludes to gelatine dry plates suitable for
photo-mechanical work only, if it is desired to use ordinary
gelatine dry plates in the same dark room, a blind of ruby,
or orange fabric, must be provided.
Photo-mechanical plates must not be manipulated in the
subdued light necessary for the rapid ordinary plates, so this
blind must be moveable.
For developing dry plates, a shallow dish is required, and
to prevent waste of solution, a separate dish is used for each
size of plate, these dishes are sold in glass, porcelain, ebonite,
in papier mache, and in tin, japanned ; the last are cheapest,
and quite as good as any of the others; for fixing and clear-
ing, &0., porcelain dishes, large enough to contain, the
largest plate likely to be used, should be provided.
A remote corner of the dark room away from all chances
of stray light, or splashing from the taps, should be chosen,
for the operations of opening the box containing the dry
plates, and putting them into the slide, previous to exposure.


The developing solutions are mixed as follows :
Developer No. 1.
Hydrokinone ... ... 80 grains
Meta-bi-snlphite of potash 80 grains
Bromide of Potassium ... 5 grains
Water 20 ounces
Dissolve and label No. 1.
Developer No. 2.
Caustic Potash, pure stick 200 grains
Water ... 20 ounces
Dissolve and label No. 2.
The Fixing Solution.
Hypo Sulphite of Soda ... 4 ounces
Water 20 ounces
This should be mixed in a jug, and only sufficient to cover
the plate poured into the dish, as it gets discoloured by the
developer, and needs changing each day.
The Clearing Solution.
Powdered Alum ... ... 4 ounces
Hot Water 20 ounces
Nitric Acid 10 drops
This solution is best kept in a bottle, and poured into the
dish each day as required. Must be cold when used.
These solutions, and a glass measure, are placed close to sink,
then the door of dark room is closed, a box of dry plates
opened, the top one removed, dusted with clean dry camels’
hair brush, and placed film downwards in the slide, which is
then closed : the dry plates are re-packed, and the loaded
slide taken into the studio.
Put the mirror into its box, pin up the drawing on the
easel, and adjust the camera so that the image on the


focussing screen is the required size, the nearer the camera
to the easel, the more the bellows are extended, the larger
will the image be, and vice versa.
For focussing by, use a stop of medium size, and focus
the image about half way between the centre and edges,
when satisfactory, remove the stop and substitute the smallest
one in the. case, put the cap on the lens, take out the focus-
sing screen, and put in the dark slide; draw out the shutter,
and make the exposure, removing the cap gently, so as to
avoid shaking the camera; the slightest vibration during
exposure being sufficient to spoil the negative ; the exposure
varies with circumstances, but as a beginning, about three
minutes will serve as a guide.
The exposure being complete, re-cap the lens, close the
shutter, and remove the slide to the dark room.
Now into a clean measure, pour one ounce of developer
No. 1, and half an ounce of No.' 2, this for a half-plate,
larger plates will require more in proportion, now close the
door of dark room, take the plate from slide, and put it face
up in the developing dish, then pour the, mixed developer
■over the plate, examine the film closely for air bells, and if
any have formed, touch them with the finger, now rock the
dish gently, and if the exposure has been right, the image
will begin to appear in about 60 seconds, and will gradually
grow in brilliancy.
When all details are well out, put another half-ounce of No. 2
into the measure, and return the developer to it, mix, then
return to the dish, and continue the development till the
ground of picture is quite opaque, then throw away the
developer, and wash the plate under the tap ;then immerse
in the fixing solution, where it will remain until the milky
■appearance has quite gone.


If the image flashes out soon after the application of the
mixed developer, the exposure in the camera has been too
long, and the result is useless; if the image appears very
slowly, add the other half ounce of No. 2, adding more No.
2 if there seems any chance of the image developing up to-
any strength ; the solution No. 2 being the accelerator, by
judicious use, an under exposed plate may often be saved.
When the negative is fixed, remove it from the hypo,
and wash, put face down upon a piece of clean white
paper, and examine the image, if the lines show up clear and
distinct, the negative is all right, but if veiled or cloudy, then
it is useless. Now hold it up to the light, and see if the
ground be black, or nearly so, if it be thin and grey, it has
not been in the developer long enough^
Examine also for sharpness, every line, from corner to
corner must, be sharp, any fuzziness being quite inadmissable.
The negative passing muster, is washed under the tap for a
few minutes, is then immersed for one minute in the clearing
solution, after which it is well washed under the tap, then
put on a rack to dry.
CHAPTER V.
PRINTING ON ZING IN ALBUMEN.
A negative,answering all requirements set down as necessary
-* V '- in the two last chapters, having been obtained, the next
step will be to produce from that negative, a replica of the
original drawing, in ink, upon a sheet of polished zinc.
Zinc Plates, suitable for Photo-engraving can be obtained,
either in large sheets, or cut to size as ordered, and when
new, require polishing with a damp rag, dipped in levigated
pumice powder, i.e., the pumice powder washed in water, so
as to get rid of any grit that may accidentally have fallen
in.


Lay the plate upon a polishing hoard, covered with
American cloth, and polish with a from and to the body
motion, not' circular; do not use a great deal of pressure,
the object being to get the plate highly polished with a
perfectly smooth surface.
Plates that have been printed upon, and are not satisfac-
tory, are cleaned off, and re-polished in the same manner.
Plates that are scratched, will require polishing with
emery cloth to remove the scratches, which would otherwise
interfere with the picture.
To remove these scratches, sprinkle the face of plate with
turpentine, then rub with a piece of PF emery cloth (this is
Oakey’s brand, other makers brand theirs of the same
degree in other.ways) stretched over a carpenter’s cork cov-
ered rubber, use the same motion, to and fro, until all the
turpentine has evaporated, and the surface of the zinc pol-
ished, and if the scratches are removed, the plate is ready for
use, but if not, then the operation must be repeated. If the
scratches are too deep for emery cloth, the scratches must
first be removed with a piece of fine pumice stone, followed
by snake stone, then by pumice powder, rotten stone and
rouge : too much care cannot be taken with the zinc plate
at this stage, as if after the block is etched it is discovered
that the plate has not been properly polished, all will have
to be done over again, entailing a loss of time, labour and
materials.
Remember, that no matter the polishing agent used, the
plate must be polished with a to-and-from the body
motion, not a circular motion, as is the usual method of
polishing.


Graining the Plate.
The next operation is to give the plate a slight tooth, so
that the sensitive solution will flow evenly over the surface,
by removing all traces of. grease that may chance to be on
the surface.
This graining is done in a wooden tray, 24 inches by 18
by 9, lined with pitch, and mounted upon rockers ; it is
quite necessary that the graining tray be of a large size, as
if only a little larger than the plate, the returning wave of
acid water, will mark the edges of the zinc.
Into this tray, pour a quart of clean water, add 1
dram of nitric acid, and 1 ounce of a saturated solution of
common alum, place the zinc, face up, on the bottom of tray,
commence rocking at once, or else the acid will mark the
surface, and it will require re-polishing ; rock slowly for five
minutes, during which time the polished surface will give
way to a fine matt, like fine frosted silver, now remove the
plate, and rinse under the tap, rubbing gently with a fine
sponge, or a pledget of cotton wool, to remove the scum or
deposit formed by the acid. The surface at this stage should
be quite smooth ; if it is at all rough, the acid is too strong,
and the solution must be diluted with water ; if the action
of the acid is very slow, then a little more acid must be
added, but it will only be necessary to add more alum when
the plate is a bluish colour, instead of being a pearly grey.
A drop or two of acid will be required each time a plate
or batch of plates are to be grained.
In rubbing with sponge, or pledget of cotton wool when
under the tap, care must be taken not to scratch the surface
of zinc, or it will need re-polishing.


If the solution of albumen be poured over the plate,
drained, and dried, the film would be boo thick at the bottom,
and too thin at the top ; it is therefore necessary, in order
to ensure an even film of sensitive albumen, to subject the
plate to a quick circular motion, so as to spread the film of
albumen evenly, and to get rid of the surplus solution not
required, this is effected by placing the grained zinc in the
jaws of an instrument called a whirler, made as follows :
Two pieces of wood, each half an inch thick, twelve inches
long, nine inches wide at one end, and six inches at the
other ; upon the narrow end of one piece fix with four
screws, a piece of iron the shape of a X the top end of which
is shaped to fit into the socket of a common carpenter’s brace,
(which must have the centre handle revolving, not fixed like
some of them are) the cross being flat, and pierced .with four
holes, countersunk to admit of stout screws to go through.
This being done, place the two pieces of wood together,
the J_ piece between the two, and with a piece of stout lea-
ther, hinge the two together, nailing the leather not only on
the outside, but upon the top also; now screw a narrow
batten on each of the pieces, about an inch from the widest
end, to keep the wood from warping.
Four inches from top .(the hinge being the top) bore a
hole right through both pieces, and pass through a couple of
strong leather laces, fix one end of these on the outside
of the cheek to which the iron _L is screwed, and on the
outside of the other cheek, seven inches from top, hinge a
piece of wood (so as to fall towards bottom) 5 inches by 2% ;
and in centre of the batten screwed on to prevent warping,
fix a broad headed nail, or a turn button, over which the
free end of the leather laces can be passed.


Now about half an inch from each end, drive, in a straight
line right through the wood, 6 or 8 wire nails one inch long?
so that the points project on the inside of each cheek, now
fix the top of iron into socket of brace, and the thing is
ready for use.
To use this instrument, lay it upon the bench, raise the
upper jaw, place the grained zinc behind the teeth (face out)
close the jaw, and after seeing that the face of zinc is close
up to the teeth, tighten the shoe lace, pass it over the hinged
piece, (which is lying down close to the cheek) and round
the screw on batten with two or three turns, then pass it
back, and tie the loose ends round the iron shank at top,
then raise the hinged piece, which by straining on the leather
laces will cause the jaws to grip the zinc tight and hold it
in position. See figure 2.
Fig. 2.


Now lift the whirler from the bench, grasping the handle
of brace, firmly in the right hand, hold it at arm’s length,
and by a series of quick jerks, set the plate revolving, this
will require a little patience to do evenly and rapidly, but-
with a little practice it will be quite easy.
The plate is coated twice, whirling it after each applica-
tion of the sensitive mixture, then the whirler is laid upon
the bench, the hinged piece let clown, which, relaxing the
strain upon the leather laces, will allow the jaw to be lifted,
and the plate removed.
Dry the Sensitive Coating.
The film of albumen now requires drying, which should
be done over a spirit lamp, the best form of which, is one of
the small pocket spirit stoves sold at the ironmongers at Is.
and Is. 6d., having the three supports for a kettle cut
away. The zinc is held over the flame, and kept in con-
stant motion, so as to dry the film as quickly and evenly as
•possible ; no fear need be felt at applying too great a heat so
long as the metal cam be held comfortably in the fingers;
when dry, the plate is ready for printing upon.
Tor drying large plates, two or more of these stoves would
be required, but it is very easy to extemporise a suitable ar-
rangement, by laying a large pad of cotton wool in a flat tin
dish, saturating with Spirits of Wine, and setting it on fire ;
by this means, a stove of any desired dimensions can be
prepared quickly. To extinguish such a flame, cover it with
a large sheet of zinc when finished with.
It must be borne in mind that the film on the zinc is now
very sensitive to light, therefore the preparation of the film
D


musb be done iti a yellow light, as must also the operation of
placing in the printing frame, inking up, and development
gas, or lamp light may be used, as the film is not sensitive to
artificial light of a low actinic power.
The Printing Frame.
The printing frames used for this process must be the box
pattern, fitted with stout plate glass fronts, the cross bars
behind being fitted with wooden screws, instead of springs,
as absolute contact can only be obtained between the surfaces
of the glass negative and zinc plate, by jneans of screw pres-
sure.
The front glass of printing frame must be kept perfectly
clean, and especial care musb be taken that no grit be either
upon the glass, or on back of negative, else the negative will
be sure to smash.
Timing the Exposure.
The time of exposure to light is measured by means of an
aotinometer, which is simply an instrument in which is a strip
of sensitive paper, either under a graduated series of different
thicknesses of translucent paper, each, division of graduations
being distinguished by a number thus ; —No. 1 has only
one thickness of paper over it; No. 2, two thicknesses, and
so on, but on account of the ever varying intensity of the
light, a screen actinometer that is reliable is almost an im-
possibility, therefore the best form of actinometer is Johnson’s
single tint (sold by the Autotype Co. at 2s. 6d. each) its only
drawback being that it must be closely watched in a bright
light, so that the tints are changed evenly.
This actinometer is very simple and handy ; it consists of
a cubical box with two lids, the inner one serving to press
the paper in contact with the glass of outer lid, the outer lid
has a circular opening with a narrow rectangular strip in


centre transparent, the rest of glass being covered with
pigment, the colour assumed by the sensitive paper after
exposure to the light, and when the strip of sensitive paper
inside has assumed this colour, it is called one tint, the strip
of paper is then pulled forward, and another portion, quite
white is brought under the transparent portion of glass, and
when the light has turned that the colour of the pigment,
that counts two tints, and so on.
The exposure of zinc in the printing frame under a good
line negative, will be about six or eight tints in diffused
light, but in direct sunlight the exposure may be timed by
the watch, a suitable line negative never requiring more than
from one to three minutes.
Inking- the Exposed Zinc.
.The sensitive zinc being exposed to light under the nega-
tive, the next operation is to cover the surface with a thin
coating of Winstone’s photo, transfer ink.
For this purpose we require a type printer’s composition
roller, mounted upon a litho stock. This roller must be per-
fectly smooth, cast in a solid mould, as the line along the
side, formed by a split mould, would render it useless for
inking up a zinc plate, a useful sized roller will be eight
inches long, by five or six in diameter. We also require an
inking slab, a palette knife, a bottle of turpentine, with the
cork out, so that the turpentine can be sprinkled out with-
out having to remove the cork, a tin of Winstone’s photo,
transfer ink, and a linen cloth or two.
The inking slab may be made of smooth iron, or a suit-
able sized lithographic stone.
d 2


CHAPTER VI.
Printing on Zinc in Albumen. (Continued.)
O ELECT a piece of zinc, a little larger each way, than the
picture to be printed upon it, polish carefully (page 29),
then grain (page BO),- keeping the graining bath as weak as
possible ; wash well under the tap, removing the oxide from
surface with a fine sponge, or pledget of lint or cotton wool;
place in the jaws of whirler, face outward, rinse and whirl,
so as to get rid of as much of the water as possible ;
examine the plate, and if not perfectly smooth and free
from grit, rinse again, and again whirl.
The plate is now ready for coating, with the sensitive
albumen made as follows, and carefully filtered
Albumen of one egg ...
Water ...10 ounces.
Saturated solution of Bichromate of Potash ... 1 ounce.
Place the white of an egg into a bottle, containing a lot of
small pieces of perfectly clean glass, add the -water, and
shake up, for a minute, add the solution of Bichro-
mate, again shake well, and add two drops of liquor Ammonia,
Now place a pledget of cotton wool into the neck of a glass
funnel, pass a few ounces of clean water through, (if this
is not done there will be a difficulty in getting the albumen
to filter) drain as much as possible of the water away, and
filter the albumen into a clean bottle ; when all the solution
has gone through, remove the cotton wool from the funnel,,
which well wash, then re-charge with a fresh pledget,


pass some water through, and again filter the albumen solu-
tion, this time into a ten ounce glass measure,
which is to be used for pouring out of, upon the zinc ; the
stem of the funnel should be long enough to reach the bot-
tom of glass measure, so that the formation of air bubbles
be avoided, which is impossible with albumen, if the funnel
is not below the surface of the filtrate.
Of this, pour over the zinc sufficient to well cover the
surface, letting any surplus go into the sink, set the
whirler revolving, coat again, and again whirl: now examine
the surface, and if free from dust, spots, and air bubbles, re-
move the zinc, and dry it over the spirit stove ; but if either
air babbles, or dust be present, wash off under the tap, and
coat again.
The film being dry, get the printing frame ready, see that
the surface of glass inside is quite clean, and free from grit,
as also the back of negative, taking special care that the
ridge of varnish which often forms at bottom of negative
be removed, as the slightest inequality of surface will surely
cause disaster directly the screws exert their pressure.
Do not lay the negative into the frame flat upon the glass,
but slide it in from one side, so as to carry any dust away
from the glass front of printing frame.
The negative being in the frame, film side up, place the
coated zinc upon it, face down, judging the proper position
and placing zinc flat down upon negative, now put a piece
of brown paper over back of zinc, then place the back of
printing frame in its place, fasten down the cross bars, and
apply the pressure screws, evenly and'gently.
Do not screw one side tight before the other has been
touched, but screw down so as to tighten all as nearly level
as is possible.


Even pressure being- applied, see that the front of frame
is clean, and then expose, to direct sunlight for five minutes,
remove the frame to the dark room, unfasten the cross
bars and remove the zinc, taking great care to lift the zinc
without scratching the film, against film of negative.
Now, after wiping the inking slab with a clean linen duster,
place a piece of the photo, transfer ink about the size of a
small bean upon the upper corner, sprinkle this with a little
turpentine, and mix with the palette knife, until about the
consistency of cream.
Spread some of this mixture as far over the inking
slab with the palette knife as possible, distribute with
the composition roller, rolling to and fro, across and
diagonally, until there is a thin even coating of ink all over
the slab (not touching'the corner where the ink was mixed
with the turpentine) and upon the roller ; if the mixture is
too dry and refuses to spread, sprinkle a little more turpen-
tine, but do not use too much, else it will take a long time
to evaporate.
The roller having a coat of rather moist ink spread evenly
upon it, place the exposed zinc face up, on a piece of clean
white paper, and proceed to roll briskly to and fro, using a
moderate amount of pressure, until the whole of the turpen-
tine has evaporated, leaving a thin coat of ink with an even
matt surface, not thick enough to quite hide the yellow film
of the sensitive albumen, as if it does, too much has been
put on, and it will most likely smear in development.
If, after first applying the roller, the ink on the zinc seems
likely to be too thick, at once wipe the roller dry, and then
roll the zinc briskly, until the coat of ink is perfectly even,
and the turpentine evaporated.


At this stage, every thing depends upon getting the coat
of ink even, if there are patches of thick and patches of chin,
sprinkle some turpentine upon slab, quickly charge the roller,
and roll up the zinc again, until the coat of ink is thin and
even.
An even coat of ink being obtained, the zinc is laid in a
tray containing clean cold water of a sufficient depth to well
cover the surface, w'th a pledget of cotton wool rub
the surface gently, when the ink covering the albumen .pro-
tected from light by the black portions of the negatives, will
wash away, leaving the picture on the zinc in ink; if the
finer details do not develop easily, continue the rubbing with
the cotton wool, but be careful not to rub so hard as to
scratch the ink lines.
All details being developed, rinse under the tap, and put
away to dry, which at ordinary temperature will only be a
few minutes.
The chances of failure in this portion of the process are,
first of all, air babbles, and dust spots in film, which will at
once declare themselves, and for winch the remedy is in-
creased care and cleanliness.
If upon development some of these lines are missing, then
the zinc, and the negative have not been in actual con tact, or
if the finer lines wash away easily, then the exposure has not
been long enough, whilst if it has been too long, etcher the
finer details are covered up, or the whole refuses to part with
any ink.
A satisfactory print, showing all the lines in the original
drawing, having been obtained, it is drained and dried as


quickly as possible now with a piece of fine sponge,
cover the surface with a coating of gum arabic dissolved in
water (the solution being about the consistency of cream).
Allow to dry in a cold current; be sure and do not
use heat, else the gum will split off, and bring the image
with it.
CHAPTER VII.
Printing on Zinc in Bitumen.
HP HE process described in the previous chapter, is most
suitable for printing on zinc, for blocks that are not
overburthened with fine fines, that are intended for rough
printing, and also, when from want of sunlight, and the
exigences of business, the exposure has to be made by Elec-
tric Light; but when the subjects are very fine, and the
blocks must be of the very best, it will be best to print
the image in bitumen, when the first etching can be done
without having to ink up, previous to immersing in the
Acid Bath (which must be done after developing the inked
albumen image), so getting the sharpest possible results, and
also securing a better depth to close work, than when the
inking up has to be done previously.
The generally accepted idea of bitumen is, that it
requires such a long exposure to fight, as to be practically
useless, except for direct sun printing, bur that only stands
good where the crude bitumen is used, and when too thick a
film is upon the plate.
By preparing the bitumen as about to be described, and
taking care to have a very thin film of the sensitive bitumen


upon the zinc plate, the exposure either to sunlight or electric
light, is not more than double that of albumen.
There is one special virtue in a bitumen film, if by chance
too much exposure to light has been given, a prolonged im-
mersion in the developing liquid (turpentine), will remedy
the defect, whereas if an albumen image be over exposed, it
is quite spoiled, and the work must be done over again.
We are still upon the subject of line work, and the same
class of negative laid down as desirable for printing with an
albumen film, is necessary for printing in bitumen, viz.,
the lines must be clear glass without veil, and the rest of
negative must be sufficiently opaque to stop the passage of
light.
The sensitive solution of Bitumen is made by procuring a
.small quantity of Photographic Bitumen or Asphaltum, from
.a good firm, 'and powdering it in a clean dry mortar. Now
take a clean and dry glass beaker, half filled with Methylated
Ether, and pour into it the powdered Bitumen, stirring with,
.a glass rod for a few minutes, cover the beaker with 1 a
piece of thin sheet india rubber, and upon that place a piece
■of thick plate glass, so as to make the vessel as air tight as
possible, and allow to stand a few hours, stir up again,
and pour away the Ether, draining the liquid as closely as
possible, so as to get rid of all those constituents which are
soluble in the Ether. Now add more fiesh Ether, stir
up thoroughly, and again allow to stand and settle, putting
on the cover as before, so as to prevent evaporation as much as
possible. After again settling, the Ether is poured away,
fresh Ether being added, the mass well stirred, and allowed
to stand a few hours, all liquid, and semi-liquid matter
carefully drained away, after which, the residue in the
beaker is removed to a glass plate and spread out over its
surface, so that any Ether remaining may quickly evaporate.


The object of thus purifying with Ether, is to get rid of
those constituents of the Bitumen which are not sensitive to
light, and as these constituents are soluble in Ether, whilst
those sensitive to light are nob, by getting rid of them we
secure a film of Bitumen sensitive to the action of light right
through.
When the Ether has evaporated, take of the residue, half
an ounce, and dissolve in pure benzole, (free from water) 15
ounces, allow to stand all night, then filter through filtering
paper (placing a sheet of glass over the funnel to prevent
evaporation).
New zinc plates will require polishing first with rotten
stone, and finishing with rouge, but plates that have been
used should be first polished with fine emery cloth, followed
first by puinmice powder, then rotten stone, and finished with
rouge, remembering that a circular motion must nob be used.
If after polishing, the surface is at all greasy, immerse it
in the graining bath of nitric acid, alum and water, wash well,
and rub away scum, then with a perfectly clean piece of
blotting paper, remove the water from surface ; dry over the
spirit flame.
To coat a piece of zinc with Bitumen, place it in the
whirler, and when (fixed in position, dust the surface with
a clean camel hair brush, flow over it sufficient of the
filtered Bitumen solution in benzole, lower the whirler
and set it in motion ; whirl rapidly for about a minute,
which will equalize the coat or film of Bitumen, and get rid
of superfluous solution. The plate when taken from the
whirler, will be quite dry, and ready for putting at once into
the printing frame.
As these Bitumen coated plates do not, like albumen,
deteriorate by keeping, a stock of them may be prepared at


a time, and stored away in the dark till wanted, but great
care must be taken, nob to allow the slightest- ray of daylight
to fall upon them, else the action once set up, will continue,
and spoil the plate.
On examining the zinc plate after removing from the
whiiier, it will he difficult to realise that there is really a
sufficient film of bitumen on the zinc, but there will be quite
sufficient to form a resist, if the proportions given are
adhered to.
In printing upon bitumen from negatives that have been
varnished, it will be as well to rub the varnished surface of
negative, with a pledget of cotton wool dipped in dry French
chalk.
The same care in putting into printing frame, as enjoined
in the chapter on zinc printing with Bichromated Albumen,
is requisite with these plates, as also is the putting on of
pressure by means of the screws.
The exposure to light will vary from ten minutes in the
sun, to. two or three hours in the shade.
Developing the Image.
These prints on zinc are developed by placing the exposed
plate, face up, in shallow tin tray, and pouring into the tray
sufficient turpentine to cover the plate, rock the tray so as
to keep the solution in motion, and (if the exposure has been
right) the image will gradually make its appearance, the
bitumen protected from the action of light by the dense por-
tions of negative gradually dissolving away ; as the develop-
ment approaches completion, great care must be used, and
when the last detail is visible, remove the plate, and rinse
with water from a rose ; now if the image is quite perfect,
immerse the plate at once into a mixture of Nitric Acid and
water, the acid being just strong enough to just taste, keep
the tray containing this acid solution rocking for about a


minute, remove the plate, and wash it thoroughly under
the tap.
The immersion in the acid water will have removed the
shiny appearance of the zinc, and the mat surface will enable
the operator to see if all the requisite details of the image
are visible, if not, and they are covered with bitumen,
another immersion in the turpentine will complete the de-
velopment, but if any of the lines are rotten, or - the details
dissolved away, then the exposure has been too short, and
the plate will require repolishiug, and another exposure made.
The image being satisfactory, the water is blotted off with
clean blotting/ paper, and allowed to dry, ( don't use heat for
drying ) it may then be exposed to light for a few minutes,
but this is not absolutely necessary, although such exposure
tends to make the image stronger.
The plate is now ready for etching in relief.
With regard to the keeping qualities of a solution of bitu-
men, as described in this chapter, my experience is, that it
keeps in perfect condition for at least six months.
CHAPTER VIII.
Zinc Etching from Transfers.
/ T V HE foregoing chapters treat upon the production of relief
blocks of line subjects, the same size, larger, or smaller
than the original, the ink image being put upon the zinc by
means of photography, hut, when it is desired to make a zinc
block by direct transfer to zinc without the aid of photography,


then the picture is drawn by the artist, if the subject is in line,
on ordinary lithographic writing transfer paper ; if the. subject
is in chalk, the picture is drawn upon specially prepared
transfer paper, like Josz’s polygraphic transfer paper, or other
grained paper made specially for the purpose, perhaps the
subject is already on the stone, having been used as a Litho-
graph, or it may be a copper-plate engraving, in these cases
transfers are made, put on the zinc, and etched into
relief.
When the drawing is made specially for transfer to zinc,
it should be made on writing transfer paper, if in line, or
polygraphio chalk paper if in chalk; taking care to avoid
touching the surface with the fingers, as finger marks roll up
black ; all lines must be firm, no attempts must be made to
get effects by using pale ink. In chalk work also, the draw-
ing must be firm and strong, corrections and alterations
should be made on the transfer, and not left to be done after
transferring ; if the corrections or alterations are small, they
may be removed by inkeraser, or by careful washing with
turpentine or benzole, so that all the ink is removed; if the
correction is large, a piece of clean transfer paper may be
pasted over the place, using the paste as thin as possible ;
gum must not be used.
The transfer being obtained, the next step is to tranfer to
stone, then after rolling up, and proving, a transfer is made
on India transfer paper, and that transferred to the zinc.
If it is desired to make a type block on zinc, from an en-
graved copper-plate, a transfer must be made from the plate,
on India or Scotch retransfer paper; these transfers may be
made on a copper-plate press, or on a Litho press.


The engraved copper-plate is first of all examined to see
that all old ink is out of the lines,- if not, wash with turpen-
tine, and wipe quite dry, then tie up in a piece of linen rag
some plate retransfer ink, warm the copper-plate either on the
hot plate used during the etching, or over a butisen burner,
until it can hardly be held in the hand, hold it in a
piece of cloth to protect the fingers, and rub in the ink until
sufficient is melted to well cover the surface, taking care to
see that the ink is rubbed well into the lines, take a
piece of soft clean rag, and wipe off the ink from the surface
of the plate carefully, so as not to remove it from the
lines, this is best secured by wiping across the lines,
not with them. When the plate is quite free from ink on
the surface, rub the lower part of the palm of the hand, upon
a ball of whiting, and proceed to polish the surface of the
plate, do not get too much whiting upon the hand, else it
may stick to the ink, and prevent it adhering to die transfer
paper.
Now take a piece of clean transfer paper (India or Scotch)
a little larger than the plate, and laying it face downwards
upon a piece of clean paper sponge the back with a damp
sponge, let it lie a few minutes, so as to get evenly
damp right through.
See that the press is ready, if a copper-plate press is
to be used, that the bed is free from grit, and that the
blankets are in place ; if a Litho press, put in a stone, wipe
it free from grit, and see that the scraper is all right, remove
the tympan, if of leather, and substitute one of zinc or
millboard, now lay the inked and polished copper-plate upon
the stone,* then lay the damped transfer paper, face down
upon the copper-plate, upon the transfer paper, place a piece
of printer’s blanket, turn down the tympan, or put a piece


of thin millboard over the blanket, ran the bed of press
under the scraper, turn down the lever, and if necessary,
adjust the pressure (a good nip is necessary) then run the
bed through, now raise the lever, pull out the bed, lift
the tympan and blanket, reverse the plate, and pull
through again, now gently warm the plate, and carefully lift
away the transfer paper, which should contain the picture
with every line firm and sharp, if it is not, sufficient pressure
has not been used, or the transfer paper has been made too
damp, or sufficient ink has not been put into the lines.
The transfer, either drawn in line, or in chalk, or from a
plate being obtained, it is next transferred to a polished litho.
stone. Of course the picture can be at once transferred to
the zinc which it is intended to etch, but it will be found
best, to first of all transfer to stone, then from the stone pull
a transfer, and transfer that to the zinc, so that in case of an
accident during the etching, another plate can be quickly
prepared. Before putting upon the stone, the prepared
transfers should be put into a damping book until evenly
damp.
Now take a polished litho. stone, and place in front of a
fire, or in the sun to get quite dry, place upon bed of
press, and adjust the pressure; lay the transfer upon the
stone in such a manner that it is put into position without
any slurring, place a piece of clean paper upon the
transfer, then the blanket ; lower the tympan, run in the
carriage, lower the lever, and pull through, lift the
lever, draw back the carriage, turn the stone round and pull
through again, then sponge the back of transfer with water,
and pull through again, repeating the damping and pulling
through three or four times. Now with a wet sponge satu


rate the back of transfer with water, and lift away the paper,
wash away the composition, leaving the image on the
stone, now cover with thick gum solution, and allow to dry.
If more than one transfer is in hand at the time, they are
trimmed as closely as possible, and pasted with very thin
paste close together upon a large piece of paper, and all
transferred at one operation.
The gum upon the stone being dry, wash it off carefully
with clean water, then roll up with transfer ink. Clean
away any dirt there may be, with sponge, and snake stone :
where the snake stone cannot be used, a piece of pointed
wood dipped into acid gum will clear away the dirt, taking
care to have the wet sponge handy, so as to prevent the acid
spreading on to the work ; now roll up as strong as possible,
then etch, by passing over water, acidulated with nitric acid
of such a strength, that it just slightly effervesces when the
stone is touched, saturate a sponge with the weak acidulated
water,' and go gently over the stone, then with ‘another
sponge, charged with clean water, wash off the acid, now
again roll up with transfer ink as strong as possible, and pull
the transfer. Chalk drawings are transferred to stone in the
same way, then etched, but the acid water is allowed to act
a little longer than for a line transfer, and after washing
away the etching solution, the picture is washed out with
clean turpentine, then wiped with a sponge, gummed in,
fanned dry, moistened with a wet sponge, superfluous water
removed, then the image is rolled up with leather roller
charged with transfer ink, aud transfers pulled for trans-
ferring to zinc for subsequent etching.
To transfer to zinc, take a piece of polished zinc, and clean
with pumice powder, immerse in the graining bath
(page 82) for about a minute, remove, wash under the


tap, and rub with cotton wool, then wipe dry as possible with
cotton wool, warm the plate slightly, lay it upon a litho.
stone in the press, lay the transfer (which has been lying in
the damping book) upon the zinc plate, lay upon the transfer
the backing, lower the tympan, and pull through, then damp
the back of transfer, pull through again, then reverse plate,
damp back of transfer, and again pull through, again damp
back of transfer, and again pull through; now saturate
transfer with warm water, peel off the paper, and with a
sponge and warm water, remove the composition : now smear
over with thick gum, and allow to dry, the plate being now
in the same state as those treated by the two previous
methods of. obtaining the image upon the zinc.
CHAPTER IX.
Etching in Line.
npO etch the image upon the zinc plate into relief, so as to
make it fit for printing from, the following appliances
are required, viz : —a hot plate, similar to the heater used by
copper-plate printers, warmed by means of gas jets under-
neath ; a set of rollers, comprising an ordinary lithographic
printing roller, in good condition, a flannel roller, and a
glazed roller, an inking slab, an etching tray, 24 inches by
18-, by 10 deep, mounted upon rockers, and lined with a good
thick coat of pitch, a supply of rags for wiping the slab
down, &c., nitric acid, turpentine, gum arabic, three or four
sponges, damping rag, powdered resin, a flat camel’s hair
brush, a solution of shellac in methylated. spirits of wine
thin litho. varnish, soft and hard etching inks.
E


The soft etching is compounded as follows :
Beeswax ... ... ... 6 ounces
Russian Tallow 5 „
Asphaltum 2 „
Litho. Printing Ink at 5/- per lb. 1 lb.
melt altogether in a tin, over a gas stove, stirring well, until
all the ingredients are melted and thoroughly mixed, then
add 1 lb. of thin litho. varnish, mix thoroughly, and allow
to cool, when cool turn the whole out upon an inking slab,
and with a stone muller work the whole mass until smooth
and homogeneous.
The hard-etching ink is composed of :
Beeswax ... | ounce
Resin „
Litho. Printing Ink ... ... 2 „
- Shoemakers’ Wax 1-| ~
melt altogether, stirring well to get thorough incorporation,
then cool, and it is ready for use.
A solution of gum arabic is very necessary, a good sample
of gum being used, dissolve in water until the thickness of
cream, to which must be added two drams of nitric acid to
each quart of gum solution, and well stirring after the addi-
tion of the acid.
The room in which the etching is to be done must be well
lighted, have plenty of benches, and must be provided with
a sink and a water tap.
The first stage of etching a zinc plate into relief will be to
reinforce the very thin coat of ink, as left upon the bichro-
mated albumen rendered insoluble by the action of light,
this operation is called rubbing up, and is done as follows :


first; with a clean sponge dipped into the gum solution, smear
the front of zinc all over, giving a thin even coat on the
gum, allow this to dry spontaneously, or accelerate this dry-
ing by means of a pair of bellows, but do not use heat, or the
image will split off.
When the gum is dry, the plate is well washed under the
tap, and well rubbed with a soft sponge, remove surplus
water with a damp rag, and lay upon the bench face up ;
cover with gum, and dip a piece of rag into litho. print-
ing ink thinned with turps, (the ink and turps being thor-
oughly incorporated, else the ink already upon the image
will be removed) to about the consistency of cream, rub this
inky rag gently, round, and round, all over the plate, until the
image stands out black, bold and sharp, do not have too
much ink on the rag, and be sure to have plenty of gum on
the plate, then the operation of rubbing up will be quickly
effected, now wash away the gum under the tap, rubbing
gently with cotton wool or lint, dab with a soft damp rag,
dry, and cover with powdered resin, brushing with flat cgmel’s
hair brush, again wash, then place the plate in a mixture of
nitric acid and water, the acid being just strong enough to
taste, rock the dish for about half a minute, remove,
wash well under the tap, rubbing the zinc back and front
with soft sponge, then with damp cloth ; now dry in warm
current of air, when dry, put a piece of brown paper upon
the hot plate, and the zinc upon this, and allow to remain
until the ink just begins to glisten, then remove and allow
to cool.
Now examine the image, and if there are any lines defect-
ive, touch them up with a fine sable brush, and hard etching
ink, thinned with turps, any alteration or addition to the
picture must now betmade, using the same ink for the pur-
pose.
e 2


The back of the plate is now brushed over with a. solution
of shellac in spirits of wine, and when that is dry, the mar-
gin in front is also varnished over, up to about a quarter of
ah inch of the picture, any very broad whites, which will
require cutting out afterwards, are also varnished, so as to
economise both acid and time in etching.
The varnish being quite dry, the plate is smeared with
gum, and stood away to dry,
Whilst the gum is drying, clean the inking slab, and
scrape the roller, then take a little of the soft etching ink,
and with the palette knife, put a little ink upon the roller,
distributing it in a line from end to end of roller, roll vig-
orously over the slab until the ink is evenly distributed all
over the slab, and upon the roller ; the gum on the plate is
now moistened with water, using a wet sponge, then it is
laid upon the bench, and being well covered with water, it
is rolled all over with the etching ink, using moderate pres-
sure, with a slow motion, re-charging the roller at intervals
from the slab, and occasionally using the damp sponge, so
as to keep the plate sufficiently moist to resist the ink, if the
roller slides over the image, wipe it with rag, then re-charge
by ‘rolling vigorously over the slab, adding more ink if at all
spare.
When the image is well rolled up all over, it is dusted
over with powdered resin, which is well brushed in with a
flat camel’s hair brush, first from one 'side, then from the
other, after which, give a rinse under the tap, a rub with the
sponge, so as to remove the powdered resin from the whites,
then the plate is ready for the first etch.
The plate is now ready for the first etch, for which pur-
purpose a little Nitric Acid is added to the water in the


'fetching tray—precise directions cannot be given as to how
much acid is to be added, as so much depends upon the area
of zinc on the plate that requires dissolving; practice, how-
ever, will soon enable the operator to judge the proper
'quantity, if too much acid is added, the plate will quickly
be covered with myriads of minute bubbles, in which case it
must be instantly removed, well washed, and the bath dilu-
ted with water before the plate is re-immersed. If, on the
other hand, there is too little acid present, the action is top
‘slow, and more must be added.
The first etch must be carefully watched, aud the rocking
continued until the application of the finger nail to the mar-
gin shows that the zinc inside has been dissolved away to a
depth of about the thickness of a visiting card.
The first etching is the most important of the whole, as
unless a sufficient depth be attained at the first etch, sharp
lines will not be obtained, and as yet, the ink is not capable
of resisting too strong acid, great care must be taken that
the work is not damaged ; proceed cautiously, adding acid
from time to time as required.
As a rule, the first etch will take from 4 to .6 minutes
(the tray being kept rocking all the time.)
When it is judged that the first etch has been carried
far enough, remove the plate from the tray, wash well under
the tap, rubbing gently with a sponge, so-as to-remove the
scum left by the acid, dry by means of gentle heat, then
put it upon the hot plate until the ink is melted, remove and
allow to cool. !
■ When the plate is quite cold, smear it over with gum solu*
tion, and with apiece of cardboard or pair of bellows, fan
the gum dry.


Sprinkle the inking slab with turpentine, and with a
cloth wipe the slab clean. Take a piece of etching ink, and
thin with thin varnish, mixing well with the palette knife
upon the slab ; now take the leather roller, and with the
palette knife place a little of the ink upon it, and roll up on
the slab until both roller and slab are well coated, but on no
account must there be too much ink, nor must it be too thin.
Lay the zinc down on the bench, and with the wet
sponge carefully moisten the gum, then wipe all superfluous
water off the plate, and roll up with the leather roller charged
as above, roll the plate first one way, and then the other,
keeping the zinc evenly damp all over, else the zinc will
catch in the whites, and probably spoil the picture. When
the rolling is completed, and as much ink as possible been
piled on, the zinc will be nearly dry, if not, allow to stand
in a cold current for a little time, then take it to the drawer
in which the powdered resin is kept,- and smear the plate all
over with the powder, now brush as much of the resin away
as will come, using the brush from all sides, so that all the
lines get evenly coated, not only on, the top, but upon the
sides; this being done, take a damp sponge and carefully
remove the superfluous resin from the whites, or unprotected
zinc.
■ The plate is now ready for the second etch, and the solu-
tion in the etching tray must be re-inforced by the addition
of a little acid, but do not add too much at once, it will be
far best to add a little at a time, and then as soon as the zinc
shows there is no action going on, add a little more ; an easy
and simple method of ascertaining whether any acid be pres-
ent or not is to wipe the bare metal with the tip of the finger,
and if that spot (which will be brighter than the surrounding
parts) does not speedily resume its dingy colour, the acid is
exhausted.


The plate being immersed in the solution, set the tray
rocking, and paying attention to the remarks above, at the
end of ten minutes remove the plate from the tray, wash it
under the tap, rubbing gently with soft sponge, then remove
as much of tire water as possible, and examine the progress
made by the acid, which can be seen by lines being bare
below the ink, in which case the etch has been earned far
enough, and if not stopped, there would be danger of under
cutting ; if, however, no progress has been made, add a little
acid to the solution, replace the zinc, and rock away for
another 5 or 10 minutes.
The second etch being effected, the zinc is carefully
washed, and the scum, left by the acid, carefully sponged
away ; now stand up near the hot plate, so that it will get
the benefit of a gentle heat, and when quite dry, lay it upon
the hot plate (which should be heated to a temperature of
120 or 150 degrees F.) face up, with a piece of brown paper
between the zinc plate, and the hot plate.
Now as soon as the zinc plate begins to get hot, there will
be a tendency to curl slightly away from the hot plate, which,
if allowed, would prevent the ink being evenly melted. To
prevent this, take a bradawl in each hand, and press down
the sides of zinc, taking care not to touch any of the picture.
Allow the zinc to remain on the hot plate, until the ink
and resin are melted, and rim down to the bottom of the
etch, then remove, and lay on the cold slab until the plate is
cold.
■ When cold, smear the plate with the gum solution, fan it
dry {never use heat for drying the gum), moisten with wet
sponge, roll up again (using the leather roller), using the ink
pretty stiff on the inking slab, keep the surface of zinc well
moistened, and when the roller gets too much water upon it,


pass a piece of damp cheese cloth over it, which will remove
the water, then roll the roller vigorously on the slab, until
it again bites the ink. Continue rolling the zinc until all
portions have received due attention from the roller. *
Now allow the zinc to get dry, then cover with resin,
brushing from all sides, so as to coat sides of lines as well as
top, and then remove superfluous resin from whites with a
damp sponge, and the zinc is ready for the next etch, for
which more acid is added to the solution in the etching tray.
Rock the tray carefully, watching the zinc to see that the
acid is neither too weak, nor too strong, until the progress
can be seen by examining the plate, the time with the proper
quantity of acid being 20 to 30 minutes.
When the etching has proceeded far enough, after washing
and sponging, again allow to dry, then place upon hot plate
until the ink is melted and runs down the sides of lines, then
cool, smear with gum, fan dry, moisten with sponge, and roll
up as before, dry, cover with resin, using camel hair brush,
then damp, sponge, and give a fourth etch, using same pre-
cautions as to strength of acid and duration of rocking as
before.
The round of operations is repeated, but for rolling up for
the fifth and subsequent etch, a flannel roller is used, and
more ink will be required upon the slab ; it will also require
to be a little thinner,
For some subjects, three to six etchings is required,
whilst for others—especially where there are whites that are
too small for cutting out with fret saw or router-—three
•N.B.—Some of the closest work will be quite blocked up this time,
and each subsequent rolling will block up more and more, until only
the very open work will be left.


etches will be ample; practise, the best teacher, will
soon enable the operator to judge how many, or how few are
required.
The etching having been carried as deep as is judged
sufficient, warm the plate well, and sprinkle liberally with
p&raffin, and with a stiff scrubbing brush, loosen the ink
from the hues, and wash off with solution of American potash
and well scrub with clean water, to remove all traces of
potash.
The plate being cleared from all ink, &c., is now examined
carefully, the sides of the lines will show each etching, by a
series of irregular steps ; and if the plate be put into the
press in this condition, the chances are that before many
copies had been made, these steps would take more or less ink
from the rollers, and blur the image ; therefore, before pas-
sing into the hands of the printer, the plate will require
. etching two or three times more, to get rid of these irregu-
larities.
This is done by warming the zinc on the hot plate, and
then, whilst still warm, rolling up with a fine glazed roller,
charged with the hard etching ink on a clean inking slab.
Eoll firmly, first one way and then the other, so that all
the tops of the hues get well coated with ink, make a mark
with a blunt point in ink, on margin, so as to lay a short
line of zinc bare to the action of the acid.
Now having emptied the etching tray, put it into some
clean water, and add sufficient acid to make it taste like
strong vinegar, and in this immerse the plate, and keep rock-
ing for ten or fifteen minutes, or until the mark on margin,


when felt with the finger nail, shows that it has attained a
depth about the same as obtained in the first etching.
Now warm the plate, and wash off the ink with solution of
American potash, and again wash, and dry on hot plate.
Now examine, and if the lines are free from the steps, the
plate is finished, but if not, the operation must be repeated
until the steps are all removed.
Be careful to cover the surface of block thoroughly with
the ink, else the acid will soon spoil the picture.
The plate is now ready either for mounting for the press,
or for electrotype being taken from ; if the former, the deep
whites are cut away with router or fret saw, the edges are-
trimmed and bevelled, holes drilled and counter sunk at con-
venient places, for the insertion of nails or screws to fix the
zinc to the wooden block, to make the surface type high.
These instructions are applicable for etching into relief,
prints on zinc, made either in bitumen or in albumen,


PART II.
PHOTOGRAPHIC ENGRAVING IN
HALF-TONE,




Photo-Engraving in Half-Tone.
INTRODUCTION.
T N maldng a type block from a photograph, washed draw-
■y ing, or painting, in which the half-tones are washes of
colour, some method of breaking up these half-tones, so as
to bring the different gradations of shadows, light and half-
tint, upon one plane is necessary, this is usually done by
breaking up the lights and half-tints into dots, or stipple,,
and various are the methods which have been advocated for
the purpose.
The first patent, dated 1852, bears the honoured name of
Mr. Fox Talbot, is for intaglio printing, and therefore a little
out of place under the above heading, still it claims our at-
tention, as giving a method for breaking up the half-tones
of the photograph, by placing muslin, crape, etc., between
the photographic cliche, and the sensitive surface •, or a glass
plate may covered with fine opaque lines, or glass may be
coated with fine powder, which is caused to adhere.
In 1864, Paul Pretsch broke up the half-tone by the
reticulation of gelatine, caused by the admixture with iodide
of silver, and bichromate of potash ; this was spread upon a
silvered copper plate, dried, and exposed to light under the
half-tone negative, then washed in cold water and borax, or
carbonate of soda, then in alcohol, then coated with copal
varnish, and then in weak solution of tannin, after which, an
electrotype block could be made from the relief, or printing
ink could be applied, and a transfer made to zinc or stone. ;


In 1855, A. J. Berchtold produced a grain by printing
upon a photograph, in black or in any colour, from a plate
or block, or other surface, or by perforating, or making
strokes, lines, or dots upon it, by roller or other instrument,
worked by machinery or by hand, such perforations passing
completely, or only partly through the picture, which methods
of producing a grain have been re-patented in 1883, by
Brown, Barnes, and Bell.
In 1860, E. J. Asser used starch, and in 1865, J. W.
Swan, a tissue of gelatine mixed with charcoal, or other
chemically inert grit, and in the same year Messrs. E. & J.
Bullock published, perhaps the most important specification,
describing all, or nearly all practical methods of obtaining
grain, the most important of which are, the placing of any
fine fabric between lens, and sensitive surface, or between
camera and object, or copies of granulated, or reticulated
structures or fabrics could be used, or such copy could be
placed in contact with negatives, and both copied together.
In 1879, J. W. Swan made negatives, by moving, during
exposure, the Bullocks’ screen, placed in front of sensitive
plate and Meisenbach’s specification a little later, is somewhat
similar.
Woodbury reliefs can be used for the production of Photo-
type blocks in a very simple manner, but there is nearly
always a halo round the outlines, which spoils the effect.
If a Woodbury relief is thinly coated with transfer ink,
and then laid upon a piece of ordinary litho. transfer paper,
which has been embossed with lines, or dots, or stipple, by
being pressed in contact with the wire gauze, or an engraved
plate.


The inked relief, and the embossed litho. transfer paper,
are then subjected to heavy pressure, and a grained image is
impressed upon the transfer paper, from which it can be
transferred to zinc, and then etched in relief.
The method now in general use, and which will be fully
described in this book, shortly stated is as follows—a copper
or steel plate (preferably) is ruled by special machine, with
fine lines diagonally across, from this plate an impression is
printed upon smooth white paper, this sheet is photographed,
two exposures being made, turning the sensitive plate end
for end between the two exposures, the result being a nega-
tive with crossed lines, and called a screen, this screen is
placed in front of sensitive plate, and the photograph or
picture to be re-produced as a type block is copied through
this screen, the dots upon which, obstructing the light, cause
the half-tones to be broken up, and render it available for
typographic printing.
From the grained negative a print is made on zinc or
copper, in bichromated albumen or bitumen (preferred) the
dots in negative protecting the sensitive surface from the
action of the light, the surface of zinc is left free from resist,
consequently the mordant eats away the metal, and so forms
the relief block.
When the etching fluid has done its work, the whole of
the resist is cleaned off, and a proof taken, the result being
far from perfect, in consequence of the general flatness of
the image, but after the plate has been re-bitten two or three
times by an artist, who, by stopping out various portions of
the picture, and re-etching, gradually infuses brightness into
the lights and half-tones, and produces a result, which, prop-
erly manipulated on the printing press, puts into the shade
all manual engravings, for truth and finish.


For photo-engraving in half-tone, the same aparatus and
methods of making the negatives, &c., are used as have been
described in detail in the earlier chapters of this book.
The wet collodion process, or the special dry plate method
may be used just as is most convenient to the operator, but
if the dry plate process be employed, it must be again most
emphatically laid down , that only the special dry plates men-
tioned be used, the ordinary dry plates of commerce being
utterly and entirely useless for the purpose.
Beginners are also cautioned against any deviation from
the method of working given, until by practise they have
mastered their process, and are thus in a position to trace out
any failure.
CHAPTER I.
The Screen.
/ “P HE screen is a negative taken from an impression from
a steel or copper-plate machine, ruled with lines 120 to
the inch, the plate being at least 18 inches square, the lines
being ruled diagonally, one way only.
The impressions from these plates must he absolutely per-
fect, on smooth white paper, and in jet black or brown ink ;
a perfect sheet with care, should last a life time, and as they
cannot be prepared in a hurry, too much care cannot be exer-
cised in their storage.
The sheet should be mounted upon thick smooth card
board, freshly made ; starch, or well stained gum being the
best mountants for the purpose, the fine lines on the sheet
being very difficult to focus, especially when making very
small screens; it is advisable to paste narrow strips of bold
type at each corner, just outside the ruling, and focus these.
To make the screens, remove the mirror and its box, placing


the lens in the camera, in its ordinary position, fix the ruled
sheet upon the easel, and after ascertaining that the camera
and. easel are quite parallel, carefully focus, getting the image
absolutely sharp all over, using a focussing magnifier care-
fully adjusted to the operator’s sight.
If the focussing screen be at all rough, this will be a mat-
ter of some difficulty, unless the ground surface is greased,
the grease being removed with a rag as close as possible.
A series of screens should be made, varying from 4 to 10
inches in width, also of different degrees of density, so as to
suit the different grades of photographs for reproduction.
The fines upon the sheet are not crossed, so to get the lines
crossed in. the screen negative, two exposures are made, the
sensitive plate being returned to the dark room, and turned
end for end between the two exposures, some screens should
be made of the single ruling only, and will be found very
useful for many subjects.
Each screen must be free from speck or stain, or they will
be quite useless, the lines represented by bare glass, and ab-
solutely sharp. These screens may be made either by the
wet collodion process, or upon the special photo-mechanical
dry plates, which, together with the dark slides, must be care-
fully dusted before use, do not over expose, nor hurry in
development.
When the wet collodion process is used, the nitrate of silver
bath must be in its very best condition and full strength, the
collodion ripe, well settled, and carefully decanted ; the glass
plates should be of very thin patent plate, free from specks,
or flaws, carefully cleaned and albumenized, drying rapidly
in a warm room, free from dust.
3?


These screens require great care in their preparation, but
as they must be perfect, and are the foundation of the
the time and trouble taken in making them must not be
grudged ; with care a good screen will last for years.
The final operation of screen making is to coat them,
whether on wet plates or dry, with a good film of white
hard varnish well filtered.
CHAPTER II.
The Grained Negative.
t_T AYING made the screens in various sizes and degrees of
- L density, lines clear and sharp, the next step to consider
will he the grained negative.
Grained negatives for half-tone Mocks should not be made
from the original subject, a far better effect being obtained
from a good silver print, preferably upon plain paper ; if any
of the outlines or details are obscure, by judicious re-touching
upon the print, a more satisfactory result will be obtained,
heavy shadows being relieved by washes of blue, or white
pigiment.
A print for reproduction should be flat, rather than bril-
liant, as tending to the better rendering of the half-tints.
The screen used must be chosen to suit the subject, both as
regards fineness and density ; the finer the detail in the print
and the smaller the block (due regard being paid to the fact
whether the printing is to be done upon rough or fine paper),
the finer the screen; a dense screen being used for a bright
print, and a more transparent one for a flatter subject.
The screen being placed in front of the sensitive plate
during exposure in the camera, some arrangement must be
made to ensure the sensitive plate being in focus.


When the dark slide will admit of it, the screen may he
fixed in front of the plate carrier hy means of thin strips of
cardboard or metal, the wire corners of carrier keeping the
.two films apart, an essential necessity when the wet collodion
process is used ; if the dark slide has not sufficient room
between the front of carrier and sliding shutter, then the
screen must be laid in the carrier, the collodion film being
prevented from contact by means of two or three thicknesses
of clean blotting paper at each corner, the focussing screen
being packed out in its frame to the thickness of the screen
and the blotting paper.
With dry plates, the two films (carefully freed from dust)
may be in contact, so that the packing out of the focussing
screen, need only be to the extent of the thickness of the
screen.
The above preliminaries being attended to, the print to be
copied is fixed upon the easel, the mirror put into its box,
the lens screwed into the flange, and the camera adjusted, till
the image upon the ground glass is of the size required, a
negative can then be made either by the wet collodion or dry
plate process, the manipulations given in the earlier chapters
being the same except in the wet collodion,when the negative is
finished after washing from fixing with cyanide of potassium,
grained negatives not requiring the after operation of inten-
sifying.
A grained half tone negative must be perfectly clear aU
through, free from spots, or stain, or fog.
Instead of using a paper print, from which to make the
grained negative, a transparency may be used, the screen
being in contact either with the film of transparency, or of
sensitive plate.
e 2


Using a transparency from a .perfect negative will, in
skilled hands, and a good light, yield by far the best results,
especially when the screen is in contact therewith; but in
very dull weather, the small stop.necessary to get absolute
sharpness from corner to corner, makes so long an exposure
necessary, that this method is at a great disadvantage, as
compared with the screen next the plate, in which case a
large stop may be used, materially shortening the exposure,
the image not requiring the same microscopic sharpness
necessary for the grain.
CHAPTER III.
HALF-TONE FEINTING ON ZINC;
A suitable grained negative 'being obtained, the next
operation will be to make a print from it upon zinc in
bitumen.
For the operations, of printing upon zinc in bitumen and
the subsequent etching into- relief, the same apparatus,
rollers, and materials, as are described in Part I, are used.
The zinc plates used for half-tone blocks must be the
very best procurable, as near fat as possible, the best gauge
being 17 or 18.
The zinc plate as received is first of all polished with
charcoal, the sticks being cut at an angle, and kept in water
when not in use.
The polishing is done by rubbing the charcoal in short
circles round and round, the plate being kept flooded with
water all the time, until the whole surface is perfectly smooth


and quite free from scratches; when this result has been
attained, wipe dry with a clean dry cloth, and finish the
plate with a paste of whiting, moistened with spirits of wine
and ammonia, or of benzole and vegetable naptha, rubbing the
paste on with a piece of clean lint and polishing off with
another piece.
Too much care cannot be taken in these operations of
polishing and cleaning the zinc, as upon these being properly
performed depends in a great measure the quality of the
block, scratches being quite fatal.
If the plate is scratched, defying the power of the char-
coal to remove, a preliminary polish with fine emery cloth,
and turpentine will be requisite, the emery cloth being-
stretched over a cork rubber, or over a block of wood,
4 + 3 + 2 inches covered with thick felt, the zinc being-
placed upon a board covered with American cloth, the face
sprinkled with turpentine and then rubbed with the emery
cloth (to and fro only, not round and round) until the
turpentine has evaporated, if the scratches are removed the
plate is ready for polishing, if not, the emery cloth must he
used until they are.
The sensitive film with which the zinc is coated is of
prepared bitumen, as described in Chapter YII, Part 1., dis-
solved in pure benzole, the polished and cleaned zinc plate
being put into the whirler, carefully dusted with a camel’s
hair brush, then sufficient of a carefully filtered solution of
prepared bitumen in benzole is poured upon the plate, the
whirler being promptly reversed and set in rapid motion for
about one minute,’ when the film will be found quite dry,
and if perfectly even and free from dust spots, is ready for
the printing frame. Spots are caused by careless filtering,


and by neglecting to dust the plate before pouring on the
bitumen solution. In filtering the solution of bitumen,
precautions must be taken to prevent evaporation of the
benzole, which is very volatile, the best medium for filtering
being two thicknesses of good lint.
The benzole used for dissolving the bitumen must be pure
and quite free from water ; if any difficulty be experienced
in procuring good benzole, a preparation called “ Benzine
Oollas ” may be used, but it is far more costly than pure
benzole; methylated chloroform is also a good solvent
of the prepared bitumen, but being so much more volatile
than even benzole, it requires some skill to use, the thickness
of the bitumen being so uncertain from one time of using to
another. When methylated chloroform is used, the whirler
cannot so well be used ; so the best way of coating is to let
the bitumen solution run over the plate from the filter, putting
on a good pool, at once throwing off the superfluous into
the funnel, and draining off quickly, the film drying almost
instantly.
The film of bitumen must be very thin, just sufficient to
give a pale golden hue to the zinc.
The zinc plate coated with the sensitive bitumen is put
into the printing frame in contact with the grained nega-
tive, and screwed up as tight as possible, (as unless the
negative and zinc be in perfect contact, the print will be
quite useless), then exposed to light.
The exposure must be made to sunlight when possible,
and will require from one to three hours, the exact time of
course being a matter for experiment and practice; when
diffused light only can be had, then the exposure will be
very uncertain, and two or three trial zincs should be put
out at the same time as the main zinc, the trial zincs being


withdrawn and developed at intervals before the main zinc.
All photographic exposures are very difficult to lay down
on paper, so much depending upon many conflicting
circumstances which may be prevailing at the time, practise
and careful observation being the only true guides ; a stan-
dard negative, of which, by being frequently printed in
sunlight and diffused light, the time of exposure is known,
should be kept, and in time, the operator can, by com-
parison with each fresh negative, accurately (or at least
approximately), apportion the requisite time of exposure. •
When the exposure is judged to be sufficient, the zinc is
withdrawn from the frame, immersed in dish containing
turpentine, and gently rocked until the bitumen, not ren-
dered insoluble by the action of light, gradually comes away,
leaving the image upon the zinc, which is at once with-
drawn, and well washed,under a tap, then placed between
clean sheets of blotting paper to remove the water. A bath
of water and nitric acid is now T prepared, the acid being
just strong enough to taste, in which the zinc plate is
immersed ; the acid attacking the bare zinc dulls the bright
lustre, and allows the operator to at once see if all the
bitumen has been removed from each dot or stipple; as if
not, the plate must be well washed back and front (not
rubbed), blotted off, and at once returned to the turpentine,
there to remain until the last vestige of bitumen is removed
from the whites.
If after immersion in the acid bath (one minute being
sufficient) the image shows clear and bright, it is well
washed, the water blotted off, and put away to dry.
The developement of the bitumen image in the turpen-
tine is not a very rapid process, except when the exposure
has been just right, in which case the plate must be care-
fully watched and removed as soon as ‘ developement is


complete ; if the exposure has been longer than necessary,
a prolonged immersion in the turpentine will be all that is
required to get a good plate, as within certain limits there
is a large degree of latitude permissible in the exposure
of sensitive bitumen, so long as that exposure has been
sufficient.'
"When methylated chloroform is used as the solvent for the
sensitive bitumen, the developement is much more rapid,
indeed it is often done by a mere wash over with turpentine,
and the image is cleared at once, so that when chloroform is
used the developement must be very closely watched.
As is hinted above, over exposure is not very much to be
feared, but under exposure will soon declare itself by the
image breaking up, either in the grain, or image, in which
case it is useless proceeding further with it, the plate being
wiped cleau, polished with whiting and spirits, and re-coated
with bitumen,
The plate after immersion in the weak acid bath, must be
a perfect replica of the negative, every line or dot showing
perfect, the dark half-tones of picture also being clear and
free from deposit of bitumen ; the net work of grain across
the lights, and.light half-tones, being quite perfect and free
from break, then the plate is ready for the etching.
CHAPTER IV.
ETCHING HALFTONE PRINTS UPON ZONC.
"DEEOIIE proceeding with the etching, tlie border lines are
, first made. When a thin white line is next the picture,
this line is scratched with a graver, using a steel straight edge
for a guide ; a black line of stopping out varnish (composed
of hard etching ink thinned with turpentine) is then care


fully painted upon the zinc outside the scratched line ;
another line being afterwards grooved out, leaving the
thickness of black just as required for the finished line.
This last line may be grooved out nearly through the zinc,
and then painted over with stopping out varnish, as also
the back of plate.
The plate is now ready for the first etching bath, the
strength of which may be tested by placing a little upon a
piece of clean litho stone, which it should just cause to effer-
vesce, the etching bath being water and nitric acid ; the
plate is immersed, and gently rocked for two or three
minutes, being closely watched the whole time, so that it
may be removed, at the slightest evidence of undercutting.
When it is judged that the biting has progressed far
enough, the plate is removed, washed well, the water blotted
off, and the image fanned dry; it is then smeared over with
gum and allowed to dry. When dry, moisten the gum with a
damp sponge, and roll up with litho printing ink, thinned
with thin litho varnish, using a good grain leather litho
roller, continuing the rolling until the whole of bitumen
forming the image is completely covered with ink, taking
■care to keep the zinc well moistened by the frequent
application of a damp sponge.
When the whole of the bitumen is covered wdth ink, fan
dry, then dust over with very finely powdered asphaltum,
brush the powder w T ell in with a camel’s hair brush, wash off
the surplus asphaltum, dab dry with a soft cloth, then warm
■on the hot plate until the asphaltum and ink are just
melted ; remove, cool, and after making a slight scratch in
margin, immerse in acid bath, ‘which must be a little
stronger in acid than before, testing by means of the effer-
Tescence of litho stone.


The second etch will take about ten minutes, the etching
tray being kept gently rocked all the time, the solution
being from time to time poured over it from a height,
using a cup for the purpose, so that the scale may be
washed away, and the fact of the presence, or otherwise of
sufficient acid determined, as when the solution is poured
upon the plate, the metal shows bright, which brightness
should, if the acid be sufficiently strong, quickly disappear,
but if not, the action is too slow, and the time given above
will be too short.
During the time the plate is in this bath, it must be very
closely watched, and removed at the slightest sign of under-
cutting, or if any of the grain should be attacked, which
however is not likely, so long as the acid is not too strong.
The second etch will have proceeded far enough as soon as.
the scratch in margin gives a grip to the finger nail, when
the plate is removed, washed under the tap, and the whole
of the resist, bitumen and all, removed with turpentine
and a small stiff brush, again well washed, and wiped
quite dry.
The plate as done so far will print, but the result will be
very flat and grey, so that to finish it, it will be necessary
to re-bite, this re-biting being carried on until the high lights-
have their true value, and the whole picture stands out bold
and vigorous, instead of flat and grey.
This re-biting is properly the work of an artist, and can
only be done successfully by some one who has some slight
skill in the use of the brush. '


CHAPTER V.
Re-biting Half-Tone Zinc Blocks.
"C'ROM the block, as left in the last chapter, a proof
should be pulled on an ordinary printing press, the
pull to be the guide in the re-biting operations, now to be
effected.
The inking slab must first of all be cleaned down with
turpentine and an old rag, a piece of hard etching ink
(Chapter IX., Part I.) is taken from the tin and mixed
with turpentine until about the consistency of soft soap,
using for the purpose a palette knife ; the glazed roller is
cleaned with turpentine and rag, then charged with the ink,
rolling it upon the slab until a fine even coat of ink is
obtained, the rolling being continued until the turpentine
has evaporated, leaving the ink on roller and slab dry
and hard.
The etched block is warmed on the hot plate until of
blood heat, when it is removed, sprinkled with turpentine
and well scrubbed with a stiff brush, the operation being
repeated until the whole of the ink is removed from the
metal, replaced upon hot plate, a piece of clean paper being
underneath it; and when again about blood heat, roll up
with the charged glazed roller, rolling gently and carefully
until all the image is covered with the ink, remove the zinc
from the hot plate to the bench, and continue the rolling
until the ink has set quite hard and dry to the touch;
examine the picture, and if the tops of the lines only have
been inked up, the plate is all right; but if the ink has


run down into any of the portions etched away, the plate
must be wanned up again, the ink removed with turpentine
and stiff brush, the rolling up being repeated. Novices
will find a great help in this operation if they first fill up
the etched lines of plate with whiting, afterwards wiping
all whiting from the surface, and polishing up the block
with the palm of the hand, the whiting being washed aw r ay,
and ithe plate dried after the inking up is done, and before
proceeding further.
The zinc being properly inked up, it is laid upon the
bench in a good light, the print from it being placed close
to it; the etcher will then proceed to paint over all those
portions of . the picture which are sufficiently dark enough,
leaving those open only which it is deemed necessary to
have lighter printed; a good sable brush (or brushes) must
be used, the stopping out being done with the hard
etching ink.
When the stopping has been done, carefully softening
any harsh outlines to such stopping out so that the effect
from half-tone to light is gradual instead of abrupt, the
plate is ready for the etching bath, the acid in which is
kept w r eak, as before, a fresh bath being used each time, so
, that the full effect of the acid is got, as cannot be the case
if the acid bath has been previously used. Rook the dish
gently, and watch very closely for about three minutes ;
then remove, wash, dry,-and remove the whole of the resist
with turpentine and stiff brush, wipe clean and pull another
proof, from which can he seen the improvement made, and
also the further improvement that can be effected, far better
than any further instructions.
This rebitiug is a very important portion of the process
of making these zinc blocks, and has no doubt given rise to


the theory of a discriminating grain put forward by some
writers, who, not being practically acquainted with the
work, have sought to build up an edifice of theory to hide
the fact.
One of the best specimens of this rebiting, which, whilst
being perfectly effective, still to the eye of the expert shows
the method quite plainly, is a block on the front page of the
Illustrated London JS'eivs for November 8, 1889, of Tippoo
Tib; the background aud turban, in which has been
re-bitten, making as fine a portrait block as has ever been
published.
From the above it will be seen that the process of making
halftone type blocks is not a very simple one, but requires
skill, care, and patience at each and every stage; nothing
must be hurried, nothing slurred, every operation must be
done with intelligence and method ; the instructions given
are as full as is possible upon paper, but there are lots of
little dodges which may be used, and which any student
will find himself practising, which are not, and cannot be,
mentioned here, because, although these dodges come up as
wanted, the deepest thinker cannot remember them after-
wards ; the memory of them vanishes as soon as the necessity
for their use has gone, to reappear as mysteriously when
next required.
Very fine halftone blocks should be made upon copper
instead of zinc, the whole of the operations being precisely
the same, but the best mordant to use is that commonly
called the Dutch mordant, composed of
Fuming Muriatic Acid (spg. 1,190) ... 10 parts.
Water 70 „
Add a boiling solution of Chlorate
Potash 2 ~
Water ... 20 „


This being diluted with 300 parts of water for use.
Trimming and Mounting the Etched Zinc.
When a large amount of work is turned out, a circular
saw is required to cut off the edges and trim up the zinc
previous to mounting; if only a block be done now and
then, a small hand saw will do the work.
When the edges are cut off, a good file must be used to
get rid of the burr left by the saw.
To mount a zinc type high, bay wood is usually used, being
procured in slabs, planed both sides, and about three quarters
of an inch thick, which, with the zinc plate (guage 17 or 18),
will make the combined height as near as possible type high,
any difference being below, which is better than being too
high ; a rough and ready method of ascertaining whether
the block is near right may be done by measuring with a
shilling, the diameter of which is about the height of type ;
if zinc of a lower guage be used, then the bay wood blocks
must be thinner.
A block of wood being cut to size and squared with a
shooting plane, the zinc is bored in any suitable place, the
etched out portions representing the whites of print, being
usually selected close to the edges, as well as in centre,
using a small hand drill for the purpose ; the zinc is then
fastened to the block with small wire nails, well punched
home ; when the block contains any very broad whites
likely to catch the inking rollers, the metal should be cut
out with a chisel after mounting, the wood being also
gouged out to give additional depth.
Half-tone blocks are a little more difficult to mount,
there being only the edges of zinc available, but if the


edges after trimming are bevilled outwards with the file,
there will be sufficient room to drill holes on the skew,
which will efficiently fix the metal to the block.
CHAPTER VI
Other Methods of Making Type Blocks.
SWELLED GELATINE PROCESS OF MAKING RELIEF
BLOCKS.
By this method, type blocks are made without etching,
the block being obtained from a wax mould, by the process
of electrotyping, the wax mould being made from a cast in
Plaster of Paris, from a bichromated gelatine film exposed to
light under a negative, then soaked in cold water, until
those portions representing the whites of original, have
absorbed water and swollen, the lines not swelling, on
account of the light having deprived them of the power of
absorbing water.
As in the etching methods, the first consideration is a
•suitable negative, in which the lines or original drawing, are
perfectly sharp, free from fog, or veil, the whites being
represented by perfect opacity. The gelatine films are pre-
pared as follows : —Pour ounces of Nelson’s amber gelatine
are soaked all night in 15 ounces of water, then melted in a
suitable vessel, a gas or parrafin stove being preferable to an
open coal fire, one ounce of sugar, and ten drops of a
saturated solution of chrome alum, are then added, stir well
until dissolved, strain through muslin, and it is ready for
coating the plates, which are first carefully cleaned, then
coated with plain enamel collodion and allowed to dry ; coat


with the gelatine solution, in the proportion of three ounces
to a plate 12 by 10; when coated, put the plate upon a level
slab until the film of gelatine has set quite firm, then place
on a rack to dry in a current of dry air; when dry, the
plates may be kept indefinitely. When required for use, the
films are sensitized by immersion in solution of : —■
Bichromate of Potash- 1 ounce.
Water .. 15 „
Methylated Spirits ... ... 5 „
Three minutes immersion are sufficient, this time the
plates must be dried in the dark room.
When dry, expose under negative until the image shows
through to the back, remove from the frame and immerse
in clean cold water, where it must remain until the whites
have absorbed all the water possible. Just how long
soaking is requisite will be a matter for practice ; if not
soaked sufficient, the relief will be too low ; if too long, the
tops of the lines will be rounded instead of flat; this, however,
would take 12 to 15 hours. On an average from
two to four hours will be sufficient; when sufficiently soaked
remove from the water, dab with a soft rag until surface
dry, and lay upon the bench ready for the plaster.
The plaster is prepared by pouring sufficient fine plaster
of Paris into a basin half full of clean water, stir until
thoroughly mixed, then pour upon the gelatine film, rub
gently with the finger over the film, so as to break and
disperse any air bells, sufficient plaster should be mixed to
make a cast at least half an inch thick, the back being
levelled with a palette knife; the plaster must not be mixed
too stiff, or it will set before it has time to get down into
the lines, and if too thin it will refuse to harden.


"When the plaster has set hard and dry, turn it over, trim
off the edges with a knife and gently force the plate away
from the cast, which should show the picture clean and
sharp and quite free from broken plaster.
To make the wax mould, the plaster cast is placed in a
deep porcelain dish, and water poured in until nearly level
with the top; the plaster will absorb water, and as soon as it
shows evenly moist all over the surface, remove from the
water and pour over it melted wax mixed with fine black lead,
and when set lift away from the plaster cast, trim and bevel
the edges; then proceed to build up the whites with wax
guiding the wax with conical tool heated, a stick of wax
being pressed against the hot tool; the melted wax runs
down the tool, and is readily guided just were wanted; when
finished the mould is ready for electrotpying, a process quite
outside the scope of this book, and with which the writer
has only a theroretical knowledge.
For half-tone blocks the gelatine films are sensitised in—
Bichromate of Potash 1 ounce.
Water ... 15 ounces.
Ferricyanide of Potash 240 grains.
Immerse for three minutes, then dry at a temperature of
120 degrees fahrenheit; expose under an ordinary half-tone
negative (rather thin) soaked in cold water until thoroughly
swollen, immerse in a bath of tannic acid one ounce,
methylated spirits 20 ounces, soak for five minutes, then
dab surface dry, then make the plaster cast, from this the
wax mould, and finally electrotype, no building up of whites
is required with half-tone blocks.
a


This method of producing phototype blocks is very
interesting as a process, but is of a very limited practical use,
in fact nothing can be done by it, that cannot be done
cheaper, better and quicker by the etching method ; for half-
tone blocks, it is quite useless, as there is no power of
compensating for the degradation of the whites caused by
the screen, as there is by stopping out, and rebiting, in the
etching method.
Wash-out Gelatine Peocess.
In the swelled gelatine process it is necessary to use a
gelatine of the very best quality, so that the unexposed
portion of the film may absorb the maximum quantity of
water, and so enhance the height of the relief, but in the
wash-out process we require to use a very poor quality of
. .gelatine, so that the setting power be easily destroyed by
prolonged boiling 'with ammonia and sodium carbonate or
hydrochloric acid. The process is as follows : —Three pounds
of glue are soaked in cold water until thoroughly soft, the
water being changed at frequent intervals, so as to remove
any soluble impurities, when quite soft, drain free frqm
water and put into a jar, place this in a pan of water, and
put on a slow fire, gradually raising the temperature to 200
deg. far., when the glue is melted add five ounces of ammonia
or one ounce of hydrochloric acid, then keep up the tempera-
ture of 200 degrees for three days or a week, until the setting
power of the glue is quite destroyed, when this stage has
been reached, add five ounces of treacle, ten ounces of water,
three ounces of bichromate of potassium in fine powder, mix
thoroughly, then strain through muslin, when it will be
ready to coat the plates prepared as below, clean glass plates
of a sufficient size with dilute nitric acid, rubbing and
washing well the coat with—


Gelatine 2 ounces.
Water ... 20 „
Bichromate of Potassium ... 30 grains,
melted and flooded over the wet plate, when coated stand
up to dry on a rack, and when dry expose for an hour or
two to strong light, so as to make thin film of gelatine
thoroughly insoluble, now place these plates on the levelling
screws of a drying box which can be heated to 80 or 90
deg. far., coat with the sensitive glue mixture, putting on as
much as possible without overflowing, and when all in the
box are coated, close the lid, and the films will be dry in
from three to six hours, be very careful of dust or air-bells
as they would quite spoil the surface ; when the plates are
dry expose under the negative, which must be quite opaque
in the black portions representing the whites in the original
and clear in the lines, the progress of the exposure can be
seen from the back, but with practice a time exposure can
be given, from five to thirty minutes in sunlight being-
required ; the longer the time, the deeper the relief. When
the exposure is complete, lay the plate in a dish of cold
water for ten minutes, then put it into an upright bath
containing water at 100 deg. far., when the development will
be complete in from two to six hours ; remove, wash under
tap and immerse for fifteen minutes in a strong solution of
alum, wash, remove surplus water, by dabbing with a soft
rag and at once pour over it plaster of paris, using the very
best and not at all thick, allow the plaster a couple of hours
to set, then lift the plate away carrying the gelatine image,
after the plaster is poured the back should be smoothed as
much as possible, from this cast, polished with plumbago, an
electrotype is made. If the film of gelatine be dried upon a
metal plate instead of. glass, instead of taking a cast, the
plate can be mounted upon wood, and printed from in the
press.
• g 2


ROMAN MENDICANT.
(Photo. Litho. from an original etching by an Italian Artist.)


PART III.
PHOTO-LITHOGMPHT IN LINE.




CHAPTER I.
Photo-Lithography in Line.
pHOTO-TRANSFERS have been made and used for
many years, but it is only very recently that, the
great advantage of a photo transfer, from the original
drawing, over a drawing put down direct, has been
generally recognised.
The majority of the best artists cannot make a good
drawing, which will look as well on the stone as it does
before transfer, one reason being that the prepared transfer
paper used is not so good to draw upon as a good drawing
paper ; then again, it is not always possible to make a good
drawing within exact limits, or with lines as fine and sharp,
as are looked upon as a sine qua non in lithographic work
of the present day; good drawings made upon white paper,
larger than the litho is required, may be photographed, and
a photo transfer supplied, which will be far superior to a
direct drawing upon stone, or transfer paper, having all the
sharpness of an engraving on the stone.
For colour work, where one design has to be produced in
a variety of sizes, photography renders material aid, a pull
in black from each colour stone, being photographed, and
transfers made the required size, so obtaining a whole series
in different sizes without the uncertainty and expense of
having to re-draw the whole series.


Whether the drawing is in line, dot, stipple, or chalk, is
quite an indifferent item, all being reproduced with equal
facility ; for the production of a photo transfer there are
two methods, the rigid and the flexible, the rigid method
being a direct photo print upon zinc, from which prints
may be made direct, or the zinc plate may be used us an
original, re-transfers being taken as required.
When the photo transfers are made upon zinc, a reversed
negative of the drawing will be required, and the transfer
printed, either in albumen or bitumen (Chapters Y., YI. and
YIL, Part I.), the operations of pulling the transfer being
then purely lithographic ; for lithographic transfers, say of
map work, where it is absolutely necessary to work to exact
size and scale, printing the transfer upon zinc is the only
plan ; the flexible method not being capable of rigid exact-
ness, as, in the manipulations the paper transfer has to
undergo, the paper stretches, and contracts, and scarcely
two different samples of paper stretch and contract alike;
for printing the photo transfer upon zinc, the thick metal
'used for type blocks is not necessary, thin plates being far
better; the zinc may he either smooth, or polished, or the
prepared plates, sold as substitutes for litho stones may be
used.
Flexible paper photo transfers are made upon paper
coated with gelatine, the resulting transfer being very little
different from the ordinary lithographic transfers.
For these transfers the photographic negative is taken
direct, i.e., without a mirror, and must ho perfectly sharp from
corner to corner, the lines forming the image being repre-
sented by apparently clear glass, without fog, or veil, or
stain, the whites of the original being as near opaque as
possible.


These negatives may he either by the wet collodion
process, or upon the special gelatine dry plates, (as treated
of in Chapters IT., 111. and IY., Part I.) ; the remarks in
Chapter I. about apparatus, dark rooms, &c., also apply to
photo lithography, cheap apparatus sold for outdoor work
being useless for this purpose.
Por exposing the paper to light under the negative,
strong printing frames, with thick plate glass fronts, stout.
backs, good clean soft padding, either felt, or blotting paper,
and screw pressure, are required, so as to get absolute con-
tact between negative and paper during exposure ; it is
false economy to have thin plate glass in front of these
frames, as it is so easily broken ; a sudden change of tem-
perature, such as takes place in carrying the frame inside
the room after exposure outside, being a frequent cause of
breakage.
Por inking up these transfers, the same rollers of glue
and treacle, as used in typographic printing, photo transfer
ink, palette knife and inking slab, (described in Chapters Y,
and YL, Part I.), are required, with the addition of a
board to hold the transfer in situ during the operation;
the board is here illustrated, and is made in two parts, hinged
together, the hinges being counter sunk, so that the
board can lie flat upon the bench ; at the extreme end of the
smaller piece of wood a thin strip is nailed, that when the
print is clipped, the board only touches the bench at the
extreme ends, so that the pressure of the roller causes the
paper to be held quite tight; instead of having the edges
of the two boards square, as in block, they are better
rabbeted, when the grip is much stronger ; this board should
have two or three coats of good bard white varnish, then
when inked it can be cleaned with turpentine.


Fig. 3.
Two zinc trays, 24 by 20 by 4, will be required for sensitiz-
ing the paper in, and subsequent soaking, prior to develop-
ment, also some good surgical lint, blotting paper, and a
drying closet, heated to about 70 or 80 degrees F. for
drying the sensitive paper in.
When transfers are required larger than the largest plate
capable of being exposed in the camera possessed by the
reader, two, three, four, or more negatives may be made,
each negative containing a different portion of the original,
with of course a little overlap for piecing purposes, but when
a job of this description is undertaken, once the camera is


focussed for the first negative, it must not he moved until
the whole series of negatives have been made, the drawing
being adjusted in position on the easel to marks made
previously, of course to make a success of this class of work
the apparatus, camera, and easel, must be solid, strong, and
true, or the result cannot- be a success.
In making transfers in sections, for subsequent piecing
together, either before transferring, or after printing, great
care must be taken to cut the paper all the same way of the
sheet before exposing to light under the negative, as all
paper stretches more one way than it does another; it is
obvious that it will be a difficult, if not impossible
task, to match two sections, one cut the long way of
the sheet and the other the narrow ; the same remarks
being pertinent to transfers for colour stones, and must be
rigidly adhered to, when the transfers are all small, cutting
all out of one sheet will much facilitate “ register ” in
printing.
Apropos of this, the following measurements of a sheet of
Photo-lif/ho paper are interesting, and will show at once the
importance of the above remarks.
Dry as received 23 1-16 by 17|
Dry after sensitizing, and drying
at 80 degrees F 23 by 17 5-16.
The transfer blotted, and ready
for drying 28£ by 17 11-16.
Transfer dried at 60 degrees
F. 22 15-16 by 17 3-16.
After being in damping book 23 1-8 by 17 5-16.
The transferring to stone of photo-litho transfers, differs
very little from ordinary transfers, the sojourn in the
damping book should not be longer than just necessary to
get the requisite grip, the stone must be evenly warm, pull


through the press steadily at least twice, before lifting the
tympan, damp the back thoroughly, then after two more
pulls thorough, the paper must be lifted away, leaving all
the ink upon the stone.
As a general rule it will be better to buy transfer ink
ready made, but here is a receipe for making it when so
preferred ;
Ohalk Printing Ink Litho 4 ounces.
Beeswax $ ounce.
Stearine ounce.
Resin ounce.
Melt the resin first, then add the wax, when melted, add
the stearine, then the ink a little at a time, stirring well
till all is melted ; the mixture may be made in a tin, on a
bunsen burner or stove.
Instead of using stearine, mutton fat may be used,
obtained by dropping solid kidney suet (mutton) into a pan
of boiling water, when cold the fat will bo on top of the
water in a solid cake, and requires laying upon a sheet of
blotting paper to get rid of water hanging to it, then it may
be weighed.
CHAPTER II.
pHOTO-LITHO TRANSFERS are printed upon paper,
coated first with gelatine, then with albumen, after-
wards sensitised in a solution of bichromate of potash. Full
directions will be given for the preparation of this paper
from beginning to end, but first of all, it is intended to give
instructions how to work a paper that can be purchased
ready prepared, only requiring sensitising to be ready for
use. This paper is manufactured by Professor Husnik, and


is sold by Winstone. By using this paper, beginners avoid
the risks of failure from unevenly coated paper, and from
the numerous causes of trouble only encountered by tyros ;
they also obtain a better idea as to what they have to aim at.
The paper as received must be kept quite dry and away
from foul air ; it is sensitised for use in a solution made as
follows :
Bichromate of Potash 1 ounce.
Water ... ... ... ... 16 ounces.
Methylated Spirits of Wine ... 5 ounces.
When the Bichromate is dissolved, add Liquor Ammonia
until the colour of the solution is changed from red to
a light yellow; be careful not to add a large excess of
Ammonia after the colour has undergone the change
indicated.
This solution is poured into a dish, and the paper is
drawn slowly through, face up, so as to avoid scraping the
bottom of dish ; the paper must not be allowed to remain
in the solution, but simply drawn slowly through, then it is
hung up at once to dry in a cupboard capable of being
heated to a temperature of 80 degrees F. ; this may be done
by having a sheet iron bottom to the cupboard, .under
which is a gas jet or a parrafin lamp, the bottom being
flanged downwards to the extent of six inches, and a pipe
in the flange close to the bottom of cupboard to carry off
the fumes from the products of combustion, which must
not be allowed to get access to the interior of cupboard.
The dimensions of the cupboard should be 30 inches high
by 22 inches deep, and 12 or 15 inches wide; then full
sheets of paper can be dried in it.
The paper when wet is pinned upon rods fitting into
slots 2 inches from the top; the top of box should have a
few augur holes in the top for ventilation.


The room in which the operations of sensitising’, drying,
inking up, &c., are conducted, must have the window
covered with one thickness of golden fabric, or of a good
yellow printing paper, or must be lighted by gas or paraffin ;
the transfer paper, though extremely sensitive to daylight,
is not affected by artificial light of the low actinic power of
gas, or paraffin light.
When the paper is dry, it should be rolled up and put in
a tin case, or in a portfolio interleaved with dry blotting
paper, and only sufficient for the day’s use should be
sensitised at a time, as it does not keep well in that state.
Before putting into the printing frame in contact with
the negative, it should be pulled through the press upon a
clean dry litho stone, or through a pair of rollers between
two smooth shalloon boards, so as to smooth it after drying;
it is then placed upon the negative, the padding put in, then
the back, and by means of the screws the paper is forced
into close contact with the negative.
Whenever practicable, the exposure to light should be
made to direct sunlight, when, from five to fifteen minutes
will be sufficient, the time of year and of day, also the
absence or otherwise of stain or veil on the lines, modifying
the time.
In a dull light the time will be considerably more, and
can only be learnt by experience.
The progress of the action of light can be seen by opening
a portion of. the back of frame, and examining part of the
print, hut extreme caution must be exercised in doing this,
as the paper is liable to expand or contract when the frame
is opened, and then, if not sufficiently exposed, the lines
will be blurred; when the exposure is sufficient, the image


is brown on a yellow ground, and the progress may, to a
great extent, be judged by the depth of the margin outside
the picture,
"When the print is exposed, the next operation will be to
ink it up, for which purpose it is placed upon the board
described in last Chapter (fig, 3); the board being placed
upon the bench, close to the inking slab, (a litho stone or
a board covered with a sheet of zinc), a little
photo transfer ink is mixed with turpentine by means of a
palette knife, a glue roller is then charged with the ink, and
the transfer is at once rolled up, the roller being used one
way only, i. <?., from top of board, and is continued until the
turpentine has evaporated, leaving a thin, even film of ink
upon the paper, through which the image can be seen
distinctly. Be very careful over the operation ; if the ink
is at all thick, and the image invisible, the transfer will be
no use. When the transfer is inked up, allow it to lie for
five minutes, then put into a dish of clean cold water, and
soak for ten or twenty minutes; put it face up on a smooth
slab, and rub over with a pad of wet lint, which will remove
most of the ink from the whites ; then put back into the
water (which should be changed) until the whole of the
bichromate is removed, when the whole of the loose ink is
cleaned away from the picture, leaving a replica of the
original in ink, with every line clear and distinct; rinse
with water, place between sheets of blotting paper, and pin
by the four corners to a board till dryT** v " s *
With ordinary care the above method is simple and
certain, the only chances of failure (providing of course
that a good negative is used), are, too little methylated
spirits of wine in the sensitising solution, too much
ammonia, or too long immersion therein, or drying the
paper at too low a temperature, or in the presence of foul


air, the remedies for which are obvious, the result being the
same in each case, viz,, refusal of the ink to leave the
whites. The bichromate must always be removed fromTEe
transfer, or trouble will arise during transfer.
To prepare the transfer paper at home, good hard sized
wove, not laid , writing paper is coated twice with a solution
of gelatine as follows :
Gelatine (Nelson’s Amber) 3 ounces.
Sugar | ounce.
Water 40 ounces.
Soak the gelatine in jar until quite soft, add the
sugar, and put the jar into a pan of cold water, place on a
gas, or parrafin stove, and raise the temperature very gradu-
ally until the gelatine is all dissolved, add 1 dram of a 20
grain solution of chrome alum, stir well, strain through
muslin into a clean dish, standing in a larger dish containing
hot water.
Eoll up the sheets of paper (not less than half-demy) face
out (and be sure it is face out) rather tightly, place the
loose end of sheet on the hot gelatine, and as it curls up,
release the roll, take hold of the end at each corner and lift
slowly from the gelatine, by which means the paper will
receive a nice even coating of gelatine ; directly the paper
is lifted free from the gelatine, at once reverse it, turning it
upside down and repeat this again and again until the
gelatine sets, then either pin the sheet up to dry, or throw
over a line.
When dry, another coat should be given in the same
manner, so as to quite ensure filling the pores of the paper
and getting rid of all paper texture.
When dry the second time, the paper must be calendered,
either by being pulled through a litho press in contact with


a smooth stone, or by being rolled between shallow boards,
in a rolling press.
Paper so prepared may be done in quantity as it improves
with age.
For use it is floated for 8 minutes upon —
White of ... ... 20 eggs.
Water ... 20 ounces.
Saturated Solution of Bichromate of
Ammonia . ... ... ... ... 10 ounces.
■Then dry in a drying bos at about 70 to 80 degrees
farenheit, after which it is used exactly as-directed for
Husnik’s paper in last chapter.
Instead of sensitizing upon the above solution, the paper
may be sensitised by immersion for three minutes in—
Bichromate of Potass 1 ounce.
Water ... ... ... ... 20 ounces,
and dried in the dark.
Expose under the negative, then immerse at once in
clean cold water until the bichromate is quite removed, place
upon the inking board (fig. 3), blot with a clean cloth,
then roll up with the glue roller charged with transfer ink,
thinned with turpentine, continuing the rolling until all the
lines have received a thin coat of ink, and the whites are
nearly if not quite clean, then a gentle rub with a wet pad
of clean lint will remove all ink from the whites, blot off,
then dry.
H


Another method of making transfers is to coat a good
smooth hard sized paper with —
Arrowroot (Bermuda) 4 ounces.
Bichromate Potash ounces.
Water 60 ounces.
moisten the arrowroot with cold water first, then add the
remainder of water boiling, in which the bichromate is
dissolved, stirr "well, then at once coat the paper and dry.
.Expose as usual under the negative, ink up dry, and
develops by immersion in water at a temperature of
100 degrees P., removing the surplus by means of a
pad of lint.


PART IV.
PHOTO-LITHOGRAPHY IN HALF-TONE.




CHAPTER I.
Photo-Lithography in Half-Tone.
J N Photo-Lithography in line, the transfer is made from
a drawing or engraving in line, dot, stipple, or chalk,
hut in Photo-Lithography in half-tone, an ordinary photo-
graphic negative from nature, or a washed drawing, may be
transferred to stone and worked either on a hand press or
upon machine, the requisite breaking up of the half-tones
(technically called grain) being effected during the process
of making the transfer, either by using a lined or stippled
screen in front of the sensitive plate, by impressing a dot or
stipple upon the sensitive transfer paper, previous to ex-
posure to light under the negative, or by exposure to light
under the negative of a film of bichromated gelatine,
supported upon paper or upon glass.
The first method of using a lined screen does not give
very fine results, the grain being apt to overpower the high
lights and flatten the picture ; the second method is some-
what similar, but the high lights may be worked in, and
very good results may be obtained, provided, of course,
that an artist finishes the transfer upon the stone; the
other two methods, both photographically and litho-
graphically, call for very high skill, care and patience, the
grain being obtained by drying the film of bichromated
gelatine at a high temperature, thus causing it to reticulate,'
which reticulation, by breaking up the smooth gradations
of photographic half-tone, enables the ink image to be
transferred to stone, and worked as a lithograph.


The purest form of Photo-Lithography is the collotype
process, which yields prints at press and machine, in much
the same way as lithographs are printed, the results vicing
in quality and brilliandy with the best solar photographs,
but unfortunately, collotype prints cannot be printed so
rapidly as lithographs; therefore, for many purposes, they
are too costly, hence the necessity of transferring to stone,
in order that the cost of printing may be less, and that with-
out in any way destroying the photographic character of the
picture.
As well as the methods indicated above for obtaining
half-tone transfers to stone from ordinary photographic
negatives, there are others which may be mentioned, and
which, for some purposes, may suit as well as the best; for
instance, a grained zinc plate, prepared with Bichroinated
Albumen (Chapter YL, Part I.), exposed under half-tone
negative, inked up and developed, will give transfers in
which the half-tones are broken up very nicely. An ordinary
collotype print can be transferred to a fine grained stone, or
the print from the collotype plate may be pulled upon
grained or stippled transfer paper, and then transferred to a
smooth stone.
In all of these processes of half-tone transfers, the first
thing to learn will be care and patience ; give each part of
the process its proper time, do not hurry it up, and then,
when failure ensues, blame the process ; more failures are
caused by over anxiety to get at final Insults, before the
proper time, than by anything else.
In the following Chapters various methods of producing
half-tone transfers will be given, but one method (and that
a very important one) will be found in the last Chapter of


the Collotype. It is not treated here in what may be called
its proper place, because it is practically a collotypic process,
the same apparatus, &c., being used, as will be treated of in
describing the collotype process.
CHAPTER II.
Grained Transfer Paper,
A perfectly smooth and well polished Lithographic stone
is grained with fine flour emery, (washed, and sifted
through fine muslin,) the mnller used being of glass (a piece
of plate glass will do).
To grain the stone, sift over it the flour emery, moisten
this thoroughly with water, then rub with the mnller round
and round in short circles, wash off and renew the emery
directly its tooth has gone, or the grain of the stone will be
too smooth; continue the graining until the whole of the
stone is evenly grained all over, then wash thoroughly and
allow to dry.
The stone should now be gone over with good hard
Lithographic chalk crayon, a rather tedious operation, but
a very necessary one; use the crayon with a light hand, so
that only the tops of the grain are touched.
The next operation will be to etch the stone with diluted
nitric acid, so as to destroy the saponaceous character of the
Lithographic crayon, and render it capable of withstanding
water. To etch the stone, place it on the sink, and take' a
solution of gum arabic, the thickness of linseed oil (50 parts),
nitric acid (one part), stir thoroughly so as to well mix the
acid with the gum, in this dip a broad camel’s hair brush


(not less than four inches wide), and brush over the stone
in rapid strokes, from left to right, and right to left, until
the stone is well covered, keeping the brush well charged
with gum ; then repeat the operation across these strokes,
wash well under the tap, gum up with a soft sponge charged
with plain gum, and allow to dry.
When the gum is quite dry, put the stone on the press,
and with a wet sponge moisten the gum thoroughly, wipe
with a damp soft rag, and roll up the stone with a Litho-
graphic roller charged with stiff transfer ink, damping and
wiping with the rag at intervals. A piece of the sensitive
Photo-Litho transfer paper (prepared for Line Photo-Litho,
see page 93,) is pulled through the press with the prepared
surface, in contact with the inked up grained stone ; the
paper upon removal will be covered with a fine stipple,
which will form the grain for breaking up the Photographic
half-tones ; the stone, when finished with, is gummed in,-
and when dry, put away till again required.
This operation of pulling through the press must be done
in a room illuminated by yellow light, or by gas, or oil light,
to avoid spoiling the sensitive paper.
The sensitive transfer paper is now exposed to light in
the printing frame, under an ordinary half-tone negative,
until the image is as distinct as possible through the
interstices of the ink.
The print is then put upon the inking board, and inked
up with a glue roller, charged with Photo-Litho transfer
ink, thinned with turps, until the whole sheet is covered
with a thin even film of ink, when it is put into a dish of
clean cold water, and allowed to soak for fifteen or twenty


minutes ; then it is placed upon a smooth slab, and gently
rubbed with a pad of wet lint, and the whole of the loose
ink is gently washed away; if the whole of the yellow
bichromate is now removed, the print may be blotted off
and pinned on a board to dry, but if not, it must be soaked
until free from the bichromate, then blotted off ; when dry,
the print is then ready to be transferred to a smooth stone,
after passing through the damping book as usual.
The negative used should be soft and not too brilliant;
if at all chalky, the result cannot be good, a thick over-
exposed negative being quite inadmissible.
Instead of working up the grained stone with the crayon.)
it may be inked up with a glazed roller and stiff ink, but
this will require plenty of care and an extra amount of
skill. When rolled up properly, etch, wash, and gum up as
before.
After impressing a sheet of the sensitised paper, the stone
must be damped and rolled up with ink before impressing
another sheet, and before putting away for any time, the
stone must be covered with gum, and the gum allowed
to dry.
When the transfer is oh the stone, the high lights must
be put in by scraping or polishing, taldng heed that outlines
are taken out with a gradually softening outline ; heavy
shadows may be painted in with a brush after etching, as if
done when gum is present the work will not stay.
If there be any difficulty in having the Litho press in a
dark room ( ie a room illuminated by yellow light, or by
gas, or oil), the paper in an insensitive state may be
impressed and sensitised afterwards.


CHAPTER III.
Husband’s Papyrotint Process.
/ jpHIS process has been named Papyrotint, being a
modification of Captain Abney’s improved method of
Photo-lithography, named Papyrotype. It is specially adapted
for the reproduction of subjects in half-tone, such as architec-
tural drawings in monochrome, or subjects from nature, and
it is inexpensive. Its advantages over other methods of
half-tone photo-lithography are, that a transfer can be
taken in greasy ink, for transfer to stone or zinc direct from
any negative, however large, without the aid of a medium,
the grain or reticulation being obtained simply by a chemical
change. The transfer paper being in direct contact with
the negative, the resulting prints are sharper than by those
processes where interposed media are used ; whilst the same
negative will answer either for a silver print, platinotype, or
a transfer for zinc or stone. The advantage of being able
to use a non-reversed negative is very great, now that gela-
tine plates have so largely superseded those made with
collodion.
The method of manipulation is as follows : a hard sized
writing paper is floated on a bath composed of—
Gelatine (Kelson’s flake) ... ... 8 ounces.
Glycerine X -
Chloride of Sodium (common salt) ... 2 „
Water 50 „


Great care should be taken that the solution is not over
heated, and that the paper is coated without bubbles. It is
then dried in a temperature of 90 F. degrees. The paper
will take about ten hours to dry, and in this state will keep
for years. "When required for use, it should.be sensitized by
floating, or immersing in a bath of—
Bichromate of Potash ... ... e . 1 ounce.
Chloride of Sodium i »
Ferricyanide of Potassium 100 grams.
Water 30 ounces.
This need not be done in a dark room as the solution is not
sensitive to light.
The paper, after sensitizing, is dried in a temperature of
70 degrees, and in a dark room. When dried it is exposed
under any half-tone negative, in the ordinary printing frame.
It is preferable to print in sunlight, and for negatives
of medium density, an exposure of three minutes is re~
.quired ; but the exposure will vary according to the density :
of the negative. The correct time of exposure can best be
judged by looking at the print in the frame. When the
image appears on the transfer paper of a dark fawn colour,
on a yellow ground, the transfer is sufficiently printed. It
is put into a bath of cold water for about ten minutes, until
the soluble gelatine has taken up its full quantity of water ;
then taken out. placed upon a flat piece of stone, glass, or
zinc plate, and the surface dried with blotting paper.
The action of the light has been to render the parts to
which it has penetrated through the negative, partly in-
soluble, and at the same time granulated. A hard transfer
ink is now used, composed of—
White virgin, wax ... ... ounce.
Stearine ... ... ... ~
Common resin ... ... i „


These are melted together in a crucible over a small gas jet
and to them are added 4 ounces of chalk printing ink, and
the mixture reduced to the consistency of cream with spirits
of turpentine. A soft sponge is saturated with this mixture
and rubbed gently over the exposed paper (in this stage the
nature of the grain can be best seen). An ordinary letter-
press roller, charged with a little ink from the inking slab,
is then passed over the transfer, causing the ink to adhere
firmly to the parts affected by the light, and removing it
from the parts unacted upon. It will be found that with
practice, rolling slowly and carefully as a letterpress printer
would his forme, the ink will be removed by the roller ac-
cording to the action that has taken place by light, leaving
the shadows fully charged with ink, and the high lights
almost clear, the result being a grained transfer in greasy
ink. The transfer is next put into a weak bath of tannin
and bichromate of potash for a few minutes, and when taken
out, the surplus solution should be carefully dried off
between clean sheets of blotting paper. The transfer is
hung up to dry, and when thoroughly dry, the whole of the
still sensitive surface should be exposed to light for about
two minutes. A weak solution of oxalic acid should be
used for damping the transfer (about 1 in 100), and this
should be applied to the back of the transfer with a soft
sponge. After it has been damped about four times, it
should be carefully put between clean sheets of blotting
paper, and the surplus moisture removed. A cold polished
stone is then set on the press, and after everything is ready
the transfer is placed on the stone and pulled through
twice. The stone or scraper is then reversed and the transfer
is again twice pulled through. A moderate pressure and
a hard backing sheet should be used, care being taken
not to increase the pressure after the first pull through. The


transfer is taken from the stone without damping, when it
will be found that the ink has left the paper clean. Gum
up the stone in the usual way, but if possible, let the trans-
fer remain a few hours before rolling up. Do not wash it
out with turpentine, and use middle varnish to thin down
the ink.
It should have been mentioned that varying degrees of
fineness of grain can be given to the transfer by adding a
little more ferricyanide of potassium in the sensitizing solu-
tion, and drying the transfer paper at a higher temperature,
or by heating the paper a little before exposure, or by adding
a little hot water to the cold water bath, after the trans-
fer has been fully exposed ; the higher the temperature of
the water, the coarser the grain will be. The finer grain
is best suited to negatives from Nature, when a considerable
amount of detail has to be shown. The coarse is best for
subjects in monochrome, or large negatives from Nature, of
architecture, &0., where the detail is not so small.


PART V.
COLLOGRAPHIC PRINTING.


Collotype Print, Waterlow & Sons Limited, London.




Collotype.
TN the processes of Photo-Zincography and, Photo-Litho,
graphy,- the original mnst be a drawing or engraving
in line, dot, or stipple, but in Collotype, negatives from
nature can be used, and prints made at press or machine in
ink, the smooth half-tones being represented in the same
degree of gradation as in an ordinary silver photograph.
Collotype prints are made from a thin film of bichromated
gelatine dried upon a plate of thick glass, exposed to light
under a negative from nature, the film of gelatine taking
ink from the roller exactly in proportion to the amount of
action of the light during such exposure.
Negatives for Collotype must be of the very best quality,
soft, without flatness, brilliant, without hardness, possessing
full gradations of tone from the deepest shadow to the
highest light; negatives that are hard and under-exposed,
or flat and dirty, are quite useless for Collotype,
Negatives for Collotype may be made either by the wet
collodion or by the gelatine dry plate process, the wet process
being best when film negatives are required, that being the
best form of negative for printing from upon the Collotype
plate, contact being so easily obtained between the whole of
the negative and the Collotype plate ; that not being the case
with negatives upon the ordinary dry plates of commerce,
they being as a rule far from flat, and either break in the
printing frame, or give a blurred image.
Negatives for Collotype must be reversed, and if made
with a reversing mirror behind the lens, either by the wet
or dry process, patent plate glass should be used to make
them upon, or may be made without the mirror, and then
I


stripped and (in the case of a wet collodion plate) made
into a flexible film, or, (if a dry plate) cakcn from its
original plate, and transferred to a sheet of patent plate
glass.
Negatives for Collotype that are too valuable to run the
risk of stripping must be reproduced ; a carbon trans-
parency being first made, the reversed negative being made
from this, by contact upon an ordinary dry plate.
If the gelatine dry process be used, the new celluloid
films will be found very good indeed, being flexible, contact
is easily obtained in the printing frame.
In the. Appendix both wet and dry process will be treated
of for the production of half-tone negatives for Collotype.
CHAPTER I.
Preparing the Collotype Plate.
TpOR the preparation of a collotype plate an •oven is
required, in which the plate of thick glass can bo dried
quite level and free from dust.
Here are dimensions of oven to dry two plates, each 15 x 12,
it is a rectangular box 30 inches long, 18 inches wide, and 18
inches deep, inside measure, supported upon four legs 18
inches high ; the bottom of the oven is of thin sheet iron
and from the bottom six inches downwards is a jacket of
sheet iron, thus forming a deep flange holding the beat from
the gas used for warming the oven, the source of heat being
simply U shaped, made of inch gas barrel with a smaller
supply pipe screwed into the base of (Jj bo be further con


nected with the gas supply by means of an india-rubber
tube, each arm of the (J should be 24 inches long, and 10
inches apart, each arm to be perforated with five small holes,
in each of which is fixed a Brays No 1 gas burner, same as
are in ordinary every day use for lighting purposes, do not
attempt to use an atmospheric burner of any kind, as it is
impossible to control the temperature with an atmospheric
burner, and also because they are very apt to fly back and
cause a fire.
This burner is supported under the oven bottom upon
a light iron stand, the top of the flames being about 2 or 3
inches below the sheet bottom.
On one side of the oven, one inch from the sheet iron
bottom, a slit one inch high is left, going the whole width of
the oven, and inside, some well washed silver sand is put
about one inch deep upon the sheet iron bottom, so as to
equalise the heat evenly all over; eight inches from top of
oven two strong cleats one inch wide are nailed one on each
end, to carry two iron bars, 30 inches long, 2 inches wide,
half an inch thick; one bar having four thumb screws each
four inches long (the point being tapered)' each six inches
apart, the other bar having two similar thumb screws only,
so arranged as to come in the centre between each two screws
on other bar, by this means each plate is supported upon
three screws, and is easily adjusted quite level. The top of
oven is a frame covered with red flannel, and raised from
the oven about half an inch, so that there is a free current
of air right through; in the centre of top, or lid of oven, a
long thermometer must be fixed, the bulb being nearly level
With the plates when upon the levelling screws, the scale being
outside, so that the temperature inside the oven may be
seen at a glance.
l 2


When gas cannot he obtained, parrafin lamps, or stoves
may be used, lamps being perhaps the best, being easier to
keep from smoking.
The plates upon which the collotype film is dried, is the
best British plate glass, at least three-eights of an inch thick,
the size being determined by the size of paper upon which the
the print is to be made, or by the size of the press to be used,
the best and most economical plan will be to have not more
than two sizes of plates in nse, the largest that can be used,
and 1 a medium size for general use, plates 13 by 10, and
15 by 12, will be very useful sizes.
The glass free from scratches is first of all ground upon
one side, which is done by laying one plate upon a couple of
bearers, placed across the sink, sprinkled with some fine emery
powder, and then with a little water, now place another plate
on top of emery powder, and grind with a circular motion,
continuing the grinding until the emery is worn pearly
smooth, now wash both plates, aquegee the water from plates,
and examine, and if the whole of the surface is evenly ground,
the plates are ready for the next stage, if not, cover again
with emery and water, and continue the grinding until the
surface of both plates are evenly ground all over, when only
patches are left unground, finish with a small piece of plate
glass and emery.
The plates being ground, they are well rinsed under the
tap, both sides well scrubbed with a stiff brush, washed free
from emery, &0., and allowed to get quite dry ; when quite
dry, lay on a clean sheet of paper, put on the surface a few
drops of—
Liquor Ammonia ... ... 2 ounces.
Spirits of Wine ... ... 2
Water ... ... ... 5 „


Eub this well all over with a piece of papier Joseph, and
then rub dry with another piece of the same paper. Good
clean rag quite free from grease may be used for this purpose,
but the papier Joseph will be the best,, cheapest, and more
certain. ,
The plate is next coated with—
Stale Beer ... ... ... 5 ounces.
Syruppy Silicate of Soda ... 1 ounce.
Mixed thoroughly, then filter, (this solution should be mixed
at least 12 hours before using,)when the plate is covered with
the above solution, it is drained slightly, then put in the oven
on the levelling screws, and dried at a temperature of from
120 to 140 Q F.' When dry the plates are removed from the
oven, allowed to cool, rinsed under the tap for one minute, and
dried on a rack spontaneously, in this condition the plates
will keep for any reasonable length of time.
CHAPTER II.
Sensitive Collotype Mixture.
The glass plate having received its preliminary coating,
which is to hold the sensitive gelatine film down upon the
plate during the printing operations, it is next placed in the
drying oven, carefully levelled and warmed to a temperature
of 110 degrees F., previous to being coated with a solution
of bichromated gelatine.
This sensitive gelatine is made as follows :
Stock Gelatine.
Gelatine ... 2 ounces.
Water ... ... ... ... 10 ounces.
Soak the gelatine till soft, then put in a “ Bain Marie ”


place on a gas stove, raise the temperature gradually, until
the (gelatine is all dissolved, then add half an ounce of
bichromate of potass in very fine powder, and stir until
dissolved, add ten drops of liquor ammonia, again stir well,
then let it stand until set.
When the plates are in the oven and ready for coating,
take of the above jelly one ounce, or about, and put into a
clean jar ; placing this jar into a pan of hot water, until the
jelly is melted ; when melted, pour into a warm measure and if
there are eight drams it is all right, if not add a little more jelly
to make up to the desired quantity, return the gelatine to
to the jar, and keep it hot until eight drams of pure, or
clean methylated spirit, have>been warmed in a beaker to the
same temperature, this is best done by placing beaker in the
hot water with the jar containing the gelatine, now add the
spirit to the gelatine, pouring it in very slowly, and stirring
the, mixture vigorously with a glass rod, until ‘all the spirit
is added, now add two drops of liquid ammonia, stir this
well in,'then strain through fine muslin into a warm clean
beaker, cover the top of this beaker with clean line muslin,
previously dipped in hot water, and proceed to coat the
plates warming up on the levelling screws, hold the
plate on the palm of the left hand, dust with a flat camel’s
hair brush, then pour over the plate, eight drams of the
mixture of gelatine and spirits of wine, flowing it all over the
surface, now pour about 2 drams of the solution off the
plate, leaving six drams only for a plate 13 by 10, that being
the size the above quantities are intended for, now place upon
the levelling screws as nearly in the same place as when
levelled, coat the other plate in the same manner, then close
the oven and leave till dry, ■which will take about 40 minutes
at a temperature of 110 degrees F.


The method given above must he carried out exactly as
given, if more than above quantity be left upon the plate the
prints will be mottled, the spirits of wine is very useful,
enabling the exposed portions, to hold ink with a minimum
of grain.
The temperature of oven during the time of drying the
sensitive film, will vary with different samples of gelatine,
some samples giving the best-results when dried at 98 or
100 degrees F., whilst others must be dried at 120 degrees
F., the temperature given, 110 degrees F., is a good medium
temperature.
Tn purchasing gelatine for collotype it is a great mistake
to get small quantities, as each sample has its own character-
istics, even when by the same maker some samples require
great modification in the formula, to get proper results,
and a small quantity would be exhausted just as its
peculiarities are ascertained, some gelatines require more than
the quantity of methylated spirit given above,, others must
have less.
The plates being dried, may be removed from the oven,
and when cold are ready for exposure to light under the
negative, or may be kept for seven or ten days before use if
stored in the dark and away from damp.
Previous to exposure, the negative must he masked with
strips of thin tinfoil, in such a way as to prevent any part
of the negative not required, showing in the finished print,;
the tinfoil used for this must he very thin, and may be
attached to the negative with india rubber solution. If a
a film negative be used, thin black, or any opaque paper
may be used.-


In addition to masking the negative, a brown paper
mask is used to further protect the margin of collotype
plate outside the negative, a very important measure, as if
not so protected great difficulty will be found in inking up
the image evenly, or in lifting up the mask without tearing.
The printing frame for collotype must have a plate
front, the hinged back is not needed, the bars may have
screws, or wedges may be used.
To fill in the frame, it is laid upon the bench, the bars are
removed, the front glass thoroughly cleaned, the brown paper
mask laid upon the glass, the negative put into its position,
the collotype plate placed upon the negative, centre the
image as near as possible, put in the bars, and either screw
or wedge up, if the negative is on glass great caution must
be used not to screw or wedge up too tightly, or the negative
will be broken, but film negatives stand greater pressure.
The exposure to light.should be made as a rule in diffused
light, and the time measured by means of a Johnson’s
acti no meter, from three to seven tints being the usual time
with good ordinary negatives.
The progress of the action of light, can be seen by turning
the frame over, and examining the image upon the collotype
plate, brown on a yellow ground, the exposure is fairly rapid?
in a good light with a clear negative will seldom exceed one
hour.
When the exposure is complete, the plate is removed from
the franiQ, and placed in a dish of clean cold water, the water-
being changed at intervals, until the whole of the bichromate
of potash is removed; the plate is then put on a rack to dry.
A wooden box with grooves like a plate box, with a tap at
bottom to let out the water, may be used for soaking the
plates in after exposure to light, and is recommended in
preference to a flat dish.


CHAPTER III.
Presses &c. for Collotype.
liP'or the production of prints from the collotype plate, a
press, a leather lithographic roller, a typographic roller
of 'glue and treacle, inking slab, - ink, thin lithographic
varnish, sponge, damping rag, mask frames, parchment paper,
gold size, and a good sample of paper upon which to pull the
proof are required.
The press used may be a typographic press of the form
called Albion, an ordinary Lithographic press, or a special
press made for collographic printing, of which there are
several in the market.
If an Albion press is used, the platen should be lowered so
that the requisite printing pressure can be obtained without
the use of an inordinate amount of backing. To use an
Albion prossja piece of thick plate glass is first put on the
bed with a sheet of white blotting paper underneath, upon
this sheet of glass is placed another sheet of wet blotting
paper, the collotype plate being placed upon this, the wet
blotting paper holding the plate firm, and forming a couch
for the collotype plate.
To use a Lithographic press, a smooth stone quite level is
all that is requisite, the collotype plate being bedded upon a
sheet of wet blotting paper; the tympan must be of metal,
either thin brass or zinc, and fixed only at the back of
tympan frame so as to avoid any danger from the buckling
of the tympan under pressure, a piece of thin blanket being
fixed on tympan frame in front of metal tympan. The


scraper must be shod with leather, and must be at least an
inch shorter than the width of plate to be printed from.
The presses made specially for collotype printing, are
fitted so that the plate is laid upon the bed of press, with a
sheet of blotting paper underneath so that the progress of
the inking up can be seen, the plate being kept in position
by means of clamps, the pressure being in some presses a
scraper, in others a roller.
Whichever form of press be used, the operation of
printing from the plate will be just the same so that each
operator can adopt that press which is handiest to him.
To obtain clean margins in a collotype print the plate
must be masked, as it is impossible to get a clean margin
without doing so.
There are various methods of masking, but the best way is
to use an iron frame, made to fit over the collotype plate,
this frame- being covered with a sheet of thin parchment
paper, the edges of paper being gummed or pasted
round the iron frame, the paper wetted, ami when dry
it will be like a drum head, a coat of gold size painted upon
the underside of parchment paper will, when dry, give a mask
that with care will last a 1000 impressions. For a plate
13 by 10, the mask frame should be made of quarter inch
iron rod, inside measurement of frame being 18. - by 10 ], the
inside corners to be square, the outside comers, either round
or square, at least three of these frames should he provided
for each press, so that in case of an accident to the mask,
another one can be got ready in a few minutes, instead of
delaying the work till the pasted paper and gold size are dry.
The rollers are very important and must be of the very
&st, the leather roller which is used first, must be a best


French slcin, of the quality known to lithographers as a nap
or chalk roller, i.e., the grain of leather must be outside.
A new roller must be properly prepared before use, and that
will take from three to six weeks to accomplish, and when in
good order it must be very carefully kept. Full directions
upon the preparation and care of rollers will be given in a
special chapter. The beginner is strongly advised to buy his
first roller ready for use. which can be done at an advance of
about B/6 or 5/- upon the list price of a new roller. The
best sixes of rollers are 10 inches and 12 inches long. With
the rollers a pair of leather handles are requisite.
The second roller may also be of leather, but in this case a
different kind of roller is required, viz : a colour roller in
which the grain of leather is outside, these rollers require no
preparation, beyond being kept clean, and free from ink
when not in use.
The general form of second roller however, is a typographic
roller of glue and treacle cast in seamless mould, and may be
purchased from any Lithographic or Letterpress dealer.
The inking slabs (two) may be thin lithographic stones,
or sheets of zinc screwed upon wood blocks, the size of these
slabs should be at least 18 inches by 15 inches, so as to
have plenty of room for rolling up the ink.
The ink must be the best quality lithographic ink, the
black ink being known as best chalk ink; for making coloured
inks, brown, sepia, red, and blue, are mixed in various
proportions, to get the effect desired.
The ink as received is far too stiff to use and will require
diluting with thin lithographic varnish, the ink and varnish
being mixed either with a stone muller, or a strong
palette knife.


The paper upon which the collotype prints are made must
be of the best quality, with a smooth surface, a good enamel
paper giving the richest prints, closely folio wed by Dickinson’s
Art Printing Paper, or a good plate paper.
CHAPTER IV.
Printing from the Collotype Plate.
'‘TO prepare the collotype plate for the press it is first
soaked in cold water for an hour, the hack is then cleaned
■from any clots of gelatine that may have flowed over the
edges during coating, the plate is then wiped with a soft
sponge and dabbed with a damp soft rag, placed upon a
levelling stand, and the surface covered with the so called
etcher composed of—
Glycerine ... ... ... 5 ounces.
Water ... ... ... 10 ounces.
Oxgall ... ... ... 10 drops.
This is allowed to act for half an hour, during which time
the press must be prepared, the nap roller scraped, the ink
mixed, the second roller washed with turpentine, the slabs
cleaned down with turpentine and a rag, and the printing
paper cut to size; the mask frame should have been covered
some time previously, and the gold size be quite dry.
All being ready the glycerine mixture is removed from the
plate with a sponge, the plate placed upon the bed of press, the
film dabbed with a soft cloth until the surface is dry, it is then
rolled up with the leather roller, slowly and with plenty of
pressure, when if all operations previously have been carefully
attended to, the shadows will first take ink, followed by the


middle half-tones, the rolling being continued slowly and
carefully until the picture is evenly inked with perhaps more
than the proper proportion of ink upon the shadows, and little
or none upon the high lights ; now take the second roller
charged with ink a little thinner, (i.e. mixed with more thin
varnish) and roll over the plate using a quicker motion, and
less pressure, the result of which will be, that the surplus ink
upon the shadows will be removed, and the lights will receive
their due proportion, the image being more harmonious
throughout, A mask is now laid over the plate in such a
manner that the iron frame encircles the plate, the top being
flush with the surface of plate, the image can be seen through
the goldsized parchment paper, and a slight pressure of the-
finger upon the margin of print, will leave an impression of
the picture upon the mask, which is now lifted away. Now
roll up the picture again, first using the leather roller, then
the second roller as before.
The mask is now placed upon a spare sheet of glass in the
same position that it occupied upon the inked up plate, and
after carefully measuring the mask upon the surface, two
lines at right angles to each other, by which the paper must
be laid so as to get the collotype image in its proper position
upon the sheet of paper to be used. This being done, the
paper upon which the image is impressed is cut away, using
a straight edge and a sharp knife to get a good edge, and
cutting the aperture about a sixteenth of an inch larger all
round than the actual size of picture, so that the mask will
not cut into the margin too close up to the picture.
The mask is now placed over the inked up plate, and the
opening will show the image, whilst the margin of plate will
be covered by the parchment paper between the opening and
the frame.


Lay the printing paper upon the mask, putting the edges
against the lines marked for the lay, upon the printing paper
put a sheet or two of Wotting paper, lower the tyrnpan,. ran
the bed of the press under the platen, scraper, or roller, then
carefully feel for the amount of pressure and if correct pull
through, then return the bed, lift the tympan, remove the
print and examine, if the ink has come away in patches the
pressure has been too light, and more must be given for the
next impression, a heavy pressure must not be used, or the
plate will be sure to smash.
Should the print be very weak and flat, the ink is perhaps
too thin, and must be mixed with fresh ink from the tin.
Ink for collotype printing must have very little varnish with
it, in fact only just sufficient to allow the ink to be spread
upon the roller.
If the film has not been sufficiently soaked, the picture will
also be flat, but in this case the margin will take as much ink
as the shadows, in this case sprinkle a little turpentine over
the plate, then deluge with water and wipe clean with a soft
rag, cover the film with the etching solution of glycerine and
water, and allow from half an hour to an hour to soak in,
then wipe off and ink up again, do not waste the glycerine
solution as it improves with use.
Sometimes after long -etching and with very stiff ink,
the image remains without high lights, in this case wash out
with turpentine as before, wipe surface dry, then wash over
quickly with—
Glycerine ... ... ... 5 ounces.
Water ’ ... ... ... 20 ounces.
Cyanide of potassium ... ... 10 grains.
And as quickly wash off with a sponge saturated with water.


After a drastic course of this kind the plate may refuse to
take ink at all, in which case remove from the press, and let
the film dry again,' then etch- for half an .hour, and ink
up. The cause of this refusal is simply on account of the
cyanide having softened the gelatine, the film has absorbed
too much water, and consequently it cannot take ink, the
drying down gets rid of the water, and restores the film to
its normal state.
When any particular portions of the picture are wanted
lighter than the rest, the plate should be wiped dry, and
those portions painted over with the etcher, leaving it to
soak in, for say fifteen minutes, then cover the whole film
for ten minutes, wipe dry and roll up.
After each print is made, the mask is removed, the plate
damped with the etching solution, by means of a sponge, then
■wiped or dabbed off with a soft damp rag, before again
inldng up.
Different tints’of ink can be made by mixing several colours
together, but it will be far better to buy the tints from the
dealers, as it will then be mixed so much better than can be
done by hand.
These preliminary stages of a collotype jplate are very
important, as if not properly carried out the subsequent
operations will only be lost time, the old films must be
thoroughly removed and the surface well re-ground, the
silicate of soda and beer must be well filtered and sufficiently
stale before use ; if the mixture of beer and silicate after
standing a few hours (after mixing) precipitates in a
flocculent mass, the silicate is not good, and a fresh sample
should he obtained; the beer and silicate should be kept
at least six hours before using.


Instead of beer albumen may be used, the whites of five
eggs, mixed with ten ounces of water, well beaten up, then
add two ounces of silicate of soda, and keep six hours
before use.
The plan of using a substratum of bichromated albumen,
or gelatine, is not recommended as it is troublesome and
tedious, and demands the use of a tank of hot water in which
to soak the plate before coating with the sensitive gelatine
solution, else the collotype film will peel off under the roller.
CHAPTER V.
Printing Collotype Plates upon a Litho. Machine.
TWT AOHINES for collotype printing differ from lithographic
in the fact that they are supplied with a
double set of inking rollers, one set (of glue and treacle) in
front of the cylinder, the other set (of leather) being behind
the cylinder, upon the cylinder there is also a semi-circular
skeleton frame for masking the margins of the collotype
print, an arrangement not required in lithographic printing;
the coffin of the lithographic machine must also be filled up
to compensate for the difference between the thickness of a
lithographic stone (about 2$ inches) and the collotype plate
(| of an inch) this is best done by using the bed-plate
supplied by most makers for fixing zinc plates for printing
from upon the machine, and this being easily procurable we
need not trouble much about it.
The extra set of rollers and the mask are the most difficult
to manage, but almost any machinist will be able to convert a
litho machine into one capable of printing impressions from
the collotype plate.


What is required then is, beyond the holders for the two
damping rollers behind the cylinder, a set of holders must be
fixed for four printing rollers, exactly as for the rollers in
front of the cylinder, and beyond these again, holders for
distributing ink upon the damping table (replaced by a
marble slab.) The whole of these holders must be made the
proper depth to allow of riders, and fitted with springs so
that the rollers may be lifted from the plate directly the
image has passed, this lifting being effected at the proper
place by moveable inclined planes upon the frame work of
machine.
The mask is fixed on pivots, the holes for which are bored
in collar of cylinder, a thumb-piece projecting at the top'for
the feeder to lift clear of the cylinder when it returns after
the impression, this mask frame is fitted with four strips of
lateen brass arranged so that they can be moved laterally so
as to form an opening in the centre the size required, for one
plate perhaps large, the next one much smaller ; the feed-
board will require cutting away a little so as to allow this
mask-frame to get under the board as the cylinder comes
round.
Another method of arranging the mask is to do without
the frame, and to have an arrangement under the grippers to
clamp a sheet of varnished paper, much simpler and quite as
effective as the semi-circular frame.
In printing from the collotype plate the ink duct on the
machine is not required, as the ink is usually used so strong
and in such small quantities, comparatively, that the feeding
of the riders is quite sufficient.
Collotype prints cannot be made at the same speed as
lithographs, viz. from 500 to 800 an hour, 200 an hour will
be found very good work, therefore the driving-shaft will
J


require altering and a smaller pulley used; the inking of a
collotype plate takes longer than a litho stone, so the feeder
will require to use his lever and give extra inking runs, unless
the machine be fitted with change gear allowing of inking
runs, 2, 3 or 4 times, between each impression.
To a lithographic machineman collotype printing will
present a curious topsy-turvydom, as the leather rollers which
do the inking of the block are placed at the other end of the
machine to which he is in the habit of working them, and
the rollers in front of the cylinder require so little ink and
so little attention, that it will he some little time before he
can get quite reconciled to the changes.
There being no possible means of automatic damping, as
in litho printing, the collotype plate must be damped (or
etched, as it is erroneously called) with glycerine, more or
less diluted with water, so as to check evaporation and also
absorption by the paper, a well damped plate will run from
80 to 100 impressions before the operation of damping will
require repeating. When the plate requires re-damping the
machine is stopped, and the plate covered with the glycerine
and water to which is added ox-gall, common salt or
ammonia, each printer having his pet formula, the fluid is
allowed to soak into the film for four or five minutes, then it
is removed with a sponge, and the plate dabbed free from
moisture.
The image should not be printed in the centre of the glass
plate, but at about an inch or an inch and a half from the
edge, so that the grippers holding the paper may clear the
plate without striking it.
The cylinder covering should be a sheet of india-rubber,
under which is placed a piece of thick smooth paper a trifle
smaller in area than the picture to be printed, this paper


being placed exactly over the image by means of an imp-
ression sheet taken beforehand ; by having this arrangement
no portion of the margin receives any pressure, by which
means cutting the film by the edges of the mask is avoided,
and many more impressions may be obtained from each
plate than would be possible if the whole plate was impressed,
and the mask gradually cut its way into the film.




CHAPTER VI.
Photo-Lithographic Transfers from
Collotype Plates.
''T'O make half-tone photo-litho transfers from collotype
plates, the glass plates are ground, cleaned, and-coated,
with the mixture of silicate of soda and beer, then coated with
the sensitive gelatine mixture (made a little' thicker, and
mixed with ferricyanide of potassium, etc.,) exactly as for
ordinary collotype plates.
The formula for the jelly is—
Gelatine (Nelson’s Amber) ... 2 ounces.
"Water ... ... ... 8 ~
Soak the gelatine till quite soft, then melt by placing in a
jar, putting this jar into a pan of water, commence with the
water cold and raise the temperature gradually, when the
gelatine is all dissolved add half an ounce of bichromate of
potash in a fine powder, and stir until dissolved, then allow
to cool and form a stiff jelly.
. For two plates each 15 by 12, sufficient of the above jelly
to make two ounces of solution (say ounces by weight of
jelly), is melted in a clean jar, the jar being put into a pan
containing hot water, whilst the jelly is dissolving, warm two
ounces of methylated spirits of wine in a beaker (put the beaker
into hot water) add 10 drops of a saturated solution of ferri-
cyanide of potassium, and two drops of glycerine, mix, and
when warm add slowly to the gelatine stirring vigorously all
the time. If the spirit be added too rapidly, and without
the vigorous stirring, the gelatine will be coagulated and the
mixture spoilt, add the spirit very slowly and stir vigorously
during the operation, then the gelatine mixture will be clear
hnd limpid without any coagulation at all.


The plates already coated with the substratum of beer and
silicate of soda, dried, rinsed and again dried, are warmed
slightly in the oven and levelled, the gelatine solution is now
filtered through two thicknesses of fine muslin into a warm
glass measure, a piece of fine muslin is tied over the mouth of
measure, the plates are then coated, each plate being allowed
twelve fluid drams of the mixture, the plate being returned
to the oven and placed carefully upon the levelling screens,
and dried at a, temperature of 150° F.
When dry the plates are exposed under a thin half-tone
negative (reversed), the margin of plate outside the negative
being masked with thick brown paper. If this is not done
it will be almost impossible to get the image properly rolled
up. The exposure must be thorough so as to get detail in all
parts of the picture, when removed from the printing frame
the plate is washed in frequent changes of water until the
whole of the bichromate is removed, when it is put on a rack
to dry.
When dry the plate is soaked in clean cold water for from
3 to 5 hours, after which clean the back and put the plate
upon the press, then roll up with a leather roller charged
with transfer ink, and pull a few impressions upon any good
printing paper, until the plate is got into good working order,
then pull an impression upon coarse Scotch transfer paper, or
upon Josz’s chalk paper, after which transfer to a well polished
stone, and work exactly as an ordinary chalk stone. Do not
be in a hurry to ink up, and prove after transfer, but gum in,
and allow to stand at least twenty-four hours.
Scotch paper suitable for these tranfers,is made as follows
Four ounces of coarse plaster of Paris is put into a quart
basin with sufficient water to cover it, stir with a spoon until
the plaster thickens, now add a little more water, and stir well


until the plaster again thickens, more water is added, and the
stirring continued, until the tendency of the plaster, to set is
quite overcome, an operation that will occupy from twenty to
thirty minutes. Dissolve a quarter of an ounce of glue in
ten ounces of water, and with this moisten three ounces
of flour, then put on the fire until it boils, and turns into a
thick paste; mis this paste with the plaster, stirring well until
the two are thoroughly mixed, then strain through canvas so
as to get rid of lumps.
Good ordinary printing paper is coated with the above
composition, by having it brushed over with a broad stiff
brush, brushing first one way and then the other until an
even coat of the composition is put on the paper, free from
lumps, or streaks. When this is done the paper is hung on a
line to dry; and before using to take a transfer impression
from the collotype plate, it is placed in a damping book until
just limp, but not sticky to the touch.


APPENDIX.


APPENDIX.
The Nitrate of Silver Bath.
T N the ancient days of Photography, when, to say it was
**■ possible to prepare a dry plate nearly as sensitive as wet
collodion, was to excite the risible faculties of the audience,
the above heading might almost always be seen in the
Journals, and the amount of matter written under that
heading would fill a many good sized volumes, some writers
going into the subject in a very elaborate manner, whilst
others would counsel very simple methods of preparation
and management.
The directions given in Chapter 11. for making a bath
solution for line negatives, will, if carried out carefully and
cleanly, at once yield a solution giving good negatives.
After the bath has been mixed, either with distilled water,
ordinary tap water (in iron districts tap water should not he
used), or water that has been sunned and filtered (page 9),
as soon as the bulk has been made up to the 80 ounces, the
solution should be put away all night before it is tried, then
in the morning filter it carefully through a pledget of
cotton wool stuffed loosely in the neck of a perfectly clean
funnel, into a perfectly clean bottle, or jug, which must be
kept entirely for use of the silver solution. When the bath
solution has been filtered it should be perfectly clear , if it is
at all cloudy or turbid, the Alteration must be repeated.
When the solution is perfectly clear and bright, pour
sufficient into a perfectly clean porcelain, glass, or papier-
mache dish, then take a clean plate (polished, or albumenised)


and coat with collodion, then close the door of the dark
room, and when the film of collodion is perfectly set, raise
one end of the dish containing the silver solution, place one
edge of collodionised plate against the bottom of the upper
edge of the dish, then drop the plate upon the bottom of the
dish, and at the same time lower the dish, by which means
the silver solution will flow in an even wave over the
surface of the collodionised plate ; now place the cover on
the dish so as to exclude light and dust, and allow the plate
to remain in the solution for five minutes, then with a silver
hook lift the plate from the solution, and allow to drain
(remember that no light must get into the dark room except
what" is filtered through either two thicknesses of golden
fabric, or one of canary medium), when the plate has drained
so that no solution drips from the plate, place it into the
carrier of dark slide, then close the dark slide and let it
remain there for five minutes, at the end of which time
remove the plate to the sink, and flood with sufficient
developer (page 8,) to just cover the film ; keep this solution
flowing to and fro over the plate for the space of two
minutes, wash under the tap until the surface is no longer
greasy, then apply the fixing or clearing solution (page 13),
until the whole of the yellow bromo-iodide is dissolved away,
again wash, and take the plate into the daylight.
Now comes the test; if the film is perfectly transparent,
the bath is all right, but if there is the slightest deposit
(which can be removed by lightly rubbing the finger along
the surface of film), then the solution will require the
addition of a little Nitric Acid, well stirring up, and after a
rest of an hour or two trying again, repeating the addition
of the Nitric Acid, and trying the plate until the film after
developing, washing, and fixing is perfectly clear, and free
from deposit and fog.


The bath is now in proper working order, and, if reinforced
after each day’s work, with a sufficient quantity of saturated
solution of nitrate of silver (filtered); and kept free from any
contamination with other chemicals, and carefully filtered
occasionally, the bath will remain in good working order
for at least six months, and then may be renewed by treat-
ing as directed in top paragraph on page 11.
It will sometimes happen, notwithstanding that extreme
care and cleanliness is exercised in the management of the
bath, still it will not work properly, and the reason why
cannot easily be discovered, in. such a case, steps must be
taken to put the solution into working order.
In the case of rectifying a disordered bath, there are many
methods of procedure, but the simplest, and as a rule the most
certain method, is to render the solution alkaline, by the
addition of Liquor Ammonia, adding the ammonia a little
at a time, then after well shaking, testing with red litmus
paper, continuing the addition of the ammonia, until the red
litmus paper is turned blue. In this alkaline condition the
solution should be poured into a large flat dish, and exposed
to the action of the sun, which will speedily reduce and
throw down in the form of a black precipitate, any organic
matter that may be in. the bath, and at the same time the
heat of the sun will cause the evaporation of the ether and
alcohol left in the solution by the collodion plates.
The bath solution should be left in the sun for two or
three days, or until such time as suffices to reader the
solution clear, and the precipitate entirely separated out, but
this cannot take place unless the solution is decidedly
alkaline, the presence of acid stopping the action of light.


Do not be in-a hurry about doctoring a bath solution (in
fact it will be far the best to have two solutions, one in use
and one either resting or being doctored), but give the light
plenty of time to reduce the organic matter, and also to
volatilise the ether and alcohol, then filter the solution
through a filtering paper (don’t use blotting paper), as if it
is attempted to filter through a pledget of cotton wool, the
fine precipitate of organic matter quickly clogs the wool and
stops the filtering.
The doctored solution being filtered, test it with a piece
of perfectly fresh, blue litmus paper, and add nitric acid,
drop by drop —shaking well between each addition of acid
—until the blue litmus paper just turns red, do not add
acid sufficient to make the litmus turn violently red, unless
the bath is for line negatives, as a bath for half-tone,,.
negatives must be only jpst acid, whereas a bath for
must contain more acid.
The colour of the litmus paper showing that the alkali
has been neutralised, a plate is collodionised, then immersed
in the bath for five minutes, then drained, and placed in
dark slide, or a dark box for five minutes, then flooded with
the iron developer (page 12), and if upon the application of
this the film should turn black, add more nitric acid, stir up
thoroughly, then try again, repeating the trials until upon
fixing the plate with the solution of cyanide of potassium,
the film of collodion is left upon the glass plate, as clear as
it was before immersion in the silver bath, • ‘
A little above here it is stated that for half-tone negatives
less nitric acid is required in the bach for half-tone negatives
than for line work, and the question may well be asked
where may the line be drawn, the reply to which is, for
half-tone work, a piece of blue litmus paper should, upon


immersion into the solution turn red very slowly, but when
the hath is required for line negatives, the blue litmus should
at once indicate the presence of acid.
After a bath solution has been renovated in the above
manner it should be tested for strength, either by the volu-
metric method (by preference), or by means of the ordinary
argentometer sold by the dealers, and if, after testing, the
strength is shown to be too great, dilute with a sufficiency of
sunned water (page ll); and if not sufficiently strong, add
crystals of nitrate of silver to make up the strength to thirty
or thirty-five grains per ounce.
A bath solution renovated as above, will generally be found
to work cleaner, and yield brighter negatives than a new
solution, and it will also, if carefully used, last longer, but
it must be kept up to a proper working strength by the
occasional addition of a little of a saturated solution of
nitrate of silver.
The fact that the strength of the silver solution has got
too low is shown by the presence of semi-opaque, fantastic
markings near the thick edge of the collodion film, and also
in conj unction with the presence of organic matter in the
deposition upon the surface of film, of an extremely fine
sand-like deposit, which in the fixed negative, developes into
myriads of pinholes in the densest portions of the image.
For half-tone negatives, instead of fixing or clearing with
the Cyanide of Potassium, directly the developer is washed
off, and then intensifying afterwards, they are intensified at
once by the application of a mixture of pyrogallic acid, citric
acid, and nitrate of silver, as follows :• —
No. 1 Solution Pyrogallic Acid ... 40 grains.
Citric Acid 30 grains.
Water 20 ounces.


as much of this solution as will cover the washed plate is put
into a small Cap and flowed all over the film, then returned
to the cup, and a few drops of
Nitrate of Silver ... 30 grains.
Water 1 ounce,
is added, then the mixture is poured over the film, and
rooked to and fro for a short time, the intensifier is then
returned to the cup, the negative held up to the light, and
examined, and if not intense enough, the intensifier is again
applied ; great care is requisite at this stage, as if the pro-
cess he carried on too far, the negative will be too intense,
and will either be spoilt, or take an abnormal time to print;
practice and observation will be the only guides to success,
the grand rules for half-tone negatives are, collodion free
from dust, the glass plate clean, the bath at its full strength,
.and in good working order, proper time allowed the plate
in the sensitising bath, well drained, afterwards a good
exposure, develope until all details are out, then wash
thoroughly, intensify with judgment, wash well, fix, and again
well wash, and then, but never till then, open the dark room
door and examine your new negative by daylight.
In making the collodion, soak the cellodoin in the Ether
for about 12 hours before adding the spirits of wine, be sure
the Ether is at least *725 degrees specific gravity, and that
the Methylated Spirit is clean and free from gum. After
mixing the collodion and iodiser, shake up well, but do not
shake up after decanting, always decant sufficient for next
day’s use, into the bottle used for pouring, over night, so that
it gets a chance to settle, and for air bubbles to get out.
Keep collodion in as cool a place as possible, and in decant-
ing it, be very careful to do it away from fire, or lighted gas
or paraffin, especially where the flame is below the bottle, as
ether vapour does not rise, but falls.


RULED ELATES FOR MAKING SCREEN RELATIVES.




In hot weather and during long exposures, wet plates are
very prone to have a peculiar stain upon them, called oyster
shell markings, the remedies for which are careful draining
before putting into slide, and covering the bottom of carrier
with clean filtering paper, so that the silver solution on
draining down is absorbed by the bibulous paper instead of
going back up the plate by capilliary attraction.
In hot weather the back of plate, when put into dark slide
should be covered with a wet piece of red blotting paper, or
orange calico, hut not white ; a wet cloth laid in the camera
will also tend to keep the plate moist, these precautions how-
ever are not required unless the exposure is likely to exceed
a quarter of an hour.
Stripping Collodion Films.
Negatives made by the wet collodion process, can easily
be stripped from the glass support, and in such a condition
are extremely handy, especially for printing on Oollographio
plates, or on zinc, or copper, as the film being flexible,
contact is more easily secured.
When it is intended to strip the film, the glass plate must
be polished, not albumenised, and after the negative is dried,
strips of thick paper are pasted along the four sides of the
negative, with starch, or a solution of gum trajacanth ; the
negative is then placed on a levelling stand and a sufficient
quantity of the following warm solution of gelatine is formed
upon the plate (which should be slightly warmed first) and
spread all over by means of a glass rod.
Gelatine ounces.
Sugar ounces.
Water 20 ounces.
K


Soak the gelatine in water until soft, then melt by gentle
heat, then strain through two or three thicknesses of fine
muslin, and pour upon the plate, using three ounces for a
plate 12 by 10, more or less, in proportion for different sizes.
The plate must be allowed to stay upon the levelling stand
until the gelatine has quite set, then put it on a rack to dry
which must be done in a cold current of air, if heat be used
the gelatine would melt.
When the gelatine is quite dry , pass the blade of a pen-
knife, all round underneath the strips of thick paper, when
the negative film may be lifted right away from the plate.
In this condition the negative may be stored away with-
out risk of being broken, the only condition being, it must
be kept away from damp.
Another plan of stripping, is to coat the dry negative
with a thick solution of india-rubber in benzole, then allow
to dry on a levelling stand, then coat with a thick plain
collodion, to which as been added a few drops of Castor
oil, and when the collodion film is quite dry, place the plate
in a dish of clean water, strip off the film from the glass,
then place the film between sheets of clean blotting paper to
dry.
Half-tone Negatives for Collotype upon Dry Plates.
Negatives suitable for collotype printing maybe made upon
the ordinary dry plates of commerce, and if made in a proper
manner are just as good as the best wet collodion negatives.
Any pet brand may be used, and any developer, except
ferrous oxalate, as under no circumstances will ferrous oxalate
give as good a negative as either pyrogallol or eikonogen ;
hydrokinone is too apt to give hard negatives, so is not


recommended unless the operator has had practice in its use.
Whether pyrogallio or eikonogen he used for the develop-
ment of the negatives, ammonia should not he used as the
alkali, being too volatile and therefore too uncertain in its
results, the carbonate of Soda, or of Potash being far better,
both as regards certainty of result as well as quality of
negative.
As a preservative for either pyrogallio or eikonogen the
meta bisulphite of potash is far ahead of sulphite of soda,
and should always be used.
The annexed formula may be always relied upon, and
should be used in preference to any other for good half-tone
negatives.
Stock Pyroqallol.
Meta-bisulphite of Potash 1 ounce
Water 9 ounces
Dissolve, then add
Pyrogallio acid ... ... ... ... 1 ounce
Stock Carbonate.
Saturated solution of common washing soda.
Developer A.
Stock pyrogallol 2 ounces
Water ... ... ... ... 18 ounces
Developer B,
Saturated solution washing soda ... 2 ounces
Water 15 ounces
For a normal exposure use equal parts of A and B, but the
best plan is always to begin with two parts of A to one of B,
adding more of B if the image is slow in making its appear-
ance.
Negatives for collotype must have detail in lights and in
shadows, and be quite free from fog or veil, thick yellow and
over-exposed negatives being quite unsuitable.
k 2


Wash the negative well after fixing, then clear by immers-
ing in a solution of
Alum 1 ounce
Water 20 ounces
.Nitric Acid \ dram
or Citric Acid 1 dram
From two to five minutes will be a sufficient time for the
full effect of this bath, then wash well and dry the negative
on a rack.
'lf the negatives are made in the studio the reversing
mirror may be used and a reverse negative made at once, but
if the negatives are landscapes, houses, etc., then to fit them
for collotype they must be stripped from their original support
and remounted with the film turned round upon another
glass plate, or a sheet of celluloid.
The operation of stripping is quite practicable and safe,
if the directions given below are rigidly followed out, but if
at all modified the operator has only himself to blame if
failure results.
First of all the negative must be quite dry, and the back
and edges of plate quite free from dirt and from remnants
of gelatine ; if not, trouble will arise afterwards, by the
gelatine &c., getting between the film and glass during the
stripping operations.
Before stripping the negatives clean a few sheets of patent
plate glass at least one size larger than the negative to be
mounted upon it. For instance, if the negatives are Si by
(A the patent plates must be 10 by 8 or 9 by 7.
Celluloid may be used instead of glass and its use is strongly
recommended, as it is just as easily manipulated, and is free
from all risk of breakage in the printing frame, as well as


less trouble to store, and for price is cheaper than patent
plate, celluloid being- sold in sheets 50 by 20 inches at four
shillings per sheet.
Whether glass or celluloid be used the manipulations are
the same, they must first be well scrubbed with a rag dipped
in fine whiting moistened with a little ammonia, well
washed under the tap, then again rubbed with a rag dipped
in a dilute acid, and again well washed, then coated with the
following solution —
Gelatine ... ... 1 ounce
Water 20 ounces
Soak the gelatine bill soft, then melt in a Jar placed in a pan
of water over a gas stove ; when the gelatine is dissolved
add 10 drops of a saturated solution of chrome alum, mix,
then‘filter through filtering paper.
Flow this over the glass or celluloid plate, and then put the
plate on a rack to dry ; a quantity of these may be prepared
at once and stored away in a dry place, as they improve by
keeping. .
The next operation will be to carefully level a large sheet
of plate glass upon which the negatives to be stripped are
laid, and then covered with as much collodion as they will
hold without spilling ; be sure that the collodion goes to the
edges, and that as much is put on as possible so as to get a
good thick film of collodion ; if this film of collodion is too
thin the negative films curl up and are difficult to handle, but
when thick lie flab and are easily manipulated.
Collodion for this purpose can he purchased at the chemists
under the name of flexible collodion, or to order from
Mawson and Swan ; but it is easily made by dissolving
Gun Cotton 1 ounce
Methylated Ether 15 ounces
Methylated Alcohol .... 15 ounces


If used directly after solution, filter through cotton wool,
hut if allowed a mouth to settle it can he decanted quite
clear.
The thick film of collodion must he allowed to set
thoroughly right through, but must not get dry. When set
the negatives are immersed in clean cold water which must
he frequently changed until the ether and alcohol are quite
removed from the film, and the water flows evenly over,
instead of having a greasy appearance.
The negatives are now immersed one at a time in a dish
containing
Hydrofluoric Acid - 2 drams
Water 20 ounces
To remain until the film commences to lift at the corners,
when this is the case the negative is removed and well washed
under the tap, after which it is put into a large dish of clean
water and the film carefully lifted off the original support,
which is put upon one side ; turn the film over and slide
under it a sheet of patent plate or of celluloid coated with
gelatine, the gelatinised side next the collodionised side of
film, carefully adjust the negative film in its position upon
the gelatinized plate, then lift the two from the water, in such
a manner as to expel all air bubbles from between the nega-
tive film and the glass plate; drain as much water as possible,
then lay on the bench and place over the film a piece of stout
tracing 1 cloth, then squegee gently; remove the tracing cloth,
and put the plate on a rack to drain, when drained surface
dry, immerse in a dish containing clean methylated spirits of
wine for ten minutes, remove and put on a rack to dry.
This bath of methylated spirit must not be omitted, else,
if the collodion is extra horny the film will be liable to split
off in drying, but when the spirit is used there is no risk of
such a contretemps.


Half-cone negatives for collotype that are too large or too
small, for the collotype print required, must be reproduced ;
when the collotype print is to be much reduced in size, a
very good plan is to make a single transfer carbon print
from the original negative, and from this print make the
small negative, without using the mirror, then a reversed
negative will be obtained, but for negatives the same size,
or enlarged, this method does nob give the best results.
To reproduce a negative the first step is to make a
transparency and to get the best result this transparency
must be made in carbon upon the special tissue sold for the
purpose. Very beautiful transparencies can be made upon
dry plates, but no matter how made, or with what care, for
the purpose at present under discussion, no dry plate
transparency will give as good a reproduced negative, as can
he made from a carbon transparency, this is not merely an
opinion, hut a hard fact arrived at after careful trial and
experiment.
Carbon transparencies are easily made and require no
costly, or special apparatus, and as the tissue upon which
they are made can be bought ready sensitised, the trouble is
reduced bo a minimum ; ordinary carbon tissue as used dor
paper prints must not be used but the special transparency
tissue, made specially for transparency work.
In printing upon carbon tissue it is necessary to have the
outside margin of print protected from light, during the time
of exposure under the negative, therefore if the whole of
subject (say on a half-plate) be required, the tissue must be
cut at least 7 by 5J thus giving a quarter of an inch margin
all round, which margin must be protected from light by a
mask outside the negative, when only a portion of the subject
on negative is required a mask with an opening a little larger


than the subject may be used behind the negative or upon
the film.
The exposure to light of carbon tranparenoy tissue is not
very rapid and may be approximately put at from three to five
times that necessary for an ordinary silver print, the exposure
must be ample, as it is very necessary to have the full
amount of detail present in the negative, so it is best to err
on the side of plenty, rather than not enough.
The tissue after exposure is mounted for development upon
glass plates, coated with
Gelatine 1 ounce
Water 20 ounces
, Bichromate of Potash ... ... 30 grains
dissolved by heat and filtered before use.
The glass plates must be a little larger than the tissue.
For a half-plate transparency whole plate glass must be used,
cleaned with a rag dipped in weak acid, then well washed
under the tap and the above solution flowed over, then put
on a rack to dry ; when dry expose the plates to daylight for
a short time to render the film of gelatine quite insoluble.
The exposed tissue is put into a dish of clean cold water
until limp, then mounted face down upon one of these gela-
tinised plates and squegeed well down, so as to expel all water
and air from between the two surfaces. Mount all the prints
in the batch in this way, then immerse in warm water at 80
degrees P., and as soon as the paper backing is loosened by
the warm water dissolving the gelatine, strip it off and throw
it away. Add more water a little warmer and let it remain
from ten to twenty minutes, then raise up one end of plate
and gently lave with the warm water until the whole of the
soluble , gelatine is removed and the picture left on the glass
clear and sharp ; rinse under tap and put on a rack to dry.


A good transparency will be full of detail in lights and
shadow and free from defects, and such only must be passed
as suitable for the next stage.
Sensitised carbon tissue will not keep longer than a month,
therefore must be used as soon after receipt from the makers
as possible. In case of over exposure hotter water may be
used to finish the development; with.
Negatives the size required are made from these trans-
parencies in the enlarging camera by transmitted light,
using a lens at least a size larger than the transparency,
without any reference to the size the enlarged negative has
to be.
The Reversing. Mirror.
The mirror is a piece of perfectly plane glass, coated on
the surface with a thick film of pure silver, highly polished.
This silvered glass must be mounted in a mahogany box, and
fitted on the front of the camera, the lens being fitted in
front of the mirror, see page 4. Tins mirror is placed in
grooves at an angle of 45 degrees from axis of lens, and so
situated, receives the image projected by the lens, reflecting
it on the focussing screen, or sensitive plate in camera, by
which means a negative is obtained, which, when looked
through, with the film between the operator and the glass,
the image is in its proper position, whereas, if the lens be
used without the intervention of the mirror, it will be
necessary to have.the glass between the eyes and the film, to
.get the image in its proper position, and as the generality of
photographic negatives are taken, without the intervention of
the mirror, they are called ordinary negatives in contra-
distinction to those made through the mirror, which are
■called “reversed” negatives.


The three adjusting screws in block on page 4 are best
dispensed with, and the box made quite true at first.
The silver surface of the mirror requires great care and
attention to preserve its lustre from tarnish, which would
make the exposure in the camera longer, besides which, the
cost of re-silvering is too great to allow of the surface being
spoilt too frequently through carelessness.
At the end of each day’s work, remove the mirror from
the box and warm it in front of the fire (not over the gas
flame) just slightly, then wrap it carefully in a piece of fine
velvet, which has also been previously warmed, then wrap up
in a piece of iudia rubber or macintosh cloth, and put away
in an air tight box; by doing this, the mirror, if well silvered
at first, will last for a year or two.
If the surface should get tarnished, get a square of very
fine chamois leather, and place in the centre a pellet of cotton
wool, then gather up the leather, and tie the wool in the
centre, making a small globe about an inch-and-a-half in.
diameter, now warm the mirror, and after dipping the leather
globe into fine rouge, proceed to polish gently with a quick
circular motion, using little or no pressure, —take care in
doing this that the mirror, the leather, and the rouge are
quite dry, else the silver coat will come away —verb sap.
In purchasing a mirror be sure and get it large enough to
take the cone of rays from the lens it has to be used with; for
a lens three inches in diameter, the plane mirror should
measure about 6-| inches by 3-|- inches.
The box to hold this mirror should be made square at the
bottom, fitting into the rabbet of the camera front, so that
when objects are to be photographed that will do better
laying on the ground than when fixed against the wall, the
mirror can be placed to look down upon the object.


For silvering the glass, one cannot do better than to quote
the directions for working Common’s process given by Major
Waterhouse in a previous volume of the Photographic
News.
“The solutions recommended by Mr. Common are three—
(l) Nitrate of silver 1 ounce
Distilled water 10 ounces
(2) Caustic potash ... ... 1 ounce
Distilled water ... ... 10 ounces
(3) Glucose ... ... ... ... ... ounce
Distilled water ... ... 10 ounces
The above quantities are sufficient for 250 square inches ;
consequently an ordinary copying mirror 8 by 6 would
require rather more than 2 ounces of each solution, and other
sizes in proportion.
The caustic potash and distilled water must be quite pure.
Ordinary caustic potash will not answer at all. The best to
use is known as jmre by alcohol.
The glass surface to be silvered is carefully cleaned with
strong nitric acid, applied, as recommended by Mr. Browning,
with a buckle’s brush, then well washed in clean water, and
after rinsing with distilled water, laid, face downwards,.in a
dish of distilled water till wanted.
Before cleaning the glass, it will be necessary to arrange
for supporting it face downwards in the depositing dish, so
that the surface to be silvered may be quite horizontal, and
just below the level of the fluid, which should be about half
an inch above the bottom of the. dish.
I have generally used a large cork, about four inches in
diameter, cemented to the back of the plate, and fitted with
three strings, by which it could be suspended in a level


position and adjust to any height by winding the string over
a roller placed at a convenient height above the dish. As
this arangement was not available, I fix on the back of the
plate two ordinary wide-mouthed bottle corks of equal
thickness, in the positions shewn in the figure, and to these
corks attached thin slips of bamboo running transversely
across the plate, and of sufficient length to rest on the sides
of the dish, thus:—
The slips of bamboo gave the arrangement a certain amount
of spring, by which the height of the plate could easily be
regulated, by putting on weights till the surface of the plate,
was just below the level of the fluid in the dish.
To prepare the silvering solution : —A sufficient quantity
of the silver solution No. 1 (2 ounces) is put into a perfectly
clean glass. Ammonia is dropped in till the precipitate first
formed is just re-dissolved. The same quantity of potash
solution, No, 2, as of silver is now mixed in, and the pre-
cipitate again dissolved by ammonia. A little more silver
solution is then added to produce a distinct turbidity, and
distilled water to make up the quantity necessary to fill the
depositing-dish to about threereights or half an inch, and
the mixture is then filtered through cotton into another clean
glass vessel.


The same quantity (two ounces) of filtered solution of
glucose, No. 3, as was taken of silver and potash, is now
mixed in, and the whole poured into a depositiug-dish (which
should preferably be of glass, well cleaned with nitric acid).
The glass plate is then taken out of the distilled water
and laid face downwards on the silvering solution, being
supported as before described, just above the surface, so that
the solution does nob cover its back.
Mr. Common places the requisite quantity of distilled
water in the dish in which the mirror has been remaining
face downwards, and then, having lifted the mirror up, pours
in the undiluted silvering solution, together with the glucose
solution, stirs well together, and then carefully lowers the
mirror again into the dish.
Almost immediatly after the immersion of the plate, the
silvering action begins, and, if things are going on well, a
brilliant reflecting surface will be seen at the back of the
plate and in forty minutes, or even less, a good deposit of
silver will be obtained. It is usually recommended to stop
the action as soon as the silvering fluid appears clear and free
from turbidity ; but it is not always easy, I find, to see this.
After silvering, the plate is thoroughly well washed, finish-
ing with distilled water, and dried off quickly. A slight
cloudiness of the surface may appear, and must be removed
by polishing before the mirror can be used. It is better to
allow the mirror to remain a day or so before polishing, in
order to harden the coating.
To polish the plate, it should be slightly warmed, and
perfectly dry, when rubbed very gently in small circles with a
piece of very soft and dry chamois leather, afterwards using
a little jewellers’ rouge.
Mirrors should always be kept in a dry place, and will
require repolishing from time, to time.


Preparation and Care of Rollers.
Leather rollers when new should first of all be warmed in
front of a good brisk fire, and when warm rubbed with a
piece of Russian tallow until the leather will not absorb any
more, then allow the roller to stand twelve hours and repeat
the operation, then take some middle varnish, smear some
of it along the roller, and on a clean slab, roll vigorously,
and repeat the operation two or three times, scrape the roller
with the grain, then roll up in varnish, allow to stand all
night, scrape again, roll up again next day, scrape, then roll
up with collotype ink, scrape and roll up, repeating this until
the roller takes the ink evenly.
In scraping the roller it must always be scraped one way.
and that with the grain, which way the grain lies being
ascertained before greasing, and a mark made upon the
handle of roller, so that no mistake can be made afterwards,
(Hue rollers should always be hung up in a cold, dry room,
and, if not wanted for some time, should be covered with
vaseline and wrapped up with tracing paper.
After each time of using, scrape the roller before putting
away, and if, after using, the roller is likely to be some time
before being wanted again, after scraping smear with Russian
tallow, and wrap up in paper, scraping before rolling up in
the ink again.
The Ruled Sheet.
TN the production of half-tone zinc blocks, the screen
negative plays a very important part, and if it is not of
the best quality and of a suitable grain, a fine printing
block cannot be obtained. The foundation of these screens
is a print from a steel or copper plate, (steel by preference
as it is harder than copper, gives a sharper line, and lasts so


much longer-ruled by a special machine with fine lines in
proportion of from 100 to 150 lines to the inch. The
plate should be at least eighteen inches square, larger when
possible, but certainly not smaller, as to get screens of the
very finest quality a reduction of at least four times is
requisite. These plates properly ruled and without flaw,
are very difficult to obtain, I have had no less than six
plates at different times from different makers, each of
whom at the time of enquiry, were quite confident of their
ability to turn out the required article, but each plate when
sent in was quite useless,
The cause of this difficulty is not far to seek, each firm
relying upon the ease with which they w r ere able to rule
the short tints in their every-day work upon wood blocks,
forgetting to allow for two things, viz., first the partial wear
of the bar carrying the cutter, secondly for the same partial
wear of the index screw ; by the first fault the lines cannot
be ruled straight, or parallel, the second causes unequal
distances, giving a screen that looks more like a tolerably
good piece of gauze than a ruled plate.
With the form of machine now in use, even if quite new,
the production of a properly ruled plate is attended with so
many difficulties, and chances of failure, as to preclude
many from undertaking half-tone ’ blocks, but I am glad to
say that just as the last sheets of this book were passing
through the press, my attention has been called by
Mr. A. Calvert, of 69, Sackville St., Manchester, to an
entirely new machine he has invented and had manufactured
for the purpose of ruling these plates, this machine is
entirely automatic, will rule a plate 36 inches by 24 to the
500th. part of an inch, from beginning to end without
any attention.


Mr. Calvert has courteously allowed, me to print the
. small specimen plate sent me which is ruled rather coarsely
so as to be certain to meet the exigences of a flat tint or an
ordinary printing machine, but it is sufficiently fine to give
a good idea of what is really required.
The block is the reverse of an ordinary ruled sheet, being
printed from in the ordinary type press, and in this condition
shows how a screen negative must be viz., with clear lines, and
grey whites.
When once the ruled plate is obtained, all trouble is not
quite at an end, as the printing of proofs from the plate is
a very difficuit operation and can only be done by an expert
copper-plate printer, and unfortunately just at present that
is a class of workmen very difficult to obtain. The proofs
must be made upon good white paper with jet black or
sepia ink, and each proof must be quite perfect.
The plate should be square, and the lines ruled one way
only, the crossing being done by means of a double
exposure, and instead of having both sets of lines the same
thickness, one set may be coarser than the other, by moving
the camera, and re-focussing between the two exposures ; to
obtain the crossed lines, the sensitive plate may be turned
round in the dark slide, or the sheet itself turned upside
down.
The screen negatives must be thin, with the lines clear
glass so that the detail in the original can get through the
film, if at all dense nothing but harsh results can be obtained.


Benjamin Winstohe & Sons,
MANUFACTURERS,
100,101, SHOE LANE, LONDON, E.C.
MATERIALS
FOR ALL
PHOTO - MECHANICAL PROCESSES.
Collotype presses, -«*■
Collotype Ipks,
Husnict's EiumtlM Plioto-Transfer Paper.
PHOTO-TRANSFER INK
AND
Ink specially made for use in Etching Zinc Plates.
(Inks usually made for this purpose are apt.to splutter.)
Rocking Baths, Zinc & Copper Plates, Rollers,
Indiarubber, Composition, Leather, Velvet on Litho.
Stocks, or in Letterpress Frames.
SCRAPERS & GRAVERS,
Stippled, Rnled, and Dotted Tint Plates,
AND ALL OTHER MATERIALS FOR
Photo-Zincography. Photo-Lithography, Photo-Engraving,
Photo-Type, Collotype, and kindred processes.


THE “ MAWSON ”
PHOTO - MECHANICAL PLATES
ARE SPECIALLY MADE FOB
Photo-Etchers } Photo-Lithographers, &c.
Most favourably reviewed by the Editors of British Journal
of Photography“ The Photographic News”; “Photographic
Answers “ The Printing Times,” and are largely used
by the leading firms.
Mawsm * SwaMi
33, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON,
Mosley Street, Newcastle-on-Tyne.


MAWSON & SWAN
MANUFACTURERS OF
Dry Plates —“ The Castle for ordinary Negative
work. “ The Mawson ” for Instantaneous. 44 The
Photo-Mechanical ” for special work.
Collodions —Mawson’s Collodion lias a world-wide
reputation for quality and uniformity.
Varnishes —Mawson & Swan manufacture all descriptions
of Photographic Varnishes.
Chemicals and Apparatus —Chemicals of the best
kind at lowest quotation as per list. Apparatus
of every description.
Bromide Paper —For the quick production of Photo-
graphs, for book and pamphlet illustrations the
Mawson Bromide paper is superb.
MAWSON & SWAN,
33, HOUl) SQUARE,
Mosley Street , Newcastle-on-Tyne.


Frederic Wesselhoeft,
2, GRESHAM PRESS BUILDINGS,
LITTLE BRIDGE STREET, LONDON, E.C.
AND
44,HOUNDSGATE, NOTTINGHAM,
SOLE AGENT FOR
mast *
COLLOTYPE INKS & COLORS.
IMPORTER OF
THE GERMAN GOLLOTYPE MAGHINES,
AND OP THE
Combination Borders, and Labour
Saving Rule,
ALL ON THE POINT SYSTEM.
All Novelties shewn in The British Printer. The Continental
Founders’ Catalogues on view at London and Nottingham Offices.
Prices and Samples of the Collotype Inks on application.


HUGO KOCH,
LBIPZI G-CO NNEWXTZ,
MANUFACTURER OF
Collotype Steam Presses and Lithographic Steam Presses,
of acknowledged highest perfectness, with all recent improvements approved in
practice. Special Price List and References on demand.
World's Exhibition, Antwerp, 1885, Diploma of honour.
Export to nil Places of the World.
m
COLLOTYPE STEAM PRESS.
HAST & tiMSKI,
STUTTGART,
Manufacturers of Printing Inks.
SPECIALITIES
COLLOTYPE INKS,
IN' ALL SHADES.
Printing Samples forwarded on Application.


9EM EM J* WmWMt
ESTABLISHED 1823.
Leipzig-Schoenefeld, Germany,
65 & 66, Basinghall Street London, E.C.
190, William Street, New York.
FINE DRY COLOURS AND INKS,
FOR ALL GRAPHIC BRANCHES.
COLLOTYPE (Lichtdruck) INKS,
A SPECIALITY.
Roller Composition. —“ Victoria” and “Victoria Bianca.”
(the white.)
Mmms&m * €&*»
Frankfort-on-the-Main, Germany,
Manufacturers and Agents for
All Special Materials & Requisites,
FOR
Collotype and Photo-Lithographic Processes,
COLLOTYPE MACHINES,
Rollers, Colours, Inks,'.'Printing, and Transfer
Papers, &c.,
PRICE LIST GRATIS ON DEMAND.


PMiraiic Art Printing anfl Engraving.
WATERLOW & SONS,
Limited,
FINSBURY STATIONERY WORKS,
LONDON, E.C.
Collotype Printing for every description of Artistic
and Commercial Illustrations. High-Class Repro-
ductions in Facsimile of Monochrome Drawings,
Ancient Manuscripts, Etchings, Engravings, &c.
The Illustrations in this Booh are Printed by
Waterlow & Sons, Ld., Collotype Process.
Woodbury Printing for Book Illustrations. These
Prints possess all the Beauty of Tone and Finish of
the best Silver Prints, with the advantage of being
absolutely Permanent.
Photo-Zinc Etched Type Blocks, in Line and Half-Tone,
from Artist’s Drawings, or from Photographs from
Nature.
Photo-Intaglio Engraving on Copper.
For Specimens, Prices, and all Particulars, apply —
WATERLOW & SONS, LI, Finsbury Stationery Works,
LONDON, E.C.


PHOTO-MECHANICAL
"PI ATF9
JL J—ill .L
These are made to meet an increasing demand for
plates that will give as good results as the wet process, for
photo-mechanical work.
They are about the same rapidity as Wet Collodion,
and with the Hydrokinone developer, give negatives of
great density, with absolutely clear lines. For all line work
they are invaluable, as they save the trouble of the silver
bath, while the negatives produced are fully equal to those
obtained by the wet process even when working at its best.
The method of working these plates is very simple.
Larger Sizes to Order.
21 to 24, Charles Street, Hotting Hill, W.


“A wonderfully cheap magazine. Collotype supplement admirably executed."
—Review of Reviews.
PHOTOGRAPHIC ANSWERS,
The Monthly Magazine of Practical Notes, with an Index to Current
Photographic Literature.
Edited Jyy E. J. WALL,
Author of “ The Dictionary of Photography."
“ Photographic Answers ” is, without an exception, the
most practically useful of any photographic monthly publication, and
has a larger Sale than any other. “ Photo- Etching and.
Collotype” is a four-page inset, edited by W. T. Wilkinson,
being the only periodical devoted to photo-mechanical work.
PRICE ONE PENNY. (“Absurdly below its value. ’‘—Photography.)
Annual Subscription, TWO SHILLINGS,
Crown Bvo, with a Frontispiece by Rejlander. Price 6d, Post free 7\di.
BOLAS’S'PHOTOGRAPHIC ANNUAL
For 1890,
London: HAMPTON, JUDD & Go., 14, Duke Street, Adelphi, W.C.
&
SBC
turk
UN
Jr G. MAILANDER,
MANUFACTURER OF STEAM PRESSES,
CANNSTATT, (WURTTEMBERG,)
Newest Collotype MacMnes in three Sizes.
I ALSO RECOMMEND MY
LITHO STEAM MACHINES EOR, BLACK ANE OHROMO PRINTING.
LITHO HAND PRESSES, PLATE PRINTING MACHINES, STEAM PRESSES EOR
TYPE PRINTING, CYLINDER TREAD PRESSES, &o.
Particulars and Samples post free on application.


INDEX.
Page.
Albumen solution, formula
for Substratum 16
Printing on Zinc 36
Apparatus for Negatives 153
Zinc Printing ... 28
Zinc Etching ... 49
Photo-Litho ... 89
Collotype 115-121-158
Bath, Nitrate of Silver for
wet collodion process 7-140
Holder for ... 8
Sensitising plate in 19
Renovating ... 9-142
Bitumen, preparation of
Sensitive ... ... 41
The Sensitive solution of 42
Coating Zinc Plates with
Sensitive ... ... 42
Developing Image in
Bitumen ... ... 43-72
Etching Image in Half-
tone ... ... 73
Board, for inking up Photo
Litho transfers ... 90
Box for Reversing Mirror 2-154
Collodion Process ... 6
Formula for ... 6-149
Mawson’s ... 7
Process, Silver Bath for 7-140
~ Developing solution 10
„ Fixing or Clearing
solution 11
„ Intensifies Mercury
and Ammonia 12
„ Intensifier Lead 12
„ „ Pyrogallic
Acid for half-tone
Negatives ... 143
Process, Gleaning the glass
plates ... 14
} , Manipulation ... 19
Film stripping ... 145
Page,
Copying easel 4
Collotype, Substratum for 117
Sensitive Mixture for 117
Negatives for 143-146
Masking Negatives for 119
Plate exposure of 120
„ Printing from 121
„ Clearing 126
~ Etching 124-130
Oven for 114
Plate, printing from
on Litho Machine 128
Plate ,masking during
printing ... 122
Developing Solutions for
wet collodion ... 10
Dry plates, line ... 26
~ ~ half-tone 147
Dry plates for line work 24
~ ~ ~ collotype 146
„ ~ fixing solution 26
~ ~ clearing solu-
tion for ... 26
Drawings 1 or transfers 45
Etching in line ... 49
. ~ half-tone ... 72-77
~ ink, soft ... 50
~ ~ hard ... 50
Glass plates cleaning ... 14-16
Glass plate for collotype 116
Gum arabic solution ... 50
Graining zinc plates ... 30
Half-tone negatives 143-146
~ transfers for Photo-
litho ~. 101-103-106-133-134
Half-tone etching on zinc 72
~ „ on copper 77
Hard etching ink ... 50
Ink for etching ... 50
~ „ photo-litho ...92-107


Pack.
Ink for collotype ... 123
Lenses 1
Line negatives ... .... 23-24
Line, etching in ... 49
Line, photo-litho in ... 88
Mirror, box for... ... 2-154
Size of ... 3
Care of ... 154
Silvering ... 155
Mounting and trimming
etched blocks' ... 78
Negatives.from line
drawings ... 17-24
For collotype 143-146
Masking negatives 119
Grained negatives 66
Photo-litho transfers in line 88
On Husnik’s paper 92
Sensitiser for Husnik’s
paper ;.. 93
Exposure to light 94 ,
Inking the exposed
paper . ... 89-95
Developing the transfer 96
Alterations in size 9 1
Preparation of the paper
for ... 96-97-98
Photographs, line blocks
from ... ... 81
Printing on zinc in albumen 28
Bitumen 40
Failures in 39
Printing frames for zinc
printing ... ... 34
Collotype 120
Press for collotype ... 121
Printing from Collotype
plate ... 122-126-128
Photo-litho transfers in halftone
from grained stone 101-103
Pi-dio.
Photo-litho transfers
Papyrotint process 106
IVom collotype plate 133
Scotch paper for ... 134
Reversing mirror ... 2-153
Reversed negatives
3.145-148-153
Rebiting half-tone blocks 75
Rollers, care 0f... ... 158
Kor zinc printing 35
For collotype ... 124
Stand for camera ... • 3
Silver bath for wet collodion 7
Filtering 7-18
Holder for ... ... 8-17
Sensitive bitumen, pre-
paration of ... 41
Bitumen solution ... 42
Sensitising photo-litho
transfer paper ... 93
Screen negatives ... 64
Swelled gelatine process 79
Scotch transfer paper ... 134
Timing exposure ...84-120
Transferring to zinc ... 45
Transfer paper, Scotch 34
Washed out process ... 83
Whirler for coating zinc
plates ... ... 31-32
Zinc etching in line ... 49
Half-tone 72
From transfers 44
Zinc plates, polishing ... 25-68
Graining 30
Drying sensitive 33
Zinc printing in albumen 36
In bitumen ... 40-70
Index.
