

Pictures of
Australian Life
1843-4.
by
Mrs. Thomas Henry Huxley
fat /Q<~-c, , / f //)


Published Monthly, price Is. Annual Subscription, postage free, 13s. to Canada
and Newfoundland; 14s. to any other Address in the Postal Union.
LONDON:
SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 WATERLOO PLACE, S.W.
PARIS: OALIGNANI A CO. LEIPZIG: A. TWIETMEYER.
NEW YORK: INTERNATIONAL NEWS COMPANY. MELBOURNE; MELVILLE <t MULLEN. PROPTY.
SYDNEY and BRISBANE; EDWARDS , DUNLOP , <t CO.. Limited.
ADELAIDE: RIGBY, LTD. TASMANIA: WALCH i SONS.
TORONTO; TORONTO NEWS COMPANY. MONTREAL: MONTREAL NEWS COMPANY.
THE
CORNHILL MAGAZINE.
DECEMBER 1911.
CONTENTS.
PAGE
Chinese Changes. By Admiral of the Fleet Sir
Edward Seymour, 0.M., G.C.B 7-21
The Case op Richard Meynbll. Chapters XXIII.-
XXIV. {Conclusion). By Mrs. Humphry Ward 782
Pictures of Australian Life. 1848-4. By Mrs.
Thomas Henry Huxley 770
Ode on the Tercentenary of Charterhouse, 1611-
1911. By Guy Kendall 782
A Tale of the Staff College. By Colonel Chas.
B. Callwbll 786
My Experiences of the Railway Strike. By a
Railway Clerk 796
An Irish Deer Forest. By Gilfrid Hartley . 805
En Avant les Enfants Perdus ! By Major G. F.
MacMunn, D.S.O. 815
Medicine in Fiction. By S. Squire Sprigge, M.D. 822
Blinds Down. Chapters XII.-XIII. By Horace
Annesley Yachell 834
At the Sign of the Plough. I. ‘ The Pilgrim’s
Progress.’ By Arthur C. Benson. 11. Shake-
speare : the Falstaff Cycle. By Sir
Frederick Pollock, Bart 855
NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Communications to the Editor should be addressed to the care of Messrs.
Smith, Eldek & Co., 15 Waterloo Place, S.W.
All Contributions are attentively considered, and unaccepted MSS. are returned
if accompanied by the necessary stamps for postage; but the Editor cannot
hold himself responsible for any accidental loss. MSS. cannot be delivered on
personal application, nor can they be forwarded through the post when only
initials are given.
Every Contribution should be type-written on one side of each leaf only, and
should bear the Name and Address of the Sender.


PICTURES OF AUSTRALIAN LIFE , 1843-18 -
BY
MRS. THOMAS HENRY HUXLEY.
Shortly before Christmas 1848, my mother, my half-sister,
and myself arrived at Sydney, New South Wales, in one of
Messrs. Green’s ships, the Ellenborough, after a voyage of four
and a-half months. Think of it, ye steam-wafted passengers
of 1911!
The sail up the harbour was a revelation of beauty. Its
fairy-like bays, their low-lying shores sloping to the water’s
edge, that allured us to explore them, the glorious golden sun-
shine, the bluest of skies reflected in another heaven in the
transparent sea, made up a scene of enchanting beauty beyond
all I had ever imagined of loveliness.
My father met us on landing, and at once took us to his
friends, Mr. Sea, manager of the Union Bank, Sydney, and his
sister, who received us with Colonial warmth. But our Christ-
mas was spent with other English friends of my fathers, the
Kirkes, who lived on the North Shore, in a picturesque house
at the head of one of the harbour’s innumerable little bays.
The Kirkes, a delightful elderly couple, had a grown-up
family of sons and daughters—frank, warm-hearted, and genial
—who, it being holiday-time, were all gathered together in the
parent home.
The morning after our arrival I was taken, at 5 a.m., by two
of the girls to the bathing-place, a retired and lonely cove,
surrounded by yellow-flowering wattles and myrtles with
glistening sheen of dark-green leaves. This kind of myrtle
showed flower and fruit at the same time. The latter consisted
of white wax-like oval berries, with patches of rich red upon
them, growing side by side with the delicate white sprays of
blossom.
Never before had I seen such beautiful trees, such brilliant
sunshine and sapphire sea—so clear that, at thirty feet below,
the bed of white sand was visible.
The sharks that infested the harbour did not come up as
far as this spot, so in safety we girls disported in the warm


rippling waters that broke into thousands of diamond-points
under the great light of an Australian summer. Stepping out
of the water we were almost instantly dried by the hot sun-
shine, even at that early hour. What a paradise seemed this
new land to me, long penned up in London streets! Mentally
I floated in a heaven of delight.
By nine o’clock the heat was so intense that we girls
assembled in a large, uncarpeted room, whose windows to the
ground were darkened by closed Venetian blinds. Putting on
cool white dressing-gowns, we lay about, by preference on the
bare floor, and talked and laughed as only girlhood, light-
hearted and irresponsible, can do.
On Christmas Day the heat became insufferable, for a hot
wind blew—a brickfielder, so called because the wind passed over
certain old brickfields, filling every house with fine red dust in
spite of closed windows. Well-soaked blankets were hung up
against the Venetian blinds inside the spacious verandah: the
evaporation from them somewhat helped to cool the baked
air.
To the verandah every one migrated after dinner, sat in low
wicker chairs, and ate our dessert of various fruits. One of
them was quite strange to me: the loquat, yellow in colour
with brown spots, and overflowing with juice, with medium-
sized, black, shiny stones like magnified laburnum-seeds.
Bananas were also new to me. Apricots, ripened under a
burning sun, were more luscious than English ones. Peaches
were so plentiful that they were given in abundance to the
pigs.
Surely I had come to an earthly Paradise —but it was holiday-
time and all the hard work of life was hidden from my view.
After this delightful visit we returned to Mr. Sea and his
sister, who lived in large rooms above the Union Bank. We
were very much surprised at the fine shops in George Street
and Pitt Street, where French silks and Parisian millinery
we found to be far cheaper than they were in London.
A military band played every afternoon in the Domain,
the beautiful public garden of the city, exquisitely kept. It
was full of magnificent trees and shrubs, native and imported.
Here, about four in the afternoon, were gathered together the
ilite of Sydney, many of them in carriages to which were har-
nessed the finest of horses, Pedestrians
49-2


would come up and chat with friends in the carriages, arrange
picnics or riding parties, and exchange local English news.
A fortnight’s enjoyment of our friends’ hospitality, and,
after they had made us promise to revisit them at some future
time, we said good-bye and began our novel and fatiguing
journey to our new home.
First my mother, my half-sister, and myself drove in a
rough cross-benched cart, yclept ‘Her Majesty’s Mail,’ to the
small town of Wollongong, where we changed to a bullock-
dray. My father was on horseback from our Sydney start.
Most of our luggage and cabin furniture had been sent on by
other drays. Into this rough vehicle we clambered, and seated
ourselves upon sacks well stuffed with maize husks. Slowly
the patient beasts drew us along the seeming lengthening way.
From Wollongong to Jamberoo the road was a mere dray-track
through a forest of tropical foliage; gum-trees two hundred feet
or more in height, gigantic indiarubber trees with broad, shiny,
dark-green leaves, lofty cabbage-palms, and many another kind
of tree towered above us, so that their tops made a twilight
canopy impenetrable to the sunlight, save for an infrequent
clearing in the forest made by the settler’s axe. Huge lianas,
some as thick as a man’s arm, hung down snake-like from the
trees. Magnificent ferns, clinging to the fork of trunk and
branches, were pointed out to me by my father, as affording
water in their sponge-like forms during times of drought to
thirsty wayfarers.
All was fairyland to me. In my delight I even made fun
of the jolting dray, but my poor mother and my sister, the
latter weakened by months of sea-sickness, were sorely tried
by the rough journey, the former lamenting with tears the day
she had ever left England.
Prom a slope we were descending at the edge of the forest
the valley of our future home burst upon our view. Before
us lay a wide clear space. The smoke of a steam-engine, the
whirr of machinery, and a cluster of wooden buildings welcomed
us to an active but primitive life.
We alighted, our limbs stiff with the long journey, and
entered our new home, whose rooms were all on the ground
floor. It was weather-boarded and shingled, and I think the
verandah was painted white. It was a deep latticed verandah,
with jalousies to open and shut, that ran the whole front of


the house, stopped by a projecting room at each end. A
pleasant-faced, rosy-cheeked, black-eyed Irish girl came forward
to show us the way to our rooms. Supper and rest were
grateful.
It was several weeks before our other trunks and belongings
arrived, amongst them my sister’s piano. For some time my
mother was very miserable at confronting new conditions of
existence. ‘ Don’t fret, Mamma,’ I said as she wept; ‘it will be
such fun! ’ So speaks youth to age.
By degrees we settled down; my mother grew more recon-
ciled to her surroundings. She amused herself by rearing
turkeys and chickens, in which she proved most successful,
finding out by experience what was good or bad for them. For
instance, she never let the turkeys out of their coops till the
dew was off the grass, and before sunset they were again housed.
It was not until years afterwards, when I was translating some
German papers on ‘ Intestinal Worms ’ for a scientific journal,
that I discovered the reason for my mother’s treatment of the
turkeys. All she knew was that unless kept off the grass till
the dew had dried they got ‘ the staggers ’ and died.
Life was now a joy to me. How pleasant it was to enter
the long shed of the saw-mills close by, where the vertical or
circular saws in quick movement made a lively whirring noise,
as they cut up long trunks of all sorts of trees that had been
felled in the bush and dragged hither by the slow, patient oxen.
To my fancy these prone trees, cleared of theiif green boughs,
seemed like prisoners suspended in chains who were being
slowly drawn up to the place of doom beneath the fateful and
relentless teeth of the saw. How delicious and invigorating was
the scent of the fresh falling sawdust, in which that of the
gums and cedars overruled the tenderer perfume of other trees!
It filled the warm, gently moving air with half-pungent aroma-
tic odours from the heart of the woods.
In the evening we often ascended the hill by the dray-
track, when a cabbage-palm would be felled. Sitting round
it, we would eat the white heart of its crown with salt which
we had brought with us. Fancy cutting down that fine column
of a cabbage-palm for the sake of its heart! What a splendour
of waste!
From sheer necessity I learnt to make my own and my


mother’s dresses and her caps, since Sydney, the nearest place
where such things could be made, was ninety miles off. The
way I set about the business was to buy a piece of stuff at the
stores attached to the mills. Then I would unpick a dress
brought out from England—which went to my heart, as I
had afterwards to put it together again. Each piece I laid
upon a linen lining and pricked the shape off with a pin; upon
this the new material was placed, tacked and joined to it,
and fitted on myself till it satisfied me. The dress completed,
never was anyone prouder of a great achievement than I was
of my humble one.
Moreover, I papered a small room and made a carpet.
When my sister’s piano arrived it struck me that one of the
little end rooms of the verandah was the very place for it.
What a trial was the papering of the walls! for the paper, when
pasted for hanging, often parted in my inexperienced hands,
and then a fresh length had to be cut and pasted; but patience
and determination carried the day, and Norah, the maid, was
a most efficient helper. At the store I bought carpeting for
the room, rather gay-coloured, but the least flaunting one to
be had. I cut it into lengths, sewed it together with strong
thread, ironed the seams, and with Norah’s help nailed it down.
The whole effect of paper and carpet was a success, and great
was my satisfaction and pride in it.
My father gave me a horse called Cora. Never shall I
forget the delight of my first mount. ‘ Are you frightened? ’
he asked. ‘ Frightened! Not a bit. I seem to have ridden
all my life.’ I was ‘to the manner bom,’ and perfectly fearless;
after a while I could take five-railed fences and huge logs
with ease. I must own, however, that on one occasion I was
alarmed. Cora had been a stock horse, so that one day, when
my sister and I were riding in the bush, the creature, hearing
the thrilling sound of the stockman’s whip, pricked up her
ears and dashed off in wiid excitement. I could not hold her
in. She carried me into the bush, galloping in and out, past
huge trees, through scrub, down deep gullies, up steep banks,
chasing and rounding in the strayed cattle, the stockman lead-
ing. Some days afterwards I walked over part of this ground,
and wondered how I had ever managed to stick to my horse.
The heat in summer compelled us to rise early; I was dressed


by five, often earlier. For amusement I took charge of the
dairy, hitherto managed by our cook, Henry, a ticket-of-leave
man. Twice a week, before breakfast, I churned twelve pounds
of butter. I also made all the bread for the household, the
cook heating the brick oven with wood, and when the oven
was hot enough he swept out the embers, then pushed in the
loaves with a long-handled flat wooden spade. I think I can
still smell the scent of the hot baked bread.
On a Friday there was cake-making, when I would invent
new combinations of ingredients, and with curiosity await
the result. How I wish I had written out the recipes of those
good cakes! I could have left both bread and cake-making
and butter-churning to our excellent though eccentric cook,
but I, being young and energetic, found time very dull, and
welcomed employment for myself.
Henry the cook was an original. ‘ How did you come to
be in New South Wales, Henry? ’ I asked of him one day.
‘All along of exploring, Miss.’ ‘Exploring? I don’t under-
stand.’ ‘ Well, this was the way of it, Miss. I was one of a
exploring party in a big park one night, and we came upon a
house and wanted to see what was inside of it. So in ,we
went, but not by the front door. And whilst we was looking
over beautiful silver things there was a noise and a barkin’ of
dogs—and another exploring party comes in, but they wasn’t
our friends, and I got away and took a cold bath.’ ‘ A cold
bath! ’ I exclaimed in bewilderment. ‘ Yes, Miss; a cold bath,
and it was in a water-butt quite convenient, and the water was
very deep and come up to my chin, and there the enemy found
me. The enemy was in uniform, and dragged me out and put
bracelets on my wrists, and was very nasty altogether; and I
made a voyage with friends of mine right out to this country,
and here I am a-cooking for your Pa and Ma and you, Miss,
and a-raisin’ of ducks and fowls. It ain’t such a bad life, after
all; but it was a grim one, you bet, before I got my ticket-of-
leave. ’
This account, interpreted, was that Henry had been caught
in England robbing a house at night, and had been sentenced
to transportation to New South Wales for seven or fourteen
years.
One day Henry was seen by a friend of ours at Kiama,


seven miles from the mills. ‘ What are you doing here? ’
said our friend. ‘ Ought not you to be cooking your master’s
dinner? ’ ‘Well, that’s it; but I just felt I wanted a day off,
so I came here to get a taste of freedom. It’ll do the, old
gentleman good to go without his dinner. He’s been getting
a deal too stout lately.’
On two mornings in the week, at five o’clock, horses were
brought round for my sister and myself by one of the men
about the place. After drinking some coffee which Norah
brought out to us when we had mounted, we rode off to
Kiama for the post-bags. Kiama was a wild spot by the
sea, possessing a wonderful blow-hole in the rocks. In
rough weather the sea would be forced through the
cavern with immense force, and thrown up at its outlet
some hundred feet high with a noise of thunder. The small
settlement could only boast of a few cabbage-tree huts and one
weatherboard and most primitive inn kept by a delightful
motherly, elderly woman. The ride, always a fearfully hot
one in summer, was simply suffocating in a hot wind, when
if you chanced to lay your hand upon a fence you instantly
drew it away, half-scorched.
Sometimes I would go into the paddock carrying a sieve
of corn (corn in Australia always means maize), entice Cora
to her shed, and bridle and saddle her. Mounting her, I would
set out by myself, cross the creek near by, then on by a
remarkably wide rough road. On each side, forming part of it,
grew low scrub. Fenced in beyond were clearings in which
the crop was apparently charred tree-stumps. In a space by
the small unenclosed wooden church felled trees of considerable
girth lay about, some very high by reason of their curvature.
Over these I used to practise leaping. Cora jumped capitally,
but often had a nasty trick of coming to a dead standstill before
a log or fence, and then as suddenly taking the leap. Before
I got to know her ways I was twice thrown, though I must own
that she always stood quite still beside me till I got up again.
On one of these occasions I remember finding myself on my
back on the ground, still holding the bridle, and saying aloud,
‘ That was too bad of you, Cora; you don’t know how hurt I
am! ’ But I soon recovered, and, not to be vanquished,


jumped several big bowed logs, and restored my self-esteem
before turning homewards.
For neighbours we had the doctor and his wife and children,
and her sister; three miles off—absurdly near for the bush—
some Scotch people also, an elderly couple wth two sons and a
daughter. The elder son and his father managed the farm.
The father on a Sunday conducted a Presbyterian form of
service at a rough building used as a church, more than a mile
distant from the mills. A creek on the way, which in the
rainy season became a swift-flowing river, was crossed by
stepping-stones. During December, in the height of summer,
it was a weary walk to church under a burning sun. We used
to carry a huge water-melon with us, and midway consume the
half of it. The remainder we put into a hollow tree-stump, to
be eaten on our return journey, always provided that the ants
had not found it out and feasted on it first. Delicious indeed
were the cool, juicy slices to our thirsty throats!
Mr. Meares, the clergyman from Wollongong, held a Church
of England service in this wooden church every few months.
He used to sleep at our house for two nights, and we always
looked forward to his visits with pleasure, since he was a well-
read man and of charming manners. Services were, also held
by Baptist or Wesleyan ministers, or by members of one of
the ranting sects. Some of the latter, coarse in appearance,
uncouth in manner, entirely uneducated, with loud voices,
gesticulating ludicrously, I positively loathed. As my mind
was then fermenting in a sort of pious must—l dare not call it
religion—l adjured myself to remember not the man but the
office he represented. But this was often more than I could do.
One of the interests I created for myself was to seek out
some of the families whom work at the brewery and mills
had attracted to settle in the bush close by. I would trudge
a mile to one family, and then a mile farther on to another.
The first dwelling, a cabbage-tree hut, held a gaunt, red-haired
man and his wife, three red-haired, shock-headed children—
two little boys and a girl. The father was a dour Irish Orange-
man, a strict Presbyterian of Calvinistic leanings. If the man
was at home when I called, he would often lead the talk to
religious controversy. It was useless to argue with him. The


clincher was for him to go inside the hut and bring out a large,
heavy book, ‘ Scott’s Commentaries on the Bible,’ and read
aloud the notes therein upon the passage he had quoted. This,
to his mind, settled the point. Never have I heard a man in
his position dispute as cleverly as he did. By contrast, never
could I have imagined such absence of intellect as the children
showed. It was very hard to get any sense of perception into
or out of the heads of the elder children, but Tim, a boy of five,
had a brain as dense as iron wood.
To teach him the alphabet, as I sat on a three-legged stool
brought out of the hut in my honour, I invented and tried every
possible device. First, in a book I pointed out big ‘A ’ and
little ‘ a, ’ big ‘ B ’ and little ‘ b, ’ big ‘ R ’ and little ‘ r, ’ one
division at a time. Then with a stick I drew enlarged forms of
the letters in the dust. I tried to make the boy see the differ-
ences between them —how ‘ B ’ drew his foot in, how ‘ R ’ threw
it out. I took a pair of scissors and cut out the letters in
paper; all in vain. The boy’s intelligence, if any there were,
was by no means quickened by his father’s remarks, for he was
always present at the lesson if it were after his working hours.
Whenever he could he would interrupt with, ‘ Tim, you rascal,
whativer do you be annoying the lady for? The “ B ” is as plain
as a wallaby, and for truth if you don’t say “ B ” when the lady
comes all the way to tache you, I’ll have the stick of you.
I’ll make you see the di-vergence betwixt him and “ R.” Lave
him to me, Miss; I’ll persuade him.’ Then would come a howl-
ing from Tim, and I would beg him off, saying we must have
patience, it was all so new to him, and so on; although in my
heart I .felt hopeless of ever teaching Tim the letters, much
less of teaching him to read.
A mile beyond my red-haired friends lived a pretty, refined
young Irish woman and her husband. He was a woodman,
and only once did I catch sight of him. On my first visit I
found her in bed, with a baby a day or two old beside her. Her
bed-jacket and bed-clothes were exquisitely clean, though she
seemed as fragile as a flower, far too weak to work. I looked
about for a saucepan, in order to make her some gruel over the
wood embers from her stock of oatmeal. ‘ Don’t you be
throubling yourself, Miss; you’ll be spoiling your illigant frock.
Larry gave me a good sup of milk this mornin’. I’ll get along


finely till he comes back this evening.’ But of course I dis-
regarded her words, and straightway set about making the
gruel. A big shallow tin dish with water in it stood on a chair
beside her, in which she had been washing the baby—with
great difficulty, I am sure. Having cleared things away, I
swept the earthen floor, and then sat down beside her and
discussed the baby. I often visited her afterwards, and had
the satisfaction of seeing her get about again and grow strong.
She struck me, with her beautiful face and refined manners, to
be one of those gentlewomen whom Nature at times produces,
with whom even those ‘ to the manner born ’ and well educated
cannot always vie, lacking as they often do the innate grace—
God-given.
Owing to special circumstances, my youngest half-sister did
not accompany us to Sydney, but joined us two months later.
It was a curious thing that, when we parted on hoard the
ship at Gravesend, I said, ‘ I shall not say good-bye, for I
am firmly convinced that you will soon follow us.’ This I felt
strongly, although at the time it seemed to be impossible of
fulfilment.
When untoward circumstances arose, my sister turned for
help to a wonderful old aunt of mine, who with keen ability for
surmounting difficulties united the kindest and most sympa-
thetic of hearts. She arranged everything for my sister, took
her passage in a ship for Sydney, and gave her in charge to
the captain. My sister was a very pretty brunette, with small,
regular features, black eyes, and cheeks the colour of a ripe
peach. Amongst the passengers on board ship she made some
kind and agreeable friends. A military doctor and his wife
asked her to stay with them in Sydney until she could com-
municate with us. How joyful and triumphant were my feel-
ings when the letter reached us announcing her arrival in
Sydney! My father fetched her thence, but not before she
had promised her kind friends to pay them a visit later on.
She returned to them, and in a very short time she became
engaged. The engagement was a short one, and soon after her
second home-coming she was followed by her future husband.
The wedding took place in a fortnight, and a curious one it was.
The clergyman, Mr. Meares of Wollongong, was to perform
the ceremony in the little wooden church across the creek. But


this was not to be. For nearly two weeks there poured down
such a tropical rain that the creek on the road to the church
became a deep, wildly rushing river, spreading and overflowing
the paddocks and country round about. My sister had made an
error in stating her age in a certain document, and because of
that and of the impossibility of reaching the church a mounted
messenger was sent off ninety miles to Sydney, through the
downpour of rain, to rectify my sister’s mistake, as well as
to obtain the Bishop’s sanction for the marriage to take place in
the house.
At first my mother had had some anxiety about the wedding-
breakfast, but by good luck the under-steward of our ship chanced
to come along, whom she forthwith engaged to help Henry, our
cook. Never was there a better or a prettier wedding-breakfast.
Trestles with boards laid across were set in the long verandah.
The finest of tablecloths, brought out by my mother from
England, was spread upon the impromptu table, and on it was
set out most goodly fare of bush turkey, stuffed with thick
rump-steak to make it juicy. The breast of this bird—the ten-
detest part—is very dark, almost black; the legs and wings
white, which are not eaten. There were also wanga-wanga
pigeons, ducks, roast and boiled salt-beef —mutton was un-
attainable (it was not a sheep country)—tongue, ham, and fresh-
water crayfish, not to mention creams, jellies, and pastry, and a
big and most excellent wedding-cake.
All was complete. The clergyman had arrived the previous
night, and the messenger who had been despatched to Sydney
ten days ago, and whose delay in returning had kept os in
unpleasant excitement, was happily back again with the Bishop’s
dispensation, although, the weather having changed, it was
hardly needed. The swollen waters had nearly returned to
their usual bounds; an unclouded blue sky and golden sunshine
glorified the wedding-day.
Our only guests were the doctor and his wife, and her sister,
who came on horseback, and our Scotch friends, who travelled
in a bullock-dray. Previous to the arrival of these the bride
and bridegroom were married in our little parlour, in the
presence of my father and mother, my elder half-sister, and
myself. Mr. Meares wound up with an address in which he
laid great stress upon avoiding the first quarrel!
Then followed the breakfast. Healths were drunk and


speeches were made? Was there ever a wedding-breakfast
without them?
Soon after, the guests departed, and we of the household were
left. In the cool of the evening, amidst the hurrahs of the men,
who had had a holiday given them and a bucketful of sherry
to drink the health of the bride and bridegroom, these two set
out on horseback for their seven-mile ride to the little weather-
board inn at Kiama, escorted by our Sydney messenger to show
them the way.
When my half-sister and her husband had settled down, a
few miles out of Sydney, in a pretty house at Cook’s
Eiver, her own elder sister went to stay with them. Subse-
quently I paid them a visit. It was to have been for two
months, but lengthened out to five years, broken by occasional
visits home.
Some two years after I had joined my sister, there arrived
in Sydney a ship, the Rattlesnake. It had been sent out by
the English Government under the command of Captain Owen
Stanley, E.N., with officers especially selected for its duty, that
of surveying the coasts of Australia, the Louisiade Archipelago,
and New Guinea.
At a private dance given to the officers of the Rattlesnake
I met the assistant-surgeon, an enthusiastic follower of natural
science. After a few more meetings we became engaged, and
eight years after, during five of which both the Pacific and
Atlantic Oceans separated us, we were married in England.
The engagement was truly a long and weary one, but its
crowning gift was above all price, that of forty years of happy
wedded life.


ODE ON THE TERCENTENARY OF
CHARTERHOUSE ,1 1611-1911.
‘ ho, dost thou not see that these blessed fathers be now as cheerful going
to their deaths as bridegrooms to their marriage! ’ — Words attributed to
Sir Thomas More, who from his prison in the Tower saw the Carthusians
passing to their execution.
For the promotion of piety and good literature.— Founder’s Prayer.
Dear daughter of Light on the warm green hills whose folds
are fringed with the shining Wey,
Touched with the first white warning of dawn and brooding late
on the long-drawn day,
With eyes turned south to your Mother of old, God’s chair of
rock 2 in a region of cloud,
Where thunder rumbling round the cliffs and the mountain-
rill’s voice lifted loud
With muttered litanies mingled once, and whirlwind to whirl-
wind shrieked yet higher,
But a still small voice in the brethren’s hearts ever followed the
earthquake and the fire.
Their name, as white as the robe they wore, was broidered with
glory of deeds more bold,
When lean hounds loosed from the kennels of kings waxed fat
on the weak defenceless fold;
Meek they of the meek, whose martyr crown with purest honour
of pear], should shine,
Because they have chosen that good part, once blessed in Mary
as more divine;
And they passed to their doom as a bridegroom goes when hymns
of rapture herald the bride;
—Whose age is past and their fancy flown, but their faith and
their love and their goodness abide.
1 The three-hundredth anniversary of Thomas Sutton’s foundation will
be commemorated at Charterhouse in London on the twelfth of December,
which is kept as Founder’s day. The event was celebrated at the new
foundation in Godaiming on the eighth of July last.
2 Chaire Dieu ; a local name, said by some to be the origin of I’abbaye’
Chartreuse.


THE DAILY TELEGRAPH.
THE HU
LATH I’WUKKSSOU T. 11. IH'XLKV. TUK KMiN'KNT HUM AHi !>T.
In a mount issue of ‘’The Hally Trio- ' will bo ivmemhomd. was. during isu; .Vf ?k»»t tnnvssary Loro io speak. Iln die
nraph" (hero appeared an ann-io imprinted ,nn assis(y’'t-sm’iroon of n.M.S. UaUb'suako, at KasMmiinio iu
from Hie 'aVnihili Magazine”! by Mrs. T. rhon - mg' liic passage between tin* Mrs. MuMoy. Jus widow who is now >
ti. widow of tin* eminent biologUi. Earri. and Mu* Australian roast. Of years o-‘ an'*. a:ul s;}’l hale and hearty. nai
" T. il. Huxley. Professc.., '} S X ~if Ids >in- li: mu distinguish'd ra!*'vr ii is rated hm* rmtilr'-lkniN ol Sydney and -lan


SATURDAY, AUGUST 17, 1912.
XLEYS.
Mb's. IirXLKY, WJUOW OF THi; ! Uorkssoi; T. 11. !i i \MY
■ heroo in tlif arlu-h* voforvoil 50. which was ino tone Ou- mtu-io \viHihlNhotl. comma- thorn v.lfh nuti-li inlor<vf. Mrs. Htmlcy w.is
very hrisrluly wriiten. it: wns "n Sydney i<h-;i|i>U \v!1 1) her, :iml received J:i return the« yoom; yirl when her family ennui to New
Hint she mol her future Imeliarn'T while hr . pjniiojn'tipiio. copies! of yitioh mv nosv I’e-. Sueili 'Viuin In ISH. Her lirsi homo wa-=
"'■’is .‘ilnicliod. to 11.M.H. KaHlosn ske. Kev. • ijroihiced, Titov r sera u< 1%. ■; ii■ i; ■ i:!.;i -in \ t .-it! Hay, hut she also lived fur some
" V. Alii ill. who waa n-vltn- o i K Ilium at, vVook. when-. •ho <>idr;i residents! inspected ; ; .<• »,» ,lainl»er«o.
