

PICTORIAL ART' AMONG THE
AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
E. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(WITH TWO PLATES.)
BE/RG A PARER HEAD BEFORE THE VICTORIA INSTITUTE.
AUTHOR’S COPY.




ORDINARY MEETING*
The Rev. Canon Girdlestone, in the Chair.
The Minutes of the last Meeting were read and confirmed, and the
following paper was read by the Lev. Dr. Walker in the absence of
the author:—
PICTORIAL ART AMONG THE AUSTRALIAN
ABORIGINES. By R. H. Mathews, L.S. (With two
Plates.)
Introductory.
MOST of the drawings of the Australian aborigines are
very primitive in execution, and conventional in
type, but they are nevertheless of unquestionable value to
the student of archaeology, I have made accurate copies of
a large number of these pictorial representations, which have
not hitherto been recorded, and propose to treat the subject
under the following divisions, namely : Rock Paintings—
Rock Carvings—Marked Trees—Drawings on the Ground-
Images—and Carvings on Wooden Implements.
The Right Rev. Dr. Thornton, Bishop of Ballarat, Victoria,
having favoured me with a copy of his valuable paper on
Problems of Aboriginal Art in Australia,” read before your
Institute on the 7th of April, 1897,f I have presumed to
forward the following pages on the same subject, in the
hope that they may, in some slight degree, serve to con-
tinue the interest awakened by his Lordship’s paper. (I
* December 4th, 1899.
t Journ. Trans. Vic. Inst., vol. xxx, pp 205-232.
VICTORIA INSTITUTE TRANSACTIONS.


may state that this subject was treated by me before the
Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science,
Section F, at Sydney, New South Wales, January, 1898.)
Rock Paintings.
In a number of articles contributed to different ethno-
logical and philosophical societies, I Jiave given a short
account of the first discovery of these drawings in several
parts of Australia, and described the manner in which the
different styles of rock paintings are produced by the native
artists, so that it will not be necessary to again refer to
these parts of the subject. I shall therefore proceed at
once to describe the cave paintings.
Cave I.—This shelter is situated in a high escarpment of
Hawkesbury sandstone, known as 4! The Wallaby Rock,”
near the left side of a small creek, about 15 chains in a
north-easterly direction from the north-east corner of Portion
No. 58 of 40 acres, in the parish of Bulga, county of Hunter.
It is 85 feet long, and extends into the face of the cliff
18 feet at the widest part; the height from the floor to the
roof at the back of the recess is 8 feet, which increases to
11 feet (3 inches at the entrance. The floor consists chiefly
of soil and ashes, through which the rock protrudes in
places. The front of the cave faces N. 60° W., and judging
by the smoke-stains on the roof, as well as by the ashes on
the floor, appears to have been used as a camping place by
the aborigines. On digging into the floor, I found several
stone-knives used by the natives in dressing the skins of
animals, and for other purposes.
The total number of hands in this shelter, all of which
are shown in the Plate, is ninety-seven, four of them being
shut hands, and thirty right hands. Some of them are smaller
than others, and in several the arm is delineated almost to
the elbow. Among the hands are a boomerang, and toma-
hawk Avith handle, executed in white stencil in the same
manner. There are also three groups of lines drawn in
white; the first group contains eight lines 9 inches long,
with a white bar across the top of them; the second group
has ten white lines 2 feet long; and the third group eight
lines 15 inches in length. White and red lines, similar in
character to these, have been observed in a number of caves,
and are worthy of careful study and comparison. On the
left of the boomerang is a pick-shaped object drawn in red,


the only instance of the employment of that colour in the
cave. The other paintings represent a fish, a human figure,
and two irregularly shaped objects, all drawn in white out-
line.
This cave is one of the largest—as well as being amongst
those containing the greatest number of drawings—which I
have visited. To a spectator standing in front of it, with
its immense array of upwards of a hundred objects painted
in white on the dark coloured rock, the view is very imposing.
The distance from the cave to the Macdonald river, in
which the water is permanent, does not exceed half-a-mile.
Cave 2.—This rock-shelter is situated at a place known
as “The Gulf,” about 13 or 14 miles from Rylstone, in the
parish of Growee, county of Phillip. It is within sight of
the main road from Rylstone to Bylong, and on the western
side of it. The cave consists of a large hollow in a huge
isolated boulder of Hawkesbury sandstone about 60 feet in
diameter, and 35 feet high. The cavity measures feet
in length, 13 feet in height, and 12 feet in depth from the
entrance to the back wall, and faces N. 35° E. The floor is
composed of sandy soil near the front, but farther in tlie
rock comes to the surface, and the cave bears evidence of
having been occupied as a place of residence. Permanent
water is obtainable in Gulf Creek which runs close by.
If the observer faces the cave, a number of hands and two v
feet may be seen on the left—the latter being apparently
those of a child, six or eight years old—all done in red stencil.
Looking towards the right we see seven hands, one of them
being shut, stencilled in white, and above them four more
hands done in red stencil. Owing to the disintegration of
the face of the rock on which the figures appear, a consider-
able number of hands have become too indistinct to be
copied. The lowest of the figures are about 8 feet from the
floor, and the highest about 12, there being a ledge of rock
running along the back wall of the cave, about 6 feet from
the ground, upon which the operators probably stood when
doing the work.
This cave is chiefly remarkable for the two stencilled feet,
which are about 12 feet from the surface of the ground. In
order to stencil them at that height, it is likely that forked
saplings were placed against the rock to support the weight
of the child, who held its feet in position whilst the artist
blew the colouring pigment around them. A theory pro-
pounded by some of the white residents in that district is
a 2


that perhaps the feet were severed from the body of a dead
person, and applied to the rock.
Cave 3 (Fig. I ). —This cave is in a high rocky escarpment
of Hawkesbury sandstone, forming the boundary of Portion
No. 65 of 40 acres in the parish of Price, county of Phillip.
The nearest permanent water is in Cooyal Creek, about
a mile to the southward. The shelter is 30 feet long,
Fig. 1.
# ''' ,;
extending into the rock about 15 feet. r lhe height at the
entrance is (5 feet, increasing to 8 feet inside, owing to the
dome-shaped roof.
The end of the cave on the right hand side of the interior
on entering, is somewhat circular, the back w r all curving
round towards the front, or outwards. Out of a considerable
number of paintings in this shelter, 1 have reproduced one


of the most important groups, drawn around the curved
wall referred to. The figures plainly distinguishable, at the
time of my visit, in this part of the cave, consisted of two
left and three right hands; seven double tracks of a
kangaroo, and six tracks of what appears to be a native
dog’s foot. Probably the feet of dead animals were em-
ployed in both instances. There is also the mark where
some object has been cut out by some white visitor—most
likely a hand. To the left of the kangaroo tracks—between
these tracks and where the object has been cut out —and
also above the dog’s tracks, several paintings of hands have
become too indistinct to copy.
This cave faces N. 85° E., and is about 150 feet above the
flat ground to the south of it. It would have formed a very
comfortable camping place in the winter time, when water
could have been obtained in the small gullies running out
of the hills close by. All the drawings have been executed
in the red stencil method.
Cave 4. —This rock-shelter is situated in a high escarp-
ment of Hawkesbury sandstone about 5 chains on the
eastern side of the old Bulga road, and about a mile north-
easterly from Portion No. 4, of 21 acres, 2 roods, 16 perches,
in the parish of Milbrodale, county of Northumberland, It
is 37 feet long, 17 feet deep, and 12 feet high, and faces
N. 70° E. The floor contains hearth rubbish, and the roof
is begrimed with smoke, indicative of the place having been
used for residential purposes. Water is obtainable in Bulgar
Creek, about a quarter of a mile distant.
At the present time there is but one right hand, done in
white stencil, in this cave. There is a human figure and
parts of two others outlined in black, and shaded in the
same colour. There are three representations of snakes
drawn in the same manner; also two objects, one on the
right and the other on the left of tne plate, probably
intended to represent native weapons. What appears to
be intended for a human head and shoulders is drawn in
black outline, filled in with lines of red and black mixed
indiscriminately. Towards the left is shown a pick-shaped
object, similar to the one represented in Cave 1, outlined in
black, and shaded with the same colour. There is also a
native shield outlined and shaded in red, with a median bar
down the centre. Crossing the lower end of the last named
is a drawing in black, the meaning of which is not very
obvious. Besides the foregoing there are three groups of


those remarkable white lines before referred to, one group
containing three strokes, another live, and another eight.
Between the last mentioned and the stencilled hand are
seven white spots, with a short stroke downwards from the
central one.
Cave s.—The low escarpment of sandstone containing
this shelter is within Portion No. 9 of 47 acres, in the same
parish and county as the last described. It is about 24 chains
easterly from the new Bulga road, and about 12 chains from
Darkey Creek, in which the water is permanent. The cave,
which faces N. 40° E.. is 37 feet long, 11 feet high, and
varying from 18 to 26 feet from front to back. The floor
consists partly of rock, but chiefly of hearth rubbish and soil,
the roof bearing the stains of the smoke of numerous flres,
showing that the place has been used as a camp by the
aborigines.
The drawings, which are all done in white stencil, consist
of thirteen hands, two boomerangs, and an object 3 feet
9 inches long, by 3 inches wide, evidently a native weapon
either flat and sword-like, or cylindrical and solid, as a
waddy. Although the rock is hard, durable and dry, and
the cave faces the forenoon sun, most of these paintings are
rather faint, indicating that they are of considerable age.
Rock Carvings.
It is not my intention on the present occasion to add a
plate showing specimens of rock carvings, but will invite
the reader to peruse a series of articles on this subject
written by me during the past four or five years, which are
illustrated by numerous plates.
In some of the articles referred to, I gave an account of
the discovery of rock carvings in the vicinity of Sydney
in 1788. shortly after the colony of New South Wales was
founded, and also mentioned other parts of Australia where
similar carvings have been observed since that period. In
other papers directions were given for copying these draw-
ings from the rocks on which they occur, by means of
measurements and sketches made in a note-book, with
instructions for the preparation of plates for publication,
in other communications I explained the manner in which
Carvings were cut upon the surface of the rocks by the
native artists, and the possible purpose of the drawings.
Several of my papers were largely occupied with illustrative


specimens, amounting in the aggregate to upwards of two
hundred and thirty separate carvings, representing human
beings, animals of various kinds, warlike implements, dances,
hunting and fishing scenes, etc.*
Marked Trees.
Aboriginal drawings on trees consist of representations
of men, animals, weapons, the different heavenly bodies,
lightning, and a variety of characters consisting of curved
and zigzag lines, lozenge and oval shaped designs, chevrons,
bars, etc. Marked trees of this kind are found at those
camps where the initiation ceremonies are performed. _ The
graves of the natives, the scenes of some of their fights,
and remarkable events in their daily life are likewise
commemorated by curious symbols marked on trees standing
around the spot.
The specimens of native art found upon trees are executed
in various ways. The mode of drawing most generally
adopted is to outline the object by a nick cut with the
tomahawk into the bark of the tree. In some cases the
whole of the bark within the outline of the figure is
removed; in other instances a portion of the bark is first
removed from the tree, and the design cut into the wood.
Some of these native drawings are merely scratched upon
the bark of the tree, whilst others arc painted upon the bark
with red ochre or charcoal.
1 will now proceed to describe some carvings copied by
me from a number of trees on a Kamilaroi Bora ground on
Redbank Creek, a tributary of the Weir River, in the parish
of Tallwood, county of Carnarvon, Queensland. These
carvings are shown on Plate I, hereto annexed as figs.
1 to 18 inclusive. Fig. 8 represents the crescent moon, cut
through the bark, and a short distance below it are four
zig-zag lines. On another tree, Fig. 13, there is a centipede
3 feet 1 inch in length, with eighteen legs, chopped through
the bark into the wood, with some diamond or lozenge
shaped devices below it. On a forked box tree was the
outline of an iguana, Fig. 17, 5 feet 2 inches long, cub
through the bark. Fig. 18 represents a carpet snake 9
* Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Auat., Queensland Branch, vol. x, pp. 46-70 ;
Ibid., vol. xi, pp. 86-106. Jo urn. Anthrop. Inst., London, vol. xxv,
pp. 145-163 ; Ibid., vol. xxvii, pp. 532-541. Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc.,
Philadelphia, vol. xxxvi, pp. 195-208 and pp. 466-478.


feet 4 inches in length, with its head toward the ground,
cut in the same manner. The marking on the remainder of
the trees shown in the plate consists of the usual zig-zag,
lozenge, oval, and other devices. Growing near these was
a small box tree, along the bole of which a wavy band about
2 inches wide had been cut with a tomahawk through the
bark, extending from near the ground to a height of
about 25 feet, representing a tree which had been struck by
lightning; this tree is not shown in fhe plate.
Drawings on the Ground. (Plate 1.)
Earthen figures formed in high relief, or engraven upon
the turf, representing human beings, different animals,
implements, and the curious designs called yowan by the
Kamilaroi and Wiradjuri tribes, are found chiefly at those
places where the youths are admitted into the status of
manhood. Where they have been observed in other
localities the circumstances Avould lead us to suppose that
they were connected with some tribal myth or superstition,
or were used on festive occasions.
Native drawings on the ground consist of several kinds.
Some are first outlined by laying down logs, bark, bushes,
or stones, to a certain height, and then covering them with
earth to complete the figure. This was obviously done
because the natives had very primitive tools for digging;
in large drawings, raising a considerable quantity of earth
would require much time and labour, especially if the
ground were hard or clayey. In other instances the figures
are formed entirely of the loose earth heaped up so as to
resemble the horizontal image of the required object.
Another kind of drawing consists of representations of
men, animals, and devices in various patterns cut into the
surface of the ground; a nick or groove from 2to 3 inches
wide and about 2 inches deep being dug in the turf along
the outline of each figure. These grooves were dug with
tomahawks, or with flat pieces of wood on which an edge
had been formed. Other figures again are merely drawn
upon the sand with a stick held in the hand of the
operator.
In the annexed Plate I have reproduced some of the
ground drawings copied by myself at the same Bora camp
as that containing the trees already dealt with. Figs. 19 to
45 will fairly represent the different patterns of yowan carved


1
J |
\
«
Vq
v r
0
S/v
W
*
u
1
\A A
w(a
l|
\
5
i
f
V
V
V U
V V
V L
V' v
m
M
I
1
i ;
i
i
4
1
Y
£
1
.L
\
/
WO
t- c
\0C
19
Z 3
j/m
4
2/
S € 7 8
*|Pi
to
z
// / 2 /J 14
CXvlAz^
|^g5g) X 0 (Q
Z« 2 /
5
15
/£ //
>** A
Z5
11
18
JO
3/
WW& ' 4^ 7
J4
M
1
wm.
n
j
M
1O0
41
y»3
7f\>
Scale of Tigs, Ito 28
FEET
0 4-8
■ 2
*g V?
\d9
24
>■
M
rr-T%
it
m^
£ Etr .
it
24
32
AO
AS
r
s/
52
s*
Scale' of Tigs
ldtoS4-
*
hi. f/jathens
let-
PLATE
I. — Drawings m
Natives
IN THE
Ground.




PLATE 11.
Additional Drawings by Natives.




upon the turf on that occasion. The largest of the designs
was 37 feet in length, by 7 feet in width, part of which is
shown in Fig, 31; another was 2-9 feet by 5 feet, and is
shown in its entirety in Fig. 34. Some of the smallest of
these carvings in the soil were only 2 or 3 feet in length,
filling out spaces between trees. A good deal of the soil
cut out in carving these designs was used in building the
raised representations of Baiamai and Gooberangalnga
described farther on.
Fig. 43 represents a legendary, serpent-like monster called
the Kurrea, which is supposed to have its abode in deep
lagoons and other sheets of water, and devours human
beings who may come within its reach. This drawing
measures 39 feet in length, and its greatest width is about
a foot. It is formed by a groove about 3 inches wide dug
into the turf along its outline. Fig. 47 is a woman cut in
the ground in a similar manner. The height is 7 feet 4
inches, but would be more if the legs were not so much
distended.
Fig. 48 is a huge horizontal representation of Baiamai,
lying on his back, formed by building up the loose earth,
which was 1 foot 2 inches high at the chest. The length
of the figure was 9 feet 6 inches, and the width from hand
to hand 9 feet.
Fig. 49.—0 n the opposite side of the pathway, close to
the last described, was a figure of Goberangalnga, the wife
ot Baiamai, formed in the same way, but with the addition
of a coat of kneaded clay on top, in which were moulded
the features of the face, the mammae, etc. The length of
the figure was 10 feet 9 incnes, with a distance of 8 feet
between the hands.
Fig. 50 delineates a man with a boomerang in each hand,
and a belt around the waist. The object 2 feet 5 inches
long rising from the top of the head, was, the native artist
told me, intended to represent a feather stuck in the hair.
This drawing bears a striking resemblance to some of the
aboriginal rock pictures found in other districts.
Fig. 51 represents two death adders, formed of raised
earth, with their heads in the same direction. One of these
reptiles is 9 feet long, the other 10 feet 6 inches.
Fig. 52. This drawing, which is outlined by a nick dug
into the soil in the way already stated, represents a cod-fish
9 feet in length, and 3 feet 8 inches across the body.
Fig. 53 was intended to denote an emu, and was formed


in the same maimer as the last described. Its length from
the bill to the tail was 12 feet 6 inches, and its height from
the feet to the top of the back 7 feet 9 inches. The legs
are short in proportion to the body, being 2 feet 6 inches
long—perhaps to indicate that the bird is sitting or crouching
down.
Fig. 54 represents two more drawings of death adders,
also formed by heaping up the loose earth into the required
shape. Their heads and tails are almost touching, and the
length of each reptile is a little over l(i feet.
In a paper contributed by me to the Royal Society of
Victoria in 1896, describing the initiation ceremonies of one
of the native tribes, I briefly referred to the marks on the
trees and on the ground dealt with in this article, but no
plate illustrating them has hitherto appeared in any publica-
tion. They are therefore quite original.
Images.
Under this designation I propose to include all figures
formed of wood, bark, clay, or other material. These images
or effigies differ from earth-moulded drawings lying flat
upon the surface of the ground, because they are not
attached to the soil, but are movable. They comprise
human figures, representations of the sun, moon, reptiles,
birds and other objects.
At the Burbung ceremonies of the aboriginal tribes on the
Lachlan and Murrumbidgee rivers, New South Wales, I have
seen an image of Dhurramoohm —a spirit whom they rever-
ence, or rather fear—formed partly of wood and partly of
clay, and placed leaning against an adjacent tree to keep
it In a vertical position. This effigy was manufactured in
the following manner. A sapling on which were two
opposite branches was selected, and cut down; the two
branches were then chopped off at such a length as to be
equal to that of a man’s arms. The stem of the sapling was
next cut through about a foot from these two lateral
branches, for the purpose of representing a man’s head and
neck. The main stem was again cut through about 5 feet
on the other side of the branches in order to form the body
and one leg. Mud or clay was then plastered all over this
wooden framework, or “ skeleton,” in such a way as to make
it resemble a human being. Only one leg was represented,
because Dhurramoolun is believed to have but one of these


useful members. The fingers, toes, face, and other features
were formed of clay, and attached to the wooden frame.
Human hair and feathers were then fastened on the head,
thus completing the rude image.
Blackfellows belonging to the south-east coast of New
South Wales, between Sydney and Cape Howe, have told
me that at their Bunan and festive gatherings, images were
formed of mud or clay and placed against trees for the
purpose of supporting them in an upright position.
In an article dealing with the Bora ceremonies of the
Kamilaroi tribes at Gundabloui,* I described two male
figures cut out of bark, and fixed up against trees. One of
these had his head ornamented with emu’s feathers, and the
other held in his hand a hielamon , or native shield. I also
described the figure of an iguana about 3 feet long, a figure
of the sun 2 feet in diameter, and one of the full moon 18
indies in diameter, all cut out of bark and fastened to trees.
Mr. John K. McKay, of Dungog, informs me that when
travelling on the Moonie river upwards of thirty years ago,
he saw an image made by the aborigines on the right bank
of that stream, about thirty miles above Nindigully, Queens-
land. it was apparently intended, he thought, to represent
a swan of enormous proportions, or some mythologic creature
of aboriginal lore. The body was about 15 feet long, 6 feet
wide, and about 4 feet high ; it was formed of bushes and
leaves pressed closely together, and covered with a thick
coating of mud. The head and neck consisted of a bent
log of the required shape, about 10 feet long, one extremity
of which was fixed into the ground at one end of the heap
of bushes, the other extremity being cut into shape to
represent the head, which was elevated several feet above
the surface, the whole figure was then ornamented with
daubs of white and red—the head being painted Avith the
latter colour. This image was at a deserted camp of the
natives, and before going aAvay they had taken all the
sheets of bark Avhich they had been using for their oavu
yimyahs, or shelters, and laid them over the monster to
protect it from rain. There was a cleared space several
yards Avide all round this animal, Avhere the natives had
apparently been dancing corroborees Avhile remaining in the
camp adjacent.
* Jo nr. Liny. ISvc. N.S. Wales, xxviii, IJ3: Journ. Antkrvp. /list., xxiv,
417.


At a corroboree witnessed by Mr. W. T. VVyndham near
either the Barwou or Condamine river, Queensland, he saw
an image made of earth and logs, which the blacks told him
represented the bunyip, warway, or polgnn, a water
monster.*
Mr. T. A. Parkhouse, in describing the customs of some
native tribes in the neighbourhood of Port Darwin,f states
that he was present at a corroboree held in connection with
a marriage ceremony. A post was fixed in the ground to
which bark was then attached forming the grotesque
representation of a man, —the whole being painted with red
ochre, and surmounted with a conical cap, covered with
white down, similar to that worn by the bridegroom. This
image was representative of the biruuel, or evil spirit.
Mr. E. J. Eyre witnessed a remarkable dance at Moorundie
on the Lower Murray river, South Australia, in 1844. The
dancers were painted and decorated as usual, and had tutfs
of feathers on their heads like cockades. Some carried in
their hands such tufts tied to the ends of sticks, and others
bunches of green boughs. After exercising themselves for
some time, they retired, and when they reappeared they
were seen carrying a curious rude-looking figure raised up
in the air. This singular object consisted of a large bundle
of grass and reeds bound together, enveloped in a kangaroo
skin, with the flesh side outwards, and painted all over in
small white circles. From the top of tins projected a thin
stick with a tuft of feathers at the end to represent the
head, and sticks were stuck out laterally from the sides fer-
tile arms, terminating in tufts of feathers stained red to
represent the hands. From the front a small stick about
(5 inches long was projected, ending with a thick knob
formed of grass, round which a piece of old cloth was tied.
This was painted white, and represented the navel. The
figure was about 8 feet long, and was evidently intended to
symbolize a man. This figure was carried for some time in
the dance. Subsequently there appeared in its place two
standards made of poles, and borne by two persons. The
standards were abandoned, and the men advanced with
their spears. Mr. Eyre believed that these dances, and the
image, and the standards, had some connection with their
* Journ. Roy. Soc. A. S. Wales , xxiii, 41.
t Austin. Assoc. Adv. Sci. (1895), vi, 642,


superstitions, and that the figure was regarded in the light
of a charm.*
Mr. Edward S. Parker says lie has witnessed ceremonies
having resemblance to an act of worship, when the blacks
have assembled to propitiate Mined , an evil spirit, whose
sole business it Avas to destroy. They used certain pre-
scribed ceremonies in order to appease his anger, and to
avert deatli and other calamities from themselves, and to
excite him to exercise his power for the injury or destruc-
tion of their enemies. “ Rude images,” Avrites Mr. Parker,
“ consisting of one large and tAvo small figures, cut in bark
and painted, Avere set up in a secluded spot; the men, and
afterwards the Avomen, dressed in boughs, and having each
a small Avand, Avith a tuft of feathers tied on it, Avere made
to dance in single file, and in a very sinuous course, towards
the spot, and after going round it several times, to approach
the main figure, and touch it reverentially with the wand.
I believe this to be a relic of the ophilatria, or serpent-
worship of India.”f
Under date of 1875, the Rev, R. W, Holden speaks of the
natives “ cutting out an image of a man out of a sheet of
bark, and erecting it, and dancing around it.”}
Carvings on Wooden Implements.
The carvings under this heading comprise decorative or
symbolical designs cut upon shields, boomerangs, Avomeras,
message sticks, bullroarers, and other articles. As the
devices on a large number of native weapons have already
been illustrated by different writers in other publications, I
shall not at present add a plate representing this kind of
native art, but will refer the reader to R. B. Smyth’s
Aborigines of Victoria, vol. i, pp. 283-341 ; E. M. Curr’s
Austradan Race, vol. i, pp. 143-151.
Message-Sticks, also known as “ stick letters ” or “ talk-
ing sticks,” are pieces of Avood of different sizes. They are
in some cases flat on both sides, ornamented more or less by
* Journals of Expeditions of Discovery into Central Australia (1845),
vol. ii, pp. 236-238.
t R. B. Smyth’s Aborigines of Victoria (1878), vol. i, p. 166,
X Folklore, Manners, Customs, etc., of the South Australian Aborigines
(1879), p. 26.


carving, and are painted a bright colour; in other instances
they are merely a rounded piece of wood, or a rod cut from
the branch of a tree ; whilst a still more primitive kind are
made of a piece of bark. Instances have been observed
where marked pieces of bone are used in a similar manner.
They are marked in various ways, consisting of notches,
dots, strokes, curves ; and also with triangular, quadilateral
and zigzag devices.* In some of the more elaborately
carved there are rude representations of human beings,
whilst in some tribes they are not marked at all, but consist
merely of a plain piece of wood. “ Stick letters ” summon-
ing festive gatherings are sometimes decorated with the
down of birds, with or without other marks. In some tribes
the wood used for making the stick must be of the same
totemic division as the sender of the message, and the man
who carries it must also belong to the same division. The
marks are cut upon them with a piece of sharp stone, bone,
or broken shell.
These “ talking sticks ” appear to have been made
according to some conventional design known among the
tribes using them. One kind of stick is used for a corro-
boree where a large number of people assemble; another
is used to convey messages or reminders between friends
residing at some distance from each other. A certain sort
of stick would be used for festive gatherings; another in
cases of sickness or death, and so on. These sticks, differ-
ing perhaps but little in general appearance, would never-
theless be recognised by the people inhabiting the tract of
country in which they were used, and would thus, to a
certain extent, have a more or less fixed significance ; which
would, however, be very much restricted unless accompanied
by a verbal explanation by the bearer. The stick is given
to the messenger to assist him in remembering the heads of
the message, by connecting them with certain pictures,
marks, or notches cut upon it, which are explained to him
before he sets out on his journey. The stick also serves as
his credentials, being a confirmation or guarantee of the
genuineness of the message.
Bullroarers made of wood, sometimes ornamented by
carving on one or both sides, are used at those ceremonies
where the boys are inaugurated into the rank of manhood.
* For copies of the carvings on seven “ message sticks,” see my paper
on that subject in The American Anthropologist , vol. x, Plate VII.


Having elsewhere given tolerably full descriptions of the
bullroarers used by several tribes,* I shall not occupy any
further space in this article. The Rev. Louis Schulze,f
referring to the initiatory rites of the tribes on the Upper
Finke river, which rises in the McDonnell Ranges, South
Australia, states that the tjurunga , or bullroarer, in use
there is sometimes made of slate, as well as of wood. The
natives assert that the bullroarers are not made by the hand
of man, thus leaving us to infer that they are produced in
some supernatural way. Mr, Schulze also states that during
the ceremonies, the men paint their bodies with fish-like
figures, and other patterns.
Discussion,
The Chairman. —I am sure we owe a debt to Mr, Mathews for
having 1 written this paper, and we are also under a debt to
Dr. Walker for having read it.
I suppose the object of a paper of this class is to illustrate two
things. First, the nature of aboriginal man and his tendency to
art together with his power of illustrating things he has observed.
The second object I suppose is to see if we can fin I out more
about the different relationships of mankind. Take, for example,
the curious story of these caves, which are almost entirely
occupied with pictures of hands. It would seem as if the artist
who took these caves as his study went in for a speciality in
hands. One would like to know whether, in other parts of the
world, anything similar has ever been discovered.
So far as I can see, the different departments of this paper are
not much related one to another The things drawn on trees are
of a wholly different character from the things drawn on the walls
of the caves, and so with the images inscribed on the ground.
There was probably more of imagination than of skill, and that is
* “Bullroarers used by the Australian Aborigines,” Journ. Anthrop.
Inst., xxvii, 52-60, Plate YI.
t “The Aborigines of the Upper and Middle Finke River,” Trans,
Roy. Soc. South Australia , xiv, 210-246.


very natural, and it leads us, of course, to the consideration of
aboriginal man. He was evidently imaginative, but of an
imagination more primitive in its natui’e, I should suppose, than
their skill would be.
The reference to serpent worship towards the end of the paper
is very interesting, because we know that there have been in many
countries, far distant from one another, tendencies towards serpent
woi’ship and so towards the imitation of serpents and reptiles
connected with serpents.
Then the “talking sticks” remind us of the North American
Indians, who have samples of peculiar language, sometimes on
sticks and sometimes on slugs of wood. We would like to know
the relative dates of these different classes of objects and works
of art.
I was rather surprised to see that Mr. Mathews had had a
conversation with the native artist, the vei’y person who apparently
had produced some of these objects. We should like to know
a little more about the date and the object which led the various
persons to make those things —whether it was a mere freak or
religious superstition, about which there is such uncommon
reserve.
The Rev. Lach Sztbma. —With regard to the subject of native
art I fancy that it is much higher than one would suppose. The
illustrations in Mrs. Langham Parker’s book on Folklore are
reproductions of native art, and I believe with regard to pictorial
representations they are of a much higher stage than one would
anticipate —indeed there is a realism, in some of the work which
is represented, which certainly is striking. It gives one an idea
of Australia in a rough way, and the natives; and being black
they are fair representations of them, and they' throw a light on
the early stages of culture which even the people of Britain
must have passed through. But the confusion of ideas of
animals and men is remarkable. In some of their stories you
hardly know whether they are referring to men, women or
animals. In some of their sentences the idea seems to be rather
confused, and I suppose is taken from the transmigration of
souls and of metamorphoses and such expressions of thought
as we find in the Arabian Nights and the transmigration into
animals there represented. The subject of these Australians
throws light on the matter, for they are one of the few people


existing on earth, at the end of the nineteenth century, who are
really in that state in which we suppose Europeans were,
probably, on this island, say a thousand years before Christ.
The Tasmanians were, I believe, still more antique and belonged
to the paleolithic stage. They, of course, have passed away;
but the Australians are extremely interesting and still linger on
in their early stage.
The Rev. F. A. Walker, D.D. —There are one or two points
which I think are of great interest in this paper.
I fancy it is a moot point whether one nation derives its arts
and customs from a distant one, or whether, as human nature is
much the same in all places, two nations that cannot communicate
with each other have arrived at the same state of civilisation.
The talking stick, mentioned on page 13 of the paper, appears
to differ in its use from that adopted in other parts of the world,
such as the scytale in Greece, where a cipher Avas used for writing
a message lengthwise on paper. When it was rolled it Avas
unintelligible, the man who received it could decipher the
message; but the herald who carried it could not. Therefore
there is a slight difference between what he carried and that
carried by the Australians; because the messenger in the
Australian case had to remember the heads of the message; but
the Greek messenger on the contrary could not understand it,
and I think in some cases the message was to put to death the
man who conveyed the message.
I quite agree with what the Chairman has said —that serpent
worship is a relic or observance found not only in many lands
but in every land of which we have knowledge, and T do not,
therefore, think that the serpent worship of India need only be
quoted, for I have seen so many instances of ancient effigies of
the serpent in my travels in Italy. Evidently the idea of every
race was to propitiate the principle of evil, which idea ultimately
gave way to those Avho possessed the greater and vital power of
the Gospel.
Mr. Martin Rouse. — I should like to add, as the trend of the
discussion is towards serpent woi’ship, that the kings of Egypt
decorated their heads with a serpent, as shown on the monuments.
John Paton the missionary, when living in the New Hebrides,
was called out one day by a man who said, “ I have killed the
Tebil!“ What do you mean ? ” Paton asked. “ Matshiktshiki,”


he answered, giving the native name, “the one who does all the
mischief in the world, and causes all the wars.” He took him
round to his hut and showed him a huge sea-snake which he had
slain. “That is not the devil,” said Paton; but the man
maintained that it was the creature which had brought all evil
into the world.*
1 do not agree with the speaker (if indeed it is his opinion)
who said that thesT men had risen from a much ruder state.
A very remarkable fact was brought to light at the British
Association meeting at Oxford in 1894. Mr. Basil H. Thomson,
who, while surveying the Fijian island Levuka, had studied its
traditions, told the natives’ story that their ancestors had come
from the west in eight canoes, and that seven out of the eight
were lost. The chief of the whole party was however saved ; but
seeing what had happened in the terrible storm, be exclaimed,
“ Oh, my writings, my writings ! I have lost my writings through
that storm; and I am not able to transmit to my children the
history of our people.” So that nation had once possessed a
means of exactly recording events which they had utterly lost
when the missionaries reached the island.
In 1893 or ’94 Mr. George O'Brien wrote a pamphlet for the
Civil Engineers Institution, on the conditions of climate in the
desert of Atacama, in the course of which he stated that at a
point on the Inca road near to the desert there is a large inscrip-
tion in Quichra, the language of the ancient people of Peru;
whereas the Spanish historians tell us that at the conquest they
had no writing ; but there stands that great slab with writing
upon it.
But just as nations and tribes through degrading superstitions
lost the intelligent knowledge of their Creator, so through
constant wars did they lose many industrial and refining arts;
and the more they moved away from one another into remote
islands and peninsulas, while continuing their idolatries and giving-
free rein to jealousy and revenge, the more completely did they
forget true religion and noble handicraft. It used to be said that
the Australians had no religion, I daresay that is within the
memory of everyone here. That false accusation was utterly
dispelled by John Paton of the New Hebrides. When crossing
* John J. Paton, ii, 156.


over to Australia he took with him a bag of charms which were
worshipped as gods by his islanders v He showed them to the
black natives of Australia upon several occasions, and they
admitted that they had “ gods ” like them used by their
“doctors.” He then twice in the presence of European witnesses
bought for a handsome price several gods from an Australian
doctor and caused terror to other blacks by showing them.
Numerous witnesses themselves formally narrate these events,
one deposition being signed by a Victorian magistrate, Mr.
Robert Hood of Hexham. Upon the latter’s asking why he had
never seen or heard of these things before, the answer came,
“ Long ago white men laughed at black fellows praying to their
idols. Black fellows said, white men never see them again. .. .
No white men alive now have seen what you have seen.”
Professor Logan Lobley. —ln the Jerrayn Street Museum there
are some remarkable illustrations of aboriginal art. Along with
a portion of the floor of a cave in the south of France there are
exhibited bones with the representation of a reindeer, which were
therefore contemporaneous with man in that part of Europe, and
that reminds us of the Neolithic Period of that part of Europe
long years ago.
It is also noteworthy in connection with the paper that all the
indigenous animals of Australia are of a very early type, and
also the vegetation. We also see now that these have remained
practically unchanged for a long period.
The Rev. G. F. Whidborne, M.A. —I should like to say a word
upon what has fallen from the last speaker.
We have not any distinct indication as to whether the writer of
the paper regards these as recent drawings or old drawings.
It strikes me they must represent a very high state of intellectual
advance, and one ivould like to know whether the present natives
can achieve such things, or whether there is any reason to suppose
that they are remains of lost civilisation. We know that some-
times, even those very old drawings referred to as of the stone
age, are really very clever and, perhaps, show us much greater
advance in human culture than one is apt to suppose they do. I
remember once hearing a lecture, long ago, by a gentleman on the
rude drawings of ancient days on bone. The lecturer was a man
of high culture, and he not only gave us facsimiles of those rude
drawings, but he wanted to illustrate some points in regard to


20 PICTORIAL ART AMONG THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
them; so he got a blackboard and made some drawings of his
own, and the drawings of his own were even ruder than those
shown us of the stone era.
The Chairman, —Perhaps I had better now close the meeting.
I will only say that I am fully in accord with what has been
said by one of the speakers as to the human race. I think man,
when he came forth from the land of his Creator, was by no
means in a state quite savage. On the contrary, if he had been a
savage I do not think he would have got any further, but I think
the essence of humanity of the best type was within him, though
his higher powers and the actual thoughts of his mind would be,
naturally, developed at a later stage.
The meeting then adjourned.
Hakbison and Sons, Printers in Ordinary to His Majesty, St. Martin’s Lane.


Clic Dictum Institute,
|p!jHosopbital of (Steal Britain,
ADELPHI TERRACE, STRAND, LONDON, W.C.
Correspondence (including communications from intending Members or
Associates, &c.)to be addressed only to “The Secretary.”
THE PRIMARY OBJECTS.
THIS SOCIETY has been founded for the purpose of promoting the
following Objects, which will be admitted by all to be of high
importance both to Religion and Science :
First.—To investigate fully and impartially the most important questions of
Philosophy and Science, but more especially those that bear upon the
great truths revealed in Holy Scripture.
Second.—To associate Men of Science and Authors who have already
been engaged in such investigations, and all others who may be interested
in them, in order to strengthen their efforts by association ; and by
bringing together the results of such labours, after full discussion, in the
printed Transactions of an Institution; to give greater force and influence
to proofs and arguments which might be little known, or even disregarded,
if put forward merely by individuals.
Third.—To consider the mutual bearings of the various scientific conclusions
arrived at in the several distinct branches into which Science is now
divided, in order to get rid of contradictions and conflicting hypotheses,
and thus promote the real advancement of true Science ; and to examine
and discuss all supposed scientific results with reference to final causes,
and the more comprehensive and fundamental principles of Philosophy
proper, based upon faith in the existence of one Eternal God, Who in His
wisdom created all things very good.
Special advantages are secured to Country and Colonial Members and Associates
in the Journal of Transactions.
THE JOURNAL OF TRANSACTIONS
Contains the Papers read at the Meetings and the Discussions thereon.
Before these are published in the Journal, both are finally submitted to their
Authors for any revision, and MS. comments and supplementary remarks are
added, which have been sent in by such British, American, and other Members
to whom, as being specially qualified to contribute information upon the respective
subjects, proof copies of the Papers had been submitted for consideration—the
authors of Papers adding their final comments. These arrangements, which are
found to add greatly to the value of the Journal, are carried out with a view to
securing the special usefulness of the Journal to all, whether home or Non-resident
Members or Associates ; these thus find in the Journal much valuable matter, and
often much (contributed by men of learning in all parts of the world) in addition
to that which had come before those actually present at the Meetings. (The
Journal is sent post-free.)


President.
Sir Gboege Gabriel Stokes, Bart., LL.D., Sc.D., F.R.S.
Vice-Presidents. (Limited to seven.)
The Right Hon. Earl of Halsbury, P.C., E.R.S., &c. (the Lord High Chancellor).
Si; Joseph Fayrer, Bart., M.D.. F.R.S. The Ven. Archdeacon Thornton, D.D,
W. Forsyth, Esq., Q.C., LL.D. A. McArthur, Esq., J.P., D.L.
W. H. Hudleston, Esq., F.R.S.
The Council (24 Members).—Kev. J. H. Rigg, D.D.; Rev. Chancellor Lias, M.A.; General Sir H.
L. Geary, K.C.8.; Dr. Walter Kidd ; Revs. |W. Arthur and Dr. Angus ; Ven. Archdeacon
Sinclair, 8.D. ; Captain Creak. F.R.S.; D. Howard, Esq., D.L.,F.C.S. ; Professor E.Hull.
LL.D., F.R.S. ; Rev. Canon Tristram, F.R.S., &c., Ac.
Corresponding Members.
The Right Hon. Lord Kelvin, F.R.S. I Sir W. Turner, F.R.S.
Prof. R. Virchow, F.R.S. | Dr. E. Navillb.
Prof. Maspero. | Prof. A. Agassiz. | Prof. Etheridge, F.R.S.
Trustees. —D. Howard, Esq., D.Lr; Rev. Dr. Wage.
Hon. Auditors. —J. Allen, Esq.; General Hallowes.
Honorary Treasurer. —Professor E. Hull, LL.D., F.R.S.
S;c. and Editor of Journal. —Professor Edward Hull, M.A., LL.D., F.R.S.
MEMBERSHIP.
Intending Members and Associates are requested to address “The Secretary.”
The Annual Subscription for Members is Two Guineas. The Annual Sub-
scription for Associates is One Guinea , without Entrance Fee. {Both receive the
Journal post free.)
In lieu of Annual Subscription, the payment of Twenty Guineas will
constitute a Life Member, or Ten Guineas a Life Associate.
The payment of a Donation of not less than Sixty Guineas qualifies for the
office of Vice-Patron , with all the privileges of a Life Member or Life Associate.
[lt is to be understood, that only such as are professedly Christians are
entitled to become Members.]
*** Subscriptions are payable to the “Victoria Institute’s” credit at
“Barclay’s Bank,” 1, Pall Mall East, S.W., or may be remitted to the Secretary,
at the Office. Post Office Orders (on General Post Office) or Cheques should be
made payable to “ Victoria Institute or order,” and crossed “ Barclay & Co.”
PRIVILEGES.
Members —on election, are presented with the last published Volume of the
Journal of the Transactions, and are entitled to a Copy of the Journal during
the years they retain their membership; and, on application, to a copy of each
of the twelve papers published in the “ People’s Edition.” Also to the use of the
Library (Books can be sent to the country), Reading and Writing Room, and to have
any correspondence received and forwarded; to introduce two Visitors at each
Meeting, and, if they desire, to receive early proofs of any papers about to be read, in
order that they may be the better able to place their opinions thereon before the
Members (when unable to attend, they can do this in writing). The Council are
chosen from among the Members, who alone are eligible to vote by ballot in deter-
mining any question at a General Meeting. Members are further privileged to obtain
any of the One Guinea Volumes of the Transactions issued prior to their joining the
Institute at half-price (half-a-guinea each), or any Quarterly Parts for past years
at half-a-crown each.
The Library, Reading and Writing Rooms are open, for the use of the Members,
from ten till five (Saturdays till two). The Institute exchanges Trans-
actions with the Royal Society and many other leading English and Foreign
Scientific bodies, whose Transactions are therefore added to the Library,
Associates—are entitled to the Journal of Transactions during the years
they retain their Associateship; to obtain the Journal for past years or copies of
the 12 papers in the People’s Edition at half price ; and to introduce one Visitor at
each Meeting. Any Public Library or Institution may be elected “as an Associate,”
and have the Journals on similar terms.
Members and Associates have the right to be present at all Meetings of the Society.
The Meetings, of which due notice is given, are held at Adelphi Terrace, at Half-
past Four o’clock on the afternoons of the First and Third Mondays of the Winter,
Spring and Summer Months,
( 2 )


fi * a g ?
2 5 S' H “
t, <s, y "
< § W > «
_ H
9p . g
I S £ J a -
$ >* H <! <£
S Si. V 3 H
8 v * s
w ~ W
<J r. O
_ *Q ■ ■ M W
O § *3 < .2
H -S S W o
O C
g -H H rh ffi
Sgu ° <
S 2 Z *
q H 2» > £
° y h *2
ot w <s si
WyV n H
w o **
s # „ * w *r
8 y £
W « s < IS
«5 X •** N U Qj
< o « r?
l-H ?“ W <U
0 t 5 « S -a
S 5 < r£ O > .
•<i U i M £ <-) —y—^
H-I o «
w t-3 i> S v.
W£* £ £ I
« < K .£
W t 6 s r** >p
5 £*l
' O >s. „ £ <-)'*■*
6 *s* w s *o
£ g * |gs II
£ h s: £>
* £ *• 6 ? §
pz * X
ti i—i 'y
£
«
.<2
■kJ
.&
Js h
<u
KO ■'SJ
<s>
5 <2
p*r
i H
' P
H H
g H
W m
xfi 2
W M r <
'— r -' “
S fi
,(s g
Cj .£> £> H c!
«° a o
■§ « £ -C3
CO K* C
' S » Q
v § 4J I
r" I—l
O « ’±3
s» v' 2 «*h ?r
5 o
« ?S w m
!j* «* i-i >% |->
*■ S a j-4 <u
%> s h S H
CL)
-N j_
C « w v r o-
S w o
a 5 E C
NT %sk
-5 » rt 00
s; a o
« B H
JOURNAL OF TRANSACTIONS.
VOL. XXVIII.
The Eeligious ideas of the Babylonians. By T. G. Pinches, M.R.A.S., British Museum,
Remarks by Colonel Conder, R.E., D.C.L., Rev. Dr. LOvvy, Prof, Hommel, &c.
Chinese Ethics and Philosophy. By Sir Charles Gordon, K.C.B. Special statement
by Sir Thomas Wade, G.0.M.G., K.C.8., &c.
On the Luminiferous Ether. By Sir G. G. Stokes, Bart., President. Speeches by His
Excellency the Hon. T. F. Bayard, United States Ambassador, Sir H. Barkly,
G.0.M.G., K.C.8., F.E.8., Sir Joseph Fayrer, Bart., F.E.S., Professor Hull,
F.R.S., Admiral Grant, 0.8., R.N., &c. (Annual Meeting).
Evolution and Design. By G, Cox Bompas, F.G.S. Remarks by Protessor Blake,
F. Rev. J."M. Mello, F.G.S., &c.
Archaeology and Evolution. By R. H. Walkey. Remarks by Prof. Lobley, F.G.S.
Holy Scripture illustrated and confirmed by recent discoveries in the East. By Professor
E. Hull, F.R.S. Remarks by Prof. Gladstone, F.R.8., Colonel Conder, R.E.
Buddhism and the Light of Asia. By Rev. E. Collins, M.A. Remarks by Professor
Legge, Rev. G. U. Pope, D.D., the Rev. Kenneth Macdonald, Professor
Orchard, M.A., B.Sc., Mr. R. Scott Moncriefp, and many others.
Stone Folk-lore. By Professor Duns. Speeches by the Right Hon. the Lord Chan-
cellor, Sir H. Barkly, G.C.M.G., K.C.8., F.R.S., Sir G. Buchanan, P.R.S.,
Sir J. Fayrer, Bart., F.E.S., Professor Hull, F.R.S., Sir 0. Gordon, K.C.8.,
His Honour J, OtonbA Payne, &c. (Annual Meeting).
The Mechanical Conception of Nature. By Professor Macloskie, D.Sc., of Princeton
College, U.S.A. Remarks by Rev. Prof. Bernard, D.D., Rev. G. Buckton, F.R.S,
The Philosophy of Comte. By J. W. Slater, F.C.S., F.E.S.
On the supposed discovery of Remains belonging to an animal intermediate between man
and the ape. By Professor E. Hull, F.R.S. (illustrated).
The Passage of the Red Sea by the Israelites, By Major-General Tulloch, G. 8.,
C. M.G. (with map).
VOL. XXIX.
Jubilee Volume. Annual Address: The Perception of Light. By Sir G. G. Stokes,
Bart., President. Speeches by Earl Halsbury (Lord Chancellor), Sir H. Barkly,
G. F.R.S., Sir C. Gordon, K.C.8,, Profs. E. Hull, F.R.S., and Sayck.


On Scientific Eesearch. By Eev. Canon Girdle stone, M.A. Eemarks by Eev. Dr.
Lowy and others.
On Certain Inscriptions and Eecords Eeferring to Babylonia and Elam, their Eulers, &c.
By T. G. Pinches, Esq., M.E.A.S.
China’s Place in Ancient History. By Sir C. Gordon, K. C.B.
Polynesians and their Plant Names. By H. B. Guppy; Esq., M.B. Comments by
Dr. Eraser and others.
The Natural and the Artificial. By Dr. A. T. Schofield, M.E.C.S. Comments by
Professors Lionel Beale, F.E.S., Hull, F.E.S., H. W. Parker, LL.D., U.S.A.
The Causes of the Ice Age. By Warren Upham, Esq., State Geologist, United States.
Eemarks by Sir Joseph Prestwick, D.C.L., F.E.S., Professor J. Geikie, E.E.S.,
General Drayson, E.E.A.S., Professors E. Hull, E.E.S., and Logan Lobley, E.G.S.
On Specimens in the McGill University Illustrating the Physical Characters of the
Guauches. By Sir J. W. Dawson, C.M.G., F.E.S. Eemarks by Professors
Putnam, Cleland, F.E.S., and others.
Miracles, Science and Prayer. By Eev. Chancellor Lias, M.A., with comments.
VOL. XXX.
Annual Address ; Chiefly on the Eontgen Bays. By Sir G. G. Stokes. Bart., President.
Speeches by Earl of HALSBt'RY(Lord Chancellor), the Et. Hon. Lord Kelvin ,G.O.Y.O.,
Sir H. Bakkly, G.0.M.G., K.C.8., F.E.S., Sir Joseph Eayrer, Bart., K. 0.5.1..
E. Professor E. Hull, LL.D,, F.E.S.
Biblical Lands; their races, customs, &c. (with Map). By Hormuzd Eassam, Esq.
Eemarks by G. Pinches, Esq., M.E.A.S. (of British Museum), &c.
The History of Manikka VScagar, “the Poe of the Buddhists.” By 7 the Eev. G. V.
Pope, D.D., with Appendix for Students.
List of Publications in the Institute’s Transactions on the Eeligions of the East.
On some Eelations of Mind and Body. By A. T. Schofield, M.D., with communications
from Professors Calderwood, LL.D., J. Cleland, M.D., F.E.S., and Dr. Sansom.
The Classification of the Yertebrata. By Prof. J. Cleland, F.E.S., J. Hutchinson, Esq.,
F. Inspector-General J. D. Macdonald, F.E.S., Prof. 11. W. Parker,
Dr. W. Kidd, &c.
The Proposed Scheme for the Embanking the Waters of the Nile. By Professor B.
Hull, LL.D., F.E.S. Eemarks by Baldwin Latham, M.1.C.E., &c.
Problems of Aboriginal Art in Australia. By the Eight Eev. Bishop Thornton, D.D.
On Primitive Man. By Eev. J. M. Mello. Communications from Sir J. W. Dawson,
C.M.G., F.E.S., Professors T. Eupert Jones, F.E.S., E. Hull, F.E.S., H. G.
Seeley, P.E.S., and others.
Investigations regarding the submerged Terraces and Eiver Valleys bordering the British
Isles. By Professor E. Hull, LL.D., F.E.S. Eemarks by Cavaliere W. P. Jervis,
Director of the Eoyal Museum, Turin, Professors Etheridge, F.E.S., T. Eupert
Jones, F.E.S., Logan Lobley, F.G.S., &c.
VOL. XXXI. „
Annual Address: The age of the Earth as an abode fitted for life. By the Eight Hon.
Lord Kelvin, G.0.V.0. Speeches by the Eight Hon. Earl of Halsbury, P. 0., F.E.S.
(Lord Chancellor), Sir G. G. Stokes, Bart., F.E.S. (the President), Sir Joseph
Fayrer, Bart., F.E.S., Sir Sidney Shippard, G.C.M.G., Captain E. W. Creak,
E.N., F.E.S. Design in Nature. By Lord Kelvin. A note.
Where is Mount Sinai? By Professor E. Hull, LL.D., F.E.S., with the Ordnance
Survey Map reduced.
Design as exemplified in the formation of the human foot. A note by Dr. Gerard
Smith, M.E.O.S.
Herodotus- His remarks bearing on Egyptian Geology in the light of recent Egyptian
Eesearch. By Eev. F. A. Walker, D.D., F.L.S. Copious remarks by Sir
J. W. Dawson, C.M.G., F.E.S.
Herodotus. His remarks bearing on Egyptian Botany and Investigation. By same.
Physical conditions of the Mediterranean Basin which have given rise to a community’ of
some species of Fresh Water Fishes in the Nile and Jordan Basins. By Professor
E. Hull, F.E.S. (with map).
Tithe Giving amongst Ancient Pagan Nations: A plea for the Unity of the Human
Eace in early times. By Eev. H. Lansdell, D.D., M.V.1., M.E.A.S., F.E.G.S.
A note, Philological reasons for the same, given at the Congress of Orientalists by
the Bight Hon. F. Max Muller, M.A., D.C.L.
Another possible cause of the Glacial Epoch. By Professor E. Hull, LL.D., F.E.S
(with map), with remarks by Professors T. Eupert Jones, F.E.S., W. S. Gresley,
F. United States, Cavaliere Jervis, F.G S., Italy’, and others.
The Literature of Egypt in the time of Moses. By J. N. Fradenbergh, Ph.D., D.D.,
LL.D. With remarks by Colonel 0. E. Conder, E.E., D.C.L., &c.
Plan and purpose in Nature. By Dr. W. Kidd. Eemarks by Professors Lionel S.
Beale, F. 0.5., E. Hull. F.E.S., J. H. Gladstone, Ph.D., F.E.S., and others.
The Star Worshippers of Mesopotamia. By Eev. S. M. Zwemer, F.E.G.S. With
remarks by Dr. T. Chaplin and Colonel C. E. Condek, E.E., D.C.L.
Annual Address: The Perception of Colour. By Sir G. G. Stokes, Bart., F.E.S., V.D.
Speeches by the Eight Hon. Lord Kelvin, G.C.V.0., F.E.S., the Eight Hon.
Lord Lister, P.E.S., Sir 0. Gordon, K. 0.8., Archdeacon Thornton, &c.
Sub-Oceanic Terraces and Eiver Valleys off coast of West Europe. By Professor E.
Hull, LL.D., F.E.S. (with three plates). Eemarks by Professors Etheridge, F.E.S.,
T. McK. Hughes, F.E.S., Cavaliere Jervis, F.G.S., of the Eoyal Museum, Turin,
General McMahon, F.E.S,, &c.
( )




