

PART 11
T> PK°’ J
(COPY EIGHT)


ADVERTISEMENTS.
gT A R HOTEL.
E ET HOTEL.
O Y A L MAIL
COMMERCIAL AND FAMILY
HOTEL.
The Largest and Most Central
LEADING HOTEL IN AUCKLAND
Replete with every modern luxury and com-
fort in each department, including telephonic
communication and electric bells.
FIRST-CLAIS FAMILY
FIRST-CLASS FAMILY AND
TARIFF :
COMMERCIAL HOTEL
Dining Room Table .. per day .. 7s. Od.
IN AUCKLAND.
Hotel Table, Visitors only „ .. Bs. 6d.
COMMERCIAL HOTEL.
Private Table „ .. 10s. Od.
ADAM CAIRNS,
SAMPLE ROOMS FOR COMMERCIAL
GENTLEMEN.
B C. ROBERTS,
ALBERT ST. (Near the Wharf),
PROPRIETOR.
AUCKLAND.
SUITES OF ROOMS FOR FAMILIES.
QUEEN STREET,
J B. MARRIOTT,
AUCTIONEER, VALUATOR,
Opposite Savings Bank.
JAMES CODLING,
MAXFI E L D,
HOUSE, LAND, AND GENERAL COMMIS-
SION AGENT,
Victoria St.
Proprietor.
WHOLESALE AND FAMILY GROCER,
Queen Street, Auckland.
AUCKLAND.
125 QUEEN STREET, AUCKLAND.
JAMES KELLY,
IRON FOUNDER,
Makes a Specialty of Iron Railings, Palisading,
Register Grates and Stoves.
AND W. HELLABY,
WHOLESALE,
QLARENDON CLUB HOTEL,
Opposite Post Office, Napier.
SHIPPING, AND FAMILY BUTCHERS,
SHORTLAND STREET,
T. PEDDIE PROPRIETOR.
. EAGLE FOUNDRY, Freeman’s Bay,
AUCKLAND.
AUCKLAND.
Sample Rooms and Suites for Families.
Coach Agency Office.'
JJENRY RAFTON,
BASKET AND PERAMBULATOR
MAKER.
CRAIG
Dealer in Furniture, Bedding, Hair, and China.
JUNCTION QUEEN and GREY STREETS,
And 40 to 50, City Market, Auckland.
COALS AND BTREWOOD.
rpHE BEST BOOK ON THE MAORI
X TONGUE is Dr. Maunsell’s Grammar
of the New Zealand Language. The Third
Edition is just published, and may be had from
all Booksellers at 4s. 6d, or Post BYee 4s. lOd.
from the Publisher,
FURNITURE REMOVED
CARTING DONE WITH DESPATCH.
N. G. LENNOX (LATE WAYTE),
100, QUEEN STREET,
COMMERCE STREET
Auckland.
Q SPENCER,
LANDSCAPE PHOTOGRAPHER,
STRAND,
AUCKLAND.
A UCKLAND IRON WORKS,
Durham Street West, Auckland.
Inventor and Manufacturer of Improved New
Zealand Eclipse, Wrought Iron Portable Cottage
Stoves, Patent Portable Ovens.
CHARCOAL
SCORIA
TANKS
SHELLS
POSTS
RAILS
Tauranga.
PALINGS
SHINGLES,
Send for Illustrated Price List.
JJOT LAKES DISTRICT.
THE WONDERLAND
pIC T U
RESQUE NEW ZEALAND.
NEW ZEALAND !
BY O. O. MONTROSE
AUCKLAND TO TAURANGA, ROTORUA,
ROTOMAHANA, AND BACK.
PART 111
Full and reliable information, free of charge,
as to Route, Cost, &c, All particulars supplied,
and the departure of intending tourists advised
by telegraph.
CONTAIN DESCRIPTION AND VIEWS OF
WILL
If desired, Through Tickets, covering every-
thing, can bo supplied at an Exceedingly Low
Rate.
PROVINCIAL DISTRICT OF TARANAKI,
Including Views of the Districts of Auckland, Tauranga,
Waikato River &c., &c.
METCALFE AND HILL, AGENTS.
A(jdres : 29 Insurance Buildings, Auckland




m
—I
do
CD
m
—I
CD
d>
c=
CD
7s
r
CD
□c
:j=-
ZJO
DO
CD
d
DO
fcr
8
i




On the left the pretty village of Parnell seems to lead hy one long street up from the shore, which here
presents a hold and striking frontage to the harbour. The streets, crossing down to the glens on either
side, so nestle among the foliage as to embower and hide the large population residing in this favourite
suburb, A little to the right the Waikato Railway, intersecting the settled country south of the city,
emerges from a tunnel, and connects with the shipping at the nearer Railway Wharf, the station forming a
conspicuous object on the reclamation on the site of the demolished headland of Fort Britomart. Away
beyond the railway are the green copses, dells, and glades of the Domain—the lungs of tlie city—where
citizens find a peaceful retreat from the cares of business ; the favourite resort of holiday seekers, and the
scene of many athletic tournaments and gala festivals. Out upon the great main wharf, and from amidst
a dense mass of buildings, debouches Queen-street, the great commercial artery of the city. Away to the
right, following the rugged outline of the cliffs overhanging the waters, the heights of the suburb of
Ponsonby close the coastal panorama, the patches of foliage heightening the picturesque beauty of the
scene, and forming a pleasant contrast to the neat villa residences scattered over that healthful and rapidly
growing environ of the city. Further to the right the harbour stretches far away towards the fiats of
Rivorhead, terminating in the faint outline of distant hills. As the vessel rounds the North Head and
steams up the beautiful landlocked harbour, with its placid waters, and the blue sky overhead, the pretty
marine suburb of Devonport is seen nestling on the green slopes and at the feet of the two extinct
volcanoes, while further on along the northern shore picturesque homesteads arc dotted over the landscape,
thicker clusters of dwellings hero and there marking the site of some embryo village. Of late there has
been an increasing demand for villa and business sites on this side of the harbour, and, having regard to
the salubrity of situation, picturesque surroundings, magnificent views of sea and land, and stretches of
distant landscape, as well as the calm and seclusion, it is already apparent that this shore is destined at no
distant day to become the resort of the wealth and fashion of the city, and the retreat and refuge of the
wearied merchant and man of business, where he may
See the stir
Of the great Babel, and not feel the crowd.
VIEW FROM MOUNT EDEN.
There are many elevations in and about Auckland, from which enchanting views of the city, its
surroundings, and the whole Peninsula may be obtained. That which best rewards the stranger is a view
from the summit of Mount Eden, to which he should proceed in a cab, so as to see the country around its
base. This extinct volcano is in the southern suburbs of the city. Its height is 642 feet, and it possesses
a perfect crater, of about 150 feet in depth, with the ridge broken only on one side, where the lava must
have poured forth in seething, molten streams over the low-lying country to the west. From the summit
of this hill the spectator obtains an extensive panoramic view which ever afterwards haunts his memory.
Looking east and west over the narrow isthmus, the traveller looks down upon two seas, evidently once
joined, for the channel can still be easily traced, and will doubtless be re-opened at no distant day by
means of a canal uniting the two harbours. Looking over the intervening land the channel leading to the
harbour of Waitemata is seen between the volcanic heights of the North Head and Rangitoto. Further off
is the lofty ridge of Capo Colville and the island of Tin Tiri with its lighthouse ; the outlines of the Great
and Little Barrier, Cuvier and other islands and islets looming faintly on the remote horizon, out of the
purple shadows and the azure blue of the sky, with the vast Pacific in the background. Turning southward
the eye rests on the waters of Manukau harbour with its numerous branches running into the land. The
lofty range that forms the South Head at the entrance of the Manukau, together with the Waitakerei
ranges, follow the outline of the landscape in the same direction, and afford that contrast which is requisite
to heighten the softer beauty of the intervening scenery. Looking away down the Waitemata and Hauraki
Gulfs to the eastward, toward the Frith of Thames, the surface of the bay is studded with numerous
peaceful islands ; beyond them can be discerned the lofty auriferous ranges that shut in the Thames district;
and in the remoter distance the blue hills of the Upper Thames, Ohinemuri, the long coveted and fancied
El Dorado of the miner, which, like the Hesperides of old, was invested by eager imagination with
mysterious romance and riches. Within the area enclosed by this view there is a diversity and beauty of
scenery of which the eye never tires. Everywhere arms of the sea indent the land like threads of silver,
and the vegetation is luxuriant and brilliant. The whole isthmus between the city of Auckland and the
distant village of Onehunga is one picturesque panorama of fields and meadows, rich pastures, well-trimmed
hedges, villas and farm-houses dotting the level country, nestling under the slope of the numerous volcanic
hills, or peeping out from the friendly shelter of graceful pines and the familiar ornamental trees of England.
It is a scene peculiarly English in all its main characteristics, with all the verdant luxuriance of a semi-
tropical climate. Almost at the feet of the spectator, and nestling under Mount Eden, are the pretty
hamlets of Ej som, Remuera, and Newmarket, with their elegant villas and cosy cottages, their trim gardens,
smooth meadows, and regular fields, presenting the very beau ideal of rural loveliness. On the other hand,
the glance lights downward upon Auckland with its busy industries, the smoke of factories, the regular
masses of brick and stone, and the forest of shipping, while the distant hum of the thronged streets and
10
PICTURESQUE NEW ZEALAND.






bustling life “ mellowed and mingling” as the sound is borne upward through the air, combine with the
exquisite beauty of the scene to gratify the aesthetic feelings even to exhilaration.
And looking northward, cool to view,
Stretches the illimitable blue
Of ocean, from its curved coast-line ;
Sombred and still, the warm sunshine
Fills with pale gold-dust all the reach
Of slumberous woods from hill to beach—
Slanting on walls of thronged retreats
From city toil and dusky streets,
On grassy bluff, and dune of sand,
And misty islands, miles from land.
COMMERCIAL ADVANTAGES.
For commercial position Auckland is not surpassed by any other colonial seaport. The great Bishop -
Selwyn, viewing the configuration of the country with the experienced eye and far-seeing judgment of a
mighty intellect, pronounced Auckland endowed with every advantage for the creation of a great maritime
metropolis, the natural mart for the produce of a wide area of country, and the emporium of a commerce
spreading its ramifications throughout the myriad Islands of Polynesia. The harbour is one of the most
secure south of the Line. It is easily accessible for vessels of the deepest draught, in all weathers, by day
or night. The channel is two miles wide, has no dangerous currents, no rocks or shoals, is clearly buoyed,
well lighted, and there is abundance of secure anchorage affording firm holding ground in the worst
weather. Auckland is in the great Pacific highway of the Old World and the New -and Australasia.
When the Panama Canal shall have been opened, Auckland will stand in the direct line of the ocean traffic.
It is the port of call for the San Francisco mail steamers, and is in regular and rapid communication with
Sydney, Fiji, Samoa, and other islands of the Pacific. It has a graving dock 300 feet in length and 42 feet
in width on the floor, with a depth at high water (spring tides) of 13 to 15 feet. In view of the early
prospect of Auckland becoming the principal British naval arsenal in these seas, as well as the rapid growth
of the maritime trade, another large dock, capable of accommodating the largest ocean-going steamships
and sailing vessels, is being rapidly built at Calliope Point, on the north side of the harbour. There is
ample wharf accommodation for vessels of 4,000 tons and upwards, as well as mooring for smaller craft
along the sea Avails of the reclaimed foreshores. The railway trucks come down to the ships’ side, and a
spacious site is being prepared for a great future central station. From Auckland the traveller may book to
America, England, and practically any part of the Avorld, and the fine steamers of the enterprising and Avell-
managed Union Steam Shipping Company afford frequent facilities for visiting all parts of Ncav Zealand
and the principal Australian seaports, *• Auckland is in telegraphic communication Avith all the main
centres of population in the civilised Avorld. Besides its raihvays and roads, numerous fine navigable
rivers open up natural arteries into the interior of the country. Manukau harbour, on the Avcst coast, is
connected Avith Auckland by railway. Only a short portage separates the Avaters of the Manukau from
the Waikato river, the Avaters of which form a navigable channel for upAvards of 100 miles through Avhat
Avill yet prove to be one of the most fertile districts in Ncav Zealand. The Waitemata extends northward
22 miles to Riverhead, Avhence a raihvay runs to Helensvillc, at the head of the navigable waters of the
Kaipara, an inland sea on the Avest coast, from Avhich fine navigable rivers intersect a country abounding with
valuable timber and other resources. On the southern extremity of the Hauraki Gulf, within four or five hours
steam of Auckland, are the famous Thames goldfields, from which almost fabulous yields of gold haA r c been
obtained, and Avhich Avill be a permanent source of mineral Avealth. The fine navigable Avaters of the
Thames and Piako rivers intersect an extensive area, enriched Avith soil of extraordinary fertility, and
rapidly developing under the stimulus of capital and enterprise. All along both the east and Avest coasts
of the Auckland Provincial District, numerous splendid harbours afford shelter and an outlet for commerce,
and Avill at no remote period become the emporiums of industry and the homes of a large population.
Already there are hopeful indications of an early collapse of the Maori King movement. The process of
disintegration is at Avork, and though a singular passion for amateur diplomacy on the part of Colonial
Ministers has served to enhance the Maori King’s influence, to consolidate his folloAvers, and to keep up
the appearance of official recognition, his authority is rapidly diminishing, and left to himself he Avill
soon completely abandon the last attempt at isolation, and relinquish his absurd kingly pretensions. The
real owners of the soil, the Ngatimaniapotos—upon whose lands the Maori King and his immediate
relatives and dependants are mere dAvellers on suffcrance—arc evincing a groAving desire to open their
territory for settlement, and it is not likely that the construction of a main trunk railway through the
centre of the North Island will be much longer delayed. When this great Avork has been accomplished,
and the fine harbour of KaAvhia throAvn open for commerce, a vast tract of fertile country, abounding in
mineral, industrial, and agricultural resources, Avill become available for settlement and development.
Auckland’s peculiarly favourable position in relation to abundant inland Avater communication and a great
netAvork of estuaries has, in the natural course of things, developed an extensive shipping trade, and she is
unrivalled for the number and excellence of her small coasting craft. What first attracts the notice and
11
PICTURESQUE NEW ZEALAND.


excites the admiration of the visitor is the “ mosquito fleet,” whose white sails are dotted about the coast and
over the waters of the harbour. The science of shipbuilding has already reached a high stage of excellence.
Auckland-built yachts have successfully competed against the crack clippers of the neighbouring Colonies.
The nautical spirit is strongly developed in the people dwelling on the sea coast, and all the elements of
future maritime greatness exist in a marked degree. It requires no dream of an enthusiast to picture
Auckland as the future centre of a vast commerce, embracing the myriad islands of the South Pacific
Ocean, and peradventure rivalling the “ modern Babylon ” in its world-wide ramifications and its beneficial
influence on the future welfare of the human race, for
Chief by numbers of industrious hands
A nation’s wealth is counted ; numbers raise
Warm emulation ; where that virtue dwells —
There will be traffic’s seat; there will she build
The rich emporium.
BUILDINGS AND INSTITUTIONS.
Though yet in its infancy, the city of Auckland possesses many fine streets, in naming which the
original founders have shown that spirit of loyalty and love of historic national glories which so
eminently distinguish the colonists. Many of the banks, insurance offices, warehouses, public buildings,
manufactories, hotels, and churches, are substantial and imposing, and distinguished for architectural
beauty. The temporary structures of primitive days are rapidly disappearing before the march of
improvement, and giving place to edifices more in keeping with the growing wealth and importance of the
metropolis of the North. Auckland possesses all the more important institutions of the great cities of the
mother country. There is a handsome and commodious Post Office, Telegraph Office, and Custom House
in the most central part of the city; a fine Market-house, of cruciform shape; massive Law Courts; a
Government House, in the midst of picturesque grounds planted with English trees and shrubs; a Choral
Hall, where a musical society superior to any of its class in the Colonies performs the best compositions of
the great masters; a Free Public Library, for which better accommodation will soon be erected in a more
suitable part of the city, where also a commodious Town Hall is to be built; a Museum with a creditable
collection and a good library, augmented from time to time by the liberality of wealthy colonists at home
and abroad; a College and Grammar School, to which will soon be added a University; three Clubs,
adapted to all grades and tastes; many public halls and places of amusement and entertainment, including
a Theatre and an Opera House; and many charitable institutions and asylums. The Hospital, situated on
a pretty eminence 230 feet above the level of the sea, and in one of the most salubrious and picturesque
parts of the city, is a noble structure, and commands an view of the coast and adjacent country.
All the religious organizations and Friendly Societies of the mother country have been transplanted here
and flourish, possessing many fine buildings, halls, libraries, and reading-rooms. The noble sports and
pastimes of home are enthusiastically cultivated, and colonial youths have frequently afforded proofs of
their prowess in football, cricket, and other manly exercises. Turf pursuits and the excitement of the
hunting-field are maintained with spirit. The city possesses several fine parks. The Domain, which is
within easy reach of the main part of the city, covers a large area, and abounds in cool shady walks and
picturesque vistas, the central portion being occupied by botanical gardens, upon which much care and
capital have been expended. The Albert Park, on an eminence in the very heart of the city, formerly the
citadel, has been recently planted, laid out, and substantially enclosed, and in time will become one of the
favourite resorts in fine weather. There is also another park on the western side but little used at present,
but sure to become a great public boon when that part of the city shall be more densely populated. The
streets of Auckland are well lighted with gas, there is an ample water-supply, and lately all the principal
offices and counting-houses have been placed in telephonic communication. The affairs of the city are
managed by a Mayor and Municipal Council, and it is very handsomely endowed. The Press of Auckland
will compare favorably in regard to literary excellence, completeness, reliability, and enterprise, with that
of any other part of the Colony. The New Zealand Herald, the morning journal originally founded by the
late Mr. W. C. Wilson, is equal in every respect to many first-class English dailies ; its contemporary, the
Evening Star, is remarkable for the enterprise exhibited in its management; and besides these there are
four weekly organs, the Weekly News, widely circulated throughout the country districts, and published at
the Herald office ; the Observer, the society paper of Auckland ; the Free Lance, an outspoken exponent of
conservative views ; the Free Press, the organ of the Protestant and Temperance parties ; the Freeman’s
Journal, the advocate of Roman Catholic interests ; and several religious publications of a denominational
character.
THE SUBURBS.
Auckland is surrounded by very beautiful suburbs. Parnell, on the east, is situated on an elevated
site, and throughout its whole length commands fine views of the harbour, and of the islands and ocean in
the distance. Parnell is constituted a Borough, and is managed by a Mayor and Council. It contains
many charming villas, which are the residences of the merchants and business men. Formerly it was the
12
PICTURESQUE NEW ZEALAND.




CO
CID
m
z:
m
:5E
zn
—I
m
DO
ca
>
CD
m
GO


CO
LU
CD
<C
or
DC
LU
I
LU
DC
3t
Lu
CD
CL.
CD
I—
CD
CD
DC
CD
1
CD
CD




favourite resort of the official class, hut since the removal of the seat of Government to Wellington and the
abolition of the provincial form of government, it has lost that characteristic. Ponsonby, on the west,
stands on elevated ground overlooking the city and harbour, and commanding a view of the coast. The
place possesses many well-built villas, and of late years has been the rival of Parnell as the abode of the
wealth and fashion of the city, with which it has recently been incorporated. Ponsonby furnishes some of
the most distinguished athletes and sportsmen of the city. Newton, or Karangahape, a suburban district
adjoining Ponsonby on the east, and which has also been incorporated with the city of Auckland, covers
an extensive area, parts of which are very densely populated, some of the streets being inconveniently
narrow. Remuera possesses magnificent marine views, rich volcanic soil, and picturesque aspects. This
is the retreat of the Hite of Auckland, at whose head stands the Mayor, J. M. Clark, Esq., thrice elected
to the civic chair. This gentleman is distinguished for his conscientious and zealous discharge of his
important functions, his courtesy to strangers and newcomers, and his openhanded hospitality. Remuera
is the scene of a continual round of social festivities, concerts, and balls. Besides these there are the
pretty suburbs of Grafton Road, Newmarket, Mount Eden, Mount Roskill, and Mount Albert, abounding
in tasteful homesteads, orchards, plantations, and farms. Omnibuses run regularly from the centre of the
city to the remote parts of the suburbs, conveying passengers at a merely nominal fare. Steamers ply
regularly every half-hour between Auckland and Devonport, a beautiful water-circled suburb, possessing
advantages especially attractive to invalids, holiday-seekers, lovers of nature, and those who take an
interest in aquatic exercises. It is the scene of an extensive shipbuilding industry. It has a pure
atmosphere, fine stretches of sandy beaches, grassy lanes, well-cultivated public and private gardens,
orchards, and quiet homes. The extensive strawberry gardens in this charming locality are frequented by
thousands during the summer months. The neighbouring settlement of Woodside, formerly called Stokes’s
Point, is rapidly increasing in population and local importance. A good road leads northward to the
Wade and other settlements, passing a number of comfortable homesteads with trim farms and extensive
orchards. A pleasant ride from Devonport leads to the picturesque Takapuna Lake, supposed to be the
site of an extinct volcano, and in subterranean communication with Rangitoto. Around the beautiful
borders of this lake are the country seats of the Hon. F. Whitaker, Attorney-General, and other influential
persons.
The Provincial District of Auckland extends from the extreme northern point of New Zealand—
nearly the 34th parallel—to the 39th parallel. The southern boundary on the western side is the Mokau
river, following its course northwards to the Rangitoto mountain, thence southwards along the Tuhua river
to the 39th parallel, from whence it follows that parallel to the East Coast. Of the 64,000,000 acres
comprised within the entire area of the Colony, Auckland contains 17,000,000, more than half the North
Island. The ranges of the Aucklaud district are comparatively low, and there is a much larger proportion
of arable land than in the South Island. But settlement and cultivation were for some years retarded by
the proximity of a large aboriginal population containing some disaffected and turbulent tribes, and by
the tedious process of acquiring land from the Maori owners. In this connection it should be observed, to
the credit of the colonists, that, although the 29,340,000 acres of the North Island were originally in the
hands of fewer than 50,000 natives, scattered sparsely over that wide area, yet every acre (except the land
confiscated for rebellion) now in the possession of the Europeans, has been purchased with the consent of
the natives, and is held from them by legal deed. The mountain ranges of Auckland are comparatively low,
and, though they cover a considerable extent of country, will be mainly utilised eventually for pastoral
purposes.
TOPOGRAPHY AND SOIL.
The isthmus on which Auckland stands is described by Dr. Hochstetter, the eminent geologist, as
“the most remarkable volcanic district in the world.” In an area of 20 miles by 12 there are sixty-three
independent points of eruption—many perfect cones from 300 to 600 feet high, with well-defined craters.
An examination of these isolated points of eruption gives proof of repeated and different volcanic outbursts
in one and the same locality, and with the beginning of the volcanic activity seems to have commenced,
although very gradually, a rise of the whole isthmus. The lava of all the Auckland volcanos consists of
porous basalt lava, rich in olivin, making an excellent building stone for the substantial erections in
Auckland, while the pretty scoria cones are being destroyed for the roads of the isthmus. That the
Auckland volcanoes were, in the true sense of the word, “ burning mountains,” is proved not only by the
lava streams, which are immense in comparison to the size of the cones, but also from the pear-shaped
volcanic bombs, which, ejected from the mountains in a fluid state, have received their shape from their
rotary motion through the air. The fact that the ashes everywhere occupy the surface, and that the
lava-streams have taken the course of the existing valleys, are proofs that the eruptions have been of
comparatively recent date.
Dr. Hector, the Government Geologist, thus describes the soils of Auckland:—“ln the north of
Auckland, including the lower portion of the Waikato valley, light volcanic soils prevail, interspersed with
areas of clay marl, which, in the natural state, is cold and uninviting to the agriculturist, but, nevertheless,
under proper draining and cultivation, may be brought to a high state of productiveness. The latter are,
13
PICTURESQUE NEW * ZEALAND.


however, almost universally neglected at the present time hy the settlers, who prefer the more easily
worked and more rapidly remunerative soils derived from the volcanic rocks. In the central district of
the North Island, from Taupo towards the Bay of Plenty, the surface soil is derived from the volcanic
rocks, of a highly silicious character, and large areas are covered with little else than loose, friable pumice-
stone. Towards the coast, and in some limited areas near the largo valleys, such as the Waikato and the
Thames, and also where the volcanic rocks of a less arid description appear at the surface, great fertility
prevails, and any deficiencies in the character of the soil are amply compensated for by the magnificence of
the climate in this part of New Zealand. On the eastern side of the slate range, which extends through
the North Island, the surface of the country is generally formed of clay marl and calcareous- rocks,
the valleys being occupied by shingle deposits, derived from the slate and sandstone rocks of the back
range, with occasional areas of fertile alluvium of considerable extent. It is only the latter portions of
this district which can be considered as adapted for agriculture, while the remainder affords some of the
finest pastoral land to be met with in any part of the colony.”
A large proportion of the country in the Auckland district is broken by ranges, but none of them
approach in height the Alps of the South Island. The highest eminence in the Province is Pirongia, near
Alexandra, in the Waikato, 2,830 feet. In the southern portion of the provincial district—west of
Rotorua and north of Lake Taupo—there is a very extensive volcanic table-land over 2,000 feet high,
covered with forest, and only partially explored. Rangitoto mountain on the north-east border of this
plateau, a few miles south of the source of the river Waipa, is 2,600 feet high.
CLIMATE AND PRODUCTIONS.
By universal testimony the climate of Auckland has been pronounced one of the most delicious in
the world. It is subject to no extremes of heat and cold. It is remarkably healthy. The summer heat
is tempered with plcas int sea breezes, while the winters arc very mild. An abundance of moisture makes
vegetation wonderfully prolific. The only drawback to the climate in the neighbourhood of Auckland is
the occurrence of moist warm days in summer, which are very relaxing. After a heavy shower
of rain the moisture is rapidly condensed by the heat of the sun, forming a vapour which renders
the air close and oppressive, and very trying to persons accustomed to the bracing climate of England, or
of the extreme southern parts of New Zealand. It is not, however, injurious to health. Meteorological
observations extending over a period of fifteen years give the following average results :—Mean barometer,
29.939; mean temperature in shade, 59.6; total rainfall, 44.651 ; days on which rain fell, 187. An
abundance of moisture makes vegetation prolific. The indigenous vegetation is all evergreen and of dense
growth ; the undergrowth in the forests rich and often impenetrable. Neither wild beast nor reptile of
any kind lurks in the secret coverts of the forests, except a harmless lizard. The ferns are unsurpassed
in the world for beauty and variety, and a prepared book of specimens is one of the most graceful presents
that a colonist or visitor can send to his friends abroad. Upwards of 130 different species have been
classified, of which 42 are unknown in any other country. The provincial flora comprises 675 species of
flowering plants, and includes nearly every New Zealand plant of proved economic value ; all the pines,
beeches, and other timber-producing trees, and fully two-thirds of the large, valuable, and important families
of grasses and sedges. The timber trade of Auckland is one of the staple industries of the colony. A
very large number of sawmills afford employment to thousands of men, and in addition to the growing
requirements of the building trade in a fast increasing population, there is a rapidly developing export
trade to the neighbouring colonies and islands. Under these destructive operations, accelerated by frequent
bush fires, the most valuable timber is rapidly disappearing, and no adequate provision is being made to
replace it. Reliable authorities estimate that thirty years hence the kauri pine will have disappeared with
the moa. Among the many useful timbers with which the northern forests abound, none approach in
general usefulness to the kauri, which combines the toughness of the Baltic red deal with the silkiness of
the American red pine. There are many other kinds of useful timber, which have been fully dealt with
in the article on the Flora of New Zealand in Part I. of this work. The totara is unequalled for construc-
tion of wharves; the kahikatea for building purposes ; the puriri for posts and house-blocks; the pohu-
takawa and other woods for shipbuilding ; the rimu, especially esteemed for cabinet-making ; and many
which are valuable for tanning and astringent barks. Fruits of all kinds grow in abundance, but the
climate and soil are specially adapted for the peach and vine, which flourish with wonderful luxuriance in
the open air. Strawberries bear abundant fruit for five months in the year ; oranges and lemons also grow
well in the open air. Had the North Island been colonized by French or Italians, they would undoubtedly
have made the vine, olive, orange, and other sub-tropical fruits the staple vegetable products of the
country. In the northern parts of the Auckland district the grape vine is often found running wild on the
site of old native settlements. There is already a considerable market in the colony for green fruit, and
with the opening up of the isolated districts by improved communication and cheap transport, there is
every probability that the cultivation of the vine,' olive, banana, and orange will be developed on a very
large scale.
The Auckland Acclimatization Society has displayed much enterprise and skill in stocking the rivers
with salmon, trout, and other fish, and filling the woods with English songsters and other insectivorous
14
PICTURESQUE NEW ZEALAND.




I—
CD
m
co
~xj
CD
CO
id
CD
CD
n
zn
H
m
—I
m
DO
CO
D*
CO
m
GO
IX3
CD
—4
CD
m
3=»


birds. The following varieties have been distributed and are rapidly multiplying : —The thrush, blackbird,
red poll, house and hedge sparrow, yellowhammer, skylark, partridge, Chinese and silver pheasant,
Australian, Tasmanian, and Californian quail, Californian mountain quail, pointed tail grouse, green linnet,
goldfinch, chaffinch, starling, and rook. But the wisdom of some of these selections is a matter of keen
dispute, many farmers and gardeners bewailing the destruction of fruit, seed, and ripening grain, by the
imported birds, while others contend for a more than counterbalancing advantage in the destruction of
caterpillars and other insects. Having described at length the Fauna of New Zealand in Part I. of this
work, which the reader should procure from a bookseller, or direct from the publisher, it is unnecessary to
recapitulate.
Auckland has reason to be proud of her numerous and rapidly increasing manufactures and repro-
ductive industries. The shipbuilding industry is a highly important one. The yachts and pleasure boats
turned out by Auckland builders are justly celebrated. The Taniwha, Secret, and others have sustained
their reputation against the crack craft of the Australasian Colonies, The local boot factories have almost
succeeded in driving out the foreign goods. Auckland cabinet makers are famous for artistic work ; many
of the staple articles of consumption are manufactured on the spot; and new industries are being daily
established. There are extensive deposits of coal at Kawakawa, Kamo, Whauwhau, Taupiri, Waikato, and
Miranda, supplying the local demand for household and manufacturing purposes and the ocean steamers.
Besides the rich auriferous deposits of the Thames goldfields, there is an abundance of silver, manganese,,
lead, copper, iron, chrome, antimony, zinc, cadmium, plumbago, limestone, sulphur, and many other metallic
and mineial substances of great commercial value. Petroleum oozes out from the surface of the ground in
Poverty Bay. One remarkable product found in no other part of the world is the fossil resinous substance
known as kauri gum, very largely used in the manufacture of varnish in England and America, and the
collection of which forms an important industry.
Profitable gold-mining is carried on at the Thames, Coromandel, Te Aroha, and some other points,
and affords employment to a large number of men. It is probable that the resources of the extensive
auriferous area have not yet been fully developed at the lower depths, for want of the requisite capital and
machinery, and that in the unexplored parts of the Cape Colville Peninsula hidden wealth will be discovered,
rivalling the famous Caledonian, Thames, which distributed half a million sterling in dividends in a few
months.
We have thus endeavoured to give within the limits at our disposal some succinct facts for the guidance
of the traveller and tourist, but for full and accurate information we recommend that excellent publication
“ Brett’s Auckland Almanac and Strangers’ Yade Mecum,” edited by Mr. T. W. Leys, in which will be found,
in an interesting and convenient form, the very latest and most reliable religious, social, political, commercial,
and general information, with statistics from official sources. As we purpose publishing a supplement
with the last number of Picturesque New Zealand, containing the latest tables showing the economic
progress of the colony, we shall not burden the reader with any figures at this stage.
AUCKLAND TO ROTOMAHANA.
The Lake District might be reached by four separate routes —one from Napier to Tapuharuru, on the
Waikato, near its outlet from Lake Taupo, and thence to Ohinemutu, diverging, if the traveller pleases, to
visit the wonders of Orakeikorako; or the traveller by this route may proceed from Napier first to Tokano,
on Lake Taupo, and, after enjoying the grand scenery on its southern and western shores, including
magnificent views of the volcanic masses of Ruapehu and Tongariro, might proceed thence by way of
Tapuharuru to Ohinemutu. Another route is by railway from Auckland to Hamilton, thence by coach to
Cambridge, Te Whetu, and Ohinemutu. The third and fourth routes are from Tauranga to Ohinemutu,
or by way of Maketu, which is about thirty miles to the southward of Tauranga. The favourite and most
easy route is from Tauranga to Ohinemutu. The conveyance from Auckland to Tauranga is bi-weekly by
the Northern Steam Shipping Company’s steamers, which afford excellent accommodation and a good
table ; the return fare being only £2 10s., and the trip occupying about twelve hours. Comfortable, safe
vehicles meet the tourist at the point of debarkation, and convey him to his destination, a distance of only
4G miles, fare each way, in a few hours. But should the traveller prefer to rest at Tauranga, he will
find all the accommodation and comfort of a first class metropolitan establishment at Menzies’s Hotel.
The Harbour of Tauranga is unsurpassed in the colony for picturesque beauty. Notwithstanding an
unenviable notoriety for disasters, it is comparatively easy of access, and affords perfectly secure shelter.
The country on both sides of the harbour is exceedingly fertile, with a deep rich alluvial soil. The town is
advantageously situated on a rising ground that overlooks the harbour, and from the adjacent elevations
commanding views are obtained of the coast and inland scenery. The principal street, called “ The Strand,”
extends along the shore, and contains many handsome buildings. Among the more conspicuous objects arc
the public buildings, two banks, a literary institute, several churches, the inevitable gaol, surrounded by
an old redoubt, a reminiscence of troublous times, when the adjacent country was the scene of many bloody
encounters with the Maoiis. On a cliff, overhanging the harbour is the cemetery, the last resting place of
many gallant soldiers and sailors who fell in the disastrous repulse at the Gate Pa, and other encounters
15
PICTURESQUE NEW ZEALAND.


with the savage foe. Surrounded by extensive areas of fertile soil, possessing a splendid climate, and an
excellent commercial position, Tauranga would long ago have risen to a city second only in importance to
Auckland, but its development has been retarded by the bugbear of a native difficulty which has repelled
capital, and population, and in a secondary degree by the evil of absenteeism, large areas of land being
withheld from cultivation and settlement by the owners. The contrast afforded by the smiling farms,
pastures, gardens, and neat dwellings on the site of the Gate Pa, is typical of the remarkable change which
is destined to come over the whole district as the obstacles to settlement and agricultural improvement are
removed. Tauranga is connected by excellent roads, and lines of stage coaches with the Lake District,
Napier, Waikato, and the Thames, There is also a very good road to Gisborne, 170 miles to the South.
Mr. Vcsey Stewart has been very energetic and enterprising in the establishment of a thriving special
settlement at Katikati, and in the Te Puke Block, A line of railway will shortly connect Tauranga with
Rotorua.
TAURANGA TO ROTOMAHANA.
Unless the tourist desires to make a long stay and an extensive tour in the Lake District, he will not
need to encumber himself with much baggage ; a carpet bag containing a change of linen, and an overcoat
as a protection from rain, will meet all his wants. All other wants will be amply supplied at the local
head-quarters, and two or three persons travelling together and keeping their expenses within a moderate
limit can do the trip from Auckland and back in a week, at a cost of about £8 or £9 each.
The distance from Tauranga to Ohinemutu is about 40 miles. One of the first objects of interest
which fche traveller encounters is the site of the famous Gate Pa, the scene of a disastrous engagement with
the Maoris, The next place of importance is the Oropi bush, from the margin of which there is a fine
view of the country about Tauranga, and stretching away to Te Aroha mountain. Up to this stage the
.country is clothed with low fern, but now for eighteen miles the road passes through a forest, which is a
very good representative of the dense growth of vegetation in the North Island. Some of the scenery is
strikingly bold, especially in the romantic Mangarewa Gorge, about the centre of the Oropi forest. The
road suddenly turns round a cliff and discloses a view of a yawning chasm, apparently only a few feet
distant, where the eye rests upon an evergreen roofing formed by the leafy tops of trees, the roots of which
are far down the gorge, or rising in terraces on its slopes. In the background, high above the tallest
monarch of the forest, is a perpendicular precipice of grey rock, festooned with vegetation which has found
an insecure hold on the top or in some cleft. A stream flowing at the bottom of the gorge, between cool
mossy banks, makes a pleasant ripple, and several broader streams are crossed during the journey
through this romantic pass. As the road emerges from the forest, pretty bird's-eye views are obtained of
Lake Rotorua in the valley below, on a plateau 1,043 feet above the level of the sea.
The large native village of Ohinemutu is built near the south-western corner of Lake Rotorua. As
the traveller approaches the village, he catches glimpses of volumes of steam rising from points around the
lake, and about a mile from this point a branch from the main Taupo road turns to the left, and passing
the Telegraph Office, brings up at one of the hotels, of which there are three —Kelly’s, Lake House, and
Mrs. Morrison’s. The village is on the slope, close down by the lake, and the visitor may pass direct from
the hotel to a natural hot, cold, or tepid bath. On the shores of the lake within the village, about thirty
or forty yards below the hotels, the boiling water, bubbling furiously from the ground, has formed for
itself natural stone baths of different sizes. About three miles across the Lake from Ohinemutu is the
island of Mokoia, famous in Maori song and tradition, and invested with a poetic romance by Mr. Domett’s
poem of “ Ranolf and Amohia.”
About a mile from Ohinemutu, on the left of the road leading to Whakarewarewa and Tarawera, in a
corner of Lake Rotorua, is Sulphur Point, where springs of pure yellow sulphur and silica have formed a
solid flooring. This place is much resorted to by rheumatic patients. It is necessary to caution visitors
never to leave the paths around Ohinemutu without extreme caution, as even among the ti-tree scrub,
which is the prevailing vegetation, small pits of scalding water and mud abound, and a false step into one
of these might be attended with serious consequences.
To visit Rotomahana from Ohinemutu the visitor may take a look, on route, at the geysers of Whaka-
rewarewa, which contain several bathing places of medicinal repute. Passing round the head of Lake
Rotorua is the road to Wairoa, the starting point for the canoes on Lake Tarawera. The general monotony
of the scenery is relieved on the way by the beautiful Tikitapu bush, of which a view has already been
given in Part I. of this work; and further on the lake of the same name.
Ten or eleven miles further on is the native settlement of Wairoa, on Lake Tarawera. Canoes bound
for Rotomahana head across the lake towards Tarawera mountain, on the south-eastern shore, the ancient
burial place of the Arawa tribe. Turning into an extensive arm on the right, the canoe passes a large
moss-clad stone, on which it is customary to throw something as a propitiatory offering to the presiding
monster of Maori tradition. The canoe pulls ashore at the outlet of a small warm creek, flowing from
Lake Rotomahana. A short walk overland, and Rotomahana, one of the great wonders of the world, lies
stretched out before the expectant tourist. The first view, however, is very disappointing. About it there
is nothing very grand; nothing but “ a small, dirty, green lake, with marshy shores, and desolate and
dreary-looking treeless hills about it.”
PRINTED FOR THE PUBLISHER BY H. BRETT, WYNDHAM STREET, AUCKLAND.
16
PICTURESQUE NEW ZEALAND.


uu
-a:
i
<c
zc
CD
I—
CD
QC
Q
25
C
H
8
&
8
•e
P
£
B
g
w




April, 1883.]
THEATRICAL.
Miss Eloise Juno will during the next few months travel through New Zealand, the repertoire
including—The Heart of Midlothian, The Gambler’s Wife, Rob Roy, Lucretia Borgia, Lady of Lyons,
Green Bushes, Annie Sylvester, etc. Her great power lies in emotional acting, for which she finds ample
scope in the above plays. As Jennie Deans she is especially good. In Lucretia Borgia and the Gamblers
Wife she is also seen to advantage. Her parts are all careful studies, and she enters thoroughly into her
cll£tr£tCLi3x
Miss Greenlees plays well in the character of Effie Deans, while in the widely different one of Mrs.
Bambridge in the Gambler’s Wife she is equally good. In Magic Toys she introduces some graceful
dances.
One of Mr. Russell’s best performances is his Rob Roy, though as Stewart Routh, the gambler, he is
remarkably good. His Gubetta in Lucretia Borgia is also a careful study.
Mr. Welsh is greatly to be praised for his able representation of David Deans, and also his Dougai
Creature, both of which parts he thoroughly enters into, and is lost in the character he pourtrays.
Mr. Lachlan McGowan is very amusing as the Laird of Dumbiedykes, but seems to make that character
rather like his Nicol Jarvie. His Aminadab Sleek is a remarkably clever piece of acting.
Mrs. Lachlan McGowan is in her element in the Serious Family, and also as Corney Carlyle in East
Lynne—though we must confess we were disappointed with her Madge Wildfire. Madness such as hers is
surely not all comic. .
Mr, Marshall plays carefully. The other members, after a few more rehearsals, will no doubt make
more of their respective parts, and considering the many changes of programme, it is wonderful how they
so well. In the Gambler’s Wife the part of the Street Arab is remarkably well played by Mr. Medus,
but we think the play would be more perfect if he was to represent the same character as a dilapidated
“ buttons a Street Arab would surely not have such free entree to a house.
Miss Eloise Juno has engaged Mr. Gerald Dillon, who will be a great support to the Company, and is
a well-known favourite.
Miss Jennie Lee opens in Auckland on April 23rd, after a very successful tour through the Australian
colonies, and her famous “ Jo” and “ The Grasshopper” will be produced. She is supported by Mr.
Burnett and a wonderfully strong company. It is rarely that such an opportunity of seeing a piece so
well produced occurs, and we trust the Auckland people and those of surrounding districts will take
advantage of it. Many who disapprove of theatres will come to see “Jo’ a piece which has moved so
many to take compassion on the poor sweepers of London, and induced people to give liberally to the
Industrial Schools. Miss Jennie Lee has herself given much time and money to their homes, the people
of England have made her a general favourite, she has worked hard and overcome the jealousy caused by
her success; and in Scotland, where's© many are against attending a play, she was enthusiastically received,
her name for helping the poor lads of London, perhaps, drawing the people as much as her wonderful
performance.
GOVERNMENT HOUSE, AUCKLAND.
This structure, pleasantly situated in Waterloo Quadrant, is a favourable specimen of colonial
architecture, though the grace of. the original building has been somewhat marred by the addition of new
wings. The grounds are beautifully laid out with many native and exotic trees and shrubs, which at once
provide a grateful shade from the heat of summer, and afford the eyes a delightful picture to rest upon.
In front of the house is a splendid and well-kept lawn; and the garden and other surroundings are in
adequate taste. At the present time, when Government House is tenanted by His Excellency the
Governor, with Lady and Miss Jervois, this illustration will have interest for people all over the colony,
who have lately received a visit from our new and already popular Governor. For many years Government
House has been untenanted, our late Governor, Sir Arthur Gordon, never having resided here, and save for
the gatherings of the Auckland Lawn Tennis Club on the spacious lawn, and the occasional throwing open
of the grounds to the public, a quietness amounting almost to settled gloom rested over the house and
precincts. So much was it felt in Auckland that this was an unjustifiable disuse, that there were proposals
made for the conversion of the building and grounds to the purposes of the Auckland University College.
Another suggestion was that the building should be devoted to the purpose of a I ree Library and Museum,
which would have been a truly national use to which to put the fine structure. Noav, however, that Sir
William Jervois has come to Auckland, and has been confessedly enchanted with the fine scenery and
delightful climate of the Queen of the North, it is not improbable that Government House may be more
frequently tenanted than heretofore, and that no need will arise and no wish be felt to divert it from
its present use as a gubernatorial residence.
PICTURESQUE NEW ZEALAND AND MONTHLY NEWS.


PICTUEESQUE NEW ZEALAND AND MONTHLY NEWS.
[April, 1883,
WITTY SAYINGS, &c.
One saying to another—“ You speak foolishly.” He answered—“ It is that you may understand me.”
Some one saying to another that he ought not to allow his son to marry till he was wiser. Answered—
“ If he gets wiser, he will never marry.”
Jerrold, meeting a celebrated song-writer, the latter to him:—“Youngster, have you sufficient confidence
in me to lend me a guinea ?” Jerrold—“ Oh ! yes ; I’ve all the confidence, but I havn’t the guinea.
Said a seedy fellow to a rich friend—“ If ever yon have a dispute with anyone about money, just leave
it to me.”
“Your horse has a tremendous long bit,” said a friend to Theodore Hook. “ Yes,” said he, “its a bit
too long.”
Charles Fox and his friend Mr. Hare, being much incommoded by duns, were together in a house,
when, seeing some shabby men about the door, they were afraid they were bailiffs in search of one of them.
Not knowing who was in danger, Fox opened the window, and calling to them said, “ Pray, gentlemen, are
you Fox-hunting or Hare-hunting 1”
MAOEI SETTLEMENT.


April, 1883.]
A gleam of light from the Magdalena on the opposite hillside shows some early peons making ready for
the day. How bright the moon was, and how still the night! Twenty yards more and he dc a e
cross-roads. The mares coralled opposite the farm-gate on the threshing-floor, where they aye een poc
ding a ceaseless round, start up and snort as he appears. “ Quien vive'l rings out fiom tie ncgc loac,an
Juan jams his spurs into the grey, dashes pass its mouth, and up the right-hand trail, to find dragoons
springing up on every side of him, unmounted fortunately, all save one, who bars the passage of the narrow
trail ahead of him. But the dragoon’s horse swerves under the grey s thundering charge, and his master
drops heavily on to the lava by the footpath, under the thrust of Juan’s mac Ute. The broken ridges of
lava, covered with heavy nopal cactus, are all that save Juan from the muskets behind. fifteen miles
from the cave, over a villainous trail, caramba ! how well lorres took his precautions . suppose am
free now at all events, unless the grey lames himself in this cursed rnalpais, lhe> gi\ eup 10 c ase
before the canon, and I’ll have time to get the old woman on to the horse and ava}, any ow, e oie ay
S “ Hold up Coyote !” They were now skirting along the edge of the stream, sometimes two hundred
feet below them and again at their own level, as they rose and fell on the long veinous ridges of lava, jutting
down black and snake-like from the line of craters rising to the right. The chase is soon hull down, and
To be only a hundred yards from twenty well armed and mounted dragoons who are on the watch for you,
would be too close quartrs for most men, but room enough for Juan and the Coyote. In three mmu es ere
were as many large irrigating ditches between Juan and the picket, still craning at the first one- 1 1 ® n
across the river at a cattle-ford only known to herdsmen and robbers, and in o ic a a ami e
beyond. The picket evidently had not seen him come back to the road again, so that he could
slacken the gallop down to the Mexican jog-trot, alike so untiring to man and horse, Ihe ow grass
fields, with willow-fringed irrigating ditches, give way to more broken ground, covered with locust, cactus,
agave, and weird grey-stemmed “huele de noche” trees, redolent with great white bell-flowers. Ahead
loomed up a spur of the mountain-range, along which he must coast until the canon is reached. A coyoU
“yap-yapping’’across the road, a “tulliwheeping” flock of curlews over his head, are his only companions.
The chase has died away, and the only point to fear is the bridge at Pomoca, five miles beyond. The game
is up now, he feels; he must get over to Laurelis as soon as possible. The conduota taken in, and lorres,
the best officer of the west, killed all in a day, will be enough to make the viceroy hunt *
dog. Chucha-to the devil with Chucha ! No use for women in his business, except old Mother Josefa m
the cave. Best go there, get her and the money on horseback, and over the hills to Gabriel s. Hurtado
probably knew of the cave, and the old woman might be killed if found there. , , ~ ,
Pomoca at last! Which road shall he take when he gets to the little farm ? Across the bridge, and
so past Tepetongo lor along the trail to the right 1 . .. .
together in about half-a-mile ; and both do—Torres with his pistol out and Juan with his nata (lasso)
trailing behind him. When scarce twenty yards apart, the Colonel bids him stand ; Juan who has his grey
well in hand, ducks his head and rides straight at the black. Bang goes the pistol, and as Juan passes
under the black’s stern, the loop of the riata settles over the Colonels shoulder to the \vaist. A sudden
jerk that no horseman can withstand, and Juan is galloping up the mad, dragging ovei 1 s erne
lifeless body. In a hundred yards the end of the riata is let go from Juan s saddle-bow, know in the chase
to be too hot to stop and take it off the body; and he settles the Coyote down into a steady g a °P-
It is six miles to the bridge across the “ Little river,” where there is probably a cavalry picket on the
scout for him; the troopers behind cannot live with the grey even at this pace for three mdes ; so foit them
he has no care. He has nothing to do but nurse the grey and think. Think 1 of what ? of the past ?
perish the thought! He hates the idea of Chucha unfaithful. Of the present ? W hat careshe, with a
good horse between his legs and no more danger than in many of Ins escapades 1 Uf the tuture 1 w nat
future ? a future without Chucha! There can be no happy future And he wanders back again to the
window scene in Maravatio. How beautiful she had looked amid her tears even; how he had loved her,
and did still! But could she ever be his wife now ? The only woman he had ever really cared for, the
only one in whom he had confided all—then to be foiled almost at the last moment by that cursed infatua-
tion all women have for confession ; little knowing that the very priest at t lem or 1 • ,
“ Hallo ahi /” challenges the picket upon the “ Little river bridge, which Juan had alto B ether forgotten
in his reverie, and which now loomed up white and cold against a dark bank of trees only some hun red
faTrfy nmds ih twain the little stream, and ere Juan and the grey can see through the dripping water
they are struggling against the opposite bank. He slips oft the horse, whici craws ou ,
soon as his master, who claws his way up the willow-roots. On to his back and awayfree!
The up-stream squad of dragoons, afraid to cross, or not knowing of his old for , pepper y
to no pnrpose. The squad with Colonel Torres are a quarter of a mile away at least, and he pats the
horse’s shoulder as they sweep out of the low land and on to the firm holding tui a ove, ree . P ,
single horseman is rig up the road to the left to cut him off. Instead of turmn* short up the
bank of the river with the rest of the dragoons, he has held on up the main road. n y ,
black can gallop like that. Yes, the Colonel it is ! “ Well, we'll try conclusions between the bpanuh
Colonel and the Indio Medina,” says Juan, between his teeth. If both keep their line icy
4
PICTUKESQUE NEW ZEALAND AND MONTHLY NEWS.


[April, 1883,
but for the horse; and he gave a sigh of relief as the horse neither swerved nor trembled in his gallop
when the volley hissed around them. And now for the gate, the pretty white houses all agleam in the
brilliant moonlight changed into low hovels, from which the dogs rush out barking in his track; then the
long parapeted causeway, lined with weeping willows, with its low swampy fields of alfalfa on each side
and the gate is befoi’e him. No one there ! And he is within fifty yards of it when twenty dragoons form
on the outside of it from the roadside. Trapped ! One furious wrench at the heavy Spanish bit brings the
grey on to his haunches, and pivoting the horse around on his hind legs, he puts him boldly at the parapet
wall to the right. It’s a long drop, some eight feet, but will he clear the irrigating ditch ? And as the horse
lunges outwards and downwards a sickening sense of uncertainty comes over him. How long it seemed
ere they struck ! Juan seemed to hear the hurried orders of Torres to the dragoons to ride out along the
causeway and up the river to cut him off, and hear, too, the “ carambas” from the troops following him ere
grey crashes into the alfalfa below. A deadened blow, a fearful shudder, a mad reel forward, and the
Coyote pulls himself together again, and is away through the deep holding ground of the alfalfa patch. If
he can get through the river now at some place, Torres and his dragoons have such a long round that they
will be too late, and the desultory fire of the troops behind him is not enough to trouble him. A long
staggering jump over an irrigating ditch, and then better going, as he keeps close to the edge of the river
looking for a ford; but the banks are too steep. At last, under a willow-tree, three hundred yards
below his old fording-place, where he can see a squad of dragoons posted, there is a good place for
getting out, and he turns the grey at another deep drop. This time, though, into water. The plunge
“ Fly ! Juan ! fly ! —they are watching for you all over the town ; they knew you were coming, and
you are surrounded."
“ Caramha I how did they know that 1” asked Juan, in surprise.
“Oh my God! my God! it was Father Hurtado; I confessed it to him. Forgive me, forgive me,
Juan ! I have killed you." _
Juan’s answer, whatever it would have been, was cut short by the furious gallop of a horse up the
street, followed by the jangling of cavalry sabres. For an instant he hesitated. To kill the crying girl
and then himself needed only two dagger-blows. But was she worth it 1 Ere he could answer, his plan
was changed by recognising the Coyote sweeping up the street towards him. A whistle brought the horse
close to him; and hurling a curse at the fainting girl, he was into the saddle and away into a cross street at
full gallop. “They’ve left a picket at all the gates ; the best way is to run the gauntlet of the cuartel and-
try the main gate. They won’t think I shall dare to try that, and I think the Coyote can jump it.” But
the three short turns before he got into the main street kept his pursuers uncomfortably close, as he dare
not let the horse out in full running for fear of a slip at the corners ; but when they are passed, and the
grey felt the rein slacken, down the street he raced. The “ Hallo ahi! Quien vive? La Guarda ! ” had
hardly been challenged in quick rough tones from the cuartel (barracks) ere Juan was thundering past it,
too fast for the volley the guard gave him. That he felt was the critical time, —for himself he thought not,
the grey going steadily and well, jogging, walking, cantering, picking his way from stone to stone, anon
swinging out into a gallop when he finds good going, as though he, too, was well aware that the safety of
his master depended upon his holding together for many an hour yet.
The mists of the valleys rise ghostly under the waning moon, the bleat of sheep and low of waking
herds from Tepetongo echo down the morning air. The walls of cliff loom and loom up ahead, darker and
darker, as the first faint glimmer of dawn struggles to take the place of the day-star above them.
The malpais is past, and the trail leads through damp shaaghs and over grassy meadows a couple of
miles, to the face of the wall before him, out of which rills the canoned stream, which eighteen hours before
saw the band ride from victory. How long it seemed ago ! what was life to him now, that he could not
trust Chucha 1 And back again with fuller force came the long year-old feeling that he was alone—an
outlaw, an outcast. True, he might be fighting for his country, but what chance was there I In all the
years he had been at it, he had only had some ten men he could rely upon. All of the* rest —and hundreds
there had been—had, after making a little money—turned either informer or else had left the gang; and now,
after the successful coup of to-day, perhaps he should find himself with only twenty men, and without
Chucha—her he could not marry. No, he must be alone,_alone always, curse the thought! The gloomy
walls of rock fall asunder, and the little glade, half in dense shadow, half in moonlight, is before him.
He calls old Josefa. No answer, and the handkerchief on the eastern end of the wall tells him she is
up the valley. A sort of foreboding comes over him that all is not right, and he rides on past the cave ; and
half-amile from it Josefa shows herself, and in a whisper tells him that the head of the gorge is patrolled
by infantry from the Jordanna, and that he had better turn back. But even as they speak, they hear the
clank of horses and steel coming up from below. Caught! Caught!
“ Take the sheep-trail,—quick,” says Josefa; the old horse can make it, and you can get out on the
down above, and so away to the northward.”
“ Adios, Josefa! I shall never come back; all my money in the cave is yours if you can save it,” said
Juan sadly, as he started up the slender path which led on to the high table-land to the left of the canon,
turning short back towards its mouth. '
PICTUEESQUE NEW ZEALAND AND MONTHLY NEWS.


FRED W. CHATFIELD.
■Axsank.l ‘v'l'^n-^rec 1 .
THE LONDON DENTISTRY.
A TEUTENBERG,
Xjl. manufacturing jeweller, engraver,
McArthur’s Buildings,
I QUEEN STREET, AUCKLAND.
New Fashions in Jewellery.—Brooches and Ear-
rings (exquisite designs) Manufactured from
v * Nautilus Shells, and Mounted with Gold and
f * Silver.
1 WEDDING RINGS AND KEEPERS MADE TO ORDER.
ADMIRABLE PRESENTS FOR HOME.
rrHE MISSES TEUTENBERG,
1 BERLIN WOOL DEPOT.
QUEEN STREET, AUCKLAND,
McArthur’s Buildings,
Designers and Workers of every description in
Art Needlework. Hair worked to any design.
Hair Guards, Bracelets, Brooches, Rings, etc.
TJ E I N R I C H P E T RY,
t J—L JEWELLER and diamond setter,
4 6? VICTORIA STREET, AUCKLAND.
■ Choice Utock of the Latest Novelties in Jewel-
lery, Watches, &c., always on hand.
Repairs Neatly Executed on the Premises.
Orders promptly attended to.
• \ RMSTRONG AND CO.,
'f- estate agents and
: LABOUR EXCHANGE,
177 queen street.
SPA R K E R,
* PLUMBER, GASFITTER, BELLHANGER,
Y ' ZINC & GALVANIZED IRON WORKER, &c.
All kinds of Spouting and Ridging made on
the premises. Galvanized Iron Water Tanks
made to order.
WELLESLEY STREET, AUCKLAND.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
f **•~ ( t ' '
By Special rfL 9 Sir A. Gordon,
Appointment G.C.M.G.,
to Governor of
His Excellency < s -® New Zealand.
H. H A Z A R D,
GUNMAKER,
166 a Queen Street, Auckland.
Agent for W. and C. Scott and Son’s; for Hay,
Mcrricks, and Co.’s Roslin Powde Mills,
Edinburgh ; and for James Pain, Pyro-
technist to the Royal Yacht Squadron, London.
Has the largest and most varied stock of Arms,
Ammunition, Sporting Tackle and Fireworks to
be found in any establishment in the colony, in-
cluding Hammerless Guns, Single and Double;
Central and Pin Fire Breechloaders, Choke or
Cylinder Bored; Martini-Henry, Snider, and
Henry Rifles and Carbines; Rook and Rabbit
Rifles, Saloon Rifles, Colt’s New D.A.C.F. Re-
I volvers and Derringers, Webleys, Hollis’s, and
Tisdall’s Bull Dog Revolvers, and a great variety
of American and Belgian Revolvers, to suit all
tastes. Eley’s Percussion Caps, Cartridges,
Wads, &c. Kynoch’s “ Perfect ’ Metallic Cases.
Sporting Powder, Chilled Shot, Powder Flasks,
Shot Pouches, Game and Cartridge Bags and
Belts, Volunteers’ Requisites, Sight Protectors,
Patent Snider and M.H. Sight Elevators, Scor-
ing Registers, Morton’s Ball Practice Instruc-
tors. Air Guns and Canes, Air Pistols, Darts,
and Slugs.
Telescopes, Field Glasses, Pocket Compasses,
Lactometers, Dram Flasks, Jacqucmin’s Patent
Eye Protectors, &c., &c.
Pain’s Fireworks in great variety.
Ships’ Signal Rockets and Blue Lights.
Every description of Gun Work done promptly
and at moderate prices.
r JH HOM A S J. HAEBUTT,
CORN BROOM MANUFACTURER,
Auckland.
Agents : J. Clarke and Son, Christchurch.
* I
: , . .....
J) K E ’ M P T,
‘surgeon dentist,
SHQKTLAND STREET,
AUCKLAND
(opposite the post office).
A UCKLAND GAS COMPANY,
_ZjL limited, established 1862.
PURVEYORS of LIGHT, HEAT, & POWER.
The Company sell and erect Gas-fittings, in-
cluding Gas Apparatus of every description, and
Gas-power Engines. Stock includes Otto Gas
Engines. Oliico and Showrooms, Fort Street.
rpHE ENGLISH PHARMACY
JL 181 Queen St - ., Auckland.
NORTH SHORE PHARMACY, DEVONPORT
The above Establishments are conducted
under the most careful supervision.
GARDNER, M.P.S., Eng.,
Pharmaceutical Chemist
rpHAMES CARRIAGE & DRAY
_L FACTORY,
VICTORIA STREET EAST, AUCKLAND.
JAMES MACKIE, PROPRIETOR
Builder of Spring Carts, Pagnells, Buggies,
Carriages, Hansoms, and Omnibuses. Painting
and Trimming done on the Premises. Repairs
of every description neatly executed. Springs
msde and repaired. Always in stock, a large
number of Lamps at Million Prices. Ironbark
Shafts and Spokes, Red-gum Felloes and Hobart
Town Hardwood.
COUNTRY ORDERS PUNCTUALLY ATTENDED TO.
10 AND AY. F 0 AYL ER,
D . PLUMBERS,
GASFITTERS, TINSMITHS, AND SHEET
METAL WORKERS,
48 & 50 VICTORIA ST., AUCKLAND.
Importers and Manufacturers of Plumbers’
Materials and Fittings. Established 1865.
t , By appointment to His Excellency the Marquis
of Normanby.
Before buying your boots
AND SHOES,
Go and Inspect the Large and Varied Stock
always on hand at
THE RED LION WAREHOUSE
Q G. HILL & CO.
OIL COLOURS & PAPERHANGING S,
CWESTPFAHL,
, BOOT and shoe maker.
108 QUEEN STREET, AUCKLAND,
290 Upper Queen Street,
63 VICTORIA STREET. *
Opposite Haymarket.
U • Importer of Best English and Continental Goods.
HENRY SAAVKINS, Proprietor,
UCKLAND.
IMPORTER AND BOOJ MAKER
px ORIENT STEAMERS.
We have received a New Stock of
pRINCE ARTHUR HOTEL,
Hobson and Wellesley Streets,
’ j AMES B. BLAIKIE,
JOSH. RODGERS AND SONS’
AUCKLAND.
IVORY-HANDLED CUTLERY
( ,
Importer of
i • -
(
LARGE, LOFTY SINGLE AND DOUBLE
Builders’ and Furnishing Ironmongery
JOHN WIGFALL AND CO.’S
BONE, HORN, AND STAG-HANDLED
TABLE KNIVES AND FORKS.
ROOMS.
(Direct from Manufacturers).
i
t Has always for sale at low rates: Carpenters
Tools, Nails, Locks, Hinges, Galvanized Corru-
, gated Iron, Sheet Lead & Zinc, Register Grates,
; Cooking Stoves & Ranges, Marble & Enamelled
. Slate Mantlepieqes, &c.
PRIVATE APARTMENTS.
JOHN ROUND AND SONS’
ELECTRO-PLATED & NICKEL.SILVER
Contains all the latest improvements that a
SPOONS, FORKS, Etc.
Country orders proudly executed.
FIRST-CLASS FAMILY AND COMMERCIAL
J. AND DID KEY
HOTEL CAN COMMAND.
231 QUEEN STREET,
VICTORIA STREET, AUCKLAND.
AUCKLAND
HUBERT ORAM, Proprietor.


