

picturesque
-4 lieu: Guinea.
£gbucg:
EPWORTH PRINTING AND PUBLISHING HOUSE,
287 CLARENCE STREET.
1893.




we consider Australia to be a Continent, New
Guinea is the largest island in the world. It is
about one thousand four hundred and ninety miles
long, and four hundred and thirty broad at the
widest part. It has an area of three hundred and
six thousand square miles, with a coastline of about
six thousand square miles, with a coastline of about
four thousand four hundred miles. The rivers are very numer-
ous, espi cially on the S. E. Coast. As yet but little is known of
the interior of the island. Some of the mountains are very
high. The Charles Louis range is nearly seventeen thousand
feet in height, and Mount Owen Stanley, which was ascended by
His Excellency Sir Win. MacGregor, is thirirteen thousand five
hundred feet in height.
New Guinea was first discovered by the Portuguese in
1521. The island is densely wooded in most parts, and the
vegetation is very luxurious. Sago palms abound, and the pre-
pared sago forms the staple food of the natives in some districts.
Edible fruit trees are numerous. The native gardens produce
taro, yams, sugar-cane, and bananas. Sweet potatoes, cassava
pumpkins, melons, pineapples, oranges, lemons, and the papaw
have been introduced by the Missionaries. Cocoa nuts are also
plentiful in most parts of the coast. The animals are princi-
pally the wallaby, cuscus, bandicoot, wild pigs, and a dog
resembling the dingo. The birds are very beautiful, and, as is
well known, New Guinea is the home of the Bird of Paradise.
The population is very dense, but no estimate of the number


can as yet be given. The natives vary a good deal in colour and
size, and average about five feet seven inches in height. Some
tribes wear no clothing, but all east of Port Moresby wear
something. The women wear a kind of grass skirt tied round
the waist. The weapons used are clubs, spears, slings, and in
some districts the bow and arrows. The houses are as a rule
well built, and some of them are very large, and are nearly all
built upon high piles. Some of the villages are built out in the
lagoon, and are entirely surrounded by water. The climate is
very warm and moist, and fever abounds in most districts. As a
field for settlement, New Guinea does not at present offer many
advantages to European settlers, except perhaps in some of the
S. E. districts.
Further information may be obtained from the article on
New Guinea in the Picturesque Atlas of Australia , from which
the above items have been taken, from the Encyclopaedia
Brittanica, and the works of Revds. Chalmers and Maefarlane,
of the London Missionary Society.
Mission operations in New Guinea were instituted by the
Missionaries of the London Missionary Society, about the same
time that our own Mission in New Britain was commenced. To
that powerful Society undoubtedly belongs the honour of first
proclaiming the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ to the heathen
of British New Guinea. Our own Mission owes its commencement
to a letter received from Sir William McGregor, the Governor of
British New Guinea, to Rev. George Woolnough in Brisbane
This letter was forwarded to the Board of Missions in Sydney,
who instituted inquiries and gathered information for the
General Conference which was held in Sydney in 1890. At that
Conference it was decided that the General Secretary for
Missions should visit New Guinea and report thereupon. It
was at the same time decided that should his report be favour-
ab'e, the Board of Missions should at once commence a Mission
in that country. The General Secretary left for New Guinea as
soon as the decision was arrived at, and whilst the General Con-
ference was still sitting. He proceeded to Cooktown, and from


there was conveyed to New Guinea in the Government Schooner
“ Hygiea.” He was most kindly received by His Excellency Sir
¥m, McGregor, and also by the Missionaries of the London
Missionary Society, stationed at Port Moresby. During his stay
there a Conference was held, consisting of Rev. W. G. Lawes
and Rev. H. M. Dauncey, representing the London Missionary
Society, Rev. A. A. McLaren, representing the Australian
Board of Missions (Anglican), and the General Secretary. At
this Conference it was decided that in the event of the Wes-
leyan Mission being established, the boundaries to be
occupied by the respective Missionary Societies should be
accurately defined, and this was accordingly done. It was felt to
be extremely undesirable that at any future time, representatives
of the different Societies (evangelical) should occupy the same
Districts. The agreement then arrived at was subsequently
endorsed by the different Societies.
The District occupied by the London Mission extends
from the Dutch boundary to East Cape. The District occupied by
our own Wesleyan Mission comprises a short distance on the
mainland of New Guinea, extending from East Cape to Cape
Ducie, together with all the Islands comprised in the large
D’Entrecasteaux, Louisiade, Engineer, Woodlark, Trobriand,
Laughlan, and other groups. The District occupied by the
Australian Board of Missions is situated on the N. E. coast, and
extends from Cape Ducie to the German boundary at Mitre
Rock, in 8 deg. Lat.
The Views comprised in this set —Nos, 1 to 51 —were many
of them taken by the General Secretary on his first visit. On
that occasion he was the guest of His Excellency Sir Win.
McGregor for more than three months, on board the “ Merrie
England,” and accompanied him on that vessel along the South
coast of the mainland, to Chad’s Bay on the N. E. coast, and
also to the large groups lying to the eastward, now occupied by
our Missionaiies.
No. 1 is a view taken from the verandah of Rev. W. G. Lawes’
house at Port Moresby. It shows a part of the native village,


and also in the far distance the Government township of
Granville.
No. 2 is a view of the Mission Station and premises, taken
from the small Island which was shown in the first picture. The
large house in the centre is the residence of the Rev. W. G.
Lawes, and the small house, with the flagstaff in front, was
built for the Rev. J. Chalmers, better known in New Guinea by
his native name of Tamate. The other buildings comprise a
Store, Church, and School-house. It was from Port Moresby
that all the earliest expeditions for the exploration of New
Guinea took their departure. The country in the immediate
neighbourhood is very barren, and consequently food is scarce
and difficult to obtain.
No. 3. —This is a group of three New Guinea young men.
In some Districts, notably in the District of Kerepunu, the white
cockatoo’s feathers can only be worn in the hair by those who
have killed a man, and many crimes are committed for the sake
of this coveted distinction.
No. 4. —During the stay of the General Secretary at Port
Moresby the Governor examined the schools conducted by the
L.M.S. missionaries. His Excellency, who is a great enthusiast
in educational matters, was so pleased with the progress which
had been made by the children that he provided funds to enable
Mrs. Lawes to give a picnic to the children. A very pleasant
day was spent by the members of the Mission, visitors and
children. The view before us was taken just as the children
were waiting for the teacher to say grace before they proceeded
to dispose of the food which had been provided for them. The
teacher who is represented in the picture is Ruatoka, one of the
oldest and best known teachers of the London Mission. The
cooking pots were all made of native crockery, and were well
filled with pork, yams, bananas and other delicacies, which were
speedily disposed of by the hungry youngsters.
No. s—This represents a scene which may be witnessed
almost any day in the village of Hanuabada, at Port Moresby.
As has been said before, the village is one in which food is ex-


tremely scarce, and most of it has to be brought from a considerable
distance. In consequence of this the women employ themselves
during some nine months in the year in making pottery, which
is afterwards taken in large canoes many miles to the westward,
and sold or exchanged for sago or other articles of food. The
view represents a woman engaged in making a cooking pot.
Other pots are placed to dry in the sun, and in the far distance the
process of baking them in the fire to harden them is going on. In
the months of September and October, and towards the close of the
S.E. monsoon the natives construct vessels called lakatoi. These
are formed by lashing several canoes together and building a
platform upon them. The pottery which has been made by their
wives and daughters during the year is then taken on board, and
they set sail for districts lying to the west of Port Moresby,
where they barter their goods and return laden with food when
the N.W. monsoon sets in. It will give some idea of the extent
of this industry when we say that from this one village alone in
Port Moresby some 30,000 articles of pottery were taken during
the last year. The articles made, consist almost entirely of
cooking pots and water jars.
No. 6.—Represents a Tree House inland from Port
Moresby. These houses arc often of a considerable size, and
afford a refuge for women and children in case of attack by
neighbouring tribes. They are often built on much higher trees
than that represented in the view, and sometimes several large
houses may be found in the same large tree.
No. 7. —This view represents two young men in full fighting
costume, fihe shields are made of wood, covered with plaited
grass-work, and ornamented with the feathers of the parrot. One
of the men is poising the typical stone-club of New Guinea, and
the other has in his mouth an article which is designed to inspire
fare in the hearts of his enemies.
No. B.—ls a photograph of a collection of ear ornaments in
the several districts on the South coast. They are nearly all
made of tortoise-shell.


No. 9.—ls a group of New Guinea girls, carrying water in
the jars peculiar to the district.
No. 10.—Is a view of three typical New Guinea youths. The
ornament hanging from the neck of the tallest is a boar’s tusk ;
the circular ornament round the neck of the one in the middle is
made of pearlshell.
No. 11. —Two New Guinea girls.
No. 12. —A scene on the Laroki River, some miles inland
from Port Moresby.
No. 13. —The Government Steam Yacht “ Merrie Eng
land.”
No. 14.—The anchorage in Kerepunu. The boat in the
foreground is the mission boat of Rev. Mr. Pearse.
No. 15.—Houses in Kerepunu. These houses may be
taken as types of the houses on the mainland between Port
Moresby and South Cape. It will be noticed that they are all
built on high piles from sto 6 feet above the ground. They are
from 40 to 50 feet in length, and very nearly 40 feet high. The
house with the pointed gable is the Boy’s Club House, where the
unmarried boys have to live.
No. 16.—Koapena, Chief of the Aroma District, between
Kerepunu and South Cape. Kaopena is one of the few powerful
Chiefs in that part of the mainland. He measures 6ft 3iu. in
height.
No. 17. —A back street in Moapa one of Koapena’s
villages in Aroma. The houses are very high, and the ridge-pole
begins to assume here the curved shape which is so characteristic
of the houses in the East end.
No. 18.—The “ Dubu,” a chief’s platform, or sacred house.
Skulls and other trophies are exhibited in these places.
No. 19. —A street in Toulon Island. There are about 83
houses in this street. The mode of calculating population in
these places, where no census is possible, has been on the basis of
5 inhabitants to each house, so that this street would represent a
population of 415. The tall post in the foreground is one of the
posts of a “ Dubu.”


No. 20.—A large and typical house at Mita, Milne Bay.
The white man is now a Magistrate in the West End of New
Guinea.
No. 21. —A group of women at Mita, Milne Bay.
No. 22. —Group of women on Basilaki Island, one of the
Engineers Group, now in the Tubetube Circuit.
No. 23.—A scene at AAoodlark Island. This is a compara-
tively unknown group. Some French Priests landed here many
years ago, but after some months of fruitless toil, they were
completely disheartened and abandoned the Mission.
No. 24. —The General Secretary and group of natives on
Woodlark Island. The Woodlark Islanders have long borne a
bad character, but the Governor and party were kindly received
by them.
No. 25. —Three Woodlark Islanders who were arrested for
the murder of two white men. They were tried by the Chief
Justice, and the one in the middle of the group was subsequently
executed.
No. 25 —A village scene in the Laughlan Group. This is
a small group ot coral islets, which was brought into notice
some years ago by the fact that 17 of the ill-fated expedition
sent out by the Marquis De Rays were landed there, the
remainder going on to New Ireland.
Nos. 27 and 28. —Houses in Kadawaga, one of the Trobriands
Group. This is a densely-populated group. The village in
which these views were taken consisted of at least 130 houses,
and there are many much larger in the group, which is estimated
to contain from 10,000 to 15,000 inhabitants. It has been
decided to occupy this group at once, and Rev. S. B. Fellows
was appointed at the Conference of this year (1893) to proceed
there as soon as possible.
No. 29.—Natives and houses at Dobu, the present Head-
quarters of the Wesleyan Mission in New Guinea. This island
i» marked on the charts as Goulvain Island, and is situated in
Dawson’s Straits, between the large islands of Ferguson and
Normandy in the D’Entre casteaux Group
No. 30. —A house with skulls at Dobu. The natives are in
the habit of preserving the skulls of those they have killed and
eaten, and exhibiting them as trophies.
No. 31—A group of natives at Dobu, with piles of yams
and cocoanuts, prepared for a wedding feast.
No. 82.—A few of the canoes alongside the vessel at Dobu.
No. 33.—Building temporary house for the residence of the
teachers at Dobu on the establishment of the Mission in 1891.


No. 34. —Two Dobu girls, front view, showing the dress
worn by the females in the group.
No. 35.—Profile view of the abovementioned girls.
No. 36.—Women on Ferguson Island, showing their mode
of carrying baskets on the head.
No. 37.—Part of village on Ferguson Island. The houses
are placed all round a large circular piece of ground, which is
then used as a burying place.
No. 38. —Group of natives at Dobu. The one with his
arms folded is Matien, who was employed as Interpreter to the
Mission.
No. 39. —Group of natives on Ferguson Island.
No. 40.—Village scene in Ferguson Island.
Nos. 41 and 42.--Boiling springs and sulphur hills at
Seymour Bay, Ferguson Island.
No. 43.—Group of natives at Dobu.
No. 44. —Native canoe and sail at Panaet, De Boyne Group,
where Bev. S. B. Fellows is stationed. The Rev. A. Fletcher
succeeds him in his appointment.
No. 45. —Houses and natives, Panaeti. It will be noticed
that these houses differ very considerably from those on the
mainland, and also from those in the other groups. The houses,
for instance, at Kerepunu have straight ridgepoles ; east of that
they begin to assume the curved shape which is characteristic of
all the Eastern Groups, Here, however, the curve is convex
instead of concave, and the houses are much more open.
No. 46.—A group of native women at Panaeti.
No. 47. —Houses and natives at Tubetube, the station of
the Eev. J. T. Field.
No. 48, —Part of village on Ferguson Island. The round
things put on sticks are old cocoanuts. You will notice here
also skulls over the door-plate.
No. 50.—Scene on Goodenough Island, the other large
island of the D’Entre casteaux Group.
* *
N.JS. —None of the New Guinea natives in the above views
are without clothing , as was the case in all the New Britain
Group. With regard to some of the vieivs, however , the Lecturer
must use his own discretion as to exhibiting them before a mixed
congregation. Theg represent the actual state of the people
amongst whom the Missionaries and their wives and the Mis-
sionary Sisters labour.
10




antern Slides.
following Sets of Slides have been prepared by Mr. Hur-
wood from negatives furnished by the General Secretary,
and may be had on application to the Mission Office.
New Britain, Past and Present
55 Slides.
Tonga i 7 Do.
Samoa .. .. •• •• •• ™ Do.
Fiji 20 Do.
Any of these Sets or selections from them are charged 18s. per
dozen.
