

i
t
i
\




•SHISST.A.TIEI,^
DARLIpEj DISTRICT,
■* QUEENSLAND.^
r<csN<9 (2>^y>
B^IJSB7I]SE:
Printed at “JOY BELLS” OFFICE, A.M.P. Building, Edward Street.




■
tf po-
rn h-
PINE CREEK ESTATE,
DARLING DOWNS DISTRICT, QUEENSLAND
By a Visitor.
PINE Creek Estate comprises 23,880 acres freehold land, the pro-
perty of F. Striiver, Esq. On it are depastured an average of
20,000 sheep and 300 head of cattle and twenty horses. The
sheep are all fine woolled Merinos of excellent quality. The run
is all fenced with a six-foot high paling fence, proof against the wild
dingo or kangaroos. The estate is all good grazing land, the indigenous
gtaSses being thick, short, and sweet. The soil is a sandy loam, rest-
ing upon a deep bed of volcanic clay, eminently suited for the culture of
wheat Or lucerne. There are several minor watercourses intersecting
the paddocks, all of which possess waterholes, never yet known to run
dry. The main watercourse is called Pine Creek, and upon this Mr.
’Striiver has erected his
HOMESTEAD.
The centre picture is a faithful photograph of this pretty spot. In
front is seen lake, erected by the owner through simply
forming a dam across the creek. This lake covers an area of about
twenty acres. The good taste of the owner has forbidden any shooting
over it, and the consequence is that it is covered with wild fowl. There
are always to be seen many wild ducks, wood ducks, teal, coots, grebes,
Cormorants, herons, spoonbills, and occasionally the noble black swan,
that rara avis of the world, prior to the discovery of Australia. Trotting
roCtnd the water’s edge can be seen the Australian dottrells, and the
spur-winged, plover ; among the sedges are often to be flushed the snipe,
and perched on the tree tops that gigantic dacelo, the laughing jackass,
can often be seen and heard laughing out its peculiar hearty laughing
song. The Australian magpie, a crow shrike, the most melodiously
musical of all Australia’s birds, is ever about the lake shores giving


utterance in its rich organ-like notes to a song of praise to the owner of
Pine Creek for his kind protection to those aboriginal inhabitants, the
birds. The homestead house is truly typical of those settlers, who,
living in the bush of Australia, yet like to make themselves comfort-
able. It is formed of the cypress pine of the district, an excellent wood
which has the quality of resisting the attacks of the voracious white ant,
that fell-destroyer of timbered structures in Queensland. Like most
Australian settlers’ houses it is all ground floor, and is verandah-sur-
rounded, for in the semi-tropical climate of Queensland, living during the
summer time is spent chiefly in the open air or on ‘the verandah. The
out buildings comprise a school-room for the children, the kitchen, a
comfortable dairy doubled walled and double roofed so as to be cool
during the summer, and a dry underground wine cellar, well stocked
with “comforts.” A small garden is laid out in front of the
house, and the whole establishment fenced in and made secure against
the depredations of the opossum, that noctirnal marsupial phalanger,
the common animal of the wooded district of the Australian continent.
This creature is about the size of a cat, and is destructive to all vege-
tables and fruits; its fur is close and fine, and the skins are an article
of export to Europe, and are used in the colonies for rugs
The stockyard is a necessary adjunct to the grazier’s homestead. In
it all the operations of branding, slaughtering, drafting, and horse-
breaking are carried out. On cattle stations the stockyard is of exten-
sive dimensions, but on a sheep run it is generally flbout the size of the
one illustrated. At Pine Creek it is formed of stout posts, eight feet
high, firmly fixed in the ground, nine feet apart, enclosing a square of
seventy-two feet of ground. Through this are threaded cables of six
strands, No. 10 steel wire, and to these cables are laced upright oak
saplings. The yard has been erected eight years and is still as sound
as ever, and no beast has ever got out except through the gates. A
comfortable calf-pen and milking-shed, with self-fastening bails for
holding the cows also are part of the yard.
THE DAM.
This picture shows the dam constructed across Pine Creek and
the little lake of water thus erected. It is constructed of earth, but
backed by logs placed at a slope of 1 feet in 12 feet. In
length it measures 250 yards, in breadth on the top 20 feet, in height
10 feet in the middle, and the top is covered with a thick sward of
couch grass, whose matted roots hold the soil so firmly that the water
can flow over without injury. Indeed, it not unfrequently happens
that a stream of water 2 feet deep flows over the whole length for
several days together, yet a breach has never been worked through.
This fact is high testimony to the engineering skill of Mr. Striiver, who
personally superintends all practical work executed on the estate.


THE FOWL HOUSE.
About 100 fowls are kept at Pine Creek Station. For these two
comfortable houses have been erected, each of these is 15 feet by
10 feet by 7 feet high to the wall plates. These houses are made
of oak saplings, fastened on to a strong framework of pine. An
excellent system has been adopted by Mr. Striiver which tends greatly
to lessen the evil of vermin, the one great trouble all poultry-keepers
have to combat in the hot climate of Queensland. One house is
kept exclusively for laying and for sitting hens, not a bird being
allowed to roost in it, by this system this house can be kept much
cleaner. The upper loft is allotted to pigeons. It is necessary at Pine
Creek that the poultry be all secured at night from the depredations of
the native cat, and Mr. Striiver has ingeniously contrived this and yet
allow the birds to leave the house early in the morning without waiting
for an attendant to open the door; perches project from the gable
ends of the roosting house so as to give the fowds the option of sleeping
out of doors during the summer weather and yet be safe from their
night-prowling enemy, the native cat. This animal is not of the cat
tribe, though colonists have given it that name on account of its fowl-
destroying habits. Its proper name is the spotted Dasyurus. It is
typical of that tribe called Dasyurid*. In shape they are not unlike
the stoat or the ferret of the old world, having a long slender body,
sharp nose, and erect ears. They are very ferocious, and when
“ cornered,” will fight any animal not excepting man. There is a
variety which grov'S to a much larger size, though in every way
identical with the ordinary Dasyurus, and this variety is called the
tiger-cat. These especially are most blood-thirsty creatures, for one
alone has been known to slaughter a dozen full grown turkeys in a
single night. All sorts of poultry fall victims to them. The creatures
fasten upon the neck, bite the head off, and lap the blood ; then they
proceed to do the same to another bird, and so on. The Dasyruridse
climb with great facility, and before the advent of civilised man, existed
solely by hunting at night time for birds, their nests and eggs, In
colour they usually are a yellowish brown, spotted freely on the back
and sides with white, but there is a variety that is all black with white
spots. It is a remarkable fact that both these black and the yellow
animals are of the same species, for both colours will frequently be
found in the one litter.
THE WOOLSHED
upon all sheep stations is an important building. In it that chief
event of the shearing—takes place. This lasts usually
for about six weeks, and it is the harvest time of the sheep
owner. It is a pleasant sight to the owner of tens of thousands of
sheep to see the snow white fleeces absolutely rolling off for, tfle


- V '•dfcsJv ■■ / ... ...
Australian shearer is .a skilful and rapid worker, and will sjiear in a
work man 1 ikejtraanner from 80 to 120 wethers in one pine
©reek the shed has accommodation for 1 6 .shearers, and will hold 1500
sheep. In length it is 144>feet, in breadth 40 feet, and in height to
the wall plates 7 feet,-with a high-peaked roof. It is raised on piles
3 feet high, the‘floor, as in all woolsheds, being battened so as to allow
•all the droppings to fall through and jthns .tibe sheep be kept clean. The
'interior of all .woolsheds is divided inter of pens leading up to
Smaller pens which abut on to the shearing floor, From these small pens
the shearers catch a sheep and carry it out to the board. Mr. Striiver
has so contrived his shed that the sheep cannot get even a glimpse of the
shearers at . work* thus there is no trouble in moving the tihiid animals
up from pen to pen. To protect the shearers when at work from ah-y
“Undue heat owing to the galvanised iron roofing being so close to their
heads,'Mr. Striiver has ceilinged that part of the shed with bagging
j'materialy on the upper surface of which is spread two coats of clay
plaster. This has proved a most effective heat arrester, and enabled the
men to work in comfort and comparatively coolly. Orie part of a
' woolshed is always allotted to the folding, classing, and packing of the
wool. The conveniences for these operations at Pine Creek are very
complete. After being sorted, the wool is pressed by a powerful
ratchet press into bales of about 3 . cwt., ,aud these are then branded
with the name of the station, and loaded on to waggons for transport to
the nearest railway station. ■ •
THE SHEARERS’ HUT,
Und th.e men’s hut at Pine Creek are very comfortable. The
former ‘ will accommodate 30 men and the latter 8 men. .They
are both constructed of upright oak saplings fastened on to a strong
pine framework. In the men’s hut there is a lining of stout
bagging which hangs as a curtain from the wall plate, thus effectually
keeping out the cold winds of Winter time, but which in sumiper can
be rolled up, thus allowing abundance of fresh air during the hot close
nights of summer and autumn. This curtain is regularly papered once
a year with old Illustrated News or other pictorial serials. The fire
place in the hut is one of those large sensible structures where a huge
log can find room and so a blazing fire be indulged in. The
floor is closely boarded; there are'comfortable seats and comfortable
berths for sleeping in. The roof is shingled, and there is a verandah all
j round the building |1 very thing is done in fact to study "the bomftfrt of
the workmen. o t
THE COTTAGE AND WORKSHOP
Are also constructed of oak sapling on pine' framework. The workshop
comprises in the one building a blacksmith’s smithy, carpenter’s work-
shop, a store for tools and farm implements; also at the one end


a well ventilated meat house, made effectually proof against flies by
wire gauze, in this are salting tables, brine casks, blocks, hooks, and
all that butchers’ require. The ceilings of this building also are coated
with the heat-proof clay-coated bagging material.
THE SALT HOUSE
Is a neat little building used for storing the large quantity of salt fed
to the sheep. From two to three pounds of salt are consumed annually
by each sheep upon the estate. This is fed to counteract the
tendency to worms which the sheep would otherwise suffer from
when feeding, as they do, solely on the indigenous pastures. In
a dry season more salt is consumed, it having a tonic effect and
enabling the animals the better to digest the dried grasses. Only the
best Liverpool salt is used. It is fed to the sheep in small troughs
placed near the watering places. The salt house is constructed with a
door level with the bed of a dray so as to facilitate loading and
unloading.
THE STABLE
Is a large, roomy, comfortable building, 40 feet long, 25 feet broad
and 14 feet high, and over this is an extensive hay loft. The stalls,
or rather loose boxes, are arranged on each side of a central passage,
so that the horses can be fed without going into each stall.
Thls^passagg'fcoffneots awitff a ehaffkmtting , ; and cqrp-cyushing jjpqom at
the one end, and there is also a roomy saddle and harness room. The
floor of the stables is of tempered clay, and formed with a slope
backwards so as to prevent an accumulation of the liquids.
The above Series of Photographs illustrate faithfully the surround-
ings of the Australian settler whose good fortune it is to own from
10,000 to 20,000 sheep, and who cares to have things comfortable
around him. The climate is such that a heavy expenditure in stone or
brick buildings is uncalled for, but the keen cutting winds that prevail
over the Darling Downs during the winter and early spring render
necessary more protection to man and beast than in the wanner parts of
Queensland, therefore it is that at Pine Creek so much thought has baen
bestowed by Mr. Striiver to make his buildings both warm in winter
yet cool in summer. For this purpose the oak saplings are well suited
for they withstand the weather and the white ants; the bark does not
fall off, and thus a rustic appearance is given to all the buildings far
more pleasing to the eye than if they were built of the usual boards.
It is this general use of oak for building purposes that renders the
difference between Mr. Striiver’s homestead and that of his neighbours’
so apparent, and that tends to give the snug comfortable impression the
stranger is certain to feel on riding up to the establishment.


5 L6UO
p 1 (
“Joy Bells,” Printers, Edward Street, Brisbane.




