

PIONEERING
DAYS IN
WESTERN
VICTORIA
NARRATIVE OP EARLY STATION LIFE
J. C. HAMILTON
LUSTRATED • BY- PERCY- LEASOM


sixiiatting and digging days are inexi>re*-i
aibly dull. Mr. J. C. Hamilton, who wa.»i
broiignt to Melbourne from Scotland at fat'
back as 1841, when, he wag live year* old,
Co., Melbourne). Mr. Hamilton tell* a)
plain, unpolished story of life in the early-
days, brightened -by .many , interesting epi-
sodes and personal experiences. It »
Liar more readable than most productions
to! the kind. It is a help to the under*
.standing of Victorian history, and may
-possibly be useful to writers of faction who
may wish to make its scenes » setting foi
(typical characters.


Mr. J. C. HAMILTON


"Bringalbert”


PIONEERING DAYS IN WESTERN
VICTORIA


Pioneering Days
in
WESTERN VICTORIA
Jl Narrative of
EARLY STATION LIFE
by
J. C. HAMILTON
Melbourne:
EXCHANGE PRESS PTY. Lm
294-302 Little Lonsdale Street


To My Dear Friends
WHO HAVE ALWAYS SHOWN ME
SYMPATHY AND PRACTICAL HELP
IN THE
Days of my Adversity
I DEDICATE THIS BOOK


Pioneering Days in Western
Victoria
CHAPTER I.
Arrival in Melbourne.—Family History and
Experiences.
As a number of friends have requested me to
write a story of my experiences as a Victorian
pioneer, I will start to give in detail my experience
of bush life principally on stations from the year
1841, when I landed in Melbourne with my parents.
I was born in Scotland, near Ormiston, County
of Haddington, twelve miles south of Edinburgh,
and came to this country in the good ship Ellen
Carr. We were four months on the voyage from
Scotland to Australia, and landed at the place now
known as Port Melbourne, on the 10th day of No-
vember, 1841. We went from the landing place to
a camp called Canvas Town, near where Albert Park
now is. Our family consisted of six persons—my
father and mother, aged, respectively, 36 and 33;
the eldest son, John Bannerman, aged 7 years; James
(myself), aged 5 years; Francis, 3 years; and Jane,
the baby in her mother’s arms. John was the first
child our young minister, the Rev. Mr. Bannerman,
then of Ormiston, baptised after being called to the
ministry, so he made a special request to my parents
that the child should bear his name. I well re-
member my tramp from the ship to Canvas Town.
I cried all the way. The heat was too great for
me, and I thought I would die; but I have gone
through many hotter days through the nearly 70
years of my sojourn here. We only stayed one night
in Canvas Town, for the next day my uncle, T. L.
Gibson, sent a horse and cart for us. I remember


the horse well. He was a big cream coloured horse,
and afterwards well known in trotting circles.
Captain, as he was called, was a great trotter. On
one occasion, in 1842, he took a load of five bales
of wool to Melbourne, and my uncle put up at the
Crown Hotel, at the corner of Queen and Lonsdale-
streets. This hotel was kept by one William Mor-
timer, and was a great resort of squatters at that
time. My uncle offered to trot “Captain” against
any horse in Melbourne. A match was made, the
prize being £2O, and supper for twenty gentlemen,
but Captain carried off the honours of the day.
My Uncle Gibson was my mother’s brother,- and
a nephew of David Gibson, of Pleasant Banks, near
Evandale, Tasmania, the father of the Gibsons of
sheepbreeding fame. David Gibson never went in
for sheepbreeding, but was a very successful breeder
of Shorthorn cattle and draught horses. A month
or so before his death, I was at Pleasant Banks, and
he then showed me a lot of prizes won at different
shows—nearly enough cups and medals to cover the
diningroom table.
T. L. Gibson came out to his uncle, David Gibson,
when he was only 17 years of age, and after a
few years’ residence in Tasmania he came over
to Port Phillip, as Victoria was then called, in
the year 1835, and took up the Long Hills station,
about 40 miles north of Melbourne and about three
miles south-east of Kilmore. So the Long Hills
was our destination when we left Canvas Town. We
made as far as Moonee Ponds the first day, and
camped on what is now known as the Queen’s
Park. What a contrast between the place that
day and what it is now, for when we camped there
it was just ordinary bush. This was my first camp
out, and the novelty pleased me. (Since then I have
spent many happy days in camp life, and many in
anxiety and trouble when travelling with stock and
short of grass and water.) We left there in the
morning and got to the Rocky water-holes, where
we camped the second night, and next day we got


to the station. I well remember my uncle coming to
meet us—a fine, strapping young man about thirty
years of age and weighing about twelve stone. He
had with him two fine yellow kangaroo dogs, the
first of the kind I had ever seen. I had left at the
ship’s side a pair of carriage dogs, which took my
fancy very much on the voyage out. These dogs
were in the care of Mr. Walter Grieves, who was
a fellow passenger of ours on the Ellen Carr, and
belonged to Dr. Lang, who was well known in those
days. (Mr Grieves was afterwards manager of the
Maryvale Station, and for many years our neigh-
bour when we were at Ozenkadnook.)
The Long Hills Station consisted of the usual
buildings of station homesteads of those days—
huts, sheds, sheep yards, &c. Here began my ex-
perience of station and bush life, which has con-
tinued for nearly seventy years. (It began by my
working a little for my uncle, then for my father—
after his death for my mother, until at last I got
the Ozenkadnook Station into my own hands. Then
the Bringalbert Station, and not satisfied with this
I went into New South Wales and bought the
Gamba Gamba Station, on the Talbragar, near
Dubbo. By this transaction I lost so much that
I got into difficulties. I have gone down, but I
cannot complain, for I see tny country going
rapidly on to prosperity, substantial farmers on the
land, business places in full swing, and numbers of
fine young men and young women springing up
and taking all the care on their shoulders.) But
lam far ahead of my story, and must go back to
my uncle, the Long Hills, and Kilmore. My father
stayed with my uncle for some time while he looked
about to get a suitable home for us. A short time
before we came to the Long Hills the Govern-
ment of the day had made a special survey of cer-
tain lands, including a township which was named
Kilmore, and my father bought a township allot-
ment east of the Sydney road and running down
to the Kilmore creek. On this he built his house


and brought us all to it. He then in a short time
secured a farm of about 70 acres joining and
running eastwardly to the top of the bank from
the creek. The east end would be, I think, just
about where the railway station now stands. After
this he secured another farm of about 50 acres,
which he called the Round Hill. On these farms
he cultivated wheat and potatoes principally. The
land was very good, yielding fine crops. I remem-
ber a quantity of Swedish turnips which grew so
large we had to use an axe to cut them up for
pig feeding. I believe the turnips -would weigh
from four to six pounds. Maize, too, grew six or
seven feet high, and gave heavy yields in the rich
black soil along the creek. This he used in quan-
tities for pig and fowl feeding. Afterwards he
bought cows, young cattle, and other farm stock,
and soon got into a way of doing well as a rising
man. A good many people bought allotments and
settled on them.
By the end of 1844 we had a blacksmith (L.
Kelly), a shoemaker (J. Biddle), and a boarding-
house (J. Mitten), who, securing a licence, it be-
came a publichouse under the name of “The
Currency Lad.” This was the second public-house
for Kilmore, as there was one half a mile or so
down the Sydney road, on the Melbourne side,
kept by a man named Frank Anderson. It was a
well kept place, the people being very respectable.
A school was also opened, the master’s name being
Poulson, but he left after a year or so. and a Mr.
Abbot took his place. I attended school as long as
we were on the farm. That -would be up to the
early months of 1846, when my father sold his farm
and started to take up his new country west of the
Glenelg river.


CHAPTER II.
Shifting to New Country—Account of Trip.
Arrival.
It came about in this way. My uncle hearing
of a lot of new and unoccupied country west of the
Glenelg river, sold his Long Hills Station to Messrs
Tootle and Broadhurst, and arranged with my
father to take up as much country as would form
two stations. This new country was, as I have
said, west of the Glenelg river towards Roseneath
on the south, west to the South Australian border,
and a lot of country in South Australia known as
the Tatiara, north to the Murray River. Here to
this country my uncle came in 1845, and applied
for a large block of country running side by side
with Mr. George Urquhart’s Mary vale Station, but
only managed to keep some 98,000 acres, as I will
show further on. This was formed into the Bring-
albert Station, about 68,000 acres, and Ozen-
kadook, 38,000 acres. On his way up he
capped at Lake Wallace for a time, but
thinking the country better further on he left the
Lake, taking a north-westerly course until he came
to a little water-hole south-west of Bringalbert
Lake. This is still known as Gibson’s water-hole.
Here he camped for dinner, and whilst there a mob
of kangaroos came by and his dog took after them.
My uncle mounted his horse and followed. The
dogs singled out an old buck, and, as the custom
of his kind was, he made for the nearest water,
which proved to be Lake Bringalbert. My uncle
following, was delighted to find this splendid sheet
of water, never seen before by a white man. He
returned to his dinner camp and then started for
the lake, again taking up his camp on the bracken
fern bank south end of the lake between the Lake


"Ozenkadnook"


and Downbobberty. Downbobberty was then only
a grass-covered swamp, but now it is a much finer
lake than Bringalbert. This came about through
cutting drains from the chain of swamps south and
east principally, although a considerable amount of
water was brought in by drains from the west of
the lake. After my uncle settled his camp he set
about putting in his application for the country
required to form two stations, and applied for the
next block to Maryvale, which had been taken up
by George Urquhart some time before ray uncle
discovered Bringalbert. Further on I will say more
of boundaries, but will now go back to the time
when we left Kilmore.
My father having sold his land, we started at
the end of February, 1846, for the new country to
join my uncle. The sheep were already on the
run, my uncle having taken them with him, so we
only had the cattle to drive. My brother John
and I managed the droving. We had a team of
eight bullocks and a tilted dray to carry the be-
longings. My father was not much of a bullock
driver, so he engaged a fellow named Jimmy
Pender, who knew very little more about bullock
driving than ray father himself. However, between
them they managed to get to the end of the
journey without any serious mishap, although the
roads in those days were mere tracks. We started
from Kilmore, taking a westerly course, and made
Mount Macedon. After that we kept the Pyrenees
in sight on the south side of our course until the
Grampians loomed in front of us. We crossed the
“Pickanniny Wimmera,” somewhere near Glenorchy
and the Wimmera River, before we reached Rose's
Gap, a narrow defile on the mountains called after
Mr. P. D. Rose, who had formed the Rosebrook
Station nearly three years before the time of our
journey. We passed Rose’s Station and then went
south-west until we reached Rocklands, then owned
by a Mr. Sherard. He was a kind-hearted gentle-
man, for our meat having run out my father asked


him to sell us a sheep. But this kind man would
not take any payment, and had a sheep killed for
us, sending it down by one of his hands to our
dray. These are a class of men too seldom met
with in life’s journey, but they have the true spirit
of Christianity. The next place we struck was
Congbool, then owned by Fairbairn and Stirling,
and managed by a man named Sheppard. He told
my father which way to steer, so we made the
Glenelg river, and crossed it at Longlands, then
owned by a Mr. Donaldson. Poor fellow, he met
with a tragic fate afterwards, for coming up from
Portland with his wife and child in a spring cart
the horse bolted with them, and a smash took
place, Donaldson being killed, but his wife and
child escaped serious injury. From Longlands we
steered our course westerly, and made Lake
Wallace on the Bth of May, 1846. The lake at
that time was nearly dry. I do not think it had
more than six inches of water in its deepest part.
I was sent down to fill the kettle, and found the
water so shallow I had to dip it out in small sips.
Our camp was near where the police station now
stands. We were now at the end of all roads
and tracks, as no one had travelled to the north-
west but my uncle. However, we found his track,
and, following it with some difficulty, we got to
the boundary of Eringalbert. Next day we reached
the station, and our journey was at an end. This
was on the evening of the 10th May, 1846. I was
just 10 years and one month of age at that time,
and I have nevey forgotten the scene that opened
to my view the next morning when I first saw
the lake. The sun was just rising over the bracken
fern bank on the east side of the lake, and, shining
through a mist which hung over the surface of the
water with a lovely subdued radiance, produced a
picture never to be forgotten by me. To add to the
entrancing loveliness of the scene, there was an
almost continuous margin of flags or bulrushes
about eight or nine feet high round the margin of


the lake, out of which came a delightful harmony
from numbers of small birds who had made their
home in the rushes. As the sun rose higher the
curtain of mist lifted, and I beheld another picture
of beauty. The calm and placid bosom of the lake,
with its hundreds of wild fowl of every sort, such
as the majestic black swan, duck of different sorts,
a great variety of coots, divers, ckc,, was a sight that
made a deep impression on my boyish mind.
There were a great many blacks round this part
at this time, from the infant on its mother’s breast
to the extremely aged men and women. Numbers
BLACKS CAMP
HOME FROM THE KUNT.
of them made their way in to the station to see
the little white pickanninies, as they called us. They
had never seen a white child before they saw us,
so we were great curiosities. All these swarthy
sons and daughters of the original race have passed
away, but I will further on give my knowledge
and impressions of them. The changes are great
since that 10th of May, 1846. There were then only
two white females in this part of the country —my
mother and my sister, a little girl of about five
years of age. Of course, more women came with
the new squatters, but for some time they were very


few. Another baby girl was born to my mother
on the nth of April, 1847. This girl was the first
white child born in what was known as the new
country in the sixties. She became Mrs. Cowell, of
Brippick. Some years afterwards I remember Mr.
Skene, then Surveyor-General and father of the
well-known ex-Secretary for Lands, advising my
mother to put in an application for a grant of land
on my sister’s account. He thought such an appli-
cation would be entertained by the Government of
the day owing to my sister’s distinction as the first
white child born in the new country. My mother
never made the application, so it passed away like
all other changing scenes in this rapidly changing
world.


CHAPTER III.
Remove to Ozenkadnook.—Carting Wool to
Portland.—A Long Run.
We stayed for a while at Bringalbert with
my uncle before we took up our abode at Ozen-
kadnook, my father helping him to build a house
and wool-shed. My first job was to drive the
bullocks for the plough, Joe Williams being the
ploughman, so that sixty-two years ago I had a
hand in putting in the first crop on Bringalbert,
and, I think, the first in the district. This was
not my first attempt at bullock driving, as I drove
for my father on his farm at Kilmore when I was
only seven or eight years of age. He never had
any other bullock driver when he was farming
and when we had wool to cart to Portland
from the station I was the driver, he always
accompanying me nearly up to the end of 1850. I
will relate the circumstances of his death, which
was indeed a sad one, further on. After his death
we had more sheep, and so got another team of
bullocks. My brother Frank was made second
driver, but I continued longer than he did. We
were good hands at it. As an instance, we had
on one occasion only eight bullocks on the place
to draw the two drays, but we had a fine lot of
unbroken steers. So he and I (boys of about fifteen
and seventeen) got eight steers coupled and yoked
together. We then let them go to do as they
pleased for the night, and loaded our drays with
the wool to be ready for an early start. In the
morning we divided our teams of eight steers and
eight bullocks into our two teams and got off with
our loads. We did the journey to Portland and
back in seventeen days (two hundred and forty
miles). This was pretty good work, as we’never


We did the journey to Portland and back in seventeen days


took a horse with us to get up the bullocks. We
did all our work of that sort on foot, and a run
of ten or twelve miles before breakfast was nothing
to us. In those days there was only one bridge
between us and Portland. That was at Heywood,
then called the Second River. The worst part
of the road was at Hotspur, then called the Smoky
River. We used to go in at the bottom of the
bank at the north side, our drays sinking nearly
up to the beds in the black mud. This river and
the glue pots north side of the Nine Mile forest
were the worst parts of the road. The boys on
stations sixty years ago had a full share of the
hard work entailed in forming and building up a
home. There were no parties—no fun of any sort
such as the young people of the present day enjoy.
Hard feeding and a life in the open air made us
very hardy, and we could sleep soundly in our
clothes by a camp fire on the damp ground, and
were always ready for a run of any sort. As an
instance, I was with my father to Portland in 1848,
taking our wool down. We got to Portland and
back as far as the Roseneath boundary, ten miles
from Elderslie, where we camped for the night. In
the morning the bullocks could not be found, and
my father believed they had gone home. He said
to me, “You must start for Bringalbert and get
another team ; I must stay by the dray.” This was
after two o’clock, and I set off, reaching Bring-
albert that night, safely returning with a fresh team
of bullocks next day about the same hour as I had
started. My uncle gave me a horse to ride back,
but, taking it altogether, it was not a bad perform-
ance for a boy of twelve to run and walk thirty
miles after two in the afternoon. The blacks were
numerous and not very safe. I nearly ran into a
lot of them at the Yalla Creek, half way between
Elderslie and Newiands, and only avoided them by
hearing one of their dogs bark, which enabled me
to pull to the east and get past them.


CHAPTER IV.
My Uncle’s Boundaries. — Other New
Settlers. —Applications Dealt With by
Captain Fyans at Harlot’s Station, near
Horsham.
As I have said previously, my uncle applied in
1845 f° r country required to form two stations
joining Maryvale. The Maryvale Station consisted
of Ullswater, Maryvale, Spring Hill, and Spring
Bank, abutting on to the Mallee. My uncle’s east
boundary, running south and north, ran along the
Maryvale west boundary and took in all of Pleasant
Banks and Morbat right up to the Mallee. The
north boundary ran along the edge of the scrub,
taking in all Lemon Springs and Tallageira. The
west boundary from the Mallee scrub running north
and south to the Newlands boundary. This in-
cluded all Benayeo and part of Binnum. The south
boundary ran all along the Newlands run, and the
country after that, now known as the Lake Wallace
stations, was applied for by Hope brothers. This
would have made a square block of about 300,000
acres, and was available for an annual payment of
£xo on a squatting licence. This was only to last
until such time as the Government got time to
form a bill at a value considered fair in those early
days of settlement. My uncle had picked out the
sites of his outposts as follow: —At Benayeo, where
the homestead now stands, he built a hut and put
a flock of sheep there, with a shepherd and hut-
keeper. He had a similar establishment at Munnu-
galla, south of Brippick; another at Ozenkadnook,
and lastly at Uram Uram, four miles south of
Bringalbert, now known as Uram Uram Springs.
These were the first outposts, and they were all


rushed by a number of people looking for runs.
My uncle was continually fighting to keep people
outside his outposts, and it was a great fight. There
was no trouble on the south boundary, as Mr.
Ballantyne, the son of a Presbyterian minister, held
the Newlands run from the Hynam boundary to a
water-hole called the Buffalo, eight miles south of
Bringalbert. From there Hope Bros.’ application
began, and continued on to the Maryvale boundary.
The first invaders were Dervis and Harry
Jones. They took all Tallageira and held it. Next
a man named Stephen Rowe got the Neuarparr run.
He held it a few years and sold it to F. P. Hines
for £3OO. Land on Neuarparr, now the home of
a prosperous class of farmers and graziers, brings
up to £5 per acre to-day. Mr. Hines was a shrewd
man of business, but, like the rest of us, did not
secure the best of his country at the upset price
of £1 per acre. He did wake up to secure some
of it well on in the sixties. No one saw the value
of the freehold; in fact it was not there to the
builders in those early days of settlement.
The next successful invader was H. L. McLeod.
He saw Lake Gerli, now known as Lemon
Springs, and put up one post of a hut. My uncle
saw the danger of his getting in there, so he put
up three more posts and completed the hut. When
McLeod came he found the hut occupied and the
country stocked, so he pushed on to Benayeo and
settled there so successfully that he got the land
on which my uncle’s out-station stood and ten miles
further on towards Bringalbert, right down to
Barnook water-hole, where my uncle put up an out-
station hut. That is how things stood up to the end
of the autumn or spring of 1846, when the Afflecks
and Moffat came along and invaded Mortat, Plea-
sant Banks, and Lemon Springs. The Afflecks were
the worst invaders, as they took most of the
country that should have formed the Ozenkadnook
Station. Inside of these we had two men, Ford and
Hardie, at Warrap swamp, east of Ozenkadnook


homestead, but they had to go by order of the
Commissioner. Ogiivie, who was settled at
Ogilvie’s swamp (Tyrell’s homestead, now owned
by Mr. J. H. Harvey), had also to leave. Things
were in an unsatisfactory way until the end of 1848,
when all the applicants had to go to Brighton,
Darlot’s Station, near Horsham, to meet Captain
Fyans, and have their applications confirmed or re-
jected. My uncle was informed he could only take
100,000 acres for ten thousand sheep, and as his
sheep and my father’s hardly made that number his
application was cut down, as I have previously
stated, to 98,000 acres.


Bill’s heels flew into the air and his head disappeared
into the water


CHAPTER V.
Shepherding.—The Cook and Irish Bill.—
Kangaroos,—Sheep Drafting.—Learn-
ing under Difficulties.
My first job of shepherding was at Bringalbert.
One of the men left, and as another shepherd could
not be found, my brother John and I were sent out
to take his place for a while. This was not so bad,
as we were both together with one flock and we
had a good fellow for a cook and hut-keeper. His
name was Stephen Wight, and he kept us sup-
plied with meat pies every night during the time
we were there. He was a merry-hearted fellow and
used to sing songs for us every night after tea
until bedtime. I never heard him utter an oath
or use any kind of bad language all the time we
were with him. Our place was taken by a shep-
herd called Irish Bill, and my uncle sent him with
our flock to an out-station near Brippick. This
place was called Munnungalla. The hut stood on
a hill about twenty yards above a little round
water-hole. Irish Bill turned out to be one of those
men who are never satisfied but are always growl-
ing. One night he came home with his flock, and
as usual started to growl and swear about his food.
It was too much for our old cook, Stephen, and,
making a rush at Bill, he seized him by the back
of the neck and convenient part of his trousers.
Facing him for the water-hole, he started him down
the hill, increasing the pace until he came to the
brink. Then the hands that held Bill took force
and action, for Bill’s heels flew into the air and his
head disappeared into the water. Bill came out
spluttering and swearing, and strained relations
taking place between the two, Stephen left to look


for other work. My companions when out of har-
ness were my two brothers and the black boys.
With the last named we had great sport hunting
kangaroo, native dogs, emus, &c. In those early
days the bush was alive with all sorts of animals
and birds. There were three sorts of kangaroo—
the large grey forester, a smaller sort called
Meringer, and a much smaller sort called
the brush kangaroo. The Meringer was a pretty
animal, having a light brown coat and black velvety
muzzle. He was a great fighter, and I have seen
him when at bay make a sudden spring at a dog
ten feet from him, and coming down on the dog
give him a terrible wound with his hind feet. It
The Chase of the Kangaroo
may be guessed bow numerous they were when I
mention that in one year I killed two thousand
with my dogs. I used sometimes to get twenty or
thirty in a day, and putting my day’s tally down
in my pocket-book, found I had in twelve months
killed the number I have stated. My hunting took
place when I had other work to do, but my dogs
being always with me we had many a chase. It
may be thought that this was wanton sport, but
it was not so, for -we had to keep them down, as
they ate a lot of grass. I think during the fifties
we must have had ten to fifteen thousand


kangaroos on Bringalbert and Ozenkadnook, and
they continued in numbers up to the early
seventies. As we were paying a big rent to the
Government, rising up to £1750 per annum, we
could not afford to feed kangaroos. After the year
1880 the selectors came and proved a worse enemy
to the kangaroo than the station people, as they
wiped out every kangaroo and the squatters also.
The first experience I had of sheep drafting was
in the early years of the forties, when the sheep
were yarded every night on account of the native
dogs, which were very numerous. They used to
follow the flocks in the evening, and the yards had
to be guarded by tied up dogs to keep the dingoes
from rushing in. There was no means of dealing
with these pests except running them down, shoot-
ing or trapping, as strychnine was unknown to us
in those early days. Drafting the newly-born lambs
and their mothers had to be done every morning,
wet or dry, the ewes and young lambs in one lot
and the dropping ewes in another. I had to lamb
down eight hundred or a thousand ewes, and every
morning at sunrise help to draft off thirty or forty
lambs, many a time in a pouring rain. The ewes
and young lambs were handed over to some other
member of the family to take to another yard, and
I would go out with the dropping ewes, bringing
them to the yard at night. Many a time I have
gone out from the yard wet to the skin and stayed
with my sheep till sunset, carrying home lambs
that could not walk. My food consisted of a piece
of bread and meat and my drink of water. I used
just to kneel at a crabhole and drink what I re-
quired, but, thank God, I never got sick or caught
colds. This was often my work after I was ten
years of age and onwards. I had to get my educa-
tion at night, my father having from the first
secured a teacher, a Dr. Smith. He used to set my
lessons for the day, and heard them at night. I
carried my books in a school bag slung over my
shoulder, and they consisted of a Bible, dictionary,


grammar, geography, and history. I had to learn
a lesson out of each and repeat them at night to
the schoolmaster; then have a try at other branches
of learning, sometimes up to twelve o’clock at
night, and our work began at sunrise. As I got
older I did bullock driving, horse-breaking, hut
building, fencing, and all other station work, but
I think it will be allowed that a station boy of my
time had harder work than an average boy of
modern times.


CHAPTER VI.
Pioneer Squatters and Their Runs.—Blacks
Kill Squatter. — Punishment Dealt
Them.—The Petrified Blackfellow.
In 1848 we went from Bringalbert to Ozen-
kadnook and took up our abode there. The owners
of the stations round us were as follow: —My uncle,
T. L. Gibson, Bringalbert; H. L. McLeod, Benayeo;
H. and D. Jones, Binnum, which comprised the
land afterwards called Tallageira (the Joneses sold
that part of their run to Smith and Cattanach) ;
Stephen Rowe, Neuarparr; William Moffatt, Lemon
Springs ; the Afflecks, father and three sons (James,
David, and William), owned Pleasant Banks, as
Mortat was then called. John Affleck and George
Younger had the country from about two miles on
the south side of Pleasant Banks to the Ozen-
kadnook boundary. They were our nearest
neighbours, as their homestead was about seven
miles from ours. George Urquhart had Maryvale;
Hope Bros., Lake Wallace (which included the
runs known as north and south). I think, but am
not sure, that C. Armytage had Mundarra. Mrs.
Hutchinson (afterwards married to John Dunn,
Biscuit Flat) had the Gunnoo Gunnoo property. Her
homestead was on the Yalla Creek, four miles south
of Mundarra. Townsend was the owner of
Kybybolite; Smith and Oliver at Hynam, then
called Broadmeadows; William Wallace had
Elderslie; Robert Ballantyne, Newlands; Robert
Lawson, Padthaway; John Smith and McNicol
Comaum; David Edgar, Pine Hills. What changes
there are since those days. I can say with Robbie
Burns, “Pve seen sae mony changefu’ years on


earth, I am a stranger grown.” It will be interest-
ing to relate some particulars of these early
pioneers whose names I have given.
H. L. McLeod formed Benayeo into a station in
1846 or 1847. He was a native of Skye, and came
from Tasmania over here. His father held a com-
mission in the army. H. L. McLeod was single
when he came, but married a Miss Hines, a
Tasmanian lady of Irish extraction, who was a
sister of F. P. Hines, of Neuarparr. His brother,
John Norman McLeod, took up and formed the
Tahara Station, near Coleraine. He afterwards
lived at “Castlemaddie,” near Portland. One of his
sons was an M.P. for this State for some years,
but I have lost sight of the family. Hugh McLeod
had a large family, but they have long left this part
of the country, and I have lost all trace of them.
The freehold land of Benayeo is now in the hands
of the late Mr. Walter Laidlaw’s family. Hope
Bros, settled at Lake Wallace in 1846. They were
also from “the land of cakes.” Mr. George Hope,
who afterwards settled near Geelong, was one of
the brothers. Robert Ballantyne, of Newlands, was
the son of a Presbyterian minister, and was a fine
type of Scotsman. He had a property of some
70,000 acres, mostly open crabholes, but did not
live long to enjoy it, as he went wrong in his mind
and never recovered his reason. The station then
fell into the hands of the late Mr. James Gordon,
who held it until his death, and is now in the pos-
session of the Laidlaw family, the late Mr. Walter
Laidlaw having married a sister of Mr. Gordon’s.
Maryvale was taken up by George Urquhart in
1843 °r 1844. He was also a Caledonian, and got
together a large tract of country amounting to
some 400,000 acres, comprising Maryvale,
Ullswater, Spring Hill, Spring Bank, and Miga
Lake. It was he who named St. Mary’s Lake (in
which, I believe, he had a considerable interest)
and “Maryvale” after his deceased wife. He stocked
up this country with sheep, cattle, and horses, and


held it until the diggings commenced in the
fifties. He then cut it up into the five stations I
have named, and sold out for £IOO,OOO. After
that he bought Kulkyne, on the Murray, and,
selling that, bought Menindie, which turned out a
bad speculation for him. He rose again after he
fell and got into a fair position in a squatting way
in Queensland. I heard he came down again after
that, but I never heard how he fared ultimately.
He used to say to us, “ Work with your
head, my boys, in a country like this, not
with your hands”; but I remember on one
occasion, when, from a boyish point of
view, I thought his heels served him better
than his head. It was in a cattle yard, and branding
was going on when an old cow rushed at him.
George made for the fence, and, diving under the
lowest rail of the slip panel, only saved his mole-
skins by a fraction. He was one of the best of
pioneers, employing a large staff of men and giving
good wages. With that tenacity of purpose charac-
teristic of so many men of his race, he met reverses
when they came, and was always on the lookout
for another opening. Stephen Rowe settled at
Neuarparr in 1846, but only kept it a short time,
as he had no permanent water, and on that account
sold some thirty or forty thousand acres of the
best grazing country in the district for £3OO, sheep
and plant going with the land. His successor, F.
P. Hines, got the station early in the fifties. He
came from Tasmania, and soon made the run a
paying concern, making many waterholes with the
scoop. The station was rushed by selectors in the
seventies, and Mr. Hines sold the freehold to Mr.
A. A. Cowell, of Brippick. Leaving the district he
went to New South Wales, and I have lost trace
of him. William Moffatt settled at Lemon Springs
in 1546, but did not live long in it, as he had a
fall off his horse which caused his death in 1848
or 1849. Pie was married to a Miss Affleck, and
had one son and three daughters. All of them arc


now dead. His widow married the late J. B.
Broughton, whose family held what was left of the
original holding up to recent years. The Afflecks
came in 1846, and secured a large tract of country,
the freehold of which is known as Mortat and
Pleasant Banks. Like Moffatt, they were Scotch,
and the station was taken up by the father and four
sons. As I mentioned previously, John and his
brother-in-law, George Younger, secured a portion
of the country to the southward. The Afflecks held
their country till late in the seventies, and James
bought the Kybybolite Station, in South Australia.
They were all married, and had families, but died,
and their wives as well, in middle life. I do not
think there is one of the name left in the district.
Truly this life is a changing scene.
C. P. Gook lived at Konepra, and David Edgar
took up his abode at Pine Hills about the year 1849.
He lived at Heywood when I first remember him,
and came to that district about the same time as
the Learmonths, of Ettrick, and Carmichael, of
Harton Hills, so that he was a very old pioneer. He
lived and prospered for many years at Pine Hills,
doing useful work for the district. There were no
shire councils when Mr. Edgar came to Pine Hills,
and as he was anxious to improve the roads, he got
his neighbours to join him and form a Road Board
Out of this came the Kowree Council, in which he
took a prominent position, and his son, Mr. J. T.
Edgar, carried out useful work as a councillor for
about thirty years, retiring only a short time ago.
His third son lives at Pine Hills with his mother
and sisters. While I write, Mrs. Edgar, senr., is still
living. It is sixty-one years since she came to the
district, so that she is indeed a pioneer. [Since this
was written Mrs. Edgar has passed away.]
Mr. William Wallace, Elderslie, was the man who
first discovered and named Lake Wallace. He liked
the Elderslie country better, and applied for cer-
tain lands there, forming it into a fine station. He
lived there many years, afterwards returning to


Scotland, where he died. I understand one of his
sons, Mr, J. C, Wallace, became a partner with Mr.
J. McNicol (another old resident of our district,
and whose death occurred recently) in the Melrose
Station, in New South Wales. The terrible years
of drought in the back country crippled him, as
it did many another enterprising squatter. The
Elderslie Station is now in the hands of another
pioneer family—the Robertsons. They first settled
at Struan, in the Coleraine district, in the beginning
of the forties, and came to the Narracoorte district
about the year 1843. These were Messrs. John and
William Robertson. William Robertson dissolved
partnership with his brother, and bought Wando
Vale, where he lived until his death. Another bro-
ther, Duncan Robertson, settled at Gringegalgona,
in the Coleraine district, in the early days, where a
son and daughter still live. Some of John Robert-
son’s family still live at Struan House, near Narra-
coorte, and another son, Mr. John Robertson, lives at
Elderslie.
Mr. Adam Smith came to Sydney in 1839, to
Hynam about the year 1844. He had a partner
called Brown, who was murdered by the blacks.
Mr. Brown was shepherding some sheep not far from
the station, and, seeing a camp of blacks, he went
over to have a chat with them, not fearing any harm,
as he had a double-barrelled gun with him. He was
in the act of stooping down to get a firestick to light
his pipe with, when a blackfellow struck him over
the head with a waddy, killing him instantly. They
stripped him naked, taking all his belongings, includ-
ing his gun. It was necessar}' to teach the blacks
a lesson, and the station people met and decided to
take the law into their own hands. This would be in
the year 1845, just before we came to Bringalbert.
A call to arms was made—the footmen going one
way and the horsemen another. They were all
armed with flintlock muskets and pistols of the
same sort —heavy, clumsy weapons they were, but
effective enough. (I have put a ball into a tree


at a hundred yards with one of these pistols, and
used the musket successfully as a fowling piece.)
It was a bad day for the ill-fated darkies. The
horsemen came up with them in the ranges, behind
Narracoorte, and saw one fellow carrying poor
Brown’s gun, and a lubra wearing his coat. The} r
opened fire, and many of the blacks went under.
They made no show of resistance, but scattered and
ran for their lives. What happened that day is a
scene of the past, and the curtain is drawn over it
all. There is not a white man or black man alive
who was an actor in that scene, and that is only
about sixty-five years ago. One black, who was mor-
tally wounded, made his way into a cave and died
there. He was found years after sitting in an up-
right position, petrified, and was one of the sights of
those wonderful caves, until he was stolen and
taken to England, where he was exhibited. The
lesson given to the blacks that day made them un-
derstand that they must respect the lives of white
men.


CHAPTER VII.
South-East Squatters.—Tragic End of One.
—Jones’ Mad Gallop with New Chum.
Mr. George Ormerod took up and formed the Nar-
racoorte Station in the early forties, and lived there
until the year 1849, when he sold out and went to
Guichen Bay, now Robe, where he formed a business
as a merchant and wool buyer so successfully that
he diverted all the wool from the Mallee and south-
east stations away from Portland to Robe. Robe
was a great business centre in those days, and
George Ormerod was the reigning Monarch. Mr.
William Mclntosh bought the Narracoorte Station
from Mr. Ormerod, and, in conjunction with Mr.
Duncan Mcßae, built the first public house, called
the Merino Inn, and store in Narracoorte. They did
a large business as store and inn keepers. The
Tatiara Stations were taken up about the time my
uncle came to Bringalbert, viz., in 1845, and Robert
Lawson, a substantial looking Scotsman, took up
Padthaway a little later. Pie died in middle life, and
some of his family are still in possession. Cam-
pion, a smart looking little Irishman, secured a good
block of country, and called it the Broom Station.
He held it until the end of the fifties, when he sold
it to Lawson, and went back to Ireland. He was
always fond of a good horse, and when he got to
his native land he bought a high spirited horse, and
coming home late one night from a party, he got
too much pace on, rode into a canal, and was
drowned. So, after all his struggles here, and when
still a young man, and in comfortable circumstances,
his life ended in that way. I have often thought of a
remark Campion made in my presence, and it shows
how little a man knows of his fate, , This was in


reference to the untimely end of a friend of ours,
named Gray, who was cattle manager on Maryvale.
Gray went to the nearest blacksmith, who was at
Cavendish, to get two horses shod. Cavendish
was sixty-five miles away, but he got. there alright,
and, on returning, tied the led horse to the one he
was riding. About six miles from Cavendish, while
going down a hill where there was a honeysuckle
tree, the led horse went one side of the tree, and
Gray’s horse, turning a somersault, smashed poor
Gray’s chest in. I don’t think he ever moved, and
his body was found by John Moflfatt, of Mortat, who
Jones' mad gallop with new chum
was on his way to town with a load of wool. Cam-
pion and I met at a station about that time, and he
asked: “Is this true about Gray being killed?” and
when he was answered “Yes,” he said: “Dear me! I
thought something of that sort would happen to
him, for he was a wild man.” How little he thought
of that wild dash into the canal in Ireland so soon
after.
Other neighbours of ours were Dervis and Harry
Jones, both Welshmen, who secured Binnam, in
South Australia, and the country on the Victorian
side, which they called Tallageira. They had been
neighbours of ours in the Kilmore district, and be-
came so again in 1846. They were both unmarried
when they came here, but married afterwards. Dervis
was a very retiring man, no one, excepting intimate


friends, knowing anything about him. Harry was a
“showy” sort of man, a noted driver of four-horse
teams, and was fond of showing his skill in that
direction. He liked to take gentlemen new to the
country for a drive on the run, when he would dash
along at racing speed over brush fences three or
four feet high. I believe he knew the places not
strong enough to upset his turn-out, and arranged for
them before he went on his wild gallop. But the
poor new chum did not know, and admired Jones as a
wonderful driver, although he fought shy of a second
drive. Binnam was conducted on very strict lines—
men called out of bed summer and winter by a bell
ringing at six in the morning, wet or fine. Harry
took a trip to his native land in the fifties, and, mar-
rying his cousin, brought her out to Binnam. Dervis
then sold his interest in the station, and retired to
England. One of Harry’s sons became a medical
man, and it is recorded of him that during a fight in
the Boer War he was attending to the wounded in
the shelter of a large rock. Noticing a comrade
badly wounded, he left his shelter, and carried him
to safety, amidst a storm of bullets. These are the
sort of boys who are a credit to our fair Australia.


CHAPTER VIII.
Grass in Early Days.—Black Thursday.—
Narrow Escape while Shepherding.—
Description of Timber.—Brush Fences
and Bush Fires.
In 1846 all the country round here, then called the
New Country, afterwards the West Wimmera, was
covered with kangaroo grass —splendid summer feed
for stock of all kinds. It was at its best during
January, February and March, and remained good
up to May, but it lost its colour after that, and gave
place to a finer grass—herbs such as yams, etc. You
get a fair representation of what the district was like
in local cemeteries, which have been fenced for
years, and in parts of which the grass is allowed to
grow untouched. The country was like this for
some years after 1846, until, destroyed by the indis-
creet use of fire. When we were children at Ozen-
kadnook, we used to play “hide-and-seek” in the
long grass near the homestead, and I have known a
flock of sheep to be hidden by the grass, and only
discovered by its waving as they made their way
through it. It is easy to imagine how a fire would
travel before a hot wind in January or February.
Sheep were all shepherded in those days, and pro-
vision was made for a place to fly to for safety in
case of fire. This was done by burning the grass
ift patches when it was half-green. These patches
were all over the run, and when a shepherd saw
a fire coming he could drive his flock there, and
remain in safety until the fire passed by. Of course,
on such a day as the 6th of February, 1851, it was
almost impossible to find a place of safety. My own
share of the day was as follows: —I was in charge


of all the sheep we possessed, and cut off from all
places of safety and help. Fortunately, there was a
large swamp (near where Messrs. Bull Bros, now
live) within my reach. I made haste and drove my
flock to it, staying with them until all danger was
over. About three in the afternoon, a thunderstorm
came on, with a heavy downpour of rain. I just
laid down flat on the ground, and opened my shirt
and let the rain pour down on my naked breast. Soon
after, my uncle, who was staying with us (my father
having been accidentally killed a few months before)
came out to look for me and the sheep, and found me
there. I was only a boy of fourteen at that time,
so that it was rather a trying position to be in. The
country when we took it up was lightly timbered
with red and white gum, yellow box, sheoak, and
honeysuckle. There were pines on the sand banks,
belts of stringy barks, but only a few bulloaks here
and there. The country remained open until brush
fences were started, and the use of wholesale fire
given up. This gave the timber a chance of going
ahead as it liked. Something favourable to the
honeysuckle started it first on the light sandy soil,
and it became a dense scrub. This went on for some
time, and then it stopped. I can only conjecture that
something in the seasons caused it. Then bulloak
sprang up everywhere, taking possession of the best
‘of the country. Where the seed came from is a
mystery. Red gum also went ahead, but it does
not seem to poison the ground so much as white box,
which, when it grows thickly, is the greatest enemy
to vegetation. We used to have a bad time of it with
our brush fences. The ring fences of Bringalbert
and Ozenkadnook would measure seventy miles, and
the subdivision into paddocks another seventy miles.
These fences cost us £ls per mile, and in two years
had to be topped up. That meant a fresh lot of
trees had to be cut down, and rolled into the fence,
which cost nearly £lO a mile. This was our posi-
tion in the sixties and seventies —inflammable pro-
perty to the amount of upwards of £3OOO, and we


could never tell when a fire would swoop down on
us and burn both fences and sheep. I have seen a
fire coming out of the Mallee twenty miles wide,
clearing all before it, but with the provision we used
to make, we never had any serious loss, although
we had many a hard fight. I have been on the run
fighting one of these big fires for three days and
three nights without going to bed, and that in the
hottest days of the summer. The squatting fra-
ternity used to muster when a fire was seen coming,
and fight it until it was got under. There was less
loss in those days than now. We were in the habit
of burning all rubbishy country in the autumn. I,
myself, made a practice of setting aside all station
work in March, and, taking five or six men and a
supply of water, we burned the country into com-
parative safety, often working up to a late hour at
night and starting early in the morning.


CHAPTER IX.
To Portland with Wool. —Incident at New-
lands. —Description of Journey.—Port-
land in 1848.
Portland was our market town in the early days.
My first visit there was after the shearing of 1848.
My father had about a thousand sheep, mostly ewes,
and took them out of my uncle’s flocks that year,
but as we had no shed, they were shorn in my
uncle’s shed. After shearing, we started with our
load of wool and eight bullocks for Portland. There
were no roads in those days, only tracks leading
from station to station. We made Newlands the
first day, Mr. Ballantyne being a friend of my
father’s. I was the bullock driver, my father walk-
ing alongside me. Mr. Ballantyne was unmarried,
and lived alone at Newlands. I remember an in-
cident that happened there. I was sitting on the
sofa, playing with the cat, and not taking much
notice of the conversation. For want of better
amusement, I slipped the elastic band of my cabbage
tree hat round pussy’s neck, and pushed her quietly
off the sofa. The poor cat got a fright, and went
round the room like a circus horse. Mr. Ballantyne
and my father both jumped up, calling out, “What’s
that?” Finally, pussy made a bound for an open
porthole, which served to give light to the room,
and disappeared with my hat. I never saw it again,
but as we were leaving in the morning, Mr. Ballan-
tyne came out, laughing, with a new “cabbage tree”
to replace the one his cat stole from me. We got
to Mr. Wallace’s station, Elderslie, that day, and the
next stage took us to the Dergholm boundary. This
was part of the Roseneath run owned by Simpson


and Ralston, Tasmanian people. The Ralstons are
long since out of it, but a descendant of Mr. Simp-
son’s still holds a part of this at one time very large
run. We journeyed on through Nangeela, Mr. Wil-
liam McPherson’s station. He was a fine, kind-
hearted man, and an old pioneer, having taken up his
country about the time the Hentys took up
Muntham and Merino Downs. We came on to
Dunrobin, then owned by Murray and Addison, and
camped that night at the Deep Creek, three miles
from Casterton. We started early next morning,
and soon reached the township, which consisted of a
public house, store, and a few small huts. A man
named McKinlay was the owner of the public house,
called the Glenelg Inn, and the store. He was after-
wards drowned in the Dismal Swamp, S.A. The
inn was built of slabs principally, and had a shingle
roof. There was also a blacksmith’s shop in the
township. In those days there was no bridge over
the river, but the water was shallow enough for us
to cross without damaging the wool. We had to
cross the Wannon ten miles further on, at a place
called the Major’s Ford, as Major Mitchell had
crossed there in his journey through Australia. We
got across safely, and camped that night at Bryan’s
Creek. Next day we got to the Emu Creek, where
Digby is situated, and camped there for the night.
Digby at that time had a public house, store, black-
smith’s shop, and a few huts. We had to ford the
creek there, too. The hotel was kept by Richard
Lewis, who prospered so well that he bought the
Rifle Downs Station. While on a visit to England,
he bought the celebrated blood stallion, King Alfred,
the sire of many a grand steeplechaser, and one
of the best horses ever brought into Victoria. He
also bought a very fine stamp of a draught stallion,
“Agronomer.” Both these horses stood at Rifle
Downs for a number of years. From Digby we
made the Smoky River next day. This was our
worst crossing—the black mud and slush running a
long way out at each side of the channel. On get


ting through, we camped at the township, now
called Hotspur. It was much in appearance like the
other townships I have described. The public
house was kept by Hector McDonald, who after-
wards shifted to Portland, and built the place well-
known as Mac’s Hotel. Our next stage brought us
to Heywood. Here there was a bridge, and having
nothing to stop us, we drove past the township
and camped for the night.
Heywood differed little from the other places we
passed through as to the buildings. We got to
Portland next day, and took our wool to Mr. Ste-
phen George Plenty’s yard. Air, Henty was the
leading w r ool broker and merchant in Portland at
that time, and doing a splendid business. Two other
merchants were also doing business in that line—
Messrs. Flower and Must, and Mr. Cruikshank. My
father sold his wool to Air. Henty for something
under a shilling a pound. Wool had to be well
washed, clean and bright to bring a shilling, the
average price of good washed wool being about
eightpence. Greasy wool was unsaleable. We took
up our quarters at the London Hotel, a little square
stone building facing the sea, which is still there, but
much improved since those days. In the morning
I was up early, and had a walk to the seaside, where
I found dozens of skeletons of large whales, this
being, as everybody knows, the Alessrs. Henty’s
whaling station. Many people considered that Air.
William Dutton, who was also a whaler, was the
first man to settle at Portland. Some years after
this, in the year 1859, I was at Air, Dutton’s farm,
but had no conversation on the subject. I was then
on a visit to Air. Adolph van Hermet, at Boolwarra,
on a fishing and quail shooting expedition.
Portland at the time of our visit was a nice
compact town built mostly of stone. Some of the
business places were Alessrs. Crouch and Trang-
mar, iron merchants. The drapers were Messrs.
Muir, Smith and Hutchinson; saddler, John Finni-
gan, who has since returned to his early home after


many years residence in Harrow. Mr. Berming-
ham carried on a tan yard, and some of his family
are the owners of Mullagh Station, near Harrow.
Dr. Sutherland had a fine practice, and a very
pretty, nicely arranged chemist shop. He was at
that time our nearest doctor. His family live in
the Harrow district occupied principally as graz-
iers. Nearly every business in Portland was repre-
sented by shrewd practical men, and it bid fair at
that time to be one of the foremost towns in Vic-
toria. Since then trade has been diverted, and
Portland has for many years languished; but in the
near future railway connection with the Wirnmera
and South-Eastern districts must give it an im-
petus towards prosperity. The Revd. Thos. El-
yord Richardson was the Presbyterian minister in
1848, and used occasionally to visit our district.
He resigned his charge in Portland, and established
the “Portland Guardian,” of which I possess a copy
dated 1849. The Revd. Wm. Wilson was the
Church of England minister, and I understand his
son George has lately come into a fortune and a
title.
We had to get our stores together for our re-
turn journey, enough to last us a year—all kinds
of provisions and clothing, and we reached home in
due course.


CHAPTER X.
A Sad Day.—My Father’s Death in the
Bush. —Blacks Give Timely Help.
The 15th day of November, 1850, was a sad day
in our household, for on that day my father met
his death. He left home in search of a horse that
had strayed away, and found the animal with a
lot of young horses belonging to Maryvale Station.
My father succeeded in getting them into a hurdle
yard and caught his own horse, but the other
horses rushing to get out of the yard, his horse
plunged and jumped to get after them, finally break-
ing away from him. As he did so the rope came
round my father’s leg, making a half hitch round
his boot and spur. My father went down, and the
frightened horse galloped with him in that position
for fully a mile. This happened at Ullswater, then
an outstation shepherd’s hut of Maryvale. There
was a tribe of blacks camped near there, and when
they saw the accident they followed the horses and
managed to surround them at a swdmp which was
full of water. One of them crept right up to the
horse and unfastened the rope from my father’s
leg. They then carried him to the outstation
hut, and as he was still living, they brought
him to Maryvale. A Dr. Leek happened to
be staying at Maryvale, and he immediately
went to my father’s assistance, bleeding him,
and doing all he could; but the injuries were
too great for mortal skill, and he passed
away at three o’clock in the morning. The hut
was nine miles from Ozenkadnook, and there was
no road or track; but the stock keeper from Mary-
vale, who had come out with the doctor, had some


idea of the direction, so, taking my father’s horse,
he started off to tell my mother what had happened.
He just gave the old horse his head and he came
straight through, arriving at Ozenkadnook about
eight o’clock at night, in a terrible downpour of rain,
which continued all night. My mother was just
frantic and would not be pacified, and insisted on
going to my father at once. I was only a lad of
fourteen years and my mother had a young baby
in arms. I remember saying, “Mother, I know my
way as far as our boundary, and I know near about
the direction to the hut where father is, so get baby
and we will walk there by the time it is daylight.”
So my mother wrapped up baby, and we started,
the stock keeper accompanying us. I made my
way in a straight course to a swamp called Warrap,
about three miles from home. The night was
very dark and the rain pouring down, but I thought
I could still find my way and turned a little to the
right, making for Ullswater; but, although I have
always been a good bushman, I failed that night,
for after a long walk we found ourselves back at
the swamp. ' I said then, “It is no use, mother,
we had better go home and wait for daylight,” and
she, being nearly knocked up, agreed to do so. I
went straight home, and at the first streak of light
my mother started in the cart, and got there safely,
only to find that my father had been dead some
hours. We brought his body home rolled in a
blanket, and one of my brothers went to our
nearest neighbours, the Afflecks, and three of them
came to help. My father had two blackwood
boards put away for some purpose, and these made
the bottom and sides of the coffin, with a small
sheet of bark for the top. We laid him to rest
in a corner of his garden, which is now the Ozen-
kadnook private cemetery. Since then, in 1882,
my sister was buried on his left hand, and on
the 2nd November, 1892, we laid my mother to rest
on his right hand. A little granddaughter a few
years ago was laid at mv mother’s feet. My wife


was the last laid to rest there; she died on the 13th
of June, 1910, and sleeps a little to the north of
them. A few others who have crossed the flood
are also resting in that quiet spot away from the
strife and turmoil of life.


CHAPTER XI
Shepherds and Cooks.—Weights of Sheep
and Cattle in Shepherd Days.—Effect
of Fencing.—Sheep Drafting.
In the early days of settlement of which I write
my uncle's first work after applying for a squatter’s
licence was to put up huts for himself and his men,
master and men all joining- in this work. The di-
mensions of these huts would be loft, by 12ft., and
the materials slab walls and bark roof, the cost of
which would be about £lO. The putting up of
these buildings and brush yards were the first steps
towards forming a station. All the sheep had to
be shepherded by day and watched all night to
protect them from the ravages of native dogs and
from the natives themselves, as their ideas on the
rights of property were much on a par with that
of their own dogs. Out station huts were also
put up at suitable places, and hurdles 6ft. long and
3ft. 6in. high were made out of split palings mor-
tised into heads large enough to admit them.
Forty-four of these hurdles made a yard large
enough to hold a thousand sheep, and the cost
would be about £ls a hundred. A watchbox 6ft.
long and 3ft. high was made for each yard, and the
hut keeper had to camp in there and watch the
sheep. He had also to cook for the shepherd and
shift the hurdle yards to a fresh place every second
day to prevent foot rot. For this he got damper,
tea, sugar, and mutton and a weekly wage of eight
shillings. Ido not think it was necessary to shift
the yards so often; but there can be no doubt that
camping the sheep too long in one place will cause
foot rot. I once had a flock of young wethers
camped in an old brush yard for some months, and


95 per cent, of the flock developed into bad cases
of foot rot. I have had many a nasty day’s work
foot rotting and dressing with corrosive sublimate.
Shepherds got ten shillings a week and bullock
driver twelve shillings, the usual rations being 10
lbs. flour, 2 lbs. sugar, V 4 lb. tea and 14 lbs. meat.
We never got clear of foot rot until the runs were
fenced, when trouble of that sort disappeared; but
we had a worse evil to face after the diggings broke
out, when scab was brought into this district. I
will, however, deal with this subject further on.
One great mistake was made by squatters when
they had got their sheep paddocked, for they almost
invariably overstocked. We had on Bringalbert
and Ozenkadnook in the shepherding days about
thirty thousand sheep and five hundred head of
cattle, and with the 98,000 acres we held stocked
to this extent, our sheep grew very large. Merino
wethers went from 75 to 85 lbs., and our bullocks
1000 to 1500 lbs., cows from 800 to 1000 lbs. These
were principally Herefords, my uncle having
brought the nucleus of the herd to the Kilmore dis-
trict from David Gibson’s Pleasant Bank property
in Tasmania. David Gibson interested himself
more in cattle and draught horses than in sheep,
leaving the latter to his sons to develop. How
they did it is well known and needs no comment
from me. We had no disease or trouble with our
stock when we gave them plenty of feed and water,
all the medicine they required being contained in
the quantity and variety of grasses and herbage.
When we got the paddocks we stocked up to
50,000 sheep, the result being that the sheep de-
generated in size, and this process has been going
on until to-day, when you can hardly get a sheep
to go over 40 lbs. or a beast to kill up to 600 lbs.
Before the advent of Morton’s swing gate, which
came into general use in the early fifties, all draft-
ing was done by hand, and hard work it was. With
the swing gate I have often put through eight or
ten thousand sheep in a few hours; but in the days


before the swing gate appeared a man’s share of
the ten thousand would be about two thousand
kicking and struggling sheep. By the time he
had caught and carried that number he would be
pretty well played out, and would be in some-
thing like the condition induced by a Turkish bath.
When I was a young fellow of twenty-five I have
caught and marked two thousand sheep in a day;
but I was somewhat stiff next day; and at another
branch of station work (lamb marking) I could,
with three good catchers, get through about three
hundred and fifty lambs an hour.


CHAPTER XII.
Effect of Father’s Death.—Dealing with
Scabby Sheep.—My Shepherding Ex-
perience.—Taking Sheep to Melbourne.
My father’s death made a great difference in our
lives. He was a kind father, but strict, and made
us fully understand that his word was law and our
part obedience. As long as he was with ns our
duties were well attended to, but when lie was
gone we felt something like young dogs let off the
chain. We did not actually rebel against my
mother’s authority, but let her know that we were
big boys, and while we would still go on working,
intended to have a good share of our own way.
It was a false step which I have often regretted,
even to this very day. I was only in my four-
teenth year, my eldest brother seventeen, the
youngest in his twelfth year. John, my eldest
brother, started to work at home in his father's
place, and I went on shepherding until the end of
1853 or 1854, when my uncle died and Bringalberf
fell into our hands, my mother and the children
being conjointly his heirs. In the year after my
father’s death the gold diggings became a fact, and
every man who had a penny in his pockets cleared
out from the stations. Then our troubles com-
menced in earnest, for we had to do a lot more
of our own work, such as shearing, etc., and the
whole of the sheep burst out suddenly with scab.
So there we were with about twenty thousand
scabby sheep to deal with and no knowledge of how
to treat the disease. There was not a station
holder in the district who had ever seen a scabby
sheep, and there were no men to be had for love
or money. It was not a pleasant prospect for


three boys in their teens called upon to find means
to cure all those sheep. Some people tried arsenic,
and mixing it too strong killed their sheep in hun-
dreds. I remember one man who dipped two
thousand one cold day, and left them in the yard
all night. The result was that about nineteen hun-
dred .were dead in the morning. We were told
that corrosive sublimate was a good thing, so my
brother next of age to me was sent to Geelong with
the bullocks to bring up a load of the stuff. This
meant a journey of five hundred miles there and
back for a remedy we knew nothing about. But
people have to buy their experience in all walks of
life, although the school of experience is often a
dear one. After a lapse of a good many weeks, the
dray returned with its boy driver and a quantity
of the sublimate in earthenware jars. We soon
got to work with it, but in dissolving it, we made
the mistake of not using the jars it came in, the
result being that we soon got through all the pots
on the station. It would eat the bottom out of a
three-legged iron pot in about three days. How-
ever, we went at the dipping with a hand dip, catcn-
ing the sheep day after day, and sousing them in
this dangerous mixture. It was no use as a remedy,
and I have seen sheep after being dipped in it with
their legs eaten right off. The three boys of us
went on dipping day after day, wet to the skin,
and despite the risk we ran, we finished the work
without an illness of any kind. Like the rest of
our neighbours, we went on trying remedy after
remedy, without result., until tobacco and sulphur
came into the field, and with that we soon put an
end to the scab.
The sheep we had in the early days were larger
framed than those in our district now, and the
wool of a coarser quality. We used to cull chiefly
for quality, and any sheep having hair in the breech
was condemned. The worst fault in sheep was
wrinkle, or leathery neck, as we called it, and any
sheep of that sort was considered the worst sort


to breed from. Elderslie had the best bred sheep
in our neighbourhood, and Willis and Swanston,
Moree, had also very good sheep, William Willis
was the managing partner and one of the best-liked
men in the district. On his death, which took place
at Moree, his brother shifted the homestead to
Koolamurt, and there are now only a few trees to
mark the spot where the old station stood. Sheep
before the diggings started were selling at very
low prices. I remember a flock of fat sheep sent to
Melbourne, in 1849, which only brought two shil-
lings a head, and these sheep would weigh from 65
to 70 lbs. In 1853 sheep of the same sort were worth
twenty shillings on the station, and the supply
limited. I had a lonely time of it that year for a
boy in his teens, as I took a flock of about 1500
(ewes and wethers), and lived by myself in a hut
all through the winter. I never saw a living soul, ex-
cepting when they came to bring me rations or
clothes. Many times I had to rush out at all hours
of the night, with my gun in my hand, to hunt a
native dog away from the yard. One night, in particu-
lar, I awoke out of sleep, to hear the sheep rushing
about the yard. It was a very dark night, but I ran to-
wards the yard shouting. Before I reached it, the
gate went down with a crash, and the sheep were
off with a terrible rush. I fired my gun low over
their backs, which scared the dogs, and next morn-
ing I got the sheep together, and found that they
had been bitten, but not seriously injured. In spite
of these drawbacks, I got my flock fat, and when
they were shorn, started with them to Melbourne.
I had with me a new chum Highlander, named Neil
Mclnnes, and a big boy. We had no cart —only a
pack horse in charge of Neil Mclnnes, and a horse
for the boy. I will give some of the incidents of
that trip, just to show what droving was like in
those early days. Sheep, through being so con-
stantly shepherded, were no trouble at night unless
something disturbed them, for they would just lie
down till morning. I did not take the saddle off my


horse until I saw them settle down, and as I had
my blanket and hobbles strapped on the saddle,
I was prepared to lie down anywhere. My route
was by the Salt Lakes and Mt. Talbot, but when
I got level with the north end of the Black Ranges
I took a line across country for Rose’s Gap. I didn’t
give notice to anyone, as I wanted to save time and
distance, and I got through Wonwondah (Ruther-
ford and Quarterman’s Station), on to the Glenisla
run. I was nearly through when the owner came up
and wanted to know who I was, and what I was do-
ing there, etc. He used a great deal of language,
which was only too common in those days, and got
my “dander” up, the result being that we tongue-
whacked each other for some time. Finally, he
cooled down, and said: “Look here, young man,
there are people who would take straggling sheep
if they found them, but I don’t think you would
do anything of that sort, and you have as fine a
lot of sheep as I have ever seen.” We shook hands
and parted good friends. I then pushed on and got
safely through Rosebrook and Rose’s Gag. Here
my first serious difficulty began. I found the Wim-
mera very deep, as there had been some flood waters
coming down, and there was no bridge or any way
of crossing. Here was a dilemma, but I had the
sheep rounded up at the edge of the water, and
tying the tether ropes together, the men held them
at each side of the flock. Then with the dogs I
forced the sheep along until the front lot were
nearly swimming, and leaving the men to keep the
tail going, I walked into the water waist deep, and
pulling some of the sheep off their legs I faced them
for the opposite bank, and they started to swim.
I then got quickly amongst the others, and soon had
the whole mob safe on the other side. I crossed
the Little Wimmera at Glenorchy, which was then
called the Four Posts, and on from day to day, with
many little troubles and rows, until I reached Mel-
bourne in Christmas week. I had been just six
weeks on the road, and did my droving trip with


out losing a single sheep. I struck an overstocked
market, as I only got 17/6 instead of the 25/- per
head that I expected. I refused an offer of 15/- per
head cash at Ballarat Swamp, now Lake Wen-
douree. This was, as I have said, in 1853, and it
was after Christmas before I got my sheep sold,
and a settlement with my agents, Messrs. Kay and
Butchart. I then had leisure to look round for
some of the landmarks I remembered in earlier
years. There was the old gum-tree near St. Francis’,
in Elizabeth-street, the Flagstaff, with its graves of
early colonists, and the little sheoak-crowned hill,
now the site of the railway sheds in Spencer-street.
The Crown Hotel still stood at the corner of Queen
and Lonsdale-streets, and was then, as in earlier
days, a great place of call for squatters. What a
change time, with steady onward steps, has made
with men and places, and how many men and
women of these early days are quietly sleeping
their last sleep after splendid pioneering effort in
a new country?
I paid off my man, Neil Mclnnes, as he wished to
stay a while in Melbourne, and with the boy I had
started on my return journey home. We put all our
belongings on the pack-horse, and arrived home in
ten or twelve days—just about eight weeks from
the time we started with the sheep. During that
time we had done three hundred miles with the fat
sheep, and six hundred for men and horses. I do
not think we did any harm to anyone beyond taking
a little grass, which was unavoidable. I have had
many a droving trip after that, but this is a fair
sample of what it was like. Younger men now
fill our places (and I am quite content that it should
be so), but we old fellows do not want to sit down
and do nothing. We think there will be time enough
to rest when we go to our long home.


CHAPTER XIII.
Tatiara and Western Wimmera Pioneers.-
Sad Fate of Squatters.—Murder of Mr.
Young.
I will now say something of our Tatiara neigh-
bours. Our country and that round us was origin-
ally known as the Tatiara, but when a boundary was
formed between Victoria and South Australia, the
name was applied exclusively to stations on the
South Australian side. A station taken up by a
Scotsman called Bennie was named Wirrega. Ben-
nie prospered well until the early sixties, but lost
his life in a sad way. He had gone to Adelaide
to see his wool sold, and a bale of wool slipped out
of a stack in the wool store, and, falling on him,
caused his death. A dapper little Irishman named
Brian Cousins formed Bangham, a station which
comprised a good deal of scrub country, but in
which he did well. He also met his death in the
early sixties between Narracoorte and Bangham.
He had gone to Narracoorte on business, which he
transacted, and was on his way home. I am not
clear how his death was caused, but his body was
found on the road. Nalang was taken up by a Mr.
Louden McLeod, and consisted mainly of good open
country. McLeod was a man of good family, but
did not like station life, and put his brother Frank
on the station. He lived himself mostly in different
cities, finally dying suddenly in Melbourne. Nalang
is now the home of a prosperous body of farmers.
Cannawigra, joining Nalang, was taken up by two
partners, Messrs. Young and Lloyd, who worked
it successfully until some time in the fifties. The
partnership then came to an end by the mysterious


disappearance of Mr. Young. He started for Mel-
bourne with a mob of fat sheep, taking a shepherd
with him. The sheep reached the market alright,
and were sold, the money, it was thought, beiug
paid over to Young. He never returned to the
station, and it was believed he had gone off, taking
the money with him. Years after, a body was
found in a hollow log just where their last camp was
before reaching the market; from articles about the
remains it was clear that it was Mr. Young. Some
one saw him at the camp in the evening, and when
an enquiry was held, he came and told all he knew.
The enquiry made it only too plain that Young had
been basely murdered by the shepherd, who then
took the sheep to the market, sold them, and cleared
off with the money. Search was made for him, but
he was never caught, and this crime, like others
in those early days, was never sheeted home to the
murderer. It is a long time ago, but I think my
statement is correct. I knew Mr. Young, who was
an educated gentleman, and often visited us when
in our district. His partner (Mr. Lloyd) soon after-
wards sold the station, and went in other business.
It was a man of that name also founded the town-
ship of Border Town—built and opened the first
hotel and store there, which he ran for many years.
“Swede’s Flat” and “The Monster” were taken up
by an Englishman called Allan, who made money
there, and sold the stations to a man named Pat-
rick Kelly. Allan went to New Zealand, where
he lived until his death. His wife was a sister of my
late wife’s, and one of his sons, the Hon. Jas. Allan,
is a member of the House of Representatives.
Cove Station, on the Victorian side of the border,
was so named by a man named Short, who dis-
covered the country, and formed it into a station.
He was a big strapping fellow, about six feet, and
worked his place up to the early fifties, employing
the usual station hands. Amongst these was the
afterwards notorious Daniel Morgan, the bush-
ranger, but I will give some particulars of his ex-


ploits further on. Short eventually sold the station
to Donald Swan. South from Cove lay the Lock-
hart Station, taken up by Beard and Hutchinson. It
was a grand block of country, including 3000 acres
known as Brimboal, and all the country known as
Lillimur Station. Beard and Hutchinson found
there was no permanent water on all this country,
and sold the whole of it for £3OO. It was sold
again in the early fifties to Edward Kearney, an
Irishman from Athlone, who started putting down
wells. It was an expensive business, as the water
was, in many instances, two hundred, and even
two hundred and fifty feet below the surface. The
price paid was about 10/- a foot for the first 50 feet,
£1 for the next 50 feet, and still higher prices until
water was reached. When that .took place, £3 a
foot was the price paid, and, of course, the shaft
had to be timbered according to arrangement. Then
a whim had to be erected, a partition having been
made in the shaft to allow one 25 or 30 gallon cask
to go down empty while the other came up full.
Troughs had also to be scooped out of trees or logs
not less than two feet in diameter. The total cost
of a well so fitted up would be about £2OO, and a
station of 60,000 acres, such as Lockhart was before
Lillimur and Brimboal were sold, would require six
of these wells. The cost, too, of keeping the wells
in repair was considerable, and when one considers
what a pioneer squatter laid out in fencing, build-
ings, etc., it is clear that the glittering gold of
stations in a waterless country was only a loan
to build up a land for a class of men such as we
see to-day prosperous and happy. How little a
present generation knows of the struggles of the
men of the past, and how dearly bought often ex-
perience is. It was not until the sixties that the
men of the forties and fifties found they could make
scoop holes and dams in which water could be stored
for their stock. Many of them were, however, so
involved that they were only tenants at will, but
they continued doing good work as long as it suited


the mortgagee to allow them to remain. Kearney,-
the owner of Lockhart, became involved like many
others, but he might have pulled through if he had
not met with an accident in one of the deep wells
on the station, bursting a blood vessel. He was
only 45 years of age, and a hard working, indus-
trious man. I have known him, after working all
day at ordinary station work, come home and get
his tea, after which, on clear moonlight nights, he
would go out and work till all hours of the night.
After his death, the mortgagees foreclosed, and the
station was sold for half its value, which left very
little for Kearney’s wife and family.
Yarrock was taken up by a man named Frank
Herbertson, but he never occupied it. He was en-
gaged to be married, and everything, so far as the
outside public knew, seemed to be running smoothly,
he himself appearing cheerful and happy, but, to the
surprise of all outsiders, he took his own life. The
station then fell into the hands of the Jones Bros.,
of Binnum. Yanac Yanac was discovered by a man
named Ford, who held it for a time, and sold it to
Jones, of Yarrock. Lillimur was, as I have already
said, part of Lockhart, and Kearney sold it to John
Brewer. Brewer is well known in racing circles,
and his horse “Bondo” will long be remembered by
old time racing men as a steeplechaser of wonderful
jumping power.
Bullarook was taken up by Grant, who carried it
on himself for a time, afterwards acquiring Vectis
Station, and renting Bullarook to the Broughton
family. At the end of their term it was sold to the
Messrs. Ross Bros. Bunyip was taken up by Welsh
and Ryan, who held it for some years. Then Welsh
retired, and Ryan carried it on until he got into
difficulties with his agents, and J. B. Broughton be-
came the purchaser. Mt. Elgin was either taken
up or acquired at a very early date by a man called
Little, who was very successful there until his death,
which was the result of an accident. He had been at
the Lawloit races, and his horse, carrying him


against a tree, smashed his thigh so badly that he
died from the effects. Family disputes then brought
the property into the market. Winiam was taken up
by Townsend, and Dugald McPherson held Nhill
Station as far back as I can remember. Going further
east and north, Upper Regions, near Dimboola, was
formed by Edols, whose family now own the famous
Burrawong Station, near Forbes, on the Lach-
lan River; and Antwerp by Ellerman, who was sub-
sequently ordained, and officiated as Presbyterian
minister at Dimboola. Nearer Horsham, the settle-
ment ol the country is better known. The Wilsons
settled at Waimer in 1845, and afterwards sold the
station to the Carters, who are amongst the oldest
pioneers of the Wimmera. The Wilsons also ac-
quired Vectis, but before their time, it was in dif-
ferent hands ; Major Firebrace was the 'first to form
a station there, and I have mentioned Grant as
going there from Bullarook. Alexander Cameron
was, I think, at Lochiel. I met Cameron several
times in the early fifties. He was a fine looking
young man then, but very dark, and was known as
“Black” Cameron. Like some others of old pioneers,
he was at times too devoted to the “Mountain
Dew” of his native land, and at such times he did
some eccentric things. On one occasion he engaged
a young fellow to work, at 15/- a week. Then pro-
ducing a pair of blankets, pistol and ammunition, he
told the new chum to shoot the fleas when they
jumped, but if he put a hole in a blanket, he would
sack him. A keg of whisky having come to the
station, his friends thought to get it out of his way,
so they got a blackfellow to fasten it high up on a
gum tree. When Cameron missed the keg, it was
pointed out to him, and he was told he would have
to wait for it, as the blackfellow had left the station.
He calmly went inside, loaded his gun with a bullet,
and having secured a big tin dish, fired at the keg,
and his bullet finding its mark, he secured more
than enough whisky to satisfy his wants. It was
good generalship under difficulties.


The bullet found its mark in the keg


I have written at considerable length of the men
who formed stations in the early forties, but, alas!
when one looks back, how many of them are in their
graves! I stand here to-day almost alone, and I
sigh to think how many of my contemporaries
passed away in poverty. As I look back, I am
struck with the scenes of ruin and tragedy which
meet my view, men of industry with the posses-
sion of all the qualities necessary for success going
down after heroic struggles. Well, after all, they
played their part as builders, but let present and
future generations never forget what they owe to
them. From 1835 to 1875 they were the backbone of
the country, but after the latter date they began to
wane very rapidly, and in the ten years following
1875, scarcely any were to the fore. Another class of
settler, the small land holder, had come, and come to
stay. All honour to him; he had his battles to fight,
too. But what a mine to draw upon the squatter
was, in many cases, to him; for from the squatter
he got shearing, fencing, dam making, etc., which
helped him establish his own home on the land..


CHAPTER XIV.
At School in Launceston.—Prison Life
There. —Difficulties of Return Journey.
When I was well on in my teens, in the early part
of the fifties, I had a short break away from station
and bush life, as I went over to Launceston to study
land surveying, at St. John’s Church of England
Grammar School, under the Rev. Mr. Plow Kane.
One of my schoolmates was the son of the govern'or
of the jail, and another was the son of the matron.
I had an opportunity of seeing something of jail life,
as these boys brought me to their homes. In com-
pany with young Irwin, the son of the governor of
the jail, 1 went through the prisoners’ quarters one
Sunday forenoon. We first went through the cook-
ing department, a spacious room upstairs, with a
fireplace in the middle of the room. This room was
fitted up with large boilers, cauldrons, etc., and spot-
less cleanliness was everywhere. The cooks and
helpers were all dressed in white, and were very
civil to us, treating us to excellent soup. A¥e went
from there to the women’s quarters, where they were
kept in solitary confinement in locked cells. Some
of them greeted us with smiles, others with frowns.
From there we went to a room where a treadmill
was situated. Ido not think it was used at this time,
as stone breaking in the yard seemed to be the
general occupation of the prisoners. The treadmill
was a long drum-shaped contrivance with steps like
stairs, and would hold a number of men standing-
side by side. When in motion it kept revolving
pretty quickly, so that the men on it had to go on
stepping upwards until their time was up. Irwin
and I got on it, but we could not move it. We then
made our way to the yard, where there were a num


ber of men in prison garb. There was chapel in
the prison that day, and some of the prisoners
were in groups practising hymns. I remember the
opening words of one hymn were, “Oh, Lord, grant
us freedom,” and to my youthful mind it seemed
to me they sang that with fervour. I saw in the
street a number of able bodied men who were blind,
and on asking Mr. Kane how this came about, he
said they had destroyed their sight by a hot brass
plate. It seemed a terrible thing, but the reason
given was that they wished to escape their term
of convict serviture. I should not have believed
this, but the information, coming from such a man
as Mr. Kane, was unquestionable.
I got on fairly well with my studies, and only
required to go into the field to get practical ex-
perience, but a sudden stop was put to all that by
a letter from home, telling me to come back and
take charge of the station, as my brothers wanted
to go to New Zealand, my youngest brother having
discovered a large tract of unoccupied country in
the southern island, and had made successful appli-
cation for it. When I told Mr. Kane, he said I must
go, but he regretted it very much. I had become a
favourite with him, and accompanied him on many
a pleasant drive when he was conducting country
services. I had his private study to do my work
in, and in the holidays, I had my own people, the
Gibsons, to visit. These were my best days, and
had I been left a while longer, the whole course
of my life would have been changed. However, I
said my good-byes, and took my passage in the
“Royal Shepherd” for Melbourne. We had a very
rough trip, as it took us six days to reach Mel-
bourne. I remember well the captain’s anxiety
about his charge all that time. I was out
on the bridge with him when a light appeared in the
distance, and he exclaimed: “Thank God, there is
the Otway!” When I said to him, “Have we been
in any .great danger?” his answer was, “You might
soon lose the number of your mess in a sea like


this.” However, we got safely through, and after
a day’s rest in Melbourne, I began to enquire about
a way to get home. There was no coach or convey-
ance of any sort going that way, and the only way
out of the difficulty seemed to be to buy a horse
and ride home. At the last moment, though, I
heard that Rutledge was running a coach from Gee-
long to Hamilton, so to Geelong I made my way.
I found a small express waggon, which carried the
mails to Hamilton, so I booked my seat, and started
for home. The driver was that well known and
capable Jehu, Tom Cawker, who is still to the lore as
livery stable keeper and coach proprietor in Caster-
:on. The Hopkins’ Hotel (now Wickliffe) was our
destination, and we got on well until dark, when our
driver found out he had kept too far to the west of
it. He altered his course then, and hit the Hopkins
right opposite the hotel. It was pitch dark, and no
bridge, with the river running pretty fast; but Cak-
ker sent his team straight at it, and got through to
the other side. Here, though, there was a slippery
bank, and the horses wouldn’t tackle it, so I jumped
into the water, and, taking the leaders by the head,
steadied them while they scrambled up the bank. I
didn’t much relish that plunge into the water on a
dark night amongst struggling horses, but a blazing
fire in the hotel and a good supper made us soon for-
get our troubles. Next day we made Hamilton, then
called the Grange, and pulled up before the Victoria
Hotel, where I walked ankle deep in mud and slush
up to the door step. This hotel was built by the
Blastock family, and was kept at the time of.my
visit by a Mr. Malcolm, who had married a Miss
Blastock. My troubles weren’t at an end at Hamil-
ton, for there was a hundred miles between me and
home, and no coach or trap going that way. Horses,
too, were difficult to get, and it looked as if I would
have to walk, which wasn’t a pleasant prospect, as
it was a wet winter —roads bad and creeks running
high. However, Tom Cawker helped me out of
my difficulty by selling me a young filly, rather low


in condition, for £27. I started then, and got as
far as Cavendish alright, but a few miles further on
the filly knocked up, and I had to walk and lead her
all the rest of the way to Balmoral. Here luck
favoured me, for one of our neighbours had left an
old horse there on the chance of some one going
Apsley way taking him home. This just suited me,
He swam safely across
and leaving the filly there, 1 started late in the after-
noon for Harrow, I got on well until I came to the
Glenelg, which was in flood, and not crossable at
the usual ford. I rode down to the river to where
it widened out and the current was not so strong,
and putting the old horse at it, he swam safely
across to the other side with me. Next day I
reached home, and my brothers were able to carry-
out their project of going to New Zealand.


CHAPTER XV.
Bushrangers.—Morgan, Gardiner, Captain
Melville.
I stated in a previous chapter that Short, the then
owner of Cove, had amongst his men Daniel Mor-
gan, the bushranger. Morgan was known as Bill
the Spaniard, or Bill the Native. He was a slender,
swarthy young fellow, flash as to style, but a good
rider, and was employed by Short for some time
until he did something of which his employer dis-
approved, and was discharged. Bill, instead of
going right away, hung about the neighbourhood,
waiting for a chance to be revenged, and his oppor-
tunity came in this way. Short had occasion to
leave the station, and did so, leaving only the cook
at home. Bill then walked into the station store,
and with his knife ripped open all the bags of flour,
sugar, etc., he could 'find, emptying their contents on
the floor. He then helped himself to everything he
wanted, stole a horse, saddle and bridle, and made
off for the Murray, through the Mallee scrub. Short
was furious when he came home and found such
destruction and loss of property. He had the
horses run up, armed himself with a gun, and taking
a black boy to follow the tracks, started in pur-
suit. They ran the tracks right to the Murray,
and there they found Bill camped. It was a sudden
surprise, and Bill had no chance to get away. Short
had him covered with his gun, and said, “You are
my prisoner!” “All right,” Bill said, in a humble
tone, “better luck next time.” This humility of
manner put Short off his guard, and he went to
dismount. Just as one foot touched the gro.und,
Bill whipped out a pistol and shot Short in the knee.
Springing forward then, he snatched the gun away,


saying, “Now I’ve got you. I ought to have given
it to you in the head; and if you interfere with me
again, you’ll get it there.” Short managed to get
back to Cove, but he was crippled for life, his knee
becoming hopelessly stiffened. He eventually sold
the station to Donald Swan, who was afterwards
well known in the Western District. After Swan
had taken over the station, he wanted a well put
down, and Morgan (who was quite unknown to
Swan), turning up just at this juncture, got the
contract, and with a mate started to work. It is
difficult to say whether this mate knew who Mor-
gan was, but it is certain they worked together for
some time. One night, however, Morgan said he
would go in to the station and get some more
rations, and on reaching the station Swan took him
into the store and gave him what he asked for.
Swan was living alone, not being married, and being
a good natured man, asked Morgan if he would have
a glass of whisky. Morgan thanked him, and Swan
turned away to get the bottle. Just as he turned
round again with the whisky, he found Morgan
had him covered with a pistol. The villain then
said: “Put the bottle down, I’ll help myself, and
you stand up against that post.” Swan, having no
alternative, did as he was told, and Morgan, tying
him securely to the post, helped himself to every-
thing which took his fancy, including a horse, and
started off through the Mallee for New South Wales.
It was a bad time for poor Swan, as he was left
tied up all night, and part of the next day, until
someone came along and released him. The treat-
ment he received so affected his nerves that he took
a voyage to Scotland, afterwards selling the station
to Donald McLellan. I do not know if Morgan
ever came back to Cove in McLellan’s time, but
likely enough he did, as he stole a good many horses
in the district. One of his daring acts was to take
a pair of carriage horses out of the Lemon Springs
stable. He got them as far as the Murray, but
the river being in flood, he lost one of the horses,


Morgan said “I’ll help myself”


as he was taken down by the strong current. Mor-
gan was a slippery customer, who knew the Mallee
thoroughly, and at the time of which I write the
Mallee was only occupied by large stations. In-
deed, many parts were quite unoccupied, and police
stations were almost unknown. It was known many
years after that Morgan’s track when he had horses
was along the blazed line between Victoria and
South Australia, but he had other routes, and being
a native of New South Wales, was quite at home
when he got there. Before he met his well de-
served fate, he told someone he had heard of people
saying that the Victorian police would soon have
him if he came over again, and he said he would
ride from one end of Victoria to the other without
being caught. I really believe he intended to carry
out that boast when his end came. It was a strange
coincidence that the mare he rode to Peechelba,
where he was shot, was “Victoria,” who had been
purchased by the late Dr. L. L. Smith, and sent
in stud to our horse, “Angler,” at Bringalbert. His
last ride in our district was when he stole my own
favourite hack, saddle and bridle. I was busy shear-
ing at the time, and had about thirty hands em-
ployed. He came, as usual, at night, and stayed with
the men at the hut, but I could never find him
there in the day time. I was told by one of the
shearers that a horse was likely to be stolen, and
I was on my guard. One wet day I took a ride
out towards Ozenkadnook, and I had not gone very
far before Morgan came cantering up to me. He
said he had camped near Benayeo and had lost a
horse, which he believed was in the direction I was
going, and would be glad to ride along with me,
as he did not know the country. I wasn’t anxious
for his company, but I couldn’t well object. It
puzzled me to know where he had been hidden all
the time, or how he knew I was going out, and rid-
ing the very horse he coveted. I could hear caps
rattling in a box in his pocket as we rode along,
and I expected every minute to see a pistol at


my head, so I kept a sharp look-out. After we
had ridden some seven or eight miles, he pulled
up suddenly, and said: “I won’t go any further with
you. There is an out-station over there; I’ll go
and see if they have seen a horse. Good-day.” This
was the man who said he didn’t know the country
such a short time before. I do not know why he did
not try to take the horse from me unless it was that
in those days I was very popular with the working
class. Nearly all my men were friends, and would
do anything for me, and I treated all travellers well.
I breathed more freely after he left me. I looked
after my horse more carefully, but days passed,
and I was given to understand that Morgan had
left the district. One Sunday I went over to Ozenkad-
nook, and staying there all night, was late reaching
the shed in the morning. I left my saddle and
bridle in the stable, telling the groom to take them
in, but he did not do so, and as I had a hard day’s
work in the shed, I forgot about them until next
morning, when I hastened down to see if things
were right. I found, as I feared, horse, saddle and
all gone, and at once started off two men, one to
Harrow, and the other to Narracoorte, to inform the
police there, offering a reward of £SO for Morgan’s
arrest. There was no result; he got clean away. I
heard afterwards he stopped in the pines about four
miles from the homestead all day, and made off
through the Mallee in the night. I will close my
remarks about this desperate scoundrel by saying
that I have seen his figure in the Waxworks, and it
is a very fair likeness of him.
Gardiner was another bushranger whose career is
well known, but it may not be generally known
that he, too, belonged to our district. His real
name was Christie, and his mother was, when I
first knew her, housekeeper for Messrs. Fairbairn
and Stirling, at Congbool, near Balmoral. The
future bushranger was only a little boy at that time.
When I next heard of them the mother was house-
keeper for Munro, at Crawford Station, near Hot


spur. There the boy grew up, and went out as a
station hand. He was bullock driving for Affleck
Bros., at Mortat, just about the time when gold was
first discovered, but it wasn’t long after that he
formed a gang and attacked the Escort, with the
result that is well known. I believe all the gang
was finally accounted for, except one man, and we
had in our district one old fellow who gave out
he was the man, but not until many years
after the sticking up of the Escort. Whether this
was so or not, I do not know, but after his return
from the diggings, he lived quietly and respect-
ably, and only passed out of life recently at the
age of ninety-five years.
Another notable bushranger appeared in the fif-
ties called “Captain” Melville. He followed a man
named Parker all the way from the diggings to
our district, trying to take his gold from him. Par-
ker was well armed, and kept such a keen look-out
that Melville never got a chance until they got to
Maryvale Station. Parker had been an old station
hand on Maryvale, and by a stroke of ill-luck, his
old employer, Mr. Walter Grieves, rode up to Par-
ker’s camp early one morning. Melville had just
ridden up a few minutes before, and. got off his
horse, ostensibly to warm his hands at the fire.
Parker, seeing his old employer, forgot his usual
caution, and walked over to Grieves, leaving his
arms in the tent. In a moment, Melville was in the
tent, and seizing a gun, called out to Parker: “Now
I’ve got you; you hand over that gold.” Poor
Parker was done for. I think the gold he was carry-
ing was about 175 oz., and as he didn’t comply
readily with the request, Melville told him he would
shoot the two of them, and take the gold at his
leisure. He then ordered Grieves to lie down on
the ground, and Parker to tie him hand and foot,
and Parker had to set to work and tie Grieves
like a sheep. Melville then said to Parker: “I’ve
wasted too much time over you. I’ll count five, and
if you do not hand ovef the gold in that time, I’ll




shoot you both.” Grieves, lying helplessly on the
ground, watched Melville’s face as he started to
count, and said afterwards he saw a change in the
face, a kind of pale shadow. He immediately called
out, “Oh, for God’s sake, give him the gold!” and
Parker, walking over, handed the bushranger the
bags containing his all. Melville then went off, first
telling them they were never so near death in their
lives, and that if they attempted to follow him,
he would shoot them. A friend of mine has told me
of another incident in “Captain” Melville’s career,
which places him in a more favourable light. This
happened at Wonwondah Station, near Horsham,
and an old couple named Pickford, who are still
living in that district, although of great age, related
it to my friend. [Since writing, Mrs. Pickford died
at the age of 95 years.] Melville had lost his horse
in the McKenzie Creek, and came to the station
early one morning, on foot, “loaded to the knees,”
as old Mrs. Pickford said. It was shearing time,
and Melville told the manager who he was, and
that he would take the best horse on the station
unless the manager sent a man to find his horse
for him. A man was started off, the bushranger
first telling him that he would give him £5 if he
found the horse. His next move was to order some
breakfast, and old Mr. Pickford, who officiated as
cook, admitted that he followed instructions to “look
sharp about it,” and soon had some chops frying.
Melville came in, putting his gun in the corner
ready for use, and Mrs. Pickford described him
as a “bonnie man.” He soon got his breakfast, and
going out found the station hand had returned with
the missing horse. The promise made was faith-
fully kept, for he gave the man £5, and Pickford
£2 for his breakfast. He then left without molest-
ing anyone. The subsequent career of this noted
bushranger is known, for I believe he was cap-
tured in the Geelong district, and took his own life
while in prison. I will close this chapter on bush-
rangers by saying that when I owned the Gamba


Gamba Station, in the Dubbo district of New South
Wales, Jimmy Governor and his brother were ap-
parently innocent little boys, and used to come
to the station with their people. Poor misguided
beings, they had a short run of it, and well it was
so.


CHAPTER XVI.
Labourers.—Shearers.—Swagmen.
From the time we oame to this country —1841
to 1850, or a little later—most of the labourers were
of the convict class, and I must say in their favour
that a large proportion of them were really good,
well disposed men. About the middle of the for-
ties some shiploads from Pentonville were sent out
here, the character of many of whom would not
bear inspection, but I will be silent about their acts
and deeds. Our shearers at Bringalbert, in 1846,
were all of the convict class, with one exception.
He was a Tasmanian native, of good family, and
himself a fine type of man. How he came to be a
shearer I never knew, but he afterwards went into
business in this district, became a magistrate, and
died a few years ago, much respected. His rela-
tives occupy prominent positions in the legal life
of Tasmania to-day. Shearers in those days hardly
ever reached a hundred in a day, from 75 to 90 being
considered a good day’s work, and the man who
could do 90 was usually the “ringer” of the shed.
The price paid for shearing was about 10/- per 100
until the diggings broke out, when it went up to
about 35/-, for men could not be got at
all. After the diggings, men flocked back to
the stations, and after many years, indeed
up to the time of free selection, travellers
were a serious tax on the squatters. I have had
as many as 75 swagmen at Bringalbert in a night, and
40 at Ozenkadnook. These all got supper and break-
fast, and in the year 1877 I kept an account of
the number of men we had on the two stations,
and the total was 1800. We had at last to adopt
the same system as others, and give out a pan


nican of flour to each man. As I have said, when
the selection came, swagmen became more scarce,
and many of them drifted off to the other colonies,
where the stations were still intact. At the present
time, so far as Victoria is concerned, I believe there
are more swagmen to be seen about the suburbs
of Melbourne than in the country. In the earlier
days I have no doubt many were murdered by the
blacks. I remember my uncle asking a villainous
looking old black, who was known as “King Water-
tight,” if he had ever killed a white man. His
answer was, in manner quite as cool as the prover-
bial cucumber: “Oh, yes, two poor beggars—no
gentlemen.” If a man was paid off and started with
his swag along some bush track for his destination,
someone might say, “I saw Jack or Bill at such a
place,” but if he perished in the bush there was no
one to enquire about him. The bushman of the for-
ties had one great advantage, for when he reached
a station he got a cheery welcome from the men
in the hut. He would just throw down his swag
and be received with such a salutation as this:
“Hello, mate, come and have a drink of tea.” The
boss never expected to be asked by a man if he
could stay, for in those days everyone was wel-
come to food and shelter.


CHAPTER XVII.
New Zealand Station.—John and Frank
Hamilton.—Marriage.—Tom Hamilton.
Trip to Port Darwin.—Aboriginal
Cricketers.—Death of Tom Hamilton.
My return from school at Launceston was, as I
have elsewhere stated, owing to my brothers, John
and Frank, taking up a sheep run in South Land,
New Zealand. Frank had been living in New Zea-
land, and having discovered this country, made appli-
cation for it, and was granted a licence. He then
came over, and induced John to join him in this
venture, the sheep to be got from the family to
stock up with. My presence was needed, being
the second eldest son, to help arrange matters, and
after a consultation, it was decided that I should
remain at home with my mother and manage Bring-
albert and Ozenkadnook. I was then under twenty
years of age, and I found that my first work was
to deal with 26,000 scabby sheep, but I had gained
some further experience in Tasmania, and I got
the whole flock clean in about six months. The
recipe was 1 lb. tobacco to 5 gallons of water, 1 lb.
sulphur to 10 gallons water, and oz. of arsenic
to every gallon in the dip. After we had considered
the question of my brothers’ New Zealand project,
it was decided that they were to take 2000 maiden
ewes from the station, and charter a vessel to take
them from Portland to New Zealand. This was at
a cost of £IOOO, and I also agreed to allow them
£IOOO from the family funds for expenses in
forming the station. They then started for Port-
land with the sheep, a team of eight bullocks and
dray and one or two horses. At Portland their


troubles commenced, for in those days the -water
was too shallow for a ship to come in to the pier.
The sheep had to be caught, their legs tied, and
taken to the ship in boats. The bullocks, too, were
forced into deep water, and having a rope round the
horns of each bullock, a boatman held the end
and they were made to swim to the ship, where
they were hoisted aboard. Horses were swum
out as well, and all fixed up safely. It was a work
of some difficulty to water the 2000 sheep, and had
to be done by bottles, but they soon took to the
bottles as kindly as pet lambs. They were landed
with scarcely any loss, and my brothers got to their
station, where they started buildings, yards, etc., and
soon got everything in going order. For some time
everything went well, but John got discontented
with his lot amongst snow and icicles, and came
back to Bringalbert. He wished me to take his
place, as we were all in partnership (my mother and
seven children), but I had met a fair one willing
to share my lot in life, and on the 27th of April,
iB6O, I took my wife to Ozenkadnook, where I made
my home. John then became manager at Bring-
albert, for five years, during which time he pros-
pered so well that he was able to buy the Doogalook
Station, on the Goulburn River, near Yea. Frank
remained on the New Zealand property, and got on
well, until he thought he could do better by sell-
ing it, which he did for £IO,OOO, without consult-
ing us. He then went into business with a partner
as a stock and station agent in Invercargill, where
he and his partner did business on a large scale,
advancing money right and left. For a time they
couldn’t go wrong, and extended their operations
by buying a steamer, running her between Inver-
cargill and the Bluff. But a crisis came at last,
and they had all their capital out on unsecured bills
and depreciated property. Their fall was complete,
as far as Frank was concerned, and he had to be
brought home and placed at Sinclair, near Heywood.
My brother Tom was born on my father’s land,


neax Kilmore, on the 10th of May, 1844, and was
two years old when he reached Bringalbert. Tom
came at a good time, so far as education and com-
fort were concerned, as we were prospering during
the period of his boyhood, and he had tutors to
educate him. About the middle of the sixties, when
he was a little over twenty years of age, we gave
him full management of Bringalbert, and he con-
tinued so until 1871. It was Tom who bought
“Angler,” the sire of Robinson Crusoe, Progress,
etc., at Fisher’s sale, and we had him for some
time, eventually selling him, when he went back
to Melbourne. In the spring of 1871 Tom took
the young stock overland to Fort Darwin, having
a man and boy with him. They carried their be-
longings on pack horses, and it was well on in the
winter of 1872 before they arrived at Port Darwin,
a journey of 1900 miles. Pie didn’t meet with much
of a market for such stock, selling them at an aver-
age of £SO a head. In travelling through, he
thought the country in the McDonald Ranges a good
place for cattle, and wanted me to join him in
forming a station there, but at that time I was man-
aging partner of our Victorian stations, and declined
to go. It was during Tom’s reign as manager that
he got the aboriginal cricketers together. Tom was
an enthusiast in cricket and sport generally—a good
rider and shot, and if a visitor wanted a round with
the gloves, he was always accommodated. He was
a non-smoker, almost a total abstainer, and the
blacks loved him like a brother, and believed
he could do anything for them. One of his team
(Jellico) was very ill with pneumonia while Tom
was in Melbourne, and hearing that Tom had come
home, he said: “Mr. Tom home, me soon get better
again.” Tom went over to him and cheered him so
much that he was quite hopeful, but he passed away
before daylight. It was Tom who got these
aboriginals together round the district, and after
coaching them up, took them, at his own expense,
to play at Hamilton. He was their captain, and


was accompanied by a friend of his, Mr. William
Hayman, nephew of Mr. J. P. Hayman, then owner
of Lake Wallace South Station. The event was
very popular, and brought the well-known cricketer
of those days (T. W. Wills) on the scene. He gave
them an additional brush up, and, accompanied by
William Hayman, took them to England. Tom’s
favourite was Johnny Mullagh, who was a great
cricketer, and a man of high spirit. One day Torp
asked him why he didn’t take a wife. His answer
was : “A white woman won’t have me, Mr. Tom, and
I will never have a black one.” He brought a
lot of portraits from England, and used to say;
“This is a London lady,” or “this is a Devonshire
lady.” In the Harrow cricket ground to-day stands
a monument to Johnny Mullagh, one of the finest
batsmen, white or black, Victoria ever produced.
The journey to Port Darwin was the beginning of
the end of my brother’s earthly career, for he con-
tracted fever and ague. He recovered from it, and
after a stay at home, went back to Queensland, where
he got a second attack, which was fatal. So passed
away Thomas Gibson Hamilton, at the early age of
29 years.


CHAPTER XVIII.
Incidents in Station Life. —Learning to
Ride. — Buckjumpers. — Swimming
Adventures.
I had my first ride when I was about six years
old, in the Kilmore district. A drover came along
with a mob of cattle, and mounting me on an old
stock horse he had been riding, told me to go round
the cattle and keep them together, while he had
a rest. My legs weren’t long enough to reach the
irons, and he put my feet in the leathers. I felt
very important then, and put my nag into a canter,
but my pride soon got the inevitable fall, for my
feet slipped through the leathers, and I came off,
and hung with my hair just touching the ground.
My first ride had been my last, only for that good
old horse, who, seeming to know my predicament,
just put his head down and started to crop the grass,
and I was soon taken out of danger. In 1846, when
we were at Bringalbert, I started to learn in earnest
—bareback, with a rope made in the form of a
bridle. Saddles and bridles were scarce in those
days, my uncle having the only ones in the place.
I used to be told off to bring the horses into the
yard every morning, and as there was no paddock
the horses usually made off a few miles during the
night. A blackboy and I would start early in the
morning with our rope bridles and track the horses
till we got them. Then we would come home in
great style, and sometimes get a “blowing up” for
riding too fast. My uncle would say: “There goes
Jim; he will kill that horse,” but no word of the
horse killing Jim. As I grew older I had, like other
young station fellows of those days, plenty of ex-
perience with buckjumpers. My belief is that a


"Stick to him. Bob!“


strong, determined buckjumper of the past would
generally throw a light weight, however good a
rider, while the 14 or 15 stone rider, if equally
capable, would hardly ever get thrown. The best
heavyweight rider I ever knew was Robert McPher-
son (Sydney Bob, or Big Bob, as he was called),
who was as strong as a lion, and was seldom thrown.
Micky McCarthy, a horsebreaker, who was about
5 feet in height, and weighed about 10 stone, was
the best lightweight rider I remember. I have
known scores of other good horsemen, but not one
who could say he had never “come to grass.” I re-
member an experience I had with a young filly one
cold morning. A native dog came prowling along,
and hastening to where the filly was, I put the
saddle on her hurriedly, and mounted. The result
was that the filly went “into it” properly, and I
described a somersault, landing on my feet facing
her, with the bridle in my hand. I got on again
more cautiously this time, and catching sight of the
dingo, after a smart gallop, I ran him to earth. I
had a half Arab, who threw me many times, and a
good many other fine horsemen, too. I rode her
once to Portland from Bringalbert, in one day, a
distance of 120 miles, and she behaved well with
me going down, but on mounting her a few days
afterwards in the hotel yard, she “went to work” in
her best style, and threw me on the rough stones
with which the yard was paved. I was soon on
again, and taking her out Bridgewater way, I gave
her such a gallop that I effectually cured her buck-
ing propensities for the rest of the day. Shortly
after this I left Portland for home, intending to
make Casterton or Nangeela, but at Hotspur I
found I would have Mr. McConachie for a com-
panion if I stayed the night there, and I did so.
We started on the track in the morning, and find-
ing I had galled my mare, I slackened the girths.
I went to give her a drink at a creek about four
miles from Digby, and the saddle slipping forward,
she wheeled round like a flash and bucked till she


threw me. It was a bad fall, for the small of my
back struck a root of a big tree standing some six
inches out of the ground. It was a wonder my
back wasn’t broken, but I was so badly hurt that
I never quite recovered the effects of that fall. Mr.
McConachie caught the mare, and I mounted again
with difficulty, and reached Digby, where my com-
panion parted company with me. I had another
mate from there, as Mr. J. Botterill, of Apsley, who
was on his way home, joined me. We stayed a
night at Casterton, and next morning I could hardly
drag one foot after another. However, I managed
to mount again, and, with Botterill, made for Rose-
neath, which, at that time, was managed by my
cousin, Adam Beveridge. After lunch, we started
again, but I mistook the crossing in the Glenelg,
which my cousin had shown me when on my way
to Portland, and plunged into deep water. My
mare swam grandly, and took me across without
mishap, Botterill following me. We reached
Apsley that night, and next day I got home, but 1
had to lie up for three months before I was able
to do anything. Years after I suffered so much
that I went under medical treatment in Melbourne,
and a doctor told me I would likely lose the use
of my legs, but with care and rest I pulled through.
I had a good deal of experience swimming rivers
on horseback in the days when there were no
bridges. On a good swimming horse one felt nearly
as safe as in a boat. In crossing a fairly rapid
stream one had just to keep the horse’s head up
stream and let him drift to the landing place, sit-
ting as still and evenly as possible, with feet out of
the stirrups. If you pulled your horse suddenly,
or with too much force, in a strong current, he was
almost sure to roll over. I knew a man named
Wilson, a good swimmer, who lost his life crossing
a strong-running stream. As the horse swam for
the opposite bank, he foolishly raised his hand to
pluck a branch from an overhanging tree. This
action put a little more weight on the horse, the


result being that he rolled over and disappeared
.under the water. The horse came up almost im-
mediately, but the rider did not. There was a little
island some fifty yards further down, and here
Wilson, who was a very tall man, came up in water
that reached to his middle. He looked despairingly
round, and with a wild cry plunged into the water
and was seen no more. It is believed that he was
badly injured when the horse and he rolled over
together. His body was found miles down the
stream some days afterwards. I will just relate
one more swimming adventure I had in the winter
of 1853, when the country was in a state of flood.
I was hunting for stray cattle, and got to the south
end of Lake Ullswater, where there is a creek I
had to cross and had often crossed before. There
is a bridge now across the creek, and a good road
leading to it, with settlement all round, but at that
time there was only a shepherd’s hut and a solitary
shepherd walking round his flock. I found the
running water and land slips had dug a deep hole
in the perpendicular sides, and into this I plunged.
My horse was a good swimmer, and soon got to
the other side, but there was no landing place, so
I pulled gently round for the other bank, and
coming broadside on to it, placed my hand on the
pommell of the saddle and sprang on to it. Hold-
ing the bridle, I encouraged the mare to follow, and
she made several determined efforts, each time
slipping back into deep water. At last she made
one great attempt, and this time she got out. I
had enough of cattle hunting that day, and splashed
the eight miles home through water and bog.


CHAPTER XIX.
To Geelong and Melbourne.—A Sad Experi-
ence.—Cobb and Co. in the Fifties.—
Noted Drivers and Incidents.
My first visit to Geelong was in the spring of
1854, when I drove my mother down in an old-
fashioned spring cart and one horse. We had a
cold and tiresome journey, and when we reached
Geelong, put up at the Prince of Wales Hotel,
then kept by a man named McDonald. It was a
very different structure to the present one, but
still it was very comfortable. Our neighbour, Mr.
David Edgar, of Pine Hills, arrived at the hotel
the same evening, and we spent a pleasant time to-
gether. One incident remains firmly fixed in my
memory, for a young fellow, about 20 years of age,
came into the room afflicted with a terrible cough.
Mr. Edgar asked him what was the matter, and he
said he had been to the diggings, where he con-
tracted a cold, and came down to Geelong for
treatment. He only stayed in the room a few
minutes and then went upstairs, where I heard him
coughing so fearfully that I ran up to see what I
could do for him. Poor fellow! he was lying on
his bed with his clothes on, and just gasped once
or twice and lay still. I had never up to that time
seen anyone die, and it made a great impression
on me. I asked the landlord if he knew his friends,
and he said, “No, but he was a namesake of mine,
and was a braw bonnie laddie when he came here
first on his way to the diggings.”
We did not stay long in Geelong, and went by
boat to Melbourne, which was crowded with visitors
going to and coming from the diggings. It was diffi


cult to find accommodation, but we got quarters
at Mrs. Mclntyre’s boarding-house, in Bourke-
street, where we were all right. My mother had
business to do in connection with her late brother’s
(T. L. Gibson) affairs, and when that was com-
pleted, we returned to Geelong. I bought a nice
little bay horse, and had an outrigger put on the
spring cart, so that we got home to Bringalbert
much quicker than coming down. My next visit
to Geelong was in 1857, as I came from Melbourne
by boat, bringing a horse I had bought, with the in-
tention of riding the 250 miles home, but, unfor-
tunately, my horse got crippled, so I took him to
O’Farrell and Sons’ sale yards, and sold him. The
railway was to be opened for traffic between Mel-
bourne and Geelong, so I waited for the festivities.
A free spread was given to all visitors, and the
crowd charged in to the marquee in the spirit of
“first come, first served.” A masked ball, in honour
of the occasion that night, was more in my line, so
I fitted myself out as a courtier of the time of Charles
the Second, and had a good time of it.
These were the great days of coaching in this
country. Cobb and Co. started a large coach from
Geelong, via Batesford, Shelford, Skipton, and
Streatham, to meet at Streatham another coach,
which left Portland the same hour in the morning,
and passed through Heywood, Branxholme, Hamil-
ton, etc. Passengers and mails were exchanged at
Streatham, after which each coach started on its
return journey. The drivers were brought from
America, and I believe some of these men were paid
at the rate of £l2 per week. They had splendid
teams of 4 and 6 horses, groomed like racehorses,
and full of life. Miles, the driver from the Port-
land end, had on his last stage into Streatham (or
the Hopkins, as it was then called) a team of six
light coloured chestnuts as nearly alike as it was
possible to get them. For the Portland end he had
six greys, and used to come into Portland at a gallop.
From Julia-street he swept into Bentick-street, and


He disturbed nervous passengers. (Cobb & Co. in the fifties)


would hardly slacken pace until he landed coach,
passengers, and all, in the yard of Mac’s Hotel.
He often disturbed the minds of nervous passengers,
but I do not think he ever made a mistake, although
he invariably finished up in this style: As he pulled
up his team, he sat on the box with a satisfied smile
on his face like a man who has had a good dinner
and subsided into an arm chair. I rode once in the
fifties to Hamilton, and joined the Portland coach
there, Miles being the driver. We had a rowdy
team of four bays at Green Hills, and one of the
traces slipping out of the swingle bar ring, just at
a spot where some road clearing was going on, the
team made off at a gallop for about four miles, over
a half-cleared road, before Miles pulled them to a
dancing standstill. The trace had to be put right,
and in my hurry to get out, I fell heavily on my
left side, and although I was up quickly and put the
trace right, I received a severe injury, for I rup-
tured a vein internally and sprained my ankle. I
will just mention something of the subsequent
career of this noted driver—Jimmy Miles. When
Cobb and Co. sold out here, they transferred their
business to New Zealand, and Miles was sent there
as one of the drivers. My brother John told me
of one occasion when Miles was driving in hilly
country where there were many deep and winding
cuttings. Drivers of vehicles had to blow a horn
before entering a steep incline, and wait 'for a
signal from a team coming the opposite way. On
this occasion Miles heard no signal, and had just
got out of a winding cutting when he came face to
face ‘with a heavily loaded waggon. A smash
seemed certain, but, taking in the situation at a
glance, he turned his team almost at right angles
over the bank, landing in safety far below in the
valley. An aunt of Miles’ died in America, leaving
him a large sum of money, and, severing his con-
nection with coaching, he started to ride to a port,
where he would get a ship to America. Poor Miles


never reached his destination, for he was drowned
in one of the fast running streams over there.
There were other famous drivers in those early
days besides Miles, such as “Cabbage Tree Ned,”
“Bendigo Ike,” “Jim Redfern” (who is still to the
fore, and loves to talk over old days), Frank Ruther-
ford, and many a good whip besides, but, alas! they
have nearly all taken their last trip on this earth,
when the voices were silent that rang so merrily in
song or story on the track, and the fingers cold
that once so skilfully held reins and whip.
My uncle, William Gibson, a younger brother
of my mother’s, lost his life in one of those swift-
running rivers, as did mapy another in the early
days of settlement. Amongst the pioneers
of the hilly country in Southland, and near
my brother’s, were people well known in Vic-
toria and the South-east in the forties and fifties.
Peter McKellar, a brother of Thomas McKellar,
of Strathkellar, near Hamilton; Glendinning, of St.
Mary’s Lake, near Natimuk; Geary and Ward, from
near Narracoorte; and many others. But to return
for a moment to the coaching days in Victoria. The
effect of the accident I met with when in the Port-
land coach was such that I had to repair to Geelong
for medical treatment, and was there for six
months, under the care of Dr. Carstairs. When I
was well enough to take another coach journey, I
found a change of coach owners had taken place,
Cobb and Co. having sold their Western lines to
Meggs and Anderson and the Northern lines to
Robertson and Wagner. All honour to such men
as Cobb & Co. here, for they were the originators
of the coaching system in Victoria, and they car-
ried out their contracts splendidly under circum-
stances of great difficulty. Road forming was only
in its infancy when they started, and even when
they handed over the reins to the new proprietors.
They also had good drivers, Meggs and Anderson
driving themselves on the more important lines. A
coach was put on daily from Hamilton to Apsley


about the end of the fifties. Previous to this we
had no public conveyance, the mails being carried
on horseback. The late Mr. Malcolm McCallum of
Hamilton, was our first mailman and one of the
first coach drivers to Apsley. A coach still runs,
despite the lapse of years, Mr. Jas. Lyall, an old
identity of the coaching days, being the proprietor.
It was quite ten years later before we had a coach
from Horsham to Apsley, and Mr. Jas. Carroll was
the first proprietor. He lost his life during a flood
in the Natimuk Creek in a brave attempt to rescue
someone from drowning. Mr; T. Grace, of Goroke,
then took that line and carried it out creditably
until the railway to Goroke put an end to coaching
so far as Horsham and Goroke were concerned.


CHAPTER XX.
Incidents of Station Life.—Snakes.—Light-
ning.—Use of Wool-press as Lock-up.
It may interest my readers if I recount some of
the incidents of station life which remain fixed in
my memory. Amongst other experiences were
some with snakes, which were numerous in our
district. When we were boys my brother John and
I were at the outstation, and amusing ourselves one
day looking for young magpies. I was gazing at
the top of a tree when I felt something under my
foot, and found I was standing on a large tiger
snake. I got such a start that I couldn’t tell
whether I was bitten or not, but I thought the
snake had got me by the calf of the leg. Sure
enough, on pulling up my trousers I found marks
like this . . and blood starting out of them.
We ran to a pool of water and my brother sucked
the wound for a long time. I felt nothing of the
symptoms which accompany snake bite, although
the place round the marks was much discoloured
next day. I have found snakes under my pillow,
seen them creeping into bed, and have met them
night and day, but always saw them in time to
escape injury. One hot night at Bringalbert I was
in bed and awake, and my youngest son sleeping
alongside me, when a black snake crawled right
over me and my little bed mate. When I felt the
snake first I could hardly keep from springing up,
but I thought it better to keep quiet, and I could
distinctly hear him fall off the bed on to the floor.
It was a bright moonlight, night, and I saw the
snake cross over the floor and disappear under a
skirting board. One of my brothers was going to
bed one night when a brown snake bit him on the


big toe, leaving marks like this : : : This
sort of snake is believed to be non-venomous, but
I wasn’t sure of it, and when he called to me I tied
a string above the wound and sucked it well. I
stayed with him all night and watched the
symptoms, but nothing suspicious occurred,
although we were both very sleepy before morning.
This was not to be wondered at, particularly as it
was shearing time, my brother being over the board
and I at the sheep wash. The latter was a most
important place on a station in the early days.
Greasy wool being so little in demand, we con-
tinued to wash our sheep right up to the end of the
sixties. Badly washed wool, too, meant a loss, so
with six men to help me I usually took my place
there for the season. We had to put through from
35,000 to 40,000 sheep, and the time occupied was
about five or six weeks, so it will be readily
imagined it was a busy time. One day in particular
stands out in my memory, as a great thunderstorm
came on. We had finished the flock a second time
through, except about three hundred, which had
only been through once, when the storm caught us.
I said, “We must finish this lot, men, so come on,”
and every man took his place. The thunder
seemed to crack just above our heads, lightning
played round us, while the rain poured in sheets,
and to make it worse the sun was about setting.
I took my place with another man on the stage,
which was about 18 inches wide, the throwers
threw in the usual number of sheep (about fifteen
or sixteen), while the yarders kept the yards full.
Hardly a word was spoken, and everybody worked
with great energy, as we felt our danger in such a
storm, but we got through our work and our two
and a half miles walk home, and although soaking
wet soon forgot our troubles in different surround-
ings. My first experience of the power of lightning
was in the Kilmore district, when I was about eight
years of age. One day, when my brother John
and I were away from the house near the creek,


we saw a big, dry tree struck and splintered to
pieces. My brother ran for home and I followed
him, and when the danger was over I dared to
laugh, on which my mother seized me and cuffed
me well. I have seen a sheep yard with a flock of
sheep in it struck by lightning, the heads of some
of the hurdles splintered to pieces, and a few of the
sheep near the hurdles killed. At Bringalbert once the
lightning came right down the chimney and round
balls of fire about the size of a cricket ball hopped
along the floor and disappeared through the open
door on the verandah. I examined the verandah,
which was 'made of native pine boards, but could
see no trace of fire. On another occasion at Ozen-
kadnook I was standing on the verandah one
Sunday afternoon during a heavy thunderstorm.
A mob of horses were a short distance from me,
and I saw a young colt struck down. He lay
motionless a little while, and then struggled to his
feet, but dragged his hind legs after him for some
time. In time he quite recovered, was broken in,
and was named “Lightning” on account of his ex-
perience. The electricity which knocked the colt
down hopped along the verandah from end to end
just like cricket balls of fire, and although they
passed close to my feet I felt no inconvenience,
nor could I see any trace of their passage across
the floor. I was foolishly leaning against a gum
tree during a storm, when a flash of lightning
almost blinded me and took all the power out of
my legs, so that I staggered and had a difficulty
in keeping upright, but I soon recovered. Amongst
other incidents of station life which occur to
me, I remember the use we made of the wool
press in dealing with violent characters. A man
who had been working at Bendigo having been paid
off, got on the spree at Apsley and returned to
Benayeo in a state of delirium tremens. McLeod
started him off to Harrow in a waggonette, the
driver being instructed to take him to Harrow and
hand him over to the police, a letter being sent


describing the case. They had only got a few miles
on the road when the man had a wild fit, and,
jumping out of the waggon, he disappeared into
the bush. He turned up at our men’s hut at Bring-
albert, and was so violent that word was sent up
to us to ask what could be done with him. It was
decided to take him by force and put him in the
wool press until the police came—no easy matter,
for he was a powerful man at ordinary times, and
worse to deal with in his state of madness. 'My
brother Tom and a big Scotchman called John
Jacks did the seizing, which they managed sud-
denly when he was off his guard, and after a great
struggle he was secured. His hands were tied
behind his back and he was led up to the woolshed
and put in the screw press until next day, when
the police came and took charge of him. He made
use of fearful threats on the way to the shed, and
was going to kill every one of the name of Hamilton
if he only got free. On leaving the asylum when
he recovered he came back to Bringalbert and
thanked us for what we had done for him. The
poor fellow worked steadily at his trade for some
time, but at Border Town he broke down again,
and after a heavy drinking bout bolted into the
Mallee and was never seen again, living or dead.
There were others, too, who were thought fit sub-
jects for a night in the wool press, and it made a
very good lockup.


CHAPTER XXI.
Aborigines.—Their Customs.
In an earlier part of my narrative I stated that
when we came to Bringalbert there were a number
of natives of varying ages in the district. I should
think there were about 300 within a radius of fifty
miles from Bringalbert. I am rather diffident
about writing much on such a subject, as it has
been exhaustively dealt with by others, but as I
may add something to knowledge already recorded
I will give something of my impressions and ex-
periences amongst them. I must first say that I
am under a deep sense of gratitude to the black
race for the part they played in trying to save, and
ministering to, my father when he met with the
accident which caused his death, the circumstances
of which I have previously narrated. My first
clear recollection of the natives of this country was
in the early fifties in the Kilmore district, and in
the year 1845 I witnessed their great national event,
the Coayang. I suppose there would be from 150
to 200 of the Goulburn Valley, Kilmore, and other
tribes, and the place of meeting was in the ranges
east of Kilmore. We crept through the bushes
until we got to about a hundred yards from them,
and witnessed a scene that would have rivalled Tam
o’ Shanter’s dance of witches. Fires burned
brightly, the spectators were ranged in groups, and
on a space cleared of grass painted and naked
warriors (except for a girdle round their waist and
small neat bundles of boughs round their ankles)
danced backwards and forwards along the lines of
spectators. The women supplied the music and
kept wonderful time, their instruments being
opossum rugs beaten with small sticks, whilst there


was a chorus of not at all unmusical voices.
Shortly after our arrival at Bringalbert, when I was
about eleven years old, I was out in the bush some
four or five miles from home, and sat down on a
log amusing myself whittling a stick. I used to
go after the horses, who often wandered away, sand-
flies and mosquitoes being in those early days an
awful pest. As I sat on the log to rest I got a
great start on seeing a big black fellow, with only
an opossum rug over his breast and left arm and a
number of spears in his hand, coming towards me.
Two lubras were with him, and whatever fears I
had were soon allayed, for, sticking his spears in
the ground, the lubras sat down alongside them,
while he, with a broad smile on his face, came up
to me. This was the beginning of a friendship
which lasted as long as he lived. My new friend
was known as “Jacky,” and was King of the Apsley
and Tatiara tribe. In virtue of his kingly position
he used to wear a brass plate in the shape of a
half moon, on which was inscribed, “Jacky, King
of the Apsley and Binnum Binnum blacks.” Jacky
became a shepherd for my father, and we were
much together. In after years if Jacky met me at
a township he would come to me with a beaming
face, shake hands, and say, “Where is my sixpence,
Mr. Hamilton?” but if he met me in the bush his
salutation was, “Halloa, Jim.” Poor old Jacky! I
am glad that I had in those days always a sixpence
or a shilling for him. There were other kings too,
“King AVatertight” and “King Cole.” The latter,
like his illustrious namesake, was very fond of his
“pipe and his glass.” He had two wives, but no
children, and used to work for me sometimes at the
sheep wash. “King Cole” was a pleasant sort of
fellow, but not very fond of work. In this par-
ticular he was like a good many others of his
brother blacks. One of them was working at
another station at shearing time, and not turning
up to his work one morning the boss went down to
his mia mia and found him asleep. “Hullo,


Tommy,” said the boss, “why didn’t you come to
work?” but Tommy replied, “No work to-day, boss
—Sunday.” “This is Wednesday,” said the boss,
“Sunday three days ago.” “What,” said Tommy,
“only one Sunday in week —big fool white fellow.
What for no two Sunday?” “King Cole” died
at Bringalbert, and shortly before his death,
seemed in perfect health, he told me he
had seen in his sleep steps right up to
the clouds, and blackfellows and whitefellows
going up and coming down. They had been up, he
said, to see the Big Master, who lives up there. He
told me this very earnestly, and some three months
after our conversation he took suddenly ill and
died. The blacks had a vague idea of a God and
of a future life, and, as is well known, they some-
times believed white men to have been of their race
and risen white. I have seen a blackwoman claim
a white man as her husband, and it was quite
pathetic to see her trying to recall to him events
that happened when they were both black. The
spirit or ghost they feared most was known in their
language as the Nagie, and appeared in the form of
a white woman. They told me “King Watertight”
had seen one on the banks of the Salt Lakes, and
got a great fright. As to the way the blacks dis-
pose of their dead, I will just state my own ex-
perience. One of the black boys we had, a smart
young fellow, wandered into South Australia, and
an unfriendly tribe tried to kill him. He got back
to the station, but so badly wounded that he died
in a few days. His own people dug a grave for him
at the foot of a large box tree between Lakes Bring-
albert and Downbobberty, and laid him in it, rolled
up in his blanket, filling up the grave just as we do.
The other case was different. We had with us on
Bringalbert when we settled there first a black boy
who used to go away at stated periods to attend
gatherings of the tribes, messengers being sent for
him. When the business was over, he always re-
turned to the station, but on one occasion, after he


had taken to himself a wife, the usual deputation
came for him, and he became greatly excited, telling
my eldest brother he would have to go with them
in the morning. He went to the camp with them,
and an animated discussion took place, ending in
a scene of great consternation, as the poor black-
fellow in his over-excitement had burst a blood
vessel, and died almost immediately. Next day his
people scooped out a large hole on a sandbank about
a quarter of a mile from the station, and laid him in
a corner of it. This hole would be about six feet
deep and the same in width, but some fifteen or
twenty feet in length. They put no earth over his
body, but made a sort of roof, covering it with
boughs. The place was not disturbed for many
years, and his people cleared off after burying him.
In all my experience I have never known of a body
disposed of in a tree, although I have been told
of a case where a blackfellow died on Mr. Carter’s
station, near the Grampians, and a coffin was made
for him. His friends went off with the coffin, but
taking the body out, placed it in a hollow tree, and
carefully buried the coffin. I was at Bendigo, in
the year 1854, at the diggings, and, arriving late one
evening, our party drew up near a log, which we
intended to light for our fire, but discovering a
newly made grave just behind the log, we lit our
fire away from it, and used the logs for a seat. A
party of blacks came and wanted us to shift from
the place, as they had buried one of their number
there late the evening before, and wanted to com-
plete their arrangements. We told them we would
not interfere in any way, so they set to work and
put up a brush fence round the grave at a dis-
tance of about twenty yards, leaving an entrance
at the furthest point. This done, they made a path
from the entrance to the grave, clearing off every
blade of grass and rubbish, and then with brooms
made of boughs, they swept the path as clean as
it was possible to make it. They then made off,
and it is a custom of the race to shift their camp


after a death. I know where a large number of
blacks are buried in pits near Ozenkadnook, some
of them so near the surface that our cattle used to
scrape up the bones when making beds for them-
selves in the sand. They died of some epidemic be-
fore the white man came to that part of the country.
I have questioned other blacks about it, but the
only information I got was, “All about very sick,
and tumble down dead like rotten sheep.” The
place is about three miles from Ozenkadnook home-
stead, and since we first saw it, in 1846, I never
knew it to be used as a camp, or a blackfellow to
go near it on any occasion. Although we had a
number of boys employed at light work on the
station, these boys were not allowed to stay for a
long period, having to go and live with their people
once a year or more. If they did not go when sum-
moned, they were outlawed and killed on the first
opportunity. There were two fine boys, known as
“Kangaroo Jack,” and “Robin,” who lived at Row-
lands when Mr. Ballantyne owned it. These boys
did not go at the time appointed, and knowing what
the breaking of such a rule meant, they got away
from Newlands on their account, and camped for
a few days at the corner of Bringalbert and Benayeo.
Their camp was at Mering swamp, and while there
a party of blacks suddenly appeared, and speared
them without mercy. There were men and women
of such great age when we came to the district
first, so wrinkled, and with hair so white that they
looked more like monkeys than of the human race.'
One remarkable feature was that they never got
bald, and they had splendid even rows, of beautiful
white teeth, which lasted into old age. I have
seen a boy take a strong hurdle nail between his
teeth and twist it about until the head broke off,
and as for toothache, I never saw a case of it.
They were a wandering race, and rarely stepped
longer than a week or two in one place, shifting
their camp some ten or twenty miles. The families
were small, from three to five about the number.


and in each camp there would be about half a dozen
families. That they practised infanticide in some
cases, no one can deny. If a half-caste boy came
along, he was allowed to live, but if a female, death
was certain. My black boy companions told me that
“Lady Cole” had taken away a little girl into the
bush and broke her back with a yam stick. It was
usually a friend of the mother who, as in this case,
did the execution. How terrible was the idea they
had of renewing their strength by removing the fat
from some victim! Usually, some strong young
fellow was invited by another tribe to visit them,
and when quite at home amongst them, was sud-
denly stunned by a blow, and while unconscious
an opening was made in his side, from which they
extracted the fat to anoint themselves with, leaving
the poor fellow to come back to consciousness, and
afterwards die in agony.
Woman was of little account with these swarthy
children of nature, and had always to wait at meal
time until her “good man” satisfied his hunger. I
have been in a camp at breakfast time and saw
her roast a possum, which she handed to her “lord
and master,” or which he snatched out of her hand
when it was ready, and doubling it up, tore off the
flesh with his teeth. Then when he had reduced it
to a skeleton, he dashed it to the ground, and she
picking it up, marched off proudly without a word.
I have seen her making a breakfast which he did
not care to share with her, such as tadpoles roasted
in the ashes, or white grubs, which she scooped up
in handfuls. I have mentioned their belief in spirits,
and they did not care to leave a camp at night
without a torch of blazing bark to protect them.
I do not think there was any depth of talent in
their nature, but they were very adaptable people,
and quick to acquire a knowledge of our language.
I remember meeting a young black woman in the
fifties, who was with the tribe in our district, but
who had been for a short time at a mission station
in South Australia. I spoke to her in “pidgin”


English, and her answer was, “You need not speak
to me like that; I understand English as well as
you.” In this she was far ahead of the Highland
lady, whose reply to the correction of a friend was,
“I can speak ta English as well as you, Tonal, and
twice as more.” A great deal has been said about
the part alcohol had in shortening the lives of the
aborigines, but my experience is that it had only a
small share in producing this result. They, of
course, took easily to drink, but they had not the
means to procure much of it, and it was only at such
times as a bushman, knocking down his cheque,
who would shout for anyone, black or white,
that their opportunity came. Other evils
caused through contact with dissolute whites;
rheumatic fever and change of food were,
I believe the primary causes of the decline
of the black race. Their food was abun-
dant before the advent of white people—sev-
eral kinds of kangaroo and oppossum, bandicoots,
kangaroo rats, the muscovy rat, which went in
colonies, and lived in the ground, several kinds
of mice, amongst them being a mouse as yellow as
a canary, which they used to dig out of the sand.
I think they ate all kinds of native animals, except
the dingo, and I never knew them to eat that sort
of flesh. Then they had birds, snakes, lizards, eggs,
yams of many sorts, pig faces, grubs two or three
inches long, which they cut out of trees, and which
were like marrow, and on such foods these people
had thrived for generations. But with changed con-
ditions, sickness came, and they had no remedy for
the serious ills which attacked them, and the “poor
fellow me” of the blackfellow, in answer to an en-
quiry, often indicated that he felt he was doomed.
The natives in our district had no antidote for snake
bite beyond sucking the wound, and knew nothing
of tying a ligature. If one was bitten, he would
watch the sun anxiously, and when he felt giddy and
confused in his vision, would lie down to die. For
a deep cut or wound, the treatment was to fill it up


with earth. Their sport consisted of throwing
spears, boomerangs, sham fights with waddies and
blunt spears, the latter warded off by a long shield
—called a Nulla Nulla —which had a handhole at
the back of it. Two young men would attack each
other, throwing spears with great force, which were
turned off with the shield. They also attacked each
other with waddies, and although sometimes Ugly
blows were given, I never knew any serious result
to follow. It is well known that a good many white
people, shepherds, etc., met their death at the hands
of the blacks in early days. I remember a case
which occurred in the Malice, where an old man had
wandered away from a station, and got lost The
station people went out to look for him, taking with
them a smart young blackfellow, known as “Gentle-
man George,” but they had no success, and returned
to the station at night. George appeared later, and
on being questioned if he had seen the old man,
said: “Oh, yes, me find him.” “Well, where is he?”
—to which question George said: “Him cranky
beggar, no come with me—me knock him on the
head.”
I will close this chapter on the blacks by saying
1 never knew one who had a desire to possess a
house or land. If you gave one a horse, saddle and
bridle, he would ride away with great pride,
but in a few days he would dispose of the turnout,
spend the money on trifles, and have nothing to
show for it. It was the same with clothes, which,
in a childlike way, they were at first very proud of,
but soon got tired of them, and either gave them
away or put them somewhere, never caring to see
them again.


CHAPTER XXII.
District Events. —Start of Apsley.—The
Race Club.—Show.—Church Services.
In writing of the early pioneers of our district, I
omitted to mention the Hearne family. They came,
like Mr. Gordon, rather too late to find unoccupied
country, but the Afflecks allowed them to occupy a
piece of country on the outskirts of their Pleasant
Banks run, known as Rats Castle, near Karnak.
After a time, they rented a piece of country on
Neuarparr, and later on joined forces with Mr. J. P.
Hayman, and rented the Lake Wallace Station,
eventually purchasing it. Previous to this, Mr. Hay-
man, who had been overseer at Bringalbert, joined
Mr. Samuel Baird, of Apsley, and rented the Lemon
Springs run, and it was on the expiration of their
lease that Mr. Hearne, senr., and Mr, Hayman be-
came partners. Things went on apparently pros-
perous with them for a number of years, but
changed circumstances came to them, as it did to
others of us, and they retired from the scene. Mr.
Hearne, who did much useful work in the district,
still lives, and he and his wife have always been held
in the highest respect. Mr. Gordon could find no
resting place when he came to the district, until
Mr. Adam Smith, of Hynam, let him settle at Dyne,
with his sheep. He was a progressive man, and
while there his opportunity came to buy Newlands,
as Mr. Ballantyne had broken down mentally. It
was during Mr. Ballantyne’s occupation of New-
lands that Apsley got its first start. In the year
1848, a Mr. Mack Davidson, who had been manager
for Messrs. Plope Bros., at Lake Wallace Station,
got permission from Mr. Ballantyne to build a
public house on the Newlands Station. The founder


of Apsley built his hotel at the junction of several
tracks, and a short distance west of the present hotel.
He obtained a licence, and Apsley soon became a
post town, mails being carried on horseback from
Hamilton. Davidson only kept the house a short
time, and sold it to Mr. Samuel Baird, late of Kan-
gatong Estate, near Warrnambool. I remember Mr.
Baird there in 1849, and he opened a store, but the
township made little progress until the early fifties,
when crowds of overlanders came from South Aus-
tralia on their way to the goldfields. Baird then
made money so fast that he opened a wine and spirit
business in Geelong with a partner, under the name
of Beard and McPhillamy. He sold his Apsley
business to Mr. Joseph Botterill, and in his time the
township became of more importance. He enlarged
the hotel and store, and built a room for an Assembly
Hall, capable of holding fifty or sixty couples of
dancers. There were jolly times in it, with the
Hartz Mountain Brass Band, from Mt. Gambier,
supplying the music. We started our race club about
the year 1855, and every station-holder was a mem-
ber, besides having a hack or two for the different
events. It was an amateur race club at the start,
but our horses were good enough for any registered
course, and our jockeys, young fellows from the
different stations, who were in their glory when
astride a horse. The jumps in the steeplechase were
started at 4 feet 6 inches, and the horses of those
days did not find them too high. Accidents were
rare, and as there was a ball every night of the
three days the races lasted, visitors and district
residents had a good time of it. It was a bit ex-
pensive, though, as few families got away under
£IOO for the three days. The races came into such
prominence that it drew the attention of racing men
and professional jockeys from all quarters, and as a
result our amateur club became a registered one.
Many fine horsemen were to be found at our races,
such as Lindsay Gordon, Cuthbert Fetherstonhaugh,
Jim Wilson, Billy Trainor, Charlie Mullaley, and


many others. Horses, too, like Bondo, Darkie, and
a host of others, who figured afterwards in many a
well-contested field, began their career there. The
accommodation for visitors was ample. The hall
was large and spacious, containing tables sufficient
to seat from eighty to a hundred people at a sitting;
waiters were numerous and were generally enlisted
from the working hands of the day, while a capable
man, often brought from one of the large hotels of
the metropolis, had charge of the arrangements. Mr.
Botterill, the landlord, who had been a city man in
a drapery establishment, knew how to conduct all
things for the comfort of his guests, and, backed up
by his clever wife, left nothing to be desired. The
bedrooms in the hotel were reserved for the ladies,
and the men were provided with long runs of calico
structures, each room of this sort containing two
beds. Racing is still carried on at Apsley, but shorn
of the glory which surrounded it in the days that
are gone. Hardacre succeeded Botterill in the hotel,
and Mcßae, Hardacre; but time has laid them all
low, and their graves are close together in the Apsley
cemetery. Our Pastoral and Agricultural Show was
started in 1861, and continued in Apsley for some
fifteen years, when, in order to suit exhibitors in the
Hamilton and Coleraine district, it was shifted to
Edenhope. Although I took a prominent part in
having it shifted, I think it was of doubtful advan-
tage, as other shows began to be formed, and former
exhibitors were, in some cases, lost. Still, Edenhope
has a creditable show to-day of stock and district
products. Few of the promoters of the show are
living to-day, and some passed away under changed
and straitened circumstances.
We had no resident minister in our district when
I first went to live at Ozenkadnook, but the Rev.
Dugald McCalman, Presbyterian minister, of Narra-
coorte, used to hold Divine service in the township
and at the stations. I thought, then, with other
residents, that it would be better to have one place
of meeting, and as Ozenkadnook was fairly central.


it was arranged that regular services be held in my
home. We agreed amongst ourselves to give £lO
from each family towards the minister’s stipend. My
people from Bringalbert gave that amount, and I
gave the same, as did Messrs. Jas. Thomson, of
Maryvale, Afflecks, of Pleasant Banks and Mortat,
Broughtons, of Lemon Springs, F. P. Hines, of
Neuarparr, Hayman, of Lake Wallace South, etc.
These, with their families, made up an average con-
gregation of about 57 persons, and we had ser-
vices once a month. Then the Church of England
took action, and the late Rev. R. R. Collins came
amongst us to preach, and the result was we soon
had a fortnightly service. Ido not remember what
amount was subscribed for him, but I know that we,
of Bringalbert and Ozenkadnook, gave the same as
to our own minister. To provide better accommoda-
tion, I built a room thirty feet long, with a propor-
tionate width, had a reading desk made, and in our
church we listened reverently to the Word of God.
Many fine men preached in that little room, such as
the late Rev. Dr. Oswald Dykes, of Edinburgh, who
was on a visit to Australia. Amongst other valued
ministers, we were always glad to see the late Rev.
M. Maclnnes, who did a great deal of travelling
and preaching in those early days, and was held by
us all in the highest respect. We made all wel-
come to hold service in our little church, whether
Protestants or Roman Catholics. After many years,
the late Mr. Walter Laidlaw, then of Mundarra,
came to me and suggested that we should build a
church at Edenhope, as it was a growing township,
and would suit a number of people who could not
conveniently come to Ozenkadnook. We called a
meeting, and it was decided that a church be built
at Edenhope, which continues to this day, the Rev.
Mr. McMeekin being the minister. Mr. McMeekin
has a large district, and may be frequently seen sit-
ting behind a good pair of horses, which he knows
how to drive, in his long journey between preach-
ing stations. j


CHAPTER XXIII.
Changed Circumstances. —Conclusion.
I have now come to the close of my narrative,
and will deal shortly with events that led to my
financial downfall. From about the middle of the
fifties up to the middle of the sixties, prosperity at-
tained its greatest height on stations and station
property, and open houses and unbounded hospi-
tality were to be met with everywhere. Then a
change set in, and things began gradually to wane,
so that by the year 1880 few of the squatters who
had taken up runs in the forties were in a solvent
state. This came about through changes in the
land laws, expiration of leases, free selection, and, in
many cases, speculation, which seemed safe, but
turned out ruinous, in New South Wales station
property. Enterprise is always accompanied by
danger, and it is always so easy to look back and
see what one should have done. I lived at Ozenkad-
nook for about eleven years, but as things were be-
coming complicated with us, I returned to Bring-
albert, in 1871, and took over the whole manage-
ment of our property. Our New Zealand station had
been a loss to us, as we had given my brother Frank
a free hand, without an agreement of any kind,
which is a fatal mistake, even between near relatives,
and his ultimate downfall involved us to a consider-
able extent. However, I got everything right again
and worked the place clear of debt. I carried it on
until 1879, when I bought my partners out for
£40,000. This was my last stroke, for having pur-
chased the Gamba Gamba Station, on the Mac-
quarie, in New South Wales, I was caught by
drought, and lost heavily. I had hoped to have held
the scrub lands of Bringalbert and OzenkadnonV


(some 20,000 acres) under a grazing licence for a
term of years, and this with my 6000 acres of free-
hold I believed would pull me through. But it
was not to be. The scrub lands were made agricul-
tural lands, and were rapidly selected; wool and
stock fell in price, and, to add to my troubles, I
had the misfortune to shoot myself in the knee with
a revolver, which resulted in the loss of my left leg.
I went through a lot of physical suffering, and just
at this time, when unable to look after my affairs,
I had heavy losses in stock, losing in three years,
through sheep stealers principally, 6500 sheep. Un-
der all the circumstances, I thought it better to ask
my agents to take the property off my hands and
work it for their benefit and mine, which they did.
Land rose in value, and they ultimately sold land
which, when I gave it up, was only worth 255. an
acre, up to £3 per acre. Although I got no benefit
out of the increased values, I have the satisfaction
of knowing I did not cause the firm any serious
loss. I went out of the station almost penniless,
and in increasing years and only one leg, I have
striven hard to rise again. I tried to work some
grazing area leases with a few sheep, but it was a
useless struggle, as I had no capital to start with.
Now, at the age of 76 years I find myself still
struggling. I hold 14 acres at Ozenkadnook, and a
small piece of ground at Barwon Heads, on which
there is a two-roomed cottage where I live, and I
have been trying to increase my income with a little
garden and a few fowls. My poor wife died in 1910,
after our sojourn together of fifty years, and f am
now a lonely old man, but not without friends who
have helped me in my adversity, and my heart-felt
gratitude goes out to them. I may have acted un-
wisely in my speculations, and in my course of life,
but I thought I was doing all for the best. Now I
can look with pleasure on my country’s progress dur-
ing my long sojourn here, and thank God for all He
has done for me. I have no regret that the days of
my youth are over. I have had my mornings and


midday, and am now watching the shadows length-
ening while enjoying my eventide. Now I lay down
my pen, for my story is told. I am conscious of its
imperfections, but I have shown under what diffi-
culties I obtained my education. Our young people
to-day have all the advantages I missed. God bless
them and all the efforts made for the advancement
of mankind. May truth ever prevail and wise and
good men be chosen to hold the helm of government
in Church and State. I close my narrative with that
sad but expressive word—Farewell.
