

KSf;
>w\p% § Vp
PIONEERS OF
YESTERDAY






The waggon that descended the cliff


PIONEERS OF
YESTERDAY
The Overland Trip from South Australia to
TTestern Australia, accomplished Ly the
Halford Family
B y MRS. E. P. HALFORD
PRINTED BY
THE IMPERIAL PRINTING COMPANY LIMITED
397 HAY STREET (EAST). PERTH
“5^




PIONEERS OF
YESTERDAY
AS a preliminary I will revert to a few reminiscences that caused
us to change our locality.
Drought, with its inevitable troubles, losses, and disappointments,
set in, in inexorable severity. No rain to speak of for several years.
Dust storms so dense that in the middle of the day you could hardly
see your hand before you while at their worst; and when they passed
over, all was desolation.
The men used to go out every morning with waddies to kill the
lambs to try and save their mothers. The sheep dog got so disgusted
at the sight, that he would run and hide himself when he saw them
pick up the cudgels. After dispatching about 1,700 lambs, they
succeeded in saving 400 ewes.
They carted chaff from the Burra, a distance of 45 miles—9o
there and back—while the horses lived, but eventually scoop-team,
kuggy-horses, riding horses, and other animals succumbed, and their
bones lay bleaching on the plains.
As nothing further could be done before rain came, my husband
and son, with a neighbour, went up to Mt. Eba, in the far north,
where there were 10,000 sheep for sale. They got the sheep and
travelled them down: expecting that in all probability there would
be rain that winter, the dams full, with grass, herbage, and saltbush
in evidence; but it was not so.
The dust storms still raged, until you could drive (in some
places) a buggy and pair over the top of the vermin-proof fences, the
sand had so accumulated against them.
There was very little water left, the salt bush was reduced to
sticks, and the devastation complete.
My husband and son were favourably impressed with the north.
5
Pioneers of Yesterday


It had been a good season up there, and, consequently, looked its
best.
The sheep were sold, and " Mistletoe,” our homestead, put up at
auction. The late Mr, Mcßride bought it for £BlO. It has since
been sold at over £15,000.
Our Yubalia place, 80 miles out towards the Murray, with a
well and engine, also sixteen dams, was allowed to revert to Govern-
ment.
It was not always thus. In 1893 my husband went out to get
the horses, but could not find two of them, so was going to drive
home those he had, when both rose up to follow the others. The grass
was so high that they were completely hidden. The wild oats used
to hit my son in the breast as he rode through them. In 1900 all
was desolation.
It is surprising how quickly that country responds when the
rain comes. I remember a heavy rain coming on Friday, and Sunday
afternoon we went for a walk along the water course, and saw green
grass 18 inches long in a tussock.
Having secured 630 miles of country on a 42 years’ lease, be-
tween Mt. Eba and Tarcoola, my husband and three sons travelled
the cattle up to Mintabyng, our future home.
The little girls and I lived in the Burra until the death of my
mother, who was 84 years and six months.
I was run down, and the doctor ordered me a change. I took
the youngest and left the other three with a friend.
When I left the south-east nearly twenty years before, I had
to come round by steamer then. This time I could go by train.
I spent my youthful days in what was known as the " Garden
of the Colony” (now the State). I may say I have never come
across anything quite so absorbing as Mt. Gambier and Millicent.
The panorama from the top of the mount, with two beautiful lakes
in its centre, and the famous Blue lake in close proximity, Mt.
Shank, with its extinct crater, and the sea beyond, makes a beautiful
picture. Mt. Muirhead, near Millicent, is worth the climb; you can
see the vast plain, two lakes in the distance, and Lake George is not
far away; the sand hummocks and the sea beyond, all come into view.
I have seen them all, so can speak from experience. An early morning
view from a high hill was exquisite. I arrived at Millicent before
my letter, so you may guess the surprise I gave. Strange to say,
there was a tea meeting the afternoon of my arrival to celebrate the
fact that the church had been enlarged. The same thing had taken
place twenty years before on my first arrival as schoolteacher at Milli-
cent! The church had been enlarged, and the tea meeting was that day.
The enlargement was very necessary, as I had an average attendance of
sixty, and the school roll was a hundred and odd. The new school
house and residence were built after. I was teaching six years at
Kalangadoo before that.
6
Pioneers of Yesterday


The Millicent land was opened for selection as soon as the drains
or canals were finished. The land had to be drained before it was fit
for cultivation, and bridges made over the canals. The people left
Kalangadoo to take up the new land.
As the attendance there fell below 20, and the people wrote
urging me to go to Millicent, and I eventually went. I remained there
until I was married, five years afterwards, in 1881. In 1870 we had to
pass an exam., and if successful, apply for a license to teach. There
were great changes in the school curriculum in those eleven years—
many changes for the better, both for the teachers and the children.
Reverting to my visit. It soon got round the church that I was
present, and the young women flocked round asking " who is this? ”
and " who are those? ” I could name the families to which they
belonged, but their own names were an enigma. They said, " Mr.
Kent is still alive, at the age of 92.” I went to see him as soon as
possible; he looked frail, but was alert in mind. He told me he had
read the Bible through hundreds of times (lam sorry I do not remem-
ber the exact number). I remarked, " you will take a large portion of it
away with you.” He said, " Yes.” He was an educated man, and
very useful in his church. When I saw him, he was not able to leave
his chair. He had fourteen children, but one was not. We missed
his quota when he left Kalangadoo, but regained it at Millicent.
I met the schoolmaster down the street, but he did not recognise
me. I saw him again at the Post Office. I said, " Good afternoon,
Mr. Thomson, I suppose you do not remember me? ” He was on
his dignity at once, and said " No.” I said " you were my successor.”
He shook hands and chatted away for a while. I told him of a boy
who was never going to forgive me for a whipping he got. He then
told me of a brother, who was also a schoolmaster, visiting a place
where he had been teaching many years before. He had many invita-
tions to dine, but one man gave him such a pressing invitation, that
he thought he had better go. He had bread and dripping only served
up. He said, " how is this? you invited me.” He replied, "we must
be thankful for small mercies.” I did not ask if he got a whipping.
I could count the chastisements inflicted for the five years on the
fingers of one hand. As a rule, we had a happy time. I worked hard,
and saw that the pupils did the same. Two boys left for college,
but, as a rule, their education ended at the State school. It was,
therefore, imperative that they know how to calculate the area of
land ploughed, price per bushel of wheat, excavations, etc. It was
not compulsory to teach these things, but necessary.
I was going to tell you about the boy who was never going
to forgive me.
Of course, he had grown a man by this time. He had a butcher’s
shop. I went into the shop. There were, I think, three men and a
woman standing at an inner door, I recognised the young man, and
shook hands with him. " I said, "do you remember Miss —.” He
7
Pioneers of Yesterday


said " Yes.” I told him that he had told me he was never going to
forgive me for the thrashing he got. I could not have that, so he
must forgive me. He said, " yes, I will forgive you. I got the boy
who got me into all the trouble down a well and let a pole down on
his head. I have had my revenge.” I should like you to have seen the
astonished faces of all in the shop. They had never even heard of
me. They could not have been more surprised if I had sprang out of
my grave. I visited several other families that day. One man, in the
course of conversation, remarked, " It is hot up at the Burra, is it
not? ” A boy of his, who had been listening, said, " that child never
came from a hot climate ” —meaning my little girl. She looked very
white. She had never been in a cold climate before.
Those I could not visit came to see me. An old gentleman told
me if he had known I was at the tea meeting, he would have been
there. He thought it too cold to go out.
I could go on for a long time, but I remember I have other
obligations to fulfil. After spending a very pleasant time at Millicent,
I returned to Mt. Gambier. I had visited the cemetery at Millicent,
and now had to see the familiar spots here. Miss Tucker had lost
both parents since we left that part. They had a beautiful monument
between the grave of both parents; they had sent to Rome for it.
While these sadden us, they also remind us of the fleeting years.
The news of my arrival soon spread. The invitations came thick
and fast. After a long day, I left my little girl home in the evening,
and went to visit an old friend, I had not been back long before
a lady came in, and said she had been looking for me all the after-
noon. She knew her husband would be very disappointed if she
returned without me. I had to wake the child and dress her. We
went out of town about eleven miles. Of course, there was very little
sleep that night. The next night we stayed at Kalangadoo, and visited
some of the friends there; we were now on our road home. Next
day we boarded the train for Adelaide. I visited the West Terrace
Cemetery, and many friends, then returned to Burra.
On the way up, as it got dark, my little girl sang at the top
of her voice, " Going to the Dear Old Home Again,” her own com-
position. A gentleman opposite smiled over the top of his paper at
her, and all was silent.
I got my furniture all packed up and forwarded a few days
before we were to start, to be sure of the things being on the same
train north.
We left Burra on July 5 th, and reached Quorn the first night.
We had to change trains at Terowie. A dear old friend, Rev. C.
Tresise, met us. His daughter came on at the previous station, and
said her father would do his best to be at the next station. I saw him
driving very fast as we neared the station. It was the last chance
of seeing us in this world.
On leaving Quorn we passed through the agricultural country.
8
Pioneers of Yesterday


Flinders Range, before on the left, was now on the right, with mineral
country beyond it.
We passed Parachilna, Leigh’s Creek, Beltana, Farina, Mundowdna,
and other stations. As there are no stores after leaving the settled
district, the train stopped here long enough for the passengers to get all
they required. We obtained water for tea from the engine driver.
They are very considerate and kind on that line, and do all they can
to make the journey agreeable.
On board there was a missionary and his family, who were re-
turning to the mission station in Central Australia. He recognised
some of the aborigines, who came to the train, at stopping places.
He gave them food, and seemed to be upbraiding them for some mis-
demeanor by the look of their faces. He spoke in their own language.
That day we crossed Leigh’s Creek. The engine seemed round in
another direction as it circled round the bend, but we kept moving
slowly. Looking down it seemed a long way to the bed of the creek,
and only two iron rails for the carriage to stand on. The engine
driver was watching the carriages very intently while we passed over.
It was a very long train.
The driver for next day was in the carriage, anxiously watching
proceedings. He told me after we got over that that was the most
dangerous place on that line.
We got to Hergott Springs that night. There is a two-storey
hotel, and good accommodation, a few houses, some date palms, and
many interesting things. The sub-artesian waters start here, so they
have an abundant supply of water.
Early next morning we started for Coward Springs. On the
way we saw Lake Eyre south and we crossed the corner of the lake.
The mirage made the small islands in the lake look very high. It is
a beautiful sheet of water 30 feet below sea level. Stewart Creek
Siding is three feet below sea level. We arrived at Coward Springs
about noon. My husband and two sons were there waiting for us.
They had brought a waggon for the furniture, and two buggies for us.
After lunch we saw the bore. It sends out a continuous stream of
water, which forms a creek where it runs away. The mosquitoes there
are of the first order; we only found them beaten once, and that was
at Denial Bay,
We got to Billa Kaleena that night. The bore there threw up
the water less vigorously than at Coward, and not such a full
stream. There were also mounds that had springs.
Next day we came to the table-lands. The road here is well
defined. We could see a long distance ahead. The country here is
covered all over with small stones, as far as the eye can reach, and
so regularly that you would think they had been placed there.
I passed a remark about them once to a man, who assured me it
was the last place God made, and there was not enough earth to cover
them. The table-lands are high and flat; through long years the
9
Pioneers of Yesterday


wind has blown the soil away and left the bare stones.
I was surprised to see a large patch of Sturt Pea. It looked like
a red blanket. We climbed from one tableland to another, we passed
Emu Well, Crown Well, and eventually came to Miller’s Creek, where
there were trees, shrubs, and grass in abundance. We camped there
for the night. We were nearing the stations now. Next night we
got to Kallabying. We did not get as far as the station house, so
camped before it got dark. My husband choose the hill, but I
thought the dry swamp, with tall bushes, would be more sheltered,
as it was very windy that night. He said " just as you like,” and
drove down the bank.
Next morning we found an abundance of prickly geranium
seed sticking to our dresses and underclothes. It absorbed our
attention so long, that the men were getting anxious about starting,
and rang the breakfast bell vigorously, but all to no effect. We were
too much engrossed with our own troubles. It was impossible to get
the prickles out. We never put the clothes on again.
When we camped for lunch one day a person came over to see
us with her two daughters. She told us that when she came there she
had only a tent to live in. It was too hot in the day, so she got some
water to soften the ground, and sat down and dug post holes to put
up a brush shed; the - sitting down to dig post holes tickled us im-
mensely! That night we got to Mt, Eba, and were then a day’s
journey from our future home.
We arrived at Mintabying early in the afternoon, and had a look
round. The detached places seemed all over the shop. It would
make one tired to walk round. I had brought all my furniture up,
at a great expense. It was a puzzle to know where to put it for the
best. We got settled after a while. People wondered to see such
furniture up there. One man said it was "an oasis in the desert.”
The blacks used to sit round the door and listen to my little
girl playing. They are very fond of music. Although they live and
work on most stations, we did not hire coloured labour.
The blacks used to call in passing and get something to eat.
One day two of the Bon-Bon blacks came along, they said they were
going to Kallabying, and wanted three days’ food. I gave them
flour to make a damper, as I had not sufficient bread to spare. A little
while after one of them came to the back of the chimney, calling
out " wetty, wetty.” I went out to see what it meant. His hands
were covered with wet dough! So I had to give him more flour. They
made their way back to Bon-Bon, after getting their supply for Kalla-
bying. I was writing to Mrs. Gourley that day, and mentioned
that their boys had gone to Kallabying. When she received it, she
went out and told them what I had said, and they wanted to see
the letter. They looked at it, and said " him tell a lie alright.” Of
course, they could not read or write.
The mail coach from Coward Springs passed on Monday to
Tarcoola, and went back on Friday, so we got our letters, papers,
10
Pioneers of Yesterday


and periodicals regularly. We lived on the main track, so it was never
dull. We have seen as many as 70 camels in one string, all heavily
loaded. The white men drove as many as twenty horses in a waggon
without reins. One time a man was taking a lot of women passengers
to Coward to catch the train. He had loading back to Tarcoola. They
all sang and laughed so loudly that it frightened his team, and it
bolted through the scrub, scattering knives, forks, and other things
as it went. He was never able to recover them. I hope the ladies
behaved better after that episode. Fortunately no one was hurt.
After a time the mines began to fail at Tarcoola. The bore
at Lake Phillipson, that was being put down at great expense to the
S.A. Government, seemed likely to become a failure. They had a
derrick 70 feet high, and kept boring until bedrock was struck, with
no results.
My husband took the mail bags and meat (fresh beef) every
week, while the coach continued to run. He drove the buggy at
first, but finding it very heavy for the horses, got a shandydan, which
is popular in the north. It is a dog-cart with a pole and two horses,
and it is much easier to drag through the sand, in which the north
abounds.
We also sold meat to teamsters, and to Afghans, if it were
Afghan killed. When the beast was shot, the Afghan would im-
mediately cut its throat, and as he explained to us, he " prayed,”
without which they dare not eat the meat. We would wait for hours
when we knew they were coming, to give them a chance of getting
a bit of meat. It was the only place they could get meat along that
road; and we always had it fresh.
It was not dull up here. I will try to describe our nearest
neighbour’s first visit, from 17 miles away. Distances do not count
in the north; they speak of everything as " just over there.” They
arrived in the morning, Mr. and Mrs. Gourley, four children, gover-
ness, and nurse-maid, with a man on horseback to open the gates and
attend to the horses, as they drove a four-in-hand. The two eldest
children rode their ponies—they also had an attendant. That after-
noon the coach came along, in which were two nurses from the
hospital returning to town, so things were very lively for a time.
Mrs. Gourley had herself been a matron, so they were well met. We
enjoyed their company very much, and all had a good time. In
the afternoon they took snaps of the cattle, which looked very pretty
on a green plain near the well, but they were a failure, owing to the
plate having been used before.
When Tarcoola failed, the coach stopped running from Coward.
We had then to go to Bon-Bon, where Mr. Gourley had a store and
post office. That was the terminus of the mail coach from Port
Augusta to Tarcoola. His station was not very dull either, and we
often visited Bon-Bon.
At Mintabying they used to draw the water up in 36 gallon buc-
11
Pioneers of Yesterday


kets, while one was coming up the other was going down. There was a
lip on each bucket that would catch on the tipping trough when it
came up, and the horses or bullocks would walk up and down for
hours, turning at each end, as travellers depended on Mintabying
well for a supply. It was 120 feet to the water. Someone passed
every day, so we had always to keep a supply. It was good stock
water, but a little brackish, so we did not drink it. Drinking water
had to be carted. We had good drinking water in a well twenty-four
miles distant. We had now to get our supplies from Coward by the
camel teams. The white men had now nearly all left the road.
The man in charge at the Lake Phillipson bore—Jack Ried, a
white man—when the coach from Coward stopped running, sent an
Afghan to Bon-Bon for their mail on a camel. He called and got their
meat also from us, as he had to pass our place, and go seventeen miles.
The season was bad, and there was no feed for horses. The
Afghan had a sick camel, and he wanted some fat to give it, but said
it must be Afghan killed. I did not know whether it had been
mixed or not, but I said " that will be right.” He said when I gave
it to him, " If that is Afghan killed my camel will get well, but if
not, my camel will die.” He said the camel was well when he came
back, so it must have been Afghan killed!
He came one day with our stores; he was disappointed to find
that my husband was away, as he wanted his money. "If you have
your cart notes I will make it up and pay you,” I said. He said,
" You schoolmaster,” I said " Yes.” I had always to make up his
accounts after that. The next loading was a conglomerate mixture
of fish, sauce, pickles, jams, etc., for which he charged eight pounds
per ton. In extenuation he said " camel buck, chuckum.”
We had now put in two years in that semi-tropical part of
Australia, and I felt quite willing for someone else to occupy Minta-
bying for the remaining forty years of our lease. We could not keep
sheep without shepherding, as only a part of the run was vermin
proofed. The wild dogs were very numerous, and destructive. When
the cocks crew in the morning at four o’clock, a whole chorus of
howls was heard for about twenty minutes. They would make off
about day-break. Occasionally one was caught in a trap. They are
fond of fowls, and I lost seventeen one night. I think their only limit
is all they can get.
The Afghans came one very hot day with loading. I told them if
they went to the kitchen I would give them a cup of tea. There
were five of them. I put on a saucepan full of eggs; they ate them
and asked if there were any more. After eating another saucepanful,
they inquired " how many do white men eat? ” I said " two or three,”
" Oh, that no good.” I did not ask them to have any more!
A young man called at the station just before Christmas. He
was riding a push bike to Coward to catch the train to get home
in time for Christmas. It was a scorching day, so he stayed until
four o’clock. His father and he were blacksmiths; they had been
12
Pioneers of Yesterday


working at their trade at Tarcoola. I never noticed until after he
started that he had a narrow-brimmed white straw hat on. I was
sorry after I had not sent after him, and put something round his
hat, to prevent the sun from striking the back of his neck. On the
Monday the coach called, and the driver told me a young man was
lying dead by the side of the road, the other side of Mt. Eba. He had
tied strings across the road from his bike to where he lay, covered up
with his blanket. The driver called to him, and receiving no answer,
got down and shook him. I told him he was young Glasson, that
he left here on Friday afternoon, after having a cup of tea. His
father had gone down the other way by the coach to Port Augusta.
The mail coach went on to Tarcoola, and the driver reported the sad
affair to the police. The boy had water on his bike, so it must have
been sunstroke. The police searched him; he had telegrams and
letters in his pocket to post at Coward for us. He was an only child,
nineteen years of age. The fenced-in grave and head-stone may still
be seen along that lonely road. We sent along some wreaths, and the
mailman placed them on his grave. One consolation the parents had,
he was a Christian.
I had a sister in W.A., who wrote glowing accounts of the West.
I said " why can’t we go overland and take the stock with us? ” My
husband and sons thought it might be possible.
Mr. Halford went down to Adelaide to go by steamer to Fre-
mantle, and come back overland to see what things were like. He
met a friend in Adelaide who advised him not to go to the West,
but to try Port Lincoln, which place was booming at the time. He
took up a place, paid a deposit, and after a short holiday, returned
to the north. The whole family were pleased at the prospect of living
near the sea, though when their father said the cattle and horses
would have to be sold, no one wanted to go. Coast fever would
not permit of their being taken there. The boys were fond of the
cattle, and the girls loved their ponies, so Port Lincoln fell flat. W.A.
was again to the fore. I was still a firm advocate. Eventually they
all decided on the overland trip.
The furniture was carted to Tarcoola, but as no one wanted fur-
niture, it had to be left in an agent’s hands to be disposed of later.
A stove, building materials, new iron, etc, and two large boxes, which
were got to pack the library, music books, and other valuables, were
to be sent down to Adelaide, and round by the steamer to Albany,
when the camels went down.
There was no overland express train in those days. The man
we left the boxes with died, and we have never heard of them since.
We also left at Mintabying two 36 gallon iron buckets, yards of steel
rope, a blacksmith’s forge, etc., and when the wagon was loaded
there was no room for my side-saddle, so that, too, was left behind.
If Tarcoola had maintained its former position, money could
have been made there. The bore also failed.
There was an amusing little incident just before we left. An
13
Pioneers of Yesterday


Afghan was trying to put a nose line in the camel’s nose. By some i
means he irritated the animal, and it chased him all round the place,
he just escaped by creeping under the waggon, as it was going to flop
on him. That is the way they kill anyone, by bringing their breast ;
down full force. Our men ran to his assistance, or the camel would
have had him.
I must pass over further preliminaries, and start about the over-
land trip.
We started from Mintabying in June, 1903. My friends made
me promise to write a detailed account of our journey on arrival in
Western Australia. I suggested a pamphlet, but they would have
nothing less than a book.
I have since been reminded many times of my promise. I have
never had time or leisure before to devote to it.
Since the death of my husband, April 4th, 1928, I have been
travelling about from one place to another. I did not feel able to
put my mind on anything till my tenant’s leaving caused me to
decide to re-establish my home, and fulfil my promise to my friends,
and write about the overland trip.
I find, to my dismay, that my notes taken daily by the way
are either lost or. destroyed. I shall have to revert to memory, and
do my best, as I have no one to appeal to.
14
Pioneers of Yesterday


THE OVERLAND TRIP
ALL arrangements now being made, we started in June, 1903. We
were all to travel together until we reached the coast, then the
girls and I were to go round to Adelaide by a coasting steamer, and
from there take an ocean liner to Albany; but this plan never
eventuated.
Perhaps I had better describe our caravan —a spring table-top
waggon (that had been a hawker’s van), with eighteen bullocks; a
spring cart, with a tandem team; a buggy and pair; four on horseback;
two girls riding their ponies; a number of loose horses, and a big lot
of cattle. I have forgotten the exact number of each.
We got off our country and camped the other side of the fence,
so as to pick up the tracks easily in the morning. A few radicals
got through the fence, and made back to their old feeding ground, a
distance of over twenty miles, causing the delay of a day or so.
None of us slept very well that night. I heard some of them
get up and grill beef steak at the fire; after that, they went to sleep.
I was still listening to a most beautiful song of a bird. I have never
heard its equal since.
The next night the girls and I arrived at Bon-Bon. As I drove
up there were camels in the yard near the gate through which I had
to pass. One of the horses was terribly afraid of camels, she would
bolt at sight of them. A man opened the gate and took the mare out,
narrowly averting an accident. We had a good time, but the men,
a very difficult one. Some held the cattle, while others were search-
ing for strays. It took three days to collect them and get to Bon-Bon.
Then, after a pleasant evening—a concert, etc., got up for our
farewell—we bid our kind friends adieu. Mrs. Gourley gave us
"On Our Selection ”to read by the camp fire. We did enjoy it.
The next night we had a fence behind us, so were able to let
the cattle loose. We were at Wallabying the next evening; there
was good feed there, and the stock were much easier to manage.
Most of them were station bred, and not very quiet. We used to
travel them all day, let them go at night, and in the morning ride
round the outside of the tracks and muster, then let them string on.
When sufficiently drawn out, two would ride along, one each side,
and count. If both were agreed, they were satisfied, if not, one had
to go back and hunt up the missing ones.
15
Pioneers of Yesterday


If no water was obtained for two days, the herd had to be rounded
up and camped. Fires were made all round the circle, and men rode
round and round with stock whips in their hands until the cattle
settled down. They would then walk round for a change, and poke
up the fires. Their horses were always close, in case of a stampede.
One night the first watch had come off and got into bed, when
some of the cattle broke camp. They had to scramble out to stop the
others from going, while the riders followed the runaways. The moon
had set, and it was very dark. They had to jump fallen trees, scrub,
and bushes, and by the time they got the cattle all back, it was break
of day.
We enjoyed travelling when we got water every night, and could
rest comfortably. New scenes presented themselves each day, and
there was always something of interest.
Our next stage was to Kingoonya, a run of about 1,000 square
miles. It has some good wells, and beautiful water. Figs, grapes, and
vegetables are grown at some of these wells, when the station is
stocked. Kingoonya had just been taken up again as a speculation,
after being in the charge of a Government caretaker for many years.
The next station we passed through was Kokotha. It carried
16,000 sheep. They have three wells, also some shed tanks, so are
fairly well watered.
At Lake Everard we struck some beautiful feed on the bank of the
lake, though the country generally is poor. There are good stone
buildings round about. It is rock-hole country, not very reliable.
We next met with a series of very heavy sand hills. It is the
same sand as at Oakden Hills and Moonaree. It cannot be dodged.
We found it difficult to pull off the road one night, and in doing so
turned completely round. I peeped out of the tent in the morning,
and said, " Why, the sun is getting up in the same place as it went
down,” which caused a roar of laughter from the men, who were
boiling the water for breakfast.
The next stop of any importance was at the dam in the Gawler
Ranges. We were able to give the stock a drink without having
to draw it. The Gawler Ranges are big, high, rough hills of meta-
morphic sand stone, which might, from their utter want of order,
be aptly named " jumble hills.” Good beeftree, saltbush, grass, and
native geranium grow well in this jumble of hills, but, of course, only
between them. Consequently, there is much waste of feeding country.
The country is watered by wells, which generally have been
sunk too deep, and into bad water, which is detrimental to stock.
Hiltaba was the next station we passed through, while Kon-
doolka was twenty miles to the west. Their feeding capacity is much
the same.
There were sand hills, with an occasional plain all the way to the
west coast. On one plain I saw some beautiful honeysuckles; one
species had a tapering cone of a bright red colour, the rest were of the
ordinary yellow.
16
Pioneers of Yesterday


Every few miles there is a good underground cement tank, or
what is called a " shed tank,” which is generally an iron tank under
an iron shed, but there is sometimes a ground tank where the surface
catchment is poor. The roads and stock routes in South Australia
have been splendidly watered by the Government of that State.
At the next tank my husband left us, and made for Streaky
Bay, to get our letters and papers, some stores, etc.
The day following we turned westerly, and followed the tele-
graph line that goes from Yardea to Fowler’s Bay. We got to the
Wallalla rock-hole, which was large and good, that night, and very
high ground surrounded it; there were pine and many other trees in
close proximity. After the stock were watered, they had a short rest,
and then went through the trees to the rock-hole. I heard shouts
and laughter; I wondered what was on, and went through the trees
to see. With a lasso they had caught two poddies, and two boys
were riding them. One boy was holding the ropes, so they could
only go round, and were bucking vigorously, which caused more fun
for the onlookers—hence the noise. They will not know I saw them
until they read this, as I did not want to spoil their sport.
It was exceedingly cold and frosty that night, the ground was
white and the tents stiff in the morning. The usual routine was
gone through, and we started. Nonjikonipita was our next camp,
which we reached later in the day.
My husband was waiting for us, as we had a little delay on the
road. There were also two men who had been spelling their horses for
a time, on the good feed. One of them asked how many cattle there
were. When told, he said, "Caesar’s ghost! I never saw so many in
all my life.” They watched them string in, and helped to draw the
water for them.
We all rushed for the letters and papers, the children for the
" School Paper,” and " Young Folks.” There was quite a lot of mail.
We did not shift camp the next day, as we were getting short
of meat, so they killed a bullock. They used to cut off all the flesh,
and throw the bones away. A big cask was carried on the waggon
for the salt meat, and bags for the fresh.
That evening Mr. Halford gave us a sketch of his journey to
Streaky Bay. He said, " After a good few miles’ driving, I arrived
at the out-post of agricultural settlement. I was now on the lime-
stone country. The land seemed good enough, if only sufficient rain
fell. But there was a serious water difficulty. There were no wells,
and no watercourses. The land was just billowy, the hollows being too
small to serve as tank catchments. But the people were resourceful;
they made underground tanks at or near their houses. They also
dug long narrow holes about two feet deep at the sides of the road,
and then diverted the water from the wheel marks into those holes;
and when rain fell they were about with carts, tanks, and buckets,
and scooped up, then carted home all the dirty looking water they
could get!
17
Pioneers of Yesterday


" Nearer Streaky Bay the hollows are much larger. The making
of tanks with sloping sides, with plough and scoop, is not effective,
because of the utter absence of clay in the formation. Karcultaby,
near Streaky Bay, is stony, but good grazing country. The presence
of lime in abundance is beneficial to the stock kept there. Streaky
Bay has a jetty, a few business places, some houses, and a place of
worship. After a short stay, I drove to Perlubie, where there are quite
a number of good sand wells.
" Here I met a man who was an artist —an artist with an axe.
He was what is known as a scrubwalloper, i.e., one who chops down
the Mallee trees for mullonizing—a system of cultivating the mallee
country without grubbing the stumps first. The farmers cheerfully
paid this man a shilling per acre more than the usual, because he
rounded his stumps off so nicely!
" In a few hours I was beyond agricultural settlement and making
my way to Nonjikompita.”
(The above copied from his diary.)
We next travelled on towards Murat Bay. We were soon among
settlers, and able to procure butter, eggs, etc. The soil here was
dark, and in other places greyish. The road was good until we neared
the sea, then it was very heavy sand.
At Murat Bay there.is a long jetty, a township, and a good tank.
We camped just outside the township that night, and strolled down
the jetty. In the morning a black woman came to the camp, and
said her child was crying all night. I asked if the child was ill. She
said, " only crying for tucker.” They were from Mt. Eba.
The people told us if we had been a day sooner we could have
crossed the bay dry shod. Some thought we might risk it then, as the
sea was coming back very slowly. It was only seven miles across to
Denial Bay. Having read of the fate of the ancient Egyptians, we
were not inclined to incur the risk. It was one vast sheet of water,
increasing hourly in depth, and if a wind had come from seaward, it
would soon increase the volume. As it was, it took us all day to go the
eleven miles round in thick beach sand, nearly up to the axles all the
way.
We got a vociferous welcome that night from myriads of mos-
quitoes. They kept the whirr up until we got inside of our tents;
even then there were a few invaders. We never saw their like before
nor since.
Next morning the German doctor and two ladies had a look at
our herd, and praised the breed. A man had wanted to buy a cow
the day before, but they would not part with one, so he followed
us along to Denial Bay, still urging his plea. At last they let him
have one with a young calf. She was what the stations hands would
call a " snorter.” They yarded her, put ropes on her, and tied her
behind the cart, the calf was put in the cart. The man seemed a bit
nervous, but he said his wife would manage her.
We were now going along the west coast. The next day we
18
Pioneers of Yesterday


passed a very enterprising wheat grower’s property. He held 17,000
acres of wheat land—mallee country; had 8,000 cleared and culti-
vated by the mullenizing process. There seemed to be something
wrong about his face! Mr. Halford inquired of a person the cause,
as he thought he must have been the victim of an accident. He
had the following graphic story related to him: "He is too dirty
for even his wife to live with him. He was ill once, and taken to the
hospital. They took off his dirty clothes, and after scrubbing for
a while they came across something they found to be a flannel shirt,
after removing it they scrubbed again.” My husband asked if that
was correct. The reply was, " They say so. I shall not vouch for
this statement, but if you had seen him you may have been inclined to
believe it.”
The next day we arrived at Charra. It is rather a pretty place;
they mostly keep sheep there. We were travelling along a very
nice wire-netting fence. It had been a good fence when first erected,
but had been raised in order to keep the dogs out.
An intelligent, well dressed, and well mounted young man rode
up on the other side of the vermin-proof fence, and looked at the
cattle. He seemed to be taking a great interest in them. Our folk
accosted him, but he never answered them.
In the evening my husband and I went across to have a chat
v/ith his father and mother. The mail coach had just arrived when
we got there. The lady ushered us into the sitting room, while she
went to assist in sorting the letters and papers. The same young
man was sitting at the table trying to work out a puzzle from a
paper. He took no notice of us, just continued on with what he
was doing, and if spoken to, never answered. After a while his
mother came in and explained to us that he had always been deaf and
dumb. We felt sorry. He was good looking, and in every way
charming. He was well educated; he had been in Adelaide at school
for years, could speak rapidly on his fingers, and had also learned the
lip language. Had I know, I could have spoken to him on my fingers.
His mother was trying to learn the dumb alphabet, but was very slow
at it. His father took no interest in it, so he had to write everything
for him. His mother and I had a little fun over the puzzle. He
had found it out, but we were in the dark. He would shake his head
when we were wrong, but would not tell us, we had to find it out
ourselves.
Bagster was the next place we passed through. There are wheat
fields here, and a good many settlers.
We had always the menace of fortuitous happenings. At Penong
we had a nice heifer poisoned by eating tobacco plant. She seemed
to go mad. She would try to rush at anyone who went near her; she
could not get up. A few others were slightly affected. Penong is
a nice place, both grazing and agriculture are carried on here; they
cart their wheat to Point Sinclair. Red rust became so bad, that some
19
Pioneers of Yesterday


of the wheat crops of extraordinary growth were burned like so much
stubble.
On passing along to Bookabie we saw many crops. The rabbits
were a trouble there. A lady who invited us in to tea told me she
arose at five in the morning, got her husband a cup of tea to give
him energy to get up, then went round the crop and filled up any
holes the rabbits had made in the netting fence.
Tallala was reached the next day; it is also a farming locality.
Here we met a young lady. She had come out to travel a day with
our party, and spend the night for the novelty of camping out. We
had plenty of horses, but she had to bring her own side-saddle. Un-
fortunately, it rained next day, so her mother drove out to Pentumba
and took her and our two girls back to the station for the night.
The Stock Inspector met us at Pentumba, so we did not get an
early start next day. The girls were back in time, having enjoyed the
change.
Bob Smith, who had been cook for my husband, left Pentumba
a short time after to return to Bon-Bon. He was accompanied by
Abdul Emin, a native of India. They rode camels, and one morning,
while searching for them, missed their way, and both died of thirst
between Murat Bay and Mt. Eba. Abdul told me once that he was
going to be a great man like Basha Gool. Alas! those bubbles! Bob
was very near-sighted, but he was an excellent cook; if he laid the
table, nothing ever had to be asked for. He had been a steward on
board a vessel. Drink was his failing.
The next place was Kooringabie. This also is an agricultural
settlement, and the last along the coast.
I will now skip over ninety miles, as we shall have to travel that
again later. That takes us to the Bight Station. The mailman had
two nice turkeys he had just shot, and he gave a big one to us. (You
will hear how we disposed of it later.) We stayed here a while to
make inquiries about the road ahead. There were very high sandhills
nearly up to the station, towards the sea. We thought it might not
be far, so we started to see what the Bight was like. We had many
times read of the Great Australian Bight, but had never had an op-
portunity of seeing it. We crossed hill after hill, but no sight of
the sea. After between three or four miles, at last we sighted it. It
was then about three miles away. The hills kept diminishing all the
way. Pa went back, as he was satisfied with the view he got, but
we wanted to reach the shore. The boys and girls took their boots
and shoes off and left them on a sandhill until they came back. I was
the only one who reached the shore with shoes on. The Bight is a
vast expanse of water like a bay, only much bigger. A narrow jut
of rock ran out into the sea for a long way, and looked very much
like a breakwater, though, of course, it was a natural formation.
There were miles of sandy beach and beautiful seaweed. The water
was shallow near the edge. We picked up shells, seaweed, and a glass
off an electric light, which had floated on to the shore! When we
20
Pioneer % of Yesterday


got back we called them " the spoils of the conquered ocean.” There
was no trouble in finding the children’s shoes, as our tracks were
visible and no others were to be seen. There was a beautiful roast
turkey waiting for us when we got back, and we ate it with alacrity,
as we had taken nothing with us. Had we known it was so far, we
might have driven along the coast a few miles and reached it more
easily. As it was, we got right to the head of the Bight. The boys
rode down a while after to where they landed timber to build a
wool shed. They also loaded wool from there, but it was so dangerous
that they afterwards sent it by camel teams 120 miles to Eucla. The
boys said the spray rose up so high that it frightened their horses;
it was very rough and not at all like the head of the Bight, but it was
a sight well worth seeing.
Mr. Halford went on to White Well and ’phoned to Eucla to
see if there was any possibility of getting through. They reported
water short, no feed, and rabbits very numerous, eating the bark
round the trees and bushes; and added, " You had better wait until
the autumn rains come; there is no possibility of getting through
now.” We then negotiated with Mr. Murray, of Yalata Station, near
Fowler’s Bay. After arranging for accommodation on one of his
stations, we had to retrace our steps to Pentumba, about ninety miles.
The first night a braying ass frightened our horses, causing them to
gallop miles in hobbles. It cut their fetlocks and took a lot out of
them, and the men had a lot of tracking to do to find them.
Eventually we got back to the Fowler’s Bay district. We lived
at Torombo, a mile or more from Pentumba. We got a house and
furniture, also a buggy to use while Mr. Halford was away in Western
Australia. He took a young man with him and drove overland, to
see the condition of the road, also the water supply. All the rest
stayed to look after the stock. Here all the water had to be drawn
by windmills, which had to be attended to. Things went right for
a wdiile, until one morning my son Ewart went down to turn the
mill on, and by some means got the hook trust into the palm of his
hand, tearing the flesh to the fingers. As it took some time to heal,
he devoted his time to reading.
We liked Torombo very well, but it seemed tame after travelling
day after day, always seeing fresh scenes. We lived ten miles from
Yalata Station and seventeen miles from Fowler’s Bay. The chief
amusement of the young people there was dancing. They would
travel nearly 200 miles along the coast to attend a special dance. They
had a dance every week and a special once a month. They also
engaged in cricket, football and other sports.
We used to drive to Kooringabie to a service on Sunday morning
and attend the Sabbath school in the afternoon. There was a day
school also, but as our children had been taught at home since going
to the North, it did not seem worth while sending them for such
a short time. They used to ride four donkeys down to the school
sometimes and give the teacher a ride. Two were quiet and two
21
Pioneers of Yesterday


were not. The little girl would elect to sit facing the donkey’s tail,
and, after giving the donkey four cuts, she would say, " It is just
going to take effect.”
One day we all went to Fowler’s Bay to see the little coasting
steamer that was then in port. She was lying out a good way, rocking
about, and a little episode came into my mind of many years before.
I was going round to Adelaide with others; we were all waiting at Port
McDonnell for the arrival of the steamer (not a small craft like this
one). It was very rough and she did not get in until the afternoon.
It was really too rough to take passengers out, but as there were so
many, the men manned the boat and took us out to the steamer. We
had to stand by for more than half an hour, tossed up and down by
the waves, before they took us up. The steward looked over the
side at us occasionally. A lawyer, who stood holding his sick wife
in his arms, could restrain himself no longer, and demanded in sten-
torian tones that the chair be lowered immediately. We were taken
up, only to squat on the deck as helpless as babies. We could neither
stand, walk nor go. (Please do not assign this to alcohol, as we were
all teetotallers!) The stewardess told me afterwards they thought
no one would come out on that rough sea, and when they saw so many
cabin and saloon passengers they were nonplussed. That was the
reason for keeping us so long in the boat, tossed by the winds and
waves —the beds had to be made and things got ready!
On this present occasion I was satisfied with the look of things,
and decided that terra firma was best. The men did not say they
wanted to get rid of us, but that was the under-strata, we were sure,
as we were only to travel with them to the coast.
On the whole, we had a pleasant time in that district, and made
a few friends. We got accustomed to our surroundings, and fell in
with all that was going on. We went to Koorabie to a concert and
tableau, which were very good. They were all amateurs, but took
their parts admirably.
As an expedient, we brought along with us a separator, sewing
machine, and washing machine, for use on the road, also a large
wringer, which was used for a mangle. We could not make butter
while travelling. We only milked one cow, and she had to be tied
to the waggon wheel while she was being milked. But later the men
broke in several, and we made very nice butter. When we had more
than we required, we could give it away; the same when a bullock
was killed, there was no need for waste. We used to send to Adelaide
for fruit and some other things we needed. There were stores at
the Port, and carriage was not a big item. Water carriage is much
cheaper than land carriage.
As the season advanced and the grass got dry and hard, it caused
some of the cattle to get " dry bible,” and several of them died of it.
Then one of our best bulls was fighting with a stranger and got his
hip broken, and had to be shot. A horse trod on a bit of rusty iron.
22
Pioneers of Yesterday


which caused blood poison. The veterinary surgeon had hopes of his
recovery, but he died.
But we can always look further and find worse. A young man
at Penong was taking a horse out with blinkers and collar on to do
some work on his father’s land, when something frightened the horse
and it pulled away from him. He rode after it, to turn it round
and try to catch it, but, having the blinkers on, it did not see him, ran
into him and knocked him senseless off his horse. He never regained
consciousness, but died the next day. The doctor was miles away;
had he been there he could have done nothing, as the small bones in
the head were broken, causing the skull to fall in. His sisters had
gone to a dance, over forty miles away. They were all there when
he died, but he never came round. The funeral was a very solemn
one, as he was well known.
My husband was getting his share of trouble, but as he was a
man who never saw danger, nor ever knew fear, I felt sure he would
get through. He always took things philosophically and never excited
himself. Very few men could act with such deliberation.
He went one way to W.A. and came back another. By doing
that he found out which was the best way to travel the stock. There
were not roads all the way —not even a track. In some places it was
difficult to pass under the trees —at times they had to be cut down.
(You should have seen our trunks when we arrived at Kalgoorlie—
they were nearly bent in two!)
My husband arrived home in due course. He looked well and
was as cheerful as ever. The horses looked very tired; they seemed
to have had enough of it. I am sorry I have not his diary of that
trip, on which he was away about four months.
We all attended the Sunday services, as usual. On our way home
in the afternoon we called at a farmhouse. My husband had some
information to give the gentleman, so we were invited to stay to tea.
While we were there a blackfellow came with a message from another
tribe that one of their number was dead. They all set up a most
dismal wail, and, as they were camped not very far from the house,
and the wind was coming from that way, we got the full benefit of
it all the time we were there. I heard after that it continued nearly
all through the night. It is an ancient aboriginal custom.
We were now waiting for the rain, to be able to make a fresh
start. There was difficulty in getting sufficient water for so much
stock. Mr. Murray’s stock were there, too, and the wells were giving
out. The water trouble was becoming acute. The autumn rains were
late that year. Eventually the rain came and improved matters. The
grass started to grow, and things were better.
We have still many kind remembrances of the people of the
West Coast. We enjoyed our visits to Yalata Station, where Mr. and
Mrs. Murray and their two daughters were exceedingly good at enter-
taining their guests. We sometimes stayed all night and enjoyed A
musical evening, which was a treat, as the only musical instrument
23
Pioneers of Yesterday


we were able to carry was a violin. We missed the music more when
stopping than when travelling.
Mr. Halford visited Mr. Murray and family when in Adelaide
many years afterwards, and stayed the night with them on his way
back from Queensland. He also visited many more of his old friends
who had retired and were living in town. Some of them have since
passed away. That was about five years before he died.
24
Pioneers of Yesterday


THE JOURNEY OVERLAND FROM FOWLER’S
BAY TO KALGOORLIE
ABOUT the middle of June, 1904, we made another start for the
Golden West. Our cattle, which were fat when we left Minta-
byng, were getting poor now Some people predicted we would lose
half of them before they got to Eucla Their prognostications were
vain: we never lost one The only animal that died was a horse that
was bought to replace the one we lost. He died just before we got
to Eucla. We took along with ours a lot of horses belonging to the
telegraph operators, that had been sent along 200 miles to save their
lives through the summer. The man who had charge of them brought
them the second day after we started, from his paddock.
We passed Kooringabie, the most westerly of the agricultural
settlements in South Australia, and left Nundroo, a small station, on
our right. We camped on a plain where there was good feed. Mallee
and grassy plains alternate right on to Colona Station, a distance of
from 90 to 100 miles. We passed the Bight Station, where we stayed
before, and went on to Colona. We had now entered the cave
country. If one fell into one of these he could not, unaided, get
out again. Some were narrow at the top and widened as they went
down. When the girls went down, they used to put a strap round
their knees to prevent their dresses from ballooning, as the current
of air was very strong.
At Colona there were two wells, with windmills, to supply the
water. We fared well, as did the cattle. We spent a pleasant even-
ing, as they had a good gramophone to supply music.
At White Well Station there was a large woolshed and the
usual station buildings; a well which had been sunk 200 feet in all;
then a bore about 500 feet to where sub-artesian water was struck.
This water rises to within 130 to 140 feet of the surface, from which
depth it is pumped by means of a large windmill. Like all other
subterranean water coming this way, it is not quite good enough for
human consumption. 23,000 sheep have been watered here in the
summer-time. There were 72,000 rabbits trapped at the troughs
in a wire-netting enclosure, in six weeks, when the weather was very
hot. It was said that a large number of rabbits ran over the cliffs
into the sea.
We stayed for a few days at Mr. Murray’s station, White Well,
25
Pioneers of Yesterday


where we branded calves. That was the last time we used the S.A.
brand. We had a look at some caves, which were very interesting,
and killed a bullock. I had a chat with Mrs. Murray at Yalata on the
’phone, over a hundred miles away. Mr. Murray forbade my going
down the caves; some of them were very dangerous. All the rest
could go but poor me! I heard of a man who threw down his hat
to show how quickly it would come up again. It never returned to
the surface. It appears that it acts both ways. The current drew
down that day. I did not experiment with mine.
The telephone was in charge of a manager who was rather deaf,
but who, however, with the assistance of a pair of Wilson eardrums,
could manage the instrument quite satisfactorily.
While we were there, two men who were travelling from N.S.W.
passed, wheeling a barrow with their belongings. One had a strap
across him and was pulling; the other held the handles and pushed
when necessary. My husband went over to them and said we had
killed a bullock and they could have the head if they liked. They
came and took the head and also the tongue. A while after one of
us went round to the bench to roll up the tongue, to send by the
mailman to Mrs. Murray, but it was gone! We all hoped they
enjoyed their feast. It was a disappointment to us, and also to Mrs.
Murray, as she had been told it would come by the mailman.
Nullarbor Station was our next place of call. It had a similar
well and windmill to those at White Well. At each place there is
a large storage tank, A little further along there is an excavation
made with sloping sides, but it is of little use owing to the absence of
clay in the limestone country.
It is remarkable that at both wells there is quite a strong current
of air blowing, so that no work can be done far down without the
aid of a hurricane lamp.
The manager at Nullarbor Station came to the camp and had
tea with us. He said it was a good spread, and that he had a sumptuous
repast. We had roast beef, turkey and other good things—not an
unusual repast while travelling, as they often shot a turkey, when
we had salt beef. We still had about 70 miles to travel before reach-
ing Eucla.
Nanwoora Station was in charge of a caretaker. The well is
about 240 feet deep, and the water so bad when the well was drawn
low that all sheep had to be watered between sunset and sunrise. If
watered during the heat of the day, they would drink too much of
such water and die. They also have a very large storage tank there.
Much to our surprise, in the morning there was a big bullock standing
up in the water at the bottom of the concrete tank. After much
consideration, and a deal of manoeuvring, they erected a tripod, got
down, and put ropes round the bullock, whose head was out of the
water, and eventually they hauled him up with the team. He was
not much hurt and no damage was done to the cement tank. The
cover was put on again over the top of the tank, and we went on our
26
Pioneers of Yesterday


way, glad it was nothing worse. The caretaker thought we should
have to dig the tank down, but that would have been very expensive,
as we should have had to pay for repairs.
We had nearly crossed the Plain, when, one morning, it looked
very black, and by noon the rain poured down. It was a thunder-
storm, but cleared up before camping time. We stopped for lunch,
lit a big fire, and the others walked and sometimes danced round it,
with the water running off their coats, while the " billy ” boiled.
I sat in the buggy, warm and dry. They handed up hot tea, beef,
bread and all I wanted. It did not seem to dampen their spirits—they
were laughing and enjoying themselves, and when they finished they
wiped their saddles and set off again.
That was the first time it rained since leaving Torombo while
we were travelling. It rained while we were at White Hill, but we
were then under cover. The weather was mild and salubrious that
winter. We never had rain again all the journey through while on
the road.
We missed seeing a large cave north of Ginewarra tank, as we could
not find a suitable camp near. It was described as being down 400
feet on the underlay, about 200 feet vertically, and containing water,
the surface of which was fresh. They had also discovered a similar
cave northerly from Eucla.
The country changes here. Sandhills have to be negotiated; to
surmount them requires an effort. Then there is dense scrub in places.
We lost a very nice calf here; its mother must have planted it, and
we had to leave it. On meeting the mailman, we asked him to
knock it on the head if he saw it.
It was mostly scrub and plain after leaving the sandhills all
the way to Shell Plain.
They had all the cattle named by this time; any new calves had
geographical names given them, according to the locality in which
they were calved.
At Shell Plain we left the main road for the coast track, and
spent six days at Muddiara on good feed before passing Wilson’s
Bluff—the South-West corner of South Australia—and entering W.A.
We had a great time that week at the sea, climbing the cliffs.
Standing at the top, the children looked like little birds running along
the seashore. It was hard work climbing the cliff. If you stood up
straight you would fall backwards. We had to keep our noses close
to the cliff all the way up. We had also to be very careful going
down. The sea was a great treat after living inland so long, and we
were sorry when it was necessary for us to leave it. Our new horse
died here, saving the sixteen shillings duty that would have been paid
on him next day!
One of the operators came out and took all their horses which
we had brought along from Torombo. He brought out a lot of
photos of the vicinity, and took snaps of the cattle and horses, and
also one of ourselves. After tea he returned to Eucla with the horses.
27
Pioneers of Yesterday


On Saturday the Stock Inspector came out early to inspect the
stock and count the cattle and horses. Duty had to be paid on all
stock —even the buggy pair—waggon, cart, buggy, saddles, bridles,
harness, etc. At this time all agricultural implements brought into
the State by farmers were admitted free. As our things were used
for pastoral purposes, we had to pay duty on them all. Having settled
with the Inspector, they drove two bullocks to Eucla and killed them
to supply ourselves and the people at Eucla with fresh beef. The
two bullocks weighed 1,616 lbs. The Eucla folk were glad to get
the meat.
Mr. Ryan, the telegraph manager for W.A., was at that time in
charge of the great repeating station at Eucla, and in several capacities
represented the Government of the State, There were thirty-five
operators at that station at work.
We had a lively time that evening. Mrs. Ryan, the children and
governess were going away shortly to spend a holiday in Adelaide, and
the operators were giving them a send-off that evening. I did not
know this, so after struggling a long time to get my trunk, to get
some clothes, I gave it up and went as I was. I went down simply
to see Mrs. Ryan, and I had no thought of meeting anyone else.
When I saw the ladies all dressed in evening dress I could not find
words to excuse myself. I was speechless! We had a most enjoyable
evening, singing, dancing and other amusements. The catering was
excellent, cakes of all sorts, and everything else you could wish. It was
quite a credit to the gentlemen who got it up. Notwithstanding being
in my deshabille, I made friendships that have lasted through all the
years.
A little company came to the top of the cliff to visit us on
Sunday afternoon, as we had to move on next day. The cattle and
horses were mustered. There was a plant growing along the cliffs
known as the tobacco plant, which would kill the cattle if they ate it,
so we decided to travel on the top of what we shall now call the
Hampton Range. It leaves the sea at Wilson’s Bluff and extends for
miles, until it joins the coastline near Israelite Bay. In some places
the sea has receded twenty to thirty miles. You can see the sea from
the top of the Range, but not at the base. The land is covered with
saltbush and many edible shrubs, where once it was all water. We
had been warned of the danger of the descent near Eucla, and had
borrowed a waggon shoe from Mr. Murray, which was to be sent back
by the mailman. Not having descended the cliff, they took it on
in case it should be necessary to use it later. That shoe was brought
to Kalgoorlie, where I put it on the train to send it to Albany, to be
forwarded to Adelaide, and it was lost somewhere—we have never
heard of it since.
We obtained information from the kind people of Eucla regard-
ing feed, waterholes, tracks, etc. We were also kindly informed that
a man with a team of bullocks, a dray and, I think, a dog, passed
through there and was never seen nor heard of again. He either
28
Pioneers of Yesterday


drove over the cliffs into the sea at night, or fell into a blow-hole,
which are numerous in that part —and no vestige of the man and
team was left. No one went through that way without a telegram
being sent to the next telegraph station. They always knew who was
travelling, and also reported when they arrived. I am speaking of
the time when we passed through. Our friends also told us of a
landslip. Two or three acres had gone down about 200 feet or more.
But, in face of all these dangers, we started. We were accustomed
to fortuitous happenings, as we had experienced many of them, and
there were still some in store for us.
It was pleasant travelling at first along the Range. We found
sufficient water for the stock, and were able to camp at night. One
morning, after the mustering was done, the bullocks were being
yoked. Four were yoked and a chain was brought along to the next
pair, when something frightened them, and they bolted off at full
gallop. They only went a few hundred yards when the steer fell
heels over head. We thought he had broken his neck; but, fortun-
ately, only the yoke was turned upside down. They were brought
back to the waggon, and the rest of the bullocks yoked. There was
no yard and no fence, so the others had to be stood up against the
waggon, and, when four were yoked, they were moved on, and four
more added, until all the eighteen were complete.
After a few days’ journey, the waters were a long way apart, and
necessitated travelling at night to reach them. There was a crescent
moon, but it was rather dull. The cattle were stringing along; a few
were following the waggon, which was away ahead, and some were
following me. All at once they started to bellow. I drove on to see
what it meant. We had come to the earth slip! Fortunately, they
did not rush over the precipice, but kept getting nearer. I turned
my horses off to see if the cattle would follow me. Then, to my
relief, I heard the hoofs of the horses galloping up. The whips
cracked continuously for about half an hour before the men got them
safely away. I felt a bit scared when I saw Aubrey ride along in front
of the cattle and close to the edge of the precipice. I felt he might
go over any minute. I went on after the waggon, listening to the
incessant cracking of the whips. I said to my son Ewart, " Your
arms must have ached cracking those whips so long.” He said, " Every
crack told.” I thought it was the cattle that needed the pity, after
that!
It was three-quarters of a mile on from the land-slip to the rock-
hole, where the waggon had stopped. The bullocks were watered, and
the rest of the stock came along shortly. After they were all watered
we had tea and went to bed.
Some of the party examined the earth-slip in the morning, and
thought it very fortunate that none of the beasts, in their excitement
to get a drink, had not rushed over the precipice, for, if one had
gone, all would.
As we travelled on one day something caused the cattle to stam-
29
Pioneers of Yesterday


pede. They frightened my horses, causing them to bolt. The waggon
was a good way ahead. There was a little plain just as I caught up
with it. The driver beckoned to me to drive round the plain. I had
had experience of bolts before, and knew that going round there would
not tame them. My only chance was to run them into the back of his
waggon, if I could keep them on the road. It acted. When they
saw the waggon they began to steady, and, with his help, they were
pulled up.
The water question was again to the fore. The kangarooers and
others had been using the water from the rock-holes and the supply
was not as good as reported. The cattle were getting thirsty and
restless. We thought if we could by any means descend the cliff
we might do better for them. My husband and sons went to examine
a place where some men got down with a horse and cart, filled with
kangaroo skins. They had tied a tree to the back of the cart to
steady it. It was an exceedingly rough place, some hundreds of feet
to the bottom, and in some places on the descent almost perpen-
dicular. Hazardous as it was, they decided to try it. Preparations
were made; and as it 'was of no use taking the buggy and cart down,
until the waggon got there, as there was no possibility of ever getting
them up again, they took the waggon first. The shoe was adjusted
on the off-side wheel. They then tied three ropes on the off-side of
the waggon and brought them over the top of the load. (The off-side
would be the lowest going down, as they had to go down obliquely.)
Then three men held the ropes to steady the waggon, and one drove
the bullocks. They took off all but the polers.
It was difficult at first to persuade the bullocks to pull the
waggon over the great stones and obstacles in the descent, as they
were accustomed to hold back going downhill. They only took a
few steps at a time. The men holding the ropes had great difficulty
in steadying the waggon. It shook and swayed like a ship in a storm.
I walked behind, or, rather, climbed down part way, to see what
would happen, and help if an accident occurred. I knew at any time
the sway might prove too much for the men, and the whole issue be
flung down into the abyss below. It would be difficult to describe
the hair-breadth escapes they had. It sometimes became too thrilling
even for prayer. No one spoke except the driver, and he very little,
as the bullocks soon got to understand their job.
Eventually they got safely to the bottom. Mr. Halford got up
and drove the buggy and pair down, with only the brake and what
help the horses could give by holding the pole back. They had no
breeching straps. It sometimes looked as if the back of the buggy
would fall over the horses. The cart also got down safely, but I
cannot describe its descent, as I had stood all that was possible for
that day; but it got down safely. After getting all the stock down
and watering them, they had a late tea and gladly went to rest.
Next morning they mustered the stock and watered them. There
were minor repairs to make, so we did not start until after lunch.
30
Pioneers of Yesterday


We had a hot mid-day meal that day. The tents were still standing,
but everything else was ready to put up on the waggon. We did not
use the diningroom tent, but, as it was a nice day, we sat round the
fire. Everyone was served, and we were enjoying our hot meal,
when all at once an explosion went up in the air like a volcano. We
picked up our plates and ran, but soon returned to put out the fire,
or fires. Hats, coats, dresses and tents were suffering from the flames.
After putting it out, we resumed our meal and then sought the cause
of our scare. A fire had run out along some leaves. We saw it, but
thought it would do no harm, so did not trouble to get up and put
it out then, as we always put the fire out before we left. The
kangarooers had planted a lot of cartridges in a hole and filled it up
with dry leaves, the fire ran to the hole—hence the explosion. I was
not there when the kangarooers returned and found all their cart-
ridges blown up, so I cannot tell you what they said; in fact, I would
not care to even imagine it!
It was pleasant travelling along the base of the Hampton Range.
We had the majestic rocks on one side of us, and a plain stretching
out to the sea miles away on the other, clothed in verdure, grass, sow
thistles and herbage; even stinging nettles were found at the base of
the rocks, as that would have more moisture, owing to the rain falling
down the rocks some hundreds of feet high.
We passed several pastoralists’ homesteads. In each case the water
difficulty was the theme of the moment. We stayed all night at Mr.
Talbot’s station, and were kindly entertained by his manager, Mr.
Scott. Mr. Talbot was away, but had left word that we were to
have a drink for the stock. You may ask any of those people for
money, but not for water; that is too precious a commodity to part
with, even for money. So you will understand how we were favoured.
"A friend in need is a friend indeed.”
It was easy following the Range. We had a substantial wall on
one side, so the stock could string along as they pleased. It gave the
riders time to look about and gather specimens. After a few days
we reached the Madura Bore. There was a good homestead there.
We rested a day and got the washing machine down off the waggon
and had a good clean-up, now that there was plenty of water. The
water from the bore was hot enough (if you got it as it came up)
to wash the coloured things, as it was as warm as I could bear my
hands in. It throws the water up to the surface; there is no pumping
to do. It is very good stock water, but we did not drink it. There
is no scarcity there, as the water is flowing all the time.
Immediately after leaving the bore we had to ascend the Range
that had been so formidable to descend. There was a good road
here, and the ascent not nearly so steep as where we came down. Of
course, the road was not straight up—it had to be negotiated obliquely,
but our teams were equal to pulling up on a good road.
We now had to cross the country to Twilight Cove, where we
met the sea again. The country we crossed had grass, saltbush and
31
Pioneers of Yesterday


other shrubs. We got water going across from small rock-holes. The
water here had to be drawn by buckets and it took some time to
satisfy the herd. Perhaps they would have said they had not had
quite enough, as it had to go round, and some drink much quicker
than others, and only a few could stand at the trough at once.
The country here is occupied by pastoralists, and is lightly
stocked.
After a few days’ journey we struck miles of very heavy beach
sand. It was so bad that it was all eighteen bullocks could do to
drag the waggon through. We were all tired and knocked out —it
was a day to be very much remembered.
After taking the herd to Twilight Cove and watering them
from some sand wells, the men returned, had tea, and gladly went
to rest.
Next morning about daybreak the men were up, anxiously listen-
ing for the bells, but, to their dismay, they could not hear them.
They did not feel like breakfast that morning, so ate very little—a
most unusual thing when travelling. They tracked up a few horses
and the bullocks, also a few cattle. All the rest of the herd had
gone back to the last watering place before crossing the sand. They
set out in pursuit, taking neither food nor drink with them. It was
late in the day before any of them arrived at the camp, and some
did not return with the cattle until next day at noon. The teams
had then gone on, so they had to overtake us before getting anything
to eat. We had stopped for lunch and it was with great thankful-
ness we saw the cattle coming. They were glad to get something
to eat after their long fast.
Once more united, we travelled on in peace to the next tank.
There was a considerable amount of greenery, trees, flowers, bushes,
and a sort of wiry creeper that ran along the ground and twined
round the bushes and trees. The children called it " toe line,” because
it threw them down. We had no rain, but exceedingly heavy dews.
The tents were wet in the mornings. We could hear the sea dashing
and booming against the rocks, but could not see it, as the cliffs along
there are high and precipitous. The heavy dews at night were of
some assistance, as the stock were not as thirsty as when on dry feed,
and when the water was short we could only afford them a little
each. There were iron tanks under an iron shed that caught the
water, and it ran down into the tanks. It had to be drawn out in
buckets. These sheds were all along the coast at intervals. We
could not take all the water, as someone else may come along and
need some, and, as it never rained, there was no hope of replenishing,
as the winter was nearly over and the surrounding country spoke of
spring. The children would gather large armfuls of flowers and
bring them to me to name them, as they had never seen such an
effulgence in the North. Every tree, bush and shrub had flowers
on it.
We got on very comfortably along here at first, and had no night
32
Pioneers of Yesterday


travelling. After a while the waters were further apart, necessitating
travelling always after tea for a while. We had not gone very far
one night when one of my horses fell down. I did not notice the
obstacle, nor could he have done so or he would have jumped over it.
My son, who was near at the time, stopped the other horse from
careering off, so no damage was done to speak of. We camped then
and got to the tank next morning. There were a few small rock-
holes along this route, but they were mostly dry, or filled with rub-
bish and dead animals. The next shed had two 400-gallon tanks and
a good supply of water, which was very acceptable. After getting
a drink, the cattle were able to feed a bit, so when they came to a
grassy plain the riders got off their horses to give them a little time
to feed. Ewart took a book out of his pocket and began to read.
Two of his sisters, who were with him, thought they would like a
little fun. They saw a branch hanging very low, so one got on to
have a ride. After a while the other girl, not finding sufficient amuse-
ment, thought she would try it, too. She got on behind the other.
All went well for a short time, but the extra weight caused the bough
to break, and all came down together. It frightened the horses tied
near. One of the girls caught two of the horses before they got
away, and jumped on her pony to go after the others; but before she
could pick up her reins the pony started and the two she held pulled
her off over the pony’s tall and sat her down on the grass. They
had their fun and it caused a bit of merriment for the rest also.
The next shed had two iron tanks of two hundred gallons each,
which were not full. The rock-hole was dry and filled with dead
matter.
At White Tank there was also a poor supply. Next were two
four hundred-gallon tanks, which would have been a great boon, but
there were holes in them. A little water was obtained from a rock-
hole, and we travelled on hoping there was more ahead.
The country looked lovely, with gay flowers and foliage. It did
not matter whether it were a strata of earth, a species of rock, flowers
or shrubs—all were of interest to the children. They lost the speci-
mens they obtained from the caves, which was a great trouble to
them. Life in the wilds is not as dull as some may think: every
animal, bird and flower is of consequence. A flock of turkeys especi-
ally so, as they often sampled them in a practical way. If it were
not Sunday, and they came across a few, they would get their rifle
out and shoot one. It was a pleasant change, especially if we had
corned meat.
One of my boys, when he was about four years old took a
great interest in birds. Lie knew every bird that came about the
place. Two young ladies who came to tea with us told him that a
little bird told them he had_a new overcoat. He said, " I never saw
that little bird.” The surprised look of the child was too much for
their equilibrium. We were out for a ride shortly after that, and,
coming home, he kept looking out, first one side of the buggy and
33
Pioneers of Yesterday


then the other. At last he said, " The birds are all gathering for
their evening song, I do wish I could stop and hear them sing.”
Life would not be much to some people without the animals, birds
and flowers. The fauna and flora of Western Australia are most
interesting.
As the journey along this coastline varies very little from day
to day, I will skip over to the 90-mile tank. Here the cliffs are not
so high. We all went over and had a look at this rock-bound coast.
There was no possibility of descending those cliffs; we could not tell
if there were a beach or not, the cliffs were so overhanging. We all
had to lie down to look over the edge; even then it was risky work.
We threw stones over, but could not see where they fell into the
water. It seemed to be a deep sea where we looked down, and from
the booming noise at night, like thunder, the sea must have been
dashing up against the rocks. There was a very wide expanse of
ocean as far as the eye could reach every way—a very rough coast.
We had now got to the terminus of our coastline. We stayed
here a day to prepare for our long, dry journey to Balladonia. No
water the whole distance other than what was carried on waggons.
We passed a big tank, but there was not a drop of water in it. My
husband had arranged with Mr. Pouton, at Balladonia Station, to send
out a tank of water to meet us.
Our waggon was unloaded and a big tank put up and filled with
water. This went with us for a few days, until the water was
exhausted, when it was returned to the 90-Mile, to the others, to
re-load and prepare for their exit.
After the waggon left us we had to travel day and night until
we met the waggon that was coming from the station. All went
well the first day or so, then one evening the cattle were getting
slow and thirsty, so that they had to be driven along as best they could.
I was driving behind the cows that night. I had to keep pulling up
to give them time. After a few hours the horses began to get im-
patient and crop the herbage on the side of the road. I let them
do it, as I thought it would take up the time a bit. I always started
the quiet one first, and as things seemed to go right I still let them
crop the bushes whenever I had to stop a while. All misdeeds have
their retribution. I started the mare as usual, but the horse under
the whip saw something he wanted to get, and did not start im-
mediately; consequently, the swingle-tree caught his hocks as the
mare pulled on, and he went up in the air as if he were shot. He
frightened the other horse and they bolted. I soon caught up to
the others, and they made way with alacrity. After passing the
cattle they became unmanageable, left the track and galloped across
the plain. The brake and reins had no effect. The rough ground
made it difficult for the children to sit in the buggy. They managed
to hold on somehow, and before we got very far the pole straps broke,
and the pole was forced a few feet into the ground. My husband
was quickly on the scene and grabbed the still careering horses. No
34
Pioneers of Yesterday


one was hurt, but we had to camp until morning, to be able to make
repairs. We thought the pole was broken, but, fortunately, it was
only splintered a bit, which we found when it was drawn out back-
wards. This was a serious delay at such a time, as it made us hours
late in meeting the waggon with the water, I doubt whether it would
have been safe to go on in the dark with the horses in such an
excited state. There was an early morning moon, but it did not
give much light—in any case, not good enough to make repairs by.
In the morning they had to whip the cows off while they boiled
the water for breakfast. We then had to get in the tent or under
the vehicles to drink it, or they would knock it out of our hands!
We could only give the horses a very little water each, and the cattle
got none. We had to keep a little water for ourselves in case of
need, as we never knew what the next fortuitous menace would be.
We travelled on that day and until about two o’clock next
morning. I was a bit further back that night, but there was no
need to inquire had the water arrived. I could hear by the bellowing
of the cattle. Perhaps you will say " the low of the cows,” but it
was beyond that. My horses quickened their pace and when we came
up to the waggon the cattle were all round it, and there was no
getting near. One of the men came across and shouted, " Drive the
horses round and round until you can get in.” If you had seen those
horses careering round, you might have thought them circus horses
which had been taught the first and last steps in dancing. The
further and faster they went, the more excited they got, until eventu-
ally they got a drink.
We camped a short distance from there, glad to get a little
sleep. It seemed soon daylight, and now we had to make our final
attempt to get to the station before the animals were assailed with
thirst again. They had to travel night as well as day, the whole
distance through, as no waggon could carry a supply for over 300
head of stock. We only brought the cows and young calves, with
the assistance I named, but the herd had to come through unaided.
We only lost one cow, and that was through the others rushing her
and hurting her leg so badly that she could not travel. They went
back to look for her, but could not find her.
We arrived at Balladonia at a gala time. Unfortunately, my
husband had to go back immediately to assist in bringing the herd
through, but the girls and I had a good time. The day after we
arrived was the races. Being an annual affair, the whole countryside,
besides people from Kalgoorlie, was there. The natives mustered
strong. It was quite an exciting event. It opened up a new vista
for me. I had never been to races before to remember them. To see
young girls betting on horses rather horrified me. I knew men to be
incorrigible on that score, but for the female contingent to addict
themselves to such a thing seemed preposterous. Even the black
women were trying their fortunes. While some laughed, others
looked very serious when they backed the wrong horse. Many of
35
Pioneers of Yesterday


them were married and were living comfortably on the station and
working for their living. I noticed that the ladies, when they spoke
to any of them, always addressed them as Mrs. , as they encourage
them to marry. All the others were called by their first names. They
were all well dressed, and tlje children looked healthy. I never heard
what means they had for educating them, but they were intelligent-
looking children. Of course, there are many half-castes among them.
They catch their own meat and seem to enjoy a wombat, and are
always in good form—you can always get a smile from the natives.
We saw very few wild blacks on our journey, and they never
interfered with us. One young fellow could only say " yes ” —it did
not matter what you ask him, he always gave the same answer. An
old lady in the tribe lined up six of them and made me understand
that they were her children. She could not even say " yes.” They
are very ingenious and clever; their ingenuity in catching wild
animals is very pronounced.
After a while the whole caravan arrived. They had got through
without the loss of a beast. Two animals were pretty-well done—
they could not even get to the water. One stood on the hill, and
they took up a bucket of water to her, but she could not drink. They
coaxed her down to the dam, where she stood in the water a long
time before she drank. They managed to get the other one along
also. She improved after taking a drink. They had both reached
their limit. After a few days’ rest they recuperated.
Fortunately, there was no water to draw—the cattle just walked
into the big rock dam and helped themselves. It is what is known
as a rock catchment. It is an immense rock, very high, inclining to-
wards the centre; the rocks spread round what appears to be a
natural indentation, leaving an opening on one side to enable the stock
to get into the dam. No doubt it has been much improved, but
nature seems to have given the object-lesson. It was by far the largest
rock catchment we saw. Most of the minor ones are small and only
hold a little water.
It is the bane of this country that excavations seem useless. If
excavations could be made to hold the water a lot more stock could
be kept. The rainfall is light and uncertain. The only thing you
can depend on is an occasional drought—that never disappoints—unless
it is in losing all your lambs and old stock.
Mr. Pouton, the owner, and Mr, Baesjou, the manager, were very
kind in giving us the assistance they did, which enabled us to get the
cows and calves through a long dry stage. A friend in need is a friend
indeed.
We saw some pretty country as we neared Balladonia. It was
early spring, so was looking its best. Lovely trees were scattered about,
exquisite flowers, every bush and shrub gaily covered with beautiful
blooms.
Having had a rest, we again proceeded on our journey to Kal-
goorlie. We reached Boomer Rocks, where we found feed and water.
3 6
Pioneers of Yesterday


We camped the night. On from there was Wallganya. Grass was
scarce, but there were saltbush, blue bush, flat leaf, and other bushes,
tall straight timber, small patches of blue gum saplings, etc. The
next camp was much the same—no grass or herbage, a few sandal-
wood and quandong trees, some bush and flat leaf.
At Norman Rocks there was good water, and a small grassy
plain half a mile south of the rocks. The next camp was Malarra, and
then the Ten-Mile Rocks. There were a lot of small holes here, and
the water was good, but not a large supply. The country changed
here; there were a lot of blackbutt, salmon gums, jam and sheoaks.
We stayed here a day and did washing, etc. The children ran down
to the rocks and came running back in great excitement, with the
question, " How long does it take for tadpoles to lose their tails and
become frogs? ” I said, "I am busy; you must do your own experi-
menting.” They found a small hole in the rock, got some water and
filled it, caught a lot of tadpoles and put them in, and watched results.
When I went along in the evening they had made three sheep-yards,
got a lot of dried sheoak cones, and drafted them according to size—
lambs, ewes and wethers. They were ready for the sale, waiting for
buyers. There was an old sheep-yard there that had been used not
long before, that must have given them the suggestion. Someone or
something slipped into one of the water-holes that day. I have for-
gotten whether it was a girl or a calf—l expect the children could
tell you. No one was hurt.
We travelled on until we got into the spinafex country. We got
down and had a look at it. We felt it also, and soon found that shoes
were not the right footwear to use in spinafex country —and got into
the buggy again. Even the cattle seemed to object to the pricks.
I never saw them sample it—perhaps they did not know that it was
an edible plant.
We left Fraser’s Range to the left, and went on the Simon Hill
an out-station of Fraser’s Range. We camped there that night.
Next morning we found that the horses had kicked a very nice foal;
it died the next day. We did all we could for it, but it was mortally
wounded. The roads were heavy and the country poor in places.
They camped near a rock-hole, but the country was not good here—a
little bush and scattered trees —no grass.
After a while we reached Fitzgerald’s Lagoon. There was still
water in it, but not very good. We met a prospector there, who gave
us a taste of an emu he had shot. I never knew emu was good to
eat before. He skinned it, and all the fat comes off on the skin. If
Denial Bay excelled in mosquitoes, this lagoon is paramount in flies.
When they rose up over the lagoon in the morning it was as if a
cloud came between us and the sun. Those who did not eat their
porridge before sunrise had to go without, as it was impossible to keep
the flies off.
We were again confronted by the water difficulty. The water
in the lagoon was not good; they carted gypsum and put in it, but
37
Pioneers of Yesterday


it was not a success. It cleared the water a little, but it was still not
good enough; and, being hot weather, it was fast drying up. My
husband and sons studied the plan carefully and found that at
Binyaringinna there was a soak. My eldest son, W. H. C. Halford,
took the plan and compass and rode across country to find it. There
were no tracks and no landmarks. He struck it, and thought that by
digging it out they might improve it and manage a while. He tried
to find a shorter cut coming back, thinking that by taking another
direction he might be able to miss the gypsum rises, as it would be
heavy pulling for the horses in the cart —a tandem team. He did
not reach the camp that night; it got too dark, and he was not sure
of the direction; so tied up his horse and laid down until daybreak.
He got to the camp for breakfast, as he was not far away.
They drafted the herd in much the same way as that at the 90-
Mile Tank. The cows and calves went with us, and the rest of the
herd went across to Binyaringinna. It was thick scrub, the only track
being the one that was made when my son crossed it. He assisted
them to take the cattle across, then returned to take the waggon and
stock to Kalgoorlie. We remained there until he came back. He
was to get a house for-us at Kalgoorlie and see us settled; get pad-
docking for the cattle, and then drive out to them with stores. Un-
fortunately, this did not eventuate. He got back to the lagoon a
day or so later, and prepared for the journey. The bullocks were frisky
after their spell, and even after being yoked did not calm down. They
tried to run into the muddy lagoon, waggon and all. It was only by
putting the brake on, and the fact that it was very sandy, that he
steadied them. He then had to leave them while he put my horses in the
buggy and drove them round, until they got steady. The stock had
gone on. The road was sandy, so the horses got quiet by the time I
caught up to them.
We travelled on all day, only stopping a short time for lunch.
We were able to camp at night, while we found rock-holes at con-
venient distances, and feed for the stock. The country improved as
we went along. There were some nice clear plains in places, plenty
of feed, lovely trees, shrubs and flowers. If only the water had been
as abundant our troubles would have been minimised. My son shot
a nice fat turkey, and all went well until we pulled up at a small
rock-hole filled with stagnant water. We had plenty of water on
the waggon for ourselves; we could have had lunch and gone on, and
no harm would have accrued. My son looked at the rock-hole and
said, " Some poor fellow may come here expecting to get water, and
may die of thirst.” He got a bucket and started to bale it out. We
all stood looking on, but had to retreat occasionally, as the smell was
insufferable. He then got clean water and rinsed it out. He then
went on to where we camped for the night. The next day he com-
plained of headache and could not eat even a bit of turkey. I opened
a tin of sardines, and that made him worse than ever. He had typhoid
fever. Of course, I did not know what it was, and hoped each day
38
Pioneers of Yesterday


he would be better. We had then over 130 miles to travel, and in
very hot weather.
We travelled on to Randal’s, a small mining place. There was
a road all the way to Bulong, so we kept going night and day until
we got there. The bullocks were never unyoked. My son could
scarcely sit upon his horse to drive them; all the cattle were very
thirsty. My son had written from Randal’s to ask the man in charge
to have the troughs full on our arrival, as we might be able to get
there through the night. In going into Bulong we had to pass the
cemetery. The tall white headstones and monuments looked most for-
midable under the circumstances. We got there about 2.30 a.m.
My son unyoked the bullocks and lay down. In the morning we
found that the doctor was away at Kalgoorlie, attending an operation.
They could not take my son into the hospital before the doctor re-
turned. That was on the 24th December. When the doctor came
along he ordered him to be brought in. It was Christmas night before
the men came down with a stretcher and carried him up to the
hospital. I followed him along and then went to the evening service
in the church—certainly with a sad heart.
The people of Bulong were very pleased that w© had called at
their town, and were ready to help in any way they could. They had
heard a great account of us through the local papers and, of course,
were curious to know of our adventures. Two of the leading hotels
sent us an invitation for Christmas and New Year dinner. I allowed
the children to go on Christmas Day, but I stayed with my son. We
all went on New Year’s Day and had the best of everything. It was
a pleasant change for us. I am sorry that I cannot remember the
names of our hosts. They were most kind and thoughtful. I expect
they are chronicled where all good deeds are. In fact, all the people
at Bulong were ready to help in every way they could, and did it.
After we had been there some time, I read the notices on the
board at the pound. It stated that all cattle, horses, etc., found
trespassing on the town reserve would be impounded and damages
charged. Ours had been there ever since the morning we arrived.
Of course, this must not continue. I arranged with the dairyman
to take my cow; she was then in full milk and gave me sufficient
for my use. She had already scared a little boy in the hospital, causing
him to jump out of his bed into a fever patient’s. There was a big
dam out near the dairy, so all the cows were taken out there and
watered. There was a large circular pump worked by hand. It was
rather hard work, so I was fortunate to be able to arrange.
We only had the horses now on the reserve, and as no one com-
plained my conscience was at rest.
Having done all we could, we were now anxious to hear of the
others. They did not know where we were, and we had no address
of theirs. I went up to the hospital every morning about six o’clock
to inquire how my son was. " About the same ” was the usual
answer. I was allowed (as a favour) to sit with him every afternoon.
39
Pioneers of Yesterday


The first question was always, " Have you heard from Pa? ” He
looked very disappointed when I said " No.” Things went on the same
for a good while. At last, one evening Mr. Norman, the minister,
came to the house. He had been sent to prepare me for the worst.
That night I felt my son would soon get a turn for the better, and
told Mr. Norman so. He did not deliver his message, as he thought
the trouble when it did come would be bad enough. Next morning
they said he had had a bad night, but now was slightly better, and
they hoped the improvement would continue. After that night he
seemed to improve slightly, though he was not out of danger for a
long time. Strange to say, Mr. Norman and his son succumbed to
fever shortly afterwards, leaving a wife and small children unprovided
for, with the father and eldest son gone. The people raised some
money and sent them back to Perth.
I must now give an account of the other members of our family.
They were looking anxiously for the buggy to come with their rations.
They began to think something must have happened. Mr. Halford
rode a horse and led a pack-horse to carry their rations, still hoping
he would meet the others. He got as far as Woolabar Hotel, and
went in for dinner. The hotelkeeper had been looking out for him,
as he had telegrams and letters there, but he did not know where to
find him. He also told him that our son was dangerously ill in the
Bulong hospital. Mr. Halford had his compass with him, so struck
straight through the bush to Bulong, arriving there on Sunday even-
ing, as I was going to church. He had first called at the doctor’s
place to find out where we lived. To his surprise, he found the doctor
was the son of an old friend of his. He went to the hospital and
then came to seek us out. It was a great relief after all those weary
weeks of waiting.
A man was sent out from Kalgoorlie, who took our men their
supplies. My husband removed us to Kalgoorlie, and all the stock.
It hurt me to leave my sick son behind, but there was no help for it.
He bought a house and we got settled, found paddocking for the cows
and calves, and then went back to Binyaringinna to see about things
there. They had had trouble there also. A few cattle died, and they
were short of water. The country is thickly timbered between Bulong
and Kalgoorlie, nearly all the way. There is a half-way hotel and a
house or two, but all the rest is dense scrub. You can imagine our
surprise, on emerging from that dense country, to see a big city—in
fact, two cities, as we could not see where Kalgoorlie ended and
Boulder began, they were so closely connected. Electric cars were
plying between the cities and trains were running round the loop
every hour or so to Boulder and back. Everything spoke of pros-
perity and wealth. Anything could be had for money. Some of the
best talent in music, etc., had been drawn to the Goldfields. There
was no lack of anything. Business was brisk. The town on a Satur-
day night was brilliantly lighted by electricity. The shops looked gay.
Thousands of people would parade the streets. There were two and
sometimes three bands in Hannan Street. It was a most gorgeous
40
Pioneers of Yesterday


sight. The next great wonder was the eight-hour day display; every
trade and calling was represented; the procession was about a mile
long, and of the gayest.
The rest of our party had arrived by this time, and enjoyed the
pageant very much. My son arrived by coach from Bulong, but was
still very weak. The others had their difficulties, but they had been
inured to losses, and were prepared to face a difficult situation. We
are to-day all accounted for, except the head of the family, who passed
to a higher sphere on April 4th, 1928. I have three married daughters
living in this district. The rest of the family are at and near
Kalgoorlie.
My sons are still pursuing pastoral occupations. For a long time
they had a cattle station, but now have turned it into a sheep run.
It took some time to get sufficient suitable land in large enough quanti-
ties, but by buying out their neighbours and taking what available
land there was from the Government, they have succeeded fairly well.
Of course, they are still battling with wild dogs, foxes, eagle-hawks,
etc., and an occasional dry season, but that is all in the game. The
homestead is twenty-eight miles from Kalgoorlie—too far for the
children to go to school; so they keep a governess and are taught by
correspondence. The wire-netting fences are proving a great boon
to them. The dogs used to chew off the calves’ tails and sometimes
kill anything they found which could not get away. My sons are
trapping them along the fences now, which prevents them from doing
so much mischief. They have been dealing with the eagle-hawks also,
to save the lambs.
As my husband was so widely known in Victoria, South Australia
and Western Australia, you may like to know a little more about him.
He travelled a great deal in the north of South Australia when he
was a young man. On one occasion, while visiting in his circuit, he
called at a farmhouse. The teams had gone for water and were not
expected back until twelve o’clock that night. It was a very hot day.
The lady made tea of the little water she had, which ran out a little
less than a cupful each—there were five of them. Of course, he
did not wish to take it, but they insisted. In drought time he was
again visiting on his way to take a service. The lady told him she
was so short of fat, she had to draw the wicks out of some candles
to make cake. She had made the candles, so knew the fat was clean.
Of course, as a minister he had to share their disabilities and comfort
them in their distresses. He experienced trying times.
The last six years before retiring he lived at Middle Creek, four-
teen miles easterly from Mt. Barker, on the Kalgan River. It was a
beautiful climate—cool in summer and moderate in winter. Occasion-
ally there was snow on the Stirling Range, but not every winter. It
was a beautiful sight to see the river running by and the snow on
the top of the Range and in the ravines; it varied very much as the
sun veered round. We were not inconvenienced by the cold, as the
prevailing winds went down the river- There was an abundance of
41
Vioneers of Yesterday


fruit and flowers, both wild and cultivated. It was quite satisfactory
to him, but when our children came down they thought we were too
far away, and persuaded him to sell and come up near them. Eventu-
ally he was able to make up his mind to sell the property, though he
did so very reluctantly. He had only retired a year and ten months
when he was called home. He was 74 years old on March 21st, and
died on April 4th, 1928. The night before he was in the hall, adjusting
picture business until twelve o’clock, and stood on the verandah
talking to his son-in-law for a while after. I was in bed, but I
could hear them talking. Next morning he went up to the church
and put two nails only into the new vestry, put the tools away, and
was returning home, when he fell a few yards from the gate. I ran
out when I saw him, but it was too late. The doctor said it was
heart failure. I need not say what a shock it was to us all.
A friend asked my husband one day, when he met him, how he
was getting on. He said, " I have got back to where I started—my
wife and I.” Well, I have exceeded that, as it is now " I only.” It
does seem rather hard, seeing that I was fifteen months older than he,
that I should be left behind.
After running about for nearly three years, I made up my mind
to return to my home and write the book I promised my friends about
twenty-seven years ago. My eyesight and memory are not so acute
as they were then, but some things are written indelibly on the
memory. The losing of my notes greatly hampered me in placing
things in rotation, as I only had my memory to depend on. I have
given you a correct account of what happened—of course, not all
minor happenings, but the principal ones. If I have been redundant,
or have otherwise infringed the rules of literature, I must hide behind
my 78 years and beg for mercy.
I was born at sea, near the Australian coast. That was in the
early days of the colony—lB 53. My parents had paid their passage
to Melbourne, but the ship was much longer on the voyage than was
expected, and my advent caused them to land at Port Adelaide.
Strange to say, I have never seen Melbourne, although I have started
to go three times, and been, disappointed on each occasion. Many
strange things happened in the early days, and many discomforts were
endured. I must not expatiate on these now.
E. P. HALFORD.
Dangin,
Western Australia.
42
Pioneers of Yesterday




