

Pioneering Days
IN THE
Wimmera and Mallee.
BY GEO. EVERARD.
L. BROWN, PHOTOGRAPHER.
HORSHAM TIMES PRINT.




Pioneering Days.
BY GEO. EVERARD.




1851.
August 22nd.—The ship “ Ballan-
giech (,>OO tons) arrived i n Hobson’s
f av a ” 01 ' a quick passage of 80 days
from land to land. On dropping aV-
c .or- t ue bumboat men came on board
w,th beer cakes, etc., and from them
we learned of the gold discoveries at
Bumnyong. The following wav we
made our way nr. the Yarra to Mel-
bourne in a small steamer, spending
the best part of the dav thumping the
at the rate of about two miles
per hour tte disembarked somewhere
opposite the Customs House There
was no wharf, so we just hauled up t c
the bank crossed over a couple of
pWs, loaded our boxes in a cart
and made our wav to the Rose. This-
tle and Shamrock Hotel, in EHzabeth-
street (the house was dost roved a few
vears ago). After a soetl of two
davs or so looking round about the
town, we came to the conclusion that
it was very small potatoes—the shops
were not a patch on the ones in Fire-
brace-street. Horsham, to-day. and T
don I remember seeing one with a
Plate-glass front. Big John O'Shan-
"asv had a draper’s place i n Elizabeth
1 tree t. with little windows. and
pretty dirty a t that. Adjoining ,t
were some shanties, mostlv of Jew
slop sellers and pawnbrokers. The
theatre, in Queen-street, was attends
hv myself and shinmates two nights,
the play was Schiller’s “ Robbers.”
and the chief character was taken bv
a barnstorm or of the name of Stark.
' hf ’. v -T ave vcm Plenty for your monev.
beginning at 7 o'clock and finishino-
at midnight. After the tragedv there
was some singing by Madam Sara
"V aT| d a gent of the name of
ualsh. after which a farce was per-
formed. We attended two nights, and
as the programme was the verv same
each night _ w-p stopped in the town,
we fumed in early, and the next day
started for Geelong, where my uncle,
to whom T was Consigned, w-as store-
keeping. It took the whole of a long
da\ to make the trip i n a queer-look-
ing old tub called the “ Aphrasia.”
and it was getting dusk when we made-
the wharf. 7 got a dray, loaded it
with impedimenta, and made my
uncle s place aftei dark, and precious
glad I was, for it was rough work
travelling in *5l. There was not a
cab in Geelong, and I don’t remembe
seeing one in Melbourne.
Aiter a fortnight’s spell lookin
round the place, I commenced vvor
w'jth a solicitor named Harvey E
Coombe. in Eyrie-street. I wa
engrossing deeds all day in a big roor
up stairs by myself, “ and the dead
quietness of the place nearly turnec
me ‘ balmy ” I stood it for abou
three months, when I made a dash fo
liberty by bolting from my uncle’s
and making tracks for Melbourne,
was two days doing the distance
stopping the first night at the Little
Eiver pub, then kept by a party o
the name of Perrin. The place was
built some years before by .John
Coppock, who years afterwards became
my boss at Albacutya. The hotel was
a queer looking shop—more lik e a
stable than anything. The walls were
wattle and daub, the roof of bark
but there was plenty of rough tucker
and a passable bed. The next day
was a good long walk, but I made
Melbourne at night. T had a job to
get accommodation, but tumbled on
the right shop, as it turned out
afterwards, at a very rough boardino-
house in Flinders-street. For a room
mate there was a man from Phillip
Island, which with French Island was
then m the hands of Messrs McHaffie
and Gardner. Two of the latter and
one ot the McHaffies were off to the
diggings, and the old man w-ho had
accompanied them thus far was
returning- to Phillip Island, and was
wanting a cook. I grabbed at the
job. and next morning went to the
office of P.ell and Co. and signed on
for six months. The old chap had
three horses to take back. He riding
one and leading one, and the other
under me. we started as soon as
breakfast was over, making our way
through Brighton, then wdth only one
pub that I could see, and very few
other houses. That night we made a
boarding house at n place called “No
Good Damper.” Starting next morn-
ing. we passed a very picturesque-


place, owned by Captain Baxter, and
that night made Drew’s, a cattle
station on the shores of Westernport
Bay. After a good supper we went
to the beach and made a good big
fire, as a signal for the whale boat in
the morning. (I must stop here to
remark that after leaving Brighton I
don’t remember seeing a house but the
two mentioned, and I can safely say
we never met one individual in the
two days’ ride. Sixty-one years have
made a wonderful change—watering
places, palatial hotels, excursion
steamers, and all the rest of it).
To resume, about 10 o’clock, Tom
McHaffie and a nephew, about my own
age (sixteen years or so) , arrived with
the whale boat, and we all sat down
in Drew’s, and made a real good
dinner, after which we carried our
saddles and bridles and put them into
the boat and pulled over to Phillip
Island, and commenced work the
following morning, but I was stiff and
sore from riding for two days—the
first saddle I ever covered. I had
never done a hand’s turn of cooking
in my life, never even seen tucker
cooked, but I was fixed up as cook
and ;had to pull through some way. I
could not think of attempting even to
make bread, leather jackets and
fritters was the limit in that line.
The meat was easier—you had only to
chop it up in chunks, put it in a
boiler or camp oven, and wait ; dish
up, and stand the racket. In time 1
got quite used to the growling. "S ou
see, I had some one to share it with.
The nephew was as big a muff and
lime-juicer as myself, and he took it
all smiling. He and I got on real
well together, brother sufferers as we
were. I soon learned how to kill and
dress a sheep, and I was improving
slowly at the cooking. Before I left
I could turn out a Johnny cake rival-
ing Professor Soyer.
After six weeks on Phillip Island
the four of us shifted over to French
Island, and here I met my Sedan.
The boss had some friends staying
with him for a day or two. He came
to me and asked kindly if I could as
a favor spread myself and concoct a
pot of soup, telling me to save the
■sheep’s head, skin it, and put in the
pot, with herbs, onions, etc., etc. —all
very easy when you know how it’s
done. I had been giving the sheep’s
heads away, and had never skinned
one, and, believe me, it is no easy
job ; if you doubt me try one with big
horns, and mind you don’t leave any
wool at the butts of the horns. It
was thinking that just a little wool
would not be noticed that was the
cause of my undoing. Just before
dinner time, I took a spoon to see
how it was getting on. I dipped the
spoon in and held it up, and the
sight was hideous. The wool was in
strings a foot long, beautifully fes-
tooned with boiled rice. There was
no retreat ; I had to face it, so I look
it into the dining room, but had not
got to the gate surrounding the house
before tureen, soup and all came after
me with some choice language. The
dinner was soon over, and in the
afternoon they got the boat up and
went over to the main land, leaving
me for a fortnight by myself on the
islands. I put in my time reading.
The bosses had the best library I
have' dropped across in! all my travels,
so I managed to put the time in
pretty well. When they returned, the
lour of us went over again to Phillip
Island, the only thing occurring of
any interest being a visit to the
island by a lot of escapees from Tan
Dieman’s Land, who cleared out with
all the stores at/ the out-station, seven
miles from the homestead. They then
made the main land, stuck up a place
where they got a horse and cart, and
were making for the diggings, when
they were taken near Melbourne. The
only one of us that saw them was the
nephew, young McHaffie. There were
seven or eight men, and he was very
frightened, seeing men dressed as they
were in canvas and kangaroo skin
hats. They gave him to understand
they were police officers looking for
absconders, and. of course, he swal-
lowed the yam, but when he told his
uncle, he soon understood and went
after them. The fellows abandoned
the boat —a real good whaler—and
McHaffie took possession of it in
return for the stores they had robbed
rrom the out-station.
T put in four months on the island.


and it was many years before 1 spent
so long a time in any other one place.
I don’t put on any frill about that,
tor you see at that time I could not
swim, or 1 would have been off when
they left me by myself at French
Island. However, looking back after
so many years, 1 think it did me good
1 learned a lot then that stood to me
in alter days. I should have had to
put in the six months but for a ship
with emigrants putting in to Western-
port bay through stress of weather.
McHaflie went on board and engaged
two men —one as cooß, the other to
Knock about. The next day he put
me across the water on to the main
land at “ Drew's Station." At part-
ing he acted as a real gentleman. He
gave me my cheque for nine pounds,
telling mo not to cash it, and, putting
his hand in his pocket, he gave mo a
soveieign, saying, " 1 am giving you
this to take you to Geelong, where
you had better go to your uncle, and,
for Heaven's sake, stop there, for,
with the exception of my nephew, you
are the most useless object 1 ever
met." I thanked him for his kind
gift and his outspoken opinions of
myself and his nephew. I never saw
him again, but still think of him as a
kind and good man.
I put in the night at Drew's place,
and the following day made the
boarding house at “No Good Dam-
per," stopping there until morning.
Next day 1 made tracks to Brighton,
and next day to Melbourne, where I
had a job to get a bed. The rush by
this time had set in to Ballarat, and
the Bay was full of ships. There was
work anywhere you went, and money
to be made easily, with little work. I
was not long spending my cheque,
and with the pound 1 went down to
Williamstown, where I got a job
unloading sugar from the barque
Napoleon, from the Mauritius. The
pay was 12/6 a day and tucker. I
was ten days at this, and then went
up to Melbourne, where I knocked
about for a week, and came back to
Williamstown and started work with
a stone mason putting in foundations
in blue stone. I left him and picked
up with an American nigger brick-
layer, who put me on mixing mortar
and carrying bricks. 1 stopped with
him a month. My next job was
assistant at the Semaphore at
Gellebrand Point, signal ling to Bat-
man’s Hill, where ships were coming
in in scores from all parts of the
globe. It was easy work, and I was
paid 12/- a day. My mate with the
glass made out the Hags, and called
them out to me. 1 signalled the first
steamer of the P. and 0. line, the
u ’ and the following one, the
Formosa," and amongst others, ttie
Vulcan ” troop ship, with the 40th
xtegiment' on board ; the “ Great
Britain,” on her first voyage ; the
“ Cleopatra,” “ Golden Age,” and
many others—both wind-jammers and
steamers. My end came one day when
1 let the button at the end of the
halyard slip through my hand, and
the weight of the line in the other
hand pulled it up to the yard-arm.
It was about 30 or 40 feet up to the
cross-trees, and then you had to go
out on the yard-arm to get the wooden
button and pull it down to my mate.
I could not do it, and my mate had
to go into Williamstown and give a
sailor £1 to do the job. The boss
was as big a land-lubber as myself, so
I was paid off at this job. I was a
day of two in Williamstown, and one
Sunday was standing on the wharf
when a boat was putting off to the
coal hulks. The man at the stem
oar called out to me, asking if I
wanted r job. I was aware they
were paying £1 a day, and was
ambitious of earning that screw, so I
told him I would accept his offer. He
pulled m and I jumped into the boat
and went out to the coal hulk. There
we commenced work at night loading
the tugs, and after that the Geelong
steamers, I was first put to carrying
the baskets to the hatchway, and one
basket was more than enough. When
filled vou took hold of one handle,
the filler the other, and threw it on
your back. When he performed the
operation on me, I thought I was
going in two, so I let the basket go,,
and the lot of the coal fell on his
toes, and there was some lurid langu-
age. I was then put to shovelling.
Tf you have never done this work
before, you may believe me, it’s a
“ tickler.” I could not do it quick


enough, and was then, in despair, put
on at the hatchway putting thee slings
through the handles and hooking on
to the rope. 1 managed to do this
until breakfast time, when I got my
meal with the others, after which thej
put me ashore, and I was glad to get
there.
My next job was with a German car-
penter. Captain i’ascoe had seen ma
mooching about, and, knowing my
uncle in Geelong - , talked like a father
to me about my way of life, and
advised me to apprentice myself to
Lahnig, a carpenter. I was intro-
duced to the German chap, spent a
night with him, found oub he was aide
to play three or four instruments, and)
went to work the next day. I had
been about a week with him, when he
went to Melbourne on business. He
had been making window sashes, and
left a lot to put together. I thought
I would astonish him when he came
back, so 1 tried to fix them up, but
broke a lot. When he arrived he did
not appear much astonished, but you
could make no doubt about his temper.
He used some beautiful swear words
in two languages, opened the door,
and gave me a parting kick on the
posterior parts, and told me to go
to II ! I did not take his advice.
I had a bob or two, so I went to the
Chip Inn, then kept by Baker, bui
afterwards by Taverner, the father of
our late Agent-General in the Big
Smoke. 1 was talking to the butler,
when another man came in —a stranger
to me, as I thought. He recognised
me at once, and asked me what 1 was
doing. 1 told him I was not doing
anything, but would be glad to do
anything light and pleasant. He
turned out to be a Mr. Lindsay, wtio
had a pub about hall-a-mile away,
near the quarries at the Lighthouse.
1 walked home with him, had dinner,
and while at the table he put me up
to a good line of business. At that
time Williamstown got a good deal of
its water from Melbourne in lighters.
There was plenty of real good water
in the quarries, and his idea was for
me to take a hogshead, fill it, roll it
up to the loading houses and sell. He
lent me the barrel and a bucket and
wooden funnel. I started away, got
a load, and rolled it up to the first
house, where I got 10/- for it. I
filled another one on the following
day, got the same amount for it, and.
was beginning to think I was on a
real good wicket. I stuck at this for
about ten days, when the money began,
to burn, so 1 went to Melbourne and
got rid of it as easily as shelling
peas. I came back to Lindsay’s, and
after giving me a lecture on things in
general, he proposed me trying a
tun but, saying 1 could get a pound
if I could roll it up to the houses. I
tell in with his idea, but to my
sorrow, after I had trundled my but
down to the water, filled it andl got to
the corner of the first house, it rolled
betw'een two big boulders, bung down,
Do what I could, it would not budge.
Two or three men passed, laughing,
but were in too great a hurry to help
me. Ido believe I was the only one
in V otoria at that time not in a
hurt}’, and 1 have never been violently
busy since. However, I acquainted
Lindsay with my trouble. He went
clown with me, and the two of us
managed to get it over and let the
water run. 1 then rolled it back, and
gave up the job. I was walking
about Williamstown when the Post-
master called me over to him, asking
if my name was . I told him it
was. He said he had been looking
for me for some days, as there> was a
registered letter waiting there. 1 wont
in and signed for it. When I opened
it I got a £5 note, and instructions
to come back to my uncle m Geelong,
Melbourne called. I took the steamer
in the afternoon, stayed a week there,
and then started to walk to Geelong,
with two pence half-penny in my
pocket. I managed the distance in
one day, and could not have done it
by myself, but had the company of
three runaway sailors, who were
making for the shipping in Geelong,
and coaxed me along. It was dark
when we made Geelong, and I had to
face my people in the following rig-
out A pair of sailor’s canvas
trousers, a big blue jersey, and a Kil-
marnock bonnet with a great round
ball on top. I was ashamed to appear
before my unde in that rig, so I went
to the hotel next door to our place
and got the landlady to go and fetch
mv mint. When she saw me she


nearly had a fit, laughing- at the figure
I cut. We went to f the store, and
when my uncle cast his eye on me he
was nearly kicking me out for an
imposter, but 1 soon proved my
identity. The next day ho took me
up to town and procured me a
civilised rig-out, and I commenced
serving out sardines, pickles and tea.
A day or two after my return wa went
for a xide to Mount Monac, to a
friend’s place, and in the afternoon,
while they were conversing, I made for
the summit of the mount. The glorious
view of the country; commanding the
plaint with Mounts Hessie, Elephant,
the cloven hills looking west, and the
Grampian mountains, and the (Pyrenees
to the north was only my undoing
again. I never rested until I saw
more of the country. I put in three
months behind the counter, and then
made a bolt for the West. I worked
a few weeks at Arthur Hopkins’
station, put in a couple of months at
Harding’s station, Mt. Geldbrand, hut-
keeping for two shepherds, and with a
pound or two in my pocket, started
again, picking up a bullock-driver on
the road to Port Fairy. I chummed
in with him, and was some days on
the road. On arriving, I put up at
the Stag Hotel, then in the hands of
old Wall, father of Mr. Wall, of
Dimboola. I stopped there two or
three days, when I fell into the hands
of about the biggest terror I have
ever met in the colony —“ Bobby,” or
as he was usually called, “ Scubby ”
Moffat. He was down for a load of
rations. His bullock driver was in
bad health, and I took on the job of
piloting them back to the station on
the Eumerella. We were three or four
days on the road. The second day
Moffat overtook us. He had picked
up two runaway sailors, and hired
them at 10/- a week. On at
the station a little before dinner, and
after unyoking the team, I asked him
for a bit of soap to w r ash myself. He
w’ent off pop, told me I had a good
cheeky wanting to run up a score for
luxuries, and only a few minutes on
the place. I had to do without the
soap, and began to think I had run
against a snag. We all sat down to
dinner together on salt beef and
potatoes, with the bone in them.
After the meal, he sent a boy out for
another team of bullocks. I yoked
them up, and i was drawing in logs all
the afternoon. We had supper in the
gloaming, after which the two sailors
asked the boss for some blankets. He
went off again in style, cursing and
telling the chaps to go into a out-
house full of potatoes, where they
would find an old tarpaulin. They
went out, and I saw them no more
that night. The boss, a married
couple, and I sat up by the fire for
some time. He was very talkative,
md I began to think rather personal
in his allusions to me. He commenced
telling me that he had had two or
three shepherds lately, who had been
hired for six months, but had bolted
after a few days. He continued—
“ Now, my London pickpocket, if you
serve me the same trick, I will follow
you to blazes, and give you six
months for breaking your agreement.”
(I had signed for six months). We
sat up some little time longer, and
every now and again he addressed
himself to me a “ Whitechapel Bird
Catcher,” “ A Newgate Knocker,” etc.
Now, I had never caught, a bird in my
life, nor had I picked pockets or had
any connection with Newgate, and I
began to think I had dropped in with
a lunatic. I was to take a flock of
sheep the next morning, so went to
bed, and started early the following
day. He counted out over two
thousand young sheep, but would not
give me a dog, and, of course, I had
a nice day of it. Some of the sheep
came home hours before I did, and he
gave me fits over it. However, I had
made up my mind to sling both the
sheep and the owner, I heard he was
going over to a neighbor’s, a few
miles away. I drove the flock about
a couple of miles, and then made
through the bush for Port Fairy,
walked all day and part of the night;
slept out near the town, got my
breakfast, and started for Warrnam-
bool, reaching it about sundown. I
stopped there one day, and the next
went to work with a threshing
machine at 12/- a day. 1 put in the
season with the thresher, and then
hired with a party of the name of
Lysaght, a farmer, near Woodford.
Here I stopped three months, and


then picked up with a mate, who had
been in the colony some years, most
of the time in Gippsland. His des-
cription of the country filled me with
a longing- to see it, so we both
started to walk the distance, and
made right across the Western Dis-
trict, through Melbourne and Dando-
nong, where we met a party of the
name of Desully. He had a lot of
work fencing and a stock yard to pu-
up, and gave us the route to the
place, but told us we would have a
job crossing two or three rivers, which
were in flood (it was one of the worst
winters for rain). However, we
started, and, after wading two days
through swamps, and being out two
nights, having a job to find enough
dry ground to make our doss for the
night, we came to the conclusion to
turn back. Two days after, at Dan-
denong, wc met a settler of the name
of Leckic, and took a job splitting a
thousand posts. We were some weeks
at this work, and on finishing and
being paid, we started for Melbourne,
putting in the night at the pub at
Brighton, where my mate commenced
drinking. In the morning 1 bought a
pair of boots, put them in my swag,
and, after a job got my mate to start.
We made Melbourne, and went to the
first hotel over Princes Bridge (I think
the Queen’s Head), at the corner or
Flinders Lane and Swanston-street,
but could not get accommodation.
Leaving mv mate, I started out to
look for a' plaae to put the night in,
and had a job to find lodgings. When
I returned my mate had vanished, and
the barman could give me no informa-
tion of his whereabouts, so I bad to
grin and bear it—ruined completely—
swag, boots and all gone. I never
saw the object again. I had just
enough money to buy a new ng-out,
and, %vith a few shillings left, made to
Yan Yean waterworks, where I tackled
navvying. I was put on to- the face
with a pick weighing about a quarter
of a hundredweight, but was soon
shunted, when I went to another
ganger and was put on to wheel clay
into the puddle across two planks.
The first trip with the barrow I fell in
to the trench, barrow and all, so was
full up of that, and was put on to
the track, placing roots in ruts the
dobbins made on the embankment. I
was two or three days at this, when
the doctor at the hospital wanted a
man to attend a poor fellow who had
been dreadfully burnt while lying out.
drunk. It was a frightful burn, hall-
way round the body. I bad to make
a supply of poultices of bread and milk
twice a day, and to help the nurse.
The doctor came in one day as I was
removing the poultice. He abused
me for my softness, and, taking hold
of it, forcibly dragged it off at one
welt. The man screamed at the pam,
and I nearly turned sick, and threw
up the job. Being full up of the \an
Yean. I made tracks for the plains
and the squatters. I had been on the
tramp about a week, when 1 Rtiacs a
job hut-keeping for two shepherds ok
a station near Lismore, o- a? it was
then called Brown’s V-aterbows. Ine
two shepherds were both off their dot,
one melancholy mad and the oihci
»ather dangerous, so 1 put in two
months to get a tow pounds, _ and
made for Ballarat, where I fell into a
job as cook, for a mob ol swells
making for Geelong. They had only
been out from the Old Country about
ten months, and were bidding good-
bye to the “ blasted karlines m
disgust. They were a comical crowd.
Their impedimenta filled two drays,
and consisted of the most curious lot
of rubbish conceivable —all bought m
London for the diggings. They had
n meat safe, bigger than some of the
huts I lived in. It had to be hauled
up to a tree with a rope and block.
They had a dray that could be turned
into a boat, for crossing rivers, and
their cradles for washing gold would
make a cat laugh. We were about a
week making Geelong. At camping
time each night, they had three shifts
taking watch for bushrangers, and
wore armed to the teeth with revo ‘
vers, bo win knives, etc., etc. I had a
good time with the johnnies, nothing
much to cook but dampers, as thev
had plenty of tinned stuff, and a
plentiful supply of bottled ale and
porter, and were very free with it. It
was a real pleasure trip for the old
carter and myself. Gn reaching
Geelong they gave me £3. But I
before my story, and may mention
here what I saw coming through Bal-


larat, p. week or two before the ruc-
tions culminating in the Stockade
affair. On passing the camp there
were two or three men chained to
trees, and guarded by old pensioners
in the queer uniform of Chelsea Hospi-
tal. Ihey had the old Brown Bess
• muskets, I rather think, with flint
Jocks. On reaching Meredith we met
the 40th Regiment and a naval con
tingent, and shortly after making
, Geelong I heard of the TCureka
unpleasantness.
I stopped in Geelong two or three
days, and then made for the bush
again, getting a job at Cressy, then
called “ The Frenchman," alter
Duvamey, the first publican at that
place. The hotel was then in the
hands of one Boods. a Yorkshireman,
not long in the country. I took the
job of stableman, and was making
good money, and getting rid of It
quite easily, having met a fellow
cooking there whom I knew in London
as a pianoforte case maker. During
my time there a mob of shearers wer
knocking down their cheques, and
whea stoney broke the miblican
started them for Colac, where they
lived two or three mornings running
They would come back after boosing
the two or three bottles he gave
them. Of course, the üblican jibbec
at last, and after hanging about
until the afternoon and getting no
more drink, they put a match in a
stack of hay. burning it, and nearly
the house as well. The police were
sent for, and three of them received
two years each for their mad work.
After n month or two. Mr. McNabb
took a fancy to me. and gave me a
billet looking after his sheep running
amongst the lakes. All I had to do
was to keep them from coming past
my hut tow ards* the road and crossing
it, but I was too near my old chum
at the pub. He was getting the
Saturday Review regularly from
Home, and I used to go down after
every mail to get the papers, and was
caught there by his nephew, and soon
got the sack. I went into the home
station to get settled up, and was
astonished when he put his
hand into his w-aistcoat pocket and
handed me one shilling as all I had
coming, after six weeks’ work. This
was the smallest settlement 1 had
received to date ; the remainder had
gone with my chum at the pub.
I then made my way up to the
Hopkins River, and started foot-rot-
ing sheep at 25 bob a week, and it
was worth it —the most disgusting
work I ever tackled. We were sitting
down at the job and had the sheep
caught for us, there being three
besides myself at the game. After
putting them all through our hands,
the races came on at Wickliffe town-
ship, and the lot of us attended them,
and we put our feet in it in doing so.
The boss, Mr. Wyselaskie, was sup-
posed to be away in Tasmania, but
came home and caught us in the
height of the fun, next morning
sacking the whole of us, including the
overseer, but leaving the cook still at
the station, as he had not attended,
as someone had to look after! the /placet
and he very unwillingly was not
included in the crowd. Three of the
men and myself then made for the
VViminera, and crossing the Pyrenees
we made Crowdands, where I parted
from my males, getting a job with a
drover with sheep for Geelong. We
delivered them at the sale yards, and
1 then made my way by steamer to
Melbourne, having heard of my
brother’s arrival in the colony some
time before. I could get no trace of
his whereabouts, and having little left
in my purse and the races being on at
Flemington, I made my way there,
and soon got a job watering horses.
The grandstand at that time was
alongside the Saltwater River, and
the water w f as brought in lighters
from Melbourne. The lightermen had
a row of buckets on the course, and !
with two buckets, had to keep them
full. I received 15/- per day for the
work, and stopped during the meet-
ing, but never met my brother,
although he was on the course all day
selling race cards, and was doing
better than I was, clearing 30/- a day
as I learnt afterwards, when we met
eighteen months later. I stopped on
the course the three days, and it was
rear fun at nights. The attendants
at the booths would bring out all the
broken food left during the day in
table cloths, and tumble it out on the
grass, and then there was a scramble.


There was pastry and cold meats and
potatoes, sandwiches, and all sorts ot
grub mixed up together, and jolly
good feeds we had. Of course, it was
.al fresco, no plates, and we had ongy
our pocket knives, but we made the
best of it, and were ready for work
the following day, sleeping out at
night under the stars with a tarpaulin
covering us. I saw little of the races
and have but a slight recollection of
a few of the horses names, Alice
Hawthorne, a mare bred by ihos.
Austin, of Barwon Park, was the crack
racer of the day.
After the races I went into the town
thinking I might meet my brother,
but was disappointed, he haying taken
on a job of horse driving with a load
for the diggings. I was knocking
about a day or two, and fell m with
a voung fellow, a native of I lymouth,
and a fellow passenger of mine from
the old dart. He had an accommo-
dation tent at Gampbellfield. on the
Sydney Road, and wanting a mate, i
chummed in with him, and went out
the next morning. He had an old
man looking after the place, but could
place no confidence in him. There was
a pub about a mile away, kept by, a
man of the name of George V xn £®’ a
well-known person at that day. When
we got to the tent it was shut up and
the old fellow away drinking at the
shanty, so he got his walking ticket,
and I was installed as partner m the
concern. We did a good trade with
the escort from the Ovens diggings,
the eight or ten men guarding the
waggon, and the driver, stopping both
ways for hot coffee and other drinks
hotter still. They were a queer crowd,
cadets from England, real johnnies,
the only colonial being the driver ot
the waggon. Our other customers
were the fellows making for the dig-
gings, and these as a rule had a bob
or two to spend. Those coming
down wo generally found stone broke,
but they got a feed and we passed
them on to Melbourne. I used to
have to go into town every week—the
road was through Pentridge, now 7
called Coburg. At that time there
xv©re no wo-lls round the buildings*
and the traffic went right through the
middle of where the prisoners were
working, with a cordon of wardfi 3
rifles guarding them. , i ou 'were sup-
posed to go through the line of
sentries without stopping or speaking.
The old hands and long-sentence men
were in uniform, with the broad arrow
all over their clothes, but with these
were a good few runaway sailors and
others in their own togs. Now. I
was going through for the lirst time,
and was about the middle of the
workings, when a man was making
towards me. On passing he said *
something. I could not catch the
words, and was going to ask him
what he panted, when one of the
warders caught sight of us. He made
over to where I was standing, and
frightened th® life out of me. Had he
taken no notice of the fellow he
would not have got the fig of tobacco
I dropped on the road, as that was
what he wanted, and, no doubt, he
picked up when he got the chance. I
went through many times after, and
saw the prisoners getting their dinner.
Two Chinamen would be carrying a
wide board with holes in it contain-
ing deep tin plates, with what 1 took
to be boiled meat and potatoes. The
men were lined up, and each got his
portion, and they just sat down on
stones and made their mid-day meal.
J put in two or three months at the
tent game, and, wanting a change,
dissolved partnership with my mate,
and made into Melbourne again. G.
V. Brooks was at the Royal, and I
saw* him in “ Alexander the Great,
or the “ Rival Queens,” and in the
name part of “Rob Roy, ’ "the Irish
Poet,” and “O’Callaghan on his last
Legs,” the two latter rollicking broad
farce and comedy. He was great in
either tragedy, comedy or farce, and I
have since seen Chas. Kean, Creswick,
Barney Sullivan, Montgomery and
others, but none could fill the bill to
my taste like Brooks. It was a treat
to see him walk the stage even—such
a splendid figure, and off the stage in
private life a real man in every res-
pect. Since the London went down,
carrying the poor fellow to his
untimely death, no actor ever
gained the good will and affection of
the Melbourne public to the same
extent as G. V. Brooks.
To resume, I left Melbourne for
Geelong, and on arriving at that place


took the coach for Dryadale,, and from
there walked to Portarlington, and
went reaping at Captain Langland s
farm. There were a lot of us at the
crop, which took a fortnight and two
davs to cut out. I then went back
to Geelong, stayed a day or two, and
then hired for si.\ months at Fitchett’s*
Registerv Otlice to go shepherding for
John Hastie, on Lake Corangamite.
I was five days making the station,
and next day was installed in a mov-
able hut between the Great and Little
Corangamite. Here I had good easy
times, and plenty of reading, until the
shearing commenced, when being
unable to procure a cook, they sent
for me. T was tiring of shepherding,
and by this time I had managed to
acquire the whole secret of bush
- cookery. I could make bread, roley-
poley, dough-boys, and I rather think
wag the introducer, if not the inventor
of brownie, the national topper up of
a feed, to the natives of Australia. I
am rather proud of this, but have put
on no dog, or "that* sort of thing. I
got through with the shearing with
only two stand-up fights, and most of
the mob stood to me with a few bob,
so I did not do so badly. I then
made my way to Melbourne again,
thinking I might drop across my
brother. I knocked about the town
for a fortnight without hearing or
seeing anything of him, and then
returned to Geelong, and the next day
was behind a storekeeper’s counter,
serving out the usual sardines, pickles,
and tea. I was here something like
five months, when my brother turned
up all of a sudden, and with a good
cheque in his pocket. Me had a time
of it for a week at the finish
up, we made up our minds to take to
the bush, as the only way at lhat
time of getting a crust. There were
any amount of men walking about the
towns' of Melbourne and Geelong,
mostly men who had lieen unfortunate
on the diggings. There was no viay
of getting on the land, and nothing
for it but to tramp the country
looking for work. 1 There were actually
half the population on the track.
Every station in Western Victoria had
its hut full every night, and on the
Wimmera and Glgnelg Rivers as many
as fifty or sixty men would turn up
every night and expect to get supper
and breakfast.
The two of us were on the road for
seven weeks before we got a job, and
were very lucky to fall into one then.
Hundreds of men were out of work
until shearing commenced. Without a
doubt it was the worst time ever
Victoria went through, and it lasted
until after the passing of the first
Land Bill, Since that day the
country has progressed steadily. There
may have been times when through
drought there was stagnation for a
season or so, but taken big and large,
it has continuously been changing for
the better.
1857.
In March, my brother and I left
Geelong, and, after tramping over the
best part of Western Victoria, and
sampling the south-east of South
Australia without getting a show of
work, we were making back to Gee-
long. After passing through Hor-
sham, we made North Brighton, darned
and Henry Harlots’ station. That day
they had just finished drafting a mob
of cattle for Fred Gazzard, and they
were sitting on the top rail of the
yard having a spell before dinner,
when we presented ourselves and asked
for the boss. dames Harlot, or as he
was better known, Cockey Harlot,
answered when we asked for work. He
took a good look at us, and asked me
where I came from, and I answered
London. He then wanted to know
what part of the Great Smoke. _ I
answered Pentonville, and he replied,
“ When you are next asked that
question tell them you are from
Islington or Clerkenwell,” alluding to
Lord Herby’s pets. The Harlots were
Sussex men, hence the name of North
Brighton, they having been born at
Brighton in that country. However,
he promised me three weeks work
dipping sheep, so that we might be
able to get a new rig-out, telling us
they (the squatters) were very shy of
new’ chums dressed as w r e were. We
went to work next morning, and put in
seven weeks, which was very accept-
able after seven or eight weeks on the
track and short commons. There was
a real good cook there, well-known
round Horsham in those days, by the


name of Morgan, and we soon put on
lat, as the work was easy. Wo put
through the sheep within the three
weeks, and then were carting bricks
burning lime, etc., for some chimney
Uj I °P' - 1 10 bricklayer, 'Tom Sayers,
and his laborer, Charley Saulsbrey,
weic shipmates with my brother from
home, and were living i n Horsham for
ears after Saulsbry becoming the
licensee of the Farmers' Arms, pre-
viously kept by dames Moore. Sub-
sequently he became manager of the
<hed t,a Melbourne, where he
The sheep were all shepherded, not
a fence between A’orth Brighton and
the Murray of course, with the
exception of horse paddocks at the
home stations. The shepherds were
mostly married men, all well-known in
-Horsham for many years afterwards.
J heir names were John Kelly, J ac k
Campbell Jack Leehane and Bob Carr
"J 1 ***. Mick Maher. The two
latter both turned publicans ; Carr
hm !\ T t " e R€Cond Pub in Dimboola.
and Maher put u t . a building and got
a license at Lawloit. There is not
one of them alive to-day. After
putting m seven weeks we were dis-
charged. When settling with the boss
he told us to go into Horsham and
proceed to Langland’s store and get
a ng-out of blue shirts and moleskin
trousers. We took his advice, and
were never after long out of a job.
Horsham at that time was just a
typical bush township-one store, a
pub kept by Captain Bowden, and
another one just built by a party of
the name of Welch. The other ‘huts
were of logs, mostly bullock drivers
living -in them, the king of the lot
being Alex. Smith. There was a
boarding house run by Mrs. Forrest,
but neither butcher, baker, commission
agent, nor clergyman, and they
appeared t Q rub-along very well with-
out them-especially the two last-
mentioned. Another working on
Brighton, and for long after-
wards residing in Horsham, was
dames deed, a quiet, reserved, hard-
working man. and one both roy
brother and I chummed up with. T
rather think he must have been a
game-keeper in the old dart, for all
his spare time was devoted to the gun
and he could talk interestingly of the
habits of the birds and animals he
brought down. Long ago he passed
over the bar, but I am given to
understand his widow is still livino- in
Horsham.
On the track once more, we made to
Ballarat, as letters and papers were
lying there, and at once made back,
as we had heard a lot of talk about
the Ma lee while at North Brighton.
I' 6 across from the Four
I oats, as Glenorchy was then called,
and our route lay right across the
Horsham Plains. At that time there
was a shepherd’s hut in nearly every
clump of bull oak. We were about
J"° . dav f mossing the Nine Creeks
(Dimboola), and e a ch night stopped
with shepherds. The last we called
at was near the Sailor’s Home, and
there we made the acquaintance of
v>aml. Anderson and his wife. Ander-
son was a native of St. Helena, and
>on don t run against people from
here every day. He was good com-
pany. and could .rive graphic descrip-
tions of Longwood and other places
connected with Napoleon’s sojourn on
the island. The poor fellow some
three or four years afterwards was
drowned at Lake Hindmarsh Station
swimming his horse after the cows.’
He wa,s liked by all. masters and men
and his grave was fenced in and a
stone still standing marks his resting
Place on the pine ridge at Jeparit.
His widow was about tha first baker
in Horsham.
Out next stopping place was Upper
Regions, then occupied by Daniel
Cameron. The station had not long
before been divided into two home-
steads, Lochiel being in the possession
of John Holt, a brother-in-law of
Cameron. The night we called there.
Jolt took a fancy to my brother, and
hired him for six months at a pound
a week. It was a real mercy he did
not cotton to me, for my brother
never exit a brown copper except the
few shillings he spent for clothes, etc.
However, I parted sadly from my
brother, and took the track on ray
own for Lake Hindmarsh. It was «
good day’s walk, and the creeks and
billybongs being full. I had to go-


round well into the Malice. (I may
as well give a description here of what
the Nine Creeks was like. The ground
where Dimboola now stands was beau-
tifully grassed and timbered with
magnificent red gums, and at the edge
of the Mallee a few pines, not a soul
living nearer than Clowes. This is
the man who took up Pine Plains in
the forties and had to abandon it,
there being no waterholes where there
was a shepherd’s hut).
To resume, I made nearly to Ant-
werp that night, sleeping * under a
pine tree near the horse paddock. The
next morning, just after starting, 1
met the owner, Horatio Ellerman,
with his little daughter. He was full
of sympathy for my having passed the
night under a tree, and invited me up
to the station for breakfast. I had
not eaten anything since the day
before at Upper Regions, so I made
good work with my knife and fork,
and then had to go into the parlor
and listen to a lot of extempore
prayers and a sermonette, etc. Me
got over it in an hour or so, and
pushed along for Lake Hindmarsh
Station, where I arrived a bit before
sundown, and was made real welcome.
After supper, Henry Ellerman, brother
of Horatio, came into the kitchen. I
got no work from him, but he was
good enough to pull me across to
Tullyrea Station—just across the
Wimmera River —where Joe Davis, Mr.
Coppock’s overseer, was staying for
the night. They were wanting a
shepherd, and I had to agree for six
months at a pound a week, and sig ll
an agreement, stating the rations at
10ft) of flour. 12tb of meat, 2ft) of
sugar and £lb tea, and coarse salt ad
lib. Tullyrea at this time belonged
to Akenson Bros., and was a cattle
station, as was Pine Hills. The
opposite side of the river, afterwards
Lake Hindmarsh, and now Jeparit,
Mr. Ellerman was getting rid of cattle
and stocking with sheen. I put in
the night with a stock rider,, one Jack
Beebe, who made me very comfortable
in one of the neatest huts I have come
across. He was a remarkably neat
man : stirrup irons, bits, etc., all
polished and hanging behind gauze to
keep the flys off. Around the walls
were dingo skins, and the pelts of
'possums, native cats, etc. Beebe
stopped with the Atkinton’s until
they sold out to Mr. George Faris,
who turned it into a sheep run, and X
have never seen him since.
The next morning 1 had to cross the
river again, and started on the east
side of Lake Hindmarsh for Albycutya
a long walk of twenty-four miles. I
pegged away all day, and about sun-
down made Corajabrim, and across
the flat I could just see a light burn-
ing. Thinking I was near the
homestead, I made for it, and pulled
up at an out station, where there werd
three or four men lambing down a
flock, and I put in the night there.
I got a good supper and breakfast,
and walked three miles, until I made
John Coppock's, rny place of residence
for six long months. The three miles
of country between the hut and the
home station on the right hand side
of the road had been mostly under
water, and was mostly drying up.
There were two or three shallow lakes
that had become nearly dry, and the
vegetation, consisting of marsh-mal-
lows, was over six feet high, and the
ground between the mallows was
covered with sow thistles, while on
the left side was a deep channel, like
a river, with six or eight feet af
water, the overflow of Albacutya. All
these depressions have never had
water in since, the floods in the early
fifties being the cause in this year.
On arriving at the slip panels, the
scrub prevented me seeing the build-
ings, and I was thinking I had got
off the track, when after a walk of
another hundred yards, the homestead
appeared on a low ridge. It con-
sisted of five huts and the store, all
built of pine logs in American fashion,
the roofs of bark. In front of the
huts stood the woolshed, a tumble-
down old place that disappeared after
the 57 shearing for a new and up-to-
date building. There was neither
stable nor cultivation paddock, the
horses doing real well on the native
grasses.
I went to the biggest building 1 saw.
thinking it to be the boss’s place. It
proved to be the men’s quarters, and
the cook pointed out the roaster s
quarters, a small hut of one room. I
at once made my appearance before


the boss, a big burly man with a
clean shaven face, and I gave him to
understand that I was the new shep-
herd. I was told to go to the men’s
hut and take a day’s spell, and at
dinner time.' I found out the boss dined!
with the men, he taking the head of
the table, and carving for about half-a-
dozen of us. The dinner was damper
and boiled mutton, and for the six
months I stayed was invariably the
same. The damper was made with
carbonate of soda —baking powder was
not in vogue—and the cook had
always a stock of six on hand and
the one in cut, baking a fresh one
every day, and placing the last cook-
ed at the back of the five others in a
tea chest. The tea was made in a
bucket, and all dipped their pannicans
into it. The table was made of pine
slabs two inches thick, and the seats
were two rails resting in forks driven
into the ground. Our community con-
sisted of six all told ; the boss and
five others, one a bullock-driver, and
two rouseabouts, and another shep-
herd and myself. As for the cook, I
don’t include him, being a regular
duffer. He made our lives a misery.
The boss had to put up with him, as
there were no travellers ever passing
During my six months there was only
one man passed with his swag, but
he would not take on cooking, so we
perforce had to put up with the
wastrel.
The day I arrived and the following
day I was spelling, amusing myself
walking about looking at the run.
The country was pretty clear, sur-
rounded with pine and bull-oak find
malleo on the east side ; the west side
was Albacutya Lake and the Outlet
Creek, with plenty of grass and pig
faces, the latter long since killed by
rabbits and heavy stocking. The
home station paddock at that time
was one mass of scrub, consisting of
hop bush, currant bush, and
thick with pine and clumps
of mallee and other timber. I
have seen them for hours looking for
the horses. At the back of the
primitive section there was a chain of
beautiful lakes, the overflow of Alba-
cutya, and good shooting on them
all. I commenced my work on the
third day. The boss came with me
to the yard and counted out two
thousand two hundred sheep. He lent))
me his own dog, and I started rather
dubious as to whether I should bring
them all back, but soon found out I
had a soft thing on with Jerry, the
dog. The day passed at last, and I
made back alright, but I had come to
the conclusion it could not be con-
tinued without books. 1 was wonder-
ing whether the boss had any, so the
next morning 1 summoned up courage
to make inquiries. The boss was still
in bed when I knocked at the door.
He told me to come in, and I made
my want known, and he, pointing to
a shelf, told me to help myself. There
were about 100 books, and a poor lot
they were. However, before my time
expired, I had read them all over
twice. As for news, we had to do
without. There was no Post Othce
nearer than Lake Hindmarsh, and no
mail beyond that. Whenever anyone
was goring down that far they brought
it up, a pack horse carrying a three
bushel bag full. During my lirst spell
at Albacutya, we got the news of the
outer world twice. ¥ou may guess
how I looked forward for someone
going down, as at that time 1 was
getting the \ Saturday Review and the
Illustrated London News regularly
from home.
There were few incidents worth re-
cording during my six months—just a
monotonous getting up, going out
with the flock, eating my meals, and
sleeping. One thing I may mention
at the time 1 am writing of, there was
just a track like a cattle pad between
the Murray and Pine Plains, and no
water after leaving the Kulkyne Lakes
until you made W’erringra, where the
Wimmera River ends on Pine Plains
Station ; so it was very seldom any-
one tackled the journey. One poor
fellow attempted the job, got as far
as Tiegia, and caved in a mile or so
beyond. His loss was made known
at Dimboola, or Nine Creeks, as it
was then called. A constable rode to
the spot, scraped a hole with a stick,
rolled the remains in, and covered it
with earth. On his return journey
his horse died some eight miles from
Pine Plains. He had, of course, to


walk that distance, where they found
him a fresh mount.
I got on well with my boss—one of
the quietest men I ever met. I have
heard him give a description of his
early struggles. In the latter forties
he squatted at Albacutya with one
flock, mrt’v the nroperty of his boss
(Captain Egerton), and partly his
own. He had been shepherding for
the captain, and had taken sheep for
his wages—a common occurrence ini the
days before the gold was discovered.
Previous to his living at Mount
Egerton, he had built a rough log
house at the Little River, beyond
Geelong, got a license, and opened the
first pub there. I passed it in 1851,
when it was in possession of a person
of the name of Perrin. It was a
rough looking place, and at some
distance I took it for a stable.
During my first term at Alb i3itya
I never heard the boss laugh but. on
one occasion, but it was a laugh to
remember. It put me in mind of
Carlvle’s description of Professor
Tuefelsdroch’s —he shook like jelly all
over The cause a blunder one
o? the hands made at the table. They
were talking of the P.unvip. wdien one
said he could not live in the water.
He was contradicted by another, who
said he could as he was an “ antibil-
lious ” animal.
Mr. Coppock died in 'fis. and was
buried on the station. His nephews
erected a stone to his metnorv, and
inscribed thereon :—An honest man,
a just and true one he was ; when he
settled with a man it wa« with orders
on Holmes and White. Geelong ; he
would fill in the pounds only. and
would alwavs manage to have a Pile
of si h er and coopers so as to set tle
to the last pennv.”
After being about a month on the
station there returned from Ballarat
a partv of two or three men. who had
taken down two thousand fat sheep.
Thev fetched a pound a head, and it
gave the boss .♦ measure, so much
so that ho started Tom Ross, the'man
in charge, with a flock of his own.
and made over the west side of Alba-
cutva to run them on. He hung on
for a year nr two and then made a
bolt of it, the ground falling back to
Mr. Coppock,
Shortly before my time expired my
brother joined me at Albacutya. The
boss found him a job until my tune
was up, when my brother and I made
our way to Geelong. Another bro-
ther having arrived from England—
he was working near Meredith, at
Dolly’s Creek—and we had the good
fortune to hear from him there. After
stopping a day or two, we were on thq
track again, and making Mount
Fyan’s Station, in possession of
Messrs Cummings, we got on as hut-
keepers, my brother being about a
mile and a half from my hut with one
shepherd, and I with two flocks. I
had two yards of eighty hurdles to
shift a day ; my brother had only one
yard. We only stopped about three
months, and then made a start for wha
Mallee once more. On reaching Isine
Creeks, we got a job at Lochiel, Holt s
Station, and fell into work splitting
posts and rails for a horse paddock.
On completing and getting our cheeses
we made back to Albacutya (Mr.
Coppock’s), and both fell into work,
mv brother as hut-keeper at Otaheity
for one man, and I as cook at the
home station. By this time, August
1858, the Government had let tenders
for the mail to Pine Plains, so once a
week we got plenty of reading, a
consolation in those days in such an
out of the way place. We seldom
saw any strangers, as the swagmen
were chary of tackling this route,
they having to turn back on their
tracks on going through the Murray,
and it required a tough stomach to
face that, having to carry water and
tucker about eighty miles . Shortly
after commencing work another poor
fellow succumbed, not a hundred yards
from where the one perished before.
He started from the lakes with a
blackfellow and his lubra. They had
a kangaroo-skin full of water with
them but the heat of the weather and
the swag proved too much for the
white fellow. At last he jibbed, and
they (the blacks) stayed with him one
day trying to coax him along, but it
was no go ; so they filled his quart
pot, and left him. They were two
days before they made water at the
north end of Weringra, the blackfellow


having to carry his lubra a good part
of the last day. They stopped a week
before they made into the station,
some six miles away, when they
reported having left the man on the
road. The owners sent a man at
once to the Nina Creeks for the police.
It was terribly hot weather, and by
the time the constable reached where
the man was lying, he found he had
been dead about a fortnight. He did
the best he could, scraping a hole
with a stick, and covering him up in
this manner. I never heard whether
he was ever recognised. Another of
the many lost since I sojourned in the
scrub.
Shortly after this incident, the
shearing commenced. The shearers
had been at work only a day or two
when a hawker with a cargo of
whisky on board made the station.
He camped near the homestead, and
brought a couple of bottles to the
shearers' hut. This started 1 them.
The next morning, while away for
his horses, the shearers looted Jhis
waggon, taking a cask containing
about twelve gallons of whisky, a pis-
tol and a flute. By the time he came
back there was not a sober man in
the hut. They had broached it at
once, pouring it out of the bung hole
into pannicans. and spilling it over
the floor. When the hawker returned
with his horses and found his loss he
came to the hut and asked vhother
they would give him the cask. A
well-known villain, of the name of
" Chokem,” was sitting astride the
barrel, like Bacchus with the man’s
pistol in hand, and he told him he
would shoot him if he did not make
tracks, and that soon, The boss was
at him, too, threatening to send
for the police, so he had to beat a
hasty retreat. And now commenced
one of the most awful orgies it has
been my lot to see. Most of the men
had done time in Tasmania, and a
queer lot they were. I had to go up
to the shearers’ hut shortly after they
began drinking. When I got near the
door, the smell of the whisky nearly
knocked me over. They had saturated
the floor with it, and most of them
were lying about insensible, and for a
week not ona( of them did a stroke of
work. They tried to coax the boss
to help them out with it. One of them,
would bring a pannican and leave it
on his table when he was getting his
breakfast in the rouseaibout’s hut. The
old fellow would take it back to the
shearers’ quarters, and just throw the
pannican and whisky on the floor and
leave it there. It took about a week
to get through the grog, and a day
or two before the work was resumed
shearing. A day or two before they
cut out the hawker made his appear-
ance with a couple oi bottles, think-
ing he would get paid, but not a
shilling would they give him. He was
flightened to come near the homestead,
and the boss hunted him off the
station.
We got through our six months and
made tracks again to Horsham, where
we made enquiries respecting the fare
by coach to Ballarat. We found it
would make too great a hole in our
cheques, so we made arrangements
with a. carrier to take us as far as
Ballarat. lie had a load of sheep-
skins, and charged us ten shillings
each to carry our swags, and was to
tucker us during the trip. The carried
got on alright until he reached
Amphitheatre, where he lost his
horses. He was three days looking
for them, and he got my brother and
I to look after the load while away.
We made a start on the fourth day,
when we reached Ballarat. We passed
through the place, and camped on the
other side until morning. Shortly
after wo took the track. The Levia-
than coach overtook us with a big
placard on it, “ Two and six to
Geelong.” They stopped and we
climbed up, and had a grand ride to
the Pivot. Next morning they sent
round runners offering to carry pas-
sengers to Ballarat for nothing, and
give them dinner at the Clyde Hotel
as well. There were two lines of
coaches—Cobbs and the Estaffette—
and the line of railway being nearly
finished, they were at war with one
another competing for the traffic. We
stopped a day or two in Geelong, and
took the steamer for Melbourne, and
had a good time there. We saw G.
V. Brooks in “ Othello,” “ Richard
ITT,” and “ O’Callaghan on His Last
Legs.” We made back to Geelong
and started for the Western District.


We got work within a week at Robin-
son’s Struan Station, near Mount
Elephant, my brother driving bullocks
carting firewood out of the Stoney
River. Tie had a mate with another
team. They would camp at the edge
ofthe rises, go in and fell, and theo
haul out the butts of the trees with
the bullocks. They could only cart
two loads a week. While my brother
was at this I was working at a dam,
facing it with stone, and mighty
hard graft it was for a pound a week.
My brother received 25 bob, and
earned it. As soon as they got in
enough for the twelve months we got
our walking ticket. We were only
two days walking when we both got
on hut-keeping at G. W. Cummings’
Mt. Fvan’s Station, my brother for
one shepherd and I for two. My job
was chiefly shifting eighty hurdles
every day, while my brother had only
one yard to shift every other day,
except in wet weather, when he had
to shift them every day. This was a
fifteen shillings’ jo'b, so as soon as the
winter set in we give it best and made
another shift after about three months
at it. We had about a week’s tramp.
The first day we were making through
Hood’s station,near the Creek ;
it was a very windy day, and one
extra heavy blast caught my brother’s
hat. It took it clean up in the air,
and it no doubt landed in Tasmania.
We never saw it fall. Well it does
not look the thing for a commercial
traveller to appear without a hat, so
we made Flood’s homestead. The boss
was sick in lied. TTe sent a little
boy out to seewhat we wanted. My
brother told the lad to inform his
father that a gentleman had lost his
hat with the wind, and he would take
it as a great favor if he could let him
have anything in the shape of a head
covering. • The boss was good enough
to send the boy back with a water-
proof cap, with a peak bound round
with brass. We thanked the boy, but
there is no doubt my brother looked
a pretty sight. Some took him for
a first mate of a liner, and others for
a German musician, and would ask at
night if we had our instruments with
us. We did not make a store until
we got to Cavendish, when we got a
new felt hat.
Next day we reached Glen Isla, then
owned by Burnett Bros. We both
got on at once at a pound a week
each, my brother breaking in cows to
milk (it was at that time mostly
cattle running under the mountains,
and very wild they were), and I took
on cooking for the men. We were in
tor the winter with a real good boss,
splendid good fat beef and plenty of
vegetables, a good warm hut with six
or seven men for mates, any amount
of good reading procurable from the
house —magazines, illustrated papers,
etc. —so we put in the winter very
cosily. The season was a very wet
one, and during our four months wo
never saw a traveller. They could
not well reach the station, the rivers
being flooded. About the\end of July
we made again for the Mallee, the
shearing season being near. We tramp-
ed up the Warracknabeal Creek as fat
as Lake" Coorong, now Hopetoun, and
then made through the heath to
Wonga Lake, at present leased by J.
Poulton aod Sons, being the first ever
to cross through. We stopped at the
home station at night, then occupied
by Thompson and Anderson, they
having bought it from Henry Eller-
man, it being the southern portion of
Bine Plains run. The homestead at
this time was at Gymbowen, or as it
was afterwards called, the Black Flat
South. It joined Nypo, owned by
Archibald and Sons. On the morning
following we, on passing Wonga Lake,
heard dogs barking, and made down
to the water side, and found the Pine
Plains crowd washing sheep. The
boss over the wash put us to work at
once, my brother to go on shearing,
and myself wool -pressing. The sheep
were put through next day, and we
all started for Pine Plains, and a real
job we had getting the sheep through
the porcupine a nd scrub'. When they
reached the yards, the sheep looked
worse than when they started. This
was the first and last time sheep were
washed at Wonga Lake.
At the time I am writing of, the
Pine Plains run was in the occupation
of Coombes and Ellerman. The latter
was a younger brother of Horatio
Ellerman, of Antwerp Station, years
after Presbyterian cl es gym an at Law-
loit and Lismore in the Western Dis-


trict. The younger brother also held
Lake Hindmarsh run. The north-west
of Werringra, then a large lake, was
rented by Edmonston and Earmacker,
they running cattle and fattening
them in about three or four months.
All the lakes and water courses when
drying up sufficiently to gr a ze on were
one mass of tree mallows and sow-
thistles, the mallow being in many
places over a man’s head on hors
back, the thistles covering the grounc
like a carpet. The lake, when
made our appearance, was drying r >
fast, and the cattle were all ” off th
run. When the lake was full afte •
the floods in the early fifties, and th
cattle men camped on the north-wes
end, it. took two days to take rations
-one day out, and back the next. Th
lake has never been full since. In th
year fifty-three it backed water a
over the country, the runs south o
Pine Plains being covered—lakes anc
billybongs everywhere.
hen I first came to Albacutya ther
was a chain of lakes between Eainbo\
and the Albacutya homestead, on th
east side of the road, and on the wes ,
for a mile or so a water course like
river, and at the west side of the iuj
three beautiful Jakes, irrespective o
Albacutya. All these depressions have
been dry ever since, with the excep
tion of Albacutya, the latter having
filled three or four times and drier
up as often. I have even shepherdec
sheep on the big Lake Hindmarsh,
and now to return to Pine Plains.
There is no doubt at that time I
thought it one of the most beautiful
places I had ever seen, such diversity
of hills and plains, the hills covered
with pines, and the open country
dotted with clumps of pine and buli-
oak, and here and there quandongs
and currant bush. At ihe foot of
■the Sand Hills the ground was one
mat of pigfaces (miserbreanthmums),
with their beautiful flowers. The
rabbits have killed most of these (the
quandongs and pig faces entirely. Dog
wood and sandal wood have .-ill dis-
appeared years ago. and are lying
prone on the ground, and for years
now the place has been of little use,
and as far as i can see will not
recover until the Government cut it
up and the cookies get on it. They
will soon alter the place. I was on
it for years, and never knew of any
one contracting disease there. It is
hot in summer, but a thoroughly
healthy dry heat. This I can safely
say after fifty-five years. I know of
only one man, an old Chinaman, who
died there, and he died through want
of opium. There are four graves near
the home st ation—all suicides —and the
poor old Chinaman’s. Three of the
graves were occupied 'by victims of
drink ; the fourth, disappointment was
the cause.
To resume, a day or two after we
arrived they commenced to shear, and
my brother got a stand on the board.
1 was to have a show to learn, but
one of the partners had promised the
place to a young fellow shepherding,
and so I had to take his place. We
went out to the hut next day and
had the sheep counted to me. There
was another shepherd there, and our
hut-keeper was a native of Van
Dieman’s Land. Dan Gordon by name,
commonly called “ Cranky Dan,” an
original genius in the cooking line.
He could make a good dish out of the
most hetrogenious things, and give
them most astounding names. How-
ever, he was better than most of the
hut-keepers at that time, and he used
to amuse us singing at night songs of
his own composing. There was no
rhyme and less sense, and when be
finished a verse he did a little high and
lofty tumbling, and then brought all
to ai close with a few howls. To keep
him in form he made a track to run
and jump in, bordered with pines he
transplanted. My other mate was a
Canadian sailor, with a most awdul
Yankee twang in his speech, but I
got on alright with the fellow. 1
would be reading all day, and at
night he would want to know about
it. I used to pitch him some real
queer yarns. He could not read
himself, poor fellow. He left before
the shearing was done, and I never
saw him afterwards. No doubt he-
made back to Canada. All his talk
was about sledging and tobogganing,
whatever that is. While I was with
the flock. Lake Werringra was nearlv
dry ; ,* n fact, it got so salt that the


sheep would not drink it, and I had
to water them at wells near the home
station when they finished shearing.
Then 1 gave up the flock to the
young fellow, and he had to do the
time he agreed to.
My brother and I then went to
Wonga bake (they had been waiting
for us), and here I learned to use
“ Joseph Sorby,” as the shears were
called in those days, 1 made a poor,
poor job of it at first. But my
brother was alongside, and before 1
left I managed to get up to thirty a
day. We had a married couple in the
hut. the woman the cook and her
husband was drawing water from
Brimmin Lake. The couple after-
wards built the second hotel in Dim-
boola.
After cutting out at Wonga, we got
on at Lake Hindmarsh. The sheep
were about half cut out. ’Che board
was not full and we and
remained there until they finished,
IRfifl. when wo took a contract to put
up six miles of Mallee fencing. We
had about six hands, including two
natives ; the last-mentioned were fell-
ing mallee, the others were driving
stakes and filling in. My brother
was with this lot. while another man
and myself w r erc in the frontage of
Lake Hindmarsh splitting stakes out
of bull-oak. the boss having to cart
them out to the line of fence. On
our completing the job we had a trip
to town, and then our next job was
with John Holt, splitting posts and
rails for the horse paddock at Lochiel
near Himboola. During the time we
were doing this, our rations were
brought out by Donald Wallace, years
after the owner of Carbine, the great
racehorse. The shearing was now
near at, hand, and we went looking
for a shed.
After a week's tramp mv brother
got on with Johnny Broughton, at
P.noropki, and went through the shed-
There was no room for me, so I had
to pad the hoof to Lanty Ryan's
Bunyip station. The board was full,
so T had to take a job of hut-keeping
for a shepherd at Yannipy. After
putting in a week or two the cook
for the shearers made a bolt in the
night, and I was sent for to take his-
place. The terms were good, thirty
shillings a week, and the three weeks’
wages the bolter had forfeited were to
be paid to me. 1 had about 40 men
all told, had to kill all sheep, and
fetch water about two hundred yards
—a pretty tough job. However, 1
pulled through to the end. The men
nearly all made mo a present, the
'* ringer ” giving me fifteen shillings
and a great lot- of tobacco he had won
at poker.
Soon after my brother re-joined me,
and he too'k a flock of sheep to
shepherd, and I was hut-keeper for
him. We put in the time till the end
of April. We got settled with, and
made our way to Albacutya, and
stopped there for a week or two when
the Cameron Bros, sent for us to
come to Fine Plains. We started at
once, and both got on. They were
just about starting lambing, and my
brother went out with a flock to
Vallum, a beautiful plain near the
boundary of the Corrong run. It was
the first time it was occupied, and was
in first-class trim, being covered with
cotton bush, sour bush, and the edges
well grassed. As soon as the ewes
began dropping I was sent out to
help. There was two of the Camerons
and two other men besides my brother
and self, six all told. This number
remained while the bulk ol sheep had
lambed, when my brother and I took
charge, remaining there until near
shearing time, when I was left by
myself.
Before my brother left he had to
bring the carriers through the four
miles of heath and scrub from Waith
to Vallum, rather a tough job, as no
one had ever been through before. It
was the first and last time they ever
tried to cart wool by that route.
During the time w r e w ere lamibing down
they had to cart all w r ater from Pine
Plains, over twenty miles, and over a
pretty rough road, so w-e had to be
very careful how we used it. It took
two trips a week to keep us going.
There was no rain to speak of until
August, when there was just enough
to keep us in water for drinking.
Frosts were frequent, and ice in the
clay pans sufficiently hard for the •


lambs to stand on. However, with
all sorts of drawbacks, we managed-to
get 85 per cent, of lambs, my brother
and I getting a shilling a head over
75 per cent. I was a few weeks by
Jmyself before they sent for my Hock to
come in to get shorn, and I was glad
to shift. It was a lonely job. I had
no one nearer than Coorong on one
hand and Pine Plains on the other.
It would be a job now-a-days to get
men to tackle such work. When the
shearing was over we went out to the
north end of Werringra, I shepherding
and my brother pumping water for
the sheep and cooking for the two of
us. W r e put in the time at this until
the month of Mlay, when we started*
out with a flock of ewes for the Salt
Lake country, some forty miles or so
from the home station. It took three
or four days altogether ; the first day
brought us to Gunnah, where we
camped for the night, and next day
camped at Jambaloke, after passing
Tfnderbool—at the latter place we had
dinner. At that time I don’t suppose
there were a dozen people in Victoria
aware of the place. There is a rail-
way station now somewhere near
where we camped. Next day, after
crossing Chave’s Plain, we went about
three or four miles and camped for the
night. There was not a drop of
water to be got nearer than Tolonga-
wank, so we sent the cart on to that
place. There had l>ecn a tank sunk
the preceding winter, but had not been
■covered, and it was full of dead kan-
garoos and emus. I he driver was
fool enough to fill a keg-full of the
stuff and got back about midnight.
But before he arrived my brother and
I had gone in for the roots of the
hakiea, or prickly mallee. It being
virgin ground, untrodden by sheep or
cattle, it was easily pulled up in
lengths of 20 or 50 yards. We cut it
in pieces of about a foot and placed
it upright in a tart pot and billy
and soon got a good drink each, and
with that had to make shift until we
reached Narr. Next morning, about
breakfast time, we found a good si"•■!<!
crab-hole full of clear water, and con-
cluded to stop here and lamb down
the flock. The next few days were
occupied in making yards and pens,
gates, etc., and at sundown we
poisoned what meat we had with
strychnine, and next morning on mak-
ing a search got three wild dogs.
During our stay there we were never
troubled with the vermin. After put-
ting up tents and bunks the driver of
the cart started back to the home-
stead at Pine Plains. We had a bag
and a half of Hour ; the half-bag was
good enough, but when we were in the
middle of the dropping and tackled
the whole bag, we had a nice treat.
It was in a dreadful state with
weaviis and maggots. We tried all
sorts of ways to make it eatable, but.
failed ; even went so far as to cook it
right through into crust. it was no
go, none of us could get it down, so
when we killed a sheep we baked the
liver and eat it for bread. As soon as
the lambing slackened a bit, the boss
walked into Pine Lodge one day and
back the next day, bringing about 20
pounds on his back, and started the
dray with a full bag. After about
four weeks the boss and another man
left, my brother and I taking charge
of the flock. We were at Narr (now
Cnarr) until the lambs were strong
enough to walk, and then were shifted
to Tolongawauk, where in the interim
the boss had made a good-sized log
tank, covered in. When we reached
the place we were surprised to find it
full —heavy rains falling there while
we had none at Narr. We were two
days travelling, the second day mak-
ing it about sundown. Just before
reaching the open malice country
there was a stretch of sand,
at the end of which was a
long ridge, backed by mallee,
The first view of the place appeared
like a garden, it being covered from
end to end with flowers —white, blue
and yellow. The sheep made a rush
of some hundred yards or so, and
were full in no time. When we
reached it, our feet sunk in some
inches. One would imagine it had
been cultivated. It was one of the
most beautiful sights i ever saw. Wo
left the flock camped and went on
some mile and\ a half to where we wer o
going to stay, and put up bunks and
a table and a bush yard, and then
went back and brought the flock.
They w'ere that full we had a job to
get them along. The next day we


never left the camp ; the sheep were in
sight until we yarded after sundown.
’The carter left next day, and we were
left alone, my brother and 1 for a
month or two. The ground was open
round the camp for about a mile, and
we amused*ourselves trying to find out
more open country. Towards the end
of my brother’s stay he was poking
about in the malice, and getting up a
pine tree, was the first white man to
cast his eyes on the open country now
know n by the name of Sunset. Of
course he could not refrain from
having a look round. It was near
sundown, and I w r as expecting him. 1
waited a bit, and got anxious, so I
started to look for him. I went
about a mile and heard him and the
dog pushing the sheep along through
the scrub. He was in great glee at
having found such a good stretch of
good grazing ground. I ho next day
we both went with the flock, 1 stop-
j;nj)o.ui aiu puu ‘deoils .»m ijljw. nuid
poking about trying to find out mpre
open country. But it was no go, and
to this day Sunset is the ultima
thule in that diroctian. Soon after
my brother left me to go into the
home station to shear, the lioss send-
ing out another man to take charge
of the sheep. In about a week or two
they sent out for the flock, and we
bid good-bye to one of the prettiest
bits of mallee country I ever saw. All
this stretch of land will one day, and
not a long time ahead, be growing
wheat, and be the homes of scores of
families.
While I was one day walking about
amusing myself, I was all of a sudden
■called by my name, and on looking
round, two little black boys, Nero
and Blucher, were making towards me.
I could not get much out of them, as
they had been out in this part some-
thing like twelve months, and had
forgotten what little English they ever
had. I asked them where Charlie,
their father, was, and they pointed
with their lips towards the west. I
looked round, but could see nothing
of Charlie or his two luhras. The
boys left me, and that was all I ever
saw of them during my stay at
Tolongawank, but I often came across
their camps, and the heaps of haven
roots was something astonishing. You
conlcl see them pilocl up like small hay
stacks at all their camps ; in the
summer time they had little else to
depend on. Charlie and the luhras
stayed out some years, and at last
made out in the open country at
Border Town, and from there to the
mission at Antwerp, where Charlie
lies buried. I saw the boys many
years after ; they were young men,
and they recognised me at once, call-
ing me by the name I was known by
amongst the blacks, Boringiman. T
think they are alive yet.
About five miles from where we
camped, there was another dock, with
a boy in charge as shepherd, and his
mother cooking for him. He had
been out about a month, when one
day towards evening he saw a fire
some two miles away, and a day or
two after, his sheep being in that
direction, he made ov e r in on!or to 1 see
what was up, thinking it would be one
of wild Charlie’s camps, but when he
got to the place, was rather astonish-
ed to find the camp had been one of
white men, with horses. lie saw
where they had camped, and where
three or four horses had been tethered
to stakes. They must have been
there some days, as there was a great
lot of paper littered about, and
amongst the rubbish any amount of
empty packets of Wotherspoon s
lollies, Scotch mixtures, etc, with
empty sardine tins. Some time before
there was a most brutal tragedy
committed at Dennis’s, or Xichol and
Ayrey’s .Station, near Gleporchy. \
hawker of the name of Selby and his
boy were done to death in a frightful
manner, the two being tied to two
trees, and while rifling the spring cart
it is supposed they w r ere disturbed,
and they then with a tomahawk mur-
dered the two unfortunates by split-
ting their heads open. 1 here was a
great to-do over it, as usual, three or
four l»eing suspected and examined,
but discharged. The real perpetrators
were never found, and no doubt the
camp the boy saw was that of the
miscreants. They camped there to
spell their horses, and then made
through the scrub to the Darling, and
no more was heard of them.


To x’eturn to the sheep. We were
two or three days on the road to the
homestead, picking up on the way
the other folk five miles from where
we started. On arrival, we found
them nearly cut out, and they com-
menced at once on the fresh ones.
They soon cut out, and after paying
off the shearers, drafted a flock for
sale, starting in a day or two. My
brother and I were about eight or ten
days before we made tracks for Mel-
bourne. We padded the hoof as far
as Ashens, where we overtook the
sheep, keeping with them two days,
when they were sold to iMr. Pearce, of
Newington, near Glenorchy. We all
made for Stawell, and took the coarh
for Ballarat, and the train for there
to Geelong, and steamer thence to
Melbourne. Four of us put up at the
old Rose, Thistle and Shamrock, in
Elizabeth-street, and had a good time
for a couple of weeks. G. V. Brooks
was at the Royal, and we saw him in
“ Richard III,” “ Othello,” and “Rob
Roy ” at the old Princess. There was
an American named Mac Kean Buch-
anan performing in Sheridan-K.no wles’
“ Virginius,” with his daughter as
Virginia, and two bigger muffs Yankee
Land never turned out. The house
was laughing most of the time, espe-
cially during the most tragic scenes.
They both spoke with a delightful
twang, and their by play was a
caution. We managed quite easily to
get through nearly two years’ wages,
but before low water mark was reached
bought a spring cart and horse to
bring three of us back to the mallee.
After ten days’ travelling we made
Pine Plains, and hearing they were
wanting two shepherds at Wongd Lake,
applied there, and both of us got on.
This place was then occupied by Mt .
Thomas Bray, formerly a draper in
Geelong, he having bought the run
from Thompson and Anderson. Our
huts were about five miles apart, and
neither had a hut-keeper, so we seldom
saw one another. From this on. the
bosses seldom supplied hut-keepers for
shepherds, this saving £45 a year.
It’s unnecessary to say they did not
rise the shepherd’s wages a brass
farthing ; that stood at the old rate-
one pound a week. The country was
all sand hills, covered with spinifox
and small malice and other scrubs.
The only openings were lakes ; one of
them where 1 watered, Bramljrook, was
a very pretty spot. I watered there
every other day, and alternate days
was on the heath east towards
Coorong boundary. It was very
rough work, and the tucker was still
rougher, having to cook at night
when the sheep were yarded. I man-
aged to put in four months. My
brother jibbed after about seven weeks
and went down to Lake Hindmarsh
Station, where he took a contract
malice fencing for Mr. H. C. EUerman.
After some time he sent for me, and I
joined him cooking fox the camp of
five men. It was a pretty long job,
but before we finished, Mr. EUerman
bought a flock of flukey sheep from
down country, and not having a
paddock ready to put them in, sent
for my brother and me to take charge
of them at the 12-raile hxit. We were
six days going the distance, making
two miles a day. It was raining
most of the time, and we were carry-
ing our blankets and tucker, the boss
bringing out bread and meat. In the
evening he would fetch us a part
bottle of wh sky, and being wet
through, we wanted it. One day it
was falling most of the time, and at
night it set in for a regular down-
pour. The ground was too wet to
camp on, and were thinking we would
have to sit up byr the fire till morning,
when I remembered that there was an
old hut about a quarter of a mile
away, with a door to it. I told my
brother and we started, and took it
off the hinges. It was made of pine
boards, roughly adzed, and my
brother started to the camp with it
on his head. It weighed something
near a hundred weight, and for two
days he could not turn his head to
look round. We put it on two logs
in front of the fire, and put in a
miserable night.
The next day we reached the 12-mile
hut. and they brought out our swags
and a fortnight’s tucker. It was
about the time the shearers were
making for the Darling, all horsemen,
and our hut being close to the road
they made it their stopping place for
the night. We often had six or eight


of them, and our rations w 7 ent at a
rare rate. Before the week w r as out I
was into the home station for more
rations. The boss took it kindly,
and I started back. That was 24
miles, and with the load on my back
I was pretty tired. How’ever, before
I reached camp 1 saw five horses
hoppled out in front of the hut. I
had to set to and commence making a
damper and frying chaps for the
crowd, tired as I was. In another
eight days we were out of tucker
again, and I took the sheep for the
day, and ray brother went in for
more rations. This time the boss
tackled some, saying it was too hot
altogether, and told my brother he
would shift us where the travellers
would not find us. The next day the
dray came out and carted our things
just over the sand hills. We were
there about three mouths, and during
that time we never saw one traveller,
the mail man excepted, he passing
going up and on the return trip.
When we went into the home station
the sheep were in real good store
condition, and almost free of fluke.
Mr. Ellorman treated us well. He paid
us a pound a week each, and gave us
a bonus of four pounds. The shearing
was just commencing, and we both
got a stand, I. as a learner, the first
time I tackled the game. The sheep
weres horn in the grease, and I can’t
say I relished the w r ork ; it was too
dirty a job, but I managed to reach
forty or so before I finished, when we
bought two horses and started for the
south-east. We were on the track for
ten days, but were too late ; the sheds
were all full, and we made tracks to
Mount Gambler, where we spelled a
week. It was not much of a town at
that time, but the environs are a per-
fect paradise. I have been there
many times since, and was ahvays
loth to leave it. I have travelled a
lot in my time, but the mount and
the lakes, I consider, one of the most
beautiful bits of scenery I ever came
across. The only place worth compar-
ing to it, in my estimation, Ixiing
Geelong. Not being able to get a
shed, wc made back to the malice
again. By this time Pine Plains had
changed hands, the Camerons having
sold, and Muirheads being the pur-
chasers. We went on, ray brother as
shepherd and I as hut-keeper. We
were not long there lief ore they dis-
covered scab in the sheep, the flock
having contracted it from stragglers
fram Cow Plains. The owners were
in a great way, as they were just
starting on their own, and had
nothing to dip them with. One of the
brothert went down to Horsham for
sulphur and tobacco, and while he w'as
away the other brother w r as making a
dip and putting up yards. It was
some time before the load of stuff
arrived on the ground. It consisted
of wool bales full of damaged cigars
and tins of snuff. They commenced
at once and soon cleaned the flock.
There has never been an outbreak of
scab since. The Muirheads had to cut
things fine in consequence of their bad
luck, reducing wages to 15s, a week,
so we made tracks again for the
Murray.
About this time there was a rush
for the Barrier Ranges, long before
Broken Hill was thought of. My
brother and I started for the Darling,
intending making the Barrier from
Menindie. It was the worst rtason
on the rivers. And Northern Wimmera I
have ever seen. We rode through the
Kulkyne, and the people there gave us
such a bad description of the road
that we left our horses at the Mourn-
pool Lakes, and padded the hoof with
matilda up the rest of our journey.
After spelling a day or two at Kul-
kyne, * we made down the river to
Wentworth. I have never seen the
Murray so low since. We could cross
quite easily in most places, having to
swim the middle about a chain ; the
rest we could w r alk, the water being
so shallow 7 . All along both sides of
the stream was a fringe of dead and
dying sheep, bogged in the mud, and
too w r eak to free themselves —a fearful
sight—the poor creatures still alive
with their eyes torn out by the cursed
crows ; flocks of the wretches in every
gum tree.
We made Wentworth in a day or
two, and camped for a spell, and then
started up the Darling River. It was
very warm weather, and the feed
something awful. Mou could see the


different flocks of sheep miles away
by looking in the sky. Above every
flock there was a dense red cloud of
dust. How they managed to keep
the sheep alive was a caution, as they
were all shepherded at Tapio Station,
twelve miles above the junction of
the rivers. We met two or three
parties returning, and by their ac-
counts we came to the conclusion
turn back. There was a dearth of
provisions, and teams coulld, not travel
for want of feed for horses. Ooe of
the parties we met had sold a bag of
flour at Pooncaire for twelve pounds,
and we paid - ■ pound for
flour, four and six for tea, and nine-
pence for sugar. At Tapio Station
we made a cut across the back Joun-
trv for Gall Gall, on the Murray, thus
saving a good many miles, and here
we saw further proofs of the dreadful
season. Most of the way the coun-
try was intersected by billy-bongs and
a few swamps, mostly dry or nearly
so. having six or seven inches of
water on the top, and the rest thick
mud. Cattle were running on this
part of Tapio. and in every creek or
swamp were dying cattle up over their
backs, their heads just out of the
mud, aud not a solitary eye amongst
them. The crows had served them
the same as the sheep. It was a
sickening sight to see the poor crea-
ture! constantly turning their heads
from side to side, and not be able to
aid them in any way. Crows from
that time get but a poor chance from
G.E.. Of all the birds these are most
damnable —the black fiends. T shall
never forget the awful sights I saw
during that trip. It was enough to
give one the horrors, the poor beasts,
and to have to leave them to their
fate made one miserable. Thank
Heaven there has neve? been anything
like it since.
After making back to Kulkyne and
spelling a day. we went out to the
lakes. At Mourpool there was a good
horse paddock and homestead ; caught
our horses and started back through
the scrub to Cow Plains. My brother
and another man took a contract to
sink a.couple of wells at the home-
stead. During the time my brother
and his mate were at work, I was 12
miles away on the road to Pine
Plains, splitting slabs for another
well. I was working by myself for
about a month, when they joined me,
having linished their job on the home-
stead. The boss being short of
rations, and there being two or three
very bad with scurvey, he got ray
brother’s mate and I to go down to
Dimboola with the sick people, con-
sisting of a married couple and a
single man, a shepherd, and to bring
hack what was wanted for the station.
We had to carry the shepherd on our
dray ; the married man had a spring
cart of his own. He had three chilo-
ren, one of them quite a baby, still at
the breast. The mother and child
were in a dreadful state with scurvey.
We were on the road a week, and
making Dimboola the seventh day out
about mid-day. We camped on the
river, and whilst at dinner. Dr. Tel-
ford, then owner of Mt. Elgin station,
passed, had a look at the mother and
child, and prescribed for them. The
poor baby died next day. The shepherd
I saw six months afterwards ; he was
then on crutches. The others I lost
sight of—they had enough of the
mallee.
We loaded up the next day, and
started back, crossing the river at
Dimboola, and keeping on the west
side of the river and Lake Hindmarsh.
On reaching the head of the lake we
met my brother, when we all travelled
back together. On arriving at Pine
Plains we fell in with Mr. Ewen
Cameron, he having lieen sent up by
the agents to take charge, the Muir-
heads having gone bung. They had
wretched bad luck—bad seasons and
the scab in the sheep gave them no
chance. They were young men, real
liard workers, and full of confidence in
themselves ; but they struck the coun-
try at a bad time, and so had to
cave m.
Mv brother and I were hired at once
by Mr. Cameron, ho being one of the
partners of Cameron Bros., who sold
to Muirheads. We had lived with the
Camerons two years, and found them
first-class employers, and were real
glad to see him back in the district.
Most of Muirhead’s men leaving with
their employer, it left the station with


but a few gr a ss hands to carry on
the work. The run was bare of grass,
on the open country there was
nothing for it but to put some of the
sheep on the heath. We were .sent
with a flock of two thousand to Sand
Mount, about four miles from Wirrm-
gra, on the road to Cow Plains. As
soon as rain came we were shifted to
he north end of Wirringra, where we
remained until shearing, when we gave
up the sheep and tackled the blades.
By the time we cut out there was
good feed and the promise of a good
season. Our horses were in good
condition, so we started for the south-
east of South Australia. We were
five or six days on the road, when we
pot on at Lake Roy, then in posses-
sion of James and Walter Laidlaw', a
small place and a very pretty one.
There were only six shearers, ao we
slogged in and soon cut out, and w r e
made for Reedy Creek. We were too
late for another shed, so we made for
Guichen Bay, where we paddocked the
horses and spelled a week. We hired
a boat and spent most of the time on
the water, enjoying ourselves greatly,
when we started again for Mount
Gambier. On reaching the mount we
had another spell for a week, rambling
over the mount, from which a grand
view is obtained—you can see McDon-
ald Bay, and the Southern Ocean.
Mount Sohanck. and a great stretch of
country. The environs of the mount
are most picturescpie—the Blue Lake
a gem, while the Valley, Leg of Mut-
ton, and other w r aters very beautiful.
It was during our stay here I first
became acquainted with the writings
of Thomas Carlyle. There was one
wet day during our spell, and wanting
something to read we inquired whether
there was a chance of getting a book
or two. We were directed to the
office of the Border Watch, the local
newspaper. Their diggings was then
in a little stone hut. We knocked at
the door, and the editor-compositor
and printers’ devil, all in one, answer-
ed our questions concerning books. He
bad about half-a-dozen for sale, and
amongst the lot was Carlyle’s address
as Rector of Edinburgh University
on the choice of books, and Sartor
Resartus. I commenced on the for-
mer and my brother on the latter
volume. By the time 1 had gone
through it twice my brother gave up
Sartor for a bad job. He could not
digest it—too tough altogether. Since
then I have bought Sartor about half-
a-dozen times, and twice I have pur-
chased the whole of Carlyle’s works —
•’4 volumes. They are scattered all
over the State at present, and 1 often
wonder whether they are giving the
pleasure to others that I enjoyed
poring over them in my seventy-
eighth year. I will have to get the
trench Revolution once more to read,
and to go through it again—the most
wonderfully graphic book I e v e r read,
or I expect to read. The day I pur-
chased those two books was a red
letter day in my wandering lif e .
To return to my yarn. After spend-
ing a week in the beautiful mount we
saddled up our horses and made back
to the scrub, once more to Pine Plains
and went on at work for Cameron.
'Soon after our return the run was
sold to Messrs Reid and Armstrong.
We stopped some time with them, and
being offered higher wages we went
through to Kulkyne, then in the hands
of Leslie and Ross, where we Ixith
went on shepherding. It was very
rough Country, and we earned our
wages—every copper. I was walking
all day. When the weather was wet
or cold I often walked twenty miles.
We soon got tired, and made back to
the old quarters. Lake Hindmarsh,
where I got four miles of mallee fenp-
ing with three mates. We were about
two months over the work, and as
there was no chance of further jobs, I
and one of my mates made back ’to
Kulkyne, where they were letting a lot
of mallee fencing. My brother was
still sherpherding a flock of weaners.
1 1' 1 had a mate to help, as they were
rather troublesome to handle. A few
days after I left him for Lake Hind-
marsh they had bad luck. The two
lost everything they had, clothes an d
all their tucker, even the whole of a
sheep they had killed the night before.
A boat load of “ skunks ” had made
a clean sweep of everything, and after
yarding the fl o ck, they had to walk
tln-ee miles to the home station for a
feed and to get rations. My brother’s
mate lost about ten pounds w r orth of


‘■clothes. My brother was more for-
tunate ; his chief loss was a new pair
of Wellington boots he had purchased
two days before off a trading steamer.
The thieves had paid a visit to all
the huts on the banks of the river.
One poor fellow at a hut eighteen
miles from the homestead lost all his
• rations, and was tw r o days without
food wdien the boss went out and sent
a man with rations to relieve his
wants. There was a police station
a mile from Kulkyne, with two men in
charge. They went in pursuit of the
thieves, and for three days were hunt-
ing for them in all the bends of the
river, but could not get any luck.
They no doubt were in some billy-
bong off the river, so the police gave
up the chase. However, a week or
two after the occurrence, the Inspector
-(Mr. Chambers) made his monthly
visit, and he gave the constables
what-for, and soon after the police
station was abandoned. It was origi-
nally formed to catch the horse
stealers making through from the
Western District for New South Wales.
There was another station in Bose »
Gap for the same purpose. The traces
otf it can still lie seen right on the
summit of the Gap. 'I he men at both
places had a good time of it, seldom
or never having a charge, just
amusing themselves fishing, boating
and shooting on the Murray and the
lakes. The men at Bose’s Gap had
not the same chances of passing the
time, only when they were nearer to
•neighbors, and twelve miles or so from
• Glenorchy.
1866.
The liest part of this year was put
in at Pine Plains ; my brother and I
were pumping water for sheep, the
station at this time being in the
hands of Beid and Armstrong. About
the beginning of August we made
tracks for Lake Hindmarsh, and com-
menced shearing for Henry EUerman.
AVe soon cut out, and then made back
to Pine Plains, and helped to cut out
the sheep there- On the completion
• of shearing we both resumed our work
■ pumping, and continued at it until
the following May, 1867, when we took
n flock out to the Salt Lakes, some
10 miles from the home station. It
was during our spell here that my
brother discovered the country called
Sundown, a beautiful stretch of good
(Trussed land, surrounded by open
malice (born to bo cut up for farms).
In duly of that year my brother went
to the home station, as they were
about the beginning of the shearing,
leaving me by myself with the sheep.
1 was all alone in my glory for five
weeks, when the dray came out to shift,
me to the homestead, and very glad 1
was, as had T been there a few weeks
longer f should have gone balmy. r J ho
(lock I brought in being the last to
shear, they soon cut out. \ly brother
and 1 tackled the pumping again,
continuing at it until my brother’s
death, which took place on the 22nd
of December. We had been nearly 11
years cogstantly together, and the
shock completely downed me, and for
many months T was incapable of doing
any kind of work. I was mostly
travelling. 1 had friends in Geelong.
1 would stay a few weeks with them,
and then make back to the mailer,
put in a short time with chums, and
again take the coach for Ballarat and
train to Geelong, and so backward
and forwards.
I killed the time until duly, when 1
turned to again at Albacutya, then
in the hands of Bow Brothers. T was
cooking.at the homestead three months
and after this was droving. At this
time they were boiling down at North
Brighton, then in the hands of Caffery
and darvis. We were about a week
on the road, and when within two
miles of our destination two or three
men came out, and cutting off about
500 sheep, drove them to the works.
When we reached the place tit sundown
everyone of the sheep were in the
boilers and on the way to make tal-
low. We stopped a day at the works
and by this time the whole of the
flock of two thousand sheep were in
the vats. During the day T spelled.
I had; a good look over the place, and
real worth while the day was spent.
Everything went on like clock-work.
There were about twenty-five men
killing ) each man had a small pen.
When they Tilled it up he would go in
with a hammer, and in about a
minute he would stun about a dozen
sheep, pull them over a grating, and


fthen stick them. There were some
men doing over a hundred a day. As
soon as the pelts were off and the
entrails out. revolving belts with
hooks carried them to the cutters,
where each carcase was cut into four
quarters, and again carried on to the
boilers, where men packed them in
tightly, the lids of the vats screwed
down, and in a few hours was the
clearest of tallow. It was about the
busiest affair I ever saw on the Wim-
mera. There was one man constantly
employed curing the tongues. He had
a place specially adapted to the work
—beautifully clean. I don’t know
exactly, but should think there were,
well, say, a million hanging up in lots
of fifty each. When 1 was starting
back, Mr. .Jarvis gave me a string,
and jolly good they were. Never again
shall we see them boiling down good
fat sheep. Freezing has altered all
that.
On reaching Albacutya I was out for
a billet, so as the shearing was near
I bought a horse, and made my way
to Lake Hindmarsh, and went through*
the shearing there, after which with a
•mate we started for Mount Gambier
district. Passing through Nhill and
Naaracoorte, we made Gaichen Hay,
where we spent two days, mostly
boating, my mate being a thorough
sailor, having been two years liefore
the mast, and previous to that had
been with the pilot at the bay. At the
time 1 am writing about, he (the pilot)
had a farm near the township, and n
small place with sheep on it, about 30
miles away. Having a mob of horses
to shift to his station, wo- got the job
to take them there, and we were two
days on the job. On arriving, we
commenced with the shears, having
two aboriginals as mates, their two
lubras pressing the wool. My next
job was at Glencoe Station, cutting
thistles. The whole of the country in
the south-east was pretty well covered
with the Scotchmen, and the South
Australian Government compelled the
occupiers of land to cut them. The
Glencoe people had no loss than aTb'out.
forty men in three camps of about a
dozen each, with a ganger over each
camp. Nine men worked In the face,
using sythes, and behind three boys
with hoes were cutting the small
thistles. There was a cook at each
camp. We had breakfast at sunrise,
worked until mid-day, when we knock-
ed off during the heat, and resumed
work until sundown. We were living
in tents, and most of the men w r ere
sleeping on heaps of ferns. The
country was infested ■with snakes, and
we sometimes killed as many as tw 7 o
dozen a day. The men with the
scythes would hold them down with
the flat of the scythe, and the boys
would run up and finish them, cutting'
them in two with the hoes. T stopped
three weeks. On the last Sunday I
was riding outside my tent, when one
of my tent mates carried his ferns out
to air them. He was sitting on the
heap with the paper, reading, when a
tiger snake about three feet long
crawled out between his legs. Fright-
ened to move, he called me, and T gave
him what-for with the hoe. That night
I slept but very little, and made up
my mind to clear, and next morning
walked into Glencoe, got my wages,
caught my horse, and made Mount
Gambier. After spelling a week, T
started again for the Mallee.
ISG9-
By this time Fine Plains had chang-
ed hands. Reid and Armstrong were
away, and the station in “ Money Mil-
lar’s hands. Wonga Lake was thrown
im by Forsyth, and had been purchas-
ed bv McVean Bros, sons of -John
Me Yean, of Stoneyford. near Colac.
Upon reaching Lake Hindmarsh I
crossed over to Tullyvea, and went on
cooking for a contractor mallee fenc-
ing some miles out west from the lake
and on the edge of the heath. The job
was soon over, and the rest of ISO 9
I put in with friends in Geelong.
Making back in July to Take Hind-
marsh (by this time Mr. Filler man had
thrown up the sponge, and Mr. Ewen
Cameron w T as managing for the owners
in Melbourne). As soon as he com-
menced shearing I went on the board,
and on finishing wmnt over to Tullyvea.
where my mate of last year was at
work. T waited a day or two, and
then started again for another shed
in the south-east. On the third day
we made to Adam Smith's, a beautiful


place near Naaracoorte. Starting the
next morning, we were overtaken by
a long slab of a fellow. He had stop-
ped at Adam Smith’s the same night.
But my mate and I had been in the
men’s hut, while the long customer
was entertained in the house. We
jogged along, the three of us, all day,
making Robinson’s Station, Struan,
at night. We got permission to
hopple out our horses, and while Hoing
so my mate got a chance to let me
know who our fellow traveller was.
No less than Adam Lindsay Gordon,
the so-called poet. However, he had
to doss down in the men’s hut that
night with my mate and self. During
our day’s ride he had seldom opened
his mouth to speak. But when my
mate was talking horse, he would
occasionally make a remark, and then
ruminate again—l suppose manufactur-
ing some more of his poetry. At
night, we struck a veal good old sort,
one Anthony Sutton, owning a place
near Mount Gambier. The poet w T as
known, and was taken inside. Next
morning, parting with the great Aus-
tralian poet, my mate and I made
Wattle Range, Widow Cameron’s sta-
tion. We went through the shearing,
and while doing so, on each succeeding
Thursday, we were treated to the
great chieftain of the pudding race,
Haggis. Myself and a Lancashire
chap were the only ones that cotton’d
to it. When it was first introduced,
mv lanky mate wanted to know
whether the kiver was eaten. Ho was
told he could please himself. We
tackled it. and the two of us made it
look small before w r e finished, since
when I never pass haggis.
On finishing. 1 made the Mount,
leaving my mate, he stopping with his
people on Glencoe run. T made back
to Lake Hindmarsh, and about the
beginning of 1870. started down to
Mt. Egerton, where my brother Tom
was living. It was a remarkably w 7 et
winter, raining nearly every day. 1
put my time in with a mate digging
holes. You could not Call it gold
digging, for we never got any worth
saving. On panning off we would sec
a beautiful streak of the very finest
gold dust, but the only way to pro-
cure it was with a little bail of damp
clay ; rolling it over the gold it would
pick it all up, and we would adi ire
it, and then throw it away. During
my slay at Mt. Egerton, a party of
Chinamen, in one week, made twenty-
two ounces in old workings, not is.ore
than a quarter of a mile from where
my mate and I were sinking. We used
to put down a shaft about ten feet,
one sinking and the other bailing the
water out of a catch hole. If we both
went home to dinner together, when
we came back the hofe was running
over with water, so we went separ-
ately—one stopping bailing. This was
my only experience of gold digging. I
stuck at it until the end of July, and
then started up country for the sheds.
I made Lake Corrong, then in posses-
sion of Bell and McGuinness. 1 was
ten days on the road, and had a job
getting along, the rivers and creeks
being all in flood, having a difficulty
crossing some of them. The grass
everywhere that year was most luxu-
riant. On crossing Morton Plains on
my way to Corrong, it was like a
field of wheat. There was any amount
of kangaroos ; you could only see their
heads over the grass. I had great
w ork crossing the Dunmunkle and War-
racknabeal Creeks. At the former,
making it at sundown, we had to stop
all night on the east side, the men
coming out at Karyrey Station and
telling us not to attempt crossing
until morning, as it was dangerous to
do so, and at Brim Homestead w T e
crossed in a boat. We made Coorong
The station by this time was nearly
all fenced in, and was carrying ninety-
five thousand sheep. There was a big
hoard of men, and we were six w-eeks
cutting out. On finishing, we made
through the heath and sand to Wonga
Lake. By this time it was in the
hands of Cameron Bros., the McVegns
having sold out. They had bad luck
with the seasons. Had they been
able to hold on another year, they
would have made a pile. The river
came down and filled all the lakes,
and for the four years the Camerons’
had the run there was no good sea-
sons.
Of course. I made again for another
shed, 'buying a horse, and with my
mate of the two previous years, was
making for Mount Gambler. We made
Glencoe Station, and both got a


stand, and commenced the next day
harboring the jumbucks. We managed
to pull through to the end, but it was
a foucrh job, men being sacked every
day, having a tarter over the board.
To return to ray brother. He was
soon full up of his job, and he and I
returned to Pine Plains, it was near
shearing time again, and until the
start we were knocking about doing
odd jobs at a pound a week, and then
started on the jumbucks, cutting out
in about five weeks. We then got up
our horses, starting for the south-east
of South Australia, but pulled up at
Lake Hindmaesh, the board being
short of two hands, and we went on
shearing there. In four weeks the
shed was cut out, and we left our
horses in the paddock and made our
way for Melbourne, where we enjoyed
ourselves for a fortnight. At the end
of that time we took the steamer for
Portland, spent a day or two in the
dull old town, and got on shearing at
a small station some miles out in the
occupation of Mrs. Cameron and Sons.
It came in very handy, as funds were
getting low. We made about seven
pounds, when we started north, mak-
ing Branxholme the first day. On the
next day we camped at Merino Downs*
The country here was a great change
from the dreary stretch from the
coast. We made Hamilton —a beauti-
ful town now —but in those days very
small potatoes. The races were on,
at which wo attended ; just a mile or
so out of the town, unfenced, any
amount of timber, no grandstand, and
some of the jockeys were in queer rig»
•—trousers in their boots and a hand-
kerchief round their heads. Only one
was in jockey costume —the well-
known Billy Trainor. 'There was a
publican’s booth and any amount of
drinking. A few were in the
logs at night, but. it was a
jolly meeting. After spending a
few days in the township we made for
the mountains, passing through the
Victoria Valley, a beautifully pictures-
que walk, and made Robertson’s
station at night. Going up before
sundown to buy some rations, we met
a rum old customer in the owner. He
was near out of flour and refused to
sell or give us any. He asked us if
we could eat oatmeal, and receiving
an answer in the affirmative he sold
us two pounds. We only had quart
pots, so we borrowed a saucepan, and
made a big feed of what Dr. Johnson
defined in his dictionary as food for
horses in England, and for men in
Scotland. However, it stood to us
until we made better quarters. We
were two days making Horsham,
where we took in cargo after the oat-
meal spell. We stopped one day, and
the following morning coached it to
Lake Hindmarsh. We spelled a day
or two and then caught our horses,
which were in grand fettle, and started
for the Murray. We were four days
making Kulkyne. The station then
was in the hands of Messrs Leslie and
Ross. They were just making a start
to fence in the run. We took a con-
tract of five miles., of brush fencing.
For a mate we took in as partner a
party of the name of Cregan, he
having a team of bullocks. The team
was at Albacutya, so Cregan and I
started for there on horseback. We
were four days making the place, a
day mustering them. They had been
in good country, with plenty of grass,
and were in good condition. Started
the following day, and was a week on
the road, making about fifteen miles a
day. During our trip for the team
my brother had put on two men, and
they had been felling timber, so we
made a good start. Two days after
we arrived on the ground. Three
men were at the fence, and the team
drawing in the timber. I was cook-
ing for them. Where w r e camped on
the Kulkyne Creek there were tons of
pie melons, so I had peaceful times
with the crowd. Most all in the bush
in those days had 1 ttle in the way of
vegetables or fruit, and melon pie was
a treat. They could put it away
morning, noon and evening. In the
middle of the night one of the chaps
working at the fence would often
tackle it. T found it a great soother
in keeping them contented, and was
never without a thumping pie or
melon jam. Our chief dishes were sea
pie, made in a nail can, with three
decks, roley poley duff, made with
black sugar. There was no baking
powder to be got. The substitute for
bread w as damper, baked in the ashes.


There being five of us, each with a
most vigorous appetite, 1 had to cook
one every day about the size of a
tombstone. The tea was made in a
bucket. Yet on this poor tucker we
were jolly as sand boys —never had an
ache or pain, and could work like
trojans. We were about three months
on the job. We should have been
done sooner, but were kept back by
the rain and the bullocks rambling.
Finishing the contract, we started
back to Albacutya, then in the hands
of Messrs Row Brothers. They were
fencing in the run, and we took some
miles of th? boundary fence to put up
dog leg, with timber cut on the mar-
gin of Lake Hihdmarsh and mallee the
best part of the way. In the heath
we had to cart the malice and stakes,
which kept us hack a lot, and the
bullocks wandered, and we could not
get on without them, so there was
lost time. We made a little money
out of the job, averaging about 15/-
a week. I was cooking, and was kept
hard at it, as I had to fetch the
sheep from the home station, walking
in one day and bringing the mutton
out the next. The swans were breed-
ing on the lake, and we had plenty of
eggs. This was the cause of our
being so long on the job. The bullock
drivers, when looking for the cattle,
would drop across a nest of eggs, and
we would make a fire and scoff a
couple or three, and then put in only a
day or two a week. The job would
have paid well only lor this.
The shearing commencing shortly
after, we got a place on the board at
the Lake Hindmarsh. After cutting
out there we saddled up and made for
the Murray River, and got on at
Mildura, then in the hands of Hugh
Jamieson. At this time it was one
of the best managed stations on the
Murray. Jamieson was the first on
that part of the river to irrigate.
There was a splendid orchard and
vegetable garden, with a windmill
pumping water from the river. It was
this garden that took the eye of the
Brothers Chaffey, and w’as no doubt
the primal cause of their settling at
Mildura. I have seen many stations
in the three States of Victoria, South
Australia and New South Wales, but
in all my experience, never came across-
one to be compared to Mildura.
Everything was as near perfection as
was possible at that time, now fifty
years ago. There was nothing very
grand about the buildings, but the
homestead, men’s huts, woolshed, etc.,
were neat and in perfect order. The
roads even were made between the
men’s quarters, and between there and
tne woolshed, a wharf on the river,
for the steamers to load at, and out-
side of the homestead paddock a com-
fortable hut for the travellers, with
five bunks, and a cupboard containing
utensils. This was kept locked.
When wanted the swagmen applied at
the stores, and were given a key with
rations of tea. sugdr, flour and meat.
A printed placard inside asking the
men to clean up in the morning and
return the key to the storekeeper.
These rules were seldom omitted by
the users of the hut. In keeping with
this was their treatment of their
employees. Their men always had
Saturday afternoons to themselves.
The boss, after dinner, on the comple-
tion of the raid-day meal, would bring
down to the huts a big armful of
magazines and Illustrated London
papers, all neatly covered with strong
paper, and leave them with the men
for the week, and the following Satur-
day w'ould replace them with fresh
ones.
It was a rule of the place all
through the year, at noon, for all the
men to line up at the store, where Mr.
William Jamieson would be waiting,
to serve out a glass of rum to each
white man. and to the aborigines a
glass of real good wine. On Saturdays
there was another tot in the middle
of the afternoon, when he brought the
paners down to the hut.
On finishing shearing we found our
horses had got out of the horse pad-
dock and had made tracks to Pine
Plains, so we w r ere in a bit of a fix.
However, the boss had made it right
with the skipper of the Pride of the
Murray steamer to take us to Kul-
kyne with our saddles, bridles and
swags. We were a day and a half on
the boat, and when we reached there
we were provided with horses to take
us through the scrub. I must here
mention another kindness of Mr,


.Jamieson. My brother, during the
shearing, in catching, was struck on
the neCK a real violent blow by a ewe.
It commenced to swell at once, and bs"
night he was hardly able to speak.
'The boss sent a man on horseback 18
miles to Wentworth for the doctor. It
was near morning when he arrived.
My brother then was near pegging
out. He at once lanced him in two
places under the tongue, giving him
almost instant relief. This was only
a week from the finish of the shed.
My brother was unable to do any
more work, and we were thinking it
would make a hole in our cheque when
we came to settle. We were agreeably
surprised on that day to find the
station had paid the doctor in full.
During my brother’s stay at Mildura
he had a job to swallow anything,
and the store was placed at his com-
mand in the shape of tinned milk,
sago, mazina, and anything he wanted
Mr. Jamieson came down 1 every day to
see him, and told off a man to attend
to him at night. We were paid in
full, the station settling the doctor’s
attendance and other expenses.
We were two days making Pine
Plains, where we got on pumping
water for the sheep, my brother at
the homestead and I at a hut two
miles away. Most of the work had
to bo done night and morning ; during
the middle of the day we were spell-
ing for the wells to fill up. We were
at this job about four months. Dur-
ing the rest of the year until shearing
we were out in the back country
shepherding.
About this time Mr. Coppock, of
Albacutya. had a brother arrive in the
colony. He was about sixty years of
age,and had been a publican in Man-
chester. He was a married man with
two children. He left his wife and
children in Melbourne, and he started
for Albacutya, to see what the coun-
try was like. The mailman took a
horse for him to Lake Hindmarsh to
bring him to Albacutya. On arriving
at the station, then in the occupation
of Mr. Henry Ellerman, he was kindly
treated, and the next morning was
directed to take the road to the left
on leaving the horse paddock. There
were only the three roads at that time
—the road he came by from Dimboola,
the road north to his destination, and
one due east to Pepper’s Plain. The
poor new chum took the latter,
followed it to the plain, and there it
ended, at that time there being only a
track or two across to the dam. Here
he had a good drink, and on mounting
his horse he headed due north. On the
following day he let the horse go,
thinking he would make to the sta-
tion, and they would send out men to
look for him. The horse made a bee
line for the, lake, some six miles from
the homestead, and when the mailman
was on his return trip from Pine
Plains and Albacutya, he found the
horse with the saddle and bridle on.
He caught him and took the horse to
the homestead, when all hands started
out to search. They thinking he
would make east. They lost two
days searching in this direction, re-
turned to Pepper’s Plain, and tried
north. On they fourth day they picked
up his tracks—he had been circular
sailing —and at about sundown reached
the poor old fellow, near done-for. He
had made a cover from the sun’s rays
and had laid down to die. He had
not a drink since the first day at
Pepper’s Plain. He was found at
what is now known as the Cattle
Trap, a rough shop for a lime juicer
to get slewed in. To-day it is all
robed, not a stick of mallee to be
seen, just a few sticks lining the roads
and for forty miles is all in farms.
To return to Mr. Coppock, they had
a job to get him round, and it was
not till the second trip of the mail
man that he reached his brother’s
place. After a week or two he got
his wife and children to Albacutya,
where he stopped for some months.
Ho never took kindly to the life. His
experiences in the mallee had soured
him. He soon returned to Manches-
ter. and I should have much liked to
hear him pitch about Australia, more
especially the beautiful Mallee, and his
sufferings in it.
On finishing the sheep, I again made
back to the mallee, and went on work-
ing for a contractor fencing in the last
paddock at Lake Coorong. I con-
tinued at it until January 1871, when


I made a trip to Mount Egerton, to
my brother Tom. I stopped there a
fortnight, and then came back to Lake
Hindmarsh Station, at this time in
the hands of Mr. Hogg. There was a
big job of fencing in hand, and I got
on at work with the contractor, E.
Cregan. The line of fence was about
eighteen miles from the homestead.
There were five men and a Chinaman
cook. The boss, with a team of bul-
locks, was mostly employed carting
water. It was a very hot summer,
and it kept him going ; having to go
into the river at the homestead, it
took him a day going in and two
days returning. We were belting
away for some weeks, when on get-
ting up one morning the whole
atmosphere was full of smoke, and the
sun rose like a copper disc. Me could
not form an idea where the fire was,
but were pretty sure it was not very
far away. On starting the men to
work, the boss gave orders for the
cook and myself to stop behind, and
clear away all the dry leaves and
sticks around the camp. We were
about two hours at work clearing,
when all of a sudden the llames ; in big
tongues, with a roar would leap over
the malice. As soon as I saw 7 this I
was off to a little plain, about a
quarter of a mile away, where I set
fire to the grass. The Chinaman was
not long after me ; he had managed
to save his coat and opium pipe, etc.
IVe stopped about twenty minutes on
the plgin, and on making back to the
camp saw a sight. I hope I may
never see the like again. We had a
big tarpaulin for a tent ; it was a job
to find out whore it stood. The
bullock dray, with the tank of water,
had toppled over, and w 7 as on the
ground, the fire having burnt through
the fetcholls and the spokes of one
wheel. There were five sheep in a pen
all dead —three were on the ground and
two were standing straight up, with
their entrails on the ashes of their
pen. The whole of us lost our swags;
the boss was the greatest loser, 11
miles of fencing being burnt. All you
could see was a white line, with just
a few stumps of the stakes. In the
tent was a bag of sugar, one of flour
and a chest of tea. The fire came
diagonally across the fence, about a
hundred yards above the camp, leav-
ing about three-quarters of a mile
unburnt. The three men continued
work, not knowing where the fire was,
until they came home to dinner. They
had finished all their water in their
bags, and were going to get a drink
at the tank ; it was nearly on the
boil. They made a fire, and making a
pot of tea, had a spell, and when it
began to get cool towards evening we
started for the homestead. !
We made Pepper's Plain, where wo
stopped all night. The boss coming
out after dark, and hearing what was
up, rode in again to the river, where
his bullocks were turned out. while
with us he told us that the hawker
was at the station. I, knowing that
half of his stock consisted always of
whisky, came to the conclusion to
make my way to Dimboola and get
another swag. The men, of course,
made the homestead, where the con-
tractor shouted a case of whisky, and
that was all they trot for weeks of
hard graft. Of course the contractor
was the greatest loser. Had he got
t he fence passed and measured he
w*ould not have lost to so great an
extent. The whole of the country
for miles around is now farms, with
tanks and water channels running
through the country. The old dray
was left to its fate, and lay there for
years after.
At the time the fire was raging on
the east side of the lake, another w r as
burning at a frightful rate on the
west side, on the station belonging to
Mr. Ferris. A party of three men
were putting up a mallee fence on the
heath. Two of the men were well-
known to me, one of them. Buck Jiiley^
1 had known since I came to the
colony. The other, James Martin, I
was acquainted with, as a hard
working man and good fellow*. The
third man had not been long in the
district, and was a native of St.
Helena. Riley 1 had been shearing
with the year before at Wonga Lake.
The three poor fellows lost their lives,
it is supposed, by fire. Their bodies
were never found, not even a scrap of
their clothing, boots, or anything that
could lead to their identification.
Their tent was ashes, and their biUys
and all tinware destroyed. At the


end of the burnt fence the heads of ihe
axes and the mall rings were found
together with their billy with the J*y
tea and sugar m it. Of course the
solder had melted, the billy had i ur-d
and the contents were on the gro i id.
For weeks after the police and a mob
of men were scouring the heath in
vain. Even after the most had given
up all hopes, one of the best busmien
in the Wimmera district was ridlag for
days without any result. Each of the
men had money coming; Riley no Uss
than £35, Martin must have had
about the same amount, and the third
poor fellow a good sum. The only
one that Mr. Feris had any know-
ledge of concerning their relations was
•lames Martin, and in his case the
money coming to him was forwarded.
The other two had no relatives in the
colony. Of course;, there was a great
loss in fencing. Row, of Albacutya,
had some twenty miles burnt, with
about six hundred sheep. Hogg, at
Lake Hindmarsh, twenty-five miles of
fencing and a thousand sheep ; and
others on the Warracknabeal Creek
were (he losers of both sheep and
fencing.
1872.
Being about full up of mallee fencing
I made my way down to Mount Eger-
ton, had a spell with my brother, and
saddling up my horse travelled back
to Wonga Lake, Cameron’s station. I
was there most of the year fencing
and stripping box bark for roofing. I
wont Hi rough the shed shearing, and
on cutting out made again for the
south-east, and went on shearing at
Fairview. eighteen miles from Naara-
coorte.
1873.
Cutting out the sheep, T rode to Mt,
Cam bier. After spelling there for a
week I started back for the scrub, and
on reaching Pine Plains, went on
cooking for a camp of fencers. T was
there a month or two, and made back
to Wonga lake, and was working
there until the shearing. I struggled
through, and then made to Wattle
Range in the south-east. On finishing
I was making my way back, when I
dropped into a job sheep droving at
Komorn. a station of Money Miller’s,
near PenoTa. Our destination was
another station of Miller’s, named
Mum hang, on the Murray River. We
were seven weeks on the road. The
only incident worth recording occurred
at Edenhope, then called Lake Wallee.
\> e had a colonial experience man with
us, rather fond of his whisky, and on
reaching the above township he got
into trouble with the storekeeper, and
playing up in the establishment in his
cups, landed in the watch-house. The
man in charge, on hearing he was in
the logs, went back to bail him out,
but got the drink in him before going
to the watch-house, and, abusing the
policeman in charge, he was lumbered
as well. - This was on a Saturday.
Well, the Court only sat on Tuesdays,
so we were left without a boss until
that day. We managed to keep the
sheep together until Tuesday, when
they appeared at the camp —both
minus a sprat. We were wanting
stores, and the boss coming to me
asked me what money I had, and if I
could lend him a pound or two. By
a rare chance I had most of my shear-
ing cheque on me, and during the rest
of the route financed the crowd. I
know the boss had sufficient funds on
leaving Komorn to take him to his
destination, but no doubt it took all
he had to square the storekeeper for
the new chum’s little joke. However,
I lost nothing. On settling up on the
day of their shivoo, someone wired
down to the ollice in Melbourne, and
a man was started off to relieve the
drover. lie, the new man, being told
to make Swan Hill, thinking he would
take that route, and make down to
the Murray to Bumberg. lie never
overtook us until we reached the
Mournpool Lakes, on Kulkyne, as we
took the route by Horsham and War-
racknabeal ami Coorong, and then
through the back country on to the
Kulkvne run.
1574.
The new man, on reaching us, was
duly installed as boss, and was with
us until we delivered the sheep, about
ten days after the new man meeting
us. After they took delivery we were
all settled with, the men dispersing in
all directions, myself making for the
Kulkyne homestead, where I went on
cooking for some two or three
months. I‘ left that to go cooking for
one man, the overseer at Tyegia, near


where the Ouyen railway station now
stands. I was only getting a pound
a week at the home station, and had
nearly thirty men to dish up, and 1
got the same amount skimming the
pot for the overseer and myself. It
was a lonely job, but my mate in the
hut had plenty of books, and Mr. Sep-
timus Miller sent me out his kangaroo
dogs, and I amused myself hunting. I
was six months on the job, and at
shearing time went in to shear. I was
six weeks before finishing, when for a
second shed made again to the south-
east, and got one at Mount Graham,
then in the hands of Mr. John Mclnnis.
At this place c dropped across the finest
cook 1 ever saw on a station —a
Canadian half-caste, crossbred with an
American Indian. A tall good look-
ing fellow, and a master at his craft.
A bit of a martinet in the hut ; he
would not allow the general rule for
the men to hack and cut at their
discretion, but appointed two men to
carve, myself being one of these. I
was not much of a dad at carving,
but all the mutton was boned, and
rolled, stuffed with sage and onions,
so it was an easy job. He made the
best bread I ever saw ; no baker by
trade or cook could hold a candle to
him. For the two lunches, morning
and afternoon, there was pastry fit
for the Melbourne Club. I was sorry
when we cut out.
The following year I was mostly
knocking about at Kulkyne, working
for contractors, fencing during the
greater part of the year. I was
shearing in the season, and made my
way down the south-east. On finishing
I got on at Benara, Ellis’s station,
the wool shed being six or seven miles
from the home station. It was a
very wet season ; some weeks we would
onlv have one or two days work. It
took us into the following year, 1876
before we cut out. On doing so,
hearing they were short of men at
Mount "Graham, made my way there,
and got a pen. I was hard at it
until the end of January, when I had
had a good spell in Mount Gambler,
and then started back for Kulkyne.
On reaching Bine Plains they were
starting a flock for Mill Park, one of
Miller’s properties, near Melbourne. I
took on the job of cooking for the
crowd and driving the spring cart
containing the swags, etc. I was six.
woeks on the road. Nothing of any
interest to relate happened until we
reached Mount Egerton. At that
place we were rounding up the sheep
just before camping for the night.
When passing a big gum tree it sud-
denly broke short off about twelve
feet up the stem, and came down in
the middle of the flock, killing right
out ten of them, and fearfully wound-
ing six or seven others, that we had
to skin. These were salted and they
did the crowd until we reached our
destination. We had a young colonial/
experience chap with us, and he had a
narrow escape, the tops of the boughs
scratching his face and tearing his
vest. On reaching Mill Park our fares
were paid to Melbourne. IVe attended
the office in Market-street, and received
our wages. I was to have taken the
horse and cart back to Kulkyne, but
when I got back to Mill Park the
order was for me to stop and help get
ip the hay. I was not in for this
kind of graft, so started at once for
.Diggers Pest, caught the first train
and booked for Inglewood.
From there I padded the hoof to
Kulkyne. I was working during the
year fencing, and during the two or
three months preceding shearing. I
had a job with a mate defining all the
water areas, cutting posts, and put-
ting them up at the corners of the
blocks. Our time was mostly taken
up travelling, and the distances were
no little journeys apart, the run being
something near seventy miles from the-
river, south to the Pine Plains boun-
dary, and the same distance east and
west. Of course, we had a horse and
cart for our tools, swags, tent, etc.
A lonely time we had, but made it
bring on the shearing, on the conclu-
sion of which I made my way to
Wentworth, where I took my passage
on the Podney steamer for Echuca.
We were six days doing the trip,
stopping so often taking in wood,
wool and other cargo. I had three
or four other shearers as mates. It
was a pleasant time and before we
reached Echuca we had two barges
loaded high with bales, and about
two hundred and fifty on the steamer.
The deck passengers had to sleep oni


the bales of wool under the house on
deck, where the cabin passengers put
in their time. There was only about
eighteen inches between the top bales
and the deck above us. A lot of our
time was put in fishing with a wire
between the bales for our boots, sad-
dle straps, etc., that had fallen down
between the corners of the wool bales.
One chap had to land with one boot,
while I was fortunate, only losing my
swag straps. However, we replaced
our losses on reaching Echuca, and
there we took the train for town,
reaching Melbourne near midnight.
After a week’s spell, I took a pas-
sage in the steamer Dawn, for Port-
land. I had another week there,
fishing and swimming in the bay and
otherwise enjoying myself, and then
started back to work. On reaching
Kulkyne there was a mob of sheep at
South Avenue, another station of
Miller’s, near Guichen Bay, to be
shifted to the Murray. I was sent
with the man in charge, knowing the
(rack. I was about a week making
the Avenue, and a day or two mus-
tering and engaging men. It was a
real good season for grass, and we
took our time on the road. On reach-
ing the station they took delivery,
and I then made for the Darling
River. Got on at Burtundy, muster-
ing and cutting lambs, ear marking,
etc. On completing, with a mate
I took a contract to pull down and re-
erect a couple of miles of fencing.
Finishing this job, and nearing shear-
ing time again, I made back to Kul-
kyne and went through the shearing
there.
1876 AND 1877.
I then went through the scrub to
Pine Plains. Not getting a job there
I tramped to Cow Plains and got a
job of cooking for a contractor’s
camp. After a week or two I was
taken ill, and had to leave. .1 was
four days on the road to Pine Plains,
and nearly pegged out. On reaching
the station I stopped a week recuper-
ating, and then made my way to
Lake Hindmarsh, where I took on
rabbiting. I pegged away at this for
six months, and then made my way
to the Western District and got on
shearing at Thomas Cummings’ sta-
tion, Stoney Point. During my time
hero shearing, the employees got up a
sweep on the Melbourne Cup, which I
was lucky enough to win, having
drawn Chester, and this added seven
pounds fifteen shillings to my cheque
on being settled with. I then, with a
mate, made Colac, and took the train
for Geelong, had a good time there tor
a week, and then trained again for
Inglewood, and from there we tramped
to the Wimmera. We got a job at
Longerenong, then in Mr. Bullivant’s
hands, and were some months at
contract work. On finishing, my mate
and I made through to the Murray,
where I parted with my companion, he
taking the Murrumbidgee, on the road
to Queensland. I could not stomach
a trio of these dimensions. I made
the Darling River and Burtundy Sta-
tion, and got a job droving. I walked
out to an out hut at the back coun-
try called Arumpo, and was hired at
thirty shillings a week. Our destina-
tion was Deniliquin, where we trucked
the sheep, after seven weeks’ travell-
ing. I got a free pass for Melbourne,
put in a week in town, and then made
for Geelong, and took train for Colac.
After two days’ travelling I got
work shearing for McDonald Bros., at
Mt. Shadwell. On cutting out T made'
tracks for Lake Corrong. then held by
Lascelles and Mandevillc. By this
time the place was in a bad way with
rabbits and wild dogs. The number
of sheep had dwindled down to a few
thousand, and it was a job to keep
them alive. I took a job doging, by
trap, and poisoning them. It was
a rough, lonely life, walking long
distances every day, the traps being
on old roads and cattle tracks. Half
my time I was lying out. My camp
was an old shepherd’s hut, with most
of the roof off ; but still there were
compensating moments, the getting the
best of the dingoes, cunning customers
as they are. They were worth one
pound, that being my recompense for
each dog ; of course, the firm supplied
me with rations. I continued at the
job for about four months, when I
threw the game up, and before I got
work again, tramped through to Pine
Plains, and from there to Cow Plains,


where I went on fencing, some ten
miles from the homestead. The sea-
son was a real bad one ; sheep that
poor, were hardly eatable. Flour,
full of weevil and maggots, had to be
sifted before making a damper. Each
man was allowed a bottle of lime
juice a week, thus keeping away
scurvey. Wo were eight weeks on the
job, when 1 was glad to get away,
making Nhill. After a spell of a week
1 started again. I had a good few
pounds in my pocket, and I wanted it,
for I was walking the whole of the
winter.
1879.
The country was in a deplorable
condition with rabbits and dingoes,
borne of the stations had no one but
a caretaker at the homestead. The
sheep were all removed or dead,
slaughtered by wild dogs. I made
from Nhill through by Pine Plains,
from there to the Murray, up the
river to Swan Hill, to Kerang, Boort,
Morton Plains, Lake Coorong, Pine
Plains. Cow Plains, through to
Pincroo, down through the Heath to
Tintinara, across the desert to Border-
town, back to Lake llindraarsh, on to
the Murray River, thence to Went-
worth, at the Junction of the Darling,
twelve more miles to Avoca, Cudmore
Bros’, station, where I got a job
fcnomg and cutting cord wood for the
engine until the shearing commenced.
This was the longest time and the
biggest tramp and loneliest I ever
made. I was sometimes for weeks
together and never saw a man travel-
ling. T w r ent into the most out-of-
the-way places thinking to get work,
but things were bad What with
drought, rabbits, and dingoes, there
was no work going. By the time I
got on at Avoca my funds were down
to seventv-two shillings. T started
the Jaunt with thirteen pounds in my
pocket. My troubles were not to end
yet. After shearing three weeks I
was fa'or- bad with influenza, and
was in bed three weeks at the station
in company with thr'v other unfortu-
nates. As soon as I began to mend,
wi th a mate, we made Wentworth,
and taking riysaun on the steamer
dane Eliza on Saturday night, made
Morgan. On the following Tuesday
during the trip we took on shearers
at Bookpuram and Lake Victoria.
Most of them were drunk, and con-
tinued in that state until they reached
Adelaide. On reaching the wharf at
Morgan, we went to the only hotel, a
fine stone building. The place was a
pandemonium with drunken men. As
my mate and 1 were not on for their
company, we got some tucker, went
about a quarter of a mile away, and
camped under a tree for the night.
On the following morning we took the
train for Adelaide ; the carriages were
full of the boozers, most of them
having a bottle. Before reaching our
destination the compartment was
stinking with whisky. We parted
with the crowd at the loop liriß rim-
ing to the port, thinking to catch the
Coorong steamer for Lacepied Bay.
On reaching the wharf wo were in time
to see the boat about a quarter of a
mile away, so we had our dinner at
the Port and took the train back to
Adelaide, where we had to put in
three days, until the Benola sailed.
We spent the time pleasantly, the
environs being very picturesque. The
nights were passed at the Theatre
Royal, Wagner’s “ Lohengrin ” being
performed, Madame Antionette Link
being the star singer. Sunday was
rather a dull time to put in at the
Holy City of Churches.
The next day we started on the
boat for the south-east, making
Lacepcde Bay the next morning. Its
a poor enough harbor, and there was
a heavy sea running. A small steam
lauch came alongside ; it was jumping
up and down, and it was a job having
to jump when it was on top of a
wave. My mate did the trick with-
out making a bungle of it. I was
rather nervous, and jumping when she
was in the trough of a wave, made a
mess of it. bruising myself badly. An
old lady had to be put in a sort of a
tub cut in two. and lowered down
with a block and tackle. On making
the wharf, we went to the only hotel,
where I stopped until the next day.
My mate had friends a mile or two
away, and made their place. The next
day I started up to Reidy Creek, call-
ing at the stations, trying to get on
shearing, but was unable to find work,
as they were not commencing for a


week or two. My funds running out,
there was nothing for it but to make
back to the old quarter. I have
never shorn a sheep since.
When I reached Lake Hindmarsh the
place was in the hands of the agents,
Mr. Hogg having left it ruined some
years before. He had real bad luck.
On making Horsham he stored a lot
of his property at Gillis’s Wimmera
Hotel, and lost the lot by fire. 1 got
a job with Mr. John Affleck at Lor-
quon. I stopped six months, and
then went to the Exhibition in Mel-
bourne. I had my dinner in the
building ; it was a memorable meal,
being the worst I ever was afflicted
with. I was in town a week, and
making back to Lake Corrong, found
it in a parlous condition. Only three
thousand sheep on the place, and they
had to be shifted twice a week to
keep them alive, and this on a station
where they shore a hundred thousand
ten years before.
1883.
At this time the Government was
doubtful whether the Mallee was worth
saving, and the two daily papers were
f”ll of leaders, asking the same ques-
tion, and for three years they were
debating the subject. During that
time the country was going from bad
to worse- I had:a job to pull through,,
but managed to get work shepherding
at Morton Plains, stopping there until
the squatters got a fresh lease in ’B3,
when I shifted to Lake Corrong with
my boss, he having became manager
for Mr. E. H. Lascelles. There were
camps of men all over the run,,
fencing, ringing trees, and trying to
get the rabbits down, and for nearly
two years Mr. Lascelles made most
strenuous efforts to redeem the coun-
try, and to very little effect until he
got permission to cut it up for culti-
vation, since when the country has
been gradually recovered.
This year ’BS, saw nearly the end of
the pastoral occupation of the lands,
most of the lessees following the
example of Mr. Lascelles, surveying
and cutting up their runs for agricul-
ture. When the cookies got posses-
sion they made short work of the
rabbits. -They may not have exter-
minated the vermin, but they soon
brought them down to a minimum,
doing little or no damage. I have
only came across one run, Ned’s Cor-
ner, on the Murray frontage, where
they actually reclaimed the place for
sheen. Their efforts were mainly con-
fined to strychnine poisoning with dog
wood. I was working on the place in
T 3, and was astonished at the splen-
did work accomplished. At this time
they had sixty or seventy thousand
sheep on the run.
In bringing my reminiscences to a
close, I would remind the Press and
Parliament of their miserable doubts
respecting whether the Mallee was
worth saving. In a very few years
the whole of the north-western portion
of Victoria will be one vast wheat
field, affording homes to thousands of
prosperous families. I will now con-
clude, wishing the present holders of
the land may have' the good luck their
strenuous labors are worthy of, and
which was denied most of the
pastoral tenants.
Conclusion.






