

PRICE ONE SHILLING
Pioneering Day:
Thrilling Incidents
Across the Wilds of . .
Queensland with Sheep to
the Northern T erritory
In the Early Sixties
BY
GEO SUTHERLAND
3MSBANE:
W H, WENDT £r ,Co. Ltd.. Printers
1913


Pioneering Days : : Thrilling Incidents
By GEO. SUTHERLAND
NO. 1
Pew of the early pioneers of Western and North-Western
Queensland are now in tlie land of the living, and to collate any
rerninisoenses of the distant past, of men and matters —the dangers and
hardships they underwent through droughts and floods, savage blacks,
hunger and thirst, &c., &c. —may be of interest to many readers of the
present day and to a certain extent illustrate the hard conditions of life
in those wild regions at that period.
The aim of our party was to buy sheep and start out with them in
quest of new country. At that time there was a big rush for runs if
the quality of the country was at all favourable. When two or more
discovered the same piece of country a race took place between them to
Brisbane, as the first applicant’s tender secured the country. It was no
joke to ride hundreds of miles and then a slow boat trip, perhaps, to
Brisbane, but the hot fever of securing runs was rampant and travelling
magnificent distances no object so long as the land was safely secured.
Alas! Sad to relate that a few years after the rush out a crash
came, a depression previously unequalled in Queensland, when stock
and wool dropped to zero, causing ruination to thousands of graziers, in
all parts of the colony, and especially to those far inland. Bad enough
to have to endure the hard and dangerous life even if a fortune was in
sight; but to struggle on from year to year and then have to bow to the
inevitable —after all their pluck, energy and endurance—was intensely
cruel and galling. ■
By the people of the present generation there is not much thought
given towards the old explorers and pioneers. To them it is oblivious
old times, and may say, “ What fools they were to risk life and limb to
penetrate the wild wilderness; was it not with the view of advancing
their own interests.” Yes, to a certain extent, just as the gold digger
tramps out beyond civilisation in the hope of discovering a new Eldorado,
or like the mariner voyaging away into unknown seas hoping in his
adventures to drop across a new and profitable land. The world to-day
would be much poorer only for those brave adventurers by land and sea


lifted out. Conway was on Rosella Greek, but I forget who owned it
then. The teams camped here a night, the sheep being a day ahead,
the two drivers and myself with them. After dark, one of the drivers,
a big, fat fellow, not long out from London, went across to the hole for
water. Hearing a fearful #ell from him, we rushed to our firearms,
and ran in his direction, thinking the blacks were murdering him. To
our surprise, we found him heels up in one of the big water-worn holes'.
He stumbled in a small hole, and then head first in the big one. The
two of us got him out, and, finding he wasn’t hurt, couldn’t help laughing
at such a predicament. Passing on towards Mount McConnell, we
crossed country where a lot of gold, silver and asbestos was afterwards
found, but all very barren country for stock. On a little creek near
Mount McConnell, I saw the first wild black. He was busy, several
feet up a big box tree, hanging on by his big toes and point of fingers,
chopping a hole in the tree with his slone tomahawk. His back towards
me, he did not notice me, so I stood some distance away watching him.
Presently he finished the hole, put his hand into it, after dropping the
loraahawk, and pulled out an oppossum, knocked him against the tree,
(hrew him down, and then came down himself. As he landed on terra
firma, I gave a big yell, and pretended I was to rush him on horseback.
He turned round and then rushed off like lightning, leaving ’possum and
weapons behind. How he could cut a neat oval hole inches deep in a
hard tree standing up in his own notches with a stone tomahawk was
beyond belief till one saw the operation.
IV.
On reaching Mount McConnell we heard the blacks were in large
mobs ahead and very aggressive, killing stock and attacking the men on
Natal Downs. Mr. Kellett, manager and part-owner of Natal, was at
the Mount trying to get help from there to disperse the black assailants,
and told us to be very watchful travelling up the Gape, especially at
night, when the niggers were more likely to make a raid. Leaving
Mount McGonnel we got on to Gape River at its junction with the
Belyando, and followed it up to the junction of Amelia Greek. The
Gape at that time held splendid waterholes right along, but, like Suttor,
many years after I could hardly find a hole; all sand, but plenty of
water a short distance underneath. Natal Downs being off the river,
we did not see it. Neither did we see any blacks, but plenty of tracks.
Coming to Amelia Greek we followed it up for some distance, and then
on to Billy Webb’s Lake —only a fair sized waterhole. Within a mile
or so beyond the lake was a belt of poison bush. The stock had to
be carefully and hurriedly driven through this belt. Camping at the
lake, next morning we rushed the sheep through in a canter, flock after
flock, and did not lose a sheep. The track was white, however, with
the skeletons of a former lot, where some thousands succumbed to
eating the bush. These sheep belonged to Alexander, a Burnett squatter,
and were in charge of Reginald Halloran, who took the remnant of the
mob down below Donor’s Hills, and settled on country there. Leaving
Webb’s Lake, our trouble commenced for want of water till we got to


Flinders. The longest dry stage was, however, 35 miles, and the
weather, being cool, we negotiated the distance fairly easy. The last
water before reaching the Flinders was in a creek called Skeleton
which I suppose ran in to the Landsborough. On this creek I spent a
peculiar night. The teams came on and camped where the track crossed
the creek. It was near dark when the teams were unyoked, and the
water was some three or four miles below us. The fat driver and myself
started down for the water with the bullocks and horses. The creek
was as crooked as a ram’s horn, and very scrubby in places. The night
was dark and cloudy, so we hardly knew where we were going.
However, the animals were perishing for water, and apparently knew by
instinct that water was ahead of them. On they went, clinging closely
to the creek, while we simply followed the bells. All at once we came on
the water, and a big mob of blacks with no end of fires camped on the
banks. The bullocks and horses marched unconcernedly right through
their camps, and rushed in to the hole. The niggers made tracks at
full speed, knocking against the scrubby bushes in their flight, and
sending showers of sparks flying from their fire sticks. Now the
question arose, “ What were we two to do?” My companion, who was
the most frightened man of blacks I ever met, wanted to start back to
the camp at once. That was easier said than done on such a dark
night, for if we got off the crooked creek we might never get on it
again, and if we went to strike across for the track, we might pass it
without seeing it, being almost invisible at times with daylight. At last
he took my advice and we rode out about half a mile to the open with
the intention of staying there till daylight. Although quite secure from
an attack there, Denis began weeping, wailing and raving all night,
getting madder and more mad, wanting my revolver to shoot himself
before the blacks would kill and eat him, as he was sure they would,
and so on. How glad was I when daylight appeared, and this madman
was again sensible. ,
We struck the Flinders somewhere about opposite where Prairie
is now. I know there were some open downs and plains about it, for
the next morning after we reached the river, I went out at daylight with
one of the drivers to muster up the bullocks and horses. The morning
was mild, and I was only rigged in thin moleskin pants and a Scotch
twill shirt. I suppose through sheer oussedness, the animals scattered
themselves as much as possible, for long before we got to camp with
them, a cold weterly wind blew up—my first experience of the downs’
chilly breezes, which nearly perished me, although not so very long
away from “ Caledonia’s stormy breezes.”
V.
From some of the hills on the Hughenden run, one gets a magnifi-
cent view of the open, almost treeless downs, a perfect panorama which
resembles looking across a vast expanse of ocean, and especially
charming at first sight is this oceah of plains. The wayfarer mav travel
far and wide throughout the West, but such an expansive and glorious
view he will not meet with; once seen, never forgotten.


Hugiienden Station was then owned, and still is, by Mr. Robert
Gray. (Mr. Gray sold out a few months ago.—Ed.) He is the oldest
station owner on the Gulf waters. The same station all the time for
nearly half a century, so he has seen many vicissitudes during that
long period of squatting life—the “ smiles of fortune and the frowns
of fate.” Like the majority of old-time squatters, the latter probably
predominated. At the time we passed the station (the first place we
saw after leaving Mount McConnell), it was only stocked with a small
herd of cattle, but soon after Mr. Gray introduced sheep, and the
country was an ideal sheep run, only the dingo and the eagle hawk pest
always caused a decrease owing to its proximity to the rangey country
and the basalt tablelands. It was in the month of June we struck the
Flinders and the grass very dry, and water, even in the river, very
scarce.
The country between Hugiienden Stalion and Teleraon was swarm-
ing with bush rats. They were in millions and a perfect nuisance to us.
At night they would run over and gnaw away at saddles, boots, rations,
&c. Dingoes were also numerous and as poor as crows, probably
through feeding on the rats. They would sneak round the sheep when
in camp, but appeared too frightened to make a dart at them, not
knowing what sheep were. Perhaps at breakfast time a dingo would
come along; then plates and pannikins would be put away and a rush
made after the dingo on foot with flresticks, axes, or anything handy.
The dog would go as fast as he could, but that was very slow. His
legs continually going down in the deep black-soil cracks, and his
mangy poverty, made him a quick victim to his pursuers, and the latter
greatly enjoyed the hunt —the only sport we had. So far we saw no
blacks, although plenty of them must have seen us, going down (he
Flinders especially, as they were generally on the other side of (he
river about the tablelands and basalt walls. The writer’s work was
each afternoon to ride ahead, find water, and select a camp for next day.
In going along, a smoke signal would start on the other side; soon
another signal further on. The niggers could speak to each other by
those signals, which were made in a hallow tree with a hole near the
bottom. This hole would be fitted with grass or dry leaves, and when
fired a column of smoke would rise in the air. The dry grass would
emit whitish smoke, but now and again bunches of green leaves would
be added, making the smoke black, which betokened something special
to the party in the distance. Although invisible themselves, their
tracks were plentiful at almost every waterhole, and one had to be
very watchful when having a drink, especially if in the deep bed of the
river.
Telemon Station; This fine run was taken up and stocked by Mr.
Robert Stewart, who had then his homestead, a small hut or two, on the
bank of the Flinders. The place was stocked with a few thousand sheep
and water on the run was very scarce at the time. Mr. Stewart was a
splendid specimen of the genus homo, a fine-looking man, an ex-British
army officer (and so is Mr. Gray, of. Hughenden Station), and a real
gentleman in every way, but somewhat careless when on the station
in his dress and ablutions, which caused him to be called a certain vulgar


epithet. Years after he sold out of Telemon and South-wick, on the
Burdekin and went home to Scotland with a lot of money, which,
unfortunately, he mostly lost through the suspension of the City of
Glasgow Bank.
VI.
On to Marathon, owned then by Kirk and Sutherland, the owners
of Suttor Greek. They were afterwards joined in Marathon by Mr.
Carson (now of the big wool firm of Winchcombe, Carson and Go.).
Marathon, like Telemon, is grand country, but at the time I speak of,
water was the great drawback. There was hardly a drop anywhere
outside the river valley, and on account of the dryness of the season,
very little there. There was any quantity of unoccupied country; in fact
all the country unoccupied was owing to the want of water, and splendid
country too. How different then to now! Miles of running water in
every direction, the dry desert turned into a garden—a paradise com-
pared to its original state. Marathon was stocked with sheep—a small
lot owing to want of water. The owners held it for some few years,
and then sold out that and Suttor Greek. Mr. Kirk took up a mercantile
business in Townsville, and died there. Sutherland, a sea captain, went
to Melbourne, bought a schooner there, and traded for some time in
the South Seas, but the venture was premature, so he sold out and
started mercantile business in Normanton. He explored a good deal of
the Flinders country when at Marathon, took up Cambridge Downs, and
sold it again without stocking- it. He also took up a number of blocks
lower down the Flinders, and, being a great admirer of Byron, named
them “ Manfred,” “ Lara,” &c. Carson went South, and some time
after poined the firm of Winchcombe, Carson and Co.
The next station on our route was Richmond Downs owned by
Bundock and Hays. They were Richmond River people, hence the
names “ Richmond Downs,” “ Wyangarie,” “ Clarence Downs,” &a.
Walter Hays managed and they took the cattle to stock the property
from the Richmond River. Like those above them on the Flinders, the
want of water was the great drawback. They held the station for
many years and then sold out. Mr. Hays started business in Townsville,
and died three years ago, and so did Mr. Bundock.
Leaving Richmond Downs the next station on our way was Lara —
a long distance down the river. Off the Flinders there were no runs
taken up at that time except Afton and Dalgonaly on the west side;
and no country occupied on the east side of the Flinders between Mount
Emu and Millungera. This latter station was owned by Mr. Gibson—
an immense area of territory, low down the Flinders and the Saxby.
Mr. Ranken owned Afton, but he was starved out for want of water, and
he had to abandon the country. He followed us to the Barclay Tableland
afterwards, but of that later on.
On our way to Lara we fell in with a Gulf notable, who went by the
sobriquet of “ Greasy Bill.” He, years after, was the discoverer of
gold at Woolgar, a place to which a big rush took place and where much
gold was obtained. “ Greasy ” prided himself in travelling about without


blankets or a stitch of clothing except what he stood in, and was never
known out there to wash himself. Although never owning a swag, he
never went about without two or three good horses. Always a “ hatter,"
(tie blacks came on him in the Woolgar ranges and killed him. There'
is a creek there named after him.
Lara was owned by Mr. Edwin Donkin, who had sheep on it, but the
country was not suitable for that class of stock. The grass coarse and
rank, and the most of the run very low. The ’7O flood came—the
biggest flood ever known in the gulf—and swept nearly all his sheep and
horses away. He and his men had to roost on the top of the huts for
days. The Flinders ther had no channels to carry flood waters away,
consequently the flats across, for miles, are one vast sheet of water.
Donkin deserved a belter fate, for he was energetic and tried his
utmost to succeed; but —he went down.
VII.
We were now nearing the sea coast and at the end of our tether to
secure decent, healthy sheep country. Landsborough some time before
when on a searching expedition for Burke and Wills spoke very highly
of the Barclay Tablelands, so our boss of the party thought that was
the locality to make for. The idea was, as a settlement was forming on
the Albert River, that the Gulf would open up a larg'e trade with
Batavia and other northern places, in wool, corned meat, &c. So far
this never happened, worse luck. The Herbert Rivfer (now the
Georgina) was a long way off, no road or track to follow, nothing but
Landsborough’s diary and steer by compass a good part of the way
when there was no watercourse to follow. However, the venture was
decided upon and a start made with the best intentions and ardent
hopes of success.
Further on than Lara was Ganobie, owned by Mr. Edward Palmer.
Most of this run was on the lower Gloncurry, Dalgonally higher up,
owned by Duncan and Donald Maclntyre—both cattle. There was also
on the Flinders a run newly taken up (at the junction of the Gloncurry)
by Mr. Murdoch Campbell, which he called Sorghum Downs, but
afterwards owned by Mr. Walker. Messrs. Jack and Tom Brodie settled
down on Donnor’s Hills, and Mr. Halloran (who lost most of his sheep
in the desert through poison bush) still lower down towards the coast.
We turned off the Flinders before reaching Donnor’s Hills and steered
across for the Leichhardt River. The whole country between the last
stations mentioned and the Gregory River was occupied by Captain
Towns and J. G. Macdonald—thousands of square miles—and known as
the “ Plains of Promise,” the homestead camp being on the Leichhardt
Palls. They also owned Inkerman, Jarvisfleld, and other stations on
the Burdekin, Carpentaria Downs, &e., on the Gulf waters. Mr.
Macdonald did a lot of exploring. He came to grief at last like many of
the early pioneers, and had to accept a police magistrate’s position.
Ever since we left the Suttor fever and ague were rampant, and
every day some one of our fellows would be ailing. A chest of medicine


was aboard, but on account of the large call made on it certain drugs
were getting very low. The want of vegetables was telling on our
constitutions, and of course fruit of any kind was out of the question,
notwithstanding the rough life (much worse was to come) all appeared
cheerful and fairly content.
We reached the Leichhardt in due course without anything eventful
happening. Crossed the river at the upper end of a 10-mile-long water-
hole, and camped there for a time whilst the boss of the party, another
man and a blaokfellow went ahead to explore and spy out the way,
and the land in front of us, for now we were on our own resources
to find our way forward, as there were no tracks of any kind to guide
us. Ploraville’s immense territory is chiefly low-lying plains as flat as
a flounder, but consists of very rich, deep alluvial soil. The grass at the
time was very high and rank—no stock to eat it. Whilst camping here
trips were made up the Leichhardt and Fiery Greek, but although the
country was all open for the newcomer, no suitable sheep country could
be found—too much grass seed, the main bad feature. Before we left
this camp Mr. John Rankin, who had to abandon Afton Downs for want
of water, came along with his sheep and camped above us. He was
on the qui vive for a run. There were also camped on the west bank
of the Gregory Messrs. Lyne and Steiglitz, also with sheep and in quest
of the same thing. Mr. James Cassidy with sheep was also waiting
somewhere in the neighbourhood on the same errand. More run hunters
were reported en route down the Flinders with stock to take up country.
VIII.
On, on, on, the exploring party returning with very favourable
reports regarding the Barclay Tableland, but unfavourable in respect to
the rough country we would have to traverse to reach it; we struck
camp and forged ahead. So rank, long and coarse was the grass on
the plains between the Leichhardt and the Gregory—some 40 miles—
that we had to get the teams in front of the sheep, with logs slung
crossways behind the drays to break down the grass and make a track.
Thus the sheep moved on in a string, flock after flock. All the drovers
were on foot in those days, no horses. One person had to pilot the
teams, steering by compass, and the rest followed. Although this great
crop of grass was pretty dry, it was not sufficiently so to burn. If it
was and the niggers set it alight, woe betide us. Some distance to our
left they had the ranges blazing everywhere. We were all very pleased
indeed to strike the Gregory and get away from this grass Jungle, which
in many places was a man’s height.
The Gregory! the most beautiful perennial stream in Queensland,
and the largest. No drought ever affects the volume of its running
waters, which is a lovely stream of pellucid water from its head to
the sea. Its banks fringed with tall, straight cabbage tree palms,
enormous Leichhardt trees, and a variety of others. The only drawback
is its inaccessibility in places for stock to water owing to steep, precipi-
tous banks.


We struck the Gregory where the Plains of Promise and the ranges
meet, and the long distance across this rangy country, and its roughness
for vehicles were likely to give us trouble. However, we had to make
the attempt and push through as best we could. We followed up the
river to its Junction with the O’Shannasy River, another large flowing
stream. A mile or two from the Junction the range came in to the
outer channel of the Gregory. A wall of precipitous rock on our left
and the deep main channel to our right, so that there was only a narrow
passage through, and that very broken ground and scrubby; an ideal
spot for the niggers to attack us. Here a tragedy nearly occurred.
The night was dark; one man’s watch was up, so he woke up the next,
and they walked round the sheep. The other man walked round the
opposite side. They met in a broken, bughy place very suddenly, and
neither expecting the other to be there the revolvers were immediately
drawn to shoot the “blaokfellow 1” One shot was fired before the
mistake was discovered, but fortunately without grave results. This
episode caused a good deal of fun in the camp for some time after.
By the number of the humpies, old and new—allowing a family of
four to each gunyah on an average—there must have been a large tribe
of blacks about the junction of the rivers. Large heaps of ashes were
also everywhere along the banks; also large quantities of kangaroos’
and emu bones, fish and fresh-water crocodile bones, &c.. The darkies
had nets set in special places on the side of the range where the
kangaroo and emu had pads in and out to water. These nets were long
and wide, very neatly made and very strong, the fibre being chiefly the
bark of the Kurrajong, a pretty shady tree, growing all round here.
For dillibags and fishing lines the bark of the wild flax plant—growing
luxuriously on the banks of the rivers—was utilised. No doubt the
niggers lived well hereabouts —on velvet compared to their skinny
brethren in the waterless deserts further inland. Plenty of flesh and
fish, and they had only to tear armsful of bark off the paper ti-tree,
which supplied them a good material for sleeping on at night, for a
covering in cold weather, and make gunyahs of. Their fishing lines
were very neatly made, sometimes one strand twisted and some three
strands. The hook, generally, the wishbone of a bird. One side of the
bone was left the full length, and the other side half broken off, the
stump neatly rasped down to a fine sharp point and barbed. The
cabbage tree palm supplied them with plenty of “ cabbage ” —a luxury
to a hungry white or black, so long as not too much was partaken of
at a time. We had no means of knowing whether they were cannibals
or not, nor had we seen any “ corroboree ” grounds such as the Suttor
River blacks formed —by making a large circle on a piece of flat, loose
soil, banking the earth outwards, and smoothing down the ground inside
the ring.
IX.
Here (at the junction of the Gregory and O’Shannessy) it was
necessary for our party to divide. Along the O’Shannessy the country
was too rough to attempt taking the teams that way, and out further
back there was danger of not sufficient water for the sheep, so the


main party started off up the river with the sheep, and I with a blaokboy
took in hand the piloting of the teams and finding a passage through
the rough rangy back country. By Landsborough’s diary we would
have four large watercourses to cross—the Seymour River, the Douglas
River, the Thornton River, and Harris Creek, all named by him —before
striking in for the O’Shannesy, towards a part of the river where we
were likely to meet the sheep.
Starting from the junction we steered by compass for the Seymour,
here and there zig-zagging in and out to avoid the rocky ridges and
the beastly old man spinnifex, which grew in big tussocks and skinned
the bullocks’ and horses’ feet. Striking the Seymour—a sandy, gravelly
watercourse—no water could be found, so had to take the animals back
to the junction to get a drink; a long way over broken stones and
spinifex. Following up the Seymour we found a small hole of water
in a cave, which supplied ourselves, but we had to take the cattle on
to the Douglas—another long way for a drink—once there we had
plenty of water, also in the Thornton and Harris Greeks, but the way
execrable. One place, the “ Devil’s Elbow ” the drivers called it,
gave us a lot of trouble, being a long wall of rock without a break to
allow us to pass, so we had to make a sloping bank of stones, timber
and earth to get the drays over. Crossing Harris Creek we followed
it down to the junction, where we found the sheep had passed up the
O’Shannessy, and in a day or two came to their camp.
The sheep party camped waiting for us at the fountain head of
the O’Shannessy. This is a natural big bore, rising in the bed of the
river in a deep pool, the water bubbling up just like an artesian bore,
and more springs right through the broken country. A short distance
out on each side of the stream are high walls of limestone rocks, and
the open downs of the famous Barclay Tablelands start from the river.
Footsore after the journey over rocks and broken stones, and their legs
raw with the prongs of the old man spinifex, we had to spell the bullocks
and horses for a day or two before tackling the long, dry stage to Mary
Lake on the Herbert. Meantime mention may be made of the huge ant
heaps all over the spinifex country. Some of these heaps are built up
to about ten feet high, and after rain, the termites, not contented with
the bulk and height of their castles, keep adding more stuff on, chiefly
grotesquely narrow spires, rising some feet above the dome-shaped mass
underneath. Inside the main body of earth is mostly hollow and full
of cells and empty spaces, which they appear to keep as a granary to
garner their grass seeds and other vegetable matter. There must be
millions of these little insects in one home when they carry up out of
the ground hundredweights of earth to establish and' build up such a
colossal structure, which stands all weathers.
It is a peculiar feature with many Australian watercourses that
they divide the conformation of country. On one side may be rolling
downs or plains with rich, heavy soil; on the other stoney, barren soil
with scrubby timber. Such is the case with the upper part of the
O’Shannessy River. On the left bank the rich, heavily-grassed table-
land comes right in on to the limestone cliffs ’of the river bank. On
the other side the quality of the country is ridgey, stoney, and inferior.


Still, although this latter country was despised in the early days of
settlement, it has long since been occupied and stocked.
From the O’Shannessy we made another move on to the end of
our destination, the Herbert River of Landsborough, afterwards called
the Georgina (after a Governor’s wife), as there was another river of
the name of Herbert on the north-east coast. The distance we had to
travel over waterless downs to the Herbert was some 35 miles. The
weather was extremely hot and parching (month of November). We
watered the sheep about 3 o’clock in the afternoon, carried all the water
possible, and drove on most of the night and all day following. At dusk
that day we struck the head of Landsborough’s “ Chester Greek,” where
there was a walerhole. The “ hole ” was there all right, but the water
had vanished—only wet mud. The sheep smelt it, however, and gave
us no end of trouble to drive them away from it. We were now some
six or seven miles from Lake Mary, and intended to camp till daylight,
as the shepherds (on foot) were completely knocked up, and so were
the dogs, but the sheep, with the usual crankiness of “ monkey ” nature,
would not think of resting for the night and rushed down the creek
baa-ing and bucking for all they were worth in search of water. Nothing
else could we do —we on horseback—but let them rip, the whole lot in a
string following the leaders and persistently keeping within the banks
of the dry creek. At last they reached the junction of the creek and
the Herbert, Mary Lake being only about a mile lower down the river.
Down they went and smelt the water. Then there was a terrific baa-ing
and galloping. On the left bank of the river at the lake, the ground
was high and rooky. Fires were burning in scores right down to the
water’s edge—a sure sign of a large camp of blacks On rushed the
sheep through tires, blacks, and all other impediments to quench their
thirst. The unfortunate niggers had a terrible time of it. To be roused
up out of their sleep at midnight by some 8,000 sheep rushing madly
and tumbling over them was chaos, was something demonical to the
simple natives, who never saw, or heard of jumbucks before. Of course
the whole tribe took up their beds quick and smart, and ran. To
this day the Georgina blacks have a corroboree indicating “the rush of
sheep to water at night.
X.
After a Journey of some thirteen hundred miles which took some
seven months’ travelling, we at last reached our destination and made
our camp on the left bank of Mary Lake, called the station “Rooklands”
and the present homestead is on the same spot, and the property bearing
still the good, hard old name.
After the fright the blacks got on the night of our arrival to rob
them of their country, we thought the poor wretches would give us a
very wide berth, and not likely to molest us for many a long day. In
this we found ourselves very much mistaken. Landsborough found
them anything but friendly when passing through, and actually deemed
it dangerous to camp near the waterholes. I never saw any body of
natives in any part of Australia to surpass physically the Rockland
blacks, and few indeed to equal them.


Only a few days’ grace they gave us when a cowardly attack, was
made in the dark, as usual with the sneaking savage, who never thinks
of anything like fair play. The attack was quick and sudden, and how
a whole dozen of us escaped with,our lives and uninjured limbs was
really a miracle. We had only calico tents rigged. These were some
distance away from the waterhole, and the cook to save carrying-
buckets of water so far made a fireplace of stones and a bough shade
of branches halfway between the tents and the water, which served all
hands as an eating place. On the day in question, one of the bullock
drivers took in a load of wood and dumped it down alongside of the
fireplace. That night we were just finishing tea, when all of a sudden
deafening yells arose from behind the wood heap and in an instant a
shower of spears, nulla-nullas, and other waddies came hying in all
directions. Unfortunately only one of the whole party had any firearms,
all left in the tents. The one possessing a revolver tired twice at the
niggers, haphazard in the dark. A spear went through the rim of his
hat, carried it away, and the pointed half of the spear was found next
morning stuck in a tree with the hat impaled on it. The other part
of the spear was lying at the fool of the tree. Of course alt made a rush
to the tents, to secure, firearms, but in the dark these were not easily
found, and had the savages followed us up, they could easily have
massacred the lot of us. However they didn’t, but grabbed and took
everything they could lay hands on, about the fireplace—-pannikins,
knives, forks, billies, etc., and actually carried away two camp ovens,
which, however, they found too heavy and clumsy, so they dropped and
cracked them on thee rocks.
Although thankful of our lives being spared and so providentially
escaping even a wound from the shower of spears, it was a grievous
loss to lose nearly all our kitchen and table utensils, owing to the
impossibility of replacing them for many a day to come. However this
was only the fortune of war. That night we kept a sharp watch in case
the niggers would make a second charge. All armed and ready for
battle, but we were not molested, and when daylight appeared, horses
were quickly got up and some half-a-dozen of us, well-mounted, made
a sudden raid after the blood-thirsty assailants. Their tracks crossed
over the river at the lower end of the waterhole, and from there they
followed the river up for some miles. All travelling in Indian file, till
they reached broken, scrubby country. Here we found the remains of
their camp, and by the number of gunyahs and fires, a large mob must
have camped there. But they vanished and made tracks, and quick
inarching over towards the heads of the Gregory, many miles in the
night and morning, and as we were unprepared for a long pursuit, we
had to return to camp again. The lesson they gave us made everyone
very cautious and watchful, so that the revolver was fully loaded, ready
for action at a moment’s notice. Settled down as we were now, all
spare hands had to go to work, building up sheep yards of stones and
brush, anything that came handy to fold the sheep, and put an end to
watching them on a camp night.
The next move was to explore the country, roughly fix on the
mileage of blocks and area to be taken up. We were quite ignorant of


where we were, South Australia or Queensland, but when a survey was
made (many years afterwards) the Rockland blacks were mostly in the
former colony, so that we were really the first party to stock any
part of the Northern Territory.
Landsborough called the two lakes “Mary” and “Frances” after his
nieces, daughters of James Landsborough, who then owned Raglan
station, near Gladstone. Although two fairly large holes they hardly
came up to the definition of “lakes.” On Mary Lake we camped and
Frances Lake is some four miles lower down, both in the shallow, grassy
bed of the Georgina. Landsborough, finding no traces of Burke and
Wills, only travelled some thirty miles down the river from Lake
Frances (where Camooweal is now) and returned for want of water.
Had he gone a few miles further he would have struck a large water-
hole. However, his ideas were to return to the Albert River and there
replenish his stores from the schooner “Firefly,” which was sent round
from Sydney to form a depot for him, Mackinlay and Walker, all of
whom were in search of the lost explorers. Leaving the Albert River,
Landsborough crossed the Plains of Promise, struck and followed up
the Flinders to near where Hughenden is now situated, then got on to
the southern waters and made for the Darling River, naming all the
places en route.
XI.
With the exception of a small waterhole in a watercourse named
by Landsborough “Don” Greek (jimetioning with the Herbert, some 10
miles below Lake Frances), we knew of no other water but the two
lakes, and they were only about a third full. The river could not have
ran for many years as its bed was overgrown with grass and no sigin of
any debris. Its course being so flat it was very hard to judge which
way the water ran, when it did run; which, apparently was very
seldom. The only thing which guided one was the bent timber growing
in the river bed. Landsborough expressed the opinion that the river
did not run for years previous to his journey, and certainly there was no
flood between his visit and ours. The two waterholes, Mary and
Prances, were a good deal supplied by a small creek running into each,
heading from the hard country which a thunderstorm would flood. The
one running into the latter ran up the river for about half a mile before
reaching the hole, thus showing the flatness of the river bed. There
was abundance of splendid grass and herbage everywhere, although
very dry. The want of more water was what gave trouble. Of course,
the everlasting stream in the O’Shannesey was always there, but the
dryness of the long stage of it prevented anything but a final dried out
rush. Observing blacks’ smoke about due west from Rooklands,
another and myself assayed a short journey of exploration, contemplating
the fire could only be some ten miles distant, but bush fires on those
vast downs are very deceptive, as we found out in this instance. Taking
three of the best horses with us, rations and two full tin canteens of
water, we struck out, travelling by compass. The loose, heavy soil
of the downs was very severe on the horses, the country in its virgin :
state and not been trampled hard by stock.’ We kept going, but no


sign of water indicated by the smoke. However, we kept travelling and
at last came in sight of a creek. This we saw several miles ahead
from the crest of the high downs and could notice some trees in the
coolibah bed denude of any foliage. This was a good sigin of water
as the cockatoos and other birds stripped the small twigs of the timber
near and around water. This gave us hope, but before, reaching the
creek we struck the head of a small gully in which we found a small
supply of water, left, apparently, by a light storm. Of course, the first
filing to do was to have a long drink ourselves, fill our canteens and
(lien allow the poor famishing horses to drink their full. Whilst the
quart pots were boiling for a much needed snack I walked down the
gully through an acre or so of emu berry bush trying to lind more
water. Around the small waterhole where we camped were many
fresh tracks of blacks, and as I walked through the low bushes all at
once I saw part of a nigger’s body lying flat under a bush. It gave me
a start, thinking a mob of natives were in ambush, so my revolver was-
immediately in evidence expecting a sudden rush, but standing still and
looking more closely at the dark apparition before me, I found it was
only a young boy newly dead. Probably his people spied/ me coming,
and in their haste to vanish left the little boy unburied.
Ko more water to be found in the gully or neighborhood. After
refreshing ourselves we saddled up and made for the leafless part of
the creek, but too late! Water was there a few days before, but now
only soft mud. Trusting to the little hole we left holding out for a
lime we pushed on, striking out in the same direction, but although
crossing one or two large creeks, no water was to be found with the
exception of two small gutters. Thus, unfortunately, we very reluc-
tantly had to retrace our steps in case the small supply of water
we knew of might dry and so leave ourselves and horses to perish.
The rivers we crossed were afterwards named the “James,” Rankin
and Lorn, but more of these later on. On returning there was just
enough in the small holes to enable us to get back to Rocklands by the
skin of our teeth.
Weeks and weeks now passed since we arrived at Rocklands and
the question was how or where to secure rations, as out stores were
running very low and our medicine chest almost empty. As stated, our
last ssupply of rations were loaded at Port Maokay many months before.
Burketown, on the Albert River, was now opened as a township, and
one or two storekeepers there, but they had never any large supply on
hand, simply because they could not secure it at any price. The only
vessel trading to the Gulf was despatched by Captain Towns and Go.,
Sydney. This old tub was rotten, generally overloaded and partially
wrecked on the Barrier reef or elsewhere before rounding Gape York.
When she did reach the mouth of the Albert her cargo was mostly
damaged; the flour sent up half rotten and full of long maggots,
the sugar (in casks) black and tarry, the tea no better than- gum-leaves.
Nothwithstanding all these drawbacks we were glad to get it, otherwise
starve. I may say here that we had to live weeks at a time on mutton,
blue bush and pig weed, not even a smoke of tobacco, or a grain of
salt. At limes it was impossible to buy a shirt or a pair of pants of


any sort, and some of Hie men had to turn tailors and make suits (not
too fashionable), out of an old blanket. But one case of Bluoher
.boots, which arrived from Sydney (consigned to our firm) took the
cake for absolute dishonesty. These looked well enough till worn a
bit, then it was found the sole, composed of a thin, skinny piece of
leather outside, and next to that a thick piece of bark. Such were the
troubles of early pioneers, or rather some of them. The present
generation of bushrnen even are in clover compared to the hard and
■dangerous lot of those who went through the fire in the early days of
.s ttlement. Selecting the freshest of the draught horses and a light
dray, the driver and Hie writer started for Burketown to make a
burred trip for supplies, and return with every expedition as our people
at Rocklands would be out of all supplies before we could return.
Our track out to the Tablelands was still visible to where we struck
the Plains of Promise, thence we had to follow the Gregory down some
distance to an outstation of Floraville, then newly taken up; from there
-a dray track or two guided us to Burketown. The blacks, so far, did
not molest us. We camped one night at the debouchere of the Barclay
from the Gregory. Here a large mob of blacks were camped. They
• appeared very excited and saucy. We had to keep watch all night in
■ case of a surprise. However, they made no attack till daylight, when
about twenty of them advanced yabbering, and going through no end
■of gymnastics. A shot from a carbine made them rush back'to where
the rest were camped. Leaving the horse driver at the dray with his
■carbine loaded, I walked out to collect the horses, having my six
■ chambered revolver fully loaded, and ready for battle.
Fortunately, the horses were handy, and jumping on the back of
■one, I galloped back and made a rush at the niggers, who, on seeing
the horse, made a bound into the river, swam across and cleared. This
Barclay stream is one of the most peculiar in Australia. It takes a
good deal of water from the Gregory, flows for many miles through
the level plains, an everlasting flowing stream, very sluggish, as there
is no fall: in the country, and just resembles all along a big ditch made
by human hands. The blacks here seemed to have revelled in abund-
ance of fish by the heaps they left on the banks where I scared them
•away. Their mode of securing the fish was peculiar. They made a
rope out of grass, twisted, about as thick as a man’s thigh, and long
•enough to reach well over each bank, having a sort of weir ready in
the shallow place below. At a deep hole, half a dozen niggers would
grasp this rope on each side, starting from the upper end to the deep
water, they would sway the rope backwards towards the bottom,
working down towards the weir, and so frightening the fish into their
net, where they were speedily clubbed and thrown ashore, perhaps ever
so many more than they could eat, but the aboriginal nature is the
nature of the dingo; he kills every animal he comes across; flesh, fish,
•or fowl, and never dreams of saving or keeping things alive for a rainy
• day when starvation may stare him in the face. To-day is sufficient
for the darkey, to-morrow he does not think of, so he makes no prepa-
ration of any sort.


XII.
Burketown was now an established township—of a sort —very rough;
and unhealthy. Landsborough was acting as Government Resident,,
when we reached there, Sharkey as Land Commissioner, and George-
Phillips, Government Surveyor, Two public houses were quickly
erected, as also two stores. Many criminals from the south made their
abode there to get away from the police, and so to speak, made it a
city of refuge. But these characters did not leave their vices behind
them, and so helped to make the little township a place only fit for
demons. Some short time after the “Jaomel Packet” arrived from
Batavia, carrying with her a terrible fatal fever known then as “Yellow
Jack,” which nearly decimated the small population, and gave Burke town
a very bad name. Of course, there was no doctor, no medicine, and no-
proper food, and the poisonous grog dispensed helped the heavy mor-
tality. Burketown is situated on the left bank of the Albert, a tidal
river, very crooked, narrow, and of not much account for safe naviga-
tion. The entrance from the sea is still worse, owing to its shallowness..
When the tide is out (only one tide in the 24 hours), one can walk
over the banks of sand for some distance seawards. The absence oh
deep water along (lie coast over the unnavigable rivers are the great
drawbacks to navigation all allong the Carpentaria Gulf shores.
Having secured a small quantity of supplies required we hastened'
back on our return trip, and the starved Rocklanders were very pleased!
to see us.
The waler in Mary Lake was drying up very quickly, and no sign
of rain, and at last dried up very suddenly, the bottom of the hole
being quite flat (we found the same remark applied to the Frances
waterhole), so we had to shift our main camp to France’s Lake. We
were only a short time there when the water vanished, and a shift of
quarters was imperative. Fortunately a heavy storm fell between us
and the O’Shannesy, running Don Greek. To this creek we shifted and.
remained there for some months, till Lake Frances got half filled, when
we took up our residence there again. On Don Greek the blacks gave
us trouble from the first, and got more and more saucy every day. At
last, to protect ourselves and stock, necessity forced us to battle royal.
Lyne and Steidletz were camped for some time with their sheep on the-
lower Gregory, and the former came up to Rocklands, looking for
country to fake up. Noticing several blacks’ fires near us, we deemed
it fully time to make a raid, and drive them back. The boss, Mr. Lyne,
and myself made for the fires, and before reaching them we met a-
large mob of the niggers making straight for our camp, fully armed,
and all painted for war. This was at the Herbert River. We tied our
pack-horses to a tree in the river, and as the darkies advanced at a
trot, we waved to them to stop, but they would not, so advancing in-
front of them we were prepared to stand our ground and fight the battle
out. When they realised our movements they suddenly stopped, but
the chief or ringleader made signs and motions for his fellows to-
advance. Seeing that our position was now getting critical, one of our
parly raised his carbine to his eye. As soon as he did the foreman


■of the tribe instantly made a target of his boomerangs, and waddies, at
the same time going through all sorts of fantastic gestures, and strange
evolutions for his men to back him up and keep advancing. Our man
fired, and the bullet struck, apparently, in the very centre of the leading-
champion’s network of boomerangs, sending them in splinters amongst
all those behind him. All fled back for their lives, but to frighten them
■we kept trotting behind them to give them a further scare and make
them understand we were their masters. It was really surprising how
■deftly those wild blacks, when even in full swing racing away for life,
could pick up in an instant, and without stopping, a stone with their
toes, off the ground, catch it up quickly with their hand, and, with
hardly stopping, hurl it with terrific force and as straight as an arrow
at the enemy.
Mentioning the name of Mr. Lyne. He went out one morning from
our camp, to look for country about the heads of the Gregory. He
camped out a night. Next morning his two horses were gone. In
■wandering about looking for them he lost his bearings. Luckily he
followed a gully which led him to the river. This he followed down to
within 30 miles of Burketown, some 300 miles by the windings of the
Gregory, on foot, without any food but cabbage tree. How he escaped
the armies of wild blacks was a miracle. On getting back again to New
South Wales he became a member of Parliament there, and for some
years holds the title of “Sir William” Lyne.
Although chasing back one tribe of niggers on our Western side,
Don Greek appeared to be the favorite habitat of those Myalls, who were
much more ferocious and warlike than those we expelled. They gave
us much watching, anxiety, and trouble. To catch birds they had the
habit of breaking down small twigs of the Goolibah trees, and plant
them closely all round the waterhole, saving one small area. This little
■spot was with flat stones, made a small causeway of, the stones an inch
•or so above water level. A blackfellow would scoop out a small hole'
alongside of this, lie there coiled up snake fashion, quietly holding in
his hands a pole, with a net affixed. The thousands of pigeons, galahs,
cockatoos, etc., famishing for a drink would alight all along the shores
■of the waterhole, but the little twigs planted along the edge prevented
their entrance to allay their thirst, so in flocks they would fly around
to the blackfellow’s causeway, then the nigger in his hole makes a
■sudden dart, down comes the pole carrying the net, and results gene-
rally in the nigger securing anything from two or three to twenty birds
in one haul. Of course, this easy style of snaring could only happen
when wafer was scarce. In an ordinary drought the inland blacks made
much easier living than during rainy weather. Continuous wet weather
■causes their starvation, being unable to secure any food, but the Herbert
River natives made a small provision for a rainy day in collecting
grass and other seeds, preserving it in bark or dilly bags and storing it
away in the forks of trees, till pressing hunger required, when the grass
was ground down between two hollow stones, mixed with water and
ibaked in the ashes something similar to a white man’s damper.


XIII.
Before the whites invaded Australia were the dusky aborigines of
the great continent a happy people? This question is very hard to
answer witli any degree of certainty. That 'the males lead a happier
life than the unfortunate females goes without saying. The greatest
fear and dread a tribe sustained was from its own neighbors—gene-
rally an everlasting feud which, now and again, broke out with fearful
bloodshed and cold murder, not on innocent men alone but on women
and children. When the slaughtering idea got into one tribe’s head
they would not hesitate for a moment, if strong enough to kill every one
of a neighboring family—men, women, and children—they would
generally commit the brutal deeds without giving their enemies the
slightest warning, their minds and mode of assaulting equal to the
tiger or the dingo. From where did the Australian come from? Is
he a special creation of this vast, ancient continent, like the marsupial
and the emu? Of course, scientists make out, or try to make out,
that every tribe of the genus homo must have been created
anywhere else to where he and aeons resided in some
other counlry before reaching the land they now inhabit. A Victorian
professor recently averred that the blackfellow only inhabited Victoria
for a period of about 1,000 years! Had lie come to the conclusion
10,000 or a 100,000 years he might have been more accurate. The
Australian blackfellow is the same type wherever you go—Jrom Port
Phillip to Port Darwin, from Swan River to Gape York—all the one
and the same breed; the same traits and characteristics; using practi-
cally the same style of weapons; the same style of hunting; the same
style, without hardly any material variation of building his gunyah. If
not the produce of the Australian soil he must have struck the coast
somewhere as one type and family; and, at his slow growth of populat-
ing the vast continent must have taken countless to spread so far
and wide. It is useless relying on any of his traditions or legends. He
can only count up to the number of his fingers. He has no religion
worthy of the name, and you cannot Christianise him. You may think
you can, but it turns out in the end a big failure. He is, however, an
adept at picking up all the evil doings and unchristian language of his
white brother. Passing away at such speed to the happy hunting
ground of the future, it is only a question of years when the last of him
will vanish—the Truganini of Australia.
Whilst on the blackfellow subject I may mention two or three more
incidents of a very narrow escape by one or two of our party. The one
who had his hat carried away on the point of a spear at Mar Lake had
■another close shave at Frances Lake. Our camp at the time was at the
latter waterhole, and tbe niggers still kept up their game of planting-
twigs round the hole. One day two of them came boldly up and started
work as usual. The person in question walked down and waved them
■off. Of this (hey took no notice. He walked up to them, revolver in
hand. They starled away and he turned round to walk back. As he did
■one of the myalls swung round and hit him a terrific blow on the back
of the head which rendered him insensible for three days. Fortunately


the deed was noticed from the camp and two or three rushed down on
foot and fired, but the niggers got clean away.
Soon after this incident the writer had occasion to visit Burketown
all alone —a lonely road and dangerous. Having two good horses I
travelled fast. All went well going down. Coming back, however, X
got a couple of surprises. At a lagoon on the edge of the Plains of
Promise and the range country, I camped an hour or two after dark
some half a mile from the water. Hobbling the horses out, I lay down
near there and fell asleep. Something woke me up suddenly. A lizard
running over dry leaves would wake one when always on the watch for
the darkies. For a few minutes nothing wrong could be seen or heard.
Then all of a sudden a small glare from the bank of the lagoon was.
noticed, then almost instantly a glare in another direction, and then in
another. It took but little time to catch and saddle the horses and
make a bolt, but now a fire was visible ahead of me, and then another.
The horses began to sniff and snort, and discern something uncanny all
round us. Making a dart forward, however, we passed unmolested,
between two moving fires, the horses going at their best. No doubt the
wretches saw me coming from the hills miles away across the plains,
and prepared for an attack , as I was surrounded by them.
The crow is neither a favorite with white or black—the most cruel
and evilly-disposed bird in the whole bush. When a poor animal'gets
sick, mainmed, or bogged, the crow comes from afar to feast on the
living skeleton; its first morsel, the helpless creature’s eyes—a dainty
mouthful for the voracious demon looking crow. How its horrible grated
voice annoyed the sickly bushman lying under a tree or trying to pass
a few minutes in quiet sleep. Still from an incident that happened him,
a crow probably saved the writer’s life. Travelling all night from the
lagoon where the Myalls surrounded me I camped to spell my horses
for an hour or two on the left bank of the Thornton, on a clear open
spot a short distance from the water. Having boiled my quart and par-
taken of a snack, I half lay and half leaned against a tree with my re-
volver handy. I was only a few minutes in camp when the übiquitous
crow made its appearance, cawing, cawing, and wailing as usual in an
adjacent tree, then it flew down and sidled along nearer when I thought
of having a shot at him, but powder and bullets were precious with us
in those days, and so I refrained making a target of the wretch, although
it annoyed me so much. I soon dosed into a light sleep. All at once
there was a terrifying yell from my black tormentor which instantly
awoke me, when I saw three or four black heads racing down a shallow
gully, making for the river as fast as their legs could carry them. They
were no doubt sneaking upon me within spear throw, but they frightened
the crow, which providentially gave me the alarm.
Speaking of the crow I may mention a bat lie between a large
iguana and a carpet snake which I witnessed on Don Greek —the only
one I ever saw during some 45 years’ bush life. They were at the foot
of a tree, the soil from which was washed away. The iguana had the
snake by the neck, the latter’s tail coiled round a root. The snake.


although wriggling and twisting, had undoubtedly the worst of the
light. Tracking lost sheep I had no time to wait, but I would give any-
thing to watch the performance from start to finish.
XIV,
From one extreme to the other. The water in Don Greek (where,
wo shifted to when the lakes dried up) was getting very low and a move
on again was compulsory. Fortunately a storm put some water in
Frances Lake (from the little creek already mentioned) after being
so long dry, and to this hole we shifted. Mary Lake was still waterless,
the grass and weeds flourishing where the water should be. We were
camped only a week or two at the former hole when down came the
rain, a big flood was imminent, and it came, the first in the Herbert
for many years. Our camp was fixed on the, right side of the river out
of reach of any flood as we thought. We were greatly mistaken, how-
ever. The river having no proper bed the water spread all over the
Hats till the whole river valley was one sheet of water. We had to shift
all our goods and chattels to higher ground in the pouring rain and at
times knee deep in the black soil. The river kept rising and the water
spreading. The second time we had to make for higher ground, but
the water followed, so that for the third time everything had to be
humped away further out. After so many troubles for want' of water
we got plenty of it now in all conscience.
We were for some six months at Rocklands before being followed
up by any one in search of country. The first to arrive was Nash, who
took up “Stony Plains,” some 40 miles down the river. Then came John
Lome Campbell Ranken, and his cousin Lome. They took up country on
the Ranken and the Lome (these watercourses are still called after
them). Steiglitz Brothers followed, and squatted down below Nash.
The latter had a partner named Gregg, and Mrs. Gregg and her little
daughter accompanied their husband and father —the first woman to
live on the Barclay Tableland, and a rough life they must have experi-
enced.
Time passed on, but nothing occurred to help the struggling
pioneers. The expected opening of trade with Batavia and other
Eastern places seemed as far distant as ever. There was no outlet
for surplus stock. Wages were very high and station hands almost
unprocurable. Wool was low in price and the cartage of it to Burke-
fown and then the high freight to Sydney round Gape York was pro-
hibitive. Besides, the rotten old schooners running in the trade at the
lime, leaked and destroyed the cargo. But there was no redress. You
had to ship by them or set fire to the wool off the sheep’s back, and in
many instances the latter would be found cheaper. Supplies from
Sydney by the same unseaworthy tubs were very expensive and always
more or less damaged—generally more. Notwithstanding all these
heavy drawbacks the owners were game, and hope still held sway in
Iheir brave and manly breasts. They stuck to their guns and to their
hardships till fate compelled them to abandon their holdings and drove


their stock back Hundreds of miles to, perhaps, near to where they
started from. An exodus took place from the Georgina, and the country
was again in the possession of the blaokfellow. Many of the Gulf!
runs followed suit.
“Look upon that picture and on this.” The owners of those runs,
at the present day are making fortunes, besides living in ease and:
comfort. Such is life!
Before closing these papers relative to the early pioneers of the
sixties, who took up runs on the Herbert (now Georgina), I may be
allowed to add a few lines more referring to their career since and
whether now dead or alive.
The first to follow up Landsborough’s exploring track and settle
at Rocklands was John Sutherland. He is still alive and active. For
many years he has resided at Kyanga Station, near Banana. Nash and
Greig, when they abandoned Stoney Plains, took their sheep to the
Flinders, bought Cambridge Downs from Sutherland, Marathon, and
settled there for a lime. Greig died at Cambridge and is buried there.'
For years Nash carried on a financial agency business in Brisbane, but I
cannot say if still alive. John Ranken in partnership with the late Hon.
Bowie Wilson, carried on a large land agency business in Sydney, but
died years ago, as also his cousin,Lorneßanken. Von Steilitzce took
up country between Townsville and Cardwell, and, I think, is still alive,
as also James Cassidy, who resided for some time ,on the
Leichhardt, sold his stock and took up land near Ingham, and also
country near Richmond. He died some three years ago. Pat Cassidy
(well known in the Gulf then) died many years ago.
XV.
On my way to Sydney (via Burketown and Townsville overland).
So farewell to Rocklands! With all the harships endured from sucli a
hard, rough life—constant watching of the blacks, the want of proper
food or none at all, but above all, the occasional dreadful sufferings
from want of water —these and many others helped at all times to make
our lives unhappy. But we were a happy family notwithstanding, and
tried our best to look at things as brightly as possible. For instance,
the fascination of short exploring trips was viewed with much delight
and pleasure. There was also something romantic in the nomadic life
we led, and certainly much pleasure was derived by the early pioneers,
as well as trouble and hardships. The pioneers are almost now for-
golten by the rising generation. Many lie in grass-covered graves,
neglected and lost to remembrance, who, in the years that are gone,
endowed the Australian of to-day with his peerless heritage.
In visiting Burketown this time, changes were few in that small
hamlet. Progress was not visible. In fact the place, like the oow’s-
tail, appeared to be growing downwards. There was very little trade,
hut still much sickness.- To add to its decline a port was opened on:
the Norman River, which drew away many people from Burketown. Then)


the Norman was reckoned to be a much better seaport than the Albert.
Landsborough had left Burketown, and Sharkey and George Phillips
soon after, A short time only elapsed when the place was almost quite
deserted.
Luckily, meeting with a gentleman going South, we started from
Burketown, and having plenty of good horses, we did long stages. We
travelled from Floraville, Neumayer Valley, etc., on to the Flinders. We
camped for a day at Sorghum Downs, and here a peculiar incident
occurred. A ration carter was working in the store. There was an
extraordinary drapery case standing against the wall, open side out-
wards, nearly full up with trousers, shirts, etc. On the top of these
a piece of loose calico. The little store was rather dark. We were
sitting on a box near the door. The station carrier pulled a cork out
of a turpentine can. As he did so some of the stuff splashed up in his
face. He went to the case and pulled out the piece of calico to wipe his
face. As be did, in an instant a snake darted at him. He felt the brute
as he pulled the calico, and jumped back instantly. He made sure he
was bitten, and turned as white as a sheet. As we saw the snake’s head
come only within two or three inches of his face, we assured him he was
not touched, but he had a narrow escape and a terrible fright. On killing
and opening the snake we found five mice inside of him, newly swal-
lowed.
Further up the river we were the observers of something ludi-
crous, although not very funny to those in the “swim.” They, were
washing sheep in a rather small but deep lagoon. This was,.of course,
what was known as “hand-washing.” Yards were erected on the banks
of the waterhole, a race made into a yard in the water where the per-
formance took place; men on the platform with “crutches” did the
work. This erection was built of smallish saplings, and very shaky
at all limes. Something on the bank gave way, and pop goes the
staging, and all hands on it, flop into the dirty water —full of yolk and
sheep dung. Fortunately all the fellows could swim, but they were
nearly choked and poisoned before they could reach the surface, owing
to the sheep swimming above them. It took them some time to get the
taste out of their mouths.
In travelling up the Flinders I was surprised at the memory one
of my horses possessed. He was a pack horse, and generally in the
lead of the others when travelling. He would stick to the track for
miles, and then suddenly make . a bolt slantingly in for the river. At
first I did not grasp his motives, or what 'induced him to act in such a
capricious way. However, I shortly found out his object in behaving
in such a peculiar manner. He was making every time for one of our
camps when coming down the Flinders some three years before, and
not one old camp did he miss!
The Flinders by this time was dotted with shanties—sly-grog
selling, of course. They were hells on earth, and gloried in such names
as the “Dead Finish,” “Sudden Death,” etc. The characters frequenting
them were the scum of the colony, so the devilish carousals carried on
would disgrace Dante’s Inferno. One’s horses were not safe if camped


near those abominations, so we took good care to put many miles be--
tween them before resting for the night.
We left the Flinders on Telemon run and travelled up Beit’s Gorge,.
Fairlight run. Mr. Beit was then manager and part owner. We passed
Mount Emu, then owned by Thompson Muirison and Jamieson. The
former’s sons still hold this station and others. We camped a night
at Reedy Springs, and were very hospitably entertained by Mr. and Mrs.
Anning and family. The third generation of Annings now own the
station. We reached Dalrymple (on the Burdekin) on Christmas Day,
1868. There was a small public house there then run by William Mark,
now owner of Gainsford station, and till lately of Saxby, on the Saxby
River. We had Christmas dinner at Mark’s, and then travelled slowly
to Townsville, as our horses were very sore-footed after the stoney
country we travelled over from the Flinders. We had a stay in Towns-
ville for a few days for a boat to Sydney. We sold our horses,, and
disposed of our revolvers, as there was now no further need for them.
I was sorry in a way parting with my shooting friend, which stood
me in good stead day and night for years in the savage wilds. When
soon after located in Southern Queensland, how sweetly and peacefully
one slept in camp without any fear of a spear or a nulla-nullah from
the hand of a nigger.
There was only, I think, a fortnightly boat at the time running
between Sydney and Townsville, the old A.S.N. Company the traders.
But we were in luck. A steamer called the Havilah arrived in port, and
immediately after her the Boomerang, Captain Lake (Lake’s Greek on
the Fitzroy is named after him). The Boomerang was told off by the
A.S.N. Company to run the stranger off and carry passengers and cargo
for next to nothing sooner than that the Havilah should secure a footing
in the trade. At any rate we got a saloon passage to Sydney for £1 10s.
by the Boomerang. Some of (he passengers asserted they paid nothing.
At any rate, we were satisfied, for only for Ihe Havilah we would have
had lo pay £ls to £t6.
