

f- $l/ $!




PIONEER DIFFICULTIES
IN FOUNDING
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
A LECTURE DELIVERED TO
The Australian Natives Association
BY THE
HON. SIR HENRY AYERS, K.C.M.G., F.G.S., M.L.C.,
PRESIDENT OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
PRESIDENT OF THE OLD COLONISTS’ ASSOCIATION,
ON THE Bth JUNE, 1891,
His Worship the Mayor of Adelaide (L. Cohen, Esq., MP.),
«nt of the Australian Natives’ Association, in the Chair.
Adelaide :
W. K. THOMAS & CO, PRINTERS, GRENFELL STREET,




H -VS <5 ** jft Kf 4> 4-
-3t V—■'
PIONEER DIFFICULTIES IN FOUNDING
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
"The President and Members or the Australian Natives’
Association.
Gentlemen—ln fulfilment of a promise given to the represen- introduction,
datives of your Society, I propose to direct your attention to some
>of the difficulties experienced by the Pioneers in the foundation
and early settlement of South Australia—a subject in which lam
glad to find you take an interest, and properly so, for next in
importance to a knowledge of yourselves is a thorough acquain-
tance with the history of the country in which you dwell.
Let me explain to you who were and are considered “ Pioneer TjRIUpL
•Colonists.” According to the classification of Colonists made by n eer Colonists.”
the Old Colonists’ Association, “Pioneers” include those who
• arrived prior to the 28th December, 1846 (that being the. tenth
•anniversary of the day South Australia was proclaimed a British
Colony), and “ Old Colonists ” were those who arrived between
28th December, 1846, and 28th December, 1856. Even among
the Pioneers there were precursors to whom we are indebted for
preparing the way for the Pioneers of later date, who together
•.underwent, for the Colonists now living, the earlier struggles which
• otherwise they would yet be contending against.
I do not propose to give you a continuous history of the
Province, but merely to refer to those historical incidents which
will illustrate the difficulties encountered by the early Colonists,
• and how they were met and overcome.
My first attempt will be to describe the vrrassnaents that
preceded the planting of the Province durin mod extending
from early in the year 1831 to the middle ot 36, and then to
trace the progress of the settlement —through ttte difficulties with
which it was surrounded—from the arrival of the first settlers, in
the "latter year to the end of 1846, when the Colony had passed
through its experimental stages —when it was established on a solid
basis —and when it gave ample warrant of future advancement.
The latter period includes the time with which the Pioneers are
more especially associated.
Among the many perplexities that beset the Pioneers, not the
least were those which arose in their endeavours to obtain Legislation,
-authority from the British Government to found the Colony. The
subject of emigration, as a means of relieving the wants of the
unemployed, had engaged the anxious attention of Ministers
■during the years 1826 and 1827, when two Committees of the


House of Commons investigated the question and reported that
the British Colonies offered scope enough, with the assistance of
the Government, to take a sufficient number of the labouring'
population to relieve the then pressure. But whether it was.
from the great cost of conducting a large emigration, or from
a disinclination lo incur the risk of deporting vast numbers of
persons to distant places, the Government did not make much
progress in that direction, and were not very ready to assist others-
in the dispatch of emigrants.
When the first effort was made and negotiations commenced for
the settlement of South Australia—in" February, 1831—there
were three circumstances powerfully influencing persons in their
endeavours to carry it into effect : The general desire for
emigration; the wish to see Mr. Edward Gibbon Wakefield’s
scheme of colonization practically tested; and the then recent
discovery of a further portion of Australia by Captain Sturt’s
voyage down the River Murray to its outlet, in February, 1830.
Most Governments know how much more they suffer, in the'
estimation of the people, by the reproach of failure of their designs-
than they gain from the praise of those that succeed; and the
British Government—probably acting on this knowledge, and to
avoid becoming responsible for the discredit of its failure should,
the scheme prove unsuccessful—were willing to consider a
proposition that the charge of founding, peopling, and governing
the new settlement, with the management of the land sales, the
application of the proceeds to emigration, and other matters,
should be undertaken by a Company with a proposed capital of
£500,000, to be called the South Australian Land Company, and
to be incorporated by Royal Charter, under which the Company
sought numerous and extensive powers, including the preferential
right to purchase 500,000 acres of land at the rate of five
shillings per acre, the payment for which was to extend over five-
years by annual instalments of £25,000, with an indefinite time to
make their selections. But when the whole of the terms of the-
Charter were submitted, embracing as it did something like a.
delegation of the substantial powers of sovereignty over the
territory, the Government declined to entertain the proposal, and
thus the first attempt to plant the Colony was abandoned in
August, 1832, to the great disappointment of many families who
were prepared to emigrate, and some of whom, on the frustration
of their purpose, deported themselves to the North American
Colonies.
A change in the Ministry having subsequently occurred, some
of the former applicants, with whom others now joined, began a
second negotiation for founding a new Colony on the southern
shore of Australia, and submitted the general terms of the project,
which were favourably received by the Government. But when.
4


the draft of a proposed Charter, somewhat modified from the
former, was afterwards prepared, submitted to, and considered by
the Government, it was not accepted. Then, in 1834, the
Government was asked to obtain from Parliament the authority
necessary for planting a Crown Colony in South Australia under
certain conditions set forth. This the Government consented to
do, but pointed out that in doing so they intimated no opinion
upon the fitness of the district selected for the intended Colony,
and that they claimed the right of opposing the measure in such
of its details as they might disapprove. The Bill was introduced
into the House of Commons, the second reading took place on
23rd July, 1834, and it passed with but slight opposition, it being
'Characterised by one of its opponents as “ a Bill to realise the
views of a set of experimental philosophers.” It passed the
House of Lords and became law on the 15th August, 1834, by the
Act known as No. 95 of 4th and sth William the Fourth, “to
empower His Majesty to erect South Australia into a British
Province.” It, among other things, authorised the appointment
of three or more Commissioners, with power to them to declare
lands open to purchase by British subjects; to make orders for
the surveying, letting, and sale of such lands at such price as
they might deem expedient, and to apply the whole of the funds
received as the purchase-money or rent in conducting the
emigration of poor persons from Great Britain or Ireland to South
Australia; it provided that no land should be sold except in
public for ready money either by auction or otherwise, but in no
case and at no time for a lower sum than twelve shillings per
English acre, and that the upset selling price at which lands might
be sold, as declared by the Commissioners, should be a uniform
price per acre, whatever the quantity or situation of the land put
up for sale ; there was also power to appoint a Commissioner of
Public Lands, to be resident in the Colony, to act under the
orders of the Board of Commissioners; it provided that until sales
of land should produce a fund sufficient to defray the cost of
conveying poor emigrants to the Province, the Commissioners
might take up at interest, not exceeding £lO per centum per
annum, £50,000, secured on the credit and to be a charge on the
whole fund to be received from the sale and rent of lands ; and
similarly, lor the purpose of founding and governing the Province,
to borrow the sum of £200,000 to be a charge on the ordinary
revenue or produce of all rates, duties, and taxes, and to be
deemed a public debt owing by the Province. Provision
was also made that no convict should at any time under
any circumstances be transported as a convict to any
place within the limits of the Province. A Constitution of
Local Government was to be established when the population
amounted to fifty thousand souls, but the mode of disposing of the


land, and of the funds obtained by the sale thereof, was not to be
in any wise altered or changed otherwise than by the authority
of the Crown and the consent of Parliament, and provision was
to be made in the Constitution for the satisfaction of the
obligations of any of the unsatisfied Colonial Revenue Securities.
Out of the moneys borrowed by the Commissioners they were to
invest, in the names of trustees, the sum of <£20,000 in Exchequer
Bills, for providing a guarantee that no part of the expenses of
founding and governing the intended Province should fall on the
Mother Country ; if after the expiration of ten years from the
passing of the Act the population should be less than twenty
thousand natural-born subjects, the unsold public lands should be
liable to be disposed of by the Crown, subject to the payment, out
of any moneys obtained from the sale, of any then unsatisfied
South Australian Colonial Revenue Securities charged upon the
land; and until the Commissioners should have raised by loan and
invested in Exchequer Bills the sum of £20,000, and until persons
intending to settle in the Province should have invested £35,000
in the purchase of land, none of the powers and authorities under
the Act should be of any effect.
poSsimevs! A dela y of months occurred after the passing of the
Act before the names of gentlemen willing to act as Com-
missioners for carrying the Act into effect were submitted
to the Government. The Commissioners were gazetted on sth
May, 1835, the Government lending them no aid whatever,
and in commencing their duties they were left to their private
resources and to those of their friends to provide the pecuniary
means of carrying on the service. In June following they issued
their first regulations for the sale of land. Each order was to be
for one lot of land, and each lot was to consist of a country section
of eighty acres and a town section of one acre, the price to be
£Bl, or £1 per acre. The holders of the first 437 orders sold in
England were to have priority of choice with respect to both town
and land. The Commissioners made extraordinary
exertions and resorted to unusual expedients to effect preliminary
sales of land to the required amount of £35,000. One of these
expedients was that each officer connected with the Commission,,,
except the Governor, should be required as a condition to his.,
appointment by the Board or recommendation to the Government,,
to purchase land in the Colony at the rate of 500 acres for every
£lOO of salary • and although this could not be carried into full
effect, the principle which it involved was so far acted upon that
those candidates for appointments in the Colony who became
purchasers of land were considered (personal fitness being equal) to
have a preferable claim. Most of the officers became purchasers of
land orders, but still the required sum was not obtained, and the
Commissioners, with all their exertions, experienced so much


difficulty in finding purchasers of land that again it looked as if
the scheme would have to be abandoned ; and in all probability
such would have been the case had not the late Mr. George Fife
An gas, who took a very deep interest in promoting the establish-
ment of the. colony, used his influence among his City friends and
induced them to join him in the formation of the South Australian
Company, with a capital of .£500,000, the bulk of which was
subscribed.
The Company was formed on 26th January, 1836, its primary
object being to buy sufficient land to make up the sum of £35,000
required by the Commissioners, provided that they would reduce
the original upset price of £l, to 12s. an acre, which they did, and
thereby gave great dissatisfaction to those who had previously
purchased at £1 an acre. This feeling was, however, soon
removed by the Commissioners granting to the original purchasers
as much land as would reduce the cost of what they had
purchased to 12s. an acre. Thus an original purchaser of eighty
acres of country land and one town acre allotment,- for which he
had paid £Bl, received 134 acres of country land (since known as
a preliminary section) and one town acre block. On the Ist
March, 1836, the upset price of land was again raised to
twenty shillings an acre. The formation of the South Australian
Company, besides enabling the Colony to be planted, was of
immense advantage towards its successful foundation, because
the Company’s large capital, which was vastly beyond any
other sum available for the same or similiar objects, was to
be expended in such various ways, all tending to give employ-
ment to the people and to the development of the resources
of the country. The necessary land was purchased, and the Act
brought into force. The Company became a Land, a Banking, and
a Trading Company ; it undertook to build and buy ships ; to
establish whaling fisheries and stations ; to enter into agricultural
and stock farming ; to embark in pastoral pursuits ; to lease land
to farming tenants and assist them to cultivate their holdings by
advancing funds; all of which were entered upon. It also
reclaimed from the sea and established the present Port Adelaide,
connecting it with the City by means of a road made through the
swamps at a cost of £13,000. Wharves were built and storehouses
erected for the accommodation of shipping and commerce ; a flour
mill was built near the Park Lands, and numerous houses and
shops within the City ; and lands were let for building purposes.
When we consider how favourable to the advancement of the Colony
ail these operations were; that they were not all accomplished
without some failures • that the Company underwent many viscissi-
tudes and encountered some perils, and that, with loss of capital
and with division of profits long deferred, its shareholders are not
even now participating in larger annual profits than are shared by
7


many persons who have more recently entered into less speculative
ventures, we may fairly regard the success of the Company as the
well-merited reward of its spirited enterprise,
the Fomicievlf S Without doubt Mr. Angas originated the Company, and thereby,
the Province, in a greater degree than any other individual, became the Founder
of this Province. He was afterwards a colonist resident among us
for many years, and to the close of his long and useful life was
identified with the Colony’s progress, never failing to advance its
interests in every way in his power.
Mfetokes ofj,~s The cardinal mistake on the part of the Commissioners,
■teatlon. C mims " which proved to be the cause of so many difficulties, disappoint-
ments, and losses, was permitting emigration to take place to the
extent they did for a period of two years before the country land
was ready for selection. The first ship to arrive from England
was one belonging to the South Australian Company, the “ Duke
of York,” which sailed towards the end of February, 1836, with
Mist Arrivals, thirteen emigrants, anchoring on the 27th July in that year in
Nepean Bay, Kangaroo Island, where the Company first located
itself, for it was then unknown where the settlement on the main
land would be effected. Colonel Light, with the first survey
party, arrived in the “Rapid” at Kangaroo Island on the 19 th
August, 1836, and on the mainland, near Cape Jervis, on the 3rd
of the month following. Of the 546 arrivals by sea in the year
1836, 375 persons preceded the coming of the Governor, the
proclamation of the Province, the survey of any land whatever,
the selection of the site of the Capital, and the passing of any
laws for the government of the people. The site of the City of
Adelaide was fixed on the 27th December, 1836, after the arrival
of Governor Hindmarsh. The survey of the City was completed,
and on the 23rd March, 1837, those preliminary purchasers who
had deposited money for land in England to enable the Colony to
be founded, made their selections. A few days afterwards the
remaining acres were sold by auction. Then came our first land
boom, when those acres which had cost from two to fourteen
guineas each at auction, and those first selected at 125., were
selling at from £BO to £lOO each, and for those considered to be
well situated as much as £250 were demanded, resulting, as most
land booms do, in disappointment to many and in the witnessing
of the resale, some four or five years afterwards, at prices not
reaching to more than one-fifth of those rates.
Delay in Survey Another grave mistake made by the Commissioners was in send-
ing so small a staff of surveyors, which was soon reduced by the
Deputy Surveyor-General’s return to England, leaving the parties in
the field altogether insufficient to survey even the preliminary
purchases, while land orders were continuing to be sold daily.
Throughout the year 1837 the complaints of the settlers at being
kept out of their land were both loud and deep, for there was no


country land whatever ready for selection, and no productive
employment for the people. For want of their land they could
neither proceed with agricultural nor with dairy pursuits, and the
implements required for the former, and the utensils for the latter,
which they had brought with them, crowded the auction rooms and
were sold at absurdly low prices that their owners might support
themselves on the proceeds. The majority of the settlers were
without income, and had to live upon their capital and by the sale
of their town acres. Rents being very high, employment was
given to artisans, at extravagant wages, to erect buildings in the
City ; but as houses soon increased and rents diminished, those
■who had embarked their capital in buildings had cause to regret
making such investments. During the year 1837 nine ships
arrived with 1,297 passengers, and the population, at the close of
that year, could not have been less than 2,000 souls.
Many of the officers having become engaged in such serious con-
troversies between themselves and the Governor, Captain Hind-
marsh, being unable to restore harmony among them, was, upon the
representation of the Commissioners to the British Government, re-
called, and Colonel Gawler appointed as his successor. Before his
arrival, however, (on 17th October, 1838) the public accounts had
fallen into confusion; the salaries into arrear • the surveys could
not be proceeded with at the rate required; the Treasury was
exhausted ; and Bills on the Commissioners to the full amount
authorised for the whole of that year had been drawn during the
first six months. The exports of produce for the year were repre-
sented by £770 worth of wool, and the Treasury receipts of
revenue only amounted to £1,448. No portion of the proceeds of
land could, lawfully, be applied to the expenses of government.
The population had increased to about 6,000 souls, and only 86
acres of land were under cultivation, of which 20 acres were in
wheat.
Early in 1839 Colonel Gawler, in his anxiety to provide for the
erection of a Government House (his then habitation being des-
cribed as truly miserable), and impressed with the necessity for per-
manent Public Offices, Court House, Gaol, and other public build-
ings, commenced their erection, with the subsequent approval of the
Commissioners, to the extent of the estimated cost of £25,162,
which, however, was greatly exceeded. The Governor was entitled
to be properly domiciled, but doubts were freely expressed whether,
in the then depressed condition of the country, a building less;
costly and ostentatious, would not have been more appropriate..
So also with respect to a Gaol, which, unfortunately, is quite
neccessary even in a very limited community. The one I found’
here on my arrival was certainly not adapted to the end in view—-
the safe keeping of prisoners. It consisted of a tent with an airing-
ground in front enclosed with a rope,’ around which one or two of
9


the turnkeys patrolled, armed with a Brown Bess musket. But
while it will be acknowledged that this accommodation was
altogether inadequate for the purpose, there was no reason why
the other extreme should have been adopted. High walls and
strong doors were doubtless necessary, but angle towers surmounted
with cut stone embattlements were certainly not required. The
stone alone for these architectural embellishments cost 425. per
cube foot to work; while for other services artisans were paid
from £3 18s. to £4 4s. per week, and the cost generally was so
greatly enhanced by the high price of labour and from unforseen
contingencies, that it brought ruin upon a most respectable iirm
of contractors and involved the Colony in debt for years after-
wards. The erection of these buildings created a demand for
labour and diverted people’s attention from developing the
productive resources of the country. Settlers were continuing to
waste their capital in personal expenses while waiting to be put
into possession of their country land; and so late as October,
1839, a considerable number of preliminary purchasers were still
unsatisfied, and the holders of the right of choice in about 450,000
acres of special surveys were pressing for the survey of their
several portions. Opinions differed at the time as to whether the
public expenditure should have been strictly confined within
narrow limits and the public works deferred to a future period,
or whether the large Government expenditure of the year 1839
had been of essential benefit to the Colony. It certainly had the
effect of greatly increasing the General Kevenue, as the last
quarter’s receipts reached £5,695, which, however, was not much
to meet the expenditure of £34,000 disbursed in the same
period.
It was estimated that the land under crop in the year 1839
amounted to 443 acres, 120 acres being in wheat ; but in
September of that year, before the harvest was ready to be reaped,
such was the dearth of breadstuffs that as much as £9O a ton and
£lO for a single bag of flour were demanded, with a threat held
out by those who had engrossed the market that exportations
would be made to farther enhance the price of the small stock
remaining on hand. To prevent this the Legislature passed “An
Act to impose certain rates and duties upon wheat and other
grain, flour, meal, and biscuit exported from the Province of
•South Australia, and to prevent the clandestine exportation of
the same ; ” by which it was enacted that the Governor might fix
such rates and duties, payable for such period of time as should
seem fit, on the export of such articles, and that four days' notice
of any intention to ship should be given to the Collector of
Customs, with severe penalties for default. The Act was to remain
in force for six months only. I believe it was never enforced, the
mere passing of the measure having had the effect of preventing
10


the exportation of breadstuff's. The singularity of the-necessity
for such an Act is only equalled by the novelty of the measure
itself, which is probably without precedent in delegating to an
officer irresponsible to the people the power of taxation, without
limit either as to amount or time, on the export of any article
enumerated in the Act. And one can hardly realize in the
present day that a country that was reduced to such an extremity
should after the lapse of a few years become, for the number of its
people, the greatest exporters of wheat and flour in the world—so
much so as to cause our neighbours to describe our City as the
“ Farinaceous Village ” —and that we should have since fed
ourselves and during the last forty years have exported breadstuff's
to the value of something like .£40,000,000.
As the Government buildings progressed towards completion
there was a want of employment for artisans and for the numerous
immigrants arriving, so that a large number of men, women, and
children had to be supported by the Government, to pay the
cost of which and of the public works, bills were drawn upon the
Lords of the Imperial Treasury, and, being in excess of authority,
were not accepted. The first draft refused acceptance was on
24th August, 1840 ;it became due on 26th October following,
and was dishonoured. The effects of the return of the unpaid
Bills were most serious, and were thus humorously described by a
Pioneer, the late Mr, Nathaniel Hales, in his “ Recollections” :
“ The dishonour of Colonel Gawler’s drafts was the bursting of the
torpedo beneath us. The Colony was insolvent. Universal was
the panic. Nearly all the mercantile firms engaged in business
to any great extent wound up their affairs. Credits, debits,
contra accounts, balances, and such like, were meaningless phrases
as related to the then present period, just as dinner-time and supper-
time were mere figures of speech when there was nothing in the
house to be eaten. A man might have a thousand or two
thousand pounds debited in his ledger to highly-respectable
parties, or he might owe a hundred or two—it came to exactly
the same thing. The apparently absurd dogma, broached by the
French Revolutionists, of ‘ equality,’ was absolutely realized then by
the people of Adelaide. All were equal, for all were equally
moneyless. A general amnesty in matters of indebtedness was
proposed—decidedly a work of supererogation ; for supposing
there were a few individuals who could scrape together silver
enough to pay Court fees, who would be so mad as to sue a soap
bubble 1 Besides, there were no parties really indebted. An old
authority assures us that ‘ He nothing owes who nothing has to
pay.’ Exactly; and as none of us had anything wherewith to
pay, of course we were not in debt. There is nothing like logic
to illustrate the truth,”
11


Imperial With the coming of the year 1841 the failure of the Colony
S seemed imminent, and its condition such that it was specially
brought under the notice of the British Government, who made
provision for advancing a sum of £155,000, by way of loan, to
meet the unliquidated liabilities of the Colony so far as they were
known. A Committee of the House of Commons was appointed
“ to consider the Acts relating to South Australia and the actual
state of the Colony.” The Committee reported in June, submitted
a mass of evidence, and made certain recommendations —one of
some importance to us and afterwards made law, which was that
only one equal half-part of the gross proceeds of the sales of the
Waste Lands should be appropriated towards defraying the
expenses of emigration from the United Kingdom, instead of the
Governor Grey’s entire proceeds as provided by the Act founding the Colony. On
regime. the 14th May of that year Governor Gawler was succeeded by
Governor Grey, who immediately commenced the policy of
retrenchment enjoined upon him by the British Government.
Offices were reviewed and useless officers dispensed with, salaries
were reduced, the erection of public buildings was discontinued, and
every endeavour made to bring the expenditure within the revenue.
In this the Governor proved successful, so far as related to matters
under his own control, as he reduced the first year’s estimates
from £94,000 to £35,000, and he succeeded in passing his first
Appropriation Act for £34,778 18s. 4d., and in subsequent years
for still smaller sums, the expenditure for the years 1843 and 1844
being respectively under £30,000. There were some matters,
however, which he could not control. One was the demand for
payment of the outstanding claims for buildings left unsettled by
the former Governor, amounting to £35,000, and another was the
cost of supporting the unemployed and their families, representing
a sum of £17,646. These amounts were not included in the
£155,000 which the British Government had temporarily
supplied. But Governor Grey, having learned that Governor
Gawler’s Bills had been met out of that sum, ventured to draw
upon the Lords of the Treasury for both amounts (together
£52,646); but the Bills were not paid, and they were afterwards,
liquidated by the issue in Adelaide of Colonial Debentures bearing
Universal interest at £5 per cent, per annum. Universal bankruptcy and
distress. great distress then prevailed throughout all Australia, such as had
never occurred before or have been since experienced. The severe
fall in land, stock, and all other property would appear to us at the
present time as almost, incredible. A song was composed and
nightly sung, which was especially applicable to the then circum-
stances of New South Wales in describing the troubles of the
period, which it did in the personal lamentations of a luckless,
individual named “Billy Barlow,” amongst whose terrible misfor-
tunes was “the sale of his sheep at sixpence per head, with the run


given in” —a state of things which was actually not so very far from
the truth. Emigration from other countries had ceased. The
privations of the settlers were severe, and everything seemed to
be at its lowest. In May, 1841, New Zealand was declared
independent of New South Wales, and was erected into a separate
Colony, and thither many of our settlers went to try their
fortunes.
For. two years after Governor Grey’s arrival it might be said
that the country was “suffering a recovery,” with that painful
languidness which so often follows a serious illness. The disorder
had passed away, but the pain and struggle towards convalescence
were almost more than the patient could bear. This was the
period of our greatest gloom and apprehension; when employ-
ment in the city became scarce; when there were something like
two thousand men, women, and children being supported by the
Government; -when the economizing policy insisted upon by the
British Government was being carried into effect ; and when
general bankruptcy had overtaken the people. A fair amount of
■capital had been brought into the country by the earlier settlers,
but it had disappeared, from the delay in surveying the country
lands, and the inability of the purchasers of land orders to locate
themselves, or follow any pursuit of a productive nature. The
erection of shops and dwellings in the City, and the buying and
selling of City land, had mostly engaged the attention and
the means of the people. Large consignments of goods
had arrived, and trade had been carried on in some cases with
profit, but in many more instances without; so much so, that not
■all the proceeds of consignments reached the hands of the con-
signors. For some time a sort of commercial cannabalism pre-
vailed, but which could not long endure. The loss of capital
incurred in founding the colony cannot be estimated, but it must
have been very considerable, inasmuch as nearly all those
■engaged in the importation and distribution of merchandize, with
many others, were ruined, A number of persons were in prison
for debt, for whom there were no means of relief. It was found
that the British Bankruptcy and Insolvency Laws did not apply
to South Australia, and so these unfortunate debtors continued
in gaol until an Act for giving relief to Insolvent Debtors was
passed on the 22nd June, 1841, and an Insolvent Court was
•established, when there soon after followed what might be termed
a “ general gaol delivery” for debtors.
Another serious difficulty arose when our capital became
■diminished, as there were then no means of paying wages in money.
I am rather loth to introduce the somewhat vexed question of the
relation of capital to labour, and, in doing so, it is not with a view of
debating it from party sides, but to show you from actual experience
•of our transactions in this country in the early days, how heavily
13


labour was handicapped, for want of capital. I need hardly say
that production rests on division of labour, and division of labour
involves easy and prompt exchange, which again involves a com-
mon medium, for which the most facile currency is money. This,
common medium became uncommonly scarce, and recourse was
had to the “ Truck” system, the “ Order” system, and to the
absence of any system whatever, for the most ingenious devices*
were resorted to as substitutes for cash, with the certain result
that there was in fact no satisfactory medium but money. Those
who are without experience of what is known as the “ Truck”
system, or the payment for services by a system of barter, have
no conception of the value' of money as a common mode of an
easy and prompt exchange. There can be no worse payment of a.
workman’s wages than compelling him to take therefor a quantity
of the articles he assists in making, or of those which his employer-
can obtain. It is not so long ago, even if the practice does not
now obtain, when farm labourers in some parts of England were-
compelled to take certain quantities of grain and cider in part
liquidation of their wages. It was the practice with many
country employers to give orders on their agents in Adelaide fer-
tile payment of wages, which frequently led to disappointment,
annoyance, and loss to the employe. Happily the present genera-
tion have no experience of those objectionable systems, for with*
sufficient capital, which we now possess, money is paid in exchange
for labour, which is of the greatest benefit to the labourer,,
enabling him to go to market with money in his hand, buying
only what he requires, and to the best advantage.
One of the most beneficial effects of Governor Grey’s policy was
to discourage people from remaining in town by diminishing
government expenditure, and they soon began to depart to the-
country, there to labour with their own hands rather than be
burdensome. Cultivation was then carried on extensively, with,
such good results, that the next difficulty which had to be faced
was—how was the crop to be reaped 1 there being no spare
agriculturalists available for that purpose. The few soldiers-
stationed here were permitted to labour in the harvest-field, and
many clerks, shop-keepers, and artisans, joined in the work with
not a few soft-handed gentlemen, delicate ladies, female domestic-
servants, and others who had perhaps never before had a sickle in
hand, turned into the fields and gathered in the harvest. No-
such difficulty has since arisen, as by the invention of Ridley’s
reaping machine, subsequently improved, the largest harvests are
now secured with facility.
Some of the clouds that lowered upon, us were gradually pas-
sing away during the year 1843. Our export of wool reached the
value of £45,568, and for the first time we exported minerals,
although representing only the modest sum of £127. Our-
14


revenue had slightly improved on that of the previous year, but
it only reached £24,953, while our expenditure was £34,386,
which was, however, less than any of the four preceding years.
On the completion of the year 1844 the picture I am attempt- A brighter
a. •/ a tnctiii’P
ing to portray exhibits brighter colours, and contains a little more
of light to 1 relieve the shadows. The Kapunda Copper Mine,
which had been discovered, in the latter part of 1842, was being
productively worked, and brought up the export of minerals to
£6,436, and the value of wool exported was £42,769. The
revenue had advanced to £26,899, and the expenditure was
£29,362; the population numbering 19,000 souls.
On the 25th October, 1845, Governor Grey was called away to
assume the government of New Zealand, when his services to South
Australia as a far-seeing statesman, as a courageous reformer
and a careful economist, were fully recognized and acknowledged
by the people, and when he had the proud satisfaction of knowing
that a country which he had found so depressed was then on the
high road to prosperity.
The picture continued to improve in its brightness throughout The Burra
the year 1845, when the export of wool was valued at £72,235, BuriaMlllc
and minerals had increased to £19,020, as during the last quarter
of the year the export of copper ore from the Burra Burra Mines
had commenced. It was in the winter of this year that the
Burra Burra and Princess Royal Mines were discovered, and the
more extensive working - of which, in the year 1846, caused the
distribution of such large sums of money in payment of wages and
cartage, among so limited a population as 25,893 souls, that a
marvellous change was effected in the condition of the Province.
It would take me far beyond my present limits to attempt a des-
cription of the excitement that prevailed, and the struggle which
took place to secure the possession of these properties by' the
colonists. The beneficial results of the working of these mines
are, however, distinctly shown in the increased export of minerals,
which this year amounted £143,231 ; the wool to £106,510; the
revenue to £47,286 ; the expenditure being only £38,690. The
prosperity of the country was then assured. We managed to live
within our income, and had, therefore, arrived at that state of
economy which we have been told is “ the foundation of all true
respectability.”
South Australia having been established on the “ Wakefield The “Wakefield.
System,” one can scarcely avoid a review of its “ principles.” colonization.
These I understand to be ; A uniform price in cash for all
lands wherever situated, the application of the whole of the pro-
ceeds to the introduction of poor immigrants, and the land to be
sold at such a sufficient and varying price so as to regulate the
supply of labour with capital. I think it will be admitted that
the principle of insisting on the sale of land at a moderate uni-


form price, in lieu of free grants, is thoroughly sound and
equitable, for it must be acknowledged that in those colonies
where land has been sold at a moderate rate such as to tempt
persons to become purchasers, and yet at a rate needing the
employment of some capital, the settlements have been of a more
satisfactory kind than they could have been under a different
policy. If the land had been given away in large quantities to
persons who had no immediate necessity or intention of making
use of it, or if it had been easily obtainable at not much more
than nominal prices, it would have been allowed to remain
unutilised and unsettled simply because the owners would not
have needed to obtain some productive value in return for the
capital employed, but would have waited for a value to be given
to it by the exertions of others or by the favourable developments
of the future. The application of the whole of the proceeds of the
land fund for the purpose of introducing immigrants, without con-
tributing anything towards the cost of government or the making
of roads, bridges, and other necessary public works, proved a failure.
This was acknowledged by the subsequent passing of an Act of Par-
liament (sth and 6th Victoria, cap. 36, 1842) which reduced the
proportion to one half part thereof, and this, in practice, proved more
than was required. It is due to Mr. Wakefield to say that he
admitted that this principle was not to be an abiding one, that it
was only required to be in force tentatively whilst colonization
was being effected, and the State was being built. The changing
price of land to regulate the supply of labour was never adopted,
and, if it had been, it could not have been successfully enforced.
While a country is subject to occasional gluts of labour and
capital, the labour market must be exposed to disturbance, and its
arrangement could rarely have been secured by alteration in the
price of land. The over-expenditure by the Government, the
delay of placing settlers on the land, and the depression and ruin
thus brought about, were unforseen reverses which ought to have
been avoided, and were not contemplated by Mr. Wakefield, and
for which his “principles” were in no way responsible. It is also
due to him to record the fact that he never called his system a self-
supporting one, and that he looked upon such a description as a
sort of puff. In view of the fact that all monetary assistance afforded
by the Mother Country in founding and supporting this Province
has long since been repaid, it may be said that Sonth Australia has
been, virtually, self-supporting; but it could not have been success-
fully maintained without the temporary aid which it received from
the Imperial Government, for whose timely assistance we cannot be
too grateful. At the same time we are free to confess that we
should not have required assistance to so great a degree if our
finances (in the early years to which I am referring) had been
managed with more wisdom.


The early settlers evinced great boldness in coming to the 0 f
country when they did, for it was no light undertaking for men Pioneers,
and women, with their children, to leave the comforts and conve-
niences of civilization and venture to settle in a country wnose
geographical position was not very generally understood and of
whose productive powers absolutely nothing was known, and it was
the possession of like courage when they were surrounded with diffi-
culties which enabled them successfully to withstand and surmount
them. I have always urged and am still of opinion that the
o-reatest factor in overcoming our difficulties w T as the sterling
qualities of our Pioneers. Taking all classes together they were a
superior sample of the people of the Mother Country ; and I was
glad to have my opinion confirmed by so high an authority as Sir
George Grey, who from the first occasion to the last on which he
addressed an Adelaide audience during his recent visit to us,
never omitted to gracefully acknowledge the abilities and good
qualities of the settlers he found here on his assuming the govern-
ment. That they were above the average of British people is
easily explained. Those who are intimate with the history of
England for the last sixty or seventy years well know that during
the later twenties and earlier thirties she was not in the prosperous
condition she has since experienced and now enjoys. She was
then suffering from prostrated trade, very general distress and
severe depression, consequent upon the speculative follies and
commercial disasters of 1824-26, which had its ruinous effects
upon all classes —even on those who had acted with prudence, for
they sustained losses, more or less, in common with the rash
speculator, as will always happen in times like those when the
mischief and losses incurred cannot be confined only to the
speculative and imprudent. The outlook in England when the
colonization of South Australia was first mooted was not
encouraging for professional or educated men, nor for tradesmen,
nor for the working men. Her poor were starving for want of
work, her rich were impoverished by maintaining the superfluous
heads, and a very strong desire obtained among all classes to try
a new field for their labours. In 1834 no less than 1,200,000
paupers were in receipt of relief, or, according to population, three
times more than now obtains. Our Pioneer Colonists had their
privations, their disappointments, and their losses, which they
bravely met; most of them were extremely capable and intel-
ligent, possessed of sturdy endurance and sell-reliance, determined
to succeed if success were possible ; in short, they were made of
the right sort of stuff, and well worthy of the grand old country
whose sons they were. It was these qualities which enabled them
to meet and surmount the reverses with which they were
environed. I am going to adduce another reason why the early
settlers w 7 ere better able to conquer their difficulties, although it


may provoke a smile from some confirmed old bachelor if there be
one present. They were in numerous instances young and
recently married, many marriages having been hastened to enable
the young people to cast their lot and try their fortunes in this
country This wise, as I think, because it is generally
conceded that there is no better period in the lives of intending
settlers to emigrate than when they are making so important a
change in their condition as marriage. It is then when men and
women leave their homes and have to found new ones, that even
the painfulness of the severance from their native land to do so
is less felt than it would be after forming a home soon to be
broken up again. It is a period, too, when men and women feel
that they are all the world to each other, so that as long as they
are together the locality of their residence is of less consequence.
It is a time when new enterprises may be undertaken with better
hope of success, for persons are then possessed of double strength
with twice the amount of hope and exhilaration that they have at
any other era of their existence. There certainly is no better
period when a man may commence a great, important, or arduous
undertaking, than when he has the enthusiastic help and tender
sympathy of a loving wife.
With the prosperity that followed our adversity, I should have
liked to have been able to say that the early settlers who worked
so diligently, and struggled so hard to sustain the settlement of
the Colony, met with the good fortune which such conduct merited.
Alas. it was not so. More fortunes were lost, or missed of
making, than had been retained or secured. The comino- of
general prosperity was, so far as most of the Pioneers were
concerned, only the renewal of fresh efforts more or less empty-
handed. I have not attempted a description of the numerous
domestic , troubles of the Pioneers. Seriously annoying as many of
those were, they generally had a humorous side; indeed they were
often of so comical a character as to provoke mirth rather than
depression.
Having now told the tale, I may be expected “to point the
mora!and if I do not succeed in showing all the useful lessons
which might be learned from the dry, hard facts I have
mentioned, I hope your intelligence will enable you to draw
t erefiom some useful conclusions which might have escajied my
notice. I think among others we learn these lessons : That the
colonization of a country cannot be effected without external
assistance; that sufficient land should be surveyed before the
arrival of tim first settlers, and be always kept in advance of the
■wants of applicants, so that there shall be no unnecessary delay in
selecting-and settling on the land ; that a long time must elapse
before the settlers can raise from the raw earth the products
required for their sustenance ; that great as the difficulties were
18


in founding this Province, they were successfully combated and
■overcome by the persevering exertions and the energies of the
Colonists ; that through all our difficulties we should endeavour
to avoid dejection and try to possess a spirit of hopefulness,
remembering that dark as are the clouds that overshadow us,
the silver|lining will sooner or later appear, and dispel our gloom
by its brightness.
The aims of your Association will doubtless have and exercise
great influence in moulding the opinions of your fellow-colonists.
Let me therefore urge you not to forget, in the pressure of present
business, the teachings of the past ; but, remembering the
instructive lessons which former events have taught us—so full of
warnings for the future—carefully give heed to these warnings,
for if you do not you will enter upon the difficulties that may
lay before you without your best guide.
19






q:
o
. Jr Ms \
