

concerned, I wish to point out that I tried years ago to prevent the
difficulty from arising, urged the winding up of the Company when parties
began to leave it and shirk their responsibility ; have called several meeting
since, have arranged terms with the Bank and proposed schemes fo
liquidation that was the most convenient I could think of ; but in every
case and particular have met with sufficient opposition to have eveiy
proposition and effort rejected. Consequent!y, to call another meeting with
my name at all connected would most probably cause a pi edjudicial feeling.
I have practically done what I wish others, to do and will continue if
others will dc likewise. I can do no more. .. '
Yours, most respectfully,
H. II. HONEY.
November 23, 1897.
\
\ IHswm gaitf Compmijh
• • • •
LIQUIDATION OF OVERDRAFT.
To Those Interested in the Above.
of you who were present at the General Meeting held in connect
tion with the above on the 14th July last, will remember that I then
stated my intention of communicating with those who were not present
asking if they were willing to join in the scheme then laid before them for
carrying out the above object. Before I had opportunity to do this I was
shown a letter by one of the interested parties, which set forth that the
General Manager of the Bank had been consulted, who advised that a
number of the Bondsmen should sign a requisition to the Bank to close the
Account, etc. Consequently, I could not carry out my previous intention,
o'he' wise, I should prubab'y have asking yoxi to do one thing, whilst
some o hers ostensibly were inclined to compel a different course ; hence my
reason of doing nothing further up to the present time. Believing that the
compulsory course would not be a wise one, if possible to avo : d it, I have paid
in the sum of £4 to a Liquidation Account, repiesenting my own personal
piyments for the Months of August, September, October and November, as
per the scheme laid before you in July last. If all will do likewise, and
continue to do so, the liability will be at once Reduced very much, and in a
reasonable time disappear. I ask yoi. all most respectfully to join me in so
doing, and make your payments in tof the ;
LIQUIDATION ACCOUNT,
from whence no one would have power to draw ; thus, security would be ,
certain. I have recently received a Requisition to call a General Meeting,
signed by of the interested parties. Wb’le I wish to do best for all


I f j
I
/
» .


'
- t
-
■
. •
■ • -
* •


