

PIONEER RAILWAYS
FOB
QUEENSLAND.




7i- a. /iw
PIONEER RAILWAYS
FOR
QUEENSLAND:
BEING CHIEFLY AN ARGUMENT IN FAVOUR OP THE MOST
ECONOMICAL METHODS OF
RAILWAY CONSTRUCTION AND MANAGEMENT
UNDER Til']*: PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS THAT OBTAIN
GENERALLY THROUGHOUT THE COLONY, AND EMBODYING
BOMB OF TIIK 'RXPKEIKNOES GAINED DURING THIRTY
YEARS OE PROFESSIONAL WORK THEREIN.
BY
GEORGE PHILLIPS
Late Km/mmr for Jfnnntmkm Hallwaysformerly Inspector of
Ikulmvy Surveys, Southern Division, Queensland.
✓
■prislmtm:
WATSON, FIS EOUS 0 N & GO.
1892.


“ lie defied Ihe Gold, ignored the
Seat, baffled the Bestilenae, pierced the
Forest, and crossed the Desert. But,
perhaps none of these enemies was so
formidable, so invulnerable, and so In-
mmible as the stupidity entrenched in
high places, against which, as Schiller
reminds ns, even the gods contend in
vain.”
—“ Character Skotuhos” by W. T. Stead
(Lord Wolaoly), page (i!).


FREEACE.
The first rays of nr summer sun flash brightly across one of
Queensland’s far western plains as the teams draw out from
the River, and the drivers, swinging the slow cattle into line,
leave the scant timber and steer a sinuous course for yonder
point, now dimly visible, hut which at high noon stands out
in the quivering haze where earth and airy meet like some
bold headland on the margin of an inland sea; —it is their
landmark and their goal, for there, where the River makes
its great bend, they unyoke for the last time by its side,
The days have rim into weeks and the weeks have faded
into months since first they started on their downward jour-
ney from the head-waters of the River, but when next they
"yoke up” they must tackle the wide and waterless waste, of
the “ Old Man Plain.”
By many a camp tire, whilst pipes are aglow and tired
limbs are stretched along, has the dry stage been, discussed in
all its hearings, and Tom “lost a steer last trip,” and Joe
“ the best yoke in his team,” and Sailor Bill “ once tackled
the plain single-handed and lost every hoof through Ins horse
coming down in one of those blamed cracks, and besides all
that lie jolly near lost the number of his mess, and ho reckons
he wants a mate next cruise.”
On the morrow there is much to be done : — food to prepare
and water to. sling in bag and keg, for neither fuel nor water
can he got in all the plain. Axles want greasing, and
shrunken spokes and worn tires—loosened by many a Jolt and
sudden wrench as well as by long exposure to scorching beat
and fierce dry winds—require attention.


See yonder one-armed driver with rough hush tools deftly
“false spoke” the off hind wheel of Ida wagon, which, with
many a groan, lias so often sunk deep in the yielding soil of
the parched and riven plain.*
No fninmnt he, nor shiftless hanger-on —this one-armed
Scot —but a man amongst men ; the first to pull out at sun-
down and take that track the only landmarks of which, are.
white and bleaching hones.
Now they face the long plain and drive —what time Orion
and his train mount to the zenith and slowly sink to rest —but
when the Cross slopes upward a halt is called, for dawn is
near, and the tired cattle must ho loosed and tended back to
water.
Perchance each wagon’s wool would have furnished a
knight’s ransom in the brave days of old ; but were the value
tenfold no faster can they go, for the motive power is water
and grass, and the way is long, and bullocks are only bullocks
after all.
Thus, with many a halt from heavy roads and Hooded
creeks, from lost cattle and want of water, the teams pursue
their tedious way.
Per thirty years I have watched them come slowly in from
the. West, through clouds of dust and seas of mud, whilst the
railways by three main arteries have advanced to meet them
from the East; but much in aid of those gallant pioneers,
upon whose success the future of Queensland so greatly
depends, remains to be done.
GEO. PHILLIPS
Kent's Buildings, Adelaide Street,
Brisbane, 34th December, 180S,
* A tact.—Cl. I>.


CONTENTS.
SKimnN I.- -INTRODUOTOHY.
I’An KH
I* t’t’inM' I’uljliiHibioiiH- -Fftsuitoru Experimental Line—Normnu-
ton Railway —Worn! and Metal Sleepimi Natural Drain-
age and Native Ballast 1-8
Srotion lI.—THIS OUMMBROIAIi ASPECT.
Klnutnntioua in Hallway Extension and olTout in Grunt Britain
—Nouusaity for Kwmmiiy iu Honour Railway Cmirtruo-
timr—When Knilwayn otmso to lie “ Pioneer ” Railwaya ... 4-6
SKxmoN 111 (JUMATE.
Snow Front - iloat—Rainfall- Termiteo—-Tractive Power ami
Working Expenses 0-7
iSnirrnm IV EVEN COUNTRY.
Dofinition... liiailminiwy of River Channels— FnoiiitioH for
Pioneer Bail way Cunstruution 8
K»sn«K V.. UNEVEN COUNTBY.
I JoilulUon - -Sdbotloa of limito—l’roportimi of Dirovt to Con-
stmutod Length Easy Gradients not luemupatilile with
.Avoidance of Heavy Earthworks ~, 8-H
Hkswton VI. MOUNTAINf) US (,'UUNTRY.
Dolinltimv-Mothod of dealing with S)
Rank Inelincft—The Haws Mimy ... 10, 10-1-108
Goat of Working do. do . ... ... 308
The Pike's Punk Raok Railway ... , 11-18
Thu Trans-Aniline Railway 13-16
Tim Vijm-Zormatt Aht Railway ... 16-17
'l'lso Full System in Now Zealand 17
Duty nl Engines on Hawk Inclines 11, 13, 16, 17, & 100
Calrna Railway ... ... ~, 17 -10
Smtiok VII,-—THE ENGINEER,
Experience required—ChitiE Duty in Now ('euntries Remarks
on Proposed Railway to Mount Morgan lil-'22


Suction VIII.-CAUCH.
I'limw
Monad ftaugo, minimum cost of—-Narrower Cange, minimum
cost of—Pestiniog Railway 1 1 i > opovtion of Paying to
Dead Load—Objections to Narrow Cange considered
Advantages of il«w Cange illustrated- -Strength nf
Permanent Way in relation to Uniformity of Cnugc ... 22-25
Suction IX,—ROLLING STOCK.
Tractive Power in relation to Adhesive Power of Locomotives,
and effect on working expenses Steam Carriages Hulling
Stock for 2' 6* gauge 'id -28
Section X.-PRHMANBNT WAY IN RKLATION TO DIS-
TRIBUTION OK LOAD.
Typioal Permanent Way, and causes that have led to its adop-
tion—Depth of Sleepers Comparison of Sleeper provision
in various Countries Disti 'ilnitiou of Weight of Trains
Spacing of Sleepers -Concentrated Loads on Bush Tranks
—Selected Ballast in relation to Displacement of Kornm-
tion 2fi :n
Section XT. DRAINACK
Natural .Drainage—Drainage essential in Mountainous Country
—Drainage in 'Uneven Country High and Low Level
Bridges—Artificial Drainage--Selection of Kim to in rela-
tion to Artificial Drainage, and example. Inadequacy of
liver Olmnnuk—Satoty nf Low Level Bridges Railway
Construction in China- -Danger from Kmbiuikimnita, null
example—Comparative necessity for Drainage of Hmy-
roatls and Railroads--■Keanonnes clTcetod hy depending
upon Natural Drainage ’ ... ... Iff :W
Skiition ,XTL SLKRI’RRS.
Advantages of Transverse Sleepers Comparison of Metal ami
Wood Sleepers-—Oxidation of Metal Sleepers Durability
of Metal Sleepers, and example Fastenings for Metal
Sleepers -. Wooden Sleepers ... ;sn -11
Suction XIII. KAILS,
Stiffness, Strength, and Durability Advantage, of Weight
Durability as Affected by Chemical Composition -II 1,1
Suction XIV.—BALLAST.
Definition—Popular delusion respecting -Soil Ballast 4111
Suction XV. KKNCINC.
Where necessary—Saving by omission Donees should not be
returned at Level Crossings-- As a Barrier, to lialibits ... •( 4-4.1
Section XVI—MI'KKD AND CONDUCT OK TRAFFIC,
Interruptions, to Traffic -Regularity in Train Service not
essential in Now Countries, anil examples-Speed the chief
factor in the Cost of Railways—Higli-lovel Pioneer Kail-
ways Unjustifiable 43 48


Hbotmin X VII. —M AINTEN AN CIS.
rAura
Particulars affecting Cost of -- Systems of Inspection, with
IMlumtos of Goat 48-50
Al’lmonihx I.— Comparative .Statement of Queensland Rail-
ways SI
Ai’pusmx 2. - Estimate toe One Mile, gauge 3' 0" ... ... 82
Ai’l'KNinx ». Estimate for Olio Milo, gauge 2' fi* 83
Aitksiux 4. Comparative Statistics, Queensland ami other
Railways • 54
Ai’uknjiix S.—Weights and Tractive Power of Locomotives in
West Australia, Queensland, and Now Zealand SS-B7
AiM'KN-lux 6.—Official Reports on the Nornmnton
Hallway 69-100
By the Railway OommisHiouuiw 01-03, '7O-71
By the Author 04-08, 07-100
By Mr. Hcndruu, Officer hi Charge 60-70
By Mr, 8011, Ollluor in Charge, with the Author’s
defence . ‘ 72-00'
Ari’KNiiix 7, English and American Railway Practice com*
pared ... ... 100-103
Al'i'KNins 8.- Kxtracts from Now Zealand Stnto-papur on the
Alit System ' 104-108
AW’liniHx ii. .Surface iiaihvayH in India ... 108-109
Armwinx 10. On tlio Substitution of Metal for Wood
Sleepers in the United States, with Tubular Statements of
Motal Truck throughout the World, compiled by Mr. IS.
M. Russell Tmlauun, C.K, in 1880 109-112
II.MWMU'JSfiifW (Hi Collotype prints) by Mr. E. H, Motikay, Artist,
South Brisbane, some of them prepared from vary inferior
photographs,
Lmiotttui’u I’uanh (two) by Messrs. Watson, EiSKcnraoN & Co.


Normanton Railway—Head of road at 25½ miles.
Plate lrying gang (steel sleepers).


PIONEER RAILWAYS FOR
QUEENSLAND.
SECTION I.
INTRODUCTORY.
For the last nine years I have advocated a radical, departure
from established practice iu the building of the pioneer rail-
ways of Queensland, more especially iu oven country, which
is the pro vailing physical feature of this colony. My conten-
tion is that, as the distributed weight of locomotives and rolling
stock does not exceed, and is often loss than, ten pounds per
square inch below sleepers (which is considerably loss than
the pressure exerted by an average man when waiting), there,
is no absolute necessity for the elaborate provision so generally
made iu the wav of artificial drainage and selected ballast to
sustain a load that is not only small in itself, hut iu the case
of the mil ways under consideration is so seldom applied, for
only a small proportion of the railways of this colony are
under a traffic greater than live or six trains a day, whilst on
some lines the traffic is confined to two or throe trains a
week.
In May, 1886,1 published the first edition of a pamphlet
entitled “ Railways for Even Country: their Construction and
Cost,” iu which 1 stated my views in a theoretical maimer.
.Shortly afterwards the thou Premier of Queensland, the
Honourable Sir 8. W. Griffith, consented on my representa-
tions to have an experimental length of about one mile laid
down in some convenient locality in order to practically test
the merits of the proposal. This was done in the form of a
deviation, or through loop on the. Pamdfern Branch Railway,
at a very suitable place about fifteen and a-half miles from
Ipswich s' and, as I was of opinion-- (for reasons which I need
not outer upon here) —-that trough-shaped metal transverse
sleepers of deep cross section would give bettor results when
ballasted with native soil and not artificially drained than
wood Bloopers of ordinary cross section would do under similar
B


conditions of service, it w* decided to lay the deviation with
60 ft. metal sleepers, each 5 foot 6 inches long by S) inches
wide by 6 inches deep, made from i inch wrought iron plates,
laid 11 to the 2d foot rail. The rails wore 41} lbs. stool.
The experimental Hue was ballasted with clay and blade soil
only, and was not drained except at the two
crossings of the side grip of tbo main Hue. It _ earned the
whole traffic of the branch—-six to eight trains daily for two
years, namely, from .Tune, 1887, to June, 1880, including
every typo of locomotive in use on the Southern mid 'Western
Eailway system, the load per axle ranging us high as 8.(15
tons.*
In June, 1888, 1 published the second edition of my
pamphlet on “ Hallways for Even Country,” containing a
description of the experimental line and copies of all otfidal
reports thereon.
As a result of the experiment Hir S. W. Griffith decided to
have the first section of the Normanton Eailway, 42 miles in
length, laid in the same manner with mild steel transverse
sleepers weighing 84 lbs., each 5 foot J) inches by 10 inches by
5 inches. The work was commenced at Normanton in May,
1888, and a length of 86 miles was completed and opened for
public traffic in May, 1881).
In the meantime there had boon a change of Government.
First, with the Honourable* Sir Thomas Mellwmith, and sub-
sequently (owing to the temporary ill-health of Mir Thomas)
with the Honourable B. D. Morohead as Premier and the
Honourable IT, M. Nelson as Minister for Hallways, and Home,
doubts were naturally entertained as to the mlvimilikmeHs of
proceeding with the lino to Croydon on the same principles of
construction, It was, however, finally decided to complete
the Normanton-Croydon Eailway in the same maimer as the
first section.
Looting hack and calmly reviewing the past, I must admit;
that I am surprised at the support I have received from
the leaders of both Parliamentary parties, to some of whom,
indeed, I am personally unknown.
The Normanton Eailway was opened in an incomplete state
for through traffic to Croydon on the 20th July, 185)1, and
the way and works were finally completed and handed over
to the Eailway Department in the month of October following,
the total length, including sidings, being nearly 100 miles,
■ As the Normanton Eailway has boon under traffic for more
than twelve months the comparative statement of all Queens-
land Hallways, given in Appendix No. I, will ho of interest.
* My loaao of the lijniUicoinilurt by tho experimental lino uxnlrwt about the tlmo of
tho arrival of tho Ballway Ommutettmoi'a in tho colony, am! they, not Ixitim <U»ikmw)
to oonUnno the experimental line, onlorwl Us removal. ■ fi. I’,


.’Pew a description of tho Nornmuton Railway, and for official
reports thereon, see appendix No. 0.
I Imre been subjected to a good deal of criticism for my
temerity in advocating bo many and so radical departures from
established precedent and practice in this colony , kit I am not
in tho least discouraged, On the contrary, what wore nine
years ago merely matters of faith baaed upon theory are to-
day matters of knowledge based upon ascertained facts; and
whenever I am in a position to retain the control of a fair
length of railway built on the same general principles as the
Normanton-Croydon line there will thou bo an end to all
cavilling and doubt, as I can absolutely defy any engineer who
believes in the necessity for artificial drainage and a plentiful
.allowance of selected ballast to compete with mo on even
country in Queensland.
I do not claim that I have had the good fortune to escape
■*he mistakes that are inseparable from the initiation of new
ideas, and that experience has taught me nothing; on the
contrary, mistakes have been made, some of which would not
have occurred if I had had more power, and less opposition to
contend with, and I have learned that some things that are
true in theory are not of unlimited application, owing to diffi-
culties of a practical character.
In my mam contention that the surface of: even country can
ho trusted to carry trains at moderate speed without the in-
tervention of embankments, artificial drainage, and a large
supply of selected ballast, I have proved practically that I was
and am incontestably correct. I have, therefore, in this
treatise abandoned all arguments of a theoretical nature, and
rest my case on ascertained facts.
My former publications dealt with oven country only, butl
now propose to extend the scope of my investigations by
showing how economy may be practised in pioneer railway
construction in uneven and mountainous aa well as even
country.
In concluding these introductory remarks I wish to say that
I do not limit the applicability of natural drainage mid native
ballast to pioneer railways in oven country by tho exclusive
use of any particular typo of sleeper. On the contrary, lam
prepared to use cither wood or metal sleepers indifferently,
according to the local circumstances of each ease.
Tho success that has attended the dependence upon natural
drainage and native ballast in the case of the Normantou-
Ornydon Railway, which traverses 00 miles of the moat rotten
country to ba found in Queensland, dispels any doubts that
may be entertained as to the suitableness or otherwise of any
particular description of soil, and no fears need be entertained
on this score.


SECTION II.
THE COMMERCIAL ASPECT.
If the annual progress of railway extension in any country
he projected upon a vertical scale it will he apparent that
periods of abnormal activity are almost invariably followed by
corresponding periods of depression, so that whilst the mean
line may show a steady advance during a period of years,
still the intervening valleys, representing the clown grade of
progress, are felt as periods of actual retrogression. It
requires no arguments to prove that a steady advance along
the mean line would be much more advantageous in every
respect than an advance which is so irregular as to simulate
occasional retrogression. If fluctuations in the volume of
trade and commerce are felt in old-established countries, how
much more keenly is this the case in young and smuggling
communities, where the advent or departure of those nomads
who follow the extension of railways make themselves felt in
the expansion or contraction of every item of the statistician’s
annual record.
No doubt there are more causes 'at work than one to ac-
count for fluctuations in the progress of railway extension;
but at least they cannot be attributed to any lack of desire fox-
additional railways on the part of the people to be served, and
there can be no doubt that the chief cause is a financial one.
If the construction or extension of every railway were within
a reasonable time justified by financial success the history of
railway extension generally would he that of steady progress,
but unfortunately too many railways are not financially suc-
cessful. It would he a mistake to attribute this failure to one
cause alone, but I am convinced that one of the chief causes
is the unnecessarily expensive manner in which many railways
are projected, more especially railways of a pioneer character
designed to open up and develop the resources of new,
sparsely-peopled, or semi-civilized countries It is evident
that to project such railways in the same expensive manner
as in Great Britain, the Continent of Europe, or the more
densely populated parts of the United States, only invites
financial disasters, which inevitably tend sooner or* later to
depression in the business of railway extension, Much too
frequently pioneer rail ways are constructed in a maimer which
is really fifty years in advance of their duty, whereas, with the
one exception, of the rail (to which reference will be made
Under Section XIII), it would be wiser to design them strictly
fox* present necessities. By this means, if the investment
turns out badly, the loss is reduced to a minimum; and on the


other hand that company is not to ho commiserated whoso
road proves in a few years'-iuadoqnato for its traffic.
Enterprise in railways to bo successful and progressive! must,
like similar enterprises, bo conducted upon a sound commer-
cial basis. To expend unnecessary capital upon railways
which can only he expected far many years to command suf-
ficient traffic to provide interest upon the least possible onilaif
compatible with certain well-known axioms of railway manage-
ment, is a folly which can only result in Joss to the promoters,
whether thoy bo Govern inputs or private individuals; nor is
the effect confined to a particular instance, as every case of
financial failure necessarily acta as a deterrent to tether en-
terprise, not merely in the particular locality, hut elsewhere.
in those preliminary remarks I have been more concerned
with the effect upon tho countries more immediately affected,
hut as no man lives to himself neither docs any country, and
there is no country tliat is so seriously and immediately
affected by fluctuations in the foreign and colonial demand
for railway metal as Groat Britain; and this holds trim
whether we consider tho extent of capital invested in plant,
tho numbers employed in tho manufacture and transport; over-
sea of railway material, or the extent to which imports repre-
sent interest upon the foreign and colonial investments of
Great Britain.
An additional reason for economy in tho expenditure of
capital upon pioneer railways is that production in new coun-
tries is generally handicapped in ho many ways that the least
possible charge for tho transport of goods is much to be
desired, and there can bo no doubt that tho low freights
charged on American railroads have been most beneficially
felt by tho farmers of tho United States, who have thus boon
enabled to successfully place on tho markets of the world
wheat grown at immense distances from tho seaboard. (See
Appendix No, 7.)
It w self-evident that, in the case of pioneer railways which
are always capable of carrying many times tho traffic that is
available, low capital cost admits of low traffic charges, and
that those again tend to encourage settlement as rapidly os
other conditions will permit j whilst, on the other hand, "any
unnecessary capital expenditure is necessarily attended by cor-
respondingly higher freight charges, so that the progress of
settlement is retarded to that extent. A. very small margin of
profit is all that differentiates the successful from tho unsuc-
cessful farmer, and if that margin is lost or swallowed up in
the cost- of transport then the soil necessarily goes out of
cultivation.
Perhaps the moat singular feature of this age is the ten-
dency ox population to’ congregate more and more in cities,


even in such countries as America and Australia. It is in
these centres that the seeds of social unrest are sown and
developed, so that any methods which tend to foster the well-
being of the farming and pastoral classes are worthy of the
attention of all who have the well-being of the community at
heart.
Whenever a pioneer railway proves inadequate for the trallle
it has developed it ceases, in exact proportion to its in-
adequacy, to be a pioneer railway, and it will then pay lo
strengthen it at the weakest points as the necessities of each
particular case demand ; nor will this process involve an ex-
penditure disproportionate to the object in view at any parti-
cular time, provided that the route Ims boon carefully selected
by a competent engineer, and that a rail with a good reserve
of strength has been purchased in the first instance, as recom-
mended under Section XIII (“Hails.”)
SECTION III.
CLIMATE.
Climate plays an important park in llio science of railway
construction—(also in the working of railways)—and a little
reflection will show that it should not bo regarded as a quantity
that may he neglected.
Show. —ln the far north of Asia, Europe, and America, as
well as in elevated regions nearer to the Equator, the railway
engineer's chief enemy is snow, which places him at a groat
disadvantage in many ways. It demands a minimum of’ cut-
ting and a maximum of embankment; it necessitates extensive
snowsheds over cuttings which cannot bo avoided, as for in-
stance cm the stoop sides of mountains where embankments
will not stand; it calls for special appliances to facilitate its
removal from the road, and reduces the haulage capacity
thereof to a minimum, thus proving itself the greatest enemy
that railway men have to contend with.
Eros®.—After snow the most formidable foe is frost:; for
whilst snow impedes the superstructure, frost; assails Hie foun-
dations of a railway; hence the desirableness of a good depth
of selected ballast, and of careful and thorough drainage to
facilitate the rapid removal of rain-water From embankments
and road-bed. The necessity for mire in (his respect
is apparent when it is remembered that water in the act
of freezing expands about 8 per coni;., and that the
small inequalities that are produced by this means in an


insufficiently drained or badly ballasted road may prove very
serious when rails and fastenings arc subjected to severe
stresses whilst in the comparatively brittle condition super-
induced by frost. Per the same reason the use of cement
concrete will always bo loss general in cold than in warm
countries.
Humd. —In tropical and sub-tropical zones a different set of
conditions is met with. The greater rainfall demands extra
provision for cross drainage in mountainous and uneven coun-
try, whilst the prevailing high temperature is favourable to the
life of rails and fastenings, and admits of the use of harder and
consequently more durable rails than could ho safely em-
ployed in colder climates. The absence of frost permits a
reduction both in the quantity and quality of selected ballast,
and in the ease of pioneer railways in even country reduces
the necessity for artificial drainage to a minimum.
In the tropics termites oat the sleepers, as well as anything
and everything made of wood, so that the advantages of metal
sleepers, iron and steel for bridges, and galvanised iron and
concrete for building purposes, are emphasised, whilst the
effect of tornadoes and mousoonal rains cannot bo safely dis-
regarded.
Ab the tractive power of locomotives con never exceed and
should he proportioned to the adhesive weight of the driving
wheels mi the rails, ami as the co-efficient or adhesion during
warm dry weather is about three times higher than in frosty
or snowy weather, it is evident that climate plays an important
part in determining the tractive power that can ho usefully
developed in leoemotivos, and, as a consequence, the working,
expenses per train mile for a given service; and it is interest-
ing to note that the working expenses per train mile are only
ono-soveuth loss in the United Kingdom than in (Jiioenshtnd',
although the rate of wages and cost of fuel (to say nothing
of the much lighter traffic to be served) are considerably
higher in the latter.
With a much smaller population in proportion to railway
mileage than either .New Mouth Wales, Victoria, or Few
Zealand, tho working expenses per train-mile are considerably
less in Queensland, although there are groat disadvantages in
the numerous disconnected railway systems and the cost of
labour and fuel in the latter. This matter is more fully dealt
with under Section IX (“ Rolling Stock.’’)
PumcAJi OiUßAOi'Kiuam's oif Commur. — Prom the
point of view of the railway engineer, the laud surface of 'the
earth may be classed under the following Loads; —
Even Country, Uneven Country, Mountainous Country,


SECTION IV.
EVEN COUNTRY.
. One-half to two-thirds of the habitable surface of the earth
consists of even country, which may be defined as land so
nearly level as to appear so to the eye.
In reality the surface of the earth is very rarely level, but
it is, frequently even —that is to say, the inclination of the
slopes is moderate and uniform .for considerable distances
(sometimes lor hundreds or even thousands of miles), whilst
the changes of inclination are gradual, and not greater as a
rule than gradients admissible on railways of the present
day.
: The term “ even country ” comprises the steppes of Eussia
and Northern Asia, the prairies of North: America, the llanos
and pampas of South America, the plains and rolling downs of
Australia, and the deserts of Arabia and Africa, whilst many
of the great river systems of India and China traverse im-
mense stretches of even cultivable plains before reaching the
ocean.
By far the greater part of Queensland,.in fact of Australia
generally, is even, and as the river beds of this vast even terri-
tory are generally mere ditches as regards their water-worn
channels, and 'as there is an almost entire absence of snow and
frost, there is no country in the world which offers greater
natural facilities for the laying down ■ of inexpensive pioneer
railways, provided that natural and not artificial drainage be
resorted to. '
SECTION V.
UNEVEN COUNTRY.
Uneven country is generally found on one side, or other of
great mountain ranges. In Queensland the larger portion of
the area between the East Coast, and the Great Dividing
Range.may be classed as “ uneven,” although there are many
minor stretches of even country near the East Coast.
As the term implies, a longitudinal section of uneven coun-
try, .presents a wavy appearance, so that the. grade'lines of
railways are alternately in cutting and bank.
To obtain the least expensive lines of railway through this
class, of country requires the, most, exhaustive and patient in-
vestigation by thoroughly competent men, whilst the chief
device fpr reducing cost should be as free a use of curvature,
combined with moderate gradients, as the mechanical limita-


Normarnton Railway —View from Cab of Engine at 25½ miles, looking towards Croydon.
( Plate laying wilk steel sleepers in progress.)




lions of the rolling-stock will admit, in order to follow as
closely os possible the swelling contours of (ho ground. This
system lias been adopted in Queensland, and is much to he
preferred to that of straight lines, easy curves, and steep
gradients, ns adopted in Now South Wales.
As a rule it will he found that fairly easy routes can be
obtained through uneven country, not more, than 20 per cent,
longer than the straight line joining the extreme ends of sec-
lions of dfl to rtO miles in length.
Where railways projected through uneven country follow
the course of large streams it will sometimes be found advan-
tageous to cross (ho main drain several times in order to secure
the most favourable gradients and the avoidance of costly
earthworks and tunnels.
I'Vvr the economic use of low level bridges hi uneven country
see Section XT (“ Drainage.”)
SECTION VI.
MOUNTAINOIIS COUNTRY.
Hy “ mountainous country ” I mean those portions of great
mountain ranges which must occasionally ho crossed when
[awning from oho great river system to another, or the sleep
still's nf an elevated lable-buiit which must ho ascended to
attain the higher levels beyond.
The least expensive method of dealing with this class of
country is precisely the reverse of that recommended for
uneven country.
I lore the groat difficulty is the ascent, which may be
reckoned by hundreds or by thousands of feet, and evidently
the correctthing to do (in the oust) 'of pioneer railways, at all
events) is to make the ascent in the least possible distance
compatible with the requirements of mixed traffic, and the best
mechanical appliances that are available.
It is evident that, to ascend a high, steep, anil rugged range
by moans of adhesion gradients, is a slow, _ tedious, and very
costly process, as it implies the limitation of the steepest gra-
dient in use on other portions of the road If this he 2 per
cent,, then to overcome a height of 1,000 feet moans at least
10 miles of mountain work, when the adoption, of rack inclines
of from 6 to 7 per cent, would permit of the ascent being made
in from H to 4 miles without serious loss of power or time,
A lew examples of tins rack type of railway may he in-
teresting.


Distances in Miles,
Height, In li’eet.
Blankenburg
= 0
.,. Datum.
1.4
304
3.7
811
5.9
485
8.3
69S
12,0
659
Taune
= 16.3
754
(1.) The Hahz Eatlwav.
Blankenburg to Tanne, completed 1886.—This. line (10.3
miles in length) traverses mountainous country, and although
the heights to he overcome are not very serious, it has been
found advantageous to adopt the central rack-rail system on
portions of the line.
The following is a table of the various distances and
heights: —
About one balf of the total length _ia straight, and the
remainder on curves from 9 to 50 chains radius; hut, as a
rule, the radius is not less than 15 chains,
About one-fifth is level, the remaining four-fifths being on
gradients. Of the latter 4.1 miles are on rack inclines, of
which there are ten, varying from 6to per cent., 3 miles
being on the steepest gradient of 1 in IG’G7 (0 per cent.).
That portion of the Hue which is worked by adhesion in the
ordinary manner is nowhere steeper than 1 in 40, and the
rails on this portion of the road weigh GO-| lbs, per yard. The
cross sleepers are of mild steel, 7 feet 8 inches x inches X
2 J inches, weighing 88 lbs. each ; they are spaced on an ave-
rage 9 feet apart, centre to centre, on thn adhesion portion,
and 2 feet lOf inches apart on the rack inclines,
The rack-rail is built with three steel bars, each 4| indies
deep f inch thick and S feet 8 inches long, laid to break joint,
and bolted to cast-iron pedestals or chairs keyed down to the
centre of each sleeper. The bars are toothed, and are kept
If inches apart by means of the chairs or pedestals, which also
raise the rack-rail 2f inches above the outer rails. A length
of .rack-rail at each end of an incline is hinged, tapered gra-
dually, and supported hy vertical spiral springs, which serve
to take up the shock of the engine when it engages with the
rack-rail.. The locomotives in running order weigh 54 tons,
and have two pairs of cylinders, one pair for the ordinary
driving wheels when working on adhesion gradients, and the
other pair for actuating the toothed wheels (of which there aro
two) when operating on the rack inclines. The diameter of
the pitched circle of each toothed wheel is L loot inches.
The gauge is 4 feet 8| inches, and the traffic mostly mineral,
(See proceedings Institution of Civil Engineers, Tol. 84,
page 494.) It is to bo regretted that particulars arc not


Load lu Tons, exclusive of Weight
of Unglue.
Hystom,
Weight
Oil
Driving
Wheels,
30 Tons.
Umdionts.
1 In 101)
at 20 mtloa
an hour.
X in no
at 10 mlloH
an hour.
1 in 211
at 0 mUoB
an hour.
i lii in
at 0 uiiloB
mi hour.
Adhuakm
linok
213
134
44-
148
27
107
given of the duty performed on this interesting railway, but
the following table, prepared from tho best information
available, will in some measure supply the omission. (See
Appendix No. 8.)
TABLE uMomring the Bmilage Capacity of a Locomotive geared lor
Hack liiolinuß when working on Adhesion (or ordinary) Gradients
and on Hook Sections of the same lino of Railway.
jlo'j'K,—For imrposos of comparison tho Imnlago capacity of lonnnioUvtn of tins same
class may ho taken »a approximately In proportion to tlui total weights on their
driving whiiota.
(2.) Tub Piick’h Peak Rack Rahvwav.
(JSivt.ro at ml from tho ISitffiuearin// News and American Unit
•imy Journal of 4th October, 1990.)
“Tho Mauitou and Pike's Punk .Railway Company was
orgaulswl with n capitalised stock of 411500,000 in tiie fail ol
1,885), For tins construction of a railway nine miles long, from
Mauitou to the old Hignal Station on Pike’s Peak. .Its direc-
tory ffiw composed of a munbor of prominent men interested
in connecting railways and resorts in tho vicinity, Mr. R. 15.
Briggs, thou of tho Denver and Rio Grande Railway, was
chief engineer, and Tims. .If. Richards contracting engineer.
“ Directly after this organisation was effected work com-
.mencod, and since then has hcou systematically and diligently
prosecuted, nearly 1,000 uum having been constantly em-
ployod. It would have hcou completed and the entire lino
now in operation hut for unforeseen delays in the manufac-
ture and shipment of requisite material and equipment. Tilt;
road is built on tho AM system, under the supervision of Mr.
W. Hildebrand, the American representative of tho Swiss
inventor, Homan AM, ami as regards grades surmounted is
perhaps the steepest and most important Abt lino in tho
world. Tim Mount Washington lino has considerably steeper
grades, very nearly 53,1 per cent., but is not of tho Abt type.
The Rlgi has n short piece of SO per cent.
“Tho exact length is 40,168 feet, or very nearly 8# miles.


The altitude of its initial station at Manitou is 6,600 feet; at
the summit it is 14,200 feet above sea level, the total ascent
being 7,600 feet, or an average of 840 feet per mile. The
maximum grade is 25 per cent., over 22 per cent, of the line
having a grade of from 224 to 25 per cent. The grades of the
entire line are very nearly as follows: —10,229 feet at 22| to 25
percent. (1,188 to 1,320 feet per mile) ; 6,820 feet at 10| t022-|
per cent.; 7,675 feet at 154 to 194 per cent.; 4,295 feet at
124 to 154- per cent.; and 17,139 feet at 124 per cent., or less.
“ The line is tolerably crooked even for an adhesion road,
and has many sharp curves. Of straight line there is 28,378
feet, and of curved 18,477 feet, about 39 per cent, of the line
being on curves. The total curvature is over 1,844°, or about
211° per mile. The sharpest curves are 16 o# , of which there
are many. The road bed is an excellent example of the usual
type of mountain roads. The foundations are firmly secured,
and further protected and sustained by wide embankments
wherever practicable. The culverts (of which there arc many)
are of stone. There are four iron bridges; two of 20 feet and
two of 30 feet span, resting on masonry abutments. The
rails are laid on red spruce and oak ties, 8 inches face, 7 inches
deep. 9 feet long, laid 20-iu. centres.
“At intervals of 200 to 600 or 1,000 feet, depending upon
the grades, anchorages are made by straps fastened to the ties
and carried up grade to eyebolts set in solid blocks of masonry.
As the whole track is tied together, not only by the spiking,
but by the extra fastenings of the rack rail, it is thought that
these anchorages will be amply sufficient to guard against the
movement of any part down grade.
“ The track rails are 40 lbs. per yard. The rack rails con-
sist of two rack bars set side by side in chairs. They are
x and 4f" x 14'', according to the grades. Bach sec-
tion is 80 inches long, and the chairs are 40 inches apart on
each second tie, the rack bars breaking joint according to the
usual A.bt practice. The teeth are 2 inches deep and 4.7
inches pitch. The material of the racks is Bessemer steel,
70,000 lbs. ultimate strength, 25 per cent, elongation in 8
inches, and 45 per cent, reduction of area. The chairs are of
the same steel as the racks, rolled and die forged, and are fas-
tened to the ties by 1 inch wood screws.
“ Three locomotives on the Abt system, each weighing 25
tons, have been built for the line by the Baldwin Locomotive
Works. _ In one of our illustrations we give a view of one of
the engines engraved from a photograph. The cab and boiler
are much like those of any other steam engine, but the intricate
machinery underneath is wholly unlike that of an ordinary
locomotive. The wheels bearing on the rails aro merely bear-
Kadlus 389‘S feet=6'4d chains.


hig wheels, not drivers, the ])1 tint differing iu this respect from
some other Abt engines which work either by adhesion or rack
indifferently. Tho Pike’s 'Peak lino being all on, rack grades
this double provision became superfluous The engine is pro-
pelled by throe sets of gearing directly over the centre of the
track, On these are sis pinions with steel teeth, 2f inches
thick, which lit into the two rack rails running along the centre
of the track. The propelling power is applied directly to a
drum above tho two roar pinions. The front pinions are moved
by n connecting rod running from tho second one. The brake
apparatus is especially powerful, very naturally. On either
side of the pinions is a corrugated surface which a steam brake
presses against them with tremendous force, Tho engine is also
lifted with hand brakes and tho Lo Oliatelior water brake, by
which the cylinders act as brakes, which is so effectively and
largely used on mountain grades. Tho tank will hold7oo gallons,
and must ho lilted four times on each round trip. One engine
will push two ears weighing 42,000 lbs. loaded The average
speed will bo Jive miles an hour; on the 25 per cent grades it
will ho throe miles per hour, and on tho 8 per cent, grades
eight miles,'*
“ Bach passenger car has twenty-five seats with a capacity
for carrying Jil'ty persona per trip, and weighs 21,000 lbs.
when loaded. It is also supplied with two tension brakes to
bo worked by hand. The cars arc not tilled, hut the seats are
ho arranged ns to give the passenger a level footing. The
engine, instead of drawing, pushes the cars, as usual on melt
mil ways, trim cars can also be letdown hill independently of
the engine, if necessary.
“ Tho road hod, 1.5 feet in embankment, and 22 feet in ex-
cavation, is nil good, no had material having boon used. I’rom
its Mftnttmi station the line runs up apparently vertical cliffs
through Hugleumn cafum. Tho steepness of this incline is
illustrated in our view' of the “ (fraud Pass,’’ engraved from a
photograph. All work above timber lino for two and a-half
niilos is largely in embankment to avoid difficulty from snow.
Below the timber lino it is largely iu excavation, as, owing to
the steepness of tho mountain sides, it was dillioult to build
embankments.”
(3.) Tin: Tbaws-An.uxhe Baijavat.
(Mvlrmitmi fnm Iho ICnyi nearing News and American Hall-
way Journal of 251 h October, 1890.)
“The lino now building extends from Moudom, tho western
terminus of the-Argentine Hallway system to Santa Hosn in
- The total tmetlvo power developed on tho 23 % gradients la 23,1)20 lbs.—fi. jp.


(Hilli, a distance of 140 miles. The line is through a, moun-
tainous country presenting exceptionally dillioult engineering
problems. The starting-point at Mendoza is 2,370 feet, and
Santa Rosa is 3,704 foot above sea level. But the lowest pass
over the Andes between these points is 12,467 feet above the
sea, or 10,000 feet above the terminals, Careful survey de-
monstrated that a surface line with gradients that could be
profitably worked would entail very considerable development,
and increase the distances exposed to snow and avalanches
without compensating advantages. The Abt rack system with
8 per cent, gradients was therefore adopted for a portion of
the line, and tunnels used freely as a protection against the
snow, with a three-mile tunnel 2,000 foot below the .Pass.
“ As finally arranged, the first 84 miles from Mendoza has
maximum gradients of 21 per cent, worked by adhesion; on
the remaining 05 miles the engines can work either by adhesion
or on the rack rail. The longest section of rack rail will .be
about 10 miles, at the summit.
“Starting at Mendoza the road reached Blanco Eucabula
(18 miles), 3,847 foot above the sea; at the fifteenth mile
post the Mendoza River is crossed by six spans of 00 foot
each. At Boca del Rio (19 miles) the' road enters the gorge
of the Mendoza River and commences the ascent of the Andos,
and heavy work begins. To mile-post flfty-sovon tho Mendoza
River is crossed eight times by viaduct and bridge, and finally
the lino reaches the ITapallata Valley, 6,577 foot above the
sea. The first of tho series of tunnels is at Dos Cuevas, 9,515
feet above tho aoa. This is the Navarro No. 1, 2,205 foot
long, with a maximum grade of 8 pea- cent. Navarro Tunnel
No. 2is 2,4(50 feet long, also with 8 per cent, grades. Just
beyond there is the Las Cuevas 'runnel, 2,700 foot long, with
a maximum grade of 0J- per cent.
“Tho highest point of the railway is about the centre of tho
summit tuunel, 10,4(5(1 feet above sea level, and tho frontier of
Argentina and Chili is also crossed at tho same point. This
summit tunnel will ho 1(5,(120 feet long, with an 8 per cent,
grade on the Chilian side. Immediately beyond tins tunnel is
tho Calavora Tunnel, 12,100 feet long, ’followed by the Por-
tillo, a double turn spiral tunnel 5,820 feet long/eontiiuiing
in tunnel through tho .Tnneallilo, 4,185 foot long, and tins
Junehl, 3,621 foot long, with maximum grade of 8 per emit,
Tho station of El Juncal is 31 miles from Santa Rosa and
7,218 loot above the Pacific. Prom El Juneal the line follows
the Bio Aconcagua.
“Upon the Chilian side about 12 miles of rack rail will be
used on 8 per cent, grades as a maximum. On tho portions
worked by adhesion 2.) per cent, will be the maximum,
"The special locomotives for the mountain section are being


built by Messrs. Beyer, Peacock and Co. In working order
they will weigh -15 tons and haul a train of 70 tons gross up
the 8 per cent, grades* The engines psed for the adhesion
portions of the line will he six wheel-coupled tank locomotives
upon ten wheels; the weight on the coupled wheels will be
28 tons. These engines will draw 140 tons gross over the 3|
per cent, grades (1 in 40).
“ The Trana-Andine Eailway will be laid to a gauge of one
metre, with 50 lb. rails on the adhesion portion and 55 lbs. to
the yard on the combined rack and adhesion parts. Hard-
wood ties will be used, except where the rack rail is laid.
“The earthwork is practically finished on two-thirds of the
line, and the rail, is laid 60 miles from Mendoza. Jt is ex-
pected that the line will, he opened to traffic as far as the
summit tunnels in 1891, and all the tunnels will be finished
in 1898.”
(4.) The Vxsx’-Zekma.t'd Abt Eailwat.
(.Extracted from the 'Engineering News and American. Bail-
imy Journal of 25th October , 1890).
“ The first part of the route from Yisp to St. Nicholas is
11.18 miles long, and without anything approaching the dig-
nity of a road. All merchandise is carried on mules or horses
over a rough narrow path.
“In December, 1880, Masson, Chavanues and Co., bankers
at Lausanne, and the Banque Gommereiale at Basle received
a concession from the Eederal Council for constructing a rail-
way from Yisp to Zermatt. A, little later a company with a
capital stock of $500,000 was formed; the necessary money
above this sum is met by notes. Surveys of the route were
made in 1887 and 1888 by engineers of the Jura and Simplon
Bailway, under the direction of M. Auguste Perey, ...
“ Several lines were traced out on these plans. An adhesion
railway was possible with a maximum grade of 4J- per cent,
and minimum curves of 60 metres (197 feet). The difference
in altitude between Yisp and Zermatt is 055 metres (9,096
feet), and it was very difficult to locate a line of this sort to
surmount this height.
!! The proposed line had a total length of 22.294 miles, of
which 4.16 miles, or 18,8 per cent., are level. About 66 per
cent, of the line are tangents. The total cost of construction
was estimated at $1,170,000, or about $52,160 a mile.
“ At the close of 1888 M. Julien Chappuis, the designer
of the important hydraulic improvements at Geneva, and M.
*No doubt the gross weight of train (70 tons) Is exclusive of engine. Inclusive ol
engine the total weight of wain will be 110 tons, and the tractive power developed at
low speed on the 8 per cent, gradients about 21,736 pounds.—S. P.


si
1
Radius
in
Feet.
Length
in
Feet
*4
01
0
£
Radius
in
Feet.
Length
in
Foot.
»4
<u
1
%
Radius
in
Feet.
Length
in
Feat,
1
194
328
i
427
217
2
902
1,132
I
197
49
6
402
1,194
5
984
§43
108
262
15,663
18
656
3,570
1
1,148
341
109
328
17,241
1
722
654
3
1,312
1,703
4
301
1,053
1
788
738
8
1,940
1,741
2
304’
479
5
820
1,311
2
2,103
838
1
410
138
1
869
793
2
3,281
561
6 %
... 1,202 feet
9 %
. 1,040 feet
12%
., 6,214 foot
7%
74%
1,868 feet
... 2,083 feet
10 %
10.3 % .
Total
. 4,862 feet
. 928 feet
12i %
... 1,888 foot
.. 18,042 foot
Ernest de Stockalper. one of the engineers of the Goeschenen
Tunnel on tho Gothard line, proposed to construct the line as
a rack road with a maximum grade of 12 per cent., the cost
• being estimated at SOBO,OOO. The plan was adopted, and the
Abt system unanimously selected by the engineering staff as
the most suitable for the work in hand,
“ The gauge is one metre. The curves on the lino are shown
in the following table
Total length of curves, 60,571 feet,
“ The grades in the adhesion part of the railway vary from
0.15 to 2.5 per cent., and have a total length of 70,778 feet,
while the level portions amount to only 19,574 feet. Tho rack
rail grades are as follows;
“ The adhesion and rack grades are connected by (vertical)
curves of 1,000 metres (3,281 feet) at all places Have two,
where the radii are 2,461 feet long. The total length of tho
rack rail is 24,475 feet, the 5,833 feet in excess of the lengths
depending entirely on the pinions, consisting of the entering
and leaving rails of each rack grade, and a few short racks
placed on the adhesion grades for safety.
“ The rails are of the Yignole type, weighing 48.4 lbs.
Bach roil is carried by 13 soft steel ties, 2.87 feet apart in tho
centre of the rail, 1.61 feet apart at the joint, and with 2.08
feel between the second and third tie numbering from the
joint, which is of the suspended type. The ties are 6 foot
long, 9f inches wide at tho base, and 3 inches high,
“ The racks are of the usual Abt type, consisting of two
parallel plates 1. inch thick on the steep, and 0.8 inch on the.
light grades. The entering and leaving racks are supported
on elliptic springs instead of the more usual spiral form,
“The locomotives are of the type illustrated in Bm/ineerinq


News for 122nd May, 1886.
given below; —
Gauge 5.28 ft.
Diam. inside oyls,, for
raokpmkma... ... 13.16 in.
Stroke inside oyls. ... 17.71 in.
Diam. outside oyla. for
adhesion grades ... 12.6 in.
Diam. driving wheels,
2 pairs 3 ft. 3 in.
Their principal dimensions are
Stroke outside oyls. ... 17.71 in.
Wheel base 13.45 ft.
D lain, of pinions ... 2.26 It.
Pitch of teeth 4,72 in.
Boiler pressure ... 176 lbs.
Weight empty ... 23,9 tons
Weight loaded ... 31.96 tons
In New Zealand the Pell or Central Ea.il Friction-grip sys-
tem is in use, with inclines as steep ns lin 15. The inclines
are worked by heavy locomotives, specially geared, The latest
type of those weigh in steam 39 tons on 3 axles, the weight on
the central axle being 16 tons, and the total weight on driving
wheels 29.5 tons. The tractive power when working as an
ordinary engine is 8,820 lbs., and the total tractive power is
given as 16,640.8 lbs. Exclusive of its own weight this type
of engine can haul by adhesion 121 tons on 1 in 50 at 10 miles
an hour, and can take 68 tons up the 1 in 15 Inclines at 4
miles iui hour.
Whilst in mountainous country the saving to he effected by
steep inclines, in earthworks, bridges, tunnels, and works
generally is very great, the additional coat of permanent way
and geared locomotives is comparatively small; nor is there
any other way in which equal economy can he practised.
The Weight of permanent way and locomotives for rack inclines
should bo proportioned to the required duty in ouch case.
On the 3 feet 6 inches gauge the duty of a 7-ton engine
ascending a rack incline of I in .15 to a height of 1,000 feet
would bo about 56 tons not (exclusive of weight of rolling
stock) per day of eight hours.
The most remarkable example of mountain railways in
Queensland is that at Cairns, a port situated on the east coast,
in latitude 16° 54' S. The first section of 8f miles traverses
the, low emuitry usually met with on the coast, and calls for
no particular remark; the physical difficulties being confined
to the second section of 1.5,1 miles, which ascends the coast
range on the adhesion principle, and has cost, (to the 30th June,
1892) nearly one million sterling, or £65,574 per mile. In
effect the ranges is simply the broken irregular edge of an
elevated plateau, which extends into the interior at a height of
from 1,000 to 2,000 foot above the soa. The 'geological
formation of tins exposed side of the plateau is generally
schistose, often decomposed, sometimes motamorphic, with
intrusions of harder rock, the greater part of -which resembles
diorito both in character and appearance. These exposed edges
have beon-ranch disturbed during the period of upheaval, and
a


very little of the rock is stratified. _ Numerous slips Is me
occurred in past ages, bo that the solid country, us a rule, is
masked by masses of loose, decomposed, or weathered material,
and floating boulders, now covered with a douse growth ot
tropical -jungle or scrub. At the lowest part of the plateau
the Barron Kiver, which drains about 700 square miles of the
elevated tableland, falls over the lip or edge into a very deep
and comparatively narrow gorge, which has been selected aw
the final avenue of approach for the railway from the lower to
the higher levels.
The summit ruling this part of the line is surmounted at the
Barron Palls (18f miles from Cairns) at about 1,000 feet above
the sea, This height has been attained by contouring round
the steep sides and spurs of the plateau, at first with 1
in 60, and subsequently with 1 in 60 gradients, both of which
have been freely used in combination with 5 chain curves.
These contours have been much too strictly adhered to, and
not sufficient play allowed for the necessary casement of the
working gradients at slack and dangerous places (which always
occur with more or less frequency on the sides of mountains) ;
for instance, the original working section show's a continuous
1 in 50 gradient for 130 chains, followed by an almost
continuous 1 in 60 gradient for 8 miles, whilst further on
there is a continuous lin 60 gradient for 130 chains 5 those
three gradients alone cover 6-} miles of the most difficult part
of the section. The result has been that slack and dangerous
places have been cut out, not by the usual process of lowering
the formation at those points, hut by thrusting the centre lino
bodily over into the hill, and at the same time retaining the
formation level of the original contour.
If the Engineers in charge had realized that, allowing for
resistance due to curvature, the actual gradient limiting tho
load is equivalent to 1 in 40 on straight, a very considerable
saving in earthworks (and cost) could have been effected
without reducing the capacity of the line. On tho lin 50
contour, with a little care in alignment, the working gradients
might have ranged between 1 in 40 and 1 in 00, and mi the
1 in 60 contour, between 1 in 40 and 1 in 120 j the range of
gradient within these limits would have boon of very material
assistance, and would have obviated a great deal of the alteration
in alignment which tho Engineers have considered necessary,
which, no doubt, the rather slavish adherence to tile
original contour gradients has rendered necessary.
In addition, it may bo pointed out that if the 1 in 60 contour
(which rules the load), instead of ending at eleven miles, had
been carried on for another throe miles towards Herhorton,
the formation would then have been about 50 feet higher






than it is at present at Stony Crook, and it would have hoop
|K>««iblo to have carried fclio Imo in tunnel behind Stony Crook
Fulls, and iu u direct lino thence to Surprise Crook, crossing
that crook with a bridge a few chains above the present creasing
and rejoining tho existing line a few chains further on at tlio
samo formation level, The tunnel, would have' been about
5,0510 yintis iu length (the straight portion on i in -to), amt
allowing 20 nr oven 50 per coni;,, additional on the Contractor’s
schedule price for tunnelling, a, very large saving could have
boon effected upon the actual cost of tho Hue between Stony
and Surprise Crooks,besides shortening tho tlmmgh distance,by
one aud-n-lui.ll 1 miles, with tho further advantage that the coat of
maintenance would have boon materially reduced, and the risk
from future slips on this, tho most difficult and dangerous part
ul: tho line, entirely avoided. A shorter practicable tumid
deviation cutting out the lied Bluff, and reducing the through
distance by iff chains, is also shown on tho sketch plan on tlio
opposite jingo. To render tho latter deviation possible tho
lino would need to have boon oarriod with a 1 in 50 gradient
from tho present formation level, at tho left bunk of Stony
Creole, to tho commencement of the deviation. This deviation
would Jams cost about 50% loss than the present lino between
tho same points.
Tho whole of the previous remarks ou tlio Cairns Kailway
refer to tho adhesion principle only, tho adoption of which
appears to have necessitated the circuitous and difficult route
eh* tho Valley of the Barronltiver. In my opinion that route
should have boon regarded as impracticable, and I have no
doubt that, if tho country had boon examined with view to
adopting a combined ruck and adhesion lino, a more direct and
very much loss cosily route could have boon obtained without
in slny way impairing the usefulness of tho railway.
SECTION VII.
THE ENGINEER.
For Homo years subsequent to tho introduction of railways,
Groat Britain supplied tho world with railway engineers. To
a lews extent this still holds, and young engineers are sent out
to learn the unwritten laws, and to contend with tho silent
forces of nature, in countries ns dissimilar as may bo from
that of their birth and professional training.
No matter how well equipped these gentlemen may bo for
the design and erection of substantial structures, or even for


the selection of route in such a country as Groat Britain
(where an intelligent draughtsman with the aid of an ordnance
map may readily prick off the moat advantageous line of com-
munication), they are not well fitted, by previous education and
experience, for the task of selecting the moat advantageous
routes in new and uncharted countries.
The result too often is that they are compelled to rely upon
the surveys of others, who, probably, know less of the require-
ments of railway construction than themselves, and who, in sonic
instances, base their surveys upon the straight lines Joining
the extreme ends of sections, or upon bush tracks, which may
or may not follow the lines of least expanse,
I remember that when railways were first commenced in
Australia serious mistakes wore made in this way, some of
which are now being recti lied at great expense.
It would be move advantageous if the engineer charged
with the construct ion of a pioneer railway were tin experienced
busbrnan, well versed in the hook of nature, than that be
should bo competent to design and construct the .Forth Bridge
or the Channel Tunnel.
Too often the young engineer leaves Europe flushed with
the anticipated triumph of erecting imperishable monuments
of his skill, and of constructing roads that, shall compare in
stability and capacity with that on which bis apprenticeship
was served, and who learns, too late it may lie For the pockets
of his employers, all that is implied by variations of climate,
temperature, and rainfall.
If there be one duty which the engineer should not dele-
gate to subordinates, it is the primary exploration of the
country, and the personal inspection mid selection of route,
oven down to the most minute detail, for all of which ho
should bo thoroughly fitted by education and experience j and
yet this is precisely the work which, in some cases, has been
considered of so little importance that it may lie safely
assigned to any inexperienced lad, who thus in turn practically
assigns to his chief the task of constructing this or that work,
which may or may not ho necessary, but which the young
surveyor Ims practically designed, if not on paper, at least by
Ms location of the lino, Too often the engineer conceives
that ho has done all that is necessary in this direction, when
ho issues on instruction to the effect that the ruling gradient
shall bo so much per cent., and the minimum curve of so many
chains radius; and in turn the surveyor in the Held is apt to
think that, provided ho keeps within the letter of his instruc-
tions, he also Ims successfully accomplished the task assigned
to him.
It will no doubt be conceded, by those at least who provide


the capital, that the highest form of engineering skill is that
which discovers the means of avoiding rather than of sur-
mmmting obstacles, and there is more credit due to the
engijieer who, by careful exploration, reduces the ruling
gradient by o‘B per cent, -without increasing the cost, or avoids
the necessity for this bridge or that tunnel, than to the
engineer who arranges to have so much earth shifted, or such
and such structures built. Unfortunately the work which is
or may be avoided by the skill and painstaking efforts of the
one is not apparent to the casual observer, whilst the works
executed by the other catch the eye of every traveller.
A.S an illustration of the advantage of local knowledge to
the engineer in charge, which can only be gained by personal
and intelligent inspection of the ground, I will take the case
of the Mount Morgan Gold Mining Company.
Tlio property of this Company is the richest gold mine in
the world j it paid in one year £1,200,000 sterling in dividends,
or £20(1,000 more than the nominal share capital, whilst for
several years past it has paid dividends to the extent of
£300,000 annually, with every prospect of continuance. The
mine is twenty miles from Eockhamptou, the chief seaport of
Central Queensland, but an intervening range known as the
“•liiiKorhaek,” about 900 feet above sea level, has proved a
serious drawback to dray traffic. To overcome this difficulty,
the company have for some years past desired to construct a
short; branch railway, fourteen miles in length, to connect the
mine anti township of Mount Morgan (population 4,000) with
the main Hue of railway from llocklmmpton westward, at
“ Kabm,” nine miles from Eockhamptou. For the first ten
miles from Kabra the road in general use traverses even
ground with a gentle ascent, intersected by a few unimportant
water-courses. The ascent of the range is made in about
three hundred yards by a favourable gap, and the descent to
Mount Morgan, along (he valley of the Deo Fiver, is easy.
Under several engineers, surveyors have boon kept almost
constantly at work for four years, exploring, examining, and
laying out various routes with adhesion, gradients of from two
to throe pem cent., but still the line is not built (although
there can bo no question that, if economically constructed, it
would prove a paying line), chiefly, I presume, because not one
of the engineers has been in a position to say definitely, from
personal knowledge of the ground, that the least expensive
route had been obtained.
During a holiday trip to Mount Morgan I devoted two days
to a barometrical* examination of the range, and I am in a
position to state positively that the most favourable gap and
ascent of the range is that availed of by the dray rood, along


which every engineer and surveyor who has visited Mount
Morgan has travelled. By the aid of a rack incline of five
or sis per cent., for about three quarters of a mile, the range
could readily be ascended at the road gap, and I am certain
that the whole cost of the branch, with equipment, need not
exceed £70,000, although I understand that the estimate based
upon the Government survey closely approximates to
£140,000, without equipment.
The engineer who, in designing a pioneer railway, displays
a greater regard for professional traditions than for the wel-
fare of his company, exhibits a want of flexibility that will
be fatal, in nine cases out of ten, to the financial success of
the enterprise with the initiation of which he is entrusted ;
and the manager who takes over the working of the traffic is
heavily handicapped at the outset by, the unnecessary amount
of capital expended.
SECTION VIII.
GAUGE.
Where there is a likelihood of sufficient traffic being de-
veloped within a reasonable time to fairly occupy, or to give a
fair return for the outlay upon, a railway of the normal gauge
of three feet six inches, or'where it is simply a question of
extending an existing line of that gauge, there can be no doubt
that the proper course is to adopt the normal gauge ; at the
same time there should be no sentiment about the matter, and
if an isolated railway or a branch line of considerable length
is required, that evidently would not pay if constructed upon
the normal gauge, then it is the duty of the engineer to con-
sider whether a line, equal to the requirements of the probable
traffic, would pay if constructed upon a narrower gauge. It
should he remembered that there is a minimum cost below
which it is not possible to construct a railway of any required
gauge and strength, upon the easiest country and under
favourable conditions. Eor a three feet six inches line, fit to
carry the ordinary rolling stock in use on the Government
railways, with a maximum wheel load of about seventy cwt,,
at from fifteen to twenty miles an hour, that minimum may
he regarded as £1,550 per mile, exclusive of artificial drainage,
fencing, laud, and rolling stock, as per estimate No. .1, ap-
pendix No. 2. Where a line of less cost than the minimum
above stated is desired, it will be preferable to adopt a nar-
rower gauge rather than to build a lighter line of the normal
gauge, and a good deal could be urged in favour of a gauge of


Uangu.
Dead weight
of open low-
sided 4 wheel
waggon.
Net or paying
load,
Total weight
loaded.
Proportion of
paying load
to dead load.
ft. in.
r> 3
tons
4
awt.
0
tons.
7
owl.
0
tUUB.
n
owt.
0
1-57 to 1
4 SJ
4
0
s
0
12
0
2 to 1
3 (i
3
4
0
10
10
0
2-1 to 1
2 tl
1
10
4
10
(i
0
3 to 1
I IU
(li’oatmioir)
0
13
2
0
2
13
3 to 1
two feet six inches for such subsidiary lines. Lines of two
feet six indies gauge, laid with stool rails weighing twenty-five
pounds per yard, operated by locomotives having a maximum
wheel load of thirty-five owt., would be capable of rendering
very useful service at an average speed of ten to fifteen miles
an hour, and a maximum speed, with light loads, of twenty
miles an hour. The advantage of adopting a narrower gauge
for lines designed to servo light traffic is two-fold : —first, the
narrow lines cost less to build and maintain, because the wheel
load is comparatively light; and, secondly, the possibility of
the heavier rolling stock being'rim on a portion of the lighter
permanent way and knocking it about, is entirely precluded.
The minimum cost of a two feet six inches gauge railway,
suitable for a maximum wheel load of thirty-five cwt., may be
taken as :6876 per mile, exclusive of artificial drainage, fencing,
laud, and rolling stock, and under favourable conditions on
even country, as per estimate No. 2, Appendix No, S.
The Pestiniog liaihvay in Wales has a gauge of one, foot
eleven and a halt inches, and is one of the best flaying rail wot
in the world, It carries a mixed passenger and goods traffic
at a speed that was limited by the Board of Trade to ten or
twelve miles an hour, but this limitation has been removed
since 1870.
Light traffic can be more, economically transported on
narrow than on broader gauge railways, because the narrower
the gauge the smaller is the proportion of dead to paying
load, os the following table shows: —
The reduction oil speed, and in Borne instances tire rehand-
ling of goods, are the chief objections that can be urged
against the adoption of a narrower gauge for lines of small
traffic; but, aa speed is the product of volume of traffic, too much
importance should not attach to this objection, and when it is


a question of a narrower gauge or uo railway at all, there
should not he much difficulty in upon the wisest
course to pursue, more especially when it is considered that
the services of a small railway will eventually bo develop the
resources of the country that the necessity for broader and.
heavier lines of rail is only a question of time. It is prefer-
able to travel with ease and comfort at ten, twelve, or fifteen
miles an hour, in a well-appointed compartment, on a smooth
road, free from dust and overcrowding, than, to he crushed
into a wretched vehicle, which it is an insult to style a coach,
cheek by jowl with kanakas, chinameu, prisoners, et luo genus
omne, jolted at every turn of the wheels, smothered with dust,
and moved under a blazing sun at the rate of from four to six
miles an hour, with the privilege of walking if the roads are
heavy after rain. ’When'this hind of thing has to he endured
for from ten to eighteen hours a day, often for several days in
succession, is it any wonder that our wives and daughters do
not take kindly to the bush, and that the country languishes
whilst the towns grow ?
The necessity for the rehandling of goods at the junction
of two lines of different gauge is, no doubt, an inconvenience,
but the additional cost is not great, and should not exceed
from threepence to sixpence per ton. Numerous methods
have been devised with the view of reducing to a minimum
the inconvenience arising from break of gauge, but
mere inconvenience of this description, or even tbo slight
increase of expense in through freight by railway, should not
he permitted to dominate the question, as the following illus-
tration clearly demonstrates. For instance, let it ho supposed
that it is desired to build a railway from Roma to Ht. George,
a distance of about .112 miles, and that tbo estimated cost of
the least expensive railway that can be constructed and
equipped between those places on tbo normal gauge is
£26*0,400(=£1,550 x 1*6x112). At live per cent, the annual
interest charge would amount to £13,020, and, if tbo annual
working expenses were estimated at £1.0,000, it would roijuiro
£23,020 worth of traffic to cover all. charges. Now, if tbo
estimate of gross traffic receipts were £IO,OOO per annum,
the estimated loss that would bo incurred by building a line of
normal gauge would amount to £7,020 per annum ; raid except
a less costly line could be built, or jiiuincial conwdcratiouM
were thrown on one side, the traffic between .Roma and Ht.
George would still have to be carried by dray and coach as
formerly, so that goods received or despatched at Roma, from
or to St. George, would have to ho handled at fiiaaa, and
passengers would continue to experience all the ineonvonitaieo
of coach traffic.


But if a line of narrower gauge (say two feet six inches)
could "be constructed and equipped at a total cost of say
£122,640 (=£B76 X i'2s x 112), the value of the estimated
traffic would in that event so closely approximate to the
estimate of working expenses and interest combined (£16,182)
that the probability is the narrow gauge line would he built,
and whilst passengers would materially benefit, there would he
uo greater handling of goods involved than formerly, whilst
the total cost of transport of both goods and passengers from
Brisbane to St. George, would be materially reduced by the
building of the narrower line.
It may be urged that the narrow gauge line would'neces-
sitate the providing of special rolling stock, and of workshops
at Roma, but on investigation it will be found that this objec-
tion is more apparent than real, tor the operation of a branch
railway of 112 miles on the normal gauge must involve either
the building of additional rolling stock, or the withdrawal
of the necessary rolling stock from other lines, so that the
additional expense in this direction is practically' limited to
the question of workshops, which is not a serious matter,
whilst the difference in cost of the rolling stock for the differ-
ent gauges, combined with the greater economy as regards
proportion of dead to paying load on the narrower gauge,
would more than counterbalance the cost of workshops. For
instance, three twenty-five ton locomotives would cost at least
£8,260 for the three feet six inches gauge, but the same num-
ber of twelve and a half ton locomotives for the two feet six
inches gauge, would not cost more than £B,OOO, whilst the
cost of 'other rolling stock would be approximately in the
same proportion.
"Where there is uniformity of gauge it is very desirable
that there should be sufficient strength to admit of free
interchange of the ordinary rolling stock in use on that
gauge, otherwise it would he preferable to build the lighter
lines on a narrower gauge as previously mentioned ; hut as the
weight imposed on the driving wheels of locomotives gener-
ally exceeds the wheel load of the freight and passenger
cars, it may sometimes he prudent to limit the interchange to
the lighter vehicles.
SECTION IX.
ROLLING STOCK.
The design and construction of locomotives and rolling
stock generally, is a specialty somewhat outside the general
work of railway engineers, so that my remarks under this


head will be brief, and confined to one or two points, to which
I think, attention may be drawn with advantage.
Under section III —Climate —I have already referred to the
extent to which the adhesive power of locomotives affects the
amount of tractive power that may be usefully developed
according to the average climatic conditions under which their
work is to be performed. Mr. D. IC. Clarke, ati authority on
English locomotive practice, says; “The proportion of the
adhesion-weight, or driving-weight of the engine, which
measures the force of adhesion available as tractive force, is
very variable—from one-fifth in dry weather, according to
the writer’s experiments on the adhesion upon railways, to
one-ninth in damp weather, when the rails may be slippery.”
“A fraction of one-eighth (280 pounds per ton on
drivers) may safely be adopted.”
The adbesive power of locomotives is given by Moles worth
as follows: —
Adhesion per ton of load on driving wheels —
When the mils are very dry 000 pounds per ton.
When the rails are very wet ... 000 ~ ~
In ordinary English weather ... 400 ~ ~
Jn misty weather, if the rails are greasy,,. ... 300 ~ ~
In frosty or snowy weather 200 ~ ~
The general practice of English locomotive engineers appears
to be to develop a tractive power ranging from 200 to 860
pounds per ton of load on driving wheels. The American
practice is in favour of adopting a higher eo-effleieat of
adhesion; thus Forney in his standard work on the American
locomotive (page 820) states; —“ For ordinary circumstances
the adhesion may safely be assumed to be mc-Jifih of Urn
■weight on the driving wheels.'’ This places adhesion at 448
pounds per ton Wellington in Iris work “Railway Location,' ”
third edition, ISBB, page 442, states that the result of all the
records included in the catalogue of the Baldwin .Locomotive
Works places the ratio of adhesion to load on drivers at one-
fourth ; this ratio places the adhesive power at 600 pounds
per ton on drivers. The mean of Forney’s ratio (one-fifth)
and the Baldwin ratio (one-fourthi is 304 pounds, which is
less by thirty-three pounds per ton on drivers than the tractive,
power developed by the 815 class of locomotive which is now
doing such splendid work on Queensland railways. (Koo
Appendix .No. 5.) The adhesive power should exceed the
tractive power (otherwise the wheels will slip), therefore it
may reasonably be expected that the BIS class of locomotive
can do better work in the dry climate west of the Main Range
(on the same ruling gradients) than can be expected in the
moister atmosphere or the coast. The average tractive power


developed in the 24 classes of locomotives in present service
in Queensland, amounts to 416 pounds per ton on drivers, the
range. being from 290 pounds (Eairlie Tank Engine, class
HDll) to 537 pounds in the 815 class, Erom the experience
already gained in this colony in would appear that a higher
eo-ellicieut of adhesion could he safely adopted in future
practice. On reference to the table given in appendix No. 4
(compiled from table IS of the last annual report of the
Queensland Railway Commissioners), it will be seen that
Queensland and Now Zealand have both adopted the same
gauge, (three feet six inches), that the difference in cost per
mile upon is only £BB5 in favour of Queensland, whilst the
population per mile of railway is twice as great in New
Zealand, yet the working expenses per train mile arc 38’70
pence in Queensland as compared with 58 - 09 pence in New
Zealand, The difference in working expenses may he caused
in many ways, and may be explicable on various grounds ; hut
I invite attention to the fact that whilst each colony Ims 24
different classes of locomotives, the totals of the weights of
which approximate ao closely as to be practically identical,
yet, with the mime effective steam pressure (ninety pounds),
the average tractive power in pounds per ton on drivers ia 416
for Queensland, as compared with 322 for New Zealand, a
difference of very nearly ono-third in favour of the former.
The point to he deduced from tin's comparison is, that the
high eo-ellicient of adhesion for the average climate of Queens-
land, as compared with- the low co-efficient of adhesion for the
average climate of New Zealand, permits of a greater tractive
power per ton on the drivers being usefully developed in this
colony, and, as a consequence, the weight of locomotives can
ho more evenly distributed in Queensland than in New
Zealand; this moans a lighter permanent way, less wear and
tear of road, and reduced cost of maintenance, whilst the
same effective work is done at less coat.
Eor table comparing the principal features of New Zealand,
Queensland, and West Australian locomotives—see. Appendix
No. 5.
In my opinion, every pioneer railway should, be provided
with at least one light steam carriage, capable of seating from
ton to twenty passengers, with room for mails and light lug-
gage, for use on those occasions when it is not advisable to
rim lull trains or heavier rolling stuck. The chief difficulty
connected with the use of these carriages on long lengths
of lino is the necessity for a more frequent water supply than
ia required for full power locomotives, but this difficulty could
he readily overcome. On pioneer railways the ordinary train
service is necessarily meagre, therefore light steam carriages


woulcl prove very serviceable for the despatch of mails that:
have been delayed, or for the conveyance of a few passengers
in eases of emergency, also for visits of official inspection, the
delivery of light goods, and rations to lengtlismon, pay trains,
and such like similar services. The cost of a steam carriage
will range from £-.100 to £6OO, according to design and
accommodation for passengers, and its weight in working
order will range from four to six tons, with a wheel load of
about one ton or less,
Passenger carriages for a line of two foot six inches gauge
would ho' about live, foot ton inches wide in the dear, and
about the same height from floor to roof, so that each second
class compartment could seat eight persons, four on each seat,
and each first class compartment, or coupe, would seat sis
persona, three on each seat. These scats would be transverse
to the rails, but there is scope for other and perhaps better
arrangement of the seats.
SECTION X.
PERMANENT WAT IN RELATION TO DISTRI-
BUTION OF LOAD.
Tlio typical permanent way of to-day is the result of many
experiments and much experience, and it is probable that tins
tendency in the future will bo in the direction of conformity
to, rather than in variation from, that typo. The distinctive
feature of that typo is the long transverse sleeper.
I do not include in “ typo ” the following details:—
(«) The shape of the vail, nor the means of attachment to
the sleeper,
(S.) The material of which the sleeper is made, nor its
precise shape, length, width, or depth.
(c.) Tlio material used for ballast.
The causes that have gradually led to the so general adop-
tion of the long transverse sleeper are as follow;
1. Speed.
2. Safety.
3. Drainage.
Where speed is desirable safety is a paramount necessity,
and the first requisite of safety on a railway is the absolute
preservation of tlio required gauge at all points and under till
emditiom of th> mid ; this can only be attained with aliso-


Into certainty by means of transverse (and especially metal)
sleepers. With frequent traffic the effective drainage of the
ballast between the rails and the sleepers is much to be
desired, so that bore again the superiority of transverse over
longitudinal sleepers is manifest.
With the adoption of a transverse sleeper the strength
and stiffness of the rail as a girder have to he taken into
account; these demand that the mil shall he supported at
frequent intervals, hence the need for close spacing and many
sleepers.
To prevent dangerous side oscillation when trains are
travelling at high, speed, as well as the breaking or buckling
of the transverse aloopors, they must be sufficiently long to
take a good hearing on the ballast outside the rails ; hence the
need for long transverse sleepers, for it is apparent that if the
sleepers were only of sufficient length, to hold the rails to
gauge, they would tend to ride on the ballast at their centres.
In order that transverse sleepers may bo capable of distributing
the weight of rolling stock with tolerable evenness throughout
their length, and in such a manner as not to impose undue
pressure upon the ballast immediately below the rail seats,
they must bo sufficiently stiff for the purpose; and, as the
stiffness of solid rectangular beams is in proportion to the
cuius of their depth, the necessity for a lair proportion of
. depth to width will Iso apparent, when it is considered that in
two rectangular wooden sleepers of the same length and width
a depth of four inches in the case of one sleeper would give
%'Wt times greater stiffness than a depth of three inches
would do in the case of the other sleeper, and that by
the time each sleeper was reduced one inch in effective
depth the deeper sleeper would be 3 - 4 times stiffer than
the other.
The foregoing explanation of the causes that have led to
the general adoption of the long transverse sleeper in pre-
ference to the longitudinal sleeper (although several argu-
ments on the score of economy could bo adduced in favour of
lho latter) may appear supererogatory, but without an intelli-
gent comprehension of first principles it is not possible to
show where economy can be safely exorcised.
It luw been shown that the load to ho canned, as well as its
distribution on the formation, has had practically very little
to do with fixing the general typo of permanent way. > This
will be more clearly understood if a comparison bo instituted
between the loads carried on different railway systems and
the superficial area of the sleepers provided in each ease. It
will be found that whilst the loud per axle has a wide range
the superficial area of transverse sleepers is not proportioned


to the load. For instance, in England and tho United States
• with tho 4 feet 8| inches gauge and a maximum load pci* axle
of about 18 tons, the superficial area of trarnmnwo sleepers por
lineal yard is about 1,200 square inches, whilst in Queensland
with a gauge of 3 feet 0 indies, and a maximum load per axle
of less than 9 tons, tho average superficial area of transverse
sleepers per lineal yard is 1,0-18 square inches,
Tho Pestiniog Railway in Wales, with a gauge of 1. foot
11| inches and a maximum load por axle of 5 tons, is pro-
vided with transverse sleepers having a superficial area per
lineal yard of 510 square indies. On the (Treat Western
Railway of England, the maximum gauge of which until
May, 1892, was 7 feet, the superficial area of the longitudinal
sleepers (disregarding tho transoms or gauge, pieces, which
cannot be regarded as contributing effectively to tho support
of the load) was SOI square inches per lineal yard.
Taking a rolling load of two tons por lineal foot it will ho
found that, with transverse sleepers 9 foot in length by 10
indies wide, spaced three feet apart from centre to centre,
this load when distributed is equal to 131 lbs. per superficial
square inch covered by tho sleepers, which is less than tho
pressure exerted by a heavy man when walking. If the
rolling load were doubled, that is to say four tram per lineal
foot, the distributed weight supported by ouch square inch
covered by tho sleepers would bo 25 lbs., which is equivalent
to the pressure exerted hy a shod draught horse when standing
nr less than one-half the pressure exerted by tho same horse
when moving at a brisk walk on a macadamised road
In America and Australia tho sleepers are usually spaced
closer together than three feet centres. On some lines in
America tho number of sleepers amounts to as many as 8,()0U
por mile, whilst in Queensland, with an uniform gauge of
3 feet (1 inches, the average number is 2,580, each B foot
f) inches x 9 indies X 4J indies.
Of the various classes of locomotives in mm on Queensland
railways, the heaviest (Class B 15) weigh in steam fit tons
14 ewt. It will bo found that the distributed weight of this
typo of locomotive and tender, as measured over the buffers
(45 feet 7 indies), is about 7 lbs, per square inch of superficial
area covered by the sleepers, whilst tho weight, 2U tons 19
cwt., on the six coupled drivers on a fixed wheel base of 8 feet
9 inches, is loss than 18 lbs. per square inch on live sleepers
spaced two foot centres, and it is evident that those sleepers
alone do not carry all tho weight.
In making these calculations .1 have taken tho whole super-
ficial area of the bottom of tho sleepers, but it should not be
inferred that the bearing on the ballast is of uniform intensity


throughout, the entire length of wood sleepers, mid this quite
apart from the fad; that transverse sleepers are not packed so
tightly under their centres as elsewhere. The actual pressure
transmitted to the ballast at any particular cross section of a
transverse wooden sleeper varies with the load, the width of
the sleeper, the square of the weight of the rail (of similar
section), the cube of the depth of the sleeper, the cube of the
clear span between the sleepers, also the modulus of elasticity
of the particular timber, so that the amount is not readily
determinable; but in practice, with sleepers of ordinary stiff-
ness, I am satisfied that whatever difference exists it may be
safely neglected for the purpose 1 have in view in making the
preceding calculations. On investigation it will ho found
that the gauge of a line is practically immaterial in this con-
nection, as the weight of the rail and the sleeper provision can
bo adjusted to the greater rolling loads imposed upon wider
gauges.
Par the purpose of comparison I may point out that in
Australia the natural surface of the earth, absolutely unpre-
pared in any way by drainage, formation, or metal, is frequently
called, upon to sustain, the passage of waggons weighing, whan
fully loaded, as much as six or eight tons on four wheels with
tiros four inches in width Tins means a pressure of from
840 lb's, to 1,, 1120 lbs. per square inch (equal to S4i tons to 72
tons par square foot) in the form of rolling loads coming into
twhml , and ifc.neralh/ violent contact with the soil, which to a
greater or loss extent (according to weather) is necessarily
displaced thereby.
The comparatively small, distributed weight of trains, com-
bined with the fact that the wheels of rolling stock do not
come into contact with the soil , precludes the possibility of
.serious displacement of the formation of railways from impact
or shook,* ho that the only tendency to displacement which
requires to bo taken into serious consideration is that caused
by the pumping action exerted by the passage of trains, when,
owing to uneven packing, small quantities of air or water
collect beneath some of the sleepers. This action, which is of
course in direct proportion to the weight and frequency of
traffic, can be effectually counteracted by packing a compara-
tively small quantity of suitable ballast immediately below
the sleepers. In practice 1 have found that 50 or (50 cubic
yards of stone or gravel ballast por mile is sufficient for this
purpose! on the H feet (i inches gauge, oven in very un favourable
country.
"VhoHluklttgot tKlUiedded dloujioki Into tho ground ia Inalgnllloiint."-Moles-
worth (Notun on I’urmiuiont Wuy), pnge 204.


SECTION XI.
DRAINAGE.
Natural Drainage.
The surface of every description of country is tlruiuoil more
or less efficiently by natural menus under the three following
laws: —
(a.) By the law of gravitation,
( [h .) By the law of capillary attraction whore the
surface is sufficiently porous.
(c.) By the law of evaporation.
Swamps are the only exception to the first law, ami even
they are subject to the second and third lawn; but as they can
be, and generally are, avoided, in the selection of railway
routes, they do not affect the general application of the laws
of natural drainage to the construction of pioneer railways in
even country not subject to severe and protracted frosts.
A saucer countersunk flush with the top of a table is a
good representation of a swamp. If a piece bo broken out of
the rim and the saucer tilted a little by raising it slightly til-
th e greatest distance from the broken edge, a very fair 'idea
will lie formed of the application of the law of gravitation to
natural drainage on by far the greater portion of lh« laud
surface of the earth.
Where it is necessary to cross swamps that cannot hr con-
veniently drained hy artificial means the road should bo raised
above the level at which water tends to stand therein for
lengthened periods.
As a rule natural drainage is only applicable to pioneer
railways, and chiefly in even country within tropical or nub-
tropical regions, where its adoption' in lion of the artificial
method means all the difference between a high cost and a
low cost road.
In mountainous country there is practically no ohoieo, and
sufficient provision must he made for artificial drainage below
the level of formation, but in uneven country very conmdo
mble economies can be safely practised by adopting in a
modified form the principle of natural drainage til; the
crossings of the larger watercourses. Tins instances in which
a high-level bridge will practically cost no more than a low-
level bridge at the same place are coinparativolyraro, and only
occur where the whole of the flood water is confined to aim
well-defined clinimol with, fijxnkß oi‘ tslic huuio 01 1 voi*y iwhitlv


Normanton Railway— Flood of January, 1890. The first rising of the waters at the
“Four Mile Creek."


S. & W. Railway— Killarney Branch, built as a high level line. Emu Yale Station after
flood of January, 1887.


the same height. Very frequently the broken portion of the
channel of a river can be spanned in a few hundred feet,
whereas in times of extreme flood the water may cover low-
lying land on one or both sides of the main channel to a
width of thousands of feet, or even of several miles, as sub-
sequently mentioned in this section. Now, these are precisely
the places where a large expenditure may he incurred under
the high-level or artificial system of drainage, or great econo-
mies may be effected under the low-level or qnasi-natnral
system, and it should be remembered that in the case of
pioneer railways the value of the traffic to be carried in any
olio year will not be increased under the first system nor
diminished under the second system.
Artificial Drainage.
Artificial drainage, to be effectively and economically applied
to railways, must be systematically based upon the following
data:—
(a.) The area to he drained.
(&.) The maximum rainfall of the region.
(o.) The inclination of the area.
(<?,) The absorbent or non-absorbent character of
the surface,
It would ho useless to give any precise formula), as these
necessarily vary with the conditions, so that an excellent
formula under one set of conditions would be worse than
useless under another set.
The necessity for or the adoption of artificial drainage in
oven and uneven country, rules to a very great degree the
selection of route, and determines the extent and cost of the
work. No one who has not been professionally engaged in
the selection of railway routes in new, uncharted, and thinly
peopled countries, can form any idea of the extent to which
the question of artificial drainage dominates almost every
other consideration. The crossing of and the providing pas-
sage for, or the avoidance of water, are very frequently the
chief items of expense, more especially in even country where
the surface of the ground offers every natural facility for the
laying down of inexpensive pioneer railways, the cost of which
need not greatly exceed the value of the rails, fastenings, and
sleepers; but the difficulty of providing artificial drainage
below the level of formation stands like a lion in the path of
the engineer who considers that artificial drainage is a
necessity. . ■ ,
Under the European or high-level system it not infre-
quently necessitates great detours to avoid low-lying and
n


flooded ureas, thus thrusting the Hues back into broken und
hilly country when much easier gradients could often be
secured at far less cost over the flooded lints, but the fear of
injury to embankments or occasional delay in the running of
trains is ever active with the engineer who is wedded to the
high-level system.
I could instance one case in my experience where nimieli-
desired branch railway has not boon built because the easy
route used by the settlors crosses flooded ground, to avoid
which would entail an expenditure out of all proportion to
the prospective traffic. There were special facilities for
working the traffic of this brunch, owing to the fact that Ihe
services of an auxiliary locomotive were available at (bo pro-
posed point of junction with the main line.
It seems almost incredible that- whilst settlers may dwell,
cultivate), and carry their produce to market on even country
whio.li is occasionally inundated, it is deemed by some engi-
neers that to lay inexpensive railways on the surface of Hindi
country is so unprofessional as to be almost immoral, ho that
the very munificence of nature is regarded oh snlllcient reason
for depriving the settlors of those modern facilities which
alone can enable thorn to turn the bounty of nature to the
fullest account.
Until a more common-sonse system lie generally adopted,
the extension of railways in such countries'os China, Africa.
South America, and Australia will progress but slowly and
intermittently.
The European nr high-level mol hod of building railway*
prescribes that all water crossing the routes of a railway must
be provided passage below formation. This may not be ms
serious a matter in Europe, whore the rainfall is usually well
distributed throughout the year, and in any ease the ex tout of
traffic to be served justifies expensive and high-class lines of
communication,
In the tropics and regions adjacent thereto the rainfall -is
usually confined to a period of a few weeks at certain seasons
of the year, and the body of water to he provided passage 4 for
under the high-level system is sometimes enormous in volume
and extent.
In Australia there are many rivers which occasionally over-
flow the hanks of their usual channels, and cover areas of
adjacent country to a width, of from one to twenty and even
thirty miles. These exceptional floods are not frequent, and
in any given locality their periodicity is so uncertain that-
intervals of five, ton, fifteen, and twenty years mav, and
do, elapse between them. * *
In passing, I may say that whilst I Imre known several


Northern Railway— Combiroed low level road and railway bridge, Rriver.
Hew stood many floods, Maximum flood height over decking 50 feet; drainage area 14,000 square miles.




high-level railway bridges to bo destroyed by floods, I do not
know an instance in winch a low-1 ovol railway bridge! lias been
seriously injured from tbo same cause, although numbers of
evioli bridges have been submerged time and again to depths
ranging up to 50 foot. (See plates of Burdekm and Nogm
Biam'u.)
The reason of this immunity is that logs, trees, and floating
deiris arc only brought down in any grout quantity whilst
floods are at or near their full height, so that the floating
material is safely (tarried over tbo low-level bridges; ou the
other band, should a flood rise a few foot higher than usual, or
than is anticipated, the debris is apt to. lodge against the
girders of high-level bridges and thus subject them to severe
lateral, stresses.
I have not enjoyed the privilege of visiting Chiba, but I
have a theory that the conservative Chinese will, not favour
the eonstruotion of railways with high embankments over the
even cultivable plains adjacent to their groat river systems, as
such embankments would necessarily derange their complicated
system of boundary ditches by gathering the drainage, of: many
ditches to a focus, and discharging the .accumulated, water at
now and unaccustomed points, I. fool confident .that this is a
question which engineers constructing railways in China would
do well t»i take into serious consideration.
There arc many places in Australia'whore' the raising of an
embankment live or six foot in height across long stretches of
oven country might, through interference with natural drain-
age, result In serious loss to the occupants of the adjacent
country, whether they ho engaged in pastoral or agricultural
pursuits. I. have taken sections across fifteen or twenty miles
of plains, bounded on either side by rivers, whore the.difference
in level was very trifling throughout the entire length, of the
section, and it is not difficult to conceive that; what would only
ho an inconvenience when the plains were covered with a few
inches of surface water, might, under the retarding influence of
a railway embankment, become a serious source of loss where
sheep are depastured'.or valuable crops arc. grown,'
As an illustration, take the-case of the railway from Sydney
to the town of Bcuirke, in Now South Wales, Iter several
hundred miles this railway traverses oven country very, similar
to that on the lower Flinders Eiver in North Queensland; for
the last thirteen miles before entering Bourfco the, railway is
within the-high flood area of the Darling Eiver, audis-con-
structed on the high-level principle,’with an embankment some
5 or 0 footdn height; pierced by many flood openings.
It should 'be observed' that the railway does'not cross the
river, but merely intrudes upon the flooded area.


11l April, 1890, the last thirteen miles were washed away
during a high flood, so that communication with the town
could only he maintained hy boats. This portion of the rail-
way probably coat £B,OOO per mile, but I hare no hesitation
iu saying that a surface line costing not more than £2,000 per
mile would have proved equally serviceable, and would not
have needed reconstruction after the flood, subsided, (See
Appendix No. 9.) In addition to this, it is evident that the
embankment (despite the numerous flood openings) must to
some extent have retarded the escape of the flood water, and
thus have caused it to rise to a greater height in the town of
Bonrke, the inhabitants of which ineffectually attempted to
protect their homes by means of a rampart of earth encircling
the town and abutting in two places upon the railway em-
bankment.
In concluding the section on drainage I cannot do better
than give the following extract from a paper “ On the Com-
parative Necessity for Drainage of Drnyroads and Railroads,”
read by me before the Eoyal Society of Queensland on the
11th June, 1892.
“"When the railroad engineer comes to deal with even
country, more especially if he has been chiefly accustomed to
construction in uneven country (as is almost invariably the
ease'with European engineers), lie is a good deal puzzled as
to the best method of procedure.
“ If he consults the standard works on civil engineering he
will learn that the approved method of crossing ft groat plain
is to throw up an embankment from side-cuttings, which aro
ultimately intended to serve as ditches. Probably his author
makes no comment upon the necessity for cross drainage
through the embankment, oi*, even so, gives no duo ub to the
amount to be provided.
“ The engineer looks with anxious eye upon the vast ex-
panse of plain, which his levels toll him rises or falls on.
either side of the proposed line of railway, and ho commences
to wonder what the effect will be when those plains are sub-
merged one, two, or three feet deep with water, and he
realises that the higher the embankment the deeper the accu-
mulated Water will he, and the greater the destruction if it
should overflow the embankment,
“ Evidently there are only two courses that can be wisely
adopted. The first, and the most usual method, is to throw
up an. embankment of sufficient height, and at the same time
provide sufficient openings to carry off the intercepted water
before it has time to rise above the level of the formation.
The second method (as advocated by me for pioneer railways in
Queensland) is to keep the line right down on the surface and


Central Railway—Law level bridge, Nogoa
(Drainage Area 5,800 square miles.)


Central Railway —Nogoa River in flood; drainage area 5,800 square miles.
Low level bridge covered.


pormit the water to fallow the lines of natural drainage, even
if those lines take the water over and across the railway. An
intermediate course is sometimes pursued by throwing up a
low embankment from soil obtained from side ditches, supple-
mented by a few box drains put in very much at haphazard,.
The fallacy of this method is generally demonstrated upon the
first heavy rainfall sufficient to scour out tho shallow formation,
and ballast, thus leaving the road in an impassable or dan-
gerous condition.
“The first,or high-level method, if carried out in a scientific
manuor, on tails a great deal of trouble and additional expense
in the survey, ns tho areas to ho drained must bo ascertained,
with approximate accuracy at all events, whilst tho water-
sheds of oven country cannot ho easily defined, and they are
often very remote from tho railway. In addition to this pre-
liminary trouble and expense in tho survey, tho artificial
method of drainage entails heavy expenditure in construction
under the following items, all or most of which are either
entirely unnecessary, or can lie very much minimised under
the method of natural drainage.
1. Embankment of aulllcient. height to provide the neces-
sary headway for the water to escape below formation
without tho necessity for resorting to excessively long
outlets to drains.
2. Cross drainage in the shape of box or pipe drains,
culverts, or flood openings, to protect tho embankment
from actual destruction.
8, Additional atone or gravel (selected) ballast, because
embankments formed from side cutting arts seldom
sufficiently consolidated before tho ballast is laid,
consequently a large proportion is lost by sinking into
the formation.
•t, Poncing, to prevent the slopes and cesses of the em-
bankment as well as the ballast from being disturbed,
and seriously displaced by cattle and horses,
5, Crossings for public and private convenience, which
must lie raised to correspond with tho level of the rails,
0, dates and gatekeepers’ residences.
7. The purchase of additional laud from which to obtain
aide-cutting material.
8, Additional labour necessary for tho proper supervision
and up-keep of the above-mentioned additional works.”
It will lie observed that all tho items of additional expense
enumerated above hinge upon tho question of drainage. If a
railway in even country is to bo artificially drained it must be
raised; if raised it must bo protected by effectual drainage.


Then follow in order, fencing, raised crossings and platforms,
gates and gatehouses, additional ballast, additional land, and
additional labour for up-keep. Now, all these can be dis-
pensed, with on pioneer railways constructed in, even country
not. subject to severe and' long-continued frosts.
After all is done under the high-level system that foresight
and experience can provide for, the engineer never knows the
day nor the hour when nature may in some wanton mood
ruthlessly destroy or injure his works. In addition to this, it
1b evident that trains running on embankments are not quite
so safe as, they are when running,on surface formation.
It is apparent, therefore, that the artificial method of
drainage should only he adopted in even country, when the
amount and character of the traffic demands a. high-class road
and justifies the additional expense.
SECTION XII.
SLEEPERS.
The reasons that hfrve gradually led to the almost universal
adoption of the long transverse sleeper have been stated under
'.Section X,and if those reasons are paramount in the case
"of'roads artificially drained and heavily ballasted with selected
material, how much more necessary is it to secure absolute
preservation of, the required gauge at all points and under all
'■conditions of the road in the case of lightly ballasted pioneer
'railways, more especially on even country .where surface water
’is permitted to follow the lines of natural drainage. As I
have used both metal and wood transverse sleepers with good
results on the even country traversed by the Norrmmton-
' Croydon Railway it is evident that a particular type of sleeper
is.not absolutely essential to success under similar conditions,
provided the’ bearing surface is sufficient, and the sleeper of
such a shape ns to admit of.being well bedded in the ballast;
but I am in, a position to 'state that, sleeper for sleeper, the
steel transverse trough-shaped sleeper can, under the con-
ditions that .obtain on the Norinanton-Croydon line, support
a heavier rolling load than a squared wooden sleeper of the
same length and width. In my opinion the advantage is about
20 per cent, in favour of the trough-shaped metal sleeper, but
local circumstances and the relative,: price of steel and wood
should be taken into consideration in deciding the class of
sleepers to be used. In some parts of the colony it will bo


S. & W. Railway-Killarney Branch, built as a high level line. Emu Creek Bridge after great
flood of Janwary, 22nd, 1887.




found more advantageous to uao metal sleepers. The number
of_ sleepers to provide per mile depends upon the -weight of
rail, the greatest load per axle, the width and depth, and to a
leas extent the length, of the sleeper used.
For rack inclines mild stool trough-shaped transverse
sleepers are generally used, as the pedestals'or chairs which
hold the rack rails can ho fastened with greater regularity and
firmness to metal than to wooden aloopors.
It appeal's probable that the tendency of permanent way in
the future will bo towards a more extended and general vise of
metal sleepers in conjunction wilb heavy rails.
So far as I am awn.ro the latest and best information upon
the substitution of metal for wood in railway sleepers is that
compiled in 1800 by the direction of the United States
Government, and is known as “Bulletin No. di” of the
forestry .Division of the United States Department of Agri-
culture. (See Appendix No. 10.)
Many different forms of metal sleepers nre now in use in
all parts of the world. They comprise cast-iron bowls and
pots connected by wrought-iron tio-bivrs, wrought-iron and
steel transverse and longitudinal sleepers of almost every
imaginable design as regards shape and method of attachment
for rails. Of Into years the practice on the Continent of
Europe has beam not to coal; metal sleepers with any preserva-
tive against rust, and the general opinion is that nothing is to
bo feared from rust. Under the most unfavourable conditions
of service to which mild stool sleepers are exposed the great-
est loss from oxidation should not exceed one-tenth of a
pound, per square tool: per annum of the whole superficies of
the sleeper plate. For instance, a plate six feet long by fif-
teen inches wide (neglecting the edges) gives a superficial
area of 11 x 1.25 x2= 15 square Feet, which, multiplied, by
one-tenth of a pound to the square foot, equals 1.5 pounds per
annum for the whole plate.
Under ordinary conditions of service the loss should not
exceed one-third of the above, or 0,5 pound per annum for
the whole plate. With plates of average thickness, say three-
tenths of an inch, and allowing that, the plates can afford to
lose one-third of their original weight before becoming unlit
for service, the average life would lie from 20 years under the
most unfavourable conditions to 00 years under ordinary con-
ditions of service.
Ah an example of the ascertained durability of metal
sleepers in a damp climate I way refer to the lino between
Deventer and Zwolle, in Holland,' on which 1.0,000 iron cross
sleepers, weighing 123.(14 pounds each, were laid in 1806. In
1887, after twenty-two years service with sixteen trains a day,


0,547 of these sleepers (95£ per cent, of the whole) wore stall
in good condition in the road ; they had at that time lost only
4 per cent, in weight from oxidation and wear combined, equal
to 0.225 pound per sleeper per annum. They are expected to
last at least twenty years longer. The fastenings are iron
bolts, 0.68 inch, in diameter, and there were still a number of
the original bolts in use in 1887.
Of course, the life of steel sleepers may be affected in other
ways apart; from the question of oxidation; for instance, the
design may be bad, or they may be spaced too far apart, or
the rail may be too light for the load, or the ballast may bo
unsuitable, &o.
The simplest fastening is that of the Cabry and Kindi mild
steel transverse sleeper, as manufactured by Messrs. Bolekow,
Vaughan and Co., of Middlesborough-ou-Tees. This fasten-
ing is obtained by punching up the top table in four places at
each rail seat, three outside and one inside the rail; two of
the outside punchbags act as gauge guides, the third overlaps
and holds down the outer flange of the rail, whilst the inner
flange is held down by a steel key driven between the flange
and the piece punched up on the inside of the rail flange.
Although nothing can he simpler than this fastening, which
admits of the sleeper being very cheaply -manufactured. It
appears to me to he a mistake to weaken the sleeper by so
much punching at the rail seat, as fully half the metal is cut
at that point; in addition, there is a difficulty in removing
individual sleepers that may he damaged from any cause. (For
a description of the method of manufactarmg transverse steel
sleepers of the “inseparable clip” type, see Minutes of Pro-
ceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Tol, CVIII,
issued last June.*) The fastening adopted by the South Aus-
tralian (Government on the Palmerston and Pine Creek Hall-
way (which is laid with mild steel transverse sleepers, pressed
to shape from inch plates) has much to recommend it.
With this sleeper the gauge (S feet 6 inches) is unalterably
fixed by the rail seats being depressed about 1 inch below the
general level of the top table, so that lateral thrust is taken
by the sleeper and not by the fastenings, which consist of
one U holt passing underneath and drawn tight against the
bottom of each of the depressed rail seats. There are two
loose clamps to each holt which bear hard on the top table
of the sleeper and on each flange of the mil, in such a
manner that the hold on the rail can always he tightened up
during the life of the rail and sleeper, whilst the form of the
« lor some extracts from the paper above rctarrod to «ee ray remarks on paragraph
12 of the report of the officer in charge at Normanton—Appendix No, 6,


bolt precludes any slipping or turning round when the nuts
are being tightened. Metal sleepers must be made stronger
and stiller than wooden sleepers usually are ; the latter bend
unequally under passing loads, the' greatest deflection being
at the rail seats, so that the reaction of the ballast is a maxi-
mum at those points; but metal sleepers descend evenly
throughout their length, so that the reaction of the ballast is
of: uniform intensity, and the rolling load is equally distributed
throughout their length.
As regards wooden sleepers, those of rectangular cross sec-
tion aro much to bo preferred to half round, which are always
more or loss irregular in shape and cross section, so that they
cannot afford that uniform support to the rail which is essen-
tial on first-class roads, and is very desirable on any. There
is no advantage in wooden transverse sloopershaving a greater
length than twice the gauge, and metal sleepers are generally
shorter. The depth of a wood sleeper is of as much impor-
tance as its width, and depth should not he lightly sacrificed
in either wood or metal sleepers for purposes of economy.
SECTION XIII
RAILS.
The introduction of homogeneous steel in the manufacture
of mils is a very important factor, as the greater strength and
elasticity of stool, as compared with iron, permit of economies
being introduced in the construction and maintenance of
pioneer railways that were not permissible with iron rails.
There can be no question that the most important feature
of a railway is the rail, nor is there any item of expenditure
in connection therewith, that so entirely justifies itself or
gives so largo a return for a liberal expenditure. In support
of this view I cannot do bettor than quote the following
extract from “ The Economic theory of .Railway Location,”
by Mr. A . M. Wellington, M. Am. Boe. (lE,, 3rd edition,
.1888, page 789; —“ In buying rails wo are not buying steel
(only) we are buying throe imponderable
qualities; (I) stiffness ; (2) strength; (3) durability.”
Taking mils of similar section, ho shows that stiffness in a
rail varies as the square) of the weight; strength in a rail
varies as the square root of the cube of the weight (or -|
powor) ; durability in a rail under identical conditions of
service is very greatly enhanced by n comparatively small
increase in weight., Iter instance, an addition of ton per
cent, represents a longer life, under the same conditions of


service, of at leant fifty per cent.; and when wo consider how
small a proportion of the rail is actually lost; by wear, the
increase of durability is much to bo desired, more especially
in countries which are under the necessity of importing rails,
and which, for this reason chiefly, have not Ibo advantage of
a ready market for the disposal of old rails.
Stiffness, strength, and durability, are qualities in a mud
that can be more readily and economically purchased in the
rail than in any other way; for whilst twice the weight of
rail of similar section moans four times the stiffness, nearly
three times the strength, and more than five times the dura-
bility under identical conditions of service, it does not imply
twice the cost, as light rails cost more per ton than rails of
heavier section, it will be soon, therefore!, that the rail is the
very last thing in which economy should bo exercised, more
especially on, pioneer railways; unfortunately it is often the
first to suffer, because it necessarily represents a relatively
large expenditure amongst many items, and is one which the
unprofessional mind can select with absolute certainty that it
at least is sure to figure in the schedule of expenditure.
The engineer is sometimes tempted under pressure to give
way on tins point, with the mental reservation that for every
shilling saved in the first cost of the rail ho will spend two in
additional ballast and sleepers, for ho knows that he must
have the necessary strength somewhere, and what is lacking
in the rail must he made good, as far as possible, in the sub-
structure.
Every pound weight that is taken oil: the rail, under false
notions of economy, means loss of power in every direction,
out of all proportion to the money saved, and lias to lie made
good in other ways ; (a) in cost ’of construction \ (A) in coat
of working the traffic; and (o) in the cost of maintenance
and renewals.
It is not implied that all railways should be provided with
the heaviest rails, hut in most eases it is sound policy to pro-
vide in the first instance a rail that is strong in relation to its
duty. With such a rail the manager can afford to contem-
plate with equanimity the rapid increase of traffic, knowing
that there arc other ways of coping with'it than by increasing
the train mileage.
I am not aware whether the steel employed in the manu-
facture of rails, intended for use on Queensland Oovernment
Railways, is subject to a specified chemical analysis, or whether
the completed rails are subject to physical tests only. If the
latter is the case, it is possible that ’there is room for sumo
Increase in the hardness of the steel, for I. have noticed that,
bearing in mind the eh me spacing of sleepers that obtains


throughout the colony, the large quantity of selected ballast
provided, the comparatively light wheel-loads, and the light-
ness of the traffic generally, in conjunction with the thoroughly
careful manner in which the lines are kept,up and maintained,
and the admirable design and construction of the rolling
stock, our rails have not the life that might be expected under
such favorable conditions. This was especially noticeable in
the case of the 00 lb. rails with which the line over the
Toowoomba .Range was re-laid.
There is no doubt that, taking the climate of Queensland
as a whole, and bearing i n mind the almost entire absence of
frost, a somewhat harder and consequently more durable
description of steel than is permissible in cold climates could
be safely employed.
The percentage of carbon that is permissible in the manu-
facture of steel rails, intended for use in any particular
climate, is a matter requiring nice investigation and experi-
ment, because the quantity used is comparatively small in
any case, whilst an addition of 0.1 per cent, would probably
be the utmost limit under the moat favorable conditions of
climate.
SECTION XIV.
BALLAST.
Ballast is the material in which the sleepers are bedded;
and, as tho term implies, it lends by its weight the forces of
inertia and stability to tho road ; this is tho primary function
of ballast irrespective of the particular description of material
that may ho used for the purpose.
It is a popular delusion in some countries, including Aus-
tralia, that the term “ ballast ” only comprises stone, gravel,
sand, or ashes, generally brought from u distance at very con-
siderable expense.
In the United States the term “ballast” is not limited to
any particular material, but includes any description of soil
adjacent to the lines, and, as a fact, most of the pioneer rail-
ways in America are ballasted with the native soil of tho
formation. This is (lie proper course to pursue in the case of
pioneer railways in oven and uneven country, but where tho
lines are not artificially drained (as in oven country) it will
generally be found advantageous to provide and distribute,
from 50 to 100 cubic yards per mile of some suitable non-
absorbent material such as stone, gravel, or gravelly earth,
for use in maintenance at those times when, owing to long


continued wet weather, the native soil is in too saturated a-
condition to be available for the purpose of taking out slack
places in the road. The reason for this lias already been ex-
plained under section X.
On rack inclines the road should he heavily ballasted with
the very best material that may be obtainable, irrespective of
cost.
On railways that are fully occupied, the best description of
ballast that is available should be provided, in order to keep
the road bed as dry as possible, and with the further object
of distributing the load over a larger area of the formation.
As explained under section 111, climate lias much to do
with the quantity and quality of ballast that should be pro-
vided.
SECTION XV.
FENCING.
Fencing is required on railways through uneven or mountain-
ous country, in order to insure the safe conduct of traffic, and
to afford protection to the works by preventing cattle and
horses from straying upon the lines, and from treading down
the banks, displacing the ballast, and from breaking down the
slopes of ditches, drains, &c. As the works on even country
can be reduced under my system to a minimum,, their protec-
tion is of less importance, and there is but little risk to traffic
conducted on such lines in daylight; it is an advantage also to
allow stock to crop the grass close to the linos, thus reducing
the risk from fire, and at the same time economising the time
and labour of lengthsmen.
The omission of fencing leads to a further saving in public
road, and occupation level crossings, gates, gate-houses and
keepers, and (where possible) it is an advantage to the occupiers
to permit stock to cross at will to and from pasture and water.
The saving to he effected by the omission of fencing is
estimated at £250 per mile of railway.
"Where fencing is necessary on pioneer railways, the fences
should not he returned at public road level crossings with the
view of closing the gates against the line, but should be
carried on at the full width of the land resumed. This is not
only more economical but much safer, and saves the necessity
for gate-houses and keepers.
In the judicious extension and fencing of railways in South
"Western Queensland will probably be found the most
effectual means of checking the advance of rabbits. It is


S. & W. Railway-Killarney Branch. Swan Creelc. Effects of flood of January, 1887.
(Puilt as a high level line.)




evident that a single line of fence patrolled by horsemen only,
is at best a poor harrier. Two lines of fence, say one chain
apart, with the intermediate space cleared and occupied by a
low cost surface railway, would afford the most certain
physical harrier, besides reducing the cost of fencing, main-
tenance, and supervision to a minimum, with the further
advantage that a railway would afford the best means of
inducing the closest possible settlement that the character of
the country admits of. -
Surface railways, depending upon and not interfering with
natural drainage, can be much more readily and securely
fenced against rabbits than railways of the ordinary type,
because on the latter, in addition to the natural watercourses
which, must be bridged under either system (but to a much
greater extent under the high level system), the numerous
flood openings and minor drains rendered necessary under the
high level or artificial drainage system afford facilities lor the
passage of rabbits through both fences, no matter how care-
fully those places may be protected during dry weather. On
tie even country of "Western Queensland natural water-
courses are few and far between; stretches of 20 and 80
miles of unbroken surface are frequent, whilst the water-worn
channels are usually too small for the body of water to be
disposed of in times of flood. On the high level or artificial
drainage system of constructing railways, openings must be
provided through the embankments every two or three hundred
yards, whilst at the crossings of natural watercourses the high
level bridges generally extend to considerable distances on
either side of the water-worn channels.
SECTION XVI.
SPEED AND CONDUCT OF TRAFFIC.
In. no country can railway traffic bo conducted at all times
with absolute certainty and regularity. Given a-sufficient
rainfall, or a snowstorm sufficiently protracted, or even wind
of sufficient force, and traffic-on the best constructed railways
will-be more or less interrupted. If this be so in countries
where a few days’ or even a few hours’ delay is a serious in-
convenience to millions of people, how much less necessary
is it to attempt to secure, at groat cost, regularity of traffic in
sparsely peopled or only partially civilized countries, where
there are practically no roads, so that the advantage of regu-
larity is confined to the immediate sphere of the railway.


It may be observed that whilst the railways of the Old
World have been designed to supplement an extensive system
of very perfectly constructed high roads and canals, in Aus-
tralia, at all events, the railways are practically the only roads
worthy the name. Our so-called hush roads are very fre-
quently mere “ tracks,” as a rule absolutely unimproved even
to the extent of clearing the primeval forest to the width of a
few feet.
It should he borne in mind that punctuality and speed in
the conduct of rail way traffic is not the most pressing neces-
sity of a young and undeveloped country like Queensland;
what is really needed is cheaper and more reliable transport
than is afforded by bullock waggons or rough coaches, tra-
velling on uncleared, unformed, undrained, and unmetalled
bush tracks, where a single heavy shower often means that
drays must camp until the country dries up, and that passen-
gers by coacb have to walk whilst the horses drag the empty
vehicle.
It is not an unusual thing for a waggon load of wool or stores
to be twelve months on the road between some of the more
outlying stations and the coast, or vice versa, and that on
country where an inexpensive pioneer railway laid on the sur-
face of the ground would afford means of transporting 100
tons of goods per train on at least 360 days in the year,
whilst, probably in three years out of five, there would not
he any delay from Hoods; and it should bo remembered that,
owing to the almost entire absence of high roads, there are
no means of distributing goods over the country at those
times, no matter how perfect the railway may be.
Bor instance, a railroad from A to B may be so perfectly
constructed that, in almost any season, and under almost any
conditions of weather, 1000 tana of goods per diem can bo
transmitted from Ato B; but without well-made high roads
from B to the surrounding districts, those goods must remain
in the warehouses of B until the country dines up, whilst
weeks, perhaps mouths, before that event takes place, the
simplest and least expensive railway could easily supply the
town, of B with any desired quantity of goods. (The great
flood of 1890 at Bourke, Hew South 'Wales, is a case in point.
See under Section XI, Drainage.)
It has been shown under Section X that the question of
speed (which is itself the product of volume of has had
more to do with determining the type and cost of permanent
way than any other consideration, and it will be found that
the best way to reduce tbe cost of pioneer railways is to limit
the speed to about fifteen or twenty miles an hour as a maxi-
mum during ordinary seasons, with any minimum that may be.


S. & W. Failway — South Coast Franah. Bits of railway bridge at Logan driver, after the
great flood of 22nd January, 1887. (Bridge rebuilt at original level and slightly lengthened.)


S. & W. Railway —South Coast Branch. Logan, Rriver Rridge before the great flood of 1887.
Rail level on bridge was 6 feet above the highest previous recorded flood; the flood of 1 887
rose 11 feet above the rails. area 1,095 square miles, driver tidal at crossing.
N.B. —For this bridge to have successfully discharged in 24 hours the whole rainfall of the 22nd January, 1887 (20 inches) the current at bridge would
need to have exceeded 40 miles an hour.


possible during heavy ami long continued rains. In fact,
tliorc should be no cast-iron regulations and time tables on
pioneer railways, for the two are absolutely incompatible.
By charging lower rates for freight during the dry months
of the year, and higher rates during the wet season, store-
keepers and others would liave sufficient inducement to lay in
their needed stock, of goods during the dry months, when
traffic can he conducted with the least inconvenience. By
these means, and the use of light steam carriages for the
transport of mails and passengers only, during times of Hood,
a great saving could bo effected, both in the first cost of con-
struction and in the subsequent maintenance of pioneer
railways.
I have found, after five years’ experience of building and
maintaining naturally drained pioneer railways in even
country, that mere thunderstorms of one or two inches have
uo bad effect upon such lines, in fact, occasional moderate
ruins have a very beneficial effect in settling and consolidating
the road, and keeping the ground mellow and more pleasantly
elastic to travel over than when thoroughly dry; whilst, in the
case of floods, as soon as the water subsides to rail level, trains
can resume running at a moderate speed of ten or twelve
miles an hour, even during seasons when drays have been
compelled to camp for months owing to the saturated and
boggy condition of the country.
The Iraifio on the ISToimiauton-Croydon Eailway, owing to
the light wet season this year, has not been delayed an hour
since the 20th April, 1891, to the present time, December,
1802 ; nor is there any prospect of delay arising prior to the
beginning of: 1803.
It fins been shown that effective and comparatively inexpen-
sive pioneer lines can ho laid on the surface of even country
at a cost of from one-half to one-fourth that of high level
artificially-drained lines between' the same points, and the
question naturally presents itself, is it worth while to expend
so much more than is absolutely necessary in the first
instance (or in most; cases, for many years), in order that a
few people living at B shall have the option of travelling to
A during the few days of each year, or periods of years, when
a pioneer surface line might be impassable ? Or, to put it in
another way ; if a railway service of one train each way per
day on BSO days in the year, from A to B, involves and justi-
fies a capital expenditure of say £l,lOO to £2,300 per mile,
is it worth while, or is it justifiable, to incur a capital expen-
diture of from £4,000 to £O,OOO per mile in order to obtain
n similar service on 305 days in the year?


TJader the high level system special advantages are con-
ferred on the people of say A, B, C, and D, whilst other peo pl e,
in no wise differing from them, except that they reside at Jit
P, Gr, H, I, J, K, and L, are entirely debarred from railway
facilities, whilst they are compelled to contribute their quota
to make good any losses that may be incurred on the luxuri-
ous railway accommodation provided for the privileged
residents of A, B, 0, and D.
SECTION XVII.
MAINTENANCE.
. Maintenance is an important item in the working expenses
of pioneer railways, and its cost is dependent upon—
a. The strength of the permanent way in relation to its
duty. _
5. The character of the road in respect of curves rtiia
gradients, earthworks, bridges, Ac.
b. The length of time the road has been in service.
d. Train mileage.
e. Speed of trains.
' • /. The system of inspection.
(a) It is possible to overload a rail within its elastic limit,
so that, although it may not cripple under the load, and may
for a time appear to be doing its duty satisfactorily, the
appearance ia deceptive, and the lengtlismen will soon discover
that the strength lacking in the rail has to he supplied Toy tho
crowbar and beater; this means expensive maintenance, and
if the exigencies of traffic are imperative, the best, and in tins
long run much the most economical plan, ia to re-lay the road
with heavier rails.
(5) The most economical road to maintain is a surface one
on even country, with easy curves and gradients. Whore
steep gradients and sharp curves are necessary, as in uneven
country, the coat of maintenance will be in proportion to id us
extent of the works to be looked after.
(c) After the first year or two the cost of maintomuuui
tends to diminish, especially in the case of roads laid with
metal sleepers ; this result is chiefly due to tho consolidation
of the earthworks, and the careful attention of the leugtliH-
men to the uniform packing of tho sleepers.
(d) A line that is fairly or fully occupied demands a larger
outlay for labour and supervision (chiefly the latter) than the
same line would require with light traffic. .


. (°) Speed (which is usually the product of volume of traffic)
is one of the chief factors in the cost, not only of maintenance,
hut of the road itself. As a high rate of speed is decidedly
not a necessity on pioneer railways, it is unnecessary to dwell
further upon this aspect of the question, except to point out
that it is unnecessary to maintain railways in a condition lit
to carry trains at twice the authorised speed.
C/) The system of inspection has a very great deal to do
with the cost of maintenance of pioneer railways.
System of inspection No. 1 (applicable to roatls with heavy
traffic). If the inspection is performed hy the gangers walk-
ing their lengths, then the lengths cannot conveniently exceed
four or live miles each; and as a gang of leas than four men
is of little practical service, this system means nearly a man
to a mile at least.
System of inspection No. 2 (applicable to roads in uneven
country, with moderate traffic). With tricycles, the gangers
or their deputies can inspect lengths of eight or ten miles, hut
as this system implies that the gangers or their deputies must
ho absent for a large part of each, day, each gang must he
strengthened hy the addition of at least one man, so that the
best that can he effectively done under this system is about
one man to two miles.
System of inspection No. 3 (applicable to lines of light
traffic in even country). By separating the duties of inspec-
tion mid repair, a further reduction in labour can he effected
with advantage to both classes of work; for whilst the inspec-
tion can he carried out hy a special staff (recruited from the
smartest and most intelligent of the gangers) who could, with
tricycles, attend to lengths of from twenty to thirty miles,
and’ still maintain the system of daily inspection, the gangers
being relieved of this responsibility would thus he at liberty
to get the host results out of their men, Under this system
a flying gang of ten men on a length of thirty miles (not less
than two years under maintenance) would, in my opinion,
prove quite as efficient as three gangs of five men each on
three ten-mile lengths under system No. 2. Under system
.No. 3, nine labourers would ho kept _ steadily at work ail day
under the immediate supervision of their ganger. Under
system No. 2, the three gangers (or at all events three men
in their place) are away half the day at least; now, in lifting
or lining up, one man must “ squint the road,” so that the
actual labouring force is reduced to three men in _ each gang
for n large part of each day; in addition to this, there is
always more emulation in a large force than a small one,
besides some parts of the work of repair can he more econ-
omically earned out by a body of men concentrated on one
s


Si/sfi’iii No. 1 —.
Fion milo Imi/ths.
('nut. pur annum.
IllS[K!«t(U' 1 ...
(if ;C2"i() per lumum
i’ffltl 0 0
(Siuij'ura ... :m ...
(a] iSh. pur day
37?iH 0 0
Labourers ... SIC) ...
(id (in. lid. pur day
mr>r. r» o
Total ... 121 mon.
Katu pur ndlu £H7 Mu. Kid,
.Cl,1,11)1 3 0
System No. 2 —
Tr.n wile Itwfff/is.
t’OHt iianinmiiii.
luepoutur ..
. 1 ...
(o' £!2tU) pui' ainimu
.0800
0
()
OlUlKlll-H
. 15 ...
(to Kh. per day
1878
0
0
XjidumrevH
, (10 ...
(oi (in. (id. per day
mew
HI
(1
Total
. 7(1 nuiu,
Unte per mile. iT)4 17a (id.
HI
0
tfys/eiit No.
IlMpOUtlH' ... 1
H Thirty miln Irnt/fhtt.
... fu! .Ci'iO per unmini
t'HHi per iHmniu.
£'M) 11 (1
SuMnspeotorH (i
... f« ! I Oh, per tiny
782 1(1
0
(laager* ...
... («' Os, per iluy
820 0
0
LivlKrtmu’H ... 40
... (o' Oh, Oil, per day
4077 12
0
'Fatal ... fid men. Rule per mile - i'41 Us. (Id,
f«23(i 2
(I
Myntam.
Klfimtlvii Lnlitmr.
Nunurvldory
llHtios.
Total No.
of Jt#n.
No. !
75 mini ill 30 guilds of 2J muu oaoli
40
121
No. 2
r>2‘o mini in ifi filings of immonuh
7«
No. :>
mini in o fianfiH of 0 muu imoh
li
8(i
piece of road than hy a larger uuinher spread over a great or
length in small gangs.
On a section of lot) miles tho labour required for inspection
and repair under each system would ho as follows!
The following comparison shows the nuuihor of effective
labourers oiujdoyod in repairs, and tho number of men em-
ployed on supervisory duties, under each system, during tho
whole of each day.
Under system No. H each gang should ho supplied with
largo quick-moving troll ion. anil during (ho rainy seasons the
mmi should ho dish'ihutod over the road.
Tho adoption of tho moot effort ivo moans of preventing tho
fish-bolts from working loose would save uiiiidi time and Inborn*.


>
Si
c
o
lz!
53
g
Q
op
: c
S'
S-
»
Si
I
S,
v*
f
rf-
e
«»
p
Vi
X
►ta
*-'
X
• e?
£
i_rr
r
io
50
1o
Mileage, including
•wharf lines.
§
to
cc
CC
j3
o*
-^r
OS
1C
23
tZ
13
05
Capital cost per mile
cc
—i
*cc
rf-
lo C2
open. Including rol-
55
o
o
05
o?
-3
05
ling stock.
05
f,
cc
t*
r*
C!
w
Per centage of net
“'t
1C
to
o
cc
23
earnings to capital ex-
cc
SC
as
X
OS
pended on open lines.
Cn
to
to
Ct
-a
-
M
—t
4*F
Gross earnings per
...
0
M
o
cc
Ot s»
train mile.
Ur"
2c
*~-3
Cl
Ci
to
Oi
05
05 F
Cost per train
1*
o
cc
-»
f~.
mile.
IC(—
,_.
Zit
CO
O
Cn
Far centage of work-
o
cc
to
05
20
Jb
13
20
ing expenses to gross
'■a
cc
5 5
o
2
g
CC
05
earnings.
oc
C3 .
—I
~ r s 2,^
-a
St
C5t
o
. CO
13
to
CO
CC
o 50
•J >1 re « (5
S. § a 2 &»
tr S.ts s ®
Of
o
a-
to
*
=■
cc
£
o
lit
1 r1||
APPENDIX NO. 1.
QUEENSLAND RAILWAYS.
Comparative Statement of all Railways for Twelve Months
ended 30th June, LS92, compiled from Annual Report of
the Queensland Railway Commissioners.
Note. —The wages paid to leugthsmen on the various rail-
way systems are us follow:—Southern, 6s. Gd. pier diem;
Central, 7b. to 7s. Od. per diem; Machay, Bowen, Northern,
Cairns, and Cooktown, Ss. per diem; and Normanton, 10a,
per diem.
* Avenge cost ot nmintemir.ee per rails of Cooktown Hailway for year ended
«li .Tune, ISBO-«1U 10b. -id.; ami for year ended .TOIi .Tune, WoUMI) (Is. 7|d.


Clearing
£
. ■ 16
0
d.
0
Perming IP wide
<52
0
0
2,400 squared wood sleepers 7' x 9" x 4*''
. '1.25
5
0
lbs. steel rails = 6P82 tons, @ £G per ton .
. 388
1.8
r>
Fastenings ...
, (JO
0
u
Jjayiug permanent way
. 170
0
0
Water supply ...
. 60
0
u
Telegraph line ...
. CO
0
0
Stations
. SO
0
0
120 cubic yards selected ballast, @ 4s.
. 24
0
0
A
Surveys, ' plans, supervision, and contingencies
at 20 7 0
51,201
8
5
258
4
B
A
11,610
8
1
APPENDIX No. 2.
ESTIMATE No. 1. —GAUGE 3' 6".
Estimated cost per mile of a 30 mile section over even
country and under favourable conditions, with wood sleepers ;
exclusive of artificial drainage, fencing, land, and rolling stock,
Maximum wheel load, about 70 cwt. Maximum load per lineal
foot of line, 30 cwt. Maximum dead distributed pressure
below sleepers, 9 lbs. per square inch.


£
s.
d.
Clearing 16
Forming, 10' wide ... ... ... 22
0
0
0
0
3,830 Bijiiftped wood sleepers, 5' x ()'' x 3" ... 110
8
0
25 1b. steel rails, = 89i tons, @ £6 10s, per ton,.. 253
3
tl
Fastenings ... ... ... 40
0
0
Laying permanent way ... ... ... 117
6
8
Water supply ... 15
0
0
Telegraph line ... ... ... ... ... 50
0
0
Stations ... ... ... ... 88
0
0
00 cubic yards selected ballast, @ 4s. ... ... 12
0
0
£729
H
2
Surveys, plans, supervision, and contingencies,
@ 20 % 145
19
5
£875
1(3
7
APPENDIX No. 3.
ESTIMATE No. 2.— GAUGE 2' 6".
Estimated cost per mile of a 30 mile section over even
country and under favourable conditions, with wood sleepers ;
exclusive of artificial drainage, fencing, land, and rolling stock.
Maximum wheel load, 35 ewb. Maximum load per lineal foot
of line, 15 owt. Maximum dead distributed pressure below
sleepers, 8 lbs. per square inch.


'A
A
<c
rj
I
/
n
f
ll
r
1’
S'#
1*#
1
g*S.
I £
! !
i
|
1
»•
' |
>
: f
? |
f"
X
. ST
: CJ ?
1 1
1
•«*
,
.a
?
1
©
*»*
4*
'k ;
1
r\
1
S
&
ft
5
&
r
r--
’•mS
i
1
s
*• i
i
1
H
g.
4<
S'
a
*n
'A
b
-
I*
. ffi
u
i Milott iijii'n.
1
w
f*
a '
i£
14
.«.
S.
M
’1
o
V|
w
p-
-9
f
i » *»
5;»
4*»
u
+. p
1
, s
??
»
u m
4*
50
2'
Sit «'
s
««• ,MK->
r
ca
i-q
a,
1 ,
V s
t 1
£
rs
p
3*
ii
,CV
b
t
j r»Hliwrmil«
OJIUH,
f—i
.fc
%$ .
c»
to
• i
O
i
a-
M
1
£
S
4*
£'
»**
! 1'iiimliitlmi irav
HH
|
SI
fe
:i
i milt' of railway,
i
a
1
(4
a
8
%
Li <-■
I [E ■?
UffS,
i
1
*--!
s
14
4t
55
Tt »
1C •
cj
bd
jjj
«**
o ,
3?.-
14
CS
V
w
'H
ic
X
f ;
J*
P
5
w
44
a 5
y,>
f
i
r*
jS
4»
o
1
1
3 S'
¥**
1:
y
tj
ft
s
i
40
14
-T
•ji
t3
i:
f ■
i
i
:i
W
H*
£
S
£
g
e
i
2cT
. • Cf
!*g
l>tir
Train mllo.
!>
g
*K :
1 i
l!
jgj
4*
2j$
14
8
..rrj
=c*ft
WorktiiK cxiiciwua
O
i
£
1%
14
• *l
P r>
l fp
Train mile*
h3
§
■ — —
W
W
4»
W
14
4*
IVr mitngu of net
fed
SL -
50
• '<4
mirnliiKR
93
o
Ef ;
Zn
ti#
05
&
O
U> i’iH‘ital.
p.
4?
y
s
■y "
®
4i
I'ur mintnuii »f
Sr i
•* i
:4**
lU
t,i
* t
Cl
wiwkliiKcxiiunucsto
uarnliiBB.
fc
• i
w
15*
14
lit*. ;
X
r| e|s|
I i
»* i
Cre
IT!
n
■tP ;
h
H
00
4*
»•"'
•«*
4-
»4 r - ;
W j
# i
4h
t~4
1 ;
£
2T
Sf
s
o
ft
C
fi '
=■
1C
•n
ft-
'***
itii
p
•*
1
GO
IB
1
s
4D
GO
s
cr>
S
'5
APPENDIX No. 4.


WEIGHTS ASM
TliACMVll
POWEK
oi? Locomotives.
Clash.
Total
weight of
Engine
and
Tender.
Weight
on
Drivers.
Total
tractive
power
in Iba.
a
'SS
j|jC5
Kemarks.
A
B
C
D ...
E
G ...
H
I
|J
Tons. owt.
U) 12
32 0
18 19
12 8
33 9
25 10
14 1
30 18
29 12
Tons. cwt.
15 9
24 10
18 19
12 8
25 13
19 17
14 1
22 10
21 12
6,048
10,011
4,961
3,645
8,307
9,703
3,780
6,667
10,607
430
409
262
294
324
489
209
290
491
Doable Faidie.
Totals ...
Averages.
222 9
24 14
174 19
19 9
64,327
7,147
367
—
(See following pages).
APPENDIX No 5.
WEST AUSTRALIAN RAILWAYS.


TABLE COMPARING- WEIGHTS AND
Appendix No.
TRACTIVE POWER
QUEENSLAND RAILWAYS.
OlASJf,
Total weight
of engine
; nd tender.
Weight
on drivers.
Total
tractive
power
in lbs.
Tractive
power in
lbs. per
ton on
drivers.
Remarks,
tons. cwt.
tons cwt.
Tender engine.
A12...
x is \
K 48 V
37 3
13
17
4,860
351
A12...
f'la x 10 %
43 /
/II X 18 %
I 42 )
flQ x U \
\ 37 /
/10 x 18 \
I 80 J
flO X 18 \
33 18
12
0
4,822
402
Do.
All...
32 5
11
4
4,667
417
Do.
A10...
21 18
9
2
3,405
374
Do.
A10...
24 12
9
11
4,500
471
Do.
AIO...
22 IB
11
2
4,500
405
Do.
BIS...
/IB x 20 %
I if" J
n$ x 20
i i i
fU x 20 %
V 80 )
as x 2o \
\ m /
m x is
51 14
20
19
11,250
537
Do.
B13...
45 2
16
12
7,800
470
Do.
BIS...
46 6
17
4s
7,800
453
Do.
B12...
84 6
14i 14*
6,646
452
Do.
B12...
31 17
13
10
5,981
443
Do,
Bll...
ai x is \
Km)
27 12
13
5
5,026
379
Do.
Bll...
fVL x 14 \
>, m }
26 9
13
18
4,764
343
Do.
016,.,
ao x 20 \
k 85 /
/16 x 18 \
s “so )
18 x 10
48 17
25
14
12,800
498
Do. ,
010...
46 16
23
6
10,125
434
Do.
018...
41 0
19
2
7,605
398
Do.
018...
as x 14 \
32 /
m x so \
38 2
15
13
6,654
425
Do.
8D11..
34 12
34
12
10,052
290
Eairlie, tank.
8D16..
35 1
25
18
11,250
435
Tank engine.
6D18..
/13 x 18 \
I 30 /
x ie\
25 5
18
19
7,605
401
Do.
6D11*
12 6
12
6
5,951
484
Do.
DIO
ao x is
22 1
11
3
4,500
403
Do.
010.
ao x is \
86 /
' 0 x 15 \
v W V
24 3
11
11
4,500
890
Do.
D9
20 8
10
8
3,313
319
Do.
Totals
787 12
385
10
.160,376
Averages
32 16
16
1
6,682
416
—


NEW ZEALAND
RAILWAYS
Total trnc-
Tractive
Total weight
Weight
on drivers.
bivo power in
power in
REMARKS.
Clash,
of engine
lbs., for
lbs. per
and tender.
adhesion
ton on
gradients.
drivers.
ton a
cwt.
tons
cwt.
A
...( 8i«\
ii
5
11
5
2,856
254
Tank engine.
80J- /
B
V 30 ' 1
fOi x 18 N
32
0
32
0
5,981
187
Double Faxrlie.
C
15
10
13
0
4,833
372
Tank engine.
v ao.v )
D
m * is \
V BtlJ- /
14
15
11
10
4,006
348
Do. old type.
D
. . m x is \
17
0
13
8
4,006
299
Tank, new type.
V 80J- )
E
...AO X 18 ■ „ 0 \
37
0
37
0
8,151
220
Double Bairlie.
v- 80J /
Tank engine.
P
...(mLlS)
19
10
19
.10
4,893
261
(t
/lOj x 18\
20
10
15
0
4,893
326
Do.
H
\ mi }
/U x 10 \
“ \ 82 /
8(5
10
28
5
8,820
312
J Pell engine,
| as altered.
H
(U x 16 s
‘" \ as )
/14 x 20 \
39
0
29
10
8,820
299
Do. new type.
J
41
0
20
5
8,850
412
Tender engine.
\ '42} )
IC
/12 x 20 \
41
0
14
10
5,372
370
Do.
\ iii /
Tank engine.
L
/10| x 18\
\ Imf /
/18 X 20 \
42* /
/13 x 20 \
10
10
14
5
4,898
343
M
27
15
37
15
7,200
259
Do. old type.
M
31
0
15
12
7,200
461
Do. as altered.
N
/IB x 2ft \
50
5
21
5
8,244
388
Tender engine,
\ }
0
/IB x 18 \
48
15
25
0
10,055
402
Do.
V au| J
Do.
P
(U x 2« \
\ 41 )
54
0
27
15
9,878
350
Q
31
10
i:i
12
4,063
290
Do.
\ 48,1 >
Single Pairlie.
R
/iai x io%
33
0
20
5
5,920
292
\ m )
M
/IS x Ifi \
35
0
20
14
6,667
322
Do,
l 304 )
T
/IB x 18 \
4.5
15
24
15
10,055
•106
Tender engine.
\ «ij ;
Y
/Ifi x 20 S
53
10
24
0
8,244
348
Do,
\ 40* /
Tank engine.
W
/14 x 2ft \
87
5
20
5
9,666
868
I m§ )
Totals,.,
709,
5
506
0
163,008
„
-
\ voragee
33
0
21
2
6794-5
822
—
s.— {Continued.)
OB’ LOCOMOTIVES.— Ekpbctiye Steak Peksstjue, 90 ujb.




APPENDIX No. 6.
OFFICIAL REPORTS
ON THE
NORMANTON RAILWAY,
WITH COMMENTS THEREON BY THE AUTHOR.




Mxtraot from the Report of the Queensland Railway Commis-
sioners, for the eighteen months ended on 80th June,
1890 — pjp, 10 and 11.
NOBMANTON-CEOTD ON RAILWAY.
A contract for the construction of the 1st Section of this
line, covering a distance of 90 miles, was made between the
late Commissioner for Railways and Mr. George Phillips, on
the 4th May, 1888, and the Section opened for traffic on the
7th May, 1889.
A second contract, or rather an agreement, was made with
the same gentleman for the construction of the 2nd Section
(a distance of 68& miles) to Croydon, on the 18th of June,
1889, to he completed on the Slat of August, 1890. The works
on this Section are now in progress, and it is hoped that the
line will bo ready for traffic early next year.
Under those contracts Mr. Phillips is, and has been, acting
in the dual capacity of contractor and engineer in charge of
the works («).
The agreement provides that this Section shall be constructed
os a. low level surface railway with steel sleepers approved of
by the engineer, and without ballast—the 1st Section having
been built in the same manner.
The agreement, however, contains a provision that all neces-
sary material (sleepers, rails, &c.) for the construction of the
lino are to bo supplied and delivered by the Commissioner,
A tender for the supply of 134,000 steel sleepers was
accepted on the 2t(th of July, .1889, shortly before our appoint-
ment, and arrangements subsequently made for their convey-
ance to the Colony, but having soon afterwards discovered
that the contractors for these sleepers would be nimble 1 to
supply them in sufficient numbers to admit of the 2nd Section
being completed within contract time, we determined, in order
to minimise the delay, to lay the lino with wooden sleepers lor
a distance of 20 miles (h). These wooden sleepers have been
laid down ns delivered, hut as the steel sleepers are now com-
ing in, it is not expected that any further serious stoppage
will take place.
(a) This 1h not oar root. Thu tloiumlsHlonoro found all materials ami labour for con-
struction purposes at tluilr own coat. 1 was paid for tho survey ami Bupoivtoion only,
\b) 11 miles are laid wltli sawn Ironbark (deepens procured from Maryborough, and
BJ miles are laid with half-round Idoodwoofl sleepers of local growth.


In deciding to substitute wooden sleepers, we did not lose
sight of the danger to be apprehended from the ravages of
white ants, which wo think have been much exaggerated (c),
as the result, of our enquiries shows that the wooden sleepers (rf)
which had been laid down for nearly throe years ou the branch
line to the “ Margaret and Jane ” 'Wharf at Nonnanton have
been hut slightly affected by these pests, while the sleepers
which have been for several years in the Cooktown Lino, a
line which runs through country very similar in character to
that met with on the Croydon Line, are not as yet showing
signs of premature decay or exhaustion, We were also greatly
influenced in using the wooden sleepers by the fact that they
could belauded at Normanton at loss than one-half the cost
of steel ones, and could ho laid down with equal facility (e).
Although the agreement provides that no ballast is to ho
used in construction, wo arc of opinion that it will he found
necessary to put down a considerable quantity for maintenance
purposes in future, in order to obtain a proper bedding for
the sleepers. Our experience during the hist wet season con-
firms ns in this opinion, as ballasting had to bo used in several
places ou the 1st Section (/).
Extracts from the Report of the Queensland Railway Oovmis-
sioners for the year ended on 80th Rune, 1891—pp, 10,
and 82 to 84. '
NOBMANTON-CBOYBON BAILWAY.
Mr. George Phillips’ contract for the Second Section of the
Croydon Railway—in connection with which, as stated in our
last Report, ho occupies the dual position of contractor and
engineer (y) —was sufficiently advanced at the end of the
year to admit of the line being opened for traffic on the 20th
July, although the terminal station and one or two bridges
were not at the time completed.
We append to this Report a long and interesting sketch of
the work performed by Mr. X’liillips on both Hoctions. From
(t) I'n my previous pamphlets :t have not made a single allusion to while ante, nm-
have I at any timo exaggerated their destructive powers, as tlio t'-nnnnlßßloiierß will
eventually discover.
(ilj Local bloortwood.
(c) The wooden sleepers actually cost from <ll to S 7 per cunt, more to lay anil lift
than this stool sleepers.
</) The actual quantity of selected ballast referred to above, anumntcdln M) culilo
varde on ft length of !18 miles.
(■() This Is not correot, nee note '«) ante.


this narrative Mr. Phillips claims to have introduced an
entirely new system of railway construction; but we think it
only right to point out that the line (constructed, as it is, with
a minimum of ballast) will only be sufficient for ordinary
traffic in dry weather, but it will—to admit of the line being
used during the rainy seasons—certainly be necessary to im-
prove the road by a good supply of ballast. In support of
this, we would refer to the Report of the officer in charge at
Nbrmanton appended hereto ( h). (See page G 9.)
We are further of opinion that any line constructed
similarly to the one from Normauton to Croydon will require
extra supervision (/), and that, to admit of a good running
top being kept on the road, the cost of maintenance will be
found to be much in excess of that required for a road pro-
perly ballasted and drained {k). We are quite prepared to
give Mr. Phillips every credit for the efficient manner in
which he has performed the work for the Department, but we
are constrained to make these observations upon his report,
otherwise our silence may possibly be construed into an admis-
sion that we fully endorse the conclusions at which he has
arrived as to the efficiency of the line.
As stated in last year’s Report, a considerable number of
wooden sleepers were used in the construction of this railway,
and so far these have given evexy satisfaction. Their price
was considerably lower than the steel, and it is anticipated
they will, in the end, prove to be the more economical. More-
over, a further advantage in the use of wooden, instead of
steel, sleepers is that, the money paid for the former is all
exxxended in the Colony.
ih) The actual quantity of selected ballast put out on the road (94.] miles) to 30th
dune, 1801, was 4,000 cubic yards.
(J) There has never been more than one Inspector employed on this line {total
length, 00 miles), and there could not be less supervision unless it were entirely dis-
pensed with.
(k) Maintenance cost £Bl os. Ojd. per mile of main line for the year ended 80th
June, 1892, which is £24 17s. 10]d. per mile less than the average cost of maintaining
Queensland Railways during the same period, although lengthsmen's wages at Nor-
manton are 10s. per day, as compared with 6s. Od. to Ba. per day on oilier lines. (See
Appendix No. 1.)


Copy qf Mr. Phillips' report to the Jiailwm/ Commissioners ,
' extracted from their licport for the gear muledMHh June,
1891.
Kent’s Buildings, Adelaide Street,
Brisbane, 3rd August, 1.891.
Sir, —I have the honour to report upon the construction
and maintenance of the Normantou-Croydon Bailway for the
twelve months ended on the 30th .lime, 1891.
CONHTJIUOTXOX,
The construction of the Nornnuiton-Croydon Bailway (ft#
miles in length*) has boon carried out on a ay atom the distinc-
tive feature of which is, that except where it is necessary for
the formation to he appreciably higher or lower than the sur-
face of the adjacent ground, no provision is made for artificial
drainage, either by side or cross drains. For instance, between
20 miles 20 chain's and 55 miles 30 chains, provision is made
at, only one place, the Macrnsaan Elver, tor the passage of
water across the lino other than by natural How over the sur-
face of the ground, whilst the length of earthworks protected
by side drains is under two miles on the whole length of iMA
miles.
This system of not interfering with and depending upon
natural drainage in oven country has been advocated by mo
since February, 1881, and is the hey to economical pioneer
railway construction, as applied to the conditions existent in
by far the greater portion of this continent.
The experience gained on the Fassiforn experimental line,
extending over two years, and on the Croydon lino, extending
over three years, has conclusively proved that this departure
from established practice has not resulted in disaster, nor has
the saving in coat of construction been effected, at the expense
of. efficiency j on the contrary, the result shows that lines
depending upon natural drainage in even country can curry a
large amount of traffic at lower rates for working espouses
than lines constructed in conformity with the usual practice.
So far 1 have been under the necessity of giving effect to
my ideas under many disadvantages, and 11 m necessity of
grafting a new system upon an old one, for, whilst almost en-
tirely dispensing with ballast and artilicial drainage, and
whilst using fewer ami,shorter sleepers (ban cm any other line
in the colony, I have had.to provide, with a 41|- lb. steel rail,
* KxelwilTO. of Wharf llmnsb.


Normanton Railway—Material train unloading rails and steel sleepers at 25½ miles.
View from Cab of Engine looking towards Normanion.




it, road of sufficient strength hi cany the ordinarv rolling
Htook of tho .Department over ho inn of the most flooded mid
cotton country in Australia,
Grand or Htono ballast law boon sparingly used, the total
iliiiinlifcy put out from tho commencement of construction to
30th Juno is about 4,000 cubic yards, of which 3,250 yards
were used in tho construetion of D-Jri miles, and 750 yards in
maintenance of 3(i miles since 7th May, 1.88!), and 57 miles
since 15th December, 1890.
The line w not fenced except at stations, and all crossings
are open with the exception of Brown (Street, Croydon, where
a pair of gates is provided,
The absence of fencing Inis not caused any serious incon-
venience to traillc.
On tho first section of 42 miles all the bridges are built of
timber brought from Brisbane and Maryborough. On the
second section of 52 i miles tho bridges, with the exception of
two small limber culverts, are iron, with concrete abutments;
the total length of bridging on both, sections is 1,750 lineal
feet, averaging I.BJ lineal feet per mile. Tho length of iron
bridging is 510 feet.
The Unit 8(1 miles is laid with stool sleepers 6 feet 0 inches
x 10 indies xj) inches, weighing 84 lbs. empty, but when
packed with soil or gravel (which adheres to the sleeper under
compression, and assists by its inertia in steading the road)
tho weight of each sleeper is inereusetl to 273 lbs. These
sleepers worn manufactured in Brisbane from imported plates
at n cost of Us. 2’()!!d. each delivered at Normmiton j 45'mil oh
are laid with steel sleepers ti feet x 1.0 inohos x S inches,
weighing 1(H) His. empty, and 21)7 lbs. when packed ; they were
manufactured in Glasgow at ,08 Bs. per ton f.0.b., which, with
freight and other charges added, brings the total cost to 10b,
()|d. for each sleeper delivered at Noruumton.
Tho coat of these sleepers is no criterion of the value of
stool sleepers manufactured in Great (Britain and delivered in
Australia under more favourable conditions for berthing and
unloading vessels than arc at present available at Norraanton,
inasmuch as they have been loaded with heavy freights rang-
ing from $2 12s. 3d. to £8 Bs. sd. per ton, whilst the sleepers
manufactured in Glasgow were purchased (July, 1.880) on a
higher metal market than had obtained for some time previ-
ously; for instance in March, 1,888, steel, sleepers were manu-
factured for Indian railways at .154 Us. (Id. per ton f.o.b.
►Seven and one-quarter* miles are laid with sawn ironbark
sleepers, « feet 0 inches x 1) inches x 3Jj inches, weighing _102,
lbs." They were brought from Maryborough at a cost of 4s.
(lid, each delivered at Noruumton; throe of these sleepers
p


eau be cut from a log which will square 11 inches, whereas if
they were of the usual depth of 44 inches, only two could bo
cut from the same log; this, together with the reduction in
weight (22 per cent.), and the depressed state of the timber
trade, accounts for the low price as compared with the tenders
received in November, 1888, for full-sized sawn ironbark
sleepers to be delivered at Normanton, which ranged from 7s.
to Bs., the average being 7s. 9d. per sleeper.
The remaining portion of the line, 5f miles in length, is
laid with half-round bloodwood sleejiers of local growth, 0
feet 9 inches x 9 inches x 44 indies, weighing on an average
102 lbs , and costing 4s. 6d. each delivered on works.
I anticipated that the local bloodwood sleepers would suc-
cessfully resist white ants, and from an examination recently
made I find this to be correct, but the sawn ironbaa.de sleepers
used on the extension of the old Haydon. fork are much ant-
eaten after two-and-a-half years’ use.*
The number of sleepers laid per mile is not uniform, but
averages about 2,234 steel, or 2,640 wood. The usual pro-
vision has been eleven of the former or thirteen of tho latter
per 26 feet length of rail.
The temporary fork and aiding at Haydon, laid with nine
half-round sleepers to the rail, were found to be quite incapa-
ble of sustaining the weight of the engine when tho ground
was in a saturated condition, the rail and sleepers being
forcibly depressed, even where ballasted, completely below
the surface of the ground, the former during the wet season
of 1890, and the latter during that of 1891. With thirteen
wooden sleepers to the rail, laid three inches below the sur-
face, no similar difficulty has been experienced.
With the exception of a few minor contracts, the work shave
been carried out by day labour (under the supervision of Mr,
A. 8. Frew), at the following rates of wages:—Carpenters
and smiths, 15s. to 16s. Bd.; gangers, 11s.; labourers, 10s,;
and hoys, Bs. per day of eight hours.
The first 36 miles (Normanton to Haydon) was opened for
traffic _ on 7th May, 1889, and on the 'l4th July, 1800, con-
struction was recommenced, and has been pushed on with as
much vigour as the delivery of sleepers and the protracted
wet season would permit. On the 15th December a further
length of 21 miles (Haydon to Patterson) was opened for
traffic, and on the 30th June the rails were laid to 02 miles 30
chains, within two miles of Croydon, and although some
buildings and permanent bridges were not completed, the line
was opened for the conveyance of mails and passengers to
Croydon on 20th July, 1891.
*TMs is a mistake; the actual time was ten months*—U,P.


The last 25 miles were laid and lifted in 04 working days,
at an average rate of 31-25 chains per day; the greatest
length laid and lifted on any one day was 40 chains of wooden
road with 87 men, at a cost of 21s. i.Od. per chain for labour,
and 52 chains of steel road with 7ti men, at a cost of 14s. Sd.
per chain for labour, the coat of labour in the former ease
being 48-8 per cent, higher thou in the latter, but on long
lengths of line I have found that the wooden sleepers cost 87
per cent, more to lay and lift than the steel sleepers.
The weight of the permanent way with the various descrip-
tions of sleepers, is as follows ;
Steel sleepers, 5 feet 9 inches long, equal 432 lbs. per yard
forward.
Steal sleepers, 6 feet long, equal 403 lbs, per yard forward.
Sawn iroubark sleepers, equal 242 lbs. per yard forward.
Half-round blood wood sleepers, equal 242 lbs, per yard
forward.
The greater weight of the steel road is due to the packing
which, adheres so firmly under compression as to form an
integral port of the sleeper, and makes the steel road on the
Croydon Eailway as-heavy as the average of English railways,
which,range from 400 lbs. to 550 lbs. peryard.oud considerably
heavier than railways in Germany, where the weight per yard
ia from 240 lbs. to 320 lbs.
Krat-olass permanent way in Queensland, with BO 11). rails,
vveighs 310 lbs. per yard, or more than one-fourth lighter than
the steel permanent way in the Croydon Eailway.
The expenditure on the Normautou-Croydon Hallway and
Wharf Branch up to the 30th June is, as nearly as I can
ascertain, £2,102 per mile for surveys, supervision, and con-
struction.*
I anticipate that the way and works will he completed dur-
ing the month of September, and additional vouchers, which
have yet to come in, will necessarily increase the expenditure
per mile to a slight extent.
Maintenance.
The first 36 miles of the Croydon Eailway has been main-
-tamed throughout the year, and a further length of 21 miles
since 15th December. The average length maintained for the
year, inclusive of the Wharf Branch, but exclusive of all
sidings—in length 2 miles 50 chains—is therefore 48’9 miles,
which, divided into the total expenditure of £4,990 Bs. 7d.,
* The total capital expenditure to 30th June, lSt)2, Js returned by the Commissioners
as £805,713, or per mile of main lino (including Wharf Brandi, SKI miles).
Q.P.


gives an average cost pa- mile per annum of £lO2 Bs. s|d.
Cost per train mile, 2s. 7fd. Total tonnage, 63,220 gross.
Tine average number of men employed per mile was 'B5, at
a minimum daily wage of 10s.
As lengthsmen’s wages vary on the different railway
systems of the colony from 6s. 6d. to 10s, per diem, the num-
bor of men employed per mile, and not the cost per mile,
should be used for purposes of comparison, but I may point
out that at the lowest rate of wages (6s. 6d.) the cost of
maintenance per mile would have been £O6 Bb, 2|d,
The wet season (January to April inclusive) proved un-
usually protracted and severe, the flood rising 18 inches higher
at Norm an ton* and 39 inches higher at Gienore, than in the
previous year; Ilf miles of the line in the vicinity of the
Neman Eiver were submerged for some time (for an average
depth of 6-4 feet, and a maximum depth over rails of 16’42
feet), whilst the Norman bridge was not crossable for several
weeks; but as trains could run on either side of the flooded
country, mails and passengers were conveyed by the aid of
boats as often as necessary, and it is worthy of remark that
the highest traffic return for any one mouth throughout the
year (£1,167 Bs. 9d. in March) was earned during the wet
season.
The average gross traffic earnings per mouth throughout
the year under review were £6Bl 13s. lid., and the average
gross earnings throughout the four wet months (January to
April inclusive) were £594 I.ls. Sd. per month, which conclu-
sively proves that the road is capable of doing fair average
work during the worst weather, and that it cannot ho regarded
as a fair weather road only.
Although the damage done by the flood was inconsiderable,
and trains were able to resume through running whenever the
bridges were uncovered, the fact that the section from Haydon
to Patterson was opened in au unfinished condition at the
commencement of the wet season, has added considerably to
the average cost per mile for maintenance.
in a report dated 27th April last, I pointed out that for an
additional cash expenditure of about £7,100, the whole of the
flooded country on the left bank of the Norman liiver (except
at the crossing) can be avoided by a deviation vid the perma-
nent survey of the Cloncurry line. (See page 97.)
I have, &0.,
GEO. PHILLIPS
Engineer for Nornmutou-Croydon Railway.
4l‘sftacta. at No, ' mlmtcm - lst Jon “«y to 80th April, 47"27 Inchon ;at Oroen Owok.


Queensland Nonnanton-Ooydon "Railway,
Traffic Manager’s Office, 2nd June, 1891,
ANNUAL REPORT.
Sib, —I have the honour to submit the following short
report on the Normauton-Croydon Railway in terms of jour
memorandum of 28th April;—
With reference to the maintenance of the opened portion of
this line, Nomanton to Blackbull, I can only express the
opinion that I believe it could be very considerably improved.
The present top on the road cannot he said to be even fairly
good, and in places is actually had; but I am of opinion that
the road would be greatly improved under the supervision of
a competent inspector, with the addition of a little stone or
gravel ballast. I submit that our experience of the wet sea-
sons of 1880-90, and 1890-91, is sufficient to prove that the
soil packing taken from the side cuttings of the country
through which the line is constructed is not good enough, to
keep a proper top on the road, in consequence of its tendency
to dissolve when soaked with water; and the fine gravel ballast
that was subsequently put under the sleepers is' not quite a
success, aa the liquid packing continues to squirt from under
the sleepers where the water lies on the road-bed for anytime.
This, therefore, points to the conclusion that river ballast or
broken stone is the better material with which to pack the
sleepers. I do not wish to convey the impression that the
road is absolutely unsafe for slow speed traffic, but I think
the bad places should be repaired with ballast from time to
time as they are indicated by the oscillation and rough riding
of the rolling stock. These remarks apply equally to those
portions of the road laid with wooden and metal sleepers, with
the exception that the packing under the wooden sleepers was
not displaced to so great an extent as that under the latter
during the wet season.*
The construction of the Second Section is rapidly approach-
ing Croydon. The rails will probably be laid into that town
* I believe Hi. Henclren's report to be entirely unbiassed. Nodoubt portions of the
road after the flood did nob present the usual appearance of an artificially-drained and
well-ballasted railway, but traffic was resumed as soon aa the flood subsided, and no
difficulty was experienced in bringing the road into good condition at moderate eost.
<T.P.


by the end o£ the present month, and the Engineer estimates
that the station-house and other buildings will he completed
by end of September, but I propose asking authority to carry
goods and passengers to and from Croydon so soon as the
rails are laid there, and sidings, &e , put down in the station
yard.
I consider the prospects of this line being numbered among
the paying lines of the Colony look very promising.
At present the accommodation provided for the goods and
passenger traffic is ample, and, with the addition of that asked
tor through the General Traffic Manager, it is considered that
provision has been made for the next two years.
With regard to the Estimates for the financial year 1890-91,
as submitted to the General Traffic Manager and the Locomo-
tive Engineer, I desire to point out that it is difficult, at
present, to arrive at a correct estimate of the staff that it will
be necessary to employ on this line; but my estimates were
framed with a strict regard for economy, and are cut us low
as it is considered safe to put them, with the information at
command with regard to the extent of traffic obtainable,
which is, of: course, of a rather speculative character.
S. J. HENDRE
Officer in Charge.
Mvtraci from the Beport of the Queensland Bailwmj Commis-
sioners for the year ended on 30th June, 1893—-p, 10.
NOEMANTON-CEOTDON RAILWAY.
As stated in our last Report, the line was opened through
to Croydon on the 20th July, 1891, although at that time cer-
tain works were uncompleted ; these have since been finished,
and the line is being worked with very satisfactory results, as
will he seen from the traffic receipts shown in Table No, 1 —
the returns giving nearly 31 per cent, upon the capital ex-
pended in its construction,
We have much pleasure in being able to state that the
wooden sleepers used on a portion of the line have fully-
answered our expectations, and have not been, affected by the
ravages of: white ants, and we are now confident that wooden
sleepers can be used all over the Northern portions of the


Colony, and on black-soil plains and downs with much less
risk than in loamy country such as is traversed by the Croydon
Line.*
Prom the report of the Engineer in Charge, and from the
observations of Mr. Commissioner Johnston and the Chief
Engineer, made during their recent inspection of this line, it
is evident that a great deal more ballast than has been used
on construction will require to be put down to admit of the
traffic being maintained during the wet season. Provision
lias been made in our estimates of expenditure for the current
year for starting the work in some of the worst places along
the line before the wet season sets in.
* I infer from these remarks that substituting wooden for metal sleepers the Com-
missioned endorse the chief principle of construction embodied in the Sonminton
Railway, i.c., Hie dependence upon natural as compared with artillolal drainage ; also to
a loss extent the second principle, i,e„ the use in tho first instance of native instead cf
selected ballast, although I claim no novelty in this respect as the latter principle lias
long been in use In America, If my interpretation is not correct, then lamat a lues to
understand the tatter part of the above paragraph, commencing with the words “ we
are now confident,” for the Commissioners have all along expressed their confidence in
the durability of wooden sleepers and in their immunity from tho ravages of white
ants i see extracts from their previous reports, ante.
The Commissioners evidently admit that some now principle has been discovered In
that 18 miles of wooden road on the Nornuinton Hallway that had not been previously
discovered In any part nf the 2,220 miles of wooden road in other parts of the Colony,
including “ the northern parts of the Colony, and on black-soil plains and downs.” G.P.


Report by the officer in charge at Normanlon to the Ohieff
Bnr/ineer for Queensland Railways , with the author's
comments on each paragraph in terpolated in smaller type,
Norma nton,
Officer in Charge’s Office,
24th Sept., 1892.
To the Chief Engineer,
Hallway Department,
Brisbane.
Sir,
1. As verbally instructed by you during
your recent visit, I have the honor to submit the
following report on the general condition of the
permanent way and works on this line.
The report deals so minutely with many minor and com-
paratively unimportant matters that it is a subject lor remark
that it is silent upon the design and construction of station
buildings and iron bridges, the design of the Croydon station
yard, the condition of the ironbark sleepers, and the suffi-
ciency or otherwise of their very unusual depth of 8| inches ;
and although the report is absolutely eloquent upon the sub-
ject of selected ballast there is no reference to the experience
gained in the conduct of traffic without the aid of artificial
drainage. It appears to me that Mr. Bell’s chief function
resembles (with a difference) the mission assigned by Balnk,
King of Moab, to Balaam, son of Beor.
2. On my arrival at Normanton (19th October,
1801) I found the road in a very rough state,
with no settled gangs of maintenance men.
In October, 1891, the first section (3(1 miles) had been
maintained under my superintendence for 2i years during two
very heavy wet seasons; the next 21 miles' had been main


tamed lor about 10 months during one heavy wet season.
In my opinion the road was in very fair order to 57 miles
when Mr, Bell took charge.
Prom 57 miles to Croydon (S7£ miles) the permanent way
was laid very quickly, and the line opened for traffic whilst
the way and works were in an incomplete state, thus iic-
commooatiug the public and at the same time producing some-
thing like £6,000 in revenue to the Department, that under
other circumstances would not have been earned; moreover,
I was Id months behind the time agreed upon for the comple-
tion of the works (owing to delays caused by the late delivery
of sleepers and the protracted wet season of 1890-1), and I
was anxious to avoid any unnecessary delay which would tend
to swell the claim I had against the Hallway Commissioners on
that account.
I deny that the road as n whole was “in a very rough
state ” when Mr. .Bell took charge, and upon lua expressing
some doubt about the fop being good enough for fast running,
I accompanied him on the 27th October over the first 14 miles
(on which portion of the road the principal curvature occurs)
at a speed of SO miles au hour. Driver Clarkson was in
charge of the engine, the wheels of which were much worn,
otherwise a higher rate of speed would have been perfectly
safe, The latter part of the road from 57 miles to Croydon
was not in first-class line or top when taken over by Mr. Bell,
chiefly owing to the fact that the line had been so recently
laid, and the difficulty of procuring in that remote corner of
the colony the necessary skilled labour.
With respect to the maintenance gangs I may say that, up
to a short time before Mi 1 . Bell arrived, I had anticipated that
the road would have remained under my charge during the
wet season next ensuing to the completion of the plate laying,
and I had made what I regarded as suitable arrangements for
placing the longthsmen, but as my anticipations were not ful-
filled, I deemed it advisable to leave Mr. Bell to make his own
arrangements in this respect, as in any case any arrangements
that I might make could not, under the altered circumstances,
be regarded us of a permanent character.
3. I established gangs and gave them fixed
lengths, and there being fortunately a very slight
wet season, the road has now been put in fair
running order.
It might be inferred from these remarks that the road had
never previously been “ put in fair running order.”
In September, ISS9, Mr, Commissioner Johnston went over


»i,« section of 36 miles, and he found no fault with the
condition of the road. In June, 1890, (after the first heavy
wet season) the Chief Commissioner, Mr. Mathieaon, in eom-
innr with Mr. Commissioner Johnston, travelled twice over
the 'first section, and each of these gentlemen complimented
me upon the condition of the road. It will be necessary for
the reader to bear these facts in mind whilst reading Mr. Bell’s
subsequent remarks.
4. lii laying tlxe steel road originally, the in-
tention appears to hare been to bury the sleepers
up to the flange of rail.
I had no such intention, nor is it a fact that the steel sleep-
ers were so buried, and I am at a loss to know upon what
"rounds Mr. Bell bases his inference. If he has over'looked
at the first 4 miles of the road, which iu October, 1891, was
standing in precisely the same condition na when originally
laid in June, 18SS, he must know that this statement is not
correct.
5. This being found to be unworkable for
several reasons, as tbe expense of cutting a track
to get at the ends of tbe sleepers to ram them,
tbo impossibility of pulling the road to line, the
line becoming a water-course during the wet'sea-
son on account of its sinking lower than the
surrounding country, &c., &c.
It would lie a work of supererogation to refute a statement
of imaginary disabilities, based upon a method which I did not
at any time adopt in connection with the steel road ; but it is
to be regretted that Mr. Bell has not defined what further;
disabilities he had in view when he appended the symbols’
Ac.. Ac.
6. The method then adopted was the raising
of the sleepers so that about two-tbirds of their 1
depth would be above tbe surface, and making
mounds of earth at their ends to prevent the
earth-packing squirting out in the wet season
or blowing out in the dry.
| ] e?P“ ,s were originally laid and packed with
™ i °fi ' their , de l s * h below tl,e 'original surface of Iho
’ 'Tit! 1 Ulo j md | were thrown up in the first
instance at the ends of steel sleepers, for much the same rea


son that selected stone or gravel ballast is packed against the
ends of wooden sleepers. After the first heavy rains, the
road, together with the mounds, settles down uniformly, leav-
ing the formation even, and slightly higher than, the adjacent
ground, but not to such an extent as to interfere with the
natural drainage; when the road gets into this condition it
should not be unnecessarily interfered with, but Mr. Bell does
not appear to have grasped this fact,
7, This last method was in vogue on. my arrival,
and as it appeared to me to be the best plan, I
have had the greater portion of the road lifted in
that way,
Mr. Bell’s way of lifting is certainly not my way, for, as will
be seen from the succeeding passages of his report, he admits
that the course be has adopted has resulted in frustrating one
of the principal objects of my system, and one which I never
lost sight of, namely, the non-interference with natural
drainage.
8. The road does now interfere with the natural
drainage, the lift of six or eight inches with the
mounds at the ends of the sleepers preventing the
“natural flow over the surface of the ground,”
and may lead to some little trouble during a
heavy wet season by the water breaking over the
line and washing the earth-packing out of the
sleepers, hut it is the only way in which a run-
ning top and line can he maintained, and when
the line becomes ballasted little or no damage
will he done.
, 'When writing the last paragraph Mr. Bell evidently lost
eight of paragraphs 4 to 7 inclusive.
According to paragraphs 0 and 7 he wishes it to he inferred
that he lias retained the normal level at which I placed, or
intended to place, the steel, sleepers, whilst Ity paragraphs 7
and 8 it now appears that ho has lifted the steel sleepers over
a greater portion of the road from 0 to S inches above the
level at‘winch I laid them, thus necessarily raising the forma-
tion from 6to 8 indies above the level of the-adjacent ground,
whilst the bottom of the sleepers must he several inches above
the original surface; tin’s is entirely at variance with my
method and intention, and in my opinion the high lift of 0 to
8 inches will not improve, but rather diminish, the stability of


tlie road during the next heavy wet season ; honeo I presume
the necessity which Mi'. Bell foresees for a largo supply of
selected stone or gravel ballast tojnwent the formation from
being carried away, and the packing from being washed out
of the sleepers during the wet season.
This is not “the only way in which a running top and line
can be maintained,” otherwise how would it have boon possi-
ble for Mr. W. A, Cross (late Engineer for existing lines) to
have maintained for two years the experimental lino near
Ipswich, or for me to have maintained the Nermantou Bail-
way for 3|- years without selected ballast, or at least with
what Mr. bell evidently regards as a totally inadequate
quantity.
T am of opinion that Mr. 801 l will not he contented even
when the line (in some mysterious and presumably inexpen-
sive manner only known to Mr. Bell) “ heeomm ballasted,
9. The method of keeping a top on the steel
sleeper portion of the road is for a gang, when-
ever a portion of the road gets rough, to give it
not less than a four inch lift (the rammers being
made of 3" x 2" pine, and the rivets on the clips
projecting about three-fourths of an inch neces-
sitating about four inches of a lift before the
rammers can. be conveniently used). This lift
frequently extends for miles ; the road gradually
settles down more or less irregularly, and another
big lift has to be made.
I presume Mr. Bell is describing his own method of keeping
a top on the road, for it certainly is not mine, and it is diffi-
cult to believe that Mr, 801 l ia quite serious, for it is evident
that if the method he describes had been adopted and pear-
severed in from the commencement of plate laying, the mils
by this time would he several feet above the surface. The
rammers described by Mr. Bell wore those used for packing
the sleepers in the first instance, and occasionally when por-
tions of the road required to bo lifted after the first wet sea-
son, but not subsequently.
10. It is of little xlse going through, a length
and taking the “ nips ” out as would bo done on
wooden roadthe only means of doing so on
steel road is using a rammer made of gas barrel
hammered flat, or by driving the earth with an


ordinary beater at the ends, neither of which
methods I have found lasting, the “slack" being
as bad as ever in a few days.
Mr. Belt ia liei‘6 speaking of his own experience when he
confesses his inability to maintain the road ; I found no diffi-
culty in taking out “nips” or “slacks” in the usual way,
that is to say hy lifting the rails slightly above the required
level at those points, as some subsidence is certain to follow,
and should bo allowed for. Mr. Bell, has fallen into a very
remarkable error in stating that the only means of taking out
“ nips” or “ slacks” is by means of “ a rammer made of gas
barrel hammered flat,” The steel road on the Normimton
railway cun be more readily lifted in the ordinary manner
than wooden road, either on the same railway or on any of
the other railways in Queensland. (Sea table on page 06,
giving the relative clearances for beater packing on steal and
wooden road respectively.)
11. The great difficulty at present is preventing
the earth from blowing out of the sleepers when
the train passes over them,- and the .time- of the
men from 14 mile to Croydon is almost entirely
occupied endeavouring to keep the sleepers full;
of course, if the road were well ballasted this
would pot happen.
If Mr. 801 l had known when to leave well alone, and bo
content with my system of maintenance, this trouble would
not have, arisen, but with Mr. Bell’s six and eight inch lifts
in noil so loose and comminuted as that met with on the Nor-
inanton Railway, no other result could bo expected. In
September, 1889, when Mr Commissioner Johnston went over
the first section, the climatic conditions were precisely the
same as .those of: September, 1892, the date of Mr. Bell’s
report. The wot season of 1888-9, like that of 1891.-2, wad
a light one, followed by the usual dry autumn and winter
Mr. Johnston saw a length of rail with steel sleepers attached
lifted bodily at 10 miles; the packing came up entire with the
sleepers, and was only -separated therefrom after repeated
blows of a heavy hammer; such packing could never blow
out, and I never experienced any trouble in conhection with
the soil packing being blown out of the ends of the sleepers.
It should be noted that Mr, Bell does not state that ho Ims
been compelled to employ additional labour, to keep the
sleepers full, and in principle there is'practically no difference


between ramming or beating earth into hollow metal sleepers
and beating atones under flat wooden sleepers j the object is
the sumo in both instances, namely, to keep a running top on
the road.
It is very remarkable that Mr. Bell cannot do without
selected ballast as I ami others have done in Queensland, and
as is done upon tens of thousands of miles of American rail-
ways at the present time.
12. The life of the steel sleepers will not he so
long as is generally thought. I am forwarding
you two sleepers from 5 mile as a sample of how
they are rusting; these sleepers are a fair sample
and not by any means the worst. I estimate that
for at least 8 miles (5 miles to 13 miles) the
sleepers are equally bad, being laid, through coun-
try impregnated with salt; tlxey have, lam told,
been in the road for four years and one month.
The steel sleepers at 5 miles were laid in August, 1888, so
that Mr. Bell is correct in stating that they Imd boon four
years and one month in the road. Thu country at. and near
5 miles is a salt clay-pan, and is the lowest ground on the
whole line between Normanton and Croydon, being only from
3 to 4 feet above the level of high spring tides which bade up
the Norman River as far as the railway crossing at 14 miles,
whilst ordinary high tides are able to hade up into the, crocks
crossed at 4 miles 65 chains and 8 miles 75 chains as far m
the railway crossings. It is not improbable, therefore, that a
good deal of the soil between the 4-milo ridge and Glonoro
(14 miles) may be more, or less impregnated with salt, and I
may mention that an analysis of water obtained from a well
15 feet in depth, at Glenore, gave from 400 to 600 grains of
chloride of sodium (common salt) and potash per gallon.
Mr. Bell should have selected one of the most rusted, ns well
as an average sample, for forwarding to head quarters.
I inspected the sleepers on • their -arrival in Briidwne, and
found that both were somewhat rusted cm their lower flangen,
but that the top tables (which carry and distribute, the weight
of rolling stock) were but slightly affected, whilst, the fixed
fastenings were in very good order (the loose fastenings wore
not sent), and the sleepers are not in tlio leant cracked, either
at rail seats, bolt holes, or rivet holes, nor arts they deformed
or buckled. I thereupon requested the Bail wav Commie-
«ioners to have the sleepers scaled, {-loaned, and weighed, sum!


they consented to carry out my request with regard to one of
them as per the following letter; —
92.8/0020.
Office of die Railway Commissioners,
Brisbane, 15th November, 1892.
Bin,—-With reference to your call here recently, I am
desired to inform you that action will be taken’ by the
Department to scrape and clean one of the sleepers, in order
to ascertain its condition, &c.
1, aui, &c..
A. PREWET
Secretary.
(ih'.o. Phillips, Esq.,
Kent’s Buildings, Adelaide Street, Brisbane.
I was not invited to be present at the tests which the Com-
missioners ordered to be (tarried out, nor bare I been supplied
with the details of the tests, hut they have written me the
following letter:—
92.302(1/8.
Queensland,
(Mice of the Railway Commissioners,
Brisbane, 26th November, 1802.
Sir., —With reference to my letter of the 15th instant, re
testing rusted sleepers sent from Normantou, I am desired to
inform you that one of the sleepers, after being scaled and
tested, weighed (10 lbs., and the Commissioners hud that
although, a portion of the steel tested stood a tensile strain of
2S.fl<l< tons per square inch of area, the elasticity is almost nil —
the rusting having caused the steel, to become very brittle.
I am, &c,
A. PREWETT
Secretary.
G. Phillips, Esq., C.E.,
Kent’s Buildings, Adelaide-street, Brisbane.
My reply to the above is as follows.;—
Kent's Buildings, Adelaide. Street,
Brisbane, 1st December, 1S02,
The Secretary, ■ .
To the .Railway Commissioners, •
Brisbane.
Sir,—I’have the .honour to acknowledge the, receipt this
day of your letter No. 02.5626/8, dated 20th ultimo, having
reference to certain tests in coimeotiou with one of the metal


sleepers manufactured by the Toowoomba Foundry Co., and
which was in the road at 5 miles on the Normanton Railway
for a period of 19 months. _ .
Whilst thanking the Commissioners tor the information
conveyed in your letter, I have the honour to request that 1.
may bo supplied with the details of the tests and copies of the
reports of the officers under whoso superintendence the testa
were applied. , . . , . ~ ..
As I presume the Commissioners have no further use lor
tbe remains of the sleeper in question, 1. would bo glad to
obtain permission to remove same, with view to further teats.
I am, &e.,
GEO. PHILLIPS.
The Commissioners’ reply to the above is as follows
Office of the Kailway CouuuisMioiiera,
Brisbane, (5th December, 1802.
92.5626/8,
Sib, —In reply to your letter of the 1st instant, I am desired
to inform you that my Commissioners■ regret they cannot see
their way to comply with your request, to bo supplied with the
details of the tests of the rusted sleeper sent from Nonnautou,
but they have no objection to your removing the remains of
the sleeper.
I mn,
A. PREWETT
Secretory.
Q-. Phillips, Esq., (IE.,
Kent’s Buildings, Adelaide Street, Brisbane.
The action of the Commissioners in declining to supply mo
with the details of the teats has placed mo at considerable-
disadvantage in dealing with the question of corrosion and its
effects, and I cannot conceive any miaou for their refusal.
If the tests have been good and sufficient, and bear out tlio
only deduction which it appears the Commissioners have
drawn therefrom, it would not he in my power to contravene
them. The reader will observe Ihal 1 Wo given the fullest
publicity in my power to each and all of the reports that haves
been from time to time made upon the Nhrmanton Hallway
by the Railway Commissioners and their officers.
The body of the tested sleeper is now in my office, and I
find that the loss of metal is almost entirely con lined to the
bottom flanges ; the top table has suffered very slightly from
oxidation, and calipers very nearly the full thickness el8/10*.
The fixed fastenings are in very good condition both at the
rail seats, the rivetted clips, and the bolt and rivet holes (one


5-75 X 1-5 x 2 x 4A }
o-i ~ 1
7 - 044 pounds
Weight of the tested sleeper after scaling and
cleaning, exclusive of the loose fastenings =
66-000 „
Add weight of loose fastenings (two clips and
two bolts)
3-400 „
Probable maximum original weight of the
tested sleeper and fastenings =
76*444 „
Specified weight of sleepers with fastenings
complete = ...
84-000 „
Difference to be accounted for
7-556 „
rivet was out out in testing), nor is there the least sign
of cracking or weakness as evidenced by deformation or
budding.*
Applying the formula for oxidation under the most un-
favourable conditions of service, given in Section No, XII., I
find that the maximum probable loss from oxidation in the
period of years would he as follows :
As the Commissioners have not supplied me with the weight
of the tested sleeper before- it was sealed and cleaned I can
only account for the difference between my estimate of the
probable maximum original weight of the tested sleeper and
fastenings (76'444 pounds) and the specified weight of
the steel sleepers, with, fastenings complete, of the same class
(84 pounds), by the fact that the sleeper plates were found,
before bending at 'Woolloongabba, to vary in weight as much
as 10 pounds, the range of those actually weighed being from
about 60 pounds to VO pounds, whereas if the plates could
have been rolled to the exact dimensions specified (09" x 18"
x 3/16") they would have weighed 66 pounds each.
As the specified weight of the plates is to the mini-
mum original weight of the plates as 11 is to 10 the
probability is that the average complete sleeper had the
same ratio of weight to the lightest complete sleeper, or
= V6'363 pounds, which agrees very closely with my
estimate of the probable maximum original weight of the
tested sleeper and fastenings.
The other sleeper sent from Normauton was not scaled and
cleaned-
* Even in its present mutilated condition this (tested) sleeper would last fifteen or
twenty yearn in any road near Brisbane. —G. P.
e


It weighs in its present condition (with fixed
Ad“KiS»
7i)"25 pounds
8-40 „
Present weight of sleeper with fastenings com-
Specified - weight "of sleepers with fastenings
complete ... •••
Mi'UU 3i
Difference =
1-85 „
Assuming that these sleepers can iifLord to lose by oxida-
tion 22 lbs., or one-third of the original average weight of the
main plate (69" x 18" x =66 lbs.) before becoming unfit
for further service, then under the most unfavorable condi-
tions these sleepers should last from twelve to thirteen years,
and under ordinary conditions of service at leant three times
that period, or about thirty-eight years.
I have in my office a photograph of a steel sleeper of 5/10"
section which was quite unfit for further service after being
a little over four years in the road on one of the Indian rail-
ways. The plate at both rail /mats has broken completely
away with a ragged fracture, but isolated eases of this descrip-
tion prove nothing. Ironbarlc sleepers 9" x 3 »■* have been taken
out of the Normanton Kail way after ton months’ service ho
badly ant-eaten that they were worthless, but I havo yet to
learn that the authorities regard thin as conclusive evidence
that wooden sleepers should not be further used, I. am con-
fident, from the appearance of the steel Bloopers forwarded
from Normanton, that they would havo lusted at least another
eight years in the road, and, having regard to the very un-
favourable conditions of service they have experienced, and
the lightness of the plate (3/16"), 1 think they imvo stood re-
markably well, and it augurs well for the life of the steel
sleepers laid under more favourable conditions of: service.
, with regard to the concluding paragraph of the Commis-
sioners’ letter dated 2Sth November, 1892, to the effect that
“ the elasticity is almost nil —the rusting having caused the
steel to become very brittle,” I may point out; that the test
strips were cut out of the sleeper with a cold chisel (the
marks of the chisel are plainly visible) ; and if the metal were
brittle it would not stand this treatment without fracture, of
which there is not the least sign. In addition to this, I may
mention that the whole of the sleepers of the sumo pattern
were pressed to shape cold, with a very trifling loss, fur out of
81,000 plates imported from England 80,626 sleepers wore
actually delivered at Normanton, the difference being chiefly


accounted for by loss from tlie ships’ slings, whilst lightering
in the Gulf. Probably not more than twenty plates were
broken in the press. These sleepers have stood their work
well; not a single sleeper lias been removed from the road
owing to fracture. During the three and a-hal£ years the
road was in my charge I ordered the removal of two steel
sleepers that had buckled owing to large stones having been
inadvertently left in the centre of the formation; neither of
these sleepers, although badly deformed under the severe
stresses they had been subjected to, showed the least signs of
fracture. My original specification for the steel is given
below, but I am not aware whether it was adhered to by the
inspector in England.
Original Specification.
“ The main plates shall he of the mildest quality of Besse-
mer or Siemens-Martin steel, of uniform quality, free from all
defects; on each plate the maker’s brand must be clearly
discernible, and the steel in the plates shall, under such tests
as may be ordered by the Commissioner for Railways or any
officer authorised by him on that behalf, bo capable of with-
standing a tensile strain of not less than 26 and not more
than 80 tons per square inch of original section, both length-
ways and crossways, with an extension of not less than 20 per
cent, of the tested length—B inches.
“ All plates shall admit of being bent double when hot
without fracture, and shall admit of bending cold without
fracture to the following angles:—“ Lengthways of grain,
120° ; across the grain, 100°.” '
It is interesting to compare the above specification prepared
by me in July, 1887, with the specification for sleeper steel
recommended by Mr. H. K . 13 amber, who has had a large ex-
perience of the manufacture of transverse steel sleepers.
The specification, which I quote below, is extracted from
paper No. 2,556 on the “ Manufacture of Transverse Steel
Sleepers of the Inseparable Clip Type 1 for Permanent Way,”
by Herbert ICelway Bamber; see Yol. 108, Minutes of Pro-
ceedings Institute 0.E., page 838, &c,, issued June, 1892.
The Quality of Steel to he used.
“ The specified requirements of sleeper steel at present are:
—l. That it shall he as even as possible in quality. 2. That
it shall withstand an ultimate tensile stress of nt most from
26 to 81 tons per square inch. 3, That it shall elongate at
least 20 per cent, in a length of 10 inches. 4i. That it shall
show a contraction of area at point of fracture of not less


Analysis op Steel.
—
A.
B.
c.
I).
IS,
Carbon
Silicon
Sulphur
Phosphorus
Manganese
0 IS
0-05
0-0G
o-os
0-46
0-15
0-04
0-06
o-os
0-47
0-15
0 06
0-058
0-083
0-45
0-14
0-05
0-056
0-03
0-47
0-15
0-05
o-oo
0-08
0-49
Tensile Test-pieces (otanneaxisd).
—
A.
B.
c.
I).
IS.
Load per square inch. ..
Elongation per cent,
in 8 inches
Contraction per cent.
39-60
mi.
j yti.
3(3-00
13-07
42-00
37-
14-22
38-
36-00
14-46
40-001
34-00
2-74
Pnioti-
cully ml.
Tensile Tests (annealed).
—
A.
B.
c.
D.
E.
Load per square inch. ..
Elongation per cent.
in S inches
Contraction per cent.
32-50
21 -09
48-00
32-30
23-83
48-00
32-50
30-31
62-00
83-33
23-44
42-00
32-60
23-84
4(5-00
than 40 per cent. 5. That it shall he capable, of being bent
double on itself to an inside radius of one half its menu thick-
ness without sign of crack or fracture.”
“The steel used is made by the Bessemer,_Thomas, and
Siemens-Martin processes, this material possessing the quali-
ties of homogehity, malleability, and ductility.” • •
“lu order to show that steel of a higher tensile strength
than 81 tons is not suitable for use in the manufacture of
these sleepers, the author (Mr. Bomber) proposes to give the
analyses and the results of tensile tests of steel, taken from
the backs or thickest parts of some sleepers which had broken
in two by falling on a hard substance when being discharged
from railway wagons. -They were all made under one order.
“Talcing the analyses and results of annealed tensile tests
of sleepers a, n, o, and e, and allowing for some little in-
equality in the mixing of the steel at the time of blowing, it
would appear as though these four sleepers had been made
from one rolled batyso closely do they compare with each
other. The effect of annealing , as shown in these results, is
very interesting.


Stakdaiu) Sijokpicb S'i’hup.
■—
Analysis.
—
ToiMimml
StruiMjUi.
Curium
•Silicon
Sulphur
WurapllOl'M
Mftiiganuac
Per cent,
O'13
0*03
(COfi
O'Oil
(C70
Load per aqmu'O inch,
tons
Elongation poi*
in 10 iuuliuH
Contraction pov otvnti,
38*00
34*00
00*00
“It was evident that those five sleepers had been made from
plates which had boon 1 cold rolled’—that is, they were not at
a proper heat at the time of rolling, either from neglect at the
furnace, or through some delay alter reaching tho roughing
rolls. The subsequent punching up of tho clips at too low a
heat had developed strains, starting at an angle of 45° with
the root of the clip, along which lines of strain each sleeper
ultimately broke.
“ The icssoii to be learned from those experiments seems to
ho that, steel having a teusional strength of B2T> tons pen?
square inch is not .suitable for use in the manufacture' of
sleepers which have to withstand strains caused by the punch-
ing up of portions of tho plate, because by working the steel
at too low a heat strains may bo sot up by tho subsequent
operation of punching to such an extent as to cause fracture,
ns in the eases just, considered. It is the author’s experience
that, if in the ordinary course of manufacture tho steel be
kept, at about 28 tons tensile strength per square inch, tho
clips may be bent double without any fear of fracture taking
place; but when of such touailo strength as to withstand 81
tons per square inch, at least 4 per cent, of tho clips will fail
on being bout to an aggie of. 00°. He is, therefore, of: opinion
that stool used in the manufacture of sleepers of this type
should bo allowed to range between 20 and iiO tons, and he
funis that tho steel which gives in all respects tho most satis-
factory results is that which answers to tho following analysis
and tests:—
“Tilt*, steel should bo capalilo of being bout double on itself
to an inside radius of ono-half its moan tldclcuoss without
sign of lamination, crack, or fracture.”
I mu not aware whether the Commissioners tested the Nor-
manton sleeper before or after annealing tho lest pieces, but
in any ease 1 nan wot. responsible for tho result of the tests
whether it ho regarded as good or bad.
II the test pieces wore properly annealed before tasting,
then the result is conclusive evidence that my specification for


the steel was not adhered to ; if, on the other hand, the tests
were applied without first annealing the test pieces, then the
test, so far as elongation and contraction of area is concerned,
is worthless, as it is well known that mild steel, after it has
had work put into it in a cold state by bending, punching, and
shearing, loses a great deal of its original elasticity in conse-
quence of the strains that are set up during the cold working.
J*’or instance, if a test bar oE mild steel is bent cold, then
straightened and tested unannealed under tension, there will
he practically no contraction of area at the point where
flexure occurred; for the same reason a large percentage of
elongation and contraction of area cannot be expected from a
strip of steel two inches wide cut out of the centre of the
top table of a steel sleeper by means of a cold chisel (the
sleeper itself having been originally bent and punched cold)
unless the test pieces be first annealed.
The limit of elastic expansion in mild steel is about OT4 per
cent., although its ultimate elongation, when tested to destruc-
tion under tension may be 150 times greater ; and I feel con-
fident, from the experience I have had of the behaviour of
these sleepers in. manufacture, in subsequent rough handling,
and when in duty in the road, that the steel is sufficiently good
lor the purpose it was intended to serve, and that it cannot
be correctly described as “ brittle
18, The timber sleepers are in good order, and
I consider that the half-round hloodwood should
have a life of at least twenty years, as this climate
is very much drier than on the coast.
Two classes of timber sleepers have been used; H miles
are laid with rectangular iron bark sleepers from Maryborougb,
and 5f miles with half-round local hloodwood sleepers.
Mr. Bell evidently intends it to be inferred that both classes
iof sleepers are standing equally well; this I am sure is not
the case, for I know from past experience that white ants will
certainly destroy the ironbark sleepers on the Narmanton
Eailway; they will not seriously injure the hloodwood, for
this is the only timber suitable for sleepers that, in my expe-
rience, will resist white ants, and as the hloodwood sleepers
on the Normanton Eailway were cut from trees grown in the
district, I have never had any doubt of their durability on that
score, Bloodwood is not a very solid timber and lacks trans-
verse strength, but I have known bloodwood fence posts to last
20 or 80 years, both in (Southern and Northern Queensland.
It may be observed that if the construction of the Korman-
ton Eailway depended upon sufficient Bloodwood sleepers


being obtained within a reasonable distance of the line it
would not be in existence to-day, nor would it ever bo built.
Blooctwood suitable for railway sleepers Is very scarce be-
tween. Norman ton and Croydon, and, besides, this class of
timber is in demand for mining and other purposes at Croy-
don .and Normanton; and as the growth of timber in the
BurJco district is very slow, it will he found impossible to
maintain that line witli Bloodwood sleepers procured in the
vicinity thereof.
This being the case I fail to see what useful purpose is
served by decrying metal sleepers, for eventually they must he
largely used in the north-western parts of Queensland. It
should be observed that Mr, 801 l is silent as to the condition
of the, road cm the 13 miles of wooden sleepers, but as these
have been laid much closer together than the steel sleepers,
and are besides an eighth longer, that part of the road is pro-
bably in quite as good order as the rest. On reference to sec-
tion 12 it will be seen that. 1 have no objection to wooden
sleepers. Mr. Bell’s absolute silence on the subject of white
ants is to me more eloquent than words, and the fact that he
does not refer by name to the ironbark sleepers invites special
attention thereto.
14. Tli© timber bridges bay© been very roughly
built; the transoms are spaced too far apart,
necessitating an additional one under each rail
joint.
The greater part of the bridge timber is old material from
the S. & W. Hallway, chiefly, .1 believe, from bridges dispensed
with between Brisbane and Ipswich at the time of the dupli-
cation of that lino.
My original agreement was to build the first section of the
Oloncurry Lina on which there were hardly any bridges.
Alter some miles of the road were laid it was decided to
divert the line towards Croydon; this alteration necessitated
the only bridge of any size, namely, that over the Norman
Biver, A design for this bridge had to be hurriedly prepared,
and the necessary timber ordered from Brisbane by telegraph.
The timber bridges are sufficiently strong and have given,
no trouble, except from the effects of climate and the ravages
of borers and white ants. Timber is not a suitable material
for railway bridges in the Burke district, and I have always
regarded the timber bridges on the Normanton Bailway as a
temporary expedient.
The spacing,of the transoms is a matter of opinion, and in
my opinion they were close enough.


15. The road has never been properly pulled to
line after it was laid ; the curves all require set-
ting off.
Vide paragraph 3 and my remarks thereon. The Bailway
Commissioners, Messrs. Mathieson and Johnston, were both
satisfied with the condition of the road in June, 1890, and Mr.
Bell says (paragraph 8) that “the road has now been put in
fair running order.” The curves are all of large radius, none
smaller than 20 chains outside of station yards, the average
radius being 94 chains, and they were all properly set off m
the first instance. I have dealt, either wholly or in part, with
the surveys of more than 900 miles of railway now in opera-
tion in Queensland, besides several thousands of miles of trial
and permanent surveys of projected lines, and from my expe-
rience I doubt if there, is a railway curve in the colony that
will stand a strict instrumental test.
1 would remind Mr. Bell that,
“To gild refined gold, to paint the lily,
To throw a perfume on the violet,
To smooth the ice ... .
Is wasteful and ridiculous excess.”
These lines were written long before the introduction of
railways, but they are applicable wherever ideal refinements
upon that which is absolutely necessary tend to produce
“wasteful and ridiculous excess.”
As a bushman of 30 years experience, accustomed to travel-
ling in all weathers over the unimproved tracks of the interior,
I have learned to regard “ stability ” as the first necessity of
a road; speed is the product of volume of traffic, and “ volume”
can afford to provide for “ speed.”
If those who are responsible persist in setting up an ideal
and totally unnecessary standard of railway excellence in the
backwoods of Queensland, the result will be that, whilst they
may experience some temporary satisfaction in combating any
eystem at variance with the standard of excellence they have
been taught to regard as essential, the progress of the colony
will be unnecessarily retarded.
16. The design of Normanton yard is, as pointed
out to you during your visit, most inconvenient,
and the curves unnecessarily sharp, one having a
radius of chains, and another of 3f chains.
The confined space available for station purposes between
Tlannam and Landsborough Streets, and the necessity of pro-


Tiding for the proposed lino to Bed Bluff, as well as for the tem-
porary wharf lino to the Margaret and Jane Lauding (both of
which join the main line at awkward angles in the Station
Yard), account for the cramped position of the sidings, and
the sharpness of the curves in the Norman ton Yard, the
arrangement of which I never liked, and had I known in time
that a better wharf site than that selected by Sir John Good©
at Bed Bluff was obtainable at Port Norman, 4 miles lower
down the river, admitting of a totally different and ranch loss
costly route thereto, other mnl hettor arrangements could have
been made at Normanton Station. The station buildings
should have faced I/.uidsborougb Street, thus giving an addi-
tional 12 chains in the required direction, but the Town
Council would not hear of Landaborougli Street being dosed,
and without them* consent I deemed it useless to approach the
Commissioner for Bail ways on the subject.
According to my plana the smallest curve has a radius of
240 feet = 3’(54 chains, but such curves are not uncommon in
station yards. I may instance both Brisbane (Eotna Street)
and Ipswich, where curves quite as sharp'arc in use.
17. Croydon Yard Ims boon laid in the roughest
manner possible, no tumble lias been taken to put
in tlie proper loads on Idas curved portions; this
yard will require to be entirely relaid.
Plans of the Croydon Yard were fully considered by the
Railway Commissioners and approved of by them, in fact, I
may say that the _ design in theirs. The yard was laid out
accordingly, and taken over by Mr. .Bell immediately upon the
completion of the buildings ; this, together with the difficulty
experienced in procuring the necessary skilled labour, accounts
for the somewhat rough state in which Mr. 801 l found it.
The yard appears to have answered the purpose for 12
months, so that the necessity for its being maid is not very
apparent, unless it is intended to alter the general arrange-
ment.
18. Tlie concrete floors of Croydon Platform
and Goods Shed have already become full of
holes, and require re-floating.
The cement was supplied by the Railway Commissioners,
and some of it (especially that used in the floor of the Croy-
don Station ofltcea.oml platform) proved to be' very bad j the
platform required re-ilnating in places immediately after
drying.


19. The gradient leading into Croydon controls
the load throughout the line, reducing it from
about 130 tons to 90.
The gradient referred to is 1 in 66 for about 50 chains,
with a cutting of a maximum depth of 4 feet containing 2,084*
cubic yards, which coat by contract 4s. per cubic yard, or £4lO
16s.
The limiting gradient, equivalent to a load of 180 tons
behind the class of engine now' in use on the Normanton
Sail way (A 10 —■* n x - 1 ft see appendix No, 5), is about lin
110, To have adopted 1 in 110 at this place would have
meant a continuous incline of 180 chains in length, with a
cutting having a maximum depth of 14 feet, containing
23,100 cubic yards, which, at ss, 9d. per cubic yard (allowing
for the extra lead), would have cost £7,216. As the Railway
Commissioners were of opinion that the Normanton Bailway,
in spite of its low cost, would not pay, I do not think it pro-
bable that they would have consented to such a considerable
departure from the plans approved by Parliament, and if the
requirements of traffic render it necessary to cut down this
hill, it can be effected at considerably less coat now than
before the rails were laid.
I may also point out that if my views with regard to the
best site for a station had proved acceptable to a majority of
the business people of Croydon it would have been practicable
to have carried the line (by a considerable detour) to the
north of Fossil Hill, over comparatively even country. After
all is said that can be said on this subject there is no great
harm done, for the AlO class of engine can haul from 80 to 90
tons to Croydon, whereas the same engines haul from 60 to
70 tons on the Saudgate line, although the gradient at the
Albion Hill has been considerably lowered since the line was
opened; nor are there many lines in the colony on which
these engines can haul a load of 130 tons behind the tender
for a continuous distance of 90 miles. In a report to the
Railway Commissioners, dated 3rd October, 1801 (see
page 97)—1 pointed out the disadvantages attendant upon
this particular incline, and recommended that a siding
should be provided at the “ Q-olden Gate” (about 4 miles
from Croydon), whereby the considerable, mining population
in that neighbourhood would be accommodated, and at the
same time the particular difficulty under consideration could
be obviated by dividing the maximum load (130 tons) at that
place. I understand that arrangements have been made to
run, suburban trains between Golden Gate and Croydon, if so


VALLEY OF NORMAN RIVER,
SECTION AT RAILWAY CROSSING.
LENGTH Of H/GH LEWI SEDGE E£QUmE~B Af/LES.
Reduced level
MOOO
I3M.
I4M.
I6M.
I7M.
ISM
lo M
I9M.
20 NT.
2IM
The Normanton-Croydon Railway is on the surf ace except at the points A , B, C, D,
where the rail level is shown by horizontal lines.
Estimated cost of High level line from 13 to 21 miles £187,411. Actual cost of
existing line from 13 to 21 miles = ,£21,090. Total cost to yoth June , 1892,
of Normanton-Croydon Railway with all sidings and branches , amounting to
nearly 100 miles of rails , and including rolling stock = £265,713.
To make use of this crossing for a high level line, would lengthen the Croydon
Railway by 13 miles.




the disability referred to by Mr. Bell can readily be obviated,
as explained.
20. I am informed that during heavy wet sea-
sons the line from 5 miles to 14 miles is under
water for some time, this will be a most serious
inconvenience when Croydon comes to be of more
importance, and could, apparently, have easily-
been avoided by keeping the line further to the
right.
In February, 1891, the line was under water from 4 miles
35 chains to 16 miles, 10 chains, to a mean depth of 6'4 feet,
and a maximum depth (at 14 miles 6 chains) of 10'42 feet;
this was by no means the highest recorded flood, so that, even
supposing that the flooded ground could, as Mr. Bell says, be
easily avoided as far as 14 miles, there still remains to be
crossed 2 miles 10 chains of flooded ground, including the
various channels of the Norman. River. Mr. Bell does not
explain in what manner he proposes to deal with this part of
the line, but I may mention that when this part 3a oroßsable,
the line to 14 miles is clear of water. If Mr, Bell can tell by-
personal observation from the railway that the flooded ground,
between 5 miles and 14 miles can apparently be easily avoided,
then he can see that which has never been apparent to any
other man who has ever travelled that line of country. The
railway from Normanton to 1.4 miles at GHenore, adheres
closely to the Cloncurry Road (which at one time carried a
very considerable traffic), crossing and re-crossing it; between
that road and the Donor’s Hills road which 1 selected and sur-
veyed in 1867 —(see lithograph of railway routes near Nor-
manton)— there is no track of any description whatever, and
at 14 miles those roads are 9 miles apart.
Does Mr. Bell seriously imagine that old bushmea would
persist for 25 years in. adhering to a line of flooded country if
it were apparent that it could be easily avoided? Nearly the
whole of the flooded country between the 4 mile ridge and
GHenore can he avoided by following the permanent survey of
the Cloncurry Railway as far as 17-fr miles from Normanton,
thence by a line of country which I am quite sure Mr. Bell
has never seen, about 9i miles to GHenore. This is the only
practicable high level route for the Cloncurry and Croydon
Railways combined, and it would lengthen the Croydon Rail-
way by IS miles. It took me a very long time to discover*
what I know about the flooded country near Normanton ; my


information is based upon personal observation gained by
riding about the country (in the year's 1867-8, and 1888-CMd)
and 91), and upon accurate surveys and levels I may men-
tion that at 10i miles on the permanent survey of the Cloi i -
curry line, that line is only just clear of the flood of Ifebniftvy,
.1891, and this point is more than 5 miles in a direct line from
the nearest part of the Croydon Railway at 7-£ miles. -All
these facts were clearly set forth by me in a report to tlr©
Bailway Commissioners, dated 27th April, 1891. (See png©
97.) The fact that Croydon is separated from its porfc_ Try
many miles of flooded country, in addition to the nine mil oh
referred to by Mr. Bell, will prove an inconvenience for imny"
years to come, and there is no easy way of getting over tins
natural difficulty. A high level bridge, with the ixeeeaHury
approaches thereto at the crossing of the Norman Elver,
would coat more than two-thirds of the total capital expended
to date (including rolling stock) upon the Normanton-Croydou
railway, besides lengthening the line to Croydon by thirteen
miles, Mr. Bell’s objection on the score of “ inconvenience ”
would entirely preclude the use of low level surface railways
anywhere; for where is the place that may not become Im-
portant in the distant future? Mr. Bell’s argument remindb
me of the boy who declined to venture into the water until li o
had learned to swim. It is to be hoped that sooner or hrtor
the requirements of our pioneers may be regarded a« of
greater importance than the upholding of old world ideas of
railway construction. These ideas have been exploded for
many years past in the 'United States, hence the fact tlmfc
goodn and passengers are carried on their railways for cma-
thircl the rates that obtain in Great Britain. {Fide extract;
from Fortnightly Review of April, 1891, given in Appendix
No. 7.)
21. Of the four watering places on the line,,
the water at Glenore has become, salt; at Hayclon
and Blackball the supplies (obtained from very
small water-holes in creeks) have failed, and at
Croydon a drive is being put in the well to en-
deavour to increase the supply. I erected, as
reported, a temporary tank at io mile, wliiolx is
now the only place on the line where suitable
water can be obtained. This entails the attaching
of three water gins to the ordinary train (to enable
it to rim from 10 mile to Croydon and back, 186






miles), and reduces tlie amount of loading that
(»w:i ho sent by each train by about 30 tons.
i do uol; tend any responsibility in connection with the
lUlim> of tlm water supply for the Formanton Railway, So
fur iw the 1.0 mile hole is concerned I had a tank there for
about H yours, hut an the pump was required elsewhere it was
removed. The water supply for the railway will always be
unsatisfactory attar a light wet season, unless special means
are adopted, Homo of which have been reported upon to the
Omuniisßioners, who have been, aware all along that the prin-
cipal supply at (Jlonoro becomes brackish towards the end of
tlm dry season on account of the north-west monsoons backing
up the water from the gull: into the river to a sufficient height
to overflow the slight natural bar at the lower end of the river
lagoon, and on which the railway bridge is built.
22. Generally, with regard to the line, I con-
aider that until it, is ballasted it will be a difficult
and unsatisfactory one to maintain.
X. have, &c.,
(Signed) N. Gf. BELL,
Officer in Charge.
The American practice is to ballast new railways under
light imllie with any mutable material obtainable on. their line
of road. Mr. W. S. Huntington in his .standard work “The
Rom I Master's Assistant; and Section Master’s Ghiide,” 10th
edition, IHS-f, page ■l4, says “Railroads are forced to'content
“ themselves with the Iml last obtain able on their lino of road
“until they become rich enough to pay for a better. Some
“ roads must employ the natural soil. It of clay, the only
“Hiilvathm ties in nypurfoet system of drainage; if of by
“tilling to the lop of. fa'os anil shouldering out at least a foot
“ and ii half to keep the track in lino; if of prairie soil—hlaek
** wind and loam fill to top and slope to end of ties.”


The selected ballast for the Norman ton Railway must come
chiefly, if not altogether, from the Croydon end, and will cost
a large sum; I put out 2,513 cubic yards on a length of 22
miles, between Haydon and Blackball; this ballast was
obtained from GHeuoro and cost (is. 9d. per cubic yard.
I do not know bow much selected ballast Mr. 801 l will
require, probably 1,200 cubic yards per mile; if he can put
this out on the road at sa. per yard all round, he will do well.
This is equal to £3OO per mile, and,taking 90 miles to ballast,
the total cost will not bo much short of £27,000, Ido not
.think the saving of this sum of money, if only for a few years,
is a proper subject for censure, although the saving of £27,000
in selected ballast is a mere trifle compared to the saving I
effected under the head of drainage, which is quite ignored
by Mr. Bell.
If Mr. Bell has proved anything, it is that ho, at least, was
not the most suitable person to place in charge of a line em-
bodying such radical departures from the practice ho him been
accustomed to.
Before closing my remarks, I regret that I am under the
necessity of drawing attention to the fact that Mr. Bell is
reporting to the Chief Engineer, who has all along predicted
the utter failure of my system of construction for oven
country.
On the 12th July, ISS7, Mr. Stanley, reporting to the Com-
missionor fox* Railways upon .the experimental lino near
Ipswich, wrote as follows; “ With a view as far as possible to
“ put the system to really practical test, it would be desirable
“to adopt means for submerging a portion at least of the
“ line until the ground bad absorbed a considerable quantity
“ of water, when the effect of n load passing over tin* sleepers
“ would afford a good indication of their stability or otherwise.*
“ I am satisfied that a lino constructed on the principles
“ enunciated by Mr. Phillips cannot bo regarded ns anything
“but a “ fair weather ” one, and that the first wet season it
“has to contend with will fully demonstrate that a thoroughly
“ drained and well-ballasted road-hod is essential to secure a
permanent and economically maintained line of railway,
•“ In conclusion, I would strongly advocate, in the event of the
“ G overnment deciding to introduce this system of constructing
"railways in any part of the colony, that the experiment
“ should be limited to a short section 'of say five or ton miles
“at the most, for I feel convinced that sooner or later it
* Since-Mr, Stanley penned those lines millions of tons of water have framed Clio
Norman ton Hallway without nlfoeUng tho stability of the road. Ko« plato omiosilß
«. F,


Normanton Railway— Talley of Norman Rirver during flood of January, 1890.
View from embankment at 4 miles 35 chains. Line submerged thence to 15 miles 70 chains.




“ would Iks found necessary to ro-constnici: the lino on recog-
liked principles more consistent with the stability, permii-
“nency, and economy of mihvny construction.’ 1
It is singular that on thovory day Mr. Stanley recommended
an artificial wtlnnorgonco of: a portion of the experimental
lino, heavy rain fell thereon, and on the 18th '>f the same
month (July, ISH7), Mr. Stanley again reported adversely,
concluding with the following words
“ In tins face, of the ahovo facts I can only infer that any
“ further attempt to construct railways on a system so entirely
“at variance with established principles and practical experk
once, can lint result in loss and disappointment;, I would,
“ moreover, point out; that the special design of Mr. Phillips’s
“ sleeper is not well adapted for the use of ballast, Should,
“ therefore, a railway be constructed on his system, and it aub-
’* set) neatly he found necessary to ro-eonstrnct with ballast,
“ as I fuel certain would be the ease, the form of the sleeper
“ would prove a serious obstacle.”
(Mr. 801 l does not appear to concur with Mr. Stanley’s
last remarks, vuh paragraphs S, 11, and 22 of Mr. Boll's
report.)
I had hoped that with the taking up of the experimental
lino aider it had successfully carried the traffic of the Pussi-
fem Branch—o to 8 trains’ daily—for two years, I and my
system hud passed out of the roach of the' Chief Engineer;
tint*, however, unfortunately, is not the. ease, for the recent
appointment of Mr. Stanley as Chief Engineer of Queensland
Baihvays, again livings my system under his review.
Per assorting a physical fact known to every schoolboy of
the present day, (lalileo was whipped ; for assorting (and
proving) that the surface soils of oven country in Queensland
tain carry trains at fair rates of speed without the aid of
artificial drainage and selected ballast, I am brought under
the, scourge of the Chief Engineer, hut the schoolboys of
another generation will, in this respect, he wiser than he.


o
o’
<*
02
g
1
H
B
g
e+-
O
1
g
o"
“ P ss
£
£
5
i
SteeJ,
Wood,
Wood,
1 rough-shaped
Rectangular
Rectangular
£
-
V
/
V J
It's?
Cu ct- ? 3 ct> —
g £ S- o £
3 0
--i
S3
*
X
H.
K_ X
13
§ 5
C»l_ Cf- fS
cT
E*
ICV
is
p i£
1-3 { tv
O
tv
Formula for
si
cs 1 -
C5 (
hi
general spacing.
w a
E K
to
1-5
tv
. J
!
General distance apart
»
centre to centre.
"
J
p"
c CC
tv
i£»
to
Maximum radius avail-
c*
C‘
able for beater packing
p t 1
*
T*
r
between sleepers.
% u
£
S'
3£
O
B
Cf“
H
OT'C* C cr^f^j
p fts C ©" v 1
~f-rr e*- *“* £L p-
£. S - £*i e+- S p*
?• P X ” '"’’ * =r
cf- cf* £ 3t ci- ■'”' ST
sS^lfo
? cc
£ <o
a
Cf- £
C
tt'lL
5 «s-
£- £3‘
E
p ~
cf-
a
C
fr-rs
Sr*5 0? £
§• £-<'£-
erf- P C
S fg 5 E,
Stc'-T P
S 2
©•«*•©
c £
V rr »■* '
C J § 3 g
JC ©0 Si <—■ p .
2C “>"* v*
cf-, g»
© C © at*
s
sc
Cf-
cr
5
£
cc
8°
_*■
$
P&
S-3
x s
c
S*- jj c»
o T c?
3 gpL
*5 2JI
- a
■- ej-
*<r ►j
p c£
'r'o
M
e Ct ’
p s
cf- P:
Et o
E c,
&
SC S
S’ g
c £
= ►
i P
Pt
X
y:
V
>
}—!
; E
; «j
; 5


Croydon,
October 3rd, 1891.
The Secretary
To the Railway Commissioners,
Brisbane.
Sir,
I have the honor to recommend that a stopping-place
and short blind siding be provided at 89 miles 73 chains, in
order to accommodate the mining population, along the
!! Golden Gate ” and “ Iron Duke ” linos of reef, where a
large amount of work is going on, and there is a considerable
population —there are three public-houses at the “Golden
Gate.” At present these people have to come into Croydon
if they desire to catch the trains to Normanton. A siding
here -would also prove of service to the through goods traffic';
for instance, the. class of engines here can haul 180 tons from
Normanton to this place, but they cannot haul more than 90
tons over the hill at 93 miles. By dividing the load at Golden
Gate full loads could be sent from Normanton.
I am, &c.,
GEO. PHILLIPS.
Brisbane,
27tlii April. 1891.
The Secretary
To the Railway Commissioners,
Brisbane.
Me diversion of Croydon Brandi from S miles 21 chains to
about 13 miles 61 chains , and re bridge at Q-lenore,
Sir,
As the extraordinary duration of the inundations ex-
perienced on the country along the loft bank of the Norman
River at present traversed by the Croydon Branch will
occasionally prove a serious hindrance to traffic, I would
suggest for the consideration of the Commissioners the advis-
ableness of making a deviation vid the permanent survey of
the Cloncurry line, which will avoid all the ground subject to
backwater from the Norman River between Normanton and a
point 60 chains from the present bridge, and reduce the
diffleultj recently experienced in conducting the traffic, in
times of flood, to a minimum.
H


The principal reasons that have led to tho adoption of the
present route between Normantou and (Honor© are briefly as
follow: —
1. The best bridge site that I am acquainted with on the
Norman Eivor (either low or high level) is at;
Glenoro,
2. The nearest permanent fresh water supply within <W
miles of Normanton is at Glonore.
Note— Between August, 1888, anil Dwtuubur, 1889, the town was
dependent upon water carried by train from this place, nor mH a rail-
way from Normantou have been built during that period by any rente
that did not tap the supply at Uluworo.
3. Tho grossly exaggerated rumours as to the extout of
country south of Normantou said to have boon
covered by the great Hood of 1H?() made tho cross-
ing of a few miles, more or less, o f similar country
appear to mo a, matter of little importance.
4. The entire absence of recorded Hood heights outside
of the town of Norumutou rendered it impossible to
determine with oven approximate accuracy tho ex-
tent of flooded country.
F.B.—Upon reference to my letter, dated 17th SmrtcmltOT, 1889, it
will be seen that, from tho meagre information then available, I
-estimated the height of the 1870 Hood at l ilmimv, sw 121*77, whumw
this height has been twice exceeded at that place since tho railway was
opened, namely, in January, 1890, observed height IsSITJ, and in fob-
auary, 1891, mean of two olisurvud heights 120*10, and 1 now know
from tho data afforded by tho last two Hoods that this great timid of
1870 reached a height at (llonoro of not less than 129*89, nor more than
134*28—-the weight of evidence leaning towards the greater height,
5. The shortest combined route, and tho mm giving the
least length of lino to construct for the jUlomnirry
and Croydon railways, is tu'tl tho present railway in
Glenoro,
Ci, Absence of reliable information as to the duration of
Hoods.
The Deviation,
The route of tho proposed deviation is shown by u blue lino
on the accompanying tracing. It commences at 3 miles 21
chains (traffic mileage) in the existing railway, and follows
the permanent survey of the second section of tho Clnncnrrv
line (hook plans of which wore supplied to yen on tho 113th
September last) ns far as 17 mil cm 3(1 cluunsj whore it leaves
the Oloncurry lino 'almost at right angles towards tho loft,
making a very direct course towards (-Houoro, generally over


Normanton Railway — Siting at Glenors (14 miles).




Length
Length
. . . Miles.
at Croydon .Railway laid with wooden sleepers 13*
(if old road to take up ... ... 10|
Total miles ... 28i
high and well-drained gravel ridges. This class of country
extends to within 60 chains of the left bank of the Norman
Elver at the railway crossing, the intervening distance being
subject to inundation during high floods only ; as a rule trains
cpuld enter the aiding at (llenoro where the proposed deviation
(in length about 23) miles) will terminate.
That part of the existing railway between 3 miles 21. chains
and about. 18 miles 61 chains will, of course, be taken up on
completion of the, deviation, as it will be of no further service,
and the sleepers will, be needed to complete the line to Croy-
don. BuUlcicnt sleepers for the. deviation can ho provided
thus:—
Mstimnlmi Cost of the Deviation.
lu the absence of .surveys between the point of departure
from the permanent survey of the Cloncimw line at 17 miles
80 chains and (Hcnore (a direct distance of 8 miles, but to
allow for possible contingencies I have estimated the distance
by wiilwivy as S)-| miles), it is not possible to give an exact
estimate of cost, but the statement attached hereto will be a
very clone approximation to the truth.
Exclusive of the actual cost of rails, Joints, and steel
sleepers, now in hand at Normrinton, the estimated cost of
land, clearing, forming, earthworks, fords, public road and
occupation crossings, taking tip and removing 10J miles of
abandoned lino, and laying and lifting 28| miles of new line,
is £7,101 Ida. 9d„ and the cost, including rails, Joints, and
steel sleepers, now hi stock at Normaiiton, is estimated at
£28,818 18s. lOd. (after deducting the value of the rails,
joints, and steel sleepers only in the 10) miles of abandoned
lino), bo that the estimated cost of constructing the deviation,
28) miles in length, averages £1,226 6s. 9d. per mile, of
which £BO2 is. per mile is for new work, and the balance
£l)21 2s. 9d. per mile, represents the value of rails, Joints, and
sleepers, now in stock at Normanton.
On the 11th ultimo (see my letter of that date) I estimated
the probable unexpended cash balance to credit of the Croy-
don Branch, on the completion of the way and works, as
£16,470, bo that the construction of the deviation will not
necessitate any addition to the amount voted for the Croydon
‘Branch.
« Hudldimt Hteol sloopor* were iiroonroil for the whole distance to Croydon,—G. P.


Advantages of the Deviation.
In addition to reducing the length of the flooded country
between Normanton and Glenore from 9| miles to about 60
chains, whilst the latter distance will be much sooner free
from floods than the former, there is the further advantage
that 3 miles 70 chains and II miles 15 chains additional of
the Port Norman-and Cion curry lines. respectively will be
built.
Me Bridge at,Glsnore.
I have not included in the estimate the cost of a higher
bridge at Glenore, because, although a new bridge sufficiently
high to span ordinary freshets would be a great convenience,
there is no particular urgency about the matter.
The smaller tracing shows at a glance the width (maximum
4 miles 7 chains) and depth (maximum 84’2S feet) of the
flooded valley, of the Norman,-River at Q-lenore, as well as the
yery limited extent of work hitherto clone in the way of
bridges and approaches.
* A. high level iron bridge could not be built at this place
'(which is the' best bridge site I know of on the Norman
River) for less, than £150,000. Although the flood of this
year will provide the necessary data to enable mo to determine
the‘most convenient and economical height at which to build
-a.permanent low- level,,bridge at this place, that data is not
-yet to hand, so that I must defer this part of the question for
the present. ‘■
I am, &e.,
GEO. PHILLIPS.
: As the ( Railway Commissioners did not accept my recom-
mendation, to, divert the Croydon railway as described above,
I did not further report upon the question of a permanent
low level bridge at Glenore.
APPENDIX No. 7.
Virginia Mines and American Railways, In/ the Duke of
Marlborough, from the “Fortnightly Review” April,
1891.
I must stop here to comment on the system of
financing a railway undertaking in America generally. It is,
I suppose, needless to state that there is no obligation in
Ameiica to bring railway schemes before Congress. A. series


Normanton Railway —Temporary road at crossing of Norman Rriver (drainage area 18,000 square
miles). Low level timber bridge, with stone approaches, in course of erection, length
708 feet, maximum height 11 feet.




of grants from the local Legislatures of rights to construct a
specified line is all that is required. The route may be varied
at will almost, and it is simply a matter of bargain to purchase
the land, except in the cases alluded to of country that
belonged to the United Suites Government, and all territories
that were unsettled, and where the land did not form part of
a state admitted into the Union. Any man really can lay out
a scheme for a railway in America, as was done with the
West Shore, for the simple purpose of paralleling another
system along its entire route, and either forcing its rival to its
knees or forcing it to buy up the new undertaking at a
squeeze price on its cost
.... . Two facts, however, are worthy of notice in this
respect. In the first place, with all the abuses of financial
management, the average rate per ton mile in the United
States for goods of every sort is under one farthing; while in
our favoured land it is over three farthings, with no greater speed
in transit. We may take it as a rough statement of general
average that railway freights and fares for goods and passen-
gers in the United States, notwithstanding that wages are
more than “ double in America,” is one-third of what it is in
Great Britain. The next fact is, that where a line has any-
thing like a decent local traffic to supplement its through
haulage, any railway in Mortli America cau, and would, earn
6 per cant, on its constructive capital
Mo one who has been to America can fail to be struck with
the Fastness of the' railway interest of that country, It repre-
sents the very life and lungs of trade, and at the same time ia
the predominant factor in preserving political unity of inter-
ests between states separated by thousands of miles of inter-
vening plains, rivers, and mountains. The management as
well as the mismanagement of these vast systems is one of the
marvels of that great continent. As a very observant ac-
quaintance said to me the other day, when we were returning
together on board an ocean steamer, having been over with the
Iron and Steel Institute ;—“ I went to America this autumn
with my son, and we travelled over more than 12,000 miles of
railway all over the continent, and we never had a hitch or
failed to make a connection throughout all the journey.” It
is not a flattering thing, perhaps, to our national pride, but, if
the truth is told, our English railways are toy systems, and
our rolling-stock are toy freight-carriers, compared to the
trains that are run all over America. The immense haulage
of American lines clone on single pairs of mils is marvellous,
and these systems must continue to grow to meet the wants
of increasing population, and. the large centres of permanent
industry and manufacture that exist everywhere.


Msstmot from the 11 Engineering News and American JRmlwag
Journal" of August Mi, 1892, on “ English Eaihmg Prac-
tice in India and the Colonies."
lu no country in the world has the economical construction
of railways been so systematically and thoroughly carried out
as in the United States, It goes without saying that its
rates for transportation are phenomenally low. In our issues
of Pel), IS to March 5, .1892, wo gave very full abstracts from
official statistics, showing that in respect of safety to persons
our railways are only fractionally, if at nil, inferior to the
British. Most of our principal trunk linos are well and safely
built, have good bridges and structures, and a track equal
to, if not superior to, that of European trunk linos, while
signals, the block system, and safety appliances arc becoming
more and more general with the growing increase of the
traffic. Eailways in the undeveloped districts of the far wort
and south, etc., are built in accordance with the traffic they
are expected to accommodate at the time of their completion,
and as the traffic increases and financial circumstances permit
these roads arc pretty steadily improved by the construction,
of new bridges and buildings, heavier track, etc.
This is the main feature of American railway practice, pro-
gressive development as the requirements of traffic warrant,
while that of English railway practice is to have hut one style
for all conditions, and that the costliest, because it has been
handed down by tradition as the “ proper thing.” There has
been some change lately, however. To some extent American
ideas are now being followed. American typos of bridge
design are being introduced, though sometimes imitated very
badly, with a not very clear perception of the principles in-
volved. Elange or T rails are being more extensively used
instead of the English double-head or bull-head.rails,'which
involve so much unnecessary material and espouse. Where
the traffic is heavy, metal tie plates are sometimes used under
the T rails, particularly in India, as noted in our issue of
July 14, but in Australia, many of the timbers used for ties
are so hard as to render tie plates unnecessary (Eng. Nows,
Oet. 31, 1891). English locomotive builders recognize the
advantages of American engines, and advertise engines of the
American type for colonial and foreign railways, though those
engines frequently embody no more “American” features


than such accessories as cowcatchers, headlights, etc., and are
almost never up to the originals in essential features. Still
the introduction of American built locomotives into Australia,
New Zealand, etc., and the growing tendency to adopt certain
features of American design in European locomotive practice,
and the successful results thereby obtained, seem to show that
the advantages of American over English practice will be
more and more generally recognised and eventually adopted
in spite of the strong opposition and dense prejudice hereto-
fore shown.
It is pretty certain that few English engineers, managers or
superintendents of colonial or foreign, railways are personally
familiar with the features of railway practice which have made
our own railway system so successful, but which they never-
theless not uufrequeutly undertake to criticise ; and it would
probably be greatly to the interests of commerce and develop-
ment if the Indian and colonial governments were to obtain
from capable men, familiar with both systems, reports on
American practice in regard to the construction, equipment,
and operation of railways in thinly populated districts, as well
as in thickly populated districts with heavy traffic.
The general features of English and American practice
were compared in an article on “ English and American [Rail-
ways” in, our issue of July 4, 1891, which was based upon
observations made in both countries, and it was there pointed
out that the central principle of American practice has been
to build n. railway at a low first cost to meet existing require-
ments and make some slight return, and thou to improve it
as traffic increases and the line becomes more prosperous.
Of course in many cases the improvements have not kept pace
with the traffic, owing to the desire to make as much money
and avoid as much expenditure as possible. This, however, is
not economy, and these are exceptions which do not affect tbe
principle. When properly carried out it is the only right
principle for the economical (not cheap) construction and
operation of railways, for the interests of the railway com-
panies, the traders, and the community at large, alike. Until
India and the Australian colonies awake to this fact their
material interests will suffer grievously and needlessly.


APPENDIX No. 8.
1888.—NEW ZEALAND.
THE ABT SYSTEM OF RAILWAYS FOR STEEP GRADE
LINES.
(Extract from the JUnf/hieer, 12th November, 188(5.)
Laid on the table by the Hon. K. MUcbolaon, with tiro leave of the Homo.
We called attention last week to some of tho disadvantages
wMeli are inseparably connected with the use of any li ladder-
like ” form of rock for steep-grade railways, and wo mentioned
that a system of rack has boon invented by which these diffi-
culties are satisfactorily overcome. We now proceed to
describe this system, ns most successfully carried out on the
Blaiikeuburg-Tonne Eailway, in the mountains of tho Harr,,
and which has there afforded a most satisfactory proof of
the practicability of working steep gradients in the most
economical maimer by combining the ordinary system of
adhesion with the use of a peculiar form of central rack.
Mr. Homan Abt, tho inventor, is a well-known Swiss
Engineer, who has been previously for some years associated
with Mr. Eiggonbach in the construction of central-rack
railways.
The Blankonburg-Tanno Eailway opens tip a .large district
of the Harz, and brings the mines of Hnottourodo, the coal-
fields and ironworks of Enobeland, tho stone quarries of
Elbingerode, and the State ironworks of Eothelmotto and
Taiine into connection with the network of Prussian Stale
railways, which had, till tho construction, of the lino under
notice, terminated at tho foot of the mountains owing to the
want existing at that time of means for surmounting the
steep gradient in an economical and satisfactory manner.
The length of the line, which, is of a normal gauge, in 10J
miles, of which 4& miles, or including terminal ends -If- miles,
are provided with a central rack in lengths varying from Id
chains to 77 chains, a practical solution being afforded, by the
mode of working to be now described, of the very interesting
problem of utilising the ordinary adhesion in combination
with a central rack.
There are two watersheds to he surmounted, the second


and highest of which is 1,000 ft. above Hlankenhnrg.* The
prevailing gradient on the central rack portion is 1 in ,16‘6
for a total length of 8 miles 8 chains ; the steepest gradient
on the other portion, worked hy adhesion, is 1 in 40. No
less than 50 per cent, of the line is in curve, the minimum
radius on thoracic being 121 chains, whilst that on the ordi-
nary rail portion is !) chains. The permanent way consists of
stool rails weighing 00 lb. per yard, resting on Schneider’s
improved Vauthorin iron sleepers, which each weigh fiO lb.
The characteristic feature of Abt's system is its departure
from the primitive and “ ladder-rack ” employed hy Eiggenhach
on the Rigi and other railways. Mr. Abt’s rack consists of
throe soft steel bars of rectangular section, f in. thick, -If in.
deep, and 8“ ft. long, provided with involute teeth, and placed
side hy side, each being one (bird of a tooth in front of its
neighbour, as in the well-known Hooke’s gearing. In the
pitch lino of the teeth of the rack the space of the teeth
themselves measures 2j} in., the teeth of the pinions on the
pitch lino 2J in , and the spaces 2«in. The pinion consists of
three separate toothed discs mounted on the same shaft, the
teeth being stopped in the same manner as those of the rack,
and the discs themselves, being connected to the shaft by
moans of springs, are thus allowed a slight play relative to
each other, to take up any trilling irregularities in the spacing
of the teeth. Owing to the plan of placing the bars as
described, above, a fresh cog is engaged in every f in., and at
the moment of engagement live other cogs are in complete
contact. Tho advantage of this arrangement is self-evident;
a smoothness of motion, quite noiseless even at high speeds,
is attained, which was quite impossible with the ladder rack,
whilst the fracture of a tooth—an event which would have
been disastrous with the latter system—is here, owing to the
fact that several teeth are simultaneously in contact, not
followed hy any serious consequence. Tho bars are laid so as
to break Joint with each other, thus giving a practically con-
tinuous structure to the rack, avid equalising throughout the
effect of expansion or contraction from changes of tempera-
ture. With tho length chosen for the bars, and n, distance
between tho sleepers of 2 ft. 101 in , one liar—allowing i ha.
full for expansion—just covers three spans; consequently one
butt joint falls on each chair. On the ladder-ruck system the
rack had, in tho case of curves, to bo specially designed and
constructed for each radius; with tho system under notice tho
aiuuo form of rack can ho used for curves as for tho straight
road, and the strains arc considerably reduced. No difficulty
whatever has arisen from snow or mud even during- very
* See lingo Cl for actual details of height.—S. P.


severe winters. A very important feature of tho Bystom w
the means provided for insuring that the_ pinion enters the
rack, without necessitating a reduction of the speed of the
train. The automatic entering rail, about 10 ft. long, is hinged
at one end to the rack, and towards its other end is iu the
form of an inclined plane, the teeth gradually increasing in
height from oto the height of the teeth on the rack. Under
this end of the entering rail are placed strong spiral springs
to admit of vertical play of the rail. Should the tooth of the
pinion not gear immediately on entering, they gradually
adapt themselves within a few feet of distance travelled over.
This arrangement has been found to answer perfectly.
Tho locomotives are constructed as tank-engines. The
three axles of the adhesion wheels, which are in front of the
fire-box, are coupled, A Bissel truck is placed under the
foot-plate. In working order each of the driving axles has a
load of 14*5 tons, and the Bissel axle of 12'4 tons. The fuel
and water are carried principally by the latter, so that the
variation in quantity has very little influence on the adhesive
jiower of the engine. There are two pairs of cylinders —one
tor the adhesive and one for the cogged wheels—with separate
steam pipes and independent action, the former outside, the
latter inside of the smoke-box. Steam is only admitted to tho
latter pair of cylinders when the engine has entered tho raok-
seetious of the line.
TJie toothed gearing is supported by an entirely separate
■frame resting on the two outside axles of the adhesion wheels,
so that the grip of the toothed wheels is in no way affected
by the play of the springs. The frame can bo lifted to allow
for wear and tear of the tires, and instead of the whole lining
a dead load when not in action, it adds to the adhesive power
of the engine when working as an ordinary locomotive.
The two rack wheels are coupled, the' rear one Being the
driver. With the ladder rack it was found to be impossible
to couple thus two toothed wheels, owing to the inequalities
in the pitch of the teeth. Each of the pinions is fitted with
two disc brakes worked from the same spindlo; a second
spindle brakes the leading and trailing wheels of tho adhesion,
axles. In addition to this there are two separate air brakes,
one for the adhesion cylinders and tho other for the rack
cylinders. The other fittings are much the same as in an
ordinary locomotive, except that, owing to there Being two
complete engines under one boiler, many of thorn tiro dupli-
cated. The weight of the engines in working order is 56*0
tons, and cost about £3,500 each for the 4 ft. S| in. gauge.
The engine can haul a train of 120 tons up the gradient of
1 in 10*6 at a speed of 7i miles per hour, or the same train


«|> %> gmdlonts of 1 in 40 at a speed of 15* miles per hour,
it being tin 18 possible in orety ease to develop the full power
of tins locomotive, and so to gain time, and diminish the cost
of working. In descending the gradients it is not found
necessary to brake the coaches, as the air brakes ou the
cylinders are sulHcioiU; to control the speed of and stop the
train whim required. _ By this arrangement the usual wear
and (-.ear of the tiros is considerably diuiiiiishofl, but provision
has also boon nmdo for emergencies by fitting the whole of
the rolling stock with Kohorlom friction brakes, which are
under the immediate control of the engine-driver by moans of
a friction reel and continuous cord, and which also apply
themselves automatically on any coupling breaking,
_ The cost, of the Bhinkoulmrg-Tanno Bailway (including
four locomotives, six passenger coaches, two post wagons,
thirty open trucks, six covered trucks, one saloon carriage,
and six ordinary trollies, amounting to £28,500; purchase of
laud, £7,000; stations, £11,000; permanent way, £40,000)
was only £175,000, or about £10,458 per mile. A very care-
ful estimate lias boon made to show what would have been
the cost of constructing, in this case, a simple adhesion rail-
way instead of a combined rack and adhesion lino, considering
the weal lei* area of laud required for the latter and the
economies of construe! ion. The result showed a saving of
about £l,OOO per mile in favour of the Aht system, the
economy being especially noticeable in the items of excavation
and masonry, the former being about three and a-half times
and the latter about six limes larger for the simple adhesion
line than for the Abt system. Railways upon the Abt system
tiro being constructed at Jjohosten, and at the extensive slate
quarries of Mir, Oertel in Bavaria. Wo understand that Mr,
Abt has also submitted to the Swiss Federal Council a pro-
posal io build a lino of railway on his system up the Bhoue
Valley from Bring, the present terminus of m Western
Itaihvay of Hwiteeriand, to join the St, C-otlmrcl line at Airolo,
iu .Italy, thus opening up the. Upper Valais, and bringing the
'Western .Railway Into direct communication with the railways
of Northern Italy. The estimated cost of this lino of 88
miles is £{120,(100—-about £24,210 per mile.
Those of our readers who desire further particulars as to
the Aid system, all the details of which appear to have been
most carefully and ingeniously worked out, wo would refer to
the very valuable paper on the subject road in March, 1880,
before the American Society of ’Civil Engineers, by Mr.
Walton W. Evans, M. Am, Hoc. 0.8., and published in the
fifteenth volume of the “ Transactions ”of that Society. To
this paper we have to acknowledge our indebtedness for some


of the data given above. Mr. Evans sums up the advantages
of the Abt system by stating that, in his opinion, “ the rack,
which thus far had been regarded more as a sold of makeshift
to be applied in extraordinary cases which required extra-
ordinary means, lias been advanced by Mr. Abt into a most
important element in the planning of new roads, or in the
economical operation of old ones.’ New and vast fields are
thus opened, up to railway enterprise, and roads which never
could have been thought of on account of enormous expense
can now be built and operated at so much lower cost that
they will prove safe and paying investments for capital.”*
The following is a statement of the traffic and working ex-
penses of the Blankenburg-Tanno Railway for the year
JBB7; —
Number of passengers... ... ... ... ... 58,300
Weight of goods (English tons) ... ... ... 118,103
Total train mileage (English miles) ... ... ... 58,008
Cost per train mile for all charges ... ... ... 2». 9'Bd.
APPENDIX No. 9.
SURFACE RAILWAYS IN INDIA.
“ Engineering ,” £9«d November, 1889. ’.Page SIS, .
*#»#*###
From Amhalla to the Sutlej River the line crosses an
immense number of waterways, many of winch are the so-
called lost rivers, whose waters ultimately disappear in the
great Indian Desert. Dor some reason that is not quite
evident, the former effluents of the Indus system that debouch
from the hills to the eastward do not now carry anything like
the steady quantities of water they formerly did —although
at times, with heavy rains in the foot hills, they still come
down in tremendous spates that last but a few hours, and
bring with them, as all lull torrents do, immense volumes of
silt. At some point or other in the course of each such
waterway a bar has silted up the defined channel, and Just
above it the water of a spate fans out and covers a wide tract
of country. While it lasts this is a very profitable form of
natural irrigation. But, unfortunately, each spate brings
with it a share of detritus, and as it cannot force this over
the bar, it necessarily deposits it higher up the channel, and
thus the bar, which forms the root of the fan, is perpetually
* Horn,—The payor id accompanied by detailed drawings of the iociimotive and
raelE-ratl, also a longitudinal auction of the route between lllonlceubuHt and
Twine.—6. P.


retreating up stream ami nearer to tlie hills * Of Into years
the consequences of this action have ’been very disastrous for
tlio railway lino between the Jumna and the Sutlej, for the
rivers, as they once wore, with fairly defined and deep
channels that wore bridged twenty-five .years ago with perfect
success, now “ spill ” or fan out their waters over the lands
above the lino, and for several years past, in spite of the
addition of immense lengths of Hood openings, ouch recurring
July and August has soon the railway broached and com-
munication jeopardised, if not entirely cut off. As the
cheapest and best way out of this class of catastrophe, Colonel
Conway Gordon, the present Director-General of Hallways
in India, lias proposed to lower the level of the rails for,
perhaps, miles together, till Hush with the natural surface of:
the absurdly slight depressions that scarcely differentiate one
“ spill ’’ from another.
# # $ # # #
—From Correspondent ut Rawalpindi, 38ih Oat., .1889,
APPENDIX No. 10.
Mvtraels from Bulletin Wo. 4 of the- Forestry .Division of the
U. 8. Department of AyHcultura, beiny a “ Report dated
81et January, 1890, on fun Substitution of .Metal for
Wood in Railroad Ties, by K li. tinmell Trntman , CLII,
together with a discussion on .PraeUeuhte Mummies in
the use of Wood for Railway .Purposes,'' by B. M. Femme,
Ohiaf of Forestry I) inis ion.
In Ills introductory remarks, Mr. Penunv says ; —
. . , . . . ‘‘It has boon shown repeatedly, all assertions
to the contrary notwithstanding, that our annual consumption
o'li wood products at present exceeds double the amount of
wood material that can possibly reproduce itself annually on
the urea covered with wood' growth. It is therefore of
national interest, and within the lino of work of this division,
to call attention to the necessity of husbanding timber supplies,
and to furnish all and any information that may lead to a more
economical use of these supplies, or a substitution of other
material where this is practicable. While such economy is
desirable in nil directions, it is especially bo in regard to tie-
timber, since, as has been stated, for this purpose the young
promising crop of the future is utilized prematurely —and that
of the best quality, and of the most valuable timbers.
Furthermore, it should bo known that for those who furnish
* A watercourse of this description Is crossed at a vary oblique angle at about II)
niiltia on the Northern (TowtiHvlUo) railway, willed I understand caused considerable
trouble In maintenance until the formation was lowered, practically to the natural,
surface.— Ci-.P,


SmaiON I.—Ktiiiom
UmuitvloH.
LcmHltiwIl'
iuUh.
Howls ami
1‘ktCH.
< tl-OHB ties.
Total motitl
trunk.
Total
truck.
Milos.
Milos.
Milos.
Miles.
Mitel.
Great Britain
,,
70-00
70-00
20,000
Franco
r.2-1‘2
02-12
21,700
Holland
8-0(1
.‘121-30
320-42
3,210
Belgium
lid'00
no-no
3, .144
Germany' 1
?,,rm-ra
3,22.1-12
8,780-04
2.1,144
Austria and Hungary
(16-no
. r )(i-37
122-1)3
14,942
Switzerland
-an
303-1)8
*.‘{07 -40
1,810
Spain
211-08
7-10
208-78
1,772
Portugal
•02
•02
1,120
Italy
7,202
Sweden and Norway
T.()
T>()
1,144
Denmark
18-U)
18-10
1,248
Russia,
17,082
Turkey
70-08
‘ 70-08
m
Rouimuiia ...
. ♦.
1,401
Sorvia
321
Greece
...
...
•380
Totals of Biu-opu ...
3,(137-30
an-tis
(1,23(1-85
10,222-09
132,071
these supplies for the railroad companies, there is but small,
if any, profit in the trade. The ties are in most eases brought
to the railroads by holders of small wood lots, and the price
paid is hardly more than fair compensation for labour in
malting and hauling the tics, no value being placed upon the,
material itself. The substitution of metal for wood—even if
this were effected readily and without delay-—would therefore
not result, as may be anticipated by some, in a loss to the
owner of wood lands. Ho will only be prevented from killing
the calf, a,a it wore, before it is full-grown, while it Ims little
or no value, and he is paid only for the slaughtering ; in the
end his crop, by being utilized later, will yield him propor-
tionately more in quantity and value.
But it is not a consideration of initial cost that makes the
substitution of metal ties desirable and profitable. It is
superiority of track, permanence of road-bod, safety, reduced
cost of maintenance, and hence ultimutu saving mid economy,
that recommend the metal tie, as will bo seen from a study of
the experiences in foreign countries here presented. It will
bo a. matter of astonishment to our railroad engineers to lind
that almost 30,000 miles of railroad track lies on metal ties,
which means over 15 per cent, of the railroad mileage of the
world outside of the United (States and Canada. The claim,
then, that metal ties arc an experiment, and their general
adoption premature for lack of experience, will have to lie
abandoned, us based simply on ignorance in regard to the mil
state of affairs.”
* Olllulivl Htutimwul ot totals.


Section - II.—A erica.
< Countries,
Bowls and
plates.
Cross-ties.
roll metal
trank.
Miles.
887-00
120-00
14-25
47-75
11(5*50
40-50
02-00
2-50
Total
track.
Miles.
1,228
} 1,538
14
50
217
1,730
45
78
| 290
Egypt
Algeria
Tunis
Abyssinia
Portuguese Territory (S. Africa)
Natal
Oape Oolony
S. African Republic (Transvaal)
Reunion
Senegal
Mauritius
Totals for Afrim
Miles,
851 -m
sb ; oo
(52-00
Miles.
35-25
120-00
14-26
47-75
30-50
40-50
2-50
993-75
206-75
1,290-60
5,202
Section
III.—Asia.
Countries,
Howls and
plates.
Cross-tics.
Tofc’l metal
track.
Total
track.
British India
Ceylon
Sumatra
Java, and Dutch Possessions
Malay States
China
Japan
Asia Minor
Asiatic Russia
Cochin China
Totals for Asia
Miles.
3,312-25
Miles.
3,912-25
00-00
Miles.
9,224-60
90-00
Miles,
13,245
182
90
720
81
85
806
372
960
523
5,312-25
4,002-25
9,814-50
19,108
Section IV.—South America,
Countries.
Centbai
Bowls and
plates.
Amewc
Cross-ties,
A, AKD M
Tofc’l mefea
track.
EXIOO.
Total
track.
Miles.
Miles.
Miles,
Miles.
Argentine Republic
3,350-15
193-41
3,543-50
4,050
Paraguay
90
Uragnay
343
Chili
i-oo
i-oo
1,830
Pem
837
Bolivia
48
Brazil ...
82-40
3-72
8(5-18
0,070
Ecuador
94
British Guiana
...
22
Venezuela ... ...
23-00
57‘25
80-25
182
United States of Columbia
164
San Salvador ...
33
Costa Kioft
...
• i It)
Nicaragua
...
32
Guatemala...
...
...
105
Honduras
37
Mexico
••
77-00
'77-00
5,000
Totals ...
8,455-01
332-38
8,787-0i
10,4(51


Section V,-
-North America.
Countries.
Cross-ties
Total mutat truck.|
Total trank.
Miles.
Miles.
i
1
Miles,
United States
,, ,
2.00
2-00
101,000
Canada
...
...
18,105
Totals of North America ...
2'00
2-00
i
174,105
Section VI. — AusTitAr.Asta.
Countries.
Cross-ties.! Total metal track.
Total track.
MiluB.
I Miles.
Miles.
South Australia
14(1
i 140
1,321
Queensland
New South Wales
40
40
2.103
2.103
Victoria'
llii
West Australia
100
New Zealand
1,343
Tasmania
375
Totals for Australasia
ISO
13(1
10,040
Summaiiy ov Totals.
Section.
Loimitmli-
UalB.
Bowls and
platen.
t'rOUH'tiUH.
Total ittnltti
trunk.
Miles.
Miles.
Miles.
Mill's.
Nr>, 1
3,037'3!)
2151-03
0,230-35
10,222-00
No. 2
003-75
200-75
1,200-50
No, 3
0,312-20
4,002-25
0,314*50
3,737-00
No, 4
> .
3,405-1)1
332*33
No. si
2'00
2*110
No,«
130*00
130*00
Total
3,1137'3!)
10,013-20
11,050-23
24,803*03
Note.—The use of loiiKltmlimils is helm? ttlmmlumsl.
Tim howls ami tiliitwt lire
maiiUy in imrYleo in hot eimnfcriuH. with Miiceial emulitioiiH of trallii?, n«
in 1 mi in and
Smith Araorien, The cvoas-tlos are timid under nmuUtlmiM of cHimitis, (mill,-, ,v-e„ nitwt
nearly according to the conditions obtaining
in thi« country.
PHttCENTAIiH
uv Metal Track Mu.hahk.
— ■
Total metal
track.
Total track.
l*urmitn(i« tif
Mittal track.
Section : —
Miles.
Miles.
No. 1
10,222-0!)
132,071
7*74
No. 2
1 .SOOTH)
5,202
*24-30
No. 3
,
0,314‘cO
10,100
48-75
No. 4
3,737-Oil
10,4(11
10--11)
No, fi
2-00
174,105
No, (i
, ,
1,30-00
10,040
1 -75
West Indies
1,241
Total
24,303-OH
301
380
0*85
Total mileage of railway with metal track ..
mites t!4.«i;i
Total milqugo of railways of
this world (exclusive of United Kittles mot
nHUm 1KT.721
Percentage of railway with metal track (oxduMvo of United Htoten uml
Canada) percent, M-'Jl
Watson, Ferguson & Co., Printers, Brisbane,


