

/M
V M
/ ifl BA
fiuX M v\ J
I J 1 \ • \llB,
V I /i/m^
w \ / \ /i
■l x&WmSSS' rMlll^m
■ /mL^^BtBM// /RT W \
fliy / A\
> / ' \
n^ i Vffii : W ’ im >A.
■HMwrVifK v#
ml min a \M r / /Jr^
■iffW mXu m i W / /Wflk
QelmBt . I yT
IRATE S GOLD


>
»>\v




✓


hi >• i w
J M J aJ ij 1 1 n
A proud and lovely ship from stem to stern.




ijliL* . . .
• ~ (s*& & G
IS PRESENTED T
from
C 5»


*


I PI^A T M' G 0 IP
/ sura C WILLIAMS
\* / illustrate® BY
I W^hM
THEW.H HONE 1 /PUBLISHING
COMPANY SYDNEY
\
\
' J \


\
m


w/
»
PIRATES' GOLD
One day, not very long ago. a pretty mermaid whose
name was Rill set out in search of a King s Ransom.
As you know, a King’s Ransom has always been a most
difficult thing to find, ever since those days of long ago when
Kings were sometimes ransomed. In these modern times
it is practically impossible to find such a thing anywhere,
search where you may, and it is doubtful whether our
mermaid would have undertaken so awkward a task had it
not been for the dire threats of a wicked old shark.
For Selwyn the Shark held Rill s favourite sister im-
prisoned in a horrid cave under the sea by the simple expedient
of sitting firmly in the only entrance, and he loudly announced
his intention of eating her for supper that very evening unless
someone brought him instead a King s Ransom.
Of course he felt perfectly certain that no one would


bring Kim a King s Ransom, because be bad never seen one
in bis life, and bad never met anyone else wbo bad seen one
either. But be prided bimself upon being tbe terror of tbe
neighbourhood and enjoyed teasing tbe mer-people in any
cruel way which occurred to him, such as driving them into
a frenzy by loudly remarking now and then that be was
growing hungrier and hungrier every moment.
Having bad previous experience of Selwyn’s healthy
appetite the imprisoned mermaid’s friends and relations,
instead of giving way to dark despair, very practically busied
themselves netting large quantities of fish which they spread
temptingly before Selwyn at two-hourly intervals, thus
endeavouring to take the edge off his hunger. A heart-
breaking situation, it was, from beginning to end, because
the more they brought him the more he ate. And no one
could cany a word of comfort or cheer to the fair prisoner in
the dark cave, for none could get past Selwyn the Shark to
communicate with her.
While most of the sea-folk were away busily fishing,
Rill, our own particular mermaid, sat alone, wondering what


to do, when a friendly little fish whose name was Gurgle
came swimming up to her and whispered in her ear.
At first she only listened to him because she was too
unhappy, even to push him away, but presently she left off
crying about her sister’s appalling plight to listen to what he
said. Then suddenly she turned to stare at the little fish and
gasped, “You don’t mean it!”
This reply appeared to vex Gurgle a great deal, for he
let out a lot of bubbles, threw a back somersault and swim-
ming up to her ear again shouted indignantly, “Of course I
mean it! Haven’t I told you I saw it with my own eyes?
Nibble my fins if I didn’t!’’
Then why,’’ asked Rill the mermaid, “did you never
mention it to me before?
Why should I? Gurgle asked, gulping slightly as he
spoke. What use are gems and precious metals to you and
I in the usual course of events, living as we do, at the bottom


of the sea? But if tKat hungry old gourmand of a shark
wants gold and silver and gems before he will release your
sister, Pink Coral, I am the fish who knows where to find
them!”
“Where can you find them?” queried Rill, on a note of
disbelief.
“I have already told you.” said Gurgle with as much
dignity as he could muster. “I have told you, but you won’t
believe me! Now listen to this. In the holds of a fine old
wreck at the bottom of the sea not far from the end of the
reef. I have seen it. I have also touched it! Gems and
bullion and golden candlesticks. Chests and coffers and
barrels full to over-flowing with gleaming riches enough to
make a King s Ransom and more besides.”
“How did it get there?” asked Rill.
“It’s always been there.” asserted the fish. “For cen-
turies perhaps. It has always been there within living
memory. Every little fish hereabouts will tell you the same
thingl”
Then why, questioned Rill, why have I never heard
of it before?”


\j ** <y ' s v £p
Gurgle came swimming up to Rill and whispered in her ear


/
*


A wreck is not an uncommon thing in the sea,
i
announced Gurgle putting on a superior air. It is not
every fish who has the perception to discover where this wreck
differs from other wrecks. Perhaps you will have noticed,
Rill my dear, that most fish are not particularly noted for
intelligence! Even seeing this treasure they might not realize
the value of what they saw. That, he concluded, wi th a
complacent flip of the tail, 'is where lam different!” And
he darted off to describe several very graceful circles and a
figure of eight before returning to her side.
Stop showing off,” commanded Rill rather unfeelingly,
“and tell me what you saw there.”
“Now you are interested, aren t you? said Gurgle. “Oh.
let me see. Gold, silver, precious gems, golden plate, coins
from a dozen different countries, bullion, treasure chests,
coffers of jewels, coronets, he reeled off this list off-handedly;
paused to emit a dozen bubbles and started again, Fans of
inlaid ivory, goblets^-”
But Rill interrupted him.
"Are you positively certain you saw as much as that?
she enquired, eyeing Gurgle in a manner half hopeful, half


( c ft~ e — - c ,
c r* r r \ or
, <' rJ Qr^<OjC£oiV XV^


suspicious. "It would take a terrible lot of gems and bullion
to make up a King’s Ransom. Perhaps you just went to sleep
and dreamed it, or bad a hallucination or something. It
sounds like a hallucination to me!
'lt wasn’t a hallucination at alii” declared Gurgle with
much emphasis. "By Neptune girl! Won’t you believe me?
Only a few months ago I spent a most pleasant afternoon
swimming in and out of cracks and crevices, cabins and
holds, inspecting everything, and I tell you that vessel contains
enough wealth to satisfy Selwyn Shark’s greed, and more
besides, even though I can’t imagine what he wants to do
with it I ’
He paused, and after a moment of deep thought Rill
asked him.
"Is the wreck far away? ’
About five knots across the ocean floor, as the crab
walks'—an easy swim."
"And can you rind the place again?
“With my eyes shut!"
"Then 1 beg of you take me there at once, and don’t


waste a minute, commanded the mermaid, darting up.
*We II see if this treasure ship is still there! You are a clever
little fish Ourgle, my dear, and I do really thank you sincerely
for telling me about this ship. This King s Ransom is
actually a very serious matter, and if what you say is true,
possibly something may be done to save my sister.”
Haven 11 told you— began Gurgle with some asperity
Never mind that now. Gurgle my love, said the
mermaid in a tone of mild rebuke. Don t waste valuable
time in useless argument. Just lead on and I shall follow.
Make haste! Not a moment is to be lost!”
So Gurgle, emitting one gulp of exasperation and six or
seven bubbles in quick succession, darted off, without waiting


for a second bidding, steering a course amongst the seaweed
approximately nor -nor -east, Rill following.
Tbey bad been travelling for some time in tbis manner
wben sbe overtook bim, an anxious expression on ber face
again.
' Gurgle, my dear,” sbe said, "you could not tell me, I
suppose, bow mucb wealth and gems actually go to make a
King’s Ransom? ’
Tbis caused Gurgle to pause for a moment or two, while
frowning and grave, be gave tbe matter bis consideration.
Finally, be said, "That should depend largely upon tbe King,
I should say. Some might have gone cheaper than others.
However, if we don’t know exactly how much it took to a


sovereign or two, I don’t suppose Selwyn knows either. And
what appears enough for a King should surely do for a
mermaid. Come along now. Let us push on. Past those
cliffs, through the grasses over the dunes, and we II he there
nearly.
So on they swan side hy side for some time, until
presently in the soft green half-light Rill and the little fish
approached a beautiful and stately ship, her hull embedded
deeply in the sand, and listing a little, as though still leaning
to the wind. Her tall masts holding aloft tattered sails which
once had billowed and trembled in the breeze. A proud
and lovely ship from stem to stern, battered old wreck
though she was.
And as Rill paused to gaze admiringly up at this ancient
vessel a slight movement close at hand caused her to turn
her head in time to see a gentleman striding across the sand
towards her. A tall gentleman in a beautifully cut coat of
greenish hue, a not unpleasant air of command and dis-
tinction in every line of him.
Rill felt that this was an unexpected turn. ’Oh I” she
exclaimed, and in her surprise she sank down very gracefully


upon a convenient sea-chest. Oh I she breathed a little
shyly as the gentleman advanced smiling in a friendly
manner. “I did not expect to find anyone here! Who are
you ?”
“I, Ma’am?” replied the gentleman bowing slightly.
‘‘My name is Dare, Captain Dare, at your service, ma’am.”
“Have you been here long? she ashed hoping he would
go away again.
Some people would call it a goodish spell, 1 believe,
ma’am,” he replied good-naturedly. Two hundred years
and morel Ever since the Genevieve went down!
“Then you are her Captain? gasped Rill the mermaid,
noticing the gold braid and glittering buttons.
Captain Dare bowed again, this time a trifle deeper.
“ I was her Captain, ma am. She was a fine, ship, the
Genevieve 1
‘‘She is a fine ship still,” Rill remarked. ‘‘l never saw
a lovelier sight in my life!”
‘‘Nor I either,” agreed the Captain at once. But you


should have seen her when she was afloat! That was a
sight to gladden the heart,’’ And suddenly his chin sank
to his chest and he took to pacing up and down, moodily,
as though wrapped in thought.
“He seems to have forgotten about me already,” said
Rill to herself. “Indeed I might just as well not be here at
all. In fact I rather wish I were not. I wonder where Gurgle
is,” and she looked about for him, but could find no sign of
Gurgle anywhere, and concluding that he might have
slipped inside one of the square ports to peep at the
treasure again decided to wait for him.
Although,” thought the mermaid regretfully, “nothing
can be done about it now, alas. If this man is the captain
of the ship, no doubt all the treasure belongs to him and
he would not give it to Selwyn Shark. Oh dear, what ever
shall we do.”
Just then Captain Dare paused in his pacing to glance
at Rill. \ es, ma am, said he lifting his head and squaring
his shoulders. ou see before you the wreck of the good
ship “Genevieve”, and I am the shade of Captain Dare.”
The shade?” queried Rill


‘Vlfz/ name is Dare, Captain Dave, at your service, ma’am.




“Exactly, he replied. “The shade, the spectre, the
spirit, the what you will. Tis no matter. lam Captain Dare!
You have heard of Captain Dare, of course! he concluded
with smiling confidence.
"No,” exclaimed Rill with I ess tact than candour. “I
can’t say that I have! ’
“You never heard >—> “began .the Captain loudly,
regarding her with a haughty stare, and then checking
himself coughed behind his hand and began again. “I fear
I do not always hear as clearly as of old. The salt water
in my ears, no doubt. Do you mind saying that again?’’
Rill felt surprised. “I but remarked,’’ she explained,
“that I had never heard of you before!
By the Lord Harry!’’ breathed the ship’s Captain
ho arsely, staggering slightly as one who had received a
blow. You have heard of Drake, I suppose ma’am?
Raleigh? Hawkins?
Naturally,” Rill agreed, wondering what she had
said to upset the gentleman. “All the sea-folk have
All the sea-folk have


heard of those great sailors. But I never heard of Dare I
‘ You astound me!” Here he lifted his voice and
roared. "Hi there!” so suddenly that the mermaid leaped
up in alarm. And immediately, in answer to his call,
came hurrying from every direction, the various members
of the Captain s crew.
From over the bulwarks they came, from tween-decks
and galley, from out of tattered rigging by means of
rope and ladder, and over the reedy ocean floor.
Swarthy, angular men for the most part, half clad
in gaudy rags, rings in ears, weapons at sides, a colourful


motley crew obeying tbeir leader’s summons. As tougb
a crew of sea dogs as ever sailed the seas.
"Alas,’’ si gbed Rill to herself, ‘that settles it. I
may as well return home again the minute I find Gurgle.
I only have to look at this crew to know that I couldn’t
wheedle half a doubloon out of any one of them. Our
cause is lost! and aloud she said to Captain Dare.
‘These sailors, I presume, are also, shades, spectres, and
what you will, Captain?’’


I
But Captain Dare, did not hear her, he was glaring
past her at his men, “This lady,” he shouted addressing
them, a hitter sneer curling his lips, “this lady says she
has never heard of Captain Dare!” and he stared at
them, glancing from side to side the better to observe
the effect of this staggering announcement.
Hustle, the mate, stepped forward. He was a
smallish man with a shrewd hatchet face, a blue chin,
and the air of being on excellent terms with himself.
Who is the lady, sir? he enquired.
My name is Rill, she answered for herself, adding
unnecessarily, I am a mermaid!’
I never heard of the lady, sir! affirmed the mate
stoutly. He was a diplomat in his way, and had long


prided himself upon Kis tactfulness and resource.
It pleased Kim to see the captain smile, but rather to
Kis surprise the mermaid smiled also.
“I don’t suppose you have,” she said pleasantly,
adding, ' forgive me for troubling you, but have you seen
a little fish about here?
“A fish ma’am!’’ said the mate taken aback, "seen
a little fish? Lor love yer, ma’am, we see about 500
little fishes around here every blessed hour. Fish? All
kinds of fish! fat fish, long fish, striped fish, spotted fish,
sea horses, octopus. If it’s fish you want, ma’am, we II
0
pack you a barrel full in about five minutes and welcome! ’
"Please do not trouble,’’ begged Rill, “the one I
want is a friend of mine whose name is Ourgle. If I
may wait here a little while he is sure to return. You
will permit me to remain here a short space, will you
not, Captain Dare?
"By all means."
Then," said Rill settling herself more comfortably
upon the sea chest, pray you tell me about yourselves*
What are you doing down here?


Hustle replied.
“We are just taking care of the old ship, ma’am.
She’d he lonely without us, and that’s a fact. We may
he Pirates, hut if we have a softness for anything it is
for the old ship!’’
“Are you really Pirates?’’ exclaimed Rill. ‘ How
very interesting. I have never had the pleasure of meeting
Pirates before. They always seem to be Privateers men,
if you ash them. Letters of mark, you know. They say
there is a tremendous difference.
“And,’’ asked Captain Dare, holding himself erect
and looking very severe indeed. “What is the difference,
may I ask?
Rill smiled sunnily round the gathering circle of
picturesque ruffians, and shaking her head exclaimed,
I haven t the least idea! I’ve never been able to make
it out. Maybe the successful Pirates were called, by
courtesy, Privateers men and the unsuccessful Pirates
were just pirates!’’
At this they all laughed aloud, and made such a
noise about it that Rill uncoiled her long tail in alarm


I
again, and prepared to swim away, but the captain
stepped forward with a new show of friendliness and
begged her to remain a little longer still.
“We see you are a lady of rare character and
understanding,” be said, “and I beg of you to stay and
talk with us awbile. Tis very dull down here, sink me,
and we don t bave such a charming visitor once in a
century.”
Just a little while, then,” she agreed, coiling herself
up on the treasure chest again. “Perhaps you would
like to tell me how you and your fine vessel came to


be down here at the bottom of the sea. Was it a sea fight?
“Not a fight,’’ sighed the mate. No fight at all,
ma’am, ’twas the reef tore a great hole in her hull large
enough to drive a coach and four through. You can
see it for yourself if you look. A very sad occurrence.”
“Would it had been a fight!” cried Captain Dare with
flashing eyes, commencing to pace to and fro again.
“A fight! A fight at sea. There is some satisfaction
in a battle at sea. That is the way for men to go. A
fight to the death, and let the best men win ! A fight
at sea! The vessels grappled together, grinding and
straining together. The clash and rasp of steel on steel.
The heat and the sweat, cannon smoke amongst the
rigging, the curses and yells of angry men! Shouting,
heaving, thrusting, parrying. The decks slippery with
here he chanced to glance at the mermaid, and all the
fire and eagerness went out of his manner. * Just slippery,”
he concluded rather lamely.
Slippery with what? enquired Rill
Oh just salt water and such, my dear,” replied


m in^JMif 1 ; mniii woiiii^ | '
Z' N /"N^
/# _
X *Jg
family have lived in these waters for countless generations.




the captain in an offhanded manner. “But oh, just to
pile her up on a reef and sink her. Just to butt her
into a cursed, jutting reef!” and here Captain Dare
forgetting the mermaid s presence altogether, let go a
string of oaths and expletives against the character of
this reef in particular and all reefs in general, until Rill
placed her hands over her ears and screamed.
“Well don’t blame our poor reef entirely!’’ she shouted,
very much affronted. “Surely it was partly your own
fault. Our reef couldn’t
forget. You should have
like the things you said
have lived in these waters
get out of your way, don t
been more care ful. I don t
about our reef. My family
for countless generations, and
lam greatly attached to the spot! At this point
observing that the captain was speaking again she removed
her hands in order to listen to him.
Indeed I crave your pardon, ma am, he was saying,
struggling with a smile. “We feel convinced that your
reef is a very fine one as reefs' go, and I did not seek
to wound your feelings. Being a seaman I am not partial
*
to reefs of any kind never knew a seaman w T ho was!


Here Hustle the mate stepped forward gleefully to
exercise a little of his tact, and enact the part of a peacemaker.
“I trust you will not let us quarrel about a mere
reef, ma’am,” he begged. ‘For myself, I feel a great
affection for this reef of yours, have lived near it for
years now, and even after all this time I can unhesitatingly
state that I would as soon be wrecked on this reef as
on any reef in the world, and that’s a fact.” Here he
lowered his voice to a confidential, if hoarse whisper, and
continued. “You must forgive the Captain for being a
trifle prejudiced on the subject of reefs, owing to his
not wishing to be drowned that voyage! The rest of us
didn t mind so much, owing to us not having so much
to lose, as it were! Oh, please don’t go! I haven’t
seen a pretty face for a couple of hundred years, in fact
longer. It is very pleasant to have a young lady to
talk to. Most young ladies don t take to pirates, somehow.
Shy off they do. I had something of the sort in mind
when I wrote my memorable song, We didn’t mean no
harm. Would you care to hear it, ma’am?”
Being a kind-hearted mermaid, Rill replied that she
would like to hear it, and without waiting For her to
change her mind the mate burst into song.


THE
MATE’S
Strange how folks don’t take to usl
Wg didn’t mean no harml
We held our lives a little light.
Sometimes got a trifle tight
Quick to draw, and quick to fight,
We didn’t mean no harm!
Our Captain was a gentle soul
He didn t mean no harm!
He sank a Spanish ship or two.
Marooned the Captain, sank the crew,
Twos quite the usual thing to do.
He didn’t mean no harm!


When out upon a treasure hunt,
We didn’t mean no harm!
The Spaniards always got the worst,
We cleared their holds of treasure first.
Then sank them fust to quench their thirst
We didn t mean no harm J
When the skull and crossbones flew,
We did n’t mean no harm!
We laughed to see the folk take fright,
They didn’t want to stay and fight,
But clapped on sail with all their might.
We didn t mean no harm J
At the sack of Santa Cruz,
We didn’t mean no harmJ
You should have heard them bullies Cuss,
We strung ’em up without no fuss J
Well, it was either them or usl
We didn’t mean no harml


o
o
'Why, that s a splendid song! pronounced Rill. For
a man who implies that he is just the mere shadow of his
former self, I call that a grand song I Then looking round,
she cried, “Can anyone else sing?”
"We all can, ma’am, if you will honour us by listening,
said one of the crew whose head was tied up in a gaily striped
handkerchief, and just as he turned away to speak to his
friends Rill was fearfully startled to hear a hissing voice
whisper in her ear.
“Gem-encrusted snuff-boxes! worth a fortune if a
farthing! ’ And turning her head in sudden alarm, she
humped her nose against little Gurgle, who was swimming
near her ear bubbling with excitement.
“Where?” grasped Rill


You’re sitting on eml
What?” she cried, leaping up.
Inside the sea-chest, girl, there is a crack in the side
and I’ve teen investigating! And twelve sapphire studded
goblets! The plunder in this place makes one’s head swim!
Oh, be quiet, ’ whispered Rill desperately. "If you
talk like that someone will hear you. I did not know that
these people were here. But as they are, the whole case is
altered. You know very well we can’t touch anything that
belongs to other people!’’
We II see! ’ replied Gurgle in a fierce hiss, and sped off
to investigate some more. It was with real relief that Rill
heard the crew break into a rolling sea song, to a jolly air.


THE PIRATES SDN
Ohl To sail the Spanish Mainl
To sail the Spanish Main againl
Wasn’t it great?
Pieces of eight.
Bullion, gems and golden plate.
Sail for the Spanish MainJ
Feel the freshing Trade-winds blowl
Treasure in the holds belowl
Wasn’t it grand
Sighting land?
The frothing surf and the golden strand,
Free as the winds that blowl
Tread the heaving decks again.
Ropes a-creaking, sails a-strain,
A Buccaneer fleet
Ready to meet
Death if we must, but never defeatl
Sail for the Spanish Main.


"That’s enough of that.” said Captain Dare, “just as
much as I can stand, sink me! What wouldn’t I give to sail
the Spanish iNlain again. Alas, alas. The wind on your
face, the warmth of the sun!” Then suddenly, pulling him-
self together, he turned to face his crew, and his glance caught
the flash of a white hat and apron. “Hi there, Bun. my
good fellow, he shouted, and a small man whose garments
proclaimed him to he the ship s cook, was pushed forward
by his shipmates.


Moses, the ship's parrot




“You, Bun, you sing us a song! he ordered.
“Me, sir? I, sir? Aye, aye, sir I** stammered Bun the
cook, touching his forelock respectfully and looking terribly
flustered.
“Sing something, shouted Captain Dare.
Oh no, sir; not me, sir; if you don’t mind, sir,” begged
the cook in shocked accents. I really couldn t, truly, sir.
My voice isn t what it was. I haven’t sung a note for hun-
dreds and hundreds of years! I haven’t the music with me,
sir, really.”


Bun, you are a fool! roared Captain Dare, with con-
viction. “Cease quibbling like a nervous young lady in a
parlour, and sing us a song. Many a baudy chanty have I
heard you shout with the others. Have done with your
maidenly excuses and sing us a song. Sing up, man!”
So the cook started in a miserable voice, with every
appearance of reluctance.
1 can make a fine souffle with suitable sauces,
A savoury omelet, a spicy ragout.
I can dish up a dinner of seventeen courses,
Cook a tasty jugged hare, or a plain Irish stewl”
Hold! cried the ship s master. Bilge and barnacles,
man! I asked you to sing me a song, not a page out of the
cookery book!”
I beg pardon, Captain. If it please you, sir, I can only
sing one other song.”
Then sing that, and I II tell you if it pleases me when
I’ve heard it.”
‘'Aye. aye. sir; at once, sir,”
again, on a different tune.
sighed the cook, and started


//' BUN'S SONG
- s /
/
9
Oh! the taverns I left behind me,
And the tankards I quaffed remind me
Of the lasses 1 left behind me
In the Inns.
How 1 wish they were here beside me
To caress, and tease and chide me,
Now that Vm lonely, woe betide me,
For my sins.


How, I wonder, did they regret me,
Or speedily quite forget me,
For they vowed that the sea would get me
Soon or late;
But now that the ocean s claimed me,
The charmers who always blamed me
Proved correct, for it hasn’t tamed me
Up to date
At one time it used to grieve me
When I supposed they might deceive me,
For to a score of them, believe me,
1 was true.
NOW, if ever the darlings find me
They can form a long queue behind me,
With one of them to remind me
Who was whol


At this Captain Dare laughed delightedly. “Very good,
very good indeed, he applauded. "A merry song after my
own heart! And he slapped his knee and nodded and
nodded and laughed again. Then, abruptly, he stopped and
glared at the unfortunate cook.
Bun, my good fellow!’ ’ he reproved him gravely. “That
is not at all the sort of song to sing when a lady is present!
I am surprised at you, sir!’’
I beg your pardon. Captain, sir; but it is the only song
I know. I thought you were aware of it, sir. lam very sorry
indeed if the lady disliked it.
I enjoyed your song immensely, thank you. Bun!” said
Rill, who felt it was time she did something to alter the trend
of this conversation. Then, smiling across at Jet, the negro


cabin boy who stood near-by, bis fine teeth flashing in a large
smile, sbe asked kindly, 'And will yon sing me a song?” But
here Captain Dare put bis foot down in no uncertain manner.
“No!” be exclaimed. "That I won t have! I beard tbat
nigger sing once, but never again while I am tbe master of
this ship! Tbat is final! Not even for you, my dear!” be
added as an afterthought, bowing gravely in Riir s direction.
Just at tbat moment a shrill and raucous voice yelled,
‘Feed him to tbe fishes!” followed by a screech of fiendish
laughter.
"Dear me!” exclaimed Rill aloud. "Whoever was that?”
“Oh! pay no heed, my dear!” said Captain Dare
smoothly, but with an uneasy glance behind him nevertheless.
'That is no one at all, I assure you. Merely Moses, the ship s
parrot. Think no more about it! The poor, pretty bird once
had the misfortune to belong to a Pirate ship, and the rough
fellows appear to have taught him some quaint phrases. Not
our ship, you understand. Another vessel altogether, of
course.
Oh, of course,” mused Rill, "A pretty bird indeed,
but I don t like his voice very much. What is his name?”


“Bun named Kim Moses, I believe, because he reminded
Kim of a friend.”
“Feed Kim to the fishes!” shrieked Moses once more.
OK, dear, dear! Why does he keep repeating that?”
enquired Rill.
“He must have heard it somewhere,” explained Hustle
tactfully, coming forward with his confiding air. “Merely
a jest, a pleasantry, a merry phrase picked up amongst his
former associates!”
“It doesn’t sound very merry to me," objected Rill.
Rather the reverse, in fact. He must have heard somebody
say that often, I fear.”
* Pay no attention to him, ma’am, I beg,” implored
Hustle. Have you observed the very cunningly wrou ght-
iron work in our poop lanterns* ma’am? Something quite
out of the usual, I may say. Quite the very latest thing in
lighting arrangements they were the year we sank. You will
observe as how the port lantern is a size larger than the star-
board one, owing to a slight mistake. Captain took on some-
thing awful about it at the time, I remember.


While the mate entertained Rill in this manner. Captain
Dare had beckoned one of the crew over to his side, and an
urgently whispered conversation had taken place.
Captain Dare had said:
Here, my good fellow, that bird may be only a shade
like the rest of us, but secure him somehow and wring his
neck! Choke him! Take him to the other side of the reef
and lose him, anything, but do not let us hear his voice again.
That beastly bird has not uttered a syllable for fifteen years
to my certain knowledge, and he has to pipe up to-day I Take
him hence, the ill-conditioned dog, and lose him! Gag him!”
“Aye, aye, sir,” the seaman mumbled, and respectfully
touching his forehead, started out on his errand of mercy by
mingling with the crew and edging inconspicuously over to
his unsuspecting victim s side. Suddenly a flutter, a squawk,
and a gargling sound satisfied the Captain that part at least
of his orders were being carried out. When he strolled back
to where Rill was talking to the mate he wore a surprisingly
hearty and jovial expression.
Is there nothing more we can do to delight our guest,
Hustle?” he asked.


“These will delight your heart, my dear/’ said Captain Dare.




“Perhaps a little light refreshment, Captain,” suggested
the mate.
“Splendid!” exclaimed Dare, well pleased with the
notion. “Hi, Bun, hasten now, bring some refreshments for
the lady. The best you have,” he added rather grandly, seeing
that he feared there might be nothing at all.
Bun appeared to be still in a flutter when he bustled
forward
“There is not a great deal in the galley, Captain,” he
ventured with some hesitation. “Some ship’s biscuits
(rather weevily), a barrel of salt pork (which I wouldn’t recom-
mend, not to nobody), sir. A cheese or two, a hogshead of
rum, and ten flaggons of Port for your own table.”
“That is a well-matured wine; set it forth in my cabin.
Rum for the men as usual.” Turning to Rill, he bowed and
smilingly addressed her. “Will you come aboard, Lady Rill?
he said. “We shall all find great pleasure in drinking your
very good health. It is not every day, nay, not every century,
that one so fair and charming drifts our way.”
Rill thanked her new friends kindly and allowed herself
to be guided to the poop deck and thence to the Captain’s


cabin. She was wondering where Gurgle could have got to,
and whether she could find her way home without him. ‘I
am not making much headway as regards the King’s Ransom,
I fear,” she said to herself. Oh, my poor Pink Coral, what-
ever shall I do. I haven’t even seen any treasure yet, except
a few coins lying about, and in any case everything here
belongs to Captain Dare and his crew. It seems a forlorn
hope, alas.’’
But presently, in spite of herself, the mermaid became
interested in the new scene around her. The lanterns hanging
from oak beams, the panelled walls. The stout table strewn
with goblets, tankards, pewter mugs and flaggons, and the
ever-changing crowd of gaudy, half-clad Pirates who jostled
and squabbled around her. Even the strange window case-
ments, glazed squarely with small thick swirls of greenish
glass, took her fancy.
After a toast or two, the mate addressed Captain Dare
from behind his hand. “Pardon me, captain,’’ he said, “but
them there ropes of pearls in your locker which we once set
such store by. They can’t hardly be no more use to us now
that we are dead. I suggest we give ’em to the Lady Rill to
adorn her pretty neck, sir.’’




' * kfjz'
"A capital notion!” agreed the Captain unhesitatingly.
"Fetch them at once!”
Pearls! exclaimed Rill, overhearing. Do you suppose
I would wear anything so exceedingly commonplace as
pearls? Why, gentlemen. I can get buckets full of pearls any
day of the week from all the oyster shells! You might as well
offer daisy-chains to a milkmaid! I wouldn’t be seen in a
string of pearls! And she added contemptuously, "Have
you nothing of greater value than pearls stowed away in this
great vessel?”
"Good'—l mean, bless my soul!” gasped the noble
Captain, greatly moved. Incredible! extraordinary! Oh,
well, there is, if you prefer it, the diamond and ruby coronet
we took from the countess in that little affair off Jamaica, in
the year before our disaster. A very choice piece, upon my
word! I mean the coronet. That trinket. Hustle, is still in
yonder panel cupboard. Be so good as to fetch it. Lady Rill
may deign to accept it as a small token of our esteem!”
Oh, thank you! cried Rill, thank you very much.
That sounds better. And to herself she thought, "I wonder
whether sharks like coronets? No. I fear not! I rather think.


from what I have seen of Selwyn, that he wouldn’t allow five
hundred coronets to get between himself and his dinner. Oh,
dear, dear Pink Coral, whatever shall we do? ’ And she felt
very sad and distressed indeed as she thought of her sister
shut up in the shark s grim cavern.
Just at that moment she caught sight of Gurgle squeezing
himself through a hole in the hoards. So here he was, she
thought; he must have been rummaging about in the holds.
“Oh, Gurgle, dear,” she cried as he came up to her, “please
take me home again, I need you to guide me home. We are
not doing any good here.”
“Not doing any goodl” he gasped indignantly. "Go
home? Not mel Why, be reasonable, my dear girl. lam
just beginning to arrive at something. Ive been down in the
holdsl Believe me, you never saw anything like it in your
life. Gold everywhere! Barrels of it. Must have had the
Midas touch, these fellows. I tell you^-
“But Gurgle, dear*—
“Don’t interrupt! ’ shouted Gurgle sternly. I have
been counting the coins. Doubloons, Pieces of Eight, Dutch
Dollars, Gold Onzas, Sovereigns, Florins, Crowns, and many
strange foreign coins of unknown value. Let me see now:


One hundred-and-twenty-nine-thousand, six-hundred-and-
eigKty-two pounds five shillings and sevenpence farthing, as
a rough estimate,* and I have, as yet, scarcely begun!”
Oh, he quiet, do,” whispered Rill desperately. I don’t
think the Pirates would like to hear you talking like that about
their plunder. It might offend them. I don t know what we
are to do about the King s Ransom, but we can t touch this
treasure now. It doesn t belong to us! It belongs to all
these men.”
No, it doesn t! hissed Gurgle truculently. “It never
did! They stole it! They are all Pirates! They—
But Rill, feeling that Gurgle had said enough, grasped
the little fish and thrust him firmly through a broken pane in
the thick glass behind her, sighing with relief as she watched
him swim away. She turned back to the room just as Hustle
handed something to Captain Dare. In an instant the Cap-
tain strode across the cabin and was smilingly presenting Rill
with a delicately wrought coronet.
She caught her breath as her eyes rested on the lovely
circlet
Oh, it is much too good for a shark, she exclaimed.


*1 beg your pardon, ma am? said tKe Captain.
“Oh, how lovely,” she breathed. “Can I really have it?
Is it for me? Oh, a lovely jewel. Oh, exquisite. Is it really
mine? Let me put it on, the pretty thing! How do I look?”
She looked very beautiful indeed, as you may imagine.
Captain Dare thought so. and he commenced with some
gallantry: * My dear, you look a pearl amongst'— ahem, 1
mean you look superb! I vow it was made for you. A rare
piece, indeed! Enchanting.”
“She out-countesses the late lamented countess!” de-
clared the mate, a worshipping look in his eyes.
As a terrible thought came to the mermaid’s mind an
expression of horror and anxiety overspread her lovely face.
“It is a real coronet, I trust! Not merely the shade of the
countess s coronet? she enquired sharply.
“Yes, my dear! the Captain gently assured her. It is
indeed a real coronet, and not like myself, just a shade, alas!
“That is a relief!” sighed Rill. “Such a lovely coronet!
I could not bear to think it less solid than it feels. One can


carry this “shade” business too far. Oh, do forgive me.
Captain Dare. \ou must really believe me when I say that
you and your crew are undoubtedly the nicest shades or
spectres I have ever met!”
That s quite all right, ma’am,” replied the Captain
cheerfully. “Believe me. one gets quite accustomed to being
a spectre after the first hundred years or so. Really, it is quite
an agreeable state, and has many pleasing advantages. Ah!
What have we here. Hustle? Why. yes. Those will delight
your heart, my dear. Here is a fine sapphire ring for you, and
two bracelets of old Spanish silver, gem encrusted. Here a
quaint armlet of golden chain and garnets, very fine of its
sort!” he bowed primly. “We hope you will accept them.”
Oh, glorious! exclaimed Rill, arranging the lovely
trinkets upon her hands and wrists. Are they really for
me? How kind you all are! You have not got a mirror, I
suppose? I have always wanted to see a mirror, there is an
amazing shortage of them down here under the sea. How
can I possibly tell you how pleased I am with these lovely
things. By the way, who was the countess?”
Oh, just a countess! replied the mate, stepping into
the breach.


“What was her name? asked Rill
“I heard it mentioned once, ma’am,” remarked the mate,
scratching his head thoughtfully, “but I could never pro-
nounce it, and now it has slipped my memory quite.”
"A pity,” murmured the mermaid, busily engaged in
arranging and rearranging her newly-acquired finery. Then
she smiled up at the mate. “And was she prettier than I?
she asked. But she was surprised at the answer.
“She was not like you in any way lady,” affirmed the
mate grimly.
“Like an old hen!” growled Captain Dare, as a man
speaks who remembers an ancient grudge. “Sixty if a day,
and with a screech like a parrot! Can one ever forget the
way that woman screeched?”


She deserved wKat she got!” declared the crew in
chorus.
“Good heavens,” gasped Rill, “what did she get?”
Nothing, ma am! declared Hustle with an air of
finality.
What do you mean?” demanded Rill. “You didn’t
hurt the poor thing, did you? I cannot understand you! You
all seem such kindly men. Pray, do not tell me that you hurt
a poor defenceless woman!
Poor defenceless woman!” cried the mate. “That’s a
good one. Did you hear that, my hearties? Poor defenceless


old lady! Save us and preserve us!” he shouted indignantly.
“Hurt her, forsooth! Just you listen to this! It was off the
coast of Jamaica. We caught up with a Portugese trader,
got out the grappling irons and hoarded her quick and smart!
Soon the day was going well for us; half the traders crew
were down, and we reckoned the prize would be ours in a
matter of minutes almost, when like a flash out rushed the
countess, her robes trailing and flapping around her. She
held in one hand a long quizzing glass and in the other a
marlin spike with which she dabbed and swiped indiscrimin-
ately at everyone who came handy. Most spiteful she was! All


the time swearing ferociously and screaming abuse in some
foreign lingo. I didn’t understand a word of it, but you can’t
mistake a swear! A fair Tartar, she was, and that’s a fact. You
should ha’ seen her smacking about with the weapon of her
choice, and a fine disregard for whether she damaged friend
or foe, and all the time swearing something cruel, and her a
lady! And all because one of our fine fellows had gone below
and took her coronet and some family jewels! Strange how
some people take on about a thing like that. Well, we lost
that engagement! The Captain called us off and we retired
in disorder. Not because we were outnumbered or outfought,
mind you, but because we were all laughing too bad to fight
proper! We didn’t want to hurt the poor old girl. In the
end she tripped over something and sat down shrieking more
shrill than anything I ever heard! The last I saw of her, she
was seated in the scuppers fishing about for her quizzing
glass! Laugh! We nearly died!
And that,’ smiled Captain Dare, “is the tale of the


Countess’s coronet, and how the noble lady saved her ship.
It is really a very fine coronet; wear it, my dear young lady,
it becomes you well. And wear it with an easy conscience.
The gracious countess can have had no use for it now for at
least two hundred years.’’
“You are very kind. Captain,” the mermaid thanked
him, “and what an amazing story.”
“Oh, pretty fair, ma’am, pretty fair,” replied the mate
with the air of one who could do better than that if he
chose. “On a pirate ship one sees some amazing things. We
get about, you know; we get about! Why,” he cried,
warming to the subject, taking a step towards her and assum-
ing his confidential manner, “I could tell you*-” But here,
catching the Captain’s forbidding gaze, he changed his mind


and his manner, and added lamely, “But it would not interest
T”
you!
You must have amassed a tremendous fortune in your
journeying. Captain Dare.’’ remarked Rill, her thoughts
straying to the King’s Ransom again.
A tolerable fortune, madame,’ agreed the Captain
“And you have proved yourselves very generous/’
I would not say that, madame, he replied, wondering
where this conversation was leading. “What would you say,
Hustle? ’
Not generous, sir, far from it. Pirates may part with a
few gee-gaws to win a smile, but that ain’t generous. NO!
Hard as rock, pirates is; they don’t spend their whole lives
fighting for a hoard of gold just to hand it out again. E)o
they, shipmates?’’ he shouted, appealing to the crew, who
growled out an assortment of replies such as “Not us.’’
Never! and Who is asking us to?”
They wouldn t be likely ever to'—well, shall we say,
give it all away in a burst of generosity?’’ ventured Rill,
hesitatingly.


A burst of raucous laughter greeted this witty sally, and
poor Rill felt her heart sink very low indeed. As she conjured
up again the grim vision of Selwyn the shark morosely guard-
ing Pink Coral s dark cave, a feeling of gloomy foreboding
descended once more like a grey cloud upon her spirits.
"What do Pirates do with all their treasure? she ven-
tured again.
Hustle answered her.
"Well,” he said in a considering voice, rubbing his chin.
Some buries it where they will know where to find it again—
with luck. Some likes to make for the nearest suitable sea-
port and, well'—spend it on something nice. Then others
just loses it.”
You are sure they never, never give it away, asked Rill
again, emboldened by the memory of Selwyn s horrid teeth.
Give—' began the mate, and choked. Lor’ love yer!
It s easy to see you don’t know nothing about Pirates. A
pirate never gives nothing away. He d die fighting first.
He d Hustle turned to the cook. * Here, Bun,” he cried;
"have you ever seen one of our fellows give away his share
of plunder?”


Bun stepped forward shyly. ‘Not
give , I fear, ma’am,’ he re plied,
“gamble it away, even
then, to part with it reluctantly. But
give, no! A lioness who sees some-
one purloining her favourite cub is
not more quickly roused to savagery
than your buccaneer who suspects
his friend of stealing a portion of his
plunder.” Bun, the cook, smiled
apologetically and waved a hand towards his shipmates
“The crew will tell he began.
“I would rather they didn’t,” begged Rill, turning pale
and trembling a little. “Say no more, I understand perfectly.
You have made it very clear! She paused and sighed.
“ Tis worse than I thought,” she said to herself. And at that
moment she caught sight of Gurgle swimming purposefully


~ N \ )© 7|^$F
• X x / \ fB / / /^H
n \ !/ >Wfl _3i
/' / ■ >r ■% \ J ■ />^T^F
* Up \ ''IT ' i% MMairnri r ' Mg / ;
5r. *\ i \ Jb v
/. , ■ 'jb I / ’-<
/ \/'
-— -— ■ '~ -% ■ ) > v
HZ H *■» , 3
TTbn’t you tell me why you cry so sadly.


.
i
I I .


I M /
pr| \
Tv OtQ^g >^>
towards her, wearing the eager expression of one who hears
good tidings, a long line of hubbies behind him. “Whatever
will he say this time? ’ she asked herself. And, to Gurgle s
amazement, she caught him deftly in her hands and pushed
him through the missing pane of glass near her before he had
time to utter a word.
Ignoring his reproachful and astonished expression, she
clapped a hand over the gap and kept it there.
“Captain Dare!’ she murmured. “I thank you for your
hospitality and kindness, and for the kindness of your crew.
I believe I had better return home now. Allow me to take
my leave of you.”
“So soon, ma’am? asked Dare, surprised. This is a
disappointment. I protest, but still, if you must!
Here the irrepressible Hustle slipped forward. Couldn t
you stay a little longer, ma’am? he begged. “Speaking for
myself and for the crew, seeing you amongst us has been the
greatest pleasure we have had for years and years. We don t


see much in the way of callers down here, you know, ma’am.
Why, the last visitor we had was years ago, and then, only a
walloping hig shark! He made a meal of Red Sam, the
gunner, and then complained that there wasn’t no flavour
or substance in him. He wouldn’t believe that Sam was
only a shade of his former self, like the rest of us. It is rare
and nice to have a pretty young He broke off and glanced
round at his shipmates in bewilderment as he beheld Rill
cover her face with her hands and start to weep quietly and
broken-heartedly to herself.
"Now, Lor’ love yerl cried the mate, appealing to his
friends. What have I said to upset her like that? ’
Oh, dear,* oh, dear, wept the distressed mermaid.
Alack and alas; woe, woe, woe is me! Oh, Pink Coral,
my love; Oh, Coral, Coral, what shall we do? ’
'She says something about coral, said one of the crew,
his ear cocked, listening for more.
Maybe she has mislaid her coral necklessl’ remarked
the cook. “Take my word for it, if a woman takes on like
that it is always about something to wear!’’


The entire crew stood and watched her, bewildered and
helpl ess.
"What could I have said now? wondered the mate.
“I thought I was behaving agreeable and pleasant, and off
she goes like that! Isn’t that,’’ he ashed, turning to the cook;
"isn’t that just a woman all over?”
"Well, replied Bun the cook, giving the matter his con-
sideration, "if you really ask me, I should say, not all over!
I should say about 50 per cent, fish really. Such a nice girl,
tool Rather a pity!”
I know!’’ the mate exclaimed as a new thought struck
him, and winking knowingly to his friends, he said, "I’ve
experienced this sort of thing before! Make a fuss of them
and they keeps on; leave ’em alone and they stops of their
own accord. See? Well talk about something else. 11l
sing a song! And strolling about in a casual sort of way,
he sang and hummed a little song of his own.


Truth to tell, I liked the life,
And that’s a factl
Just revelled in a bit f strife,
And that s a fact!
/
=
Suited my disposition fine,
That healthy life upon the brine,
A savage brawl from time to time,
And that’s a factl”
He paused to look searcbingly at tKe mermaid, but sbe
still wept on unbeedingly. So be commenced another verse.
T’ve always been a Pirate bold,
And that’s a fact I
Do anything for a piece of gold,
And that’s a factl
I lived in days when might was rightl
I fought to live, and lived to fight I
1 wasn’t reared a gentle knightl
And that’s a fact.”
'Sbe basn t stopped!” remarked one of tbe crew. ‘‘Seems
worse to me, if anything!”
With a troubled and mystified expression on bis face,


Captain Dare stepped up to Rill and gently touched her hair.
“What is the matter?” he ashed kindly. “Wont you tell me
why you cry so sadly.
“I could not tell you. You would not understand,” she
cried and sohhed again. I must go home.
“Come, come, madame, said the gallant Captain, using
all his powers of persuasion. We would like to help you,
but how can we do so if we don’t know what troubles you.
Won’t you try to tell us?
“/ will tell you/” piped a shrill voice. And to Rill s
horror up swam Gurgle, eager and bright, all anxious to get
in his say at last and letting off hubbies with every flip of
his fins.
\ s
“I will tell you!” he shrilled.
And tell them he did. Everything he could think of
about how Selwyn the shark, hungry and sinister, had selected


the lovely mermaid Pink Coral for his dinner. How the
horrified mer-people had contrived to put him off day after
day hy diligently netting fish with which to tempt his appe-
tite, until to-day he had vowed hy all the fishes in the sea to
have her to-night for his supper, and that nothing hut a King’s
Ransom would induce him to change his mind.
And there,’’ piped Gurgle, “you have the entire story
in a seashell!”
Not quite, I believe! remarked Captain Dare, in a very
dignified manner. Allow me to enquire where you proposed
to find the King’s Ransom?”
'Why, he re, of course! replied Gurgle, who believed in
direct methods; and poor Rill, hearing this, trembled all over
and peered between her fingers to see whatever would happen
next. Here in your noble ship! I knew there was enough
treasure in these holds for a King s Ransom and more besides.
What I did not know was, that you were still hanging about
and might want to keep it for yourselves!”
‘‘And what do you expect us to do about it, cat’s-meat?”
yelled the pirate crew in chorus.


I scarcely know, admitted the little fish, looking all ol
a sudden despondent and miserable in the extreme. But I
know this, if I fail in my mission Selwyn the shark will surely
devour Pink Coral for his supper at sunset this very nightl
At that remark there came a disapproving growl from
the crew.
' And Rill to-morrow nightl sighed Gurgle with the
air of one resigned to a sad fate.
“What?’’ cried Captain Dare.
And Rill to-morrow nightl repeated the little fish
“Who said so?’’ demanded Dare
“Selwyn himselfl” sighed Gurgle. “Always had a fine,
healthy appetite, did Selwyn.
“Something must be done about this confounded shark,
announced Hustle, his voice unsteady.
Suddenly, Captain Dare thumped the table with his fist,
causing all the goblets and tankards to dance and reel on the
hoards. “That is going too far, by gad!’’ he announced.
“Time someone told that shark a thing a two!” growled
one of the crew. Seems to fancy himself.


I believe, said tbe Captain, tbe shark in question to
be tbe same impudent brute wbo made a snap at me only
last week, ma am, and therefore, I take a personal interest
in this matter. Allow me to confer apart with my friends for
a moment. With a nod to bis men be walked out of tbe
cabin, and in ones and twos they followed bim, until Rill
found berself alone in an apartment grown suddenly large
and bleak. Even Gurgle bad gone.
“Ob, dear.” sigbed Rill. “Wbat a terrible situation. I


5%
1
z
* - i _j- -.:. ■
\s
1
f **MF»
/
/
.
& V . — -a "
/
/ vJ
//
gSM
/
*
V% N A-Av^
eW*
/
//V
j i
/
m M \ :^sr>
1
v y\
ft
pp
■
Mlum\
V-
A
\' _
V
A,
A>=a
■ _ _.-
L*S
PI
i-Y p yl.
"X'F
-X**
/%mm
LA
•I
ri
u &,<■
V \\ <<■
V
1
1
« • «/
-v <3
s
V/:.
N
y
/
V __ .
yjwf
Si'
Is
liKs
M ll \
’ ' '
1'
I
I £pi
■ ,n jj
,<
ii/
1—'L^
%- \ V
w
(
f
1
r
L V\ \N
-v'- , v .
V\ \\ 1
- -
■
46%
I
[
*»'»
Xj
A Al
\p^S
t
3 \j±M
v ",v '•'*’■
Pf
\x
5
I
j\
lb£2*
—
p
fy^A
pi
m
Mi
gjpl
A——-
Ap
1
f j- X
—
xA-—^
,
1
\\
\ A
I
> "X
AA
"■'■?r■ /
/T 0 m0** 0S^
J'
\\\
. S^!
1 -4
/
1
ill L~\\
m
j 1
1 4
g ... agri!
j
/
■
m
Jftl
i
/
n\
3S
Sii
|l .. t. i»i
Q
I
1
_i— ku gmaS
E
r |
■w^s*
pHpv'
) /
t *a - •
#
p
rA t
*~- / -s
\-f*
.
k
—
13i
f
k
\|
,f
/
■ f
\PK fe vKH
r
|
r
]
1
i
U v
:
k m V* A
IfeJ
- *‘
i F Jill
ii*v \
f\Nk,
(j \
mh
•s# ,
PJ
sA^
i
/
I
1 V
L / /
r
A fSi
4
uMf N
\\
v\
I
j
&
-
1^
I
r v
"\ V
\ \
t *
>
™
*■ M
\
u \
/
i?
-m 420
r 4s5- >V *a fjh
5^
■A v
\f\
iSr
/
y
/ f
,.r
. >s
v % \
X^
.
/
//
>
/ P
. ~M. vj W
\ \
■‘■/ |5P
/
(i
nj
□
£.
X '
Si^
|JP
X-
<
swfc m
y.
X ' N
|r . .
■ £
m
w
. J&r :s^c^ r
v._
1 c
%
«?
Jj J
0
" i«imm ■!>--
X x
it
«
a
,>
/TV
>
•A
X
ss
ICT
?<
>i
J
Jf J
*-
—
”5L X^HYSvr-
,*/H^ LI.W
1 “
0
RfS
"
Rill stayed to watch them a
moment.
— S
X
v.




shall never be able to save my sister now. And for a short
time I bad such high hopes of doing so; alas, alas! Even
these hind Pirates will always dislike me for coveting their
hard-won treasure. They have made it perfectly clear that
they will part with no more than the pretty things they have
already given me, and after all, why should they? I have no
right to expect them to. It will be best to go home at once!
Gurgle or no Gurgle, I shall find my way somehow.” And,
feeling very despondent, she arose and moved to the cabin
door and out onto the poopdeck again. Pausing for a moment
to avoid colliding with a file of little sea-horses who were


passing at the time, she moved slowly to the rail and looked
down into the ship’s waist.
How amazed she felt at the scene that met her eyes, for
the vessel seemed suddenly to have sprung to life. Half-clad
men hurried and hustled to and fro, shouting orders and
whistling snatches of song. Hatches newly opened revealed
holds alive with husy Pirates filling and hauling up heavy
loads of gold and precious stones. The companion ways
were crowded, gangplanks newly flung from deck to sand
jigged and trembled under the burden of hurrying feet.
Captain Dare, who stood amongst his men, shouted
orders and directed proceedings, while men strained and
laboured at his bidding; lifted, hammered and heaved. On
every side she beheld a scene of such activity and industry as
she had never before seen in her life! Rill stayed to watch
them a moment, though shy and nervous, uncertain of her
reception should they notice her.
Captain Dare caught si ghtof her, however, and hastened
forward, and, to Rill s astonishment, caught her hands in his
own with every appearance of delight and friendliness.




"Why, Rill, my dear young lady,” he cried, “come and
watch us, I beg! This is the greatest frolic I have witnessed
since that bright and memorable day in the Carribean, when
we captured the treasure ship St. Iney and the Dutch slaver
within the hour and found bulrthat would not interest you.
My b rave shipmates, my fine fellows, have resolved each man
to relinquish his share of plunder to save your sister and
yourself from that hungry brute, Selwyn. They are dragging
the treasure forth even now; and such a sight, I will wager a
monkey, you have never seen before. The booty of many a
cruise is here. The treasure of many a rich township, many
a stately villa. You must accept it, Rill, my dear. It will be
the first time it ever did good to anybody. I may mention that
I have the honour to add my own not inconsiderable hoard to
the gift and humbly desire you to take it.”
Butl gasped the mystified mermaid, “the mate
surely you heard the mate tell me that pirates never, never
give their plunder away, so I thought^”
Never mind what the mate said,” cried the Captain


“He meant, of course, that they never part with their plunder
while they live. That fellow has a way of forgetting that he
is only a shade of his former self. Why, we have no use for a
treasure-hoard down here. Hi there, Hustle, he shouted to
the mate. Come hither, man, and explain to the lady that
what treasure the ship contains is now her own. She finds
it difficult to bel ieve me after hearing one of you affirm, with
much unbridled ferocity that flowery bit about defending
each doubloon with your life. Come and reassure her, man!
Thus bidden, Hustle came hurrying up shamefaced and
smiling, to stand beside him. “Lor’ love yer, Lady Rill,
ma'am,’ he said, I wouldn’t ever ha said the things I did,
if I’d a’ known what you had on your mind, ma’am. I
wouldn t have hurt your feelings if I d known. Now, you
just leave it all to us, lady, we II fix Selwyn shark for you.
We ll take him his King s Ransom! We II take it over to him
with our own fair hands, before sundown and all. And, he
added piously, as an afterthought, “may it choke him!’’
“How kind you are,” cried Rill in great delight, new hope
and happiness suddenly swelling her heart. “Can you really
mean it?”


We mean it all right, ma’am,” replied Hustle. ’ Especi-
ally the bit about bim cboking himself witb it. But you are
welcome to our plunder, if it helps you. After all, what can
we do witb plunder down here amongst the seaweed and
fishes? Every man amongst us is busy at this very moment
a’beaving of bis share out on to the sand, and he’d do it all
the more willing if you was there to see him!”
111 come at once,” smiled the mermaid. “Can you tell
me where Gurgle is?”
Gurgle is down there inspecting the loot,” smiled Cap-
tain Dare.
And, added the mate, *an uncommon interest he


appears to take in it. Pokes his nose into every crate and
barrel, and asks all sorts of questions as to weight and selling
value. There are some rummy fishes in the sea, and that’s a
fact! But come on, ma am, come and see it for yourself.
Thus invited, the mermaid swam over the ship’s side to
the open sandy place where she had first met Captain Dare,
and there she found, sure enough, a swarm of noisy pirates,
busily engaged in sorting and packing a tremendous fortune
in bullion and jewels for its hurried transport to the shark’s
cavern.
At si ght of her the rough seamen let out a merry cheer of
greeting and Rill, in her return, thanked them with all her
heart for their great generosity and kindness, smiling and
blushing the while in a manner very lovely to behold, until
Gurgle, always a practical little fish, interrupted them to
remind them that the day was no longer young and there was
not much time to lose.
Immediately they started to form into a colourful and
rather comic cavalcade, with the little fish, Gurgle, import-
antly leading the way over the sandy slopes.


/
As man after man passed her with his rich burden, Rill
felt that she was the happiest mermaid in all the sea. And
who shall say that she was not? For now, her sister Pink
Coral would escape Selwyn the shark s cruel jaws, and soon
they could all be happy again.
Surely these men were the strangest rescue party that
ever were seen, dressed in their quaint and gaudy rags, each
man carrying as heavy a load as he dare.
Some grasped a seaman’s bucket in either hand, filled
to overflowing with pieces of eight. One man struggled with
a small sea-chest crammed with jewels and precious stones,
carrying it first on one shoulder and then on the other. One
dark-skinned fellow with great gold ear-rings bobbing against
his jaws shouldered a large sheaf of swords with bejewelled
handles, while half-a-dozen burly brigands bore between
them a large chest containing, as the Captain told Rill, bullion
and precious metals of amazing value.
Some of them bore sacks thrown over broad shoulders,
or staggered under the weight of casks or kegs, the contents
of which Rill guessed to be doubloons or onzas, or pieces of
eight. Some passed her with a silver salver beneath each


'A I - * ' _ O
mM - - : "'• iti&H
]/a/i after man passed her with his rich harden


I




arm. One held an armful of great golden candlesticks, each
worth a fortune in itself. And after him tramped a fellow
with an assortment of coronets threaded on his arm, and an
extra one on his head.
Four or five great ruffians rolled a huge barrel which
chinked musically with the unmistakable sound of coins.
And a dozen others hugged bundles of odd and bulgy shapes.
Even the cook hastened past, hearing a silver soup-tureen
glistening with gems; and Jet, the cabin boy, with a tremen-
dous ewer cunningly inlaid with gold and bronze.
As the last man passed her, Rill turned and smiled her


Will I A Mi W «w— __ „
thanks to Captain Dare and the mate who stood beside her.
How wonderful they are!” she murmured.
“Aye,” said Hustle the mate wistfully. “There it goes,
there it goes! It do seem kind of waste, now, don’t it? A
noble treasure such as any right-minded pirate would risk
sudden death for any day of the year, and we are just passing
it over to a mouldy old shark with no principles and four sets
of teeth! Seems wrong somehow! Lor love yer, it do rea IlyT”
And he gazed after the departing loot with an expression of
regretful sorrow, shaking his head slowly from side to side.
“Never mind about that,” said Captain Dare briskly.


The point is, your sister need now have no fear, and our
plunder is probably doing the best day’s work it ever did.
Why, the men are singing as they march. Can you hear it,
my dear?’’
A funny, rhythmic little tune floated back to them.
Down beneath the sea so deep
Do the fishes go to sleep?
Nol They dive and dance and leap,
Down in the deep blue seal
Down beneath the restless blue
A Captain and the whole ship s crew
Tread a merry measure, too,
Down in ihe deep blue seal
Down beneath the waters dark
Watch the swordfish stab the shark
A swordfish likes to leave his mark
Down in the deep blue seal
Down beneath the restless sea
A passing mermaid smiled at me,
Winsome, young and fair was she,
Down in the deep blue seal


"If you will pardon me, Captain, sir," said the mate, as
the last words faded away, "I have just bethought me of a
*
trifle that I wish to take along with me. 1 can catch up with
you, sir, if so be you are wishful to depart!" And he turned
and marched off sturdily in the direction of the wreck.
Left alone together, the Captain turned to Rill, smiles
brightening his usually grave face, and bowed gallantly.
"There, my dear," cried he, "I trust I see your happier
now. Your sister is perfectly safe now that my brave men
have taken the matter in hand. You could always trust them
to help a lady in distress, especially a pretty one!
"How can I ever thank you, sir?" questioned the mer-
maid, her heart overflowing with gratitude.
"We are not asking for thanks, my dear; but speaking
for myself, there is a small favour lam about to ask. I should
be deeply grateful if you would allow me to sing you a short


song, Tis a trifling thing I myself had composed the very
week we were sunk, and I never had the opportunity to sing
it to anyone. It was intended for a very charming lady of my
acquaintance in Devon; hut, of course, I never returned to
Devon. Tis not the sort of ditty one can sing to the crew;
therefore, ma’am, with your kind permission I should like to
sing it to you!”
Having granted her permission. Rill waited for the song
with growing curiosity.
The ship s Captain Lowed, and thanked her and pre-
pared to sing. First, he coughed a great deal, and cleared his
throat noisily. Then he tried out a couple of deep notes,
coughed some more, and tested his voice again about an
octave higher. It sounded a trifle husky and hoarse to Rill.
Perhaps, she thought, it has rusted a Lit from want of
use.
Finally, after singing over a few Lars to himself, he
seemed satisfied with the result. And striking an attitude,
and dropping dramatically to one knee, Captain Dare hurst
into what proved to he a very dainty love song*—


“You look so lovely, dear,
As radiant as the day;
You look so lovely, dear,
You lure my heart away.
Fragrant as the buds in spring,
Gracious as some fairy thing,
Straying from an elfin ring,
Adorable and gay
You are so sweet, my love,
And most divinely fair;
I kneel to greet my love,
Caress your darling hair
Welcome as the morn’ again,
Bright as sunbeams after rain,
Lovely as a soft refrain.
Banishing dull carel
Neither Rill nor Captain Dare had noticed Hustle’s
quiet return; but as the last words left his lips both were
startled by the sound of clapping hands, and the mate s voice,
loud and hearty, hurst in upon their thoughts.
“Very good, Captain, sir, he applauded in a cheerful.


friendly voice. Very good indeed, sir I A mighty pretty
song, that! It s many a long year since I heard your voice
a-singing, and I must say it sounded fine!”
Thanh you very much, Hustle. I am glad you liked it,”
replied Captain Dare coolly, rising to his feet and dusting
his knee. Very gratifying, I assure you.”
Said the mermaid, staring at Hustle with wide-open eyes:
“Whatever is that? What have you got there?”
/ This? said the mate smilingly, brandishing a tremen-
dous and murderous-looking spiked mace. “This is a pretty
toy I have a fancy to take with me. I^—er acquired this little


I acquired this little ireapun many years ago




weapon many years ago. An “antique” they called it, even
then. A battle -mace; lovely, ain t it? Nice handy thing.
Took a great fancy to it, I did, from the first. Selwyn might
like it, maybe. Might just take his fancy, too. And here is
something for him he is bound to like. A clock! Bronze and
solid gold, and studded with rubies and diamonds. A work
of art, and that’s a fact. Worth a mint o money, this here
clock is.”
“Very nice! said Captain Dare, interrupting. We had
better be going, ma'am, if it suits you. We must overtake
the others. Come, Hustle; step it out, man!”
And overtake them they did in a little while. Rill swam
the whole length of the cavalcade to thank each one of her
new friends separately for their generous help, and at last
arrived at Gurgle, who led the way, nearly bursting with
importance and self-satisfaction.
The Pirates were not able to travel very quickly on
account of the heavy loads they carried; and Gurgle, who
swam in front of them leading the way, found plenty of
time to dive and dart about all over the place, practising


'‘ ' a° ' ' >=^ S
5- - ' _.°
W f <_ V. I A fM-S
— ” ' ' -
swimming in spirals and figures of eight, chasing sea-horses
up and down, and playing touch-you-last with jellyfish hy
means of giving vent to his joyous and hilarious mood, so
happy did he feel. When they were within a mile of the
shark’s gloomy cavern he felt so thankful that he had played
such an important part in saving the life of a beautiful mer-
maid, or even perhaps of two beautiful mermaids, that he
started to sing aloud for very joy, blowing bubbles at every
line, while the pirates plodded along behind him.


o
°° 0
URGLE’S SON
Here we arel Here we comel
Watch for us carefully, everyonel
We’ve got the treasure, the boodle, the loot;
Generous measure, quite certain to suit.
1 told you before that I knew we could do t,
Watch out for us I Here we cornel
Watch us bring more and more,
Tramping over the ocean floor,
Bearing gems and bullion gold
Dug from a drowned ship s buried hold;
Gift from a Captain and Pirates bold.
Watch out for us I Here we cornel
o
o
Here we are, drawing near,
o
o
Each man dragging a load of gear,
Pieces of eight and onzas galore:
As handsome a Ransom as ever you saw.
And where this lot comes from there’s half a ton more,
So watch out for us I Here we cornel


Just at that moment a little mer-boy came riding by on
the back of a turtle, and by some mischance, collided with a
resounding crash into a sea-chest full of treasure which a
large pirate whose name was Grimbold happened to be
carrying.
A roar of indignation from this pirate as the sea-chest
and its contents clattered down, followed by a shout of
laughter from his fellows, brought every man to a standstill,
many of them taking the opportunity to ease their burdens to
the sand and stroll to the scene of the disturbance.
What did you do that for? roared Grimbold the pirate
in a dreadful voice, turning to glare at the mer-boy. “Can’t
you look where you are going?’’
I am very sorry indeed to have run into you!’’ apologised
the mer-boy gently. You know, I had my eyes closed and
didn t see you. I got just as great surprise as you did, I
expect. Greater, perhaps, he added, rubbing his head.
“Let me help you pick up the coins.’’
leave those coins alone! shouted the pirate un-
graciously. Why did you have your eyes closed? Sounds
silly to me!’’




Oh, I always close my eyes when I am enjoying my
ride. It feels nicer that way.
Oh, does it?” growled Grimbold. “Especially when
you catch some passer-hy amidships and fetch him a sock in
the lug, I suppose. Feels lovely that way, don’t it? Well,
you had better not try it again, see?
“Oh, no! agreed the mer-hoy cheerfully, “I wouldn’t
dream of doing it again. lam very sorry to have banged
into your money-box, hut it isn’t altogether my fault. I didn’t
expect to meet anyone here, you know.”
“Of course, he didn tl exclaimed Gurgle, swimming
forward in a friendly way and joining, without hesitation, in
this not very friendly chat. “Be reasonable, Mr. Grimbold.
How could he possibly expect to meet anyone in such a
lonely place as this ? I assure you, I know this mer-hoy
quite well. He is a great friend of mine and, believe me,
you couldn t hump into a nicer fellow if you tried.”
Well, I didn’t try to hump into him!” shouted Grim-
hold, exasperated. I didn t want to bump into anyone,
see? Oh, go away, and keep out of this! A pretty kettle


of fish, I calls it, walloping a man’s sea-chest clean out of
his very armsl”
Still muttering under his breath, Grimbold knelt clum-
sily down on the sand, and setting the sea-chest upright,
proceeded to scoop coins and jewels back into it again with
both hands.
“Rushing about with his eyes shut!’’ he grumbled, cast-
ing, from time to time, resentful glances towards the small
offender.
Suddenly he demanded harshly, “Wot’s yer name?’’
“Nep!” replied the little mer-boy.
“Who?” asked the pirate.
“My name is Nep. You know. Nep, short for Neptune.
What’s your name?
“Never you mind what my name is,” Grimbold snarled.
“I’m not feeling chatty just now. What I want to know is,
why you ride about on a turtle with your eyes shut. It
doesn t make sense to me.
“Well.” replied young Nep. “It’s such a lovely sensa-
tion. riding through the sea on a turtle with your eyes shut.


That s why.
You should try it sometime, and then you’d
know why I do it.”
“I’m too large for a turtle,” objected Grimbold, still busy
with his coins. "It would have to be a whale, and a nice
friendly, obliging sort of whale at that. Have you any other
pastimes, or do you tear about hell-for-leather on a turtle
all day?”
'Only in my spare time,” Nep explained. "My main
occupation is tormenting fishermen. You’ve no idea what
good sport that can be!”
Said the large pirate grimly^-
"Do you do that with your eyes shut, too?”
Why, of course not!” cried Nep, in a shocked voice.
You need your wits about you for that game! Very wide
awake you have to be! You would be surprised what finesse
and delicacy of touch is required to remove the bait from a
hook, and substitute an old boot or a knot of seaweed. Or
even to tangle it round a rock. Sometimes, in order to save
the life of a fish, I have found it necessary to cut the hook off
the line altogether. That takes some doing! I cannot deny


■*
« \ pr \ #
J?7J*k & .1 / X s?
ui ipC^rw
r \\ '* "'X jdMbl Ak_ I -fgaL,
/ hST iv__ «b' . y Tt>
m 13 &X>
So that is Selwvn the Sinister, is it


V


that I enjoy this work for its own sake, but it is a very fine
*
work all the same,” he concluded, with an air of conscious
righteousness.
“Oh, a very fine work!” commended Grimbold with
heavy sarcasm, remembering a time long ago when he had
tried a bit of fishing himself. 1 felt sure,” he added, ”that
you would do something of that nature the moment I saw
you. Tell me, do you do this just for devilment, or have
you any real motive?
Real motive? cried Nep indignantly. Haven 11 just
been telling you? Of course, I have a real motive! To save
the fish! If all the fishermen had their way soon there would
not be a fish left in the sea! That’ s why every mer-boy, as
he grows old enough, is allotted this worthy task. There
are hundreds of us busy all day (and half the night, too).


some in the rivers, some in harbours and in the sea, all busy
freeing our friends the fishes. A very noble employment
taking it all round, although we do sometimes enrage the
*
fishermen, poor fellows. Most of our fish friends are grateful
to us for our assistance, but some fish, of course, one simply
cannot teach. If, however, they prefer to become a fisher-
man’s breakfast, done up in egg and breadcrumbs with a
piece of lemon on top, it is no fault of ours, is it? We do our
i
very best.
/
I feel sure of it,” sighed the pirate. 'And how do you
deal with nets?”
' With fishing nets? Oh, we just slice a hole in them
and let the fishes out. Quite simple, really!” explained
young Nep.
You never get caught yourselves, I suppose?” asked
Grimbold wistfully.
‘‘Why, of course not!” the mer-boy laughed. “Who
ever heard of a fisherman landing a mer-boy? Oh dear, no!
We are much too smart for that!”


Just as I thought, agreed Grimbold sadly. "A pity,
a great pity. And as he spoke he rose to his feet, straight-
ened his back and stretched his arms. *We had better get
going again, no doubt. We are in haste to arrive at the old
shark s cave before sunset. Fare you well, young Nep.”
"Oh, then I shall come with you,” cried Nep. "I am
going that way.”
* Charmed, I am sure, sighed Grimbold, sorrowfully.
"What is up with Bun? he added, catching sight of the cook.
Bun, the cook, who had been watching Nep s turtle
with a trance-like gaze, stepped dreamily up to Nep now,
shaking his head from side to side.
Dear me, quoth he, sadly. A turtle! A very fine
turtle. Whenever I see a turtle how it does take me back
to the dear old days. I used to be so very fond of a little bit
of turtle! And so did captain. Found them on the beaches,
we did. Turtles make such beautiful soup!
* Well this turtle doesn t! cried Nep, throwing his arms
protectingly about his turtle s neck.


Bun looked startled. “No, of course not!” he agreed
hastily. Quite out of the question. A friend of a friend.
Very natural, I’m sure.
“Come along, gentlemen,” cried Gurgle. “It is time
we got moving again. Are you ready, Mr. Grimbold?
“I’m all ship-shape now,” agreed Grimbold, heaving the
filled sea-chest to his shoulder. “But make that young sea-
urchin and his steed go on ahead. I want to keep my eye
on him. He’s dangerous, that s what he is I” And here
he sought to add weight to his words hy lowering his voice
to a hoarse whisper. “A dangerous character!” he added,
treating Gurgle to an impressive warning wink. “A dan-
gerous character, you mark my words!”
Soon the long procession was swinging forward again
at a brisk pace, considerably enlivened by the extraordinary
antics of young Nep, who rode near the pirates, sometimes
at a breakneck speed, sometimes at a snail s pace, now and
then slipping from his mount altogether to perform with the
utmost grace and ease a number of cartwheels and hoops
such as only a mer-boy could achieve, singing the while an
absurd little ditty, which seemed to go something like this


The little mer-children who live in the sea,
Swim merrily, merrily round in a ring.
They are always as happy as happy can be.
For to dwell in the sea is a marvellous thing
For they never wear shoes,
And they never wear clothes,
And they don’t have to bother
With washing their toes,
With a flip of their tails
They slip “over-she-goes
Merrily, merrily, round in a ring J
In this manner the heavily laden men-of-the-sea trudged
along for another half mile or so, Grimbold brooding gloomily
neath the weight of his sea-chest.


Then presently,
"Lummy,” groaned the mate. "Aren’t we nearly there
yet? I thought you said it wasn’t above five knots. This
clock is heavier than I thought. Wearing me out it is, lugging
the lumpy thing. Wearing me to a shadow!
* But we are nearly there, Mr. Hustle, shouted Gurgle
happily. See that range of cliffs? That’s what we make
for. Just at the foot of the small one at the south-west
corner, there you can almost see the cave now! And he
started to sing again as loudly as he could.
Here we arel Here we comel
Watch for us carefully, everyone;
We ve got the treasure, the boodle, the loot,
Generous measure ”
Stop that, young cat s-meatl roared half the crew in
chorus. We heard all that before. If you want to be
helpful, swim on ahead and tell them we are coming. Go
on, sling your hook! ’
Off he darted at once with a merry flip of the tail, and
was soon lost to sight in the misty green waters, while the
pirates with their weighty burdens plodded doggedly on.


*
Eventually they also arrived at the clearing near the shark s
cave, and with sighs and oaths of relief, dropped their burdens
*
on the sand.
There was a great crowd of mer-people gathered round
Selwyn at the time, trying to persuade him to dine upon fish
that evening instead of upon mermaid; but when they saw
the Pirate band and had listened to the story Gurgle excitedly
spluttered into their ears, they rushed over to the pirates to
thank them for what they had done, and to help them drag
the King s Ransom over to present it to Selwyn.
The shark appeared to be in no very pleasant mood, for
he continually mumbled and groaned through his gills, letting
off a sound every now and then like a kind of snore.


Lor love us!” exclaimed the mate, as he caught sight of
the ugly shark. “So that is Selwyn the Sinister, is it? “Well,
I don t like the cut of his jih, and that s a fact. There certainly
are some queer fish in the sea.”
When the King s Ransom was at last arranged before
Selwyn, heaped and stacked up in a tempting array, the shark
roused himself sufficiently to snarl. “Well, what is all this
litter, may I ask? Who are you and what have you brought
this stuff here for?”
“Why, this is your King’s Ransom. Selwyn Shark!” cried
Rill delightedly. This is the King s Ransom you asked for,
you remember? These brave men have given it to us to make
us happy again. You promised to release my sister, Pink
Coral, if we could present you with a King’s Ransom. So
take this, and now, I pray you, free my dear sister at once.
That.” she said, turning to Captain Dare, who stood nearby.
That is your wish also, is it not, Captain Dare?”
My wish, affirmed the Captain, and that of every man
amongst us. This priceless treasure is yours, Selwyn Shark,
the moment you release the mermaid, Pink Coral.”


'K> iani


t


Selwyn shuffled uneasily and opened his small pig-like
eyes as widely as he could.
Is that a King s Ransom? he questioned, fiercely.
Absolutely! stated Captain Dare with much emphasis
“Do you mean to tell me, Selwyn suddenly roared,
working himself in a passion, “that all that silly junk is what
is referred to as a King’s Ransom.’’
“I should say it exceeded the amount sometimes de-
manded,’’ stated Captain Dare, coldly.
“But!’’ shouted Selwyn, shaking all over with fury, “I
always thought that a King’s Ransom was something nice to
eat. A kind of Royal Banquet! Something nice to eat, do
you hear. What do you suppose I would want with a lot of
metal and stuff like that?
“That is a question we did not ask ourselves,’’ replied
Captain Dare. “You undertook to release the mermaid upon
receipt of a King’s Ransom, and you must keep your word and
release her at once.
“That I - won t! shrieked the Shark, flapping his tail
about, as one demented. “I can’t eat that stuff. Don’t talk


such nonsense to me! I prefer the mermaid, and rn eat her
as soon as I please.”
“But you can’t break your word, protested the mate in
a shocked voice.
Oh, can t II” yelled the Shark, now thoroughly roused.
You watch me! And anyhow, who are you, you dirty pirate,
to prate to me about keeping my word. I’ll eat Pink Coral
now. Neptune knows, lam hungry enough! I’ll eat her
now, this minute, do you hear?”
And he reared himself up and poised his ugly bulk ready
to dive into the cave, but the mate stopped him with a yell,
placing himself squarely in the cave’s entrance. Selwyn the
Shark paused for a moment to leer menacingly in the mate’s
face.


“Get out of my way,” he sneered, “and stop me at your
peril. I tell you again I shall eat Pink Coral for supper to-
nightN-yes—and Rill to-morrow night! Rill to-morrow night
for certain! Now get out of my way!
But the mate did not step out of his way. On the con-
trary. he took one quick step forward and brought his great
spiked mace down on the shark’s nose with a sickening whack.
Immediately every pirate present strode forward to the mate s
assistance, and there arose a din and clamour the like of which
the mer-people had never heard, as the Pirate crew hammered
and banged, cut and slashed at the wicked shark with any and
every weapon that came within reach of their hands. In a
very few minutes the water all around became foggy with


I ( /
<k
'^ccs^v
sand and foam, raised by the tramp of many feet, and the
swirl and heave of the giant shark s body.
As the noise of combat reached its height, the mer-people
scattered in all directions, and swam rapidly away. It was
with a sinking heart that Rill saw the last of their tails
flickering off through the dim waters, and knew that she was
left to await alone the outcome of this extraordinary fight.
It seemed a very long time before there came the sudden
hush which heralded the end of hostilities. Almost afraid
to look, the mermaid arose, advanced a little, and peered
through the mist. Six strong men were dragging Selwyn
Shark away by the tail, while the rest of them stood around
looking well pleased with themselves. She heard Captain
Dare laugh quietly to himself as he examined the priming of
a large pistol. Hustle, the mate, strutted up and down dusting
his hands and whistling a little tune.
‘Lor’ love yerl’ he exclaimed to his friends. “Why
didn’t we think of that before?’’
Twould have been much simpler than carting all that
weighty treasure this deuced distance,’’ remarked the Captain




cheerfully. “Bless my soul. I don’t know when I enjoyed
anything so much since we had that little brush with the
Spanish man-o’-war off the straits of Magellan. Why. Rill,
my dear young lady, so you are still here. Well, well.”
“Is he really and truly dead?” Rill asked them in a hoarse
whisper. “Have you really killed Selwyn?
We ve killed him! nodded Dare with grim satisfaction.
“As dead as a doornail!” added the mate heartily.
“And,” persisted Rill, so relieved she could scarcely
believe her ears, “he will really never eat a mermaid again.”
Said the mate, “He will never even eat a sprat, ma’am,
believe me.”
Oh, thank you, cried Rill, thank you very much.”
“And your sister, ma am, said Captain Dare solici-
tously, “Do I understand your sister to be actually imprisoned
in yonder cave? Now, who s hall go and seek her?”
“Gurgle and I shall go to her first,” replied Rill, looking
about her. “Now, where is Gurgle?”
Said one of the seamen, I saw him go into the cavern
but a minute since, lady, under his own sail.”


Rill laughed. How like Gurgle!” she cried. *He never
wastes a minute,” and she prepared to follow him; but just
at that moment a shrill and raucous voice yelled:
“Feed him to the fishes!” and Moses the parrot fluttered
down from somewhere and settled on a seaman’s shoulder,
shuffling its feet and nodding its head.
Captain Dare groaned aloud and clapped a hand to his
brow. Here is that thrice accursed fowl, Moses, again. By
gad! he snarled between clenched teeth. Then, beckoning
to one of the crew, he shouted: “Here, you Ned, didn’t I tell
you to take the bird and lose him? Strangle him!
“Aye, sir!” replied the man. That you did, Captain;
but begging your pardon, sir, as for strangling him, well, you
*
can’t, sir! And as for losing him, this is where 1 brought him,
not knowing as how you were going to follow me. sir!
Look here,” replied Captain Dare with a dangerous
calm. **Take that bird and lose him J
But Rill interrupted with a joyous thrill of laughter
'Oh, let him remain, Captain Dare, I beg of you, she
cried. "He seems to me to be a Parrot with the right ideas!


Feed him to the fishes, hy all means, if it is Selwyn Shark
he means. Feed him to the fishes, and quite right, too. A
just retribution, indeed. And so perish all the cruel sharks
in all tKe seas!” she smiled happily round upon them all.
Then she cried, “Now for my dear Pink Corall” and swam off
gracefully to the mouth of the cave just as Gurgle emerged
proudly leading a mermaid who was very nearly, hut not
quite, as lovely as Rill herself.
How happily the sisters embraced one another, and
laughed, and cried and hugged each other again.
“So you see, said Rill at last. You have nothing to
fear any morel Selwyn Shark is as dead as a door-nail
(whatever that is, my love), so you can safely venture out.
These brave men have killed him for us, and dragged him
away by the tail. Oh, I have so much to tell you, and Gurgle
shall help me.”
Just then the mermaid noticed that the pirates were
/ >
already filing away across the sand. “Oh, my friends; my
dear friends, are you going away so soon?” she called out
to them.
We regret to leave you, ma’am,” bowed Captain Dare,
£


S \
but we have to get back to the sbip. Perhaps some other
time, madame >—>”
But you haven t met my sister, who has so much to
thank you for,” cried Rill. “And your treasure! Your won-
derful , priceless possessions! Are you leaving them behind?
Said the mate with a spurt of laughter, “These mutinous
dogs, ma’am, they refuse to lug it all the way back again.
They says as how maybe you’d like to keep it. They wants
to get back to the ship. After all, it is, and always has been,
really the dear old ship that they loves! Seamen are like
that, and that s a fact!




THE W.H.HONIY PUBLISHING
COMPANY
SYDNEY


*




Hk V II i 'IflJ j sJU
. I jy / Jr It
PIRATES GOLD
• mm " “ L B 11
