

PITCAIRN'S ISLAND.
The following Correspondence from Rear Admiral Moresby, C. 8.,
Commander in Chief in the Pacific Ocean, and from his
Secretary, will be read with interest.
Official Disiatch.
“ Portland, at sea, lat. 25 25 S., long. 126 29 W.,
August 12, 1852.
“ Sir, —Continuing the report of my proceedings from the 27th
ult., as detailed in my letter No. 71, I request you will inform the
Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty that after passing over the
position assigned to Incarnation Island without seeing it, we made
Pitcairn’s Island on the morning of the 7th inst.
“ Early on Sunday, the Bth, 1 landed. From this time to the
period of our departure, on the 11th, I remained on shore, and a
constant intercourse was kept up with the Portland.
“ It is impossible to do justice to the spirit of order and decency
that animates the whole community, whose number amounts to
170, strictly brought up in the Protestant faith, according to the
established Church of England, by Mr. Nobbs, their pastor and
surgeon, who has for 24 years zealously and successfully, by pre-
cept and example, raised them to a state of the highest moral
conduct and feeling.
“ Of fruits and edible roots they have at present abundance,
which they exchange with the whalers for clothing, oil, medicine,
and other necessaries; but the crops on the tillage ground begin
to deteriorate, landslips occur with each succeeding storm, and the
declivities of the hills, when denuded, are laid bare by the period-
ical rains. Their diet consists of yams, sweet potatoes, and
bread-fruit; a small quantity of fish is occasionally caught; their
pigs supply annually upon an average about 50 lb. of meat to each
individual; and they have a few goats and fowls. Their want of
clothing and other absolute necessaries is very pressing, and I am
satisfied that the time has arrived when preparation at least, must
be made for the future, seven or eight years being the utmost that
can be looked forward to for a continuance of their present means
of support. The summary of the year 1851 gives—births, 12;
deaths, 2 ; marriages, 3. On their return from Tahiti they num-
bered about 60, of whom there were married 13 couples ; the rest
from the age of 16 to infancy.
mM/NX* o
fax, -72 W


“ Mr. Nobbs was anxious to avail himself of my offer to convey
him to Valparaiso, and thence enable him to proceed to England,
for the purpose of obtaining ordination. At a general meeting of
the inhabitants their consent was given, provided I would leave
the chaplain of the Portland until Mr. Nobbs returned ; the advan-
tage is so obvious that I feel confident their Lordships will approve
my consenting. From the anxiety which has been expressed by
high authorities of the Church for Mr. Nobbs’s ordination, I anti-
ticipate that it will be effected with so little delay that he will be
enabled to return to Valparaiso by the middle of January. I
enclose a copy of the memorandum given to the Rev. Mr. Holman.
“ I was unable to comply strictly with the list of articles which
their Lordships authorized me to give the islanders. I enclose a
list of what we supplied ; they were greatly wanted and gratefully
received. The crew of the Portland also requested permission to
give a portion of their allowance, and also that they might be
allowed to send them a whale boat, with other stores from Val-
paraiso.
“ Captain Chads and the officers were most generous. I was
fortunate in procuring at Borobora a young bull and heifer, also
a ram, accidents having befallen the ones previously sent. The
packet of seeds forwarded in their Lordship’s letter, No. 132, of
the 4th of December, 1851, was duly delivered.
“ Should any unfortunate circumstance prevent the periodical
visits of the whale-ships, they would be left entirely to the chari-
table consideration of Her Majesty’s Government. The crews of
the whale-ships have invariably conducted themselves with marked
propriety. They take their turn of leave on shore, and their sick
are received and nursed with the greatest care.
“ The Adeline Gibbs, American whaler, Mr. Weeks master, was
there during our visit. Mr. and Mrs. Weeks were living ashore.
It would be a happy circumstance if a person like her could be
found to reside among them.
“ I forward a continuation of their journal, since that published
by Mr. Brodie—a very correct statement, which renders unneces-
sary any further remarks.
“ I have, &c.,
“FAIRFAX MORESBY,
Rear-Admiral and Commander-in-Chief.”
Letter dated “ The Portland, Valparaiso, August, 1852,” to the
Rev. T. B. Murray, Secretary to the Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge.
“ This will be conveyed to you by Mr. Nobbs, the pastor of
Pitcairn’s Island. It was not until after our departure from thence
that I found he had received a letter from you, dated the 29th Nov.,
1850, which I confess has relieved me of much anxiety on the
responsibility I have taken upon myself of sending Mr. Nobbs to
England. I can most conscientiously assure you, that the state of


society at Pitcairn has not been too highly described. The Bible
and Prayer Book of ‘the Bounty,’ as handed to Mr. Nobbs from
John Adams, has been and continues the object of their study, and
has enabled them to withstand the innovations that too fervid
imaginations in America and elsewhere have thought, by their
correspondence, it was their calling to effect.
“ The affectionate attachment of the islanders to Mr. Nobbs
(who, in the treble capacity of pastor, surgeon, and teacher, is as
necessary to them as their food) created some little difficulty in his
leaving; it was overcome by the arrangement made for leaving
with them our chaplain, Mr. Holman, and my assurance that I
would return their pastor to them with as little delay as possible.
“ Having written to the Duke of Northumberland and the
Bishop of London respecting Mr. Nobbs, I have only to request
you will give him your earliest consideration. At Valparaiso the
crew of ‘the Portland’ will be attended to by the resident chaplain,
but I shall be anxious to have our ow r n again. I hope lam not
wrong in supposing that if Mr. Nobbs is found worthy of being
ordained, only a short time will be required to prepare.
“ I think I did not mention to the Bishop of London the way in
which Mr. Nobbs reached Pitcairn; it disproves the malignant
stories which have been circulated ; and the success of twenty-four
years’ labour is an abundant proof that, under the blessing of God,
he has educated in the principles of our established Church, as one
united family, a community whose simple and virtuous lives are so
pre-eminent In 1826 Mr. Nobbs left England for the purpose of
going to Pitcairn. For nearly two years, by the way of the Cape
of Good Hope, India, and Australia, he sought a passage; finally,
at Callao, in Peru, he met the owner of a launch who, on the con-
dition of Mr. Nobbs fitting her out, agreed to accompany him to
Pitcairn. Mr. Nobbs fitted her himself, and expended what little
money he possessed. The owner was in ill health, nevertheless
these two left Callao by themselves, on a voyage of 3500 miles,
which they accomplished in forty-two days. The owner died soon
after their arrival. The launch was hauled on shore, and her
materials used to build a house for Mr. Nobbs.
“ I was four days on shore at Pitcairn, in constant discourse with
the islanders. lam convinced that the time and the opportunity
have arrived for giving them a minister of our Church; and that
Mr. Nobbs is the person they wish and the person at present best
adapted for them.”
Extract from a private letter, dated “ The Portland, at sea,
August, 1852.
“ Of all the eventful periods which have chequered my life, none
have surpassed in interest, and I trust in hope of future good, the
last, our visit to Pitcairn ; and surely the hand of God has been
in all this, for by chances the most unexpected, and by favorable
winds out of the usual course of the trades, w'e were carried in
eleven days to Pitcairn’s from Borabora. It is impossible to


describe the charm that the society of the Islanders throws around
them under the Providence of God. The hour and the occasion
served, and I have brought away their Pastor and Teacher for the
purpose of sending him to England to be ordained, and one of his
daughters who will be placed at the English Clergyman’s at
Valparaiso until her father’s return. The Islanders depend prin-
cipally for their necessary supplies on the whaling-ships, they are
generally American, greatly to their credit they behave in the most
exemplary manner, very different from what I expected, one rough
seaman whom I spoke to in praise of such conduct said, Sir, I
expect if one of our fellows was to misbehave himself here, we
should not leave him alive. They are guiltless and unsophisticated
beyond conception. But the time had arrived when preparation
for partial removal was necessary and especially for the ordination
of their Pastor, or the appointment of a Clergyman of the Estab-
lished Church. They are thoroughly versed in Bible history
which has hitherto kept them from listening to the advances of
some over heated imaginations. Pitcairn’s ought to be preserved
as the St. Paul’s of the Pacific, it is very little larger and with
reasonable expence and care its light might be diffused to many
nations. I staid four days upon that speck in the ocean, but rising
like a Paradise from its bosom, covered with fruits and no for-
bidden tree, and where by the grace of God, John Adams the
mutineer and the manslayer, has planted a faith carried out by his
descendants in lives of the simplest purity and virtue. I believe
there was scarce a dry eye in the ship when the Islanders took
their leave, we ran within hail of the Settlement, hoisted the
Royal Standard, fired a salute and cheered them.”
Extract from private letter from the Admiral's Secretary,
“At 6. 30. a. m. of the 9th, as we were dancing along about 8
knots before a fresh breeze, we discovered a thin blue shadow,
whose outline appeared to be too well defined to be a cloud; at 9
we were certain that we saw Pitcairn Island, having read so much
of the Mutiny of the Bounty and the subsequent romantic history
of the Mutineers, which has resulted in the formation of a Colony
celebrated for their virtue and simplicity and religion, I expe-
rienced a feeling of something (I know not what to call it) on
approaching the Island, that I have felt when visiting some spot
held sacred either from history or from being the scene of some
Biblical relation —it is a secret kind of satisfaction. Having a fair
wind we hoped about noon to be on shore, but whilst we were yet 20
miles from the Island the wind came directly foul and fell light, so
that we hardly held our own, owing to the heavy swell, and all
day we remained endeavouring to work up. What a little spot it
appears on the vast Pacific, a mere rock apparently incapable to
resist the mighty waves of so vast an ocean, easily indeed would a
ship not knowing its exact position miss it. The Mutineers
might well deem themselves secure on so small an Island, so re-
motely situated at that time. Also these seas w’ere but little fre-


quented, but even now to give you an idea of their vast extent,
notwithstanding the thousands of ships that are trading on them,
we have only seen one ship at sea, and our track measures 4,500
miles, when we get close to the land, or some well known Port, we
see a few. . During the night we got a slant of wind, and at 6
Sunday morning the Bth, we were close to the Island, I fired
a gun to give notice of our arrival. A whale-boat full of the
Islanders soon came off, but before coming along-side they asked
permission to come on board, then jumped up the side 7 or 8 fine
tall robust fellows, and gave us a hearty shake hands, and assured
us of a hearty welcome when we went on shore; I was in my
cabin with Philip Mc’Coy (one of the Islanders) when the sentry
came to tell me that it was Prayer time, for the Admiral always
has prayers before breakfast. I said to Philip * I shall be up
again directly if you will wait,’ he paused a moment and then
said, ‘ May I come Sir,’ Oh yes I answered. On going down we
met the rest of his companions whom he told, and they all came in
and knelt down to prayers. We then got a hurried breakfast and
the Admiral and myself immediately landed in the Cutter, the
water being pretty smooth. This was the only time a ship’s boat
was able to land, for a heavy surf generally rolls in, breaking with
terrific violence on the rocky shore, the proper way to land is to
come to the back of the rollers in a ship’s boat, a whale-boat then
comes off, you get into her, and she immediately gets ready to obey
the signal of a man who stands upon a rock on shore, and directly
he waves his hat the favorable moment has arrived, the men give
way and with wonderful rapidity the boat is borne on the top of
the wave to the shore, they are very skilful, and in a heavy surf
will generally land you dry. Mr. George Hunn Nobbs, their
teacher or Pastor, met us at the landing place, and we at once
ascended the cliffs by a steep winding path to a plantation of Cocoa
Trees, called the Market Place, as all trade is carried on at this
spot. Here the Islanders met us and gave us a hearty welcome,
generally all the Inhabitants assemble here to welcome the Officers
of a Man of War, but as it was Sunday and early, they had not
arrived, we continued our way by a pretty path winding through
the trees to the town, meeting here and there detachments coming
towards us, these all followed in our wake and by the time we
reached Mr. Nobbs’ cottage, which is situated at the opposite end
of the town, we had pretty well all the people after us, never were
seen so many happy smiling faces, all eager to look at the first
Admiral that ever came to their happy Island, but not one tried
to push his way or make any attempt to get before another;
if we said a kind word to any of them they looked so happy and
pleased, and we did not neglect to do so. There is not one in
whose face good humour, virtue, amiability, and kindness does not
beam, and consequently not one whose face is not pleasing. It
was now Church time and away we all went to Church. Mr.
Nobbs officiated and read the prayers impressively and earnestly,
the most solemn attention was paid by all, they sang two hymns


in most magnificent style and really I have never heard any church
singing in any part of the world that could equal it, except at
Cathedrals, and the whole of the credit is due to a Mr. Charleton,
who was left behind by accident from a whaler.—See Pitcairn’s
Island and the Islanders, by Mr. Hrodie. Both sexes like to
dress like English people if they can on Sundays. The women
complain that they cannot get shoes, but all the men can get them
from the whalers. During the week their dress consists chiefly of
a dark blue petticoat, and a white kind of shirt for the women, and
for the men loose shirt and trousers. Their food consists chiefly
of Yams, Cocoa Nuts, Bananas, Tacco, Oranges, etc., etc., a few
fish and in the yam season each family kills a large pig that during
the hard work of digging yams they may have a little animal food,
sometimes they get Goat’s flesh and are trying to rear a few cattle
they have there. The Admiral gave them a young Bull and Cow
also a Ram. Both sexes work very hard indeed, they usually rise
at dawn, have family prayers, do the work that is necessarj' —
about dusk have supper, then they go to the singing school or to
Mr. Nohbs, or meet to have a chat. About 9or 10 they go to bed
previously having family worship. Should one of the little ones
go to bed or to sleep during his mother’s absence she immediately
awakes it to say its prayers. Not a soul on the Island would
dream of commencing a meal or finishing without asking a bless-
ing or returning thanks. Boys and girls can swim almost as soon
as they can walk, consequently they can swim through the largest
surf and play about amongst the broken water on the rocks that
we look at with terror. One of their greatest amusements is to
have a slide as they term it, that is, to take a piece of wood about
3 feet long shaped like a Canoe with a small keel (called a surf
board) they then, holding this before them, dive under the first
heavy sea and come up the other side, they then swim out a little
w r ay until they see a rapid heavy sea come rolling in, the higher
the better, they rest their breast on the Canoe or Surf Board and
are carried along on the very apex of the surf at a prodigious rate
right upon the rocks, where you think nothing can save them from
being dashed to pieces, the surf seems so powerful, but in a
moment they are on their legs and prepared for another slide.
Their method of fishing is equally dangerous, the women walk
upon the rocks until they see a squid then watching the retreating
sea, they run in and try to pick the squid up before the advancing
surf can wash them off, but frequently they are washed off, and
then they have to exert all their skill to land, for they have no
surf board to help them. Christmas day is a grand feast and
they keep it up in good style, but the Queen’s birth-day is
their grand day, it is kept up with feasting and dancing (the
only day they are allowed to dance on the Island) and all sorts
of merriment. Among the first questions everybody asks is—
How is her Majesty the Queen ?—Away, away, we are off to
the world again, truly sorry to leave this Island, their happiness
in this life consists solely in virtue, and their virtue is their


truest pleasure. They think that (and how really true it is) the
more religious aud virtuous you become the happier you are;
deeming every sin to take from your enjoyment in this and the
after life. If we were to take away the credit due to them of
leading so good a life from principle, they would still continue, as
they know that true pleasure is only to be obtained by obeying the
will of God. Their temperance and industry give them health,
food and cheerfulness, it gains for them universal esteem, respect
and sympathy, and as in this life they do not seek their pleasures
in things below, but in a Higher Power, so we may earnestly hope
that the image of the Saviour will be found in their hearts, and
in the next world that they may be peculiarly His own.
NATIONAL AIR, BY MR. NOBBS.
Mid the mighty Southern Ocean
Stands an isolated Rock,
Blanched by the surfs commotion,
Riven by the lightning’s shock.
Hark those strains to heaven ascending
From yon slopes of vivid green,
Old and young their voices blending,
God preserve Britannia’s Queen.
What are these whose aspirations
With such ardour greet the ear,
Sons whose Sires wrought consternation,
Daughters of the Mutineerf.
Yet those Sires were ne’er disloyal,
Tho’ they curbed a Tyrant’s sway,
Their Children with affection loyal.
Hail Victoria’s natal day.
See that flash yon grove illuming,
Long impervious to the sun,
Now the quick report comes booming
From the ocean rescued gun.
Now the bell is gaily ringing
Where yon white robed train are seen,
Now they all unite in singing,
God preserve our gracious Queen.
The following is a List sent by the Admiral, of things which
the Islanders are most in need.
MEDICINES.
Opium, laudanum, gum, camphor, carbonate of ammonia, spirits
of wine, syrup of squills. Friar's balsam, ether, cerate and basilican
ointment, olive oil, surgical instruments, (that is to say such as may
be used by a non-professional man) iodine of potassium, digitalis,
hyoscyamus, conii.


ARTICLES REQUIRED BY THE WOMEN.
Calico, white, blue and colored; Earthenware, viz., platen, mugs,
basins, jugs and wash hand basins, frying pans, iron pots and
saucepans, thread, needles, scissors, tapes, knives and forks, tum-
blers; combs, large and small toothed; hand scrubbing brushes, hooks
and eyes for gowns, etc.. Butchers’ knives of good quality, (used by
the females in their cooking avocations) tin pots and pans, iron
spoons, brass curtain rings, white bone buttons, shirt buttons, hand-
kerchiefs, four chairs for Mrs. Nobhs.
ARTICLES REQUIRED BY THE ISLANDERS.
Flannel, soap, Dutch twine ; fish hooks various sizes, principally
of the size of mackerel hooks, pig lead, window glass, woollen and
striped shirts, blankets, cut nails assorted, hinges, hammers, chisels,
plane irons, gimblets, screws, white lead, paint brushes, old junk
for thatching houses, light weeding hoes, spades, bar or rod iron
3 or 4 inches in circumference, boat planks, copper nails for repair-
ing boats, pens, ink, paper, slates; pencils, slate and black lead ;
spelling books of the same series, arithmetics, (Walkingham's) small
hand copy books a good variety, a few elementary drawing books.
In the Illustrated London News of November 6th, 1852, some
sketches made on the spot, and a few other details may be found.
Last Spring a barrel organ was sent out to the Island, by the con-
tributions of Admiral Moresby and his friends.
A Contribution is now in progress, for supplying the Islanders
with as many of the things above mentioned as the funds will pro-
cure, and any subscriptions for that purpose may be forwarded to
Mrs. Moresby, Beach House, Exmouth, Devonshire; or to
Mrs. R. A. White, Wood Hill, Grantham; and will be applied
as desired.
November, 1852.
Bushby, Printer, Grantham.


P. S. —In consequence of the Islanders being able to sing in
parts, the barrel Organ was stopped, and a key as well as barrel
Organ is now in progress for the Island.
THE FOLLOWING SUMS HAVE BEEN ALREADY SENT TO MRS. R. A. WHITE,
FOR
The Pitcairn Island Fund.
£. J. d.
Dr. Brown, Grantham 1 0 0
Miss Brown, Grantham I 0 0
George White, Esq., Grantham 10 0
Wm. Ostler,.Junr. Esq., Grantham .. 10 0
The Rev. George Gilbert, Syston .. .. 10 0
R. H. Johnston, Esq., Grantham .. .. 10 0
Miss Johnston 0 5 0
The Rev. John White, Grayingham.. .. 010 0
Mrs. Garfit, Boston 010 0
The Rev. T. Mills, Peterborough .... 010 0
Mr. R. A. White, Grantham 2 0 0
