

fVV PrTVV\
h' e \n\
,■ 7
- *-9-4 J-a^cL




took shelter is still called Machico. His mistress being sea sick, Macham
landed with her and some of the people, and the ship putting to sea, de-
serted them. Oppressed with sickness and grief at seeing herself in this
hopeless state of exile, the lady died; and Macham, who was extremely
fond of her, constructed a chapel or hermitage dedicated to Jesus the Sa-
viour, in which he deposited her remains, and engraved both their names,
and the cause of their arrival, on a rnde monument which he erected to
her memory. He afterwards constructed a boat or canoe, which he hol-
lowed out from the trunk of a large tree, in which he and those of his
companions who had been left on shore along with him, passed over to
the opposite coast of Africa, without the aid of oars, sails, or rudder. He was
made prisoner by the Moors, who presented him to their king, by whom
he was sent to the king of Castile.
Madeira, in the Portuguese language, or Madera in Spanish, signifies
wood-, and this island derived its name from the immense quantity of
thick and tall trees, with which it was covered when first discovered.
One of the two capitanias, or provinces, into which this island is divided,
is named Machico, as is likewise the principal town of that district, sup-
posed to have originated from the traditionary story of the misfortunes of
Macham; the other capilania, with its principal town, the capital of the
island, is named Funchal, from Funcho, the Portuguese terra for Fennel,
which abounds on the adjoining rocks.
PITCAIRN’S ISLAND.
il is well known, that in the year 1789, his Majesty’s armed ship the
Bounty, while employed in conveying the bread-fruit tree from Otaheite
to the West Indies, was run away with by her men, and the captain and
some of his officers put on board a boat, which, after a passage of twelve
hundred leagues, arrived at a Dutch settlement on the island of Timor.
The mutineers, twenty-five in number, were supposed, from some ex-
pressions which escaped them, to have made sail toward Otaheite. As
soon as this circumstance was known at the Admiralty, Captain Edwards
was ordered to proceed in the Pandora to that island, and endeavour to
discover and bring to England the Bounty, with such of the crew as he
might be able to secure. On Ids arrival, March 1791, at Matavai-bay, in
Otaheite, four of the mutineers came voluntarily on board the Pandora to
surrender themselves ; and, from information given by them, ten others
(the whole number alive upon the island) were in the course of a few days
taken ; and, with the exception of four, who perished in the wreck of the
Pandora, near Endeavour Straight, conveyed to England for trial before a
court-martial, which adjudged six of them to suffer death, and acquitted
the other four.
17
Pitcairn's island.


Pitcairn's island.
From the accounts given by these men, as well as from some documents
that were preserved, it appeared, that as soon as Lieutenant Bligh had
been driven from the ship, the twenty-five mutineers proceeded with her
to Toobouai, where they proposed to settle ; but the place being found to
hold out little encouragement, they returned to Otaheite, and having there
laid in a large supply of stock, they once more took their departure for
Toobouai, carrying with them eight men, nine women, and seven boys,
natives of Otaheite.
They' commenced, on their second arrival, the building of a fort; but,
through divisions among themselves, and quarrels with the natives, the
design was abandoned. Christian, the leader, also very soon discovered
that his authority over his accomplices was at an end ; he therefore pro-
posed, that they should return to Otaheite; that as many as chose it should
be put on shore at that island, and that the rest should proceed in the ship
to any other place they might think proper. Accordingly, they once more
put to sea, and reached Matavai, 20th Sept, 1789.
Here sixteen of the twenty-five desired to be landed, fourteen of whom,
as already mentioned, were taken on board the Pandora; of the other
two, as reported by Coleman (the first who surrendered himself to Captain
Edwards,) one had been made a chief, killed his companion, and was
himself shortly afterward murdered by the natives.
Christian, with the remaining eight of the mutineers, having taken on
board several of the natives of Otaheite, the greater part women, put to
sea 21st Sept. 1789 ; in the morning the ship was discovered from Point
Venus, steering in a north-westerly direction; and here terminate the ac-
counts given by the mutineers who were cither taken or surrendered them-
selves at Matavai-bay. They' stated, however, that Christian, on the
night of his departure, was heard to declare, that he should seek for some
uninhabited island, and, having established his party, break up the
ship ; but all endeavours of Captain Edwards to gain intelligence either
of the ship or her crew, at any of the numerous islands visited by the
Pandora, failed.
From this period, no information respecting Christian or his companions
reached England for twenty years; when, about the beginning of 1809,
Sir Sidney Smith, then commander-in-chief on the Brazil station, trans-
mitted to the Admiralty a paper, which he had received from Lieutenant
Fitzmaurice, purporting to bean “ Extract from the log-book of Captain
Folger, of the American ship Topaz,” and dated “Valparaiso, 10th Oc-
tober, 1S08.”
About the commencement of the present year, Rear-admiral Hotham,
when cruising off New London, received a letter, addressed to the lords
of the Admiralty, of which the following is a copy, together with the azi-
muth compass, to which it refers:—
“ My Lords, “ Nantucket, March 1, 1813.
“ The remarkable circumstance which took place on my last voyage to
the Pacific Ocean, will, 1 trust, plead my apology for addressing your
lordships at this time. In February, 1808, 1 touched at Pitcairn’s Island,


in lat. 25° 2' S. long. 1° W. from Greenwich. My principal object was
to procure seal-skins for the China market; and, from the account given
of the island in Captain Carteret’s voyage, I supposed it was uninhabited ;
but, on approaching the shore in my boat, I was met by three young men
in a double canoe, with a present, consisting of some fruit and a hog.
They spoke to me in the English language, and informed me that they
were born on the island, and that their father was an Englishman, who had
sailed with Captain Bligh.
“ After discoursing with them a short time, I landed with them, and
found an Englishman, of the name of Alexander Smith, who informed me,
that he was one of the Bounty’s crew, and that after putting Captain Bligh
in the boat, with half the ship’s company, they returned to Otaheite, where
part of their crew chose to tarry; but Mr. Christian, with eight others, in-
cluding himself, preferred going to a more remote place; and, after mak-
ing a short stay at Otaheite, where they took wives and six men servants,
they proceeded to Pitcairn’s Island, where they destroyed the ship, after
taking every thing out of her which they thought svould be useful to them.
About six years after they landed at this place, their servants attacked and
killed all the English, excepting the informant, and he was severely
wounded. The same night, the Otaheitean widows arose and murdered
all their countrymen, leaving Smith with the widows and children, where
he had resided ever since without being resisted.
“ I remained but a short time on this island, and on leaving it, Smith
presented to me a time-piece, and an azimuth compass, which he told me
belonged to the Bounty. The time-keeper was taken from me by the gover-
nor of the island of Juan Fernandez, after I had had it in my possession about
six weeks. The compass I put in repair on board my ship, and made use
of it on my homeward passage, since which a new card has been put to it
by an instrument-maker in Boston. I now forward it to your lordships,
thinking there will be a kind of satisfaction in receiving it, merely from the
extraordinary circumstances attendingit.
“ Mathew Folgek.”
Nearly about the same time, a further account of these interesting peo-
ple was received from Vice-admiral Dixon, in a letter addressed to him by
Sir Thomas Staines, of his Majesty’s ship Briton, of which the following
is a copy: —
“ Sir, “Briton, Valparaiso, Oct. 18, 1814.
“ I have the honour to inform you, that on my passage from the Mar-
quesas islands to this port, on the morning of 17th September, I fell in
with an island where none is laid down in the admiralty or other charts,
according to several chronometers of the Briton and Tagus. I therefore
hove-to until day-light, and then closed to ascertain whether it was inha-
bited, which 1 soon discovered it to be, and to my great astonishment,
found that every individual on the island (forty in number) spoke very good
English, They proved to be the descendants of the deluded crew of the
Bounty, ,which, from Otaheite, proceeded to the above-mentioned island,
where the ship was burnt.


<f Christian appeared to have been the leader and the sole cause of the
mutiny in that ship. A venerable old man, named John Adams *, is the
only surviving Englishman of those who last quitted Otaheite in her, and
whose exemplary conduct and fatherly care of the whole little colony,
Could not but command admiration. The pious manner in which ail those
bom in this island have been reared, the correct sense of religion which
has been instilled into their young minds by this old man, has given him
the pre-eminence over the whole of them, to whom they look up as the
'father of the whole and one family.
" A son of Christian was the first-bom on the island, now about twenty-
fiveyears of age (named Thursday-October Christian) ; the elder Christian
fell a sacrifice to the jealousy of anOtaheitean man, within three or four
years after their arrival on the island. They were accompanied thither by
six Otaheitean men, and twelve women ; the former were all swept away
by desperate contentions between them and the Englishmen, and five of
the latter have died at different periods, leaving at present only one man
and several women of the original settlers.
“ The island must undoubtedly be that called Pitcairn’s, although er-
roneously laid down in the charts. We had the meridian sun close to it,
which gave us 25" 4" S. lat. and 130° 25' W. long, by chronometers of the
Briton and Tagus.
" It is abundant in yams, plantains, hogs, goats, and fowls, but affords
no shelter for a ship or vessel of any description; neither could a ship water
there without great difficulty.
“ I cannot refrain from offering my opinion, that it is well worthy the
attention of our laudable religious societies, particularly that for propagating
the Christian religion, the whole of the inhabitants speaking the Otaheitean
tongue as well as English.
« During the whole of the time they have been on the island, only one
vessel has ever communicated with them, which took place about six
since, by an American ship called the Topaz, of Boston, May hew Folger,
master.
« The island is completely iron-bound with rocky shores, and landing
ia boats at all times difficult, although safe to approach within a short di-
stance in a ship.
** T. Staines. 5 ’
As the real position of the island was ascertained to be so far distant from
that in which it is usually laid down in the charts, and as the captains of
the Briton and Tagus seem to have still considered it as uninhabited, they
■were not a little surprised, on approaching its shores, to behold plantations
regularly laid out, and huts or houses more neatly constructed than those
on the Marquesas islands. When about two miles from the shore, some
natives were observed bringing down their canoes on their shoulders, dash-
ing through a heavy surf, and paddling off to the ships; but their astonish-
* There was no such name in the Bounty’s crew ; he must have assumed it
ia lieu of his real name, Alexander Smith.


iwht was unbounded, on hearing one of them, on approaching the ship,
call out in the English language, “ Won’t you heave us a rope, pow?”
The first man who got on hoard the Briton soon proved who they were.
His name, he said, was Tlmrsday-October-Christian, the first-born on the
island. He was then about twenty-five years of age, and is described as
being a fine young man, about six feet high, his hair deep black, his
countenance open and interesting, of a brownish cast, but free from that
mixture of a reddish tint, which prevails on the Pacific Islands; his only
dress was a piece of cloth round his loins, and a straw hat, ornamented
with the black feathers of the domestic fowl.—“ With a great share of good
humour,” says Captain Pipon, “ we were glad to trace in his benevolent
countenance all the features of an honest English face; and I must confess.
I could not survey this interesting person without feelings of tenderness and
compassion.” His companion was named George Young, a fine youth,
about eighteen.
if the astonishment of the captains was great on hearing their first salu-
tation in English, their surprize and interest were not a little increased on
Sir Thomas Staines taking the youths below, and setting before them some-
thing to eat; when one of them rose up, and placing his hands together
in a posture of devotion, distinctly repeated, and in a pleasing tone and
manner—“ For what we are going to receive, the Lord make us truly
thankful.”—They expressed great surprize on seeing a cow on board the
Briton, and were in doubt whether she was a great goat ora horned sow.
The two captains of his Majesty’s ships accompanied these young men
on shore. With some difficulty, and a good wetting, and with the assist-
ance of their conductors, they accomplished a landing through the surf,
and were soon after met by John Adams, a man between fifty and sixty,
who conducted them to his house. 'Uis wife accompanied him, a very
old lady, blind with age. He was at first alarmed, lest the visit was to
apprehend him. But on being told that they were perfectly ignorant of
his existence, he was relieved from his anxiety. Being once assured that
this visit was ota peaceable nature, it is impossible to describe the joy these
poor people manifested, on seeing those whom they were pleased to con-
sider as them countrymen. Yams, cocoa-nnts, and other truits, with fine
fresh eggs, were laid before them ; and the old man would havekilled and
dressed a hog for his visitors, but time would not allow them to partake of
iiis intended feast.
The new colony now consisted of about forty-six persons, mostly grown
up young people, besides a number ot infants. Ihe young men, all born
on the isl md, were very athletic, and of the finest forms—their counte-
nances open and pleasing, indicating much benevolence and goodness ot
heart; but the young women were objects of particular admiration, tali,
robust, and beautifully formed, their faces beaming with smiles and unruf-
fled good humour, but wearing a degree of modesty and bashfulness that
would do honour to the most virtuous nation on earth; their teeth,, like
ivory, were regular and beautiful, without a single exception ; and ail of
them, both male and female, had the most marked English features.
The clothing of the young females consisted of a piece of linen reaching


Pitcairn’s island.
from the waist to the knees, and generally a sort of mantle thrown loosely
over the shoulders, and hanging as low as the ancles; but this covering
appeared to be intended chiefly as a protection against the sun and the
-weather, as it was frequently laid aside—and then the upper part of the
body was entirely exposed, and it is not possible to conceive more beautiful
forms than they exhibited. They sometimes wreath caps or bonnets for
the head, in the most tasty manner, to protect the face from the rays of
the sun ; and though, as Captain Pipon observes, they have only had the
instruction of the Otaheitean mothers, “ our dress-makers in London would
be delighted with the simplicity, and yet elegant taste, of these untaught
females.”
Their native modesty, assisted by a proper sense of religion and mo-
rality, instilled into their youthful minds by John Adams, has hitherto
preserved these interesting people perfectly chaste, and free from all kinds
of debauchery. Adams assured the visitors, that since Christian’s death,
there had not been a single instance of any young woman proving unchaste,
nor any attempt at seduction on the part of the men. They all labour-
while young in the cultivation of the ground: and when possessed of a
sufficient quantity of cleared land and of stock to maintain a family, they
are allowed to marry, but always with the consent of Adams, who unites
them by a sort of marriage-ceremony of his own.
The greatest harmony prevails in this little society; their only quarrels,
and these rarely happened, being, according to their own expression,
“ quarrels of the mouth ;” they are honest in their dealings, which con-
sist of bartering different articles for mutual accommodation. Their habi-
tations are extremely neat. 'The little village of Pitcairn forms a pretty
square, the houses at the upper end of which are occupied by the patriarch,
John Adams, and his family, consisting of his old blind wife, and three
daughters, from fifteen to eighteen years of age, and a boy of eleven ; a
daughter of his wife by a former husband, and a son-in-law On the op-
posite side is the dwelling of Thursday-October-Christian; and in the
centre is a smooth verdant lawn, on which the poultry are let loose, fenced
in so as to prevent the intrusion of the domestic quadrupeds.
All that was done was obviously undertaken on a settled plan, unlike to
any thing to be met with on the other islands, in their houses, too, they
had a good deal of decent furniture, consisting of beds laid upon bed-
steads, with neat covering ; they had also tables, and large chests to con-
tain their valuables and clothing, which is made from the bark of a certain
tree prepared chiefly by the elder Otaheitean females. Adams’s house con-
sisted of two rooms, and the windows had shutters to close at night. The
younger part of the females are, as before stated, employed with their
brothers, under the direction of their common father, Adams, in the cul-
ture of the ground, which produced cocoa-nuts, bananas, bread-fruit tree,
yams, sweet potatoes, and turnips. They have also plenty of hogs and
goats. The woods abound with a species of wild hog, and the coasts of
the island with several kinds of good fish.
T heir agricultural implements are made by themselves, from the iron
supplied by the Bounty, which, with great labour, they beat out into


spades, hatchets, &c. This was not all. The good old man kept a regu-
lar journal, in which was entered the nature and quantity of work per-
formed by each family, what each had received, and what was due on
acccount: —There was, it seems, besides private property, a sort of gene-
ra! stock, out of which articles were issued on account of the several mem-
bers of the community ; and, for mutual accommodation, exchanges of
one kind of provision for another were very frequent, as salt for fresh pro-
visions, vegetables and fruit for poultry, hsh, &c.; also, when the stores
of one family were low, or wholly expended, a fresh supply was raised
from another, or out of the general stock, to be repaid when circumstances
were more favourable ; all of which were carefully noted down in Adams’s
journal.
But what was most gratifying of all to the visitors, was the simple and
unaffected manner in which they returned thanks to the Almighty for the
-many blessings they enjoyed. They never failed to say grace before and
after meals, to pray every morning at sun-rise, and they frequently re-
peated the Lord’s Prayer and the Creed. “ It was truly pleasing,” says
Captain Pipon, “ to see these poor people so well disposed to listen so at-
tentively to moral instruction, to believe in the attributes of God, and to
place their reliance on Divine goodness.” The day on which the two
captains landed was Saturday, 17th Sept.; but by John Adams's account
it was Sunday the 18th, and they were keeping the Sabbath by making it
a day of rest and of prayer. —This was occasioned by the Bounty having
proceeded thither by the Eastern route, and our frigates having gone to
the westward ; and the Topaz found them right according to his own rec-
koning, she having also approached the island from the eastward. Every
ship from Europe proceeding to Pitcairn’s Island round the Cape of Good
Hope, will lind them a day later—as those w'ho approach them round Cape
Horn, a day in advance; as was the case with Captain Folger, and Cap-
tains SirT. Staines and Pipon.
The visit of the Topaz is, of course, a notable circumstance, marked
down in Adams’s journal. The first ship descried off the island was on
27th December, 1795 ; but as she did not approach the land, they could
not make out to what nation she belonged. A second appeared some time
after, but did not attempt to communicate with them. A third came suf-
ficiently near to see the natives and their habitations, but did not attempt
to send a boat on shore ; which is the less surprising, considering the uni-
form ruggedness of the coast, the total want of shelter, and the almost
constant and violent breaking of the sea against the cliffs. The good old
man was anxious to know what was going on in the old world, and they
had the means of gratifying his curiosity, by supplying him with some
magazines and modern publications. His library consisted of the books
that belonged to Admiral Bligh, but the visitors had not time to inspect
them.
They inquired particularly after Fletcher Christian. This ill-fated young
man, it seems, was never happy after the rash and inconsiderate step
which he had taken ; he became sullen and morose, and practised the very
same kind of conduct towards his companions in guilt, which he and they
■s
PITCAIRNS ISLAND.


ISLAND.
so loudly complained of in their late commander. Disappointed in his
expectations at Otaheite and the Friendly Islands, and most probably
dreading a discovery, this tieiuded youth committed himself and his re-
maining confederates to the mere chance of being cast upon some desert
island, and chance threw them on that of Pitcairn. Finding no anchorage
near it, he ran the ship upon the rocks, cleared her of the livestock and
other articles which they had been supplied with at Otaheite, when he set
her on fire, that no trace of inhabitants might be visible, and all hope of
escape cut efff from himself and his wretched followers. He soon, how-
ever, disgusted both his own countrymen and the Otahciteans, by his op-
pressive and tyrannical conduct; they divided into parties, and disputes,
affrays, and murders, were the consequence. His Otaheitean wife died
within a twelvemonth from their landing, after which he carried off one
that belonged to an Otaheitean man, who watched for an opportunity of
taking revenge, and shot him dead while digging in his own field. Thus
terminated the miserable existence of this deluded young man, who was
deficient neither in talent, energy, nor connexions, and who might have
risen in the service, and become an ornament to his profession.
John Adams declared, as it was natural enough he should do, his ab-
horrence of the crime in which he was implicated, and said that he was
sick at the time in his hammock ;—this, we understand, is not true, though
he was not particularly active in the mutiny;—he expressed the utmost
willingness to surrender himself, and be taken to England ; indeed, lie ra-
ther seemed to have an inclination to revisit his native country ; but the
young men and women flocked round him, and with tears and entreaties
begged that their father and protector might not be taken from them, for
without him they must all perish. It would have been an act of the great-
est inhumanity to remove him from the island ; and it is hardly necessary
to add, that Sir Thomas Staines lent a willing ear to their entreaties, think-
ing, no doubt, (as we feel strongly disposed to think), that, if he were
even among the most guilty, his care and success in instilling religious and
moral principles into the minds of this young and interesting society, have,
in a great degree, redeemed his former crimes.
r phis island is about six miles long by three broad, covered with wood,
and the soil, of course, very rich, situated under the parallel of 25° S. la-
titude ; and, in the midst of such a wide expanse of ocean, the climate
must be fine, and admirably adapted for the reception of all the vegetable
productions of every part of the habitable globe. Small, therefore, as
Pitcairn’s island may appear, there can be little doubt that it is capable of
supporting many inhabitants *.
* See Naval Chronicle, vol. xxxv.




