

PIUS IX. AND THE REVOLUTION:
PASTORAL LETTER
TO THE
Cla'fjy anb Daitg
OF THE
. DIOCESE OF SYDNEY.
ROGER BEDE
ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY.
SYDNEY:
EDWARD F. FLANAGAN, DUBLIN BOOK WAREHOUSE.
■ ■•f'
f/7b7Z,
594 George Street.


f mi>7%


PIUS 11. AID THE REVOLUTION
PASTORAL LETTER
TO THE
Clergy anb ICaity
OF THE
DIOCESE OF SYDNEY.
r v7?V Cfri <9 MJ
BY
ROGER BEDE,
ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY.
SYDNEY:
EDWARD F. FLANAGAN, DUBLIN BOOK WAREHOUSE,.
1877.
594 George Street.


SIDNEY I
V. CUNNINGHAME AND CO., PRINTERS,
186 PITT STREET.


I "8 S -17
ROGER BEDE, by the Grace of God and the Favour
of the Apostolic See, Archbishop of Sydney, to the
Clergy, Secular and Regular, and the Faithful of
the said Diocese,
Health and Benediction in the Lord.
Feverend and Dear Brethren, and
Dear Children in Jesus Christ, —
We seize this early opportunity to draw before your
attention the condition of the Holy Father, Pope Pius
IX., and the state of the Church in Italy ; and we intend
to dedicate this, our first Pastoral Letter, to the defence
of his august person and his high position. The Yicar of
Jesus Christ is the Spiritual Head of the Catholic Church
throughout the world; and though we live some fifteen
thousand miles distant from the Eternal City, and from
the presence of the Sovereign Pontiff, still we are no less
outraged by the treatment he receives from the enemies
who have robbed him of his inheritance, than are those
whose privilege it is to suffer at the foot of his Throne,
and who witness with their very eyes the indignities and
insults which are heaped upon him. And he, the Holy
Father, is conscious of the deep universal interest felt by
the Catholic world in his regard. And he looks to the
Catholic People of every nationality to sustain him at
this hour, and desires that they should bring their
influence to bear, in every legitimate manner, in support
of his free and independent action in the government of
the Church of God. You are aware that to this end he
has lately spoken out in clear, emphatic, and unvarnished


language In the Secret Consistory of last March he
addressed one of the most his manylLm
, J ons \° assembled Cardinals; and througl/them to
the whole Catholic world.- As a Bishop rufes teaches
and rebukes, warns and condemns within his own
jurisdiction; so does the Successor of St. Peter speak to
the whole Catholic world which forms his diocese and
over which he rules, supreme as the Vicar of our Saviour
d as each priest in charge of souls makes known to the
r/ le , en A tri it e( l t 0 hIS care the teachin gs of his Bishop •
it latf 1 Arch^! sho P and Bishop in the Church of God has
it laid upon him as a duty to promulgate and explain to
ofXT r W 1 -° m T) 6 ex^ ses spiritual authority the mind
u nter a al°OhTlh he the
universal Church Thus it becomes our solemn obligation
to study the mind of the Holy Father, and to do oufvery
best to convey .it m its fulness to those entrusted to our
care; and to stir up, in the breasts of all, those sentiments
m which his recent Allocution is caStTto
We will therefore set about placing before you as
clearly an d simply as we may, the substance of the Pope’s
diess, and then we will proceed to consider how best
SteSar the practioal nations Ihth
, , T * e Holy Father points out clearly to the Bishons
what they have to do. “We would wish/’ he says "that
our Voice might reach at one and the ie time all the
.»sz t-r
“3rr : “
and real situation, either by concealing- the gravitv of if
or by extolhng its liberty aid independence 8 oXhde
. tuation is epitomized in these words : The Church is
persecuted in Italy, and the Vicar of Jesus Christ is
* See Appendix.


neither free nor independent in the exercise of his
supreme power.”
It is evident, then, that the Pope desires the whole
Catholic world to be instructed as to his real and actual
situation. He wishes for no veils and disguises. He
desires the Bishops to make known to every Catholic in
Christendom the true state of the Church in Italy, and
the position into which the Supreme Pastor has been
thrown by that godless and revolutionary party, which
has imprisoned the Pope, and seized upon the Patrimony
of St. Peter. He asks them to sweep away that net-work
of pretence, to strip off that cloak of hypocrisy with which
his persecutors would drape their acts of tyranny; and
wishes them to expose to the public view of the world
the deeds of cruelty and oppression by means of which
his enemies hope, finally, to achieve the overthrow of
Christianity itself. In a word, he wishes them to bring
out in as clear relief as they are able, before all eyes, the
fact, that “ The Church is persecuted in Italy, and that
the Vicar of Jesus Christ is neither free nor independent
in the exercise of his supreme power.”
Now, in order to draw out the true position of our
Holy Father, such as it really is at the present moment,
it will be necessary to take a wide survey of the forces
which are acting in antagonism to each other. We shall
then, not only grasp the position of the Pope; but we
shall do more than this : we shall realize the character
of the enemy with which he is contending, and the
paramount importance, if we love not merely the Catholic
Church, but Christian civilization, of doing our full
share in supporting his cause, and fighting in his battle.
The enemies of the Church at the present hour, and the
enemies of the Papal Chair, are not simply a few obscure
and clamorous sects which are as harmless and noisy
as they are helpless ; but the really dangerous enemies
of the Church are the infidels, revolutionists and
libertines, who, looking on Catholicity as synonymous
with, or at least as the main fortress of, Christian
Civilization and Supernatural Life, would destroy the


former, simply as the most expeditious method of
getting rid of the latter. They would sweep away, with
one brush, the entire scheme of Supernatural Revelation,
and build up the world anew from the basis of mere
flesh, and blood, and the brutalities of the natural man.
Against these sectaries and their wide-spread and
secret machinations, the Sovereign Pontiff and the Roman
Catholic Church stand as a perpendicular rock of granite.
They are attempting to scale it or to blow it to pieces :
the Pope is defending it, and exposing to the world the
secret designs of the enemies of the human race. It is
the. character of this contest, and his present position in
m it,, that the Holy Father would have the Bishops
explain to, and impress upon people. He desires them
to be made acquainted with the nature of the internecine
battle he. is engaged in, so that they may know, so that
we here m Australia may know, that he is fighting in our
cause as much as in his own, and that it is our bounden
duty to assist him with all our might.
Now, to draw this out effectually, and to come to a
practical resolution with regard to the part we should take
m the contest, we must answer, pretty fully, four several
questions. First, What is the Pope, and what has he
done? Secondly, Who are his enemies, and what are
they doing ? Thirdly, How does he oppose them ? And
fourthly, What shall we do ?
Who is the Pope, and what has he done ? Who
is the Pope? Looking on him merely as a private
individual, he impresses the beholder with a deep sense
of reverence and respect, and draws from the heart
spontaneous sentiments of love and admiration. Such
gentleness, such affectionateness, and so much majesty
together with that which speaks of something beyond
the present world, but which is indiscribable, and yet
quite unmistakable, produces a remarkable impression on
all who are permitted to approach him. “He is one”
says Dr. Newman, “whom to see is to love; one who


overcomes even strangers, even enemies by his very look
and voice \ whose presence subdues, whose memory haunts,
even the sturdy resolute mind of the English Protestant.
“ X know, from the lips of those who are not in the unity
of the Church,” says Cardinal Manning, “ that they never
entered into the presence of any man who has made upon
them so profound an impression of true sovereignty and
fatherly goodness as Pius IX. I have heard this from old
Statesmen, and old Deplomatists, whose experience brought
them in contact with the sovereigns of their time in all
the nations of Europe. There goes forth from him a
benign influence which has touched even his enemies.
Throughout the Christian world the name of Pius IX. is
venerated for justice, inflexibility, and charity. Such
then is the personal character, and the exceptional gifts
of him, who, in a difficult and exceptional season, has
placed upon him the solicitude of all the Churches. It
is not anything in his personal character evidently, that
makes the world hate and persecute the Pope. He is
worried, slandered, and ill-used in spite of his wide-spread
personal popularity; and in spite of that reverence which
his most implacable enemies are forced to concede to his
courage, his charity, and his spotless life.
But Pius IX. is something more than a private
individual graced with exceptional gifts, and conciliating
to himself the personal favour of those with whom he
comes in contact. He is the Vicar of Jesus Christ; he
is the Successor of St. Peter; he is an infallible Spokes-
man on Israel’s Watch-tower, who, by day and in the
night, does not cease to warn the world; to teach the
Truth in its integrity, and without adulteration; and to
withstand the rising tide of Revolution, Libertinism, and
Infidelity which threatens to engulf the world. He is no
mere philosopher, uttering his own deep-set convictions;
but he is the Mouth-piece of the vast Church of God ;
the representative, in the face of the enemy, of that one
encompassing organization or society, which, within its
net-work contains the Christian world, and which claims to
be the one Ark of Salvation set up by Christ upon the
Earth.


foundh^ rJ°T erS “,I*° be
the Tradition of the J» ffS °l God as weU ™ m
and the living link ctn wfcTeloh^
up through the chequered history oFchristianitv
day when our Lord rewarrlprl Qi™ nstiamty to the
deep, exceptional faith “Wh j U ’ SOn °^^ oms t for his
Fathef who L°°in Heaven to'the^butMy
And
sion to feed the Lambs and in hls Commis-
teach the world the Faith and MorahW th J ruf* “■ *°
dispensation. “Simon son nf T 1 i 1 CJln stian
more than these ? ” Peter answered “Lord Th°“ I°™ Me
that I love Tbpp ?” t . / ■L'Ord ihou knowest
I»W' H.’is 1 ,. h?“in>T %
of Jonas, dost thou love Me ? ” TTp * Simon, son
Lord: Thou knowest th:t?LeT?ir SW T d;
him: “Feed My Lambs l” tt/ , , f esus said to
third time : « Simon Ton of To T k f 0 hlm for the
sv£ iS-
a’sswari f Sf wau
thf..™,,* hi. s: s,°rss


of his high office, He said to him in the presence of the rest:
“ Simon, Simon, behold Satan hath desired to have you,
that he may sift you as wheat; but I have prayed for
thee that thy Faith fail not: and thou, being once con-
verted, confirm thy brethren.” And the Prayers of Christ
to the Father are not offered in vain. The Faith of Peter
has never failed or wavered ; he has ever stood firm in
times of peril and “confirmed” his brethren ; and spoken
with so strong and loud a voice as to be heard by the
Universal Church of God in the days of her greatest
trial. For “He who is the Holy and the True, He that
hath the keys of David, He that openeth and no man
shutteth, that shutteth and no man openeth” is the stay
and support of His Vicar upon Earth'; and says to him,
as He has said to those who went before him: “My
Spirit that is in thee, and My W ords which I have put in
thy mouth, shall not depart from thy mouth, nor out of
the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed s
seed, from henceforth and for ever ! ” Thus it is evident
from Scripture and from History what the Pope is in his
official capacity. He is the Head and Supreme Hieriarch of
the Universal Church of God spread throughout the world.
He is the Watchman of the Israel round about us ; and
has to give forth his cry by day and by night. To him
the whole people of God look up for guidance in times of
confusion and of difficulty ; to him they spontaneously
turn when any great religious or spiritual crisis. is
threatening the world. He cannot, he may not hold his
peace. He is placed where he is that he should not be
silent: and it is a solemn duty, placed upon him by his
Divine Master, to speak out with a bold unfaltering voice
and preserve that ‘ Deposit’ intact which has been handed
down to his keeping. He is the Great Leader of the
Bishops of the Church. To his Spiritual Sovereignty
they owe implicit obedience; and they follow his lead,
and shape their policy according to his example ; and take
their tone from his utterances as being Divinely assisted
in his deep responsibilities whilst ruling the Church of
God. In his formal teachings as Universal Pastor in


questions of Faith and Morals he cannot lead astray
J . S Pintual policy and in his methods of ruling
and m his dealings with an evil generation, we feel assured
f P™de a n S ce W1 of Spirit of wt”d
* -fortitude and of Courage, which will
waters “if“ * e Bark of Peter safely on the
whomshah"4l‘o n ? t wfth UP htT; a t n h dfollWllinl - t o
earth, are the words of Eternal Life; for heTs the" Vfoar
ihat the Promises of our Saviour in "P^+
e; “ f j ssar 6 v *»
in the government of the OhrhP Un P ara l « led Potion
Morals, and Discipline is so vfoldW r Faith ’
fanatically opposed to the CathoKS th/t
the extract be a somewhat long one its „™’ •( th gh
plead excuse for its introductioif “The a PP oslteness must
to the Bishop of Rome” he savs “ raCteraSSlgned
venerable as any that has ever entered
ation to conceive. Europe was ? lmaSin-
as one vast moral territory of which P th<Ur SySte , m
Supreme Magistrate, on whom the eyes of dlwerTfaed®
and to whom everyone could appeal i the tutelary and


incorruptible guardian of truth and justice. Beyond the
reach of the clashing passions and numberless temptations
by which the children of men are beset, the sole object of
his authority was to secure for every Christian that future
happiness which was the future reward of virtue. For
this grand end he promulgated laws dictated by the spirit
of unerring wisdom, which prevented crime while they
purified intention, and which no one, without violating his
duty to the great European family, could venture to dis-
obey Greater than monarch by his functions, humbler
than the lowest by his inclinations, his officers were peace,
and his exactors righteousness. Unlike the reluctant
services wrung from their miserable serfs by the oppressors
amono- whom Europe had been cantoned out, the homage
which the Pope received from submissive millions was the
willing, unforced obedience of grateful children, and the
power he exercised was to guide the ignorant m the way,
and to protect him that had no helper against the mighty
and the terrible. Thus, while the face of Europe
was disfigured by a thousand ridiculous and discordant
customs, the offspring of violence and barbarity, there was
above them all a law transcendent and sublime, guarded
by sanctions which all revered, enforced by an authority
which all acknowledged, by which the conqueror and the
conquered the warrior and the peasant, the hangman and
the priest,’nay, by which the judge and the criminal who
trembled before the seat of Justice, were knit together m
one common bond of brotherhood and affection , and. if
compelled by the perverseness of his subjects,, he with
whom this divine prerogative had been deposited was
obliged to exchange the voice of paternal tenderness for
that of admonition and rebuke, to address the wanderers
like children whom he sought to reclaim, rather than as
rebels whom it was his duty to chastize ; nor was it till
admonition after admonition had been despised, till
warning after warning had been set at nought,, till entreaty
after entreaty had been rejected, that the spiritual sword
was at length unsheathed to strike, and that, armed with
the same awful power which smote ‘ Gehazi with a leprosy


and coZon Ser of all C h ■** U ™ al BiA «P
wailing, cut off the rotten h ™ w mid tears and
cast ou the incorrhdbTe off i t to “T 6 tbe tree ’ “ d
and all inter“with 1? fr °“ the laVs Paction,
reproach”* Tb. S ncLe SpeCl6S *? wbicb he ™s a
an image of the actualnosit £ “fT b ? ok -P ;it is
in the bloom of its Ch rt ' •P op d ln the world when
of the Promises * e P°™
says Donoso Cortez, "is the Jstor C 1
writing the one von vCI c! 7u f Christianity; in
Christianity is the history of the Christian Cl hIS t ory o° f
history of the Christian nu f V nri ® tlan : the
Pontiffs; for they have bo- " * he “*“7 °f the
and the sustained of the o^l^.’> 6 '****’”•
in P °l?o h )j 3 /T ate character and
bravery 6 of “potto tbe^°i^es s ami
Truth; maintained the principles V -P ro< ; lai . med the
anathamatized and smote Ll i of . Revel ation, and
head in the broad field
has not only reacbe «- He
lation as a whole as a Divit l D octnnes of Eeve-
the great world of men • but he^C 111 1™ ltS - bearm ff s on
struck at the leading errors of 11, a ®° P° IIP l 1 P t l ed out and
and, with the Sword of the 1- ” b,cb we hve ;
God, has divide 7 the light Cm Zt f the Word op
principles of Supernaturaf R„r ° da,kness . the true
and naturalism which are threat e Prom , tbat materialism
world. There is no CCi threatening to submerge the
the Church are. She isTiot afra ? / hat - th t Doct ™ es of
them. Nothing is hid under a busheT 'Vh 6 p bamed ° f
not at obscuring but at rb'snlo • • ./^ e >0 P e aims
-r, % «
* Phillimore’s Essay on Canon Law.


more completely it can be exhibited to the view of think-
ing men, so much the more will they see it to be Divine,
as the Sun of Justice, and admit that if there be a
Revelation anywhere on Earth, that Revelation is in the
keeping of the Catholic Church. And in this great
responsibility the Pope is assisted and supported by the
Almighty Cod : “ I have laid help upon One that is
mighty, and I have exalted One chosen out of the people.
I have found David My servant, with My holy oil have
I anointed him. For My hand shall help him, and My
arm shall strengthen him. The enemy shall have no
advantage over him, nor the son of iniquity have
power to hurt him. I will cut down his enemies before
his face, and them that hate him I will put to flight.
And My truth and My mercy shall be with him, and in
My Name shall his house be exalted. He shall cry out
to Me Thou art my Father, my Cod, the support of my
salvation. And I will make My first-born high above
the kings of the Earth. I will keep My mercy for him
for ever, and My - covenant shall be faithful to him.
Nor has the work done by the successor of St. Peter
in these our days been achieved without much anxious
deliberation and concentrated thought. He has had a
subtle and satanic foe to encounter. His opponent is not
armed with the mere pressure of fallen clay, of sinful
mortality. There is a subtle Spirit abroad which animates,
directs, and stimulates the passions and the pride of man
The World and the Flesh are dangerous and powerful
antagonists; but there is one who can give them a
special direction, and can turn their blind fury to his own
account, and make use of them for his own cruel and
revengeful ends. “ The Prince of the Power of this air,
“ The Spirit which now worketh in the children ot
unbelief,” is abroad. The successor of Peter is not so
much " wrestling against flesh and blood,” as “ against
principalities and powers, against the world-rules of this
darkness, against the spirits of wickedness in the high
places ” Hence he makes use of such weapons as will
most effectually meet the spiritual energies which are let


flesh* h^°/l,, SoClet T' ? e does not a PP ea! to the arm of
Kal i: 0 * enl ' St . the learni “g of philosophers
s tes
ingenuTty and ° f Which baffle his
advanced’hklmTm d ®?« n » “<» confusion. He has
his blood thirst hl s stunted materialists,
lood-thirsty revolutionists, his pretended men of
andMifs hbertines, his infidel statesmen,
leaders of S tj ,l 0r V^, k "' 8 ? ; he tas Silenced the
matist.s to subtl . e politicians and crafty diplo-
“ah, desln 2 t eir f eSpeClal “ in beha]f £ne
natiLl ’ -* h *° f S ?P, pm Z the foundations of Super-
and defend>r*u 8 6Xhlbited in tbe Catholic Church,
w. rritesi s? is
q ateteste A s 3 d 3
spiritually-tempered and too unerring in “precision
Power 6 :fthe° f Ai^r a T
7 i i . lr as placed carnal, or merely in tel
flrforlroT 0 th: n T he f an t °! bis Solii ™’ ”K
addressed his feitlrfd^ones^—^ H ? tS th ? S
dly° U and f aMe ‘o resistVthe eril
haHng Jour loin? i ? ng f P erfect Stand ’ therefore,
tiiTbfeSatlTf ? rt , about V th Truth, and haying on
prepaSrfVe^(fef pir' fe P ♦t* Wi ? the
the StiTAlrl -l eace, m all things taking
S*tetetei o "s 3:“r
Pi j d krod. And this is what Pone Pius TX
has done, without exception, from the beginning He
meets the enemies of the Church with armour, fafhioned


spiritually, and has never swerved one jot or tittle from
the policy dictated by the Gospel. From the days ot
his accession in 1846, to the present hour, he has been
true to the Supernatural Principle recommended by our
Saviour. He has not condescended to the world. His
strength, he knows it well, is to be found not on earth,
but in Heaven ; and the weapons of his warfare are
drawn from the armoury of the deposit of the h aith.
The whole world can see at a glance when they look upon
the two armies in battle array that they belong to whol y
different spheres. They are animated by antagonistic
principles, directed by opposing intellects, and are
furnished with methods of defence and. of attack contra-
dictory in every respect. ,
Let us for a moment look at the action ot the ±ioly
Father in this great ever-enduring battle, which he has
been carrying on for these thirty years. Of course ms
warfare has to be fought on a large scale. His battle-
ground is the world : his soldiers, two hundred millions.
From his position, he has to produce great effects, such as
may be seen by and exert their influence on the entire
Christian world. He has to touch the heart of all nations,
and to utter a word which may penetrate to the ends of
the earth. Therefore it is that he has struck at the
master-principles of iniquity of the present age, and m
such a manner as all may see and feel the blow.
Libertinage, Materialism, Intellectual Pride, and Febeiiion
against Authority are the four crying evils of our day.
Under those heads all other acts of iniquity of the Hydra
of anarchy may be included. To strike at them is to deal
a blow at the stronghold of Satan, and to condemn them
is to hurl the straight javelin at the World, the Devil, and
the Flesh combined. . . . -
This is not the place or time for displaying before
your imaginations the condition of modern civilization
with regard to purity of life. It is a fact admitted by all
that society is fast approaching to the condition of
things under the pagan Emperors and that the world is
steadily “ progressing ” towards that position of affairs


whieli existed when Martial wrote his sixth Satire and
when the very buffoons amongst the Romans turned into
ridicule the passions in which they themselves indulged
And how does the Supreme Pastor of the people 11
attention to this condition of society ? What does he do
to convince the world that there is a high and ruling
principle msrsted on with emphasis by the Gospel and
exhibited in its perfection in the Church; which condemns
all grossness even m secret thought, and holds up to
admiration that spotlessness of character, that supernatural
He 13 r 5" es P e . ciaU y ‘he Christian Gospel ?
e makes use of the most impressive and the most telling
means for recalling the thoughts of the entire world to
, l “ e g!ected virtue. The world at the moment did not
take in the full purport of his language, and did not at
once realize the bearing of his act. But at length it
grasped his meaning, and understood the depth of that
supernatural principle which was at work. It was in the
year 1854 that the Sovereign Pontiff drew the eyes and
thoughts of the whole world upon the figure of a Woman
who at the same time that she was a Mother was also a
Virgin He drewher for a moment forth as it were from
her high place m Heaven; and pointed her out in all her
radiant fairness to the eyes of the carnal world, that men
might see where true beauty was, where all fairness
could be found All eyes were fixed on her : the world
could not but look up when Christ’s Vicar pointed to the
heavens; and whether they would, or would not, on her
for the time, men s thoughts were fixed, whilst their minds
must have acknowledged her as the Virgin Mother of
God, the pattern of high and holy thoughts, of chaste
ove, of a pure and spotless life. And as if to burn this
thought into the minds of all, the Pontiff, by a most
of +h ln T ng 1S Supreme Power as universal Doctor
of the Church and m presence of two hundred and fifty
Bishops assembled round his throne, declared the Dogm/
not as a new truth but as one ever held in the Church of
God before, of the Immaculate Conception of our Blessed
Lady. Thus the mind of entire Christendom was arrested


by the action of one man ; all eyes were directed upwards
by the pointing of one finger; and whilst the world was
thus gazing up in admiration, the voice of Peter proclaimed
her Immaculate in her Conception, who bore the King of
Heaven at her breast, and is the glorious type of Christian
Purity and Sacrifice. This act of the Sovereign Pontiff
was at once a teaching and a protest; it taught to the
world in the most emphatic language the Church’s doctrine
of Purity of Life, and was at the same time a protest
against that spirit of carnality and libertinage which not
only blinds the eyes of Faith, but reduces man to an
animal of earth and sows the seeds of the effeminacy of
nations.
Again : what is the second master-error of the
modern world and of the philosophy of the age in which
we live ? Is it not based in the Materialistic Creed of
those who are looked upon as the leaders of so-called
“progress,” “advanced ideas,” and “modern civilization'?”
Is not the world poisoned by Materialism; and the
aspirations of the human heart dwarfed and stunted by
it; so that we have reason to fear that the world will
grow into utter unbelief; and that man will end by
absolutely denying the Unseen, and by taking up his lot
with really perishing things, as being the only existences
that have any reality about them ? Do not vast numbers
of our race practically deny the Revelation of Jesus Christ;
and in their secret heart doubt the very existence of a
Church at all; and act their whole lives through, as if the
beliefs in Heaven and Hell, and a future state, were fit only
for women and children, simply worth preserving as a set of
superstitions, useful as deterrents in the case of those who
have not been freed from the fetters of sacerdotalism and
its kindred fables ? No man who knows his fellow-man,
and the interior condition of a large portion of the educated
intellect of the present day, can help being moved with a
sense of tears. So many men of great kindness of heart,
of innate benevolence ; men of correct lives and cultured
intellects; lawyers, doctors, merchants, tradesmen and
skilled artisans, and those who live at large on their own


independent means—what is the true, unfeigned belief of
t leir interior spirits ? Do they, or do they not hold to a
Supernatural scheme of Salvation, to the Inspiration of
Scripture, to the Divinity of Christ, to a future Eternity
ot endless pam or unfinishing reward ? Of course we
know these things, to use the hackneyed phrase/ are
between their God (if they think they havi any) and
themselves. But let us push unreality on one side, and
wi 4 j /? ake , d * ruth ““Pty and honestly in the face :
What do they believe ? The reply is : They do not know
Une day, one thing; another day, another. Their faith is so
vague, so volatile, so etherial that, practically, it exercises
but feeble influence on their private lives. They are the
children of tradition and of habit: and as for the rest
they remain m doubt; and feel more inclined to risk the
future than the present ; and to secure a happiness here
on earth than to abandon the present hour, and take their
chance of gaming a future blessedness hereafter. So they
live on : so they die : intellectual, cultivated animals up
to a certain point, who have loved Dives better than
Lazarus, and who have been governed by the reality of
the present, whilst they have been paralyzed by the
doubts which have ever hung about their future. If this
'V- i fe ® nds . all > r c .feers may have been a fair success ;
if there is an Eternity of Pain, and an Eternity of Hap-
piness m store, then they have simply acted the part of
fools, whose fate is concealed by draperies which we do
not care to try to remove away. When Christ, the Son
of Justice comes, He will throw His light on all these
mgs. and each man will see each as he is ; and each
will discover then the destiny he has fixed for himself
during his time of earthly trial. It follows as an
inevitable consequence from the Scepticism which has
taken possession of the modern world, that love has grown
cold, that high deeds of devotedness are few and far
between ; and that the heroism of the Cross, when it is
displayed is seldom understood. Life is lived at a low
and earthly level; and man sinks back, from his occasional
spirations after a higher life, m despair, into that position
of uncertainty which robs the soul of every energy.


Think not that this is merely the view of a Catholic
Prelate. “ Materialism ” says Professor Goldwin Smith,
“ has in fact already began to show its effects on human
conduct and in human society. They may perhaps be
more visible in communities where social conduct depends
greatly on individual conviction and motive than in com-
munities which are more ruled by tradition and bound
together by strong class organization ; though the decay
of morality will perhaps be more complete and disastrous
in the latter than in the former. God and future retribu-
tion being out of the question, it is difficult to see what
can restrain the selfishness of an ordinary man, and
induce him, in absence of actual coercion, to sacrifice his
personal desires to the public good. The service of
humanity is the sentiment of a refined mind conversant
with history, within no calculable time it is likely to over-
rule the passions and divert the conduct of the masses.
And after all, without God or Spirit, what is “ humanity ?”
Our school of science reckons a hundred and fifty different
species of man. What is the bond of unity between all
these species, and wherein consists the obligation to
mutual love and help ? A zealous servant of science told
Agassiz that the age of real civilization would have begun
when you could go out and shoot a man for scientific
purposes ; and in the controversy respecting the Jamaica
massacre we had proof enough that the ascendency of
science and a strong sense of human brotherhood might be
very different things. “ Apparent dirce facies .” We begin
to perceive, looming through the mist, the lineaments of
an epoch of selfishness compressed by a Government of
force.
How has the Sovereign Pontiff dealt with this wide-
spread general debility amongst the vast majority of
cultured and educated men ? He has held up before their
eyes a high Christian Standard. He has draw before the
attention of the world the very opposite principle to that
which produces paralysis in the strongest heart, and
softens the strongest brain. He has held up Super-
natural Faith in" its noblest manifestations ; and has


pointed to what Christianity can do; what sacrifices it can
make; how it can trample on perishing things, when there
is a question of forfeiting the present life in witness to the
7'°f- „ . * ln S| e J e to one of the most distant portions
ot the Spiritual Empire entrusted to his keeping, the
Sovereign Father of the Faithful decreed to fix th? eyes
and intellect of every man calling himself Christian upon
a chosen company, who, in their own persons, had ex-
hibited the highest form of Christian heroism, and had
manifested the utmost power of Supernatural Love. As he
pointed out Mary Immaculate as the pattern of the Fair
: ®° h e now calls the attention of Christendom
to the Martyrs of Japan; and by a solemn judicial act
proclaims their Sanctity, declares that they have been
admitted to the Beatific Vision; and holds them up as
examples to the Universal Church. Six and twenty they
were m number; of all ages, and of varied occupations :
Some Priests, some Catechists, some Teachers, some
Laymen, all loving the Unseen World best; and taking up
their portion with what cannot fall away. All giving the
testimony of their life’s blood to the fact that they held
with the tenacity of an unconquerable conviction the
cardinal principles of Revealed Religion ; all by their
glorious deaths, witnessing against the easy lives of those
whose spiritual sensibilities are benumbed by doubt and
who have practically abandoned the future for the present
if; one . and f. U > their. heroic sacrifice, trampling on
that materialistic spirit which has debased so many noble
natures and cankered so many loving hearts. They died
J i7 y u° r .. th f W ° rd ,° f God and for the testimony which
they held: and gave the last proof of perfect charity, for ■
hi?s-:t'ss,r “ ,h - ,i “ h * '•/*>">
v - r Jt T a " ° n Whit-Sunday, 1862, that the Venerable
Vicar of Jesus Christ performed the solemn act of
Canonization. Surrounded by over three hundred mitred
heads and thousands of Priests from every quarter of the
world and a vast concourse of the people, the Sovereign
ontiff proclaimed to the world the vital principle of true


devotion. He held up to the thoughtful consideration ot
the sons of men a company of heroic Christians, who had
exhibited in its highest form the charity of Christ; and
had, in a distant land, with a distant civilization of its
own, become examples of those heroic virtues of which
the present world stands most in need. By this solemn
act the Watchman of Israel inflicted a lesson on the
world which could not be conveyed so forcibly in any
other language. He held up to the imitation of mankind
the models it had studied least; and proclaimed anew
the fundamental principles of Supernatural Faith; and
in the very act of doing so, stamped and condemned that
Materialistic Spirit which debases the "heart and degrades
the nobility of man.
So far for what the present Pontiff has done on a
large scale to hold up the Supernatural principles of
Purity and Faith to the admiration of the world ; and
by the very contrast to exhibit in their true deformity
that Libertine Spirit and that Materialistic Temper which
have penetrated through every strata of society.
So too with Pride of intellect. The world is not
only poisoned by carnality and over-bearing, short-sighted
selfishness ; but it is thrown into disorder and confusion
by that Spiritual haughtiness which is the almost
infallible attendant on a selfish, carnal mind. The hasty,
shallow, irreligious, flippant education of the present day
turns out men in scores, filled with self, and unrestrained
by either reverence or modesty. They are ready at a
moment’s notice to set up a novel theory of philosophy
in jurisprudence or religion, and to rule the State, as they
undertake to rule themselves, without the interference of
the Supernatural. Whatever is above them they
repudiate; whatever is below, they patronize; and
centering all things in themselves, their legislation, their
philosophy, and their religion, smack very strongly of the
shallow man. Inflation of intellect and pride of life have
the natural tendency to urge man to become his own
sovereign lord; and to accommodate the courses of the
world, and the principles of national, social, domestic,


and religious life to the bias of his own fallen and selfish
nature. Hence the swarm of errors that have infected
the world during the last three hundred years especially.
Hence, the confusion in religious teaching, the denial of
the hidden world, the repudiation of ancient landmarks,
and the chaos and contradiction that have been
engendered in the very definition of such words as
“progress,” “civilization,” “liberty,” “happiness,” and
“ virtue.” The very basis of Christian society and of the
civilization of the Cross are thus undermined and sapped ;
and unless some Authoritative Voice spoke out ; unless
there were some intelligence powerful enough to grasp
the truth and detect the error; unless the world could be
warned of the danger into which it is being beguiled,
how could it end but in total eclipse, in irremediable
anarchy ? And there is but One Voice that all can hear,
and that all are bound to listen to; the voice of Peter
speaking in the Pope. And what has the Sovereign Pastor
done to meet, or at least to point out this vast evil which
has spread like some prolific ineradicable couch-grass
about the fields of human thought ? He issued in the
year 1864, on the Bth of December, the feast of Mary
Immaculate, his celebrated Syllabus, addressed to all
Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops, and Bishops, through-
out the world. This Syllabus consisted of a collection of
eighty of the. principal errors which had been previously
condemned in various documents, in one part of
Christendom or another, by the Pope during the previous
eighteen years. They were not new condemnation, but a
digest of old ones, thrown into compendious form, for the
guidance of the. Pastors of the Church; and through
them, for the instruction of both priests and people
They principally concern Faith, Morals, and Political
Philosophy. They point out where the narrow way was
being destroyed, or where it was becoming pathless ; they
indicate where landmarks had been removed, and where
false, ones had been placed ; they clear away the obscurity,
fog, indeed the chaotic darkness, in which human society
was beginning to be thrown. The Atheist, the Pantheist,


the Rationalist, the Socialist, the Communist, and other
such abortions, were pinned through by the word of truth,
by the spiritual sword of Peter. The principles on which
the Christian Church is founded, were luminously re-
asserted. Deadly errors relating to Religion and Civil
Society were condemned ; the Sacrament of Marriage,
the jurisdiction of the Sovereign Pontiff were defended :
and liberalism, progress and modern civilization in the
sense of modern infidels, were declared incompatible with
the teachings of the Gospel. Thus the Sovereign Pontiff
has been true to his high responsibilities. He has not
ceased to speak out, and to condemn error whenever it
lifts up its poisonous head. He has struck boldly and
without fear at that intellectual pride which would set
itself above the most august authority on earth ; and
would ignore or stamp on the utterances of the Vicar of
Jesus Christ divinely protected as he is when teaching
the Traditions.and Revelations of the past to the Christian
world. Though the whole infidel and rationalistic party
rose up in uproar when the Syllabus struck them with its
fulminations, they did but promulgate it the more ; they
became against their will the very heralds of the truth,
and forced upon rulers and statesmen, on philosophers and
politicians, the necessity of studying more deeply than
they had done those Christian principles of statesmanship
and legislation, without which the world would speedily
fall to ruin. Though the clangor of tongues was great
at the moment, though dust was thrown in the air to
obscure the sun of Justice; though men rent their
garments and stopped their ears, and trampled under foot
the teachings of the Pontiff, though they united to do
their very worst against it: they simply proved themselves
passionate, helpless infants, who could neither stop the
sun from shining nor the Voice of the Vicar of Christ
from being heard. We shall never know how great has
been the service rendered to society by the Syllabus. All
we can tell is that it has done its work. The Truth has
been promulgated ; the principles of order have been made
the common property of the world; and error has been


authoritatively condemned by the highest authority on
earth It is to be expected that he who, as in duty
bound has so freely anathamatized wrong-doing* and
wrong-thinking should be vigorously assailed in turn.
Vere he not attacked, he would have failed in his mission
It is his happiness to feel that all wicked, proud*
unbelieving, disorderly, and sensual men are his
antagonists. They know who has struck them, and how
heavy is the blow. And they band together that they
may practise some revenge. Their pride of intellect, their
pride of life, have been humbled by the Fisherman; and
y cannot rest till they have broken up the barque of
Peter and silenced the helmsman. But men passj and
systems live on ; generations go by with their passionate
Church re of n p e^ and theJ d0 r GVil f ° r an hOUr; and the
Uiurch of God recovers her wounds, draws herself
together, and goes on battling as before. The storm
winch greeted her Syllabus has subsided, and L merX
looked back upon as an exhibition of helpless folly which
it would be chantable to forget; whilst the vital principles
taught to the world by the Sovereign Pontiff 1 are still
lving in men s minds, and forming the thoughts of those
TW W ° U U th i? *° acknowled ge their indebtedness
The world may be m storm and fog, but it cannot be in
utter darkness; for Pins has thrown the Lamp of Truth
upon it, and the pnndples of 1864 can never be extin
V nd , w haS < ? one more tha » hold up the rules of
Eight and Wrong m an anarchical world ; he has gone to
the very spring and root of our greatest evils. He has
asserted a principle of Order which implies Obedience and
consequently, prosperity and peace. What is the charac-
teristic error of the present day,-that tap-root of the
upas tree, from which all the disorder of the world springs
up t We have but to read the history of the Yorfd
during the last hundred years and we shall know. It is
‘YfiiY and the denial of Authority. The
Infidelity of Voltaire and the Immorality of Kousseau
ushered in the reign of terror; and for the time the


principle of Anarchy held its own; Christ was blasphemed
the Churches of God were profaned, and the goddess of
reason in the person of a woman of abandoned life, was
set up in the place of the Blessed Sacrament. The
Libertine, the Revolutionist, and the Atheist for the
moment, displayed themselves in their real colours, and
for all time to come have impressed upon the imagination
of the world the contrast between the Religion of the
Supernatural and the foul inventions of the poisoned brain
of man. Nor are the horrors of the first French Revolu-
tion altogether things of the past. The demon is still
alive, his agents are ever active ; and the seeds of discord,
corruption and decay are in his hand, fo be sown broad-
cast whenever an opportunity presents itself. In a little
while ” exclaims an advanced thinker, “ all religion will
disappear from the schools of the Commune , the Crucifix
will disappear as a violation of liberty of conscience.
Again : “In the name of the past and the future, says a
leader of “ modern thought,” “ the servants of humanity,
both its philosophical and practical servants come
forward to claim their due general direction of the world.
Their object is to constitute at length a real Providence
in all departments —moral, intellectual, and material.
Consequently they exclude once for all, from political
supremacy, all the different servants of God, Catholic,
Protestant, or Deist, as being at once behind-hand and a
cause of disturbance.” These are. the principles that
have already exiled and ruined kings, and dethroned
dynasties and revolutionized States ; which have upset in
the mind of the masses those Traditionary teachings
regarding Order, Obedience, and Reverence which took
centuries of tending, to foster, and make grow within
their minds. The Revolution of 1789, of 1830, and 1848,
and all those various bloody upheavings of civilized society
which have been produced by kindred causes, all point to
the one great flaw the one deadly gangrene of the day
which consists in denying the Supreme Authority which
God has placed on Earth, in rejecting the voice of Peter,
and in each man claiming private, practical infallibility in


!n8 M-° St J? oment;0 !“ and fundamental questions of Faith
and Morality as well as of Government and Law. “There
ir°|“ t i; u ,. o,l 1 u hand;” says Cardinal Manning, “the one
o y athohc Church, with its Divine Authority its
Divine Faith, its Divine Laws, and its Divine obligations
natio a ns ng U^ OUt . the worid > penetrating into all
ations. This then is on one side—and this is in the
Bu r t th T e . is on the other, a society which
he Ph darkness of mid-night; the deadly antagonist of
kmh.lf ■? 13 ° ne ecause 1* is compactly united ;it
3 “ f y V f ° r 1* S P/! n ? s from Satan ;it is universal, for it
international; it is invisible, because it is hid out of the
revolution 11 " 3 ? ; and t^, at . IS . the universal international
l evolution of Secret Societies, allied together for the
common purpose of overturning, if it were possible all
7™ Govem-nents on earth Between these two alterna-
! n ’J h t lru j rs ° f t “' da y have t 0 make their choice.
• i y understand : receive instruction, you that
judge the earth.’ The choice is before you : civU life or
death ; choose promptly, that you may live.”
live • on^h then 1S V l6 ®°" ditio “ of the world in which we
in tl : 3?, the one . hand Su pematural Re i igio embodied
m the C h u rch with Peter for its Spokesman; on the other
an Anarchical principle of rebellion and denial, pushing
way y open violence and by organized stealth ; two
mastery ““th ; °p- Wlthu l *he other struggling for life and
PrincTnf P P + C u ° f 7 h ? P ? wer of the air,” and the
P ’ the °° d ° f Su P emat ural Love and
What has the Pope done to meet this deadly
übiquitous, and Satanic influence ? He has drawn out of
held ud° U 7 t° f ?°d the master-weapon of defence; and
d up a standard; and fixed a principle of order
so'hnldl’ r aC !’ S ° h*=h, that all eyes can see it, and
meaning’ ** DOt C ' ,|jn the f ° ol can misunderstand his
_..i7 i a December, 1866, that the French army
p p‘^ dra ™ 7^?°, r ? e ; and the Ho *y Father invited
the Bishops of the World to surround him in the Eternal


City in June of the following year, and to assist m the
celebration of the Centenary of St. Peters Martyrdom
over the Tomb of the Apostle. In thus calling the
Teachers of the Church together, the Pope had an especial
design in view. He had in contemplation the dealing
a blow such as should resound throughout the entire
world against the spirit of Anarchy and Revolution which
had like a putrid fever, entered into the vitals of mankind.
Five hundred Bishops from all quarters of the world, from
China and America and Tartary ; from Canada and
Australia and the Southern Seas, surrounded the Pope
on that occasion. How marvellously different the scene
from that which was witnessed eighteen hundred years
before, when the Prince of the Apostles, amid the jeers
and groans of the populace, gave up his spirit to his
Master, as he hung head-downwards on the rough cross
prepared for him on Mount Janiculum ! Truly, the Hand
of the Lord must have been in it; and through His
power alone his horn has been so exceedingly exalted.
Encouraged by the triumphs and by the courageous
martyrdom of Peter, and animated by devotion o ns
Chair, the Bishops of the world in fixing their eyes on
Pius could well exclaim in the words of one of the greatest
Popes : “ Simon may die, but Peter lives for ever !
The Sovereign Pontiff had deeper designs than that ot
merely surrounding himself by an imposing pageant. e
took occasion from the Centenary of St. Peter to draw
closer than ever to himself, in bonds of faith and rus ,
the rulers of the Church of whom he is the appointed
Head. He spoke to them with words of Apostolic power
regarding the strength imparted to all by their unity wit
him ; and made known to them his intention of convoking
a General Council of the Church. On the 17th of June
he addressed them in words that fit to-day : “We are m
a moment of great crisis,” he said. “If we look on y o
the aspect of human events —there is no hope , but we
have a higher confidence. Men are intoxicated with
dreams of unity and progress ; but neither is possib e
without justice. Unity and progress based on pride an


egotism are illusions. God has laid on me the duty to
declare the truths on which Christian Society is based,
and to condemn the errors which undermine its founda-
tions. In the Encyclical of 1864, and in that which is
called the Syllabus,. I declared to the world two dangers
which threaten Society, and I condemned the falsehoods
which assail its life. That act I now confirm in your
presence, and I set it again before you as the rule of your
teaching. To you, venerable Brethren, as Bishops of the
Church, I now appeal to assist me in this conflict with
error On you I rely for support. When the people of
Israel wandered in the wilderness, they had a pillar of
fire to guide them in the night, and a cloud to shield
them from the heat by day. You are the pillar and the
cloud to the people of God. By your teaching you must
guide the faithful in the darkness : by your example, you
must shield them from the burning sun of this world.
lam aged and alone, praying on the mountain; and you'
the Bishops of the Church, are come to hold up my arms.
The Church must suffer, but it will conquer. ‘ Preach
the word ; be instant in season, out of season; reprove,
mtreat, rebuke, with all patience and doctrine. For there
shall be a time ’ —and that time is come—'when they will
npt endure sound doctrine.’ _ For the world will contra-
dict you , but be firm and faithful. ' For lam even now
ready to be sacrificed, and the time of my dissolution is at
hand I have, I trust, fought a good fight, and have
kept the faith, and there is laid up for you, and I hope for
me also, a crown of justice, which the Lord, the just
Judge, will render to me at that day!”
On the 26th of June, of the same year, the Pope
opened out to the Bishops his idea of meeting the
rampant errors of the day by holding an CEcumenical
bynod.
<c We have, indeed, long pondered in our mind ”
says the Holy lather to the Bishops,’’ a purpose which
we trust to be able to effect, namely, that we may hold a
a Sacred (Ecumenical and General Council of the Bishops
of the whole world, in which, after united counsels and


labours together, the necessary and healing remedies,
by God’s help, may be applied to the many evils which
the Church is suffering. From this, as we greatly hope,
it will come to pass, that the light of Catholic truth may
diffuse its saving illumination in the darkness by which
the minds of men are enveloped, so that. they may see
and press onwards, by the Grace of God, in the true path
of salvation and justice. From this, also, it will come to
pass that the Church, like a conquering army set in array,
may repel the hostile assaults of her adversaries, break their
power, and triumphing over them, propagate and spread
more widely the Kingdom of Jesus Christ on earth.
By this means the Sovereign Pontiff aimed at dis-
playing before the world the Unity, Universality, and
Power of the Church spread throughout the world ; at
vindicating the liberty of the Church in its spiritual
action; at extinguishing or at least mitigating the narrow
spirit of nationalism which dwarfs truth, and limits its
authority; at purifying the external status of the Church
from national and local taints ; and at rebuilding,
restoring, and renewing those principles, of social,
domestic, and national life which were given by our
Saviour in His Sermon on the Mount,
And what reply did the united Episcopate, speaking
it may be said in the name of the Universal Church, give
to these-utterances of the Supreme Pastor ? Their reply
is worthy of all remembrance, and proclaims I ruths ever
old yet ever new —Truths as important at this hour as
they ever were, and as fresh and applicable to the present
condition of the world as they were at the moment they
were uttered.
(i We perceive it to be an effect of the power of God,
they reply, “ that the Chair of Peter, the organ of truth,
the centre of unity, the foundation and bulwark of the
Church’s freedom, should have stood firm and unmoved
for now eighteen hundred years complete, amidst so many
adverse circumstances, and such constant efforts of its
enemies ; that, while kingdoms and empires rose and fell
in turn, it should so have stood, as a secure beacon to


direct men’s course through the tempestuous sea of life,
and show, by its light, the safe anchorage and harbour of
salvation.”
“ Led by this faith and these feelings, Most Holy
Father, we spoke before, when five years ago, standing
around your throne, we rendered our due testimony to
the sublime office you bear, and gave public expression to
our prayers for you, for your civil princedom, and the
cause of right and of religion. Led by this faith we then
professed both in words and writing, that nothing was
nearer to us, nor dearer, than to believe and teach those
things which you believe and teach ; than to reject those
errors which you reject; than to walk in the ways of the
Lord with one mind, under your guidance ; to follow you,
to labour with you, and with you to contend in the Lord’s
cause, at every risk and with whatever result
For, as Peter said long since, ‘We cannot but speak the
things we have seen and heard.’ You have also held it
to be a sacred and solemn duty ; you are giving manifest
proof that you have never held it to be otherwise. For
never has your voice been silent. You have accounted it
to belong to your supreme office to proclaim eternal
verities ; to smite with the sword of your Apostolic utter-
ance the errors of the time, which threaten to overthrow
the natural and supernatural order of things, and the very
foundations of ecclesiastical and civil power ; to dispel the
darkness which perverse and novel teachings have shed
over men’s souls ; and to declare, persuade to, and approve
all that is needful and wholesome to the individual, to the
Christian family, and to civil society ; so that at length all
may attain to know what it is that every Catholic should
hold, retain, and profess. For that exceeding great care
we render to your Holiness the deepest thanks, and with
endless gratitude ; and, believing that Peter has spoken
by the mouth of Pius, therefore, whatsoever you have
spoken, confirmed, and pronounced for the safe custody of
the deposit, we likewise speak, confirm, and pronounce,
and with one voice and one mind we reject everything
which, as being opposed to Divine faith, the salvation of


souls, and the good of human society, you have judged fit
to reprove and reject. For that is firmly and deeply
established in our consciousness, which the Fathers at
Florence defined in their decree on union, that the Homan
Pontiff ‘ is the Vicar of Christ, head of the whole Church,
and Father and Teacher of all Christians ; and that to
him, in the person of Blessed Peter, has been committed
by our Lord Jesus Christ full power to feed, to rule, and
to govern the universal Church.’ "
“ But there are other things beside, which excite our
love and gratitude towards you. We admire and rejoice
over the heroic courage with which you have opposed this
world’s pernicious stratagems, and your efforts to keep the
Lord’s flock in the way of salvation, to guard it against
the seductions of error, and to defend it against the force
of the powerful and the subtlety of the falsely wise.
We admire that zeal which knows no weariness; with
which, embracing in your apostolic care the peoples of the
East and West, you have never ceased to provide for the
good of the universal Church. We admire the noble
spectacle of the good Shepherd which you afford to the
race of mankind, that is plunged deeper into evil day by
day; one which strikes the minds of the very enemies of
the truth, and averts even unwilling eyes by its intrinsic
excellence and dignity.”
Such then was the reply given by the Bishops
of the Catholic world to the Allocution of the Sovereign
Pontiff. Thus did he, the great Commander, call his
Generals together and take counsel with them; and listen
to their loyal words of love and truth. It was the Voice
of Peter and the harmonious response of the Sacred
College expanded throughout the world, still holding to
the Divine Tradition, still boldly withstanding the three-
fold enemy of God and man; and without compromise
condemning the wickedness of those who would subvert
Christian society, and plunge the world backwards into
the darkness of infidelity, and merge it in the merely
natural man.. The congregation of the wicked heard the
Voice ; its eyes fixed themselves on that company of


Christian leaders which encircled the Tomb of the
glorious St. Peter under the expanding Dome; and
it knew that the battle of the Church as of old time
would be fought with the same spiritual piercing weapons ;
and the “ Prince of the Spirit of the Air,” the great
Prevaricator would again be crushed by a woman’s foot,
under the heel of the Church of God. There was
exhibited, as the Prelates, over 500 in number, stood
round the Supreme Leader and Watchman, a principle
which the wicked ones of the world had tried to hammer
into pieces; there was to be seen the principle of Divine
Authority and its meek attendants, Peverence, and
Obedience, and Purity, displaying themselves before the
eyes of all; and by the simple contrast, bringing upon the
Anarchical and revolutionary principle of the nineteenth
century, the hearty condemnation, the deep-seated repro-
bation of every sensible man. And whilst the great lay
world look with mixed awe and admiration, whilst the
Libertine, the Atheist, and the Bevolutionist gnashed
their teeth, as they muttered “ Crucify him,” the great
mass of faithful men and women throughout Christendom
praised God, and implored health, strength, and long days
of life to the Vicar of our Lord, and on those who were
assembled to consult, to combine, and then to part —to
fight the one great battle in every portion of the world.
Such was the work of the Centenary of St. Peter, such
the bond of union and display of power manifested, as a
kind of preparation for the main stroke and supreme act
of the Pontificate of Pius IX.
The (Ecumenical and General Council which had
been foreshadowed by the Pope in his Address to the
assembled Bishops was summoned to meet on the feast of
the Immaculate Conception in 1869.
The history of this great General Synod is still fresh
in the minds of all of you. It was truly a Senate of the
Universal Church ; and the seven hundred Prelates—the
representatives of over thirty nations and two hundred
million people, not to speak of learned divines who attended
it—were there to speak to the wide-spread tradition of the


Faith in every quarter of the globe. By this solemn act of
the Chief Pastor, by thus summoning together the most
august Senate the world has ever seen ; by thus drawing
the eyes of mankind upon the Eternal City, and solemnly,
and with all publicity, measuring and gauging the position
of the world; by this high act of his, he arrested the
attention of every thinking man and women; and as it
were compelled each one to compare the Catholic Church
of Christ and the broad principles of her teaching with
the Synagogue of Satan and its Libertine spirit, its .Revo-
lutionary maxims, and its Atheistical beliefs. The net-
work of international subversive secret societies, the bold
effrontery of unabashed vice and brazen-faced falsehood,
the leaders of iniquity, in the heights and in the depths,
could now gaze steadily upon their common enemy and
compare her teaching and her practice with their own.
They could now see their position clearly. They could
now learn the doctrines given forth by her authoritative
Voice; and she, in turn, with that unity of Creed
which speaks at once of strength and truth, could throw
her broad far-reaching light upon the world ; and give
guidance to those who had any desire to see. Her arm
is not the arm of flesh; she does not use violence; she
does but persuade ; she holds out the Supernatural Lamp;
it is for the world to open its eyes and see.
The one master-principle of destruction which the
Vatican Council was called to meet is that which presents
itself as the denial of the Divine Authority of the Church on
the one hand, and the personal assumption by each man of
being an authority to himself on the other—in a word, the
inversion of the Divine order; and the rejection of the
Divine Voice, for the perishing and discordant notions of
the unassisted human spirit. In the Syllabus, the
principal inconveniences springing in detail from this seed-
plot of error were pointed out and visited with censure ; in
the Vatican Council, the very principle itself was struck
as by an axe to the root; whilst the opposite principle was
asserted with the greatest emphasis by the solemn
declaration, not merely of the supreme authority of the


Church in Council, but of the personal infallibility of the
Sovereign Pontiff when teaching the world, as universal
Doctor, the Doctrines of our Saviour on Faith and
Morals! The world was sinking into anarchy ; the civil
order itself was placed in jeopardy ; and the Father of the
Faithful at once bolds high the standard, and proclaims
that there is at least one Voice which speaks the truth,
one Authority which claims imperatively to be obeyed.
What is the picture drawn by the Fathers themselves
of the world which they had met in Synod to wrestle with
and enlighten ? After speaking of the rejection of
authority, consequent on an earlier apostasy, they
continue : “ Then sprang up and was widely spread
throughout the world the doctrine of nationalism and
naturalism, which opposing itself altogether to Christianity
as a supernatural institution, studiously labours to exclude
Christ, our only Lord and Saviour, from the minds of
men and from the life and morality of nations, and to set
up the dominion of what they call pure reason and nature.
After forsaking and rejecting the Christian religion, and
denying the true God and His Christ, the minds of many
have lapsed at length into the depths of pantheism,
materialism, and atheism, so that, denying the rational
nature of man, and all law of justice and of right, they are
striving together to destroy the very foundation of human
society.”
“Whilst this impiety spreads on every side, H
miserably comes to pass that many even of the sons of the
Catholic Church have wandered from the way of piety,
and while truth in them has wasted away, the Catholie
instinct has become feeble. For, led astray by many and
strange doctrines, they have recklessly confused togethei
nature and grace, human science and divine faith, so as t(
depra.ve the genuine sense of dogmas which the Holj
Church our Mother holds and teaches, and have broughl
into danger the integrity and purity of Faith.”
Having taken this view, the result of the experience
of the whole Catholic Episcopate, of the conditions o
human society, the Prelates proceeded to draw out, for the


guidance and instruction of the world, leading principles
of renovation. Those principles as embedded in the
“Two Constitutions,” show how deeply infidelity had
sunk and how the Fathers followed it into its most hidden
haunts. The world did not merely require anathemas
where it had gone wrong ; but it required light to see how
to get right. It was fast losing its way in the obscurity
of unbelief, and the land-marks were becoming so few and
far apart, that men were in great danger of falling down
the incline. The very subject matter of the chapters of
these Constitutions at once indicate the condition of the
world, and the duty incumbent on the Council. The first
Constitution deals with fundamentals of Religion. The
first chapter of it treats of God, the Creator of all things ;
the second, dwells on Revelation and on the existence of
two orders of Truth, the Natural and Supernatural; whilst
the third and fourth chapters respectively treat of Faith,
and of reason in its relation to the Supernatural. In the
third chapter on Faith, the cardinal errors of the day are
exposed in all their deformity by the very action of the
light thrown on them by the Lamp of Truth; and the
world, did it care to read, would find there laid down
those guiding principles which direct the human intellect
along the path of right reason and Supernatural Truth.
Here then the aberrations of the age are met, and the
antidote is given, by the most learned body of men and
the most self-sacrificing on the earth. Those who run
may read. Peter has spoken ; the children of men cannot
say that they have been left without bread; and it is for
the Pastors of the flock, for the zealous Clergy, to insist
on and explain these luminous principles to the people ;
so that they too may have the light to see with, and
become possessed of the most authoritative teachings of
the Church. Minds founded in these Doctrines, and
guided by the principles laid down by the Council of the
Vatican, will be Christian in very deed, and will be able,
through the power of the Truth within them, to keep
those over whom they may have influence in the right
path But they must be deeply and frequently pondered


upon; they should from time to time become the subject-
matter of Lecturer, Sermons, and Discourses; and the
peoples’ minds should as much as possible be actively
employed in taking active possession of the truth; and ir
grasping beauty and the practical advantage of the
Teachings of our Saviour.
A great theologian declares this first Constitution, te
which we have briefly referred, and the study and exposi-
tion of which we recommend so earnestly to the clergy
to be “ the broadest and boldest affirmation of the Super-
natural and Spiritual Order ever yet made in the face ol
the world, which is now more than ever sunk in sense
and heavy materialism.”
The Second Constitution places before the world tin
principles on which the unity of the faith is based, and b
which the vast organism of the Church is knit in onenes
of communion; and it establishes once and for ever thi
cardinal Doctrine of the Infallibility of the Vicar o
Christ when speaking under certain conditions to tb
Universal Church. The first chapter treats of the primacy
of Peter in honour and in jurisdiction, as immediately
conferred upon him by our Saviour; the second affirm
the perpetuity of these perogatives ; the third defines tb
nature and limits of his jurisdiction as being the plenitudi
of power to feed, rule, and govern the Universal Church
and the fourth and last chapter defines the infallibl
doctrinal authority of the Sovereign Pontiff as the Su
preme Teacher of all Christians ; declaring that tb
Supreme Teacher is possessed of that infallibility whicl
the Divine Redeemer willed that His Church should b
endowed with for defining doctrine regarding Faith an(
Morals; and that such definitions of the Roman Pontif
are irreformable of themselves, and not from the consen
of the Church. Thus the Holy Father by having sum
moned the Vatican Council has brought light to t
darkening world. There is now on earth one man, at al
events, acknowledged by two hundred millions of mortal
as having authority to teach, and moreover as bein£
divinely protected in his mission. Amidst the din anc


whirl of contradictory creeds, and sceptical philosophies ;
whilst the whole of the rest of the world may doubt each
teacher as he lifts his voice, and turn a deaf or incredulous
ear to every prophet as he arises in his turn—at least
there is one to whom a vast body of Christians look up as
the Spokesman of the Almighty God, and as the Watch-
man specialty placed by Providence in a high place to cry
out to them and warn them in time of danger, and to
guide them when they are unable to guide themselves.
Thus it is that the Voice of Peter, far from being silenced
in these modern days, speaks with greater force than ever;
far from being unheeded, is listened to with all the deeper
reverence, and obeyed with all the greater readiness.
His clear articulate enunciation of Truth is a living con-
demnation of the jargon of contradictory philosophies of
modern days ; and the unanimous adhesion of thousands
and tens of thousands of the highest intellects to Peter’s
definitions, is a blow that absolutely stuns that vanity and
egotism which sets man against man, and creates a
thousand internecine wars amidst the so-called scientific
and advanced thinkers of the hour. The one Voice of
Peter speaking, and the one Voice of Peter obeyed, is as
a blow of death to the discordant and stammering efforts
of our modern Hydra when it summons up enough
audacity to babble in the face of a listening world. Pius
IX. has struck the monster with a blow that is planted in
the region of facts—and has displayed, not by the syllo-
gism, so much as by concrete action midst the contentions
of living men, the divine power of Truth, and the over-
whelming superiority of the Church over every other
attempted Creed. The Libertine, the Pevolutionist and
the Atheist, and all those societies, secret or declared,
which aim at sapping the foundations of Christian civili-
zation, have found their match, viz. : the Homan Catholic
and Apostolic Church, with Peter as its Leader in the
contest. The army is in battle array, and its Supreme
Commander does not for one instant flinch from the
glorious position of difficulty and dangers which he
occupies.


We have now seen pretty clearly who the Pope ii
and what he has done. He is personally, a noble saint!)
gentleman ; with a princely and loving heart; just anc
uncompromising; not without a touch of heaven in hii
ways; and of sovereign grace in his countenance anc
bearing; one to fascinate and to take captive by his very
presence; whilst, officially, he is the Vicar of Jesuf
Christ and the Supreme Teacher of all the Christiar
world. Such is he ; and What has he done ? He has
struck Divine blows of an Imperial character, worthy oi
his greatness ; at the spirit of Libertinage which is abroad,
by proclaiming Mary Immaculate and turning all eyes on
her ; at the demon of Materialism that infests the brain oi
the present age, by holding up to admiration and by
canonizing those who spilt their blood in witness to the
Truth, and preferred a Lasting City to the perishing life oi
earth; at the spirit of Anarchy and Revolution, by
repeating the Sermon on the Mount in its developments
as suited to our age, that is, by issuing the Syllabus ol
Errors and visiting them with just anathema ; and at the
spirit of wholesale Rebellion from Authority, by calling
the Bishops together from all quarters of the earth to
meet in General Council, by proclaiming once again the
fundamental principles of the Christian Dispensation,
and by raising into a definition of the Faith, the teaching
of Jesus Christ, that the Supreme Hierarch is an
Infallible Witness. These are the things that he has
done. He has struck blows hard and heavy; and has
passed a chequered pontificate acting a giant part;
battling on a # large and Imperial scale in favour of
Goodness, Justice and Truth.
Now, our second question is, Who are the Pope’s
enemies, and what are they doing ? Their name is legior
—they are the Libertines, Revolutionists and Atheists oi
the world. His enemies are all those who rebel againsf
his teaching, and who would, if they were able, ex-
tinguish his Voice and pull down the Catholic Church,


As has been said before, the Revolution and impiety of
France entered into the Italian Peninsular. The French
Kevolution annexed the North of Italy, and shortly after,
poured its infidel ideas over the length and breadth of the
country, and occupied Pome itself with a revolutionaiy
force. The Code Napoleon took the place of the time
honoured municipal government in Italy ; and the land
became impregnated with the worst of French ideas ;
whilst Society became dislocated by the introduction of a
system of Government altogether alien from the genius
of the people. The fanatical cry for a united Italy,
added to the fashionable infidelity of Voltaire, fired the
brain of “ Young Italyand the first threads of a wide-
spread secret society for the destruction of Poyal Power,
and the subversion of the Christian Church were laid by
a leading Italian revolutionist in 1823. Kings and Priests
were his abhorrence : and he did not give over, till death
stopped his hand, educating the youth of Italy in the
principles and arts of underhand intrigue, and in the for-
mation of those clandestine societies which are established
for ends which cannot be obtained except by stealth.
Three main aims are the motive power of this hidden
army of destroyers ; to educate the people without God
or the Supernatural ; to instil into their minds the
explosive principles of political Pevolutionism ; and to
encourage them, when the time is ripe, to Pise and
by violence, by fire, blood, and iron, to attain their ends.
It is against the children of this schooling, now grown
into bearded atheists, libertines, and revolutionists that
the Pope is now contending : He is not in contest with
the Italian people, for they are Catholic and loyal : but
with that criminal and infidel minority which has received
an especial training from the advocate of the assassination
of Kings. Their aim can hardly be said to be disguised.
They would do away with Victor Emmanuel as well as
with the Pope, and on the ashes of the High Priesthood,
and of the House of Savoy they would fix the black flag
of Communism and the Pevolution. To these men, Kings
and Priests, that is any men exercising authority as


accorded by the Almighty, are equally obnoxious. All
power claimed as coming in any shape from God, they
would annihilate at a blow, as standing between themselves
and that absolute liberty which they claim as inherited
by them from Nature. Such then are the enemies of the
Holy Father.
Now what are they doing ? They are carrying out
the principles, the threefold aim, in which they have been
so carefully instructed. The Pope has never been free
from their secret plottings, and their desperate attempts.
On ascending the Throne in 1846, he hoped to win them
by his mercy, and they hoped to use him, in consequence,
as a tool. He gave universal pardon to political prisoners.
But the love of the dagger was too strong a passion in the
mind of the assassin to be cast out or transformed by Papal
generosity. Italy was already honey-combed by the sect;
and it was solemnly decreed in the clandestine meetings
of these sectaries, that he who should betray any of the
secret schemes for the upsetting of civil order propounded
by their members, should be dispatched by the hidden
dagger, though he should be resting on the bosom of his
mother or standing at the Altar of his Christ. The
assassination of De Rossi, in open day, in a public place,
was the signal for a universal tumult. The Pope quitted
Rome and took refuge in Gaeta, under the protection of
the King of Naples. The European power this time
suppressed the revolution. The Pope returned in triumph
to the Vatican, the whole city was in uproar of delight,
the streets were strewed with flowers, and darkness
was turned to day by the illuminations at night. This
was in 1850. But the secret plots of the educated revo-
lutionists and skilled assassins were ceaselessly operating
in one direction. The spiritual edifice had to be weakened
and disabled, by shaking and destroying the temporal
Power. From the year 1859 to the present hour, there
has been a steady pressure applied to effect one purpose.
The defeat of Austria by France, the acquisition of
Lombardy by the King of Italy, and the astute policy of
Cavour, who was a child and a father of Revolution,


favoured the designs of the enemies of the Holy See.
Next came the Franco-German war, and the recall of the
French contingent from the Eternal City ; and the conse-
quent opportunity which was seized at once by the revo-
lutionary party; and the Pope became practically a prisoner
at the mercy of a band of sacrilegious robbers.
Now the Allocution of the 12th of March takes in
review the principal operations of those Libertines,
Atheists, and Revolutionists, of the Mazzinian and other
schools, during the last seven years ; and draws especial
attention to the last stroke of all by means of which the
Church of God is to be made subject to the -caprices of
the infidel, and the Vicar of Jesus Christ is to be fined
and imprisoned in the person of his subordinates, if he
should dare to fulfil the imperative obligations of his high
office, by condemning Impurity, Anarchy, and Atheism ;
and by asserting the fundamental positions of the Catholic
Church. The course taken by the enemies of Super-
natural ‘Religion has been a consistent and steady one ;
pointing, without swerving to the right or left, to one
object; not so much the disruption of the Temporal
Power; not the upheaving of Catholic Christianity
alone —but the total extinction and annihilation of the
Supernatural, and of that civilization which is founded
upon it. But it is the nature and practice of these
sectaries to work by stealth, and only so far to discover
their designs as will suit their purpose. To have declared
their purpose publicly in 1870, would have been to lose
the game ; because it would have horrified the conscience
of the Christian world. Their ostensible aim was the
unity of Italy. Rome must be the capital of an united
Peninsular ; and the temporal possessions of St. Peter
must be absorbed with other principalities into the
oneness of the Italian kingdom. As to the Sovereign
Pontiff, he should be treated as a Prince; and his
Spiritual Power should have its full and independent
exercise. The Catholic world need not fear for their
Church, for it should be placed under the protection of
the Civil Power, and formal guarantees should be given


that the religion of the Catholics should be respected in
its Head and its Members.
Now, it will be instructive to refer briefly to those
guarantees, which were given to reassure and soothe the
mind of Christendom. What were the solemn pledges
given by the Civil Power; indeed, by King Victor
Emmanuel himself, in a letter (September 8, 1870) to the
Holy Father? Recognizing the claim the Catholic world
has upon Italy for the freedom of the Church and of her
Supreme Head, he says :—“ The Government of the
King will protect the interest which the whole Catholic
world possesses in the entire independence of the
Sovereign Pontiff. The Government of the King is firm
in assuring the guarantees necessary to the spiritual
independence of the Holy See and that the Head of
Catholicity shall preserve on the banks of the Tiber a
place (or seat) honourable and independent of all human
Sovereignty.” The next month (October 9), Rome was
annexed to the Italian kingdom by a decree couched in
these terms : “ The Supreme Pontiff preserves the dignity
and inviolability and all the personal prerogatives of
sovereignty by a law for this purpose which will be sanc-
tioned, and all conditions required to guarantee it
together with its territorial liberties and the free exercise
of the authority of the Holy See.” On May 13, 1871 a
law was passed regulating the relations of the Sovereign
Pontiff to the Italian Government. The first chapters
tus expressed “ Prerogatives of the Sovereign Pontiff
and the Holy See. Article 1. The person of the
Sovereign Pontiff is sacred and inviolable. Article 2
Any attempt a ? amst the person of the Sovereign Pontiff
and of provocation to commit the same shall be punished
Vv th £ - Same a * ~ s aS any a ‘ tem P ts against the person
oi the King. The offences and insults publicly committed
directly against the person of the Pontiff by speeches or
acts, or by the means indicated by the first article of the
law concerning the Press, to be punished with the same
penalties fixed by the 19th Article of the same law
Article 3. The Italian Government pay the Sovereign


Pontiff within the territory of the kingdom the sovereign
honour and preeminences accorded to him by Catholic
Sovereigns. Article 12. The Sovereign Pontiff may
correspond freely with the Episcopate and the whole
Catholic world without any interference on the part of the
Italian Government. Article 13. In the city of Pome
and the six suburbicarian bishoprics, the seminaries, the
academies, the schools, and the other Catholic Institutes
founded for the education and'the culture of ecclesiastics,
shall continue to depend solely on the Holy See without
interference of the scholastic authorities of the king
dom.”
Such were the solemn pledges or guarantees given
by the Italian Government to the Sovereign Pontiff and
the Holy See in order to hoodwink and deceive the Vicar
of Christ and the Catholic world. But the Pope knew
with whom he had to deal, and understood the practices
of the sect. Referring in his Allocution to these pledges,
made now seven years ago, the Holy Father tells the
Cardinals how well he knew at the time they were given
what they were worth. “In spite of the hypocritical
and disloyal promises made at that moment, by the
usurpers of Foreign Governments, that they would respect
the liberty of the Church and the independence of the
Roman Pontiff, we were never under any illusion what-
ever as to the sad and miserable future in store for us
under their dominion. On the contrary, indeed, well
knowing the fell designs proper to men bound together
by the spirit of revolution and iniquitous ties, we then fore-
told that the aim of such sacrilegious invasion was not so
much the conquest of our State, as the wicked design of
destroying the more easily, through the suppression of
our temporal dominion, all the Institutions of the Church
of annihilating the Authority of the Holy See, and of
cutting down the Supreme Power of the Vicar of Jesus
Christ, to us, although undeserving, confided. Ihe Holy
Father knew, from the experience of his position and the
sufferings of the Church, what kind of mercy he had to
expect and what honesty from Statesmen—to use the


Shtsanfj Una , th ° rne im P rison and exil ®
bishops and clergy, leave the flocks without shepherds
confiscate the Churches’ revenues, suppress monkeries
and convents, incorporate ecclesiastics and religious in the
’ l duad V the Churches and monastic libraries and
LTmentfc *%**** of her --Xler
sacraments her most devoted members, to be obiects of
profane and blasphemous ridicule ”
What then have the Pope’s enemies done during the
last seven years ? Let us learn from the highest and
most authentic source, from the Allocution of his
Holiness published to the world the other dav • and it
f ty a f ea i y relentless P~e, the
Atheists, Libertines, and Revolutionists have been
endeavouring by degrees to crush out of the Church all
her spiritual life ; so that the Church of the Revolution
may take her place. Let us look steadily at their actons
and take the most important of them one by one.
k First take the Religious Orders The Ti,:,r *
Orders of the Church consist of men and women whoCe"
mLkhH en That IC th r Ilfeofs ®" i . ce the majority of
mankind Ihat they may dedicate themselves all the
more exclusively to study, prayer, contemplation or wo ks
of charity, they renounce the ties and distractions of
secular employments, and deliver over their whohf
energies to the service of God and of their neighbour
hey renounce their possessions to live at a common
table, and are content with ha vino- r i nmon
supplied by those placed over them • the/S JT”* 8
selves, for God’s love, under obedience to another that'
they may thus more perfectly follow the examrto of our
oaviour, and render themselves 1 our
good in the hands of thoTwho dtoct
schools, or promote the interests of Region" or" are
e o n ;
Orders have their centre in Rome Th’ irTL^ 6^ 10118
-“•1" «“•»' « s a SSrfe
City. There, were to be found large, compact, zealous


bodies of religious men passing their lives in prayer, and
in hard intellectual work ; and living on poor and rough
fare; and giving their services to the various works of
religion and humanity. Men of such sacrifice as this, as
is natural, would be persons of high exalted views, and
deep piety, and many of them of profound learning. They
formed, as it were, a large society of deeply learned men ;
versed in the Traditionary lore of Christendom; in
Theological principle, and in Ecclesiastical law. _ Their
knowledge on Spiritual subjects and on Ecclesiastical
government would be extensive, and from personal
experience, sound. Such centres as these in Home acted
as the hearts of the various wide-spread religious bodies
corporate. To them all looked for council and support,
for encouragement and help : and to these centres, from
time to time, those who had been a long time absent
returned, to drink in from the fountain-head fresh
draughts of zeal, 1 ight, and sacrifice. More than this :
these spiritual and learned men assisted in the govern-
ment of the Church throughout the world. They were
to be found on every congregation, and in every
department where learning, experience and piety were
required. They were counsellors of the Sovereign
Pontiff; theologians to the Princes of the Church;
consultors in deep matters of Canon Law, of Theology
and International Jurisprudence. Their lives, many
of them, were passed in the closet, bent over the
deep studies of the Scriptures or preparing matter for
dogmatic decisions, or solving some difficult and knotty
points of Morals. Being free, they were able to spend all
their energies, and absorb all their interest in the one
great work. And hence, besides being by their very
profession of Poverty, Chastity and Obedience, as salt and
light on a dark day, they were as Masters in Israel, and
deep Counsellors of the Eulers of God’s people in the
Centre-home of the Christian Faith. Surely, one would
think that they would be left alone ! What are the facts %
The libertines, atheists, and revolutionists a fierce
minority who hold for a time the reigns of power —have


suppressed bodily all these Beligious Orders. Four thou-
sand houses of them have been confiscated or suppressed ;
and titty thousand men and women, who had given up
their private fortunes as dowries, trusting to the protection
of religious life, have been cast into the streets. Thus
the government which promised to leave the Church
inviolate has mutilated her in the destruction of powerful
spiritual corporations which she alone has the power to set
on foot; and to destroy which is a violation of her dearest
privileges. Thus the enemy has crushed the centre-heart
w e p g T US H e l kas de Pnved the Church and its Head
hiaW UlerS oft . heir counsellors; has struck at the
S t ex P re f lon of Christianity; and by one brutal cruel
tb °V l an e ? d thousands of works of mercy, to
the highest form of education, and to the conversion of
the barbarians m distant lands. Hating Christ and His
first'at7b Y b at n ra ? theSe men should strik o
out first at that which aims at reproducing the closest
Retolnt H rf A Wha * have Libertines, Atheists, and
volutionists to do with Poverty, Chastity and Obe-
1S ’ haS darkneßs t 0 do with Light, Belial
2 Secondly having destroyed the Religious Orders
and the Regular Clerks, the Government of Guaran
tees turns its attention to the Secular Clergy, to the
nests of God s Church. They cannot conveniently
murder them just now ; but they will, so far as possible
nip them m the bud. They will strike at the seed-plot’
up-ioot the garden, and destroy the succession of Pastors ’
al ? dlf ” ot at once ; gradually, do away, so far as they can’
with all the teachers of Religion and all the Spiritual
Directors of the people. To effect their purpose a very
practical expedient was adopted. On the 19th of July
1871, military conscription became Law. This Law Ja
hat of 7th June 1875, provide that evL Ttahan
P^°*f >ea r'| al “ S ( exce P tm g certain categories, amongst
which the Clergy are not found,) is liable to military
service from his sixteenth to his fortieth year, in one or
other of the three armies, active, mobile and territorial


Thus Archbishops and Bishops, as well as Priests
can be legally compelled to abandon their duties,
to strip themselves of their sacred vestments ; can be
dressed up in military uniform, incorporated into a
regiment, and set to the work of wholesale bloodshed,
which is abhorrent to the sense of those who are called on
to preach the Gospel of Peace. Such is the tyrannical
and inhuman way in which the Libertines, Atheists and
Revolutionists are wreaking their vengeance against the
Religion of Jesus Christ, and against the Priests of His
Altar and the very Bishops and Archbishops of His
Church ! Nor is this all. This conscription, so far as
the Priests and Prelates are concerned, may be looked on
merely as a kind of insult and bravado. But what strikes
home at the life of the Church is its effect on youth. You
may not know the kind of atmosphere that is generated
in Barrack life in Italy. _ Now this law of Conscription
has the*power of emptying the Bishops seminaries, of
tearing off a boy s back his priestly dress, and of rigging
him out in uniform and setting him into the companion-
ship of a mixed company of Italian rank and file. Thus
all at once his ecclesiastical training is rudely brought to
an end. His moral formation and his careful education
stops. * His studies, which cannot well be resumed in
afterlife finish \ and his books are shut, and his highest
aspirations, his call to the service of the Altar and the
salvation of souls, are brutally disregarded, whilst like a
criminal he is dragged off to shoulder a musket and begin
the bloody work of war. What heart but a heart of stone,
or rather of a demon, could witness such acts as these
without being moved ? What father or mother or friend
of a boy giving himself in all his purity to God, and then
being; dragged away to misery such as this, would not
burn and swell with internal indignation at such
inhumanity ! But such is the work now going on in Italy,
where Catholics were solemnly guaranteed their
and where a King gave his word that the Sovereign Pontiff
should not be harassed in the government of the Church
of God. When remonstrated with on account of their


barbarity, what do these Atheists say ? Thev exclaim
with scorn mixed with supreme contempt that the Church
can draw her clergy from that remaining two-fifths of
the population who, on account of their immorality or their
bodily monstrosities are unfit, they say for anythin!-
except the priesthood. Thus the sword of the revolution
wieded by Atheists and Libertines has transfixed the
great orders of Secular and Regular Clergy as a prepara
tion for the ultimate annihilation of the Creed it was their
vocation to defend and teach.
i , 3 ' Tllir( %j wholesale robbery and sacrilege is added
to tyranny and oppression. The Government of the
Guarantees has seized upon the Patrimony of the Church
and turned it to profane and secular uses. For hundreds
of years the faithful have been in the habit of founding
bursaries, establishing schools, assisting seminaries and
ThJp g beq +h StS to i * he 9 hurch for tlle benefit of Religion
The Popes themselves above all have been distinguished
for their princely generosrty, and for the way in wlucl
out of their private means, they have forwarded the
interests of the Catholic Religion. Rome has ever been
a centre of Holy Christian Works. Forefon Pet! t !
and Princes, and rich nobles, have vied with one another
m their munificence in founding and endowing Churches
oratories, and shrines, where the Faith of Christ mav be
kept alive; and m building glorious Toronto te tl r. j
of Heaven in the Eternal Citf where fosTrinct h
dwells. And these possessions were held with as lTgiti
mate and sure a title as are the private estot„ r 8 ™'
landed gentry at home. They belonged as mu!h to the
Church as the broad acres of the Duke of TW , ™ e
of Northumberland belong to those noble
has been done ? All her property has been seized bvt.lm
robber Government of the Revolution- its l!n
possessors turned adrift on the cold charity of a heartless
world, and Churches, sacred edifices and L j™ ess
handed over to the mercy and the rapacity n f *h g ebes
the deadly foes of that very Creed and w"’
which it was especially bequeathed. Those houses of


Prayer where Holy Virgins had consecrated themselves
to God ; those ancient monasteries where the brethren
assembled seven times a-day to chaunt the Scriptures,
have been emptied of their peaceful occupants, and have
been turned into barracks for soldiers or stores for ammu-
nition—whilst those who had hoped to pass their lives in
works of charity and benevolence, and had sunk their
patrimony or dowery in the common fund, have been cast
on the streets with a promise, which has never been
performed, of having five pence a-day to live on from the
public Treasury. Thus homes of happiness -have been
upset, and hearts broken, and endless bitter suffering
inflicted on gentle helpless women —ladies who had con-
secrated themselves and all they had to the love of God
in solitude of monastic life, or in those active works of
charity which belong especially to women. Fifty thousand
religious people have been cast adrift by these enemies of
God and*man. “The closing of so many Convents” says
a Protestant writer, Mr. Hare, “ and the robbery of the
doweries of so many nuns (given on their entrance in the
same way that a marriage dowry is given), has not only
been an act of crying injustice in itself, but, while it has
flooded the streets with starving, helpless, or infirm persons
who subsist on the daily convent dole, has thrown
thousands of helpless ladies who believed _ themselves
provided for life, and by their own families, into a state
of utter destitution, for the relief of which the miserable
and irregularly paid pension of less than sd. a-day,
appointed by the Government, sounds a mere mockery.”
4. Fourthly, comes the seizure of private property,
and the destruction of institutions for the support of
public charity; of colleges founded by foreign nations to
educate men for the apostolic life, and the conversion of
pagans and barbarians in distant lands ; and of innumer-
able other centres of love and light and compassion set on
foot by the present Pontiff and a glorious line of prede-
cessors, who spent all they had on the sick, the poor, the
orphan, the widow, the destitute, the ignorant, the
oppressed. Let us quote the words of a recent authority


who has made a study of the matter, and you will see
that our words are not the words of exaggeration, but of
sober truth. “ The seizure of the great Roman libraries,”
says Monsignor Patterson in his recent letter to the Duke
of Is orfolk, ‘ as much the property of the Corporations to
which they belong as Arundel Castle is yours, is simply
robbery. Supposing, which is not even alleged, that the
libraries were not open to the public, what right had the
State to confiscate them on that account ? .And what has
been done with them? The Cassinese, the Roman
College, and the Angelica libraries, to say nothing of
others, have been massed together in the rooms stolen
from the Jesuits in their historic College of St. Ignatius,
and on the pretext of public utility the treasures of an
unrivalled literature have been ruthlessly cut down and
diminished. Thousands of volumes have been discarded as
duplicates, triplicates, and so forth, and have found their way
to brokers, nay, to grocers and trunk-liners, sold by weight
or at a few pence per volume. These very volumes,
which were of the greatest use to the learned public in the
libraries to which they belonged, are now lost and
destroyed; and this in the name of the advancement of
learning and civilization ! So again, under the name of
“ expropriation ” for the public service, the foreign and
Italian Colleges, and other public and private properties
have been seized, valued, and paid for by the Government
in a manner often gratuitously and wantonly oppressive
Thus the garden and part of the house of the Redemp-
tonsts, an order devoted to the care of the poorer classes
and to religious learning, has been seized on this plea" the
walls thrown down, and foundations, drains, &c., due/and
then allowed to lie an unused, unsightly heap of ruins year
by year. This property, it is no secret, was originally
bought with English money by a highly respected English
member of the order. The estimate was made and
approved, and then, without warning or justification was
suddenly cut down by one half, by that instrument of
legalized robbery, the Giunta Liquidatrice of the Roman
municipality. This may be very ‘ enlightened ’ and


* progressive we should call it by other names here in
England.”
5. Fifthly, the Kevolutionists begin to trifle with the
very Sacraments. As if to shake to its base the fabric of
social life, they bring in a law which places civil marriages
on an equality with Christian marriage ; and so far as is in
their power they overturn the Sacrament and treat the grace
of religion with levity and contempt. Italy is essentially
Catholic, and the Italian people look upon marriage as
essentially a sacramental act, containing a contract which
death alone can dissolve. And these infidel law-unakers are
doing their very uttermost to drag everything, even what is
most s sacred, down to the dead level of their own carnality
and unbelief. Their aim is ever one; all their acts
converge on one point ; all can be explained by one
solution. As Cardinal Manning has lately expressed
himself, this law was the result of “that settled, deliberate,
and systematic revolutionary movement, which has passed
over the greater part of Europe, and now is extending
itself into Italy.” “ The enactments of the revolution are
simply anti -Christian” says a high authority. “ They
have introduced,” he continues, “ civil registration. of
births as an equivalent and alternative for Christian
baptism ; they have permitted and encouraged civil
interments, instead of Christian burial; they have
abolished oaths in Courts of Law; they have systemati-
cally encouraged the profanation of the Sunday and great
Christian festivals of Christmas, Easter, &c., &c., by
ordering the prosecution of the government buildings and
other public works on Sundays ; by ostentatiously holding
their sessions on those day ; by ordering public lectures
in the Universities and higher Schools on the Sundays as
on week days ; and they have established a recognized
system of public immorality, with a code of remunerations
and rewards, holding out a premium for immorality by
indemnities, and deriving from this shameful source a
revenue applied to augment the secret service funds.”
6. Sixthly, the revolution has taken the education of
the rising generation into its own hands, and has done


its best to deprive ministers of religion of all power and
authority. The very chairs of Theology have been
abolished in all the Italian Universities ; as if these
cultivated barbarians would declare to the world that the
highest and holiest Science that man could study has
been discovered to be an imposture, and that Italy for
the future would have nothing more to do with God.
Indeed, from one end of Italy to the other the Schools
have been from the highest to the lowest—dechristian-
lzed , and those who are entrusted with forming the mind
of youth are men of three classes; those whose minds are
tainted with heresy ; those who entertain a deadly hatred
towards the religion of the "vast mass of the population;
and those who publicly profess and maintain that there is
no God I
7. Seventhly, as if to show to the whole world how
empty are the solemn promises of men who boast of
possessing no religion, the Sovereign Pontiff, in his own
City, and almost within his own hearing, is continually
made the object of public scorn, hatred, and ridicule in
the Chamber of Deputies; whilst the Catholic Religion
is trampled on and mocked by the leaders of Anarchy and
the Revolution, without being called to order bv those who
had made so much of their guarantees. One of "the leading
membei s of the Chamber, amidst loud applause, exclaimed
only the other day “ From this our Vatican of ‘ Monte
Cittorio’ (a palace robbed from the Pope) where is justice
law, and liberty, let us say to the Caliph of the West
that, like thy predecessor, St. Peter, ‘ Thou liest thou
best thou best!’ St. Peter denied his Master ; thou
hast denied thy country; be thou anathema ! ” Such is
the way those miscreants are treating the Supreme
Head, that Venerable and Sainted Pontiff of the
Christian world ! Such is the way in which their solemn
pledges are redeemed ; and such the education they are
giving to the generations of the future. They hope by
blackening and dragging down the high name of the
Hoiy Father; by continually striking at and slandering
the Church, that she will at last give way; and that*


finally, upon her vast ruins they may build up their own
pandemonium, their City of Anarchy, Darkness, and
Confusion. But they will only have their day; they
will pass like other poisonous visitations; and the
successors of Pius, and the Church of the future will
triumph over their graves, as she, as vigourous as ever,
is drawing the bow against other enemies. “ Make their
Princes like Oreb and Zeb, and Zebee and Salmana ; all
their Princes who have said: Let us possess the
Sanctuary of God for an inheritance. Omy God, make
them like a wheel; and as stubble before the Wind. . .
And let them know that the Lord is Thy Name; Thou
alone art the Most High over all the Earth ! ”
8. Eighthly, these inhuman tyrants whilst claiming
all liberty for themselves, would wholly enslave and
gag the Clergy and the Prelates of God’s Church.
This is -the last attempted stroke which, if carried into
effect, would practically silence the Voice of God and
place the Teaching Authority, confided by Christ to
Peter, in the hands of the worst class of Libertines,
Atheists, and Pevolutionists. It was this last villanous
attempt to gag the clergy and the Pope himself
that drew from the Sovereign Pontiff that powerful
Allocution which has roused up the whole of the Christian
world. Let us for a moment examine this new tyrannical
piece of legislation, this new Falck Law which is to be
applied to the Catholic Church. It is designated aLaw
for “ The Repression of the Abuses of the Clergy.” It
runs thus : “ The Minister of Religion who, abusing the
office of his ministry, disturbs the public conscience, or
the peace of families shall be punished with imprison-
ment from four months to two years ; and with a fine of
a thousand lire” —that is forty pounds. Secondly. “ The
Minister of Religion who, abusing his ministry by any
discourse, spoken or written, in any public meeting, or by
writings otherwise published, expressly censures, or by
any other public act outrages the institutions and laws of
the State, any royal decree, or other act of the public


authority whatsoever, shall be punished with imprison-
ment for three months, and a fine of a thousand lire (forty
pounds), if any resistence to Government shall follow such
discourse the author shall be punished by imprisonment
tor two years, and a fine from two to three thousand lire
(that is eighty or one hundred and twenty pounds), and
they who publish or diffuse the said writings or discourses
from whatsoever Ecclesiastical authority, and from what-
ever place they emanate, shall be punished with the
same penalties.” The text of the Law as given by the
Government had this difference : It did not contain the
words “ from whatsoever Ecclesiastical authority, and
from whatsover place they may emanate.” Those words
were introduced by the Commission which was deputed
to report upon it. Their object is as clear as light Thev
are meant to strike at the Head of the Universal Church
and to gag the mouth of the Vicar of Christ, and reduce
him to silence, whom Cod Almighty set up to teach the
world. We hardly like to trust ourselves to speak upon
us malignant piece of tyrannous legislation, this brutal
cowardly persecut! oll . Let a journal, which though
infidel, still has some idea of liberty and honesty, speak
the feeling of every rational man. " The state of things
which this bill would, introduce,” says the Pall Mall
h-azette, is one it is impossible either for Pius IX or
any other Pope to acquiesce in. More than this it is
one which no honest believer in any religion could ac-
quiesce in. Parliaments are not infallible, and a law may
be conceivably so mischievous that it may become the
duty of the clergy to state plainly what its character is,
with the view of getting it repealed. If the Italian
clergy do this after the Clerical Abuses Bill has been
passed, they will be liable to imprisonment. Even if thev
do not expressly censure a law, still if they preach in such
a way as to perturb the public conscience—if that is to
say they set people talking about the acts of the Govern
rnent and speculating whether they are good or bad-thev
will be liable to imprisonment. If they give their oninion
upon a point of conduct in the confessional, and this


opinion happens not to square with that of the head of
the family of which the person asking the question is a
member, they have perturbed the peace of families, and
ao-ain they must go to prison. If after this they resolve
to hold their tongues and say nothing except under the
express order of the Pope, they are no better oh. II they
read a Papal brief in Church, they will go to prison as
before When Mr. Tooth went to prison rather than
submit to Lord Penzance’s decree, it was pointed out to
him that so far as the law went, he was free to take a
room opposite the church door and perform any services
in it that he liked. The Italian clergy will not have this
consolation ; for they will be imprisoned if they perform
an act of external worship contrary to the directions ot
the Government. This clause in the bill seems to have
been modelled on a famous decree of King ®uc ra
nezzar. It would be interesting to know whether the
authors of this astounding experiment m legislation have
felt any uneasiness at learning that Prince Bismarck has
shown signs of a desire to come to terms with the Pope,
and to revise the May laws in a sense which would make
it possible for the Catholic clergy to render a not unwill-
ing obedience to their provision. ,
■ Thus it is clear that even an infidel, not wholly mad-
dened by secret hatred or open detestation of Supernatural
Religion, would perceive at a glance that the one aim ot
this cowardly law is to destroy once for all liberty of
speech and liberty of the pen with regard to one section
of the community. Whilst the Atheist may howl and
scream against the Vicar of Christ, and trample on his
hioh name, and revile his spotless life, and malign the
Church of which he is the Head, and condemn her to the
gallows; whilst these reprobates may thus act with im-
punity, the priests of God with the Sovereign Pontiff at
their head, shall be cast into a loathsome prison and shall
be mulct with a heavy fine, if they should dare to utter
a word of condemnation of this wickedness ; or venture
to defend their characters and that of the Church which
they love better than themselves against the vilianous,


falsehoods, and base accusations of these sectaries, with-
out honour, because without conscience ; without truth
because without God. These are the boasted Italian
.Liberals of the modern school—men who in proportion
as they claim not mere freedom, but the most abandoned
licence, for themselves ; claim, also, the liberty of thrust-
ing the gag in the mouths of those who differ from them
and of throwing into chains or hurrying to the galleys or
the stocks, those who venture to insinuate that they
themselves are men. ‘ Liberals,’ without a Religion and
a God, are the most accomplished tyrants and despots that
the world, with all its wickedness and cruelty, is capable
of producing. They possess the ferocity of the tiger with
all the cunning of the fox, together with all the cruelty
of evil spirits, whose malignity is not mitigated by the
ordinary conditions of human flesh and blood." This is not
rhetoric or merely the heat of indignation; but it is a fact
that can be accounted for on philosophical principles • and
can be easily explained by any one who has taken much
pains to study the character of the human soul when
possessed by the Spirit of Satan and directed by a malig-
nant detestation of Religion. There is but one rein that
can control the powers of the natural men, and tame
them, only one which can place love and purity and faith
where malice and debauchery and materialism reigned
triumphant; and that One is the Almighty God Hinlelf
Let man abandon Him, and he is lost; he becomes the
prey of evil spirits, and soon comes to resemble those to
whom he has been enslaved. '
Let us quote two examples, set forth recently, of the
way in which this law of one-sided tyranny would operate
and then it will be seen how steadily L revcdution is
pressing towards the completion of its scheme for the
annihilation of the Papacy, the Priesthood, and the
Christian Church “Let me suppose that a man who
has been a member of a secret revolutionary society-
and, as you know, all members of such societies are
excommunicate by the law of the Catholic Church—let
me suppose that man to be dying. On his death-bed the


Priest has done all in his power to induce him to renounce
his state of disobedience to the Church ; he refuses to do
it; the man dies; he dies without absolution, lor the
Priest cannot give it without sacrilege. If a Priest, by
the side of a death-bed, were to give absolution to a man
who refused to separate himself from a secret society
condemned by the Church, that absolution would be null
and void in the sight of Cod; and it would be a sacrilege
and a mortal sin in the Priest who gave it. Let me
suppose that this man, be he the son of a family or the
father of a family, dies impenitent and without absolution.
This, is, perhaps, a disturbing of the peace of families .
and who is to be the judge whether the Priest has done
his duty or not \ The magistrate of a country town, or
the Minister of a revolutionary Government ? Let me
take another example. I have read to you the laws by
which the.property of the Holy See was taken away, by
which the Religious Orders were suppressed, by which
civil marriage was forced upon a Catholic people, by
which Christianity was banished from Universities and
schools, by which all men, whether Priest or Bishop are
liable to be required to enter military service, though they
are forbidden to sit in the Legislature—they can be
disfranchised on the one hand and compelled to military
service on the other—let me suppose any man having m
him a just heart and the true instincts of a Catholic
openly to say, “ I look upon these laws as unjust; they
are violations of the spiritual office of the Church, that
man would be liable to prosecution. Englishmen spea
openly of the laws of their country ; and why can we do
so ? Because the laws of England are the laws in which
the majority of Englishmen agree. Why, then, is this
law necessary in Italy ? Because a minority is in power
who are conscious that they are opposed by a grea
majority who disapprove their acts. They know, and are
afraid, that if men speak openly with their neighbours,
the public opinion of Catholic Italy would become so
strong and spread so wide as to endanger their power.
And this is called disturbing the public conscience, ihe


public conscience of Italy is not revolutionary, but
Catholic: the true disturbers of th e public conscience are
the authors of these Italian Falk Laws.” No wonder
that the Catholic Union of Great Britain have protested
against the action of the revolutionary minority which is
oppressing the Supreme Vicar and trampling on the
Catholic Church That sense of fair play which is the
lueiitance _ of Englishmen, cannot brook such base
tyranny as is here displayed. The Catholics of England
plain y perceive that this legislation aims at depriving
the clergy of those rights which belong to all classes in a
free country; that ff strikes at the essential functions of
tae Sacred Ministry, the chief sphere of which is in the
conscience, individual and public; that, on account of the
vagueness of the terms in which the law is framed it
provides a constant pretext for harassing the Ecclesiastical
P „*M' aA f. avowedly aimed at the Sovereign
i ontiff ; and that it is incompatible with the free exercise
of the authority of the Holy See, which is essential to
Catholic interests throughout the world. And lastly the
Union protests against it: “Because many of its
supporters in the Italian Parliament have openly declared
mtend ed as an attack, not only upon the liberty
of the Church but upon the existence of the Christian
religion itself in Italy.” Thus it comes out clearly wS
the revolution is aiming at, and what has been its scope
rom the very first ; the wholesale destruction of
Christianity, that is of Supernatural Religion, and of that
s c “',", b a “ “ “ *A‘
. 9 • the heartless persecutors of man’s
add public insult to public injury After
having extinguished the religious Orders, forced the c W
to join the army, robbed the Church of her patrimony
and the poor of their support; after haying seized charit-
able institutions, and turned Churches where the holy
Sacrifice was offered into riding schools for cavalry drift
s leds, and ai tillery stores; after having struck at the very
Sacrament of Marriage, and held up the Sovereign Pontiff


and the Church herself to the contempt and scorn of
Libertines, Atheists, and Revolutionists ; after having pre-
pared a Bill to gag the Pope and imprison and fine the
clergv of God for preaching the Gospel of Christ; after
all these outrages, they turn round, and with barefaced
effrontery, worthy of the most abandoned class of criminals,
have the audacity to declare that the Pope is both free
and independent in the exercise of his ministry, and that
the Church and the clergy have no reason to complain !
Stuno- by the insolence and villany of such a proclamation,
the Holy Father in the bitterness of his heart exclaims to
the Christian world : “ Would that those who are tempted
to believe in such assertions were here in Rome, and they
would then see the truth with their own eyes. They
would see the most august rites and teachings of the
Catholic Church derided and trampled under foot day
after day ;.they would see how the most august mysteries
are continually profaned, how impiety and Atheism is
daily honoured by public demonstrations and solemn pro-
cessions, whilst those religious processions which'the piety
of the Italians was always free to organize on every sacred
occasion are forbidden by the Government. Their ears
would hear the blasphemies which are, without a word o±
protest on the part of the authorites, vomited forth against
the Church in the Parliamentary Chamber. They would
hear the Church of God designated as ‘ subversive and
aggressive,’ her Liberty called ‘ wicked and fata in
principle,’ her Doctrines ‘ perverse, anti-social, and
immoral,’ and her influence hurtful to society. They
would be able then to see for themselves what endless and
powerful agencies have been set on foot to corrupt and
demoralize the mind of youth, and to root out from its
heart the faith of its Fathers. Were they to wander
through the streets of Rome, which, being the seat ot the
Papal Throne, is the centre of Religion, they would then
be able to judge for themselves whether the position of the
Sovereign Pontiff has not become intolerable. For they
would find Churches where false doctrines are taught;
schools at every corner, where error is disseminated ;


houses of perdition open at every step; and the most
obscene and repulsive spectacles presented before the
i he an - ? üblic - And the y w °uld learn
tnat ne whose duty it is, as successor of St Peter to
prevent all these disorders, and who would prevent them
were he allowed to do so, has been cruelly deprived of all
power to prevent any one of them, and of guarding against
the rum of so many souls I 6 s
What more need be added to these words of the
Sovereign Pontiff? We have before us now what Pus
IX. has done for good order and Religion, how he has in
an imperial manner condemned Libertinism and held un
the principles of Purity to the world; how he has
anathematized Materialism and presented to the eyes of
Chnstendom a standard of Supernatural Paith, Sacrifice
and Love ; how he has rebuked pride of intellect by his
expansion of the Sermon on the Mount; and how he has
impressed on the intelligence of the world by ft iv!
Constitutions of the Vatican General Council the fundi
mental principles of Christianity, and tlo e cardinal'
teachings, so much wanting in the world, Reverence for
Authority, and Submission to the Teaching Voice wl
have seen on the other hand how all this is rZti cr
Libertines, Atheists, and Revolutionists against wb** In®
Church is waging the battle of
seen that it is met by . cruelty, tyranny, robbery inllh
sacrilege, oppression, and false promises • and
lIWeI IWe of Spirit of the Air ? is hl3 o lm
to use weapons which are m keeping with t), “ i ™>
of a spiritual fiend, to annihilate! if th^^
civilization which after so many thro e T aid
replaced the paganism of ancient Rome. batthngs
111.
Our third question is, How does the Sovereign Pontiff
oppose these his present enemies ? He ormnsefih
a true Soldier of Jesus Christ, as an enligCd TeaXr
of His people, and as a Captain who nevlr loses courage!


1 First lie distinctly lays down what it is that he is
fighting’for. He has attacked the enemies of Christi-
anity; and they, as is their nature, are carrying on an
internecine war against him. He consequently addresses
himself to the Christian world, and calls m the public
opinion of Christendom to make itself heard in this
supreme hour of the Church ; and to declare boldly, and
with an unanimity which shall have in it the ring of
Truth and Justice, that society shall be preserved from
chaos, and that the Religion of Jesus Christ,and the
civilization of the Supernatural shall still rule the Christian
world. He is the Supreme Head of the Spiritual Empire
of our Saviour; and as such, he must have full freedom
of action and complete independence, to carry out his high
mission, and to guide the vast interests that are confided
to his care. And this he has declared from the first can
never be, so long as he lives on sufferance ; whilst his own
Civil Princedom is in the hands of sacrilegious robbers;
and he himself is worried and insulted, gagged and
imprisoned by those miscreants who are aiming at the
overthrow of decency, order, and religion, together with
the Panal Throne. The deliberate series of persecutions
and sacrileges which have been perpetrated during the
last seven years, alone is a sufficient demonstration of the
truth of this teaching of the Pope. If he has to stand
up in sight of the whole world and Publicly °PP° se ’ c “ l_
demn, and reprobate the Devil, the World, and the Flesh,
and all those evil influences which they represent, he
must be free, and possess an independent and solid stand-
inw-eround or else his enemies—and if he does his du y
th?y must be legions—will harass, wound cripple and if
possible, destroy him. The history of the Papal Chair
bears striking testimony to the persistent course of vio-
lence which the combined action of the three greatest
human powers on earth have exercised against the
principle of Authority and Supernatural Religion, as pre-
sonified by the Vicar of Jesus Christ. Pope Libenus was
banished ; Silverius died in exile ; Vigilius was imprisoned
and exiled ; St. Martin died a martyr in exile ; bt. Eeo 111.


was driven out of Rome ; Leo V. was dethroned and
cast into prison; John XII. had to fly; Benedict Y. was
hurried orf to Germany; John XIII. had to hide himself
in Capua ; Benedict YI. was murdered by a Roman
faction ; John XIY. was cast into St. Angelo and died of
starvation ; Gregory was cast out by a civil tumult ;
Benedict VIII. was driven from Rome once and Bene-
dict IX. twice ; Leo IX. was dethroned by the Normans ;
St Gregory VII went from land to land and died in
exile ; Victor 111 could not even get near enough to
Rome to see it ; Urban 11. was restored by the French
crusaders; Paschal 11. was carried off by Henry V and
imprisoned; Gelasius was chased to Gaeta; Honoring
was driven out of Rome by an anti-pope, and Eugenios
111. by Arnold of Brescia , whilst Alexander 111. on the
very day of his consecration, was cast into prison. He was
consecrated in a village church; then had to fly to the moun-
tains ; and passed seven long years wandering from Terra
cina to Anagni, and from Anagni to Tusculum. And so we
might go on through the ages of the world, repeating the
same tale of battle between the principles of Supernatural
Religion and the demon of pride, luxury, cruelty and
revolution ; showing two things with luminous evidence :
first, that the Vicar of Christ has ever a battle to fio-ht •
and, secondly, that he is continually wounded, driven out
and despoiled, and martyred it may be, but never killed
for he ever lives in his successor. Boniface and Urban
and Leo and John may pass away, but Peter still survives •
still warns and teaches ; still bears on the glorious stan
dard of the Cross, whilst those who made away first with
one Pope, and then with another, have long been forgotten
or are merely remembered to be despised. Since then
from their very position and office, the successors of St’
Peter must of necessity create fierce, deadly and powerful
enemies for themselves ; their positions must be all the
more protected and secure. They must have a free
independent basis of operations; and feel themselves
masters on their own territory. Let them be on the soil
of another man, and they are practically in slavery or in


subjection. To fulfil their arduous duty, they must be
beholden to no man, and be in the power of none. And
this it is that the Holy Father tells us he requires ; this
it is that he urges the Christian world to secure to mm.
He tells the Cardinals in his Allocution that ‘‘The
Roman Pontiff neither is, nor ever will be free and inde-
pendent under the domination of an extraneous Power.
In Rome he must either be a Sovereign or a prisoner ;
and the Catholic world can never be tranquil so long as
the action of the Roman Pontiff is exposed to the agitation
of Parties, to the arbitrary power of Rulers, to the results
of political elections, and to the calculations of crafty and
self-seeking men.” . T , r -o
2 Having thus stated a fact which the Italian Revo-
lution has been proving the truth of, if any proof were
necessary, the Holy Father opposes his enemies as a true
Soldier of Jesus Christ by standing to his post. He has
from the first, bravely, and with all the stubbornness of
truth, stood true to his high responsibilities, and has
defended inch by inch the ground on which he stands.
Living in the serene atmosphere of Supernatural i' aith
and Love he is not moved a hair’s-breadth by the scorn
of the world or by the sarcasms or insults of his enemies ;
he hears them not, save to meet them with the courage
of Christ’s soldier, and continues to unfold to the world
those Everlasting Truths of the Gospel which he knows
are for the salvation of mankind. Thus he has stood
these years, till his head has grown white and his once
maiestic form is bent down with age; and thus still he
stands, unchanged in his firm, unswerving purpose to
keep the “Deposit,” to fight a good fight and to make
no compromise with the Libertines, Atheists, and Revolu-
tionists who surround him. The moral effect on the
whole Christian world of his sublime consistency, of his
high unfaltering courage it would be difficult to exaggerate.
The eves of the two hundred million of Catholics in
Christendom look on him with mingled love and admir-
ation ; and in the looking gam courage for themselves
It was this his influence that drew from three hundred


Bishops in 1862 these warm and affectionate expressions •
Long may you live to rule the Catholic Church ! Ad-
vance, defending it with your power, guiding it with your
prudence, adorning it with your virtues. Go before us as
the Good Shepherd by your example ; feed the sheep and
the lambs with heavenly food; refresh them with the
streams of heavenly wisdom. You are to us the Teacher
of Sound Doctrine, the Centre of Unity, the unfailing
light of the nations. You are the Rock, the founda
tion ol the Church, against which the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail. When you speak we hear Peter’s
voice, when you decide, we obey the authority of
Christ I Bravely has he carried out to the letter these
hopes in his regard and proved himself well worthy of
his high and Sacred Trust! Now, in his eighty-fifth
year, his energy fa, s him not, nor the firmness of his
purpose, nor the fire in his heart. He realizes his position
and accepts it; and tells the world what he has done and
what he means to do. «Rather than seek a tranquil
asylum in a foreign country,” he says, “We have
remained here m Rome in order to defend-like a vigilant
Sentinel at the Sepulchre of St. Peter—the interests of
the Catholic Church. We have struggled, and struggle
• a 'i? r ’ i/° r • tf ! e P res ®. rvatlon °f her rights. We defend
inch by inch the little that remains to save it from
the usurpation of the Revolution. We have accord?
ing to our duty, made our voice and our reclamation
heard. And you who have shared with us our troubles
and our dangers will bear witness that we have publicly
condemned every fresh attempt against us, have protested
agams the insolence of our enemies, and have warned
the faithful against the seductions of hypocrites a ,J th
teachings of false brethren.” Rentes and the
3. Thirdly the Holy Father reminds the Rulers and
Governments of the world that in allowing him and bis
authority, and his rights, to be tampered with, the! are
simply preparing for them own downfall, together with
that of all legitimate authority. He that
the Papal Chair is the key-stone of the arch of orde^


and that the Holy See and its Authority is the spring of
all security in society and of the well-being of mankind.
Destroy the mainspring of Religion and the maxims of
Reverence and the principles of Obedience, and you are
cutting the ground away on which you stand; and
removing that one main barrier without which the pride
and passion of mankind cannot long be kept in check.
Rebellion against God has ever, without variation, been
followed by rebellion against society; if the Creator s
Authority be trampled under foot, what creature can
hope to be treated better? “Would to Heaven that
those would finally listen to us, whose duty and interest
it is to sustain our Authority and to protect the most
holy and the most legitimate cause of any upon the
earth ! And how can they be ignorant that nations can
have no prosperity ; peoples no repose, and thrones no
firmness ‘and stability, so long as the Authority of the
Church, which is the foundation of all well-regulated
society, is trodden down and outraged, and if the Person
of the Supreme Hierarch is not free and independent in
his elevated Ministry ! ”
4. Having stated what his just claims are, and having
declared that he will not move an inch from his ground,
the Holy Father then proceeds to suggest to the Catholic
world how it can help him. He feels, what Catholics
cannot help feeling, that his cause is theirs, that he, after
all, is the Servus servorum Dei, the. Servant of the
servants of God, and that in protecting him, defending his
rights, and standing bravely by his side, they are in reality
protecting their own dearest interests, and the principles
of that salvation on which their happiness depends. He
knows, and they know it as well as he, that if the Voice
of the Supreme Teacher be silenced, if the Great Captain
be struck down, if the Watchman on Israel’s Tower be
dragged from his high position, the Christian world will
suffer, and the light of the Temple will as it were have
been extinguished. The Sovereign Pontiff is the property
of the entire Christian world. He belongs to us here in
Australia, living under other stars, as much as he does to


the Italian people; and we are set on fire as soon by
indignities and outrages heaped upon him, as are those who
stand nearest round his throne, and have the privilege of
being partakers of his sufferings. Indeed, our & very
distance from him makes his liberty all the more necessary
tor us. To others he might speak, were he in prison :
through his prison-bars he might encourage those who
could manage to approach him ; but for us here in this
distant continent nothing will avail but the full and entire
reedom of our Spiritual Chief, but the complete inde-
pendence of any foreign Power of the Bishop and Pastor
ot our souls. And as m all other matters of grave
moment we spontaneously look up to the Supreme Throne
tar counsel and advice, so do we on this occasion of the
Church s trial How can we assist in liberating the
successor of St. Peter from the thraldom in which evil
m “ ev 1 1 . 1 da 7 ifve cast him ? He himself suggests
to the Catholic world what it has to do. He would have
them use the two great means which have ever in the
end, brought triumph to the Church : he would have them
make use of all legitimate human influence to move the
powers of earth ; and at the same time he would have
them use the arms of prayer with Heaven above • he
would have them work hard and pray fervently; he would
have the whole world do this : and if two hundred millions
of Catholics cannot achieve a success, it will argue verv
£ 00rl ?L, r their honest y or their earnestness. To use the
Pontiff’s words : “ The Bishops should rouse up thrfr
respective flocks to bring their influence to bear upon their
respective Governments, by such means as are held lawful
in their respective countries, so as to urge them to take
into consideration the position in which the Head of the
Catholic Church is placed, and make effectual provision
for the remova l of those obstacles which stand in the way
of his full and real Independence ” Thus, if the Catholics
of Christendom bestirred themselves, they might arouse a
strong, nay, an overpowering public opinion in favour of
the independence and freedom of the Vicar of Jesus
Christ. All Catholic people are in duty bound to ur<m on


Governments of their respective countries to protect the
dearest interests of their common Faith ; and those
Catholics who are in a minority, living under non-Catholic
rulers, who cannot well be urged to take up the Catholic
cause, should, as has been done already m England,
Ireland, and America, make their own indignant protest,
and let the world know how deeply they have been
wounded. Where the Head is struck or outraged, nature
itself calls on the member to resent it; and if the members
remain callous or unmoved, it looks as if they practica v
were dead, as if the life-blood of that sympathy which is
the bond of strength had curdled in the veins Catholics
have not, thank God, shown themselves indifferent, and
the Catholic Powers of Europe will not suffer, it is to be
hoped, the Spiritual Chief of those over whom they rule
to be dragged down from his high position and insulted
by the ‘emissaries of the Pevolution.
5 To earnest action the Pope recommends that
Prayer should be joined. He knows in whose Hands are
the issues of the battle. He knows m whom he believes :
and that his Christ will be his Protector m the day ot
visitation. He knows that there is only One fit to cope
with ‘The Prince of the Power of this Air, with Ihe
Spirit that now worketh in the children of unbelief, and
that this One is no other than the Almighty God 1 1111-
self! For his wrestling is “ not against flesh and. blood,
so much as “ against principalities and powers against the
World-rulers of this Darkness, against the Spirits of wicked-
ness in the high places,” as has been proved all down the
weary ages of the world by the violence and bloodshed
that has poured itself about the Papal Throne ; whilst the
arm of the Almighty has become all the more visible by
its ever sustaining, in the midst of such combined and
powerful assaults, the cause of His Vicar; as if to ful-
fil the prophecy of Daniel when he says that Ihe
God of Heaven will set up a Kingdom that shall never be
destroyed ... and it shall break to pieces and shall
consume all those Kingdoms (of the earth which went
before it), and itself shall stand for ever. This then being


a supernatural work, it must be maintained by super-
natural means ; and hence the Holy Father joinfprayer
<‘ Andas e itTe7o Ce ’ ? d n S^ S thus in his J Allocutio y n:
7 d *', , gs to God alorie to illuminate the minds
and convert the hearts of men, we invite not onH you
we exhok the pTst t 0 °ff “ d f nt era to G ° d V but
we exhort the Pastors themselves of all the Catholic
peoples to assemble their flocks in their Churches and
supplications of His people who turn to Him, for He has
pleasure m those who fear Him and have bopek ffis
, +i, d r?, ad '"’. tl,e -Tope encourages and gives heart
o the Christian world, by showing his own firm trust
in Provnlence, m the justice of his cause, and in th e
ultimate triumph of Faith, Purity, and Charity over
Libertinism Atheism, and the Revolution. He feX a
confidence that God will let his enemies know that “the
Lord is His Name ; and that the Almkhtv •
Most High over all the Earth I” “ Meanwhile, Venerable
Brethren, says this intrepid soldier of Jesus Chr.lt
he ‘confirms his brethren!’ “meanwhile let comfort
ourseives m the Lord and in the power of His St
and clothed m the armour of the strong, let us not
cease to combat, as we have hitherto done, with valour
vigour against the powers of Darkness and the perversity
of the age m which we live. Already the torrent of
Revolution threatens to sweep away all thine •T a ' ot
few of the authors and promoters of ft look ba°ck’terrified lt
their own work. God is with us and will abide w7b *
till the consummation of ages. Let those fear of whom
it is written: I saw those who committed iniquity a 3
sowed troubles and reaped troubles perish at the bretth
of God; and they were consumed at the breath
anger.’ But for those who fear God, who fight in h!s
Name, who hope in His power, is prepared merly mid


aid • nor is there room for doubting that His being the
cause, His the battle, He will guide the combatants to
victory! ”
4 Our fourth question is : What shall we clo ? The
reply to this is plain and simple. The Supreme Pontiff
himself has suggested to us what to do—to Act and to
Pray If we cannot follow out his suggestions to the
letter, we can act according to the spirit of them. If we
are not in a position to induce the Government ot this
colony to bring its love of freedom to bear upon this
question, we can take it up ourselves, and do what has
been done not only in every Catholic country m the
world but by those Catholic minorities which are
to be’ found in non-Catholic lands. We can join our
voices at the antipodes with those that are nearer home ;
and let the Holy Father know, as well as the Revolution
that is persecuting him, that he has faithful and loving
children under the Southern Cross, who look up to him as
their Sovereign Spiritual Head, and as the one great
Beacon in a darkening world, of Authority and Reverence,
of Order and Supernatural Religion. Our earnest unani-
mous protest cannot but produce a strong effect Our
very distance from the Centre of Unity will add force to
our expressions, and will testify to the world how wide-
spread is the circle of influence exerted by the Vicar of
our Saviour; and that the One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic
and Roman Church, the Mother and Mistress of all the
Churches still exercises her charmed sway, still conciliates
the love, the veneration, the undying attachment ot the
most distant of her children. .
1 jjow shall we act ? How have the Catholics in
England and Ireland acted ? They, through their “Catho-
lic Unions,” have formally protested against the unjust
and sacrilegious measures which still threaten, though
checked for the moment by a small majority m the
Roman Senate (105 to 92), to become law. We have
already referred to what has been done by Great Britain,


the following protest of the Irish people, so intimately
and so hermcally bound up with the glories and sorrows
of the Papal Chair is worthy of their historic name, and
of the noble President of their Union “ The Catholic
Union of Ireland, it says, “have heard with grief and
indignation that a bill against the so-called abuses of the
clergy has been introduced in the Italian Parliament. In
CW W l h ‘Jr r br ® thren in Italy and throughout
Christendom they protest against this unjust and sacri-
legious measure. They protest, as children of the best of
fathers, Pius IX the common father of the faithful
whose sacred rights as Vicar of Christ, and the divinely
appointed head of the Christian family on earth, this bid
lies to" wT T r 6r foot ' The y P rotest as Catho-
f ’}' , '°! n our Lorcl Jesus Christ has given the right
of which this measure seeks to deprive them, of recurring
to the pastors of His Church, and especially to the
Sovereign Pontiff for direction, for guidance, and for
support in all their doubts and spiritual necessities
ey protest as Christians, believing in a sacred hierarchy
which God has instituted for the government of His
spiritual kingdom, and which this bill would thwart
degrade, and enslave m the discharge of its sacred duties
They protest as sons of Catholic Ireland, which, through
weal and woe has always remained faithful to the Hob
See, and which heresy and schism has never senara+Jl
from the Infallible Chair of Peter, because thisTlsu r f
endeavours to tear Catholic Italy from the Roman
Pontiff, who is her joy, her glory, and her crown
They protest as men, by whom the principles of justice'
of honour, and of fair play are still cherished, because tHs
measure if passed into law, would violate the pledged
faith of treaties; would encroach in the most offensive
way on the rights of the clergy, who have always been
a class of citizens without reproach, and well-deserving of
their country; would set up the civil authority as jud°e
m the spiritual domain, which is altogether outside ft!
competency; would force the judiciary to condemn the
innocent, who had acted only in accordance with thrir


conscience • and in flagrant violation of the Italian Con-
stitution would, assuredly, entail a religious
Siened on behalf of the Catholic Union of Ireland,
Gkanard, President. Dublin, March 17 (Feast of St.
ifthen imitate the example that has been set
us by every country of Europe and in America where a
handful of Catholics are to be found. True, the Senate,
scared by the Allocution, and the circular of Cardinal
Simeoni* and dreading the
every honest breast, cast out the Clerical Abuse
BilPby a slender majority. But we are not dealing with
one isolated act of tyranny. We are enpiged
energetic power of evil w ic ma ke the
vt °roft; Pelcufen of the Church in Italy aildthe
enslavement of the Pope What is defeated to-day may
“n'l-in.l.n. i>" wl * h *“ “
hs,' □> i„ (o. g™* .* ‘“'O' if*; *Th”
Za “Enlightenment ” of which so great a boast is made
E ltalv does not exist amongst the persecutors of the
m Italy, aue that “ Liberalism has
Sovereign Pontiff. / disrepute* They perceive
anEnpleasant*contraction between professing ‘«om”
Etd^rbe— ng th?bo C aS ‘‘liberty,” and fining a man,
* See Appendix.


or throwing him into jail, because he says what you do
r h h r: n r to - jke - The ? are in the «"“% on
which P in “ amixture °{ tyranny and cowardices,
ar Jf’ , their union, turn out about the most debased
the name 6 of man ?p, umanit ythat could desecrate
men X t T'- And lf these thinkers perceive this—
all others wtf™ & St /°f g ai } ta g a nism to the Church-
In a word th + not s * one ' blmd > must perceive it too.
ii tn,r „J r gre f* Se ° ular world of men > whose religion
is truth and honesty, utterly condemn the recent act on
St P mur tOrS ° f Church ' And a n-enof C !ny
insight must now see that the Pope is surrounded hv l
i ° " "scrupulous and deadly enemies who would take
Churelfof which he is the Hoad *i and tbe
/ no means synonymous with the defeat of the Revolt
many Against j9 burcb will have to co^dtr
such m y oral powef as we poTsesT A ndn ° Ur f ° rCeS ’ and
+ lln u— nnr i u possess. And now is our onnor-
affaire '; or at Wit Zs aXTed thTcZZI ° f
recently been ernellv t™•,, ‘ ™ Cllure h has
Anri ;/• 1 • • Jy ’ tyrannically, and un ustlv used
ctlfe finrt Dmg h PerC6ive that tbose who were
BiS.« uC^xz,‘ c i?t , l A ir"
solemnly against the whole treatment' Church^


received at the hands of the Revolution. Let us declare,
in strong and unmistakable language, our emphatic
reprobation of the conduct of those men who have sacri-
legiously robbed the Church of her patrimony, stampe
out of lfle her religious orders trampled on the
of her clergy, and left her desolate and helpless in the
centre-head of her power ; of men who have treated t e
Sovereign Pontiff himself with insult and indignities,
have practically made him their prisoner, and have
deprived him of the freedom and independence necessaiy
for the exercise of his supreme office as H ead of theCatho
Church, which we love dearer than our lives ; of men who
have aimed at the disruption of that high morality, that
refined civilization, that true culture, which onginaUy
sprung from Christianity, and which, without it, must at
length inevitably perish. And whilst we are doing this, let
us also Offer to the Holy Father our tribute of deepest
reverence, and our admiration for his Apostolic virtues
our unfeigned thankfulness for his having so bravely these
years stood firm on the rock of ages, and in season and
out of season proclaimed the truth and condemned error
and let us promise him that in spirit we will ever be by
his side ; and though thousands of miles separate us from
him, that we will never be less true to him than th
who are his staunchest friends, nor love him less than
those who are ready to spill their blood in his defenc .
And how can this be brought into practical effect !
How can an opportunity be given to our Catholic people
of expressing these their sentiments with regard to the
Church and the Holy Father ? An opportunity can be
afforded by our drawing out a form of Protest, embodying
the sentiments above expressed. We shall therefore send
to each Clergyman entrusted with a Church or the care
of a District printed copies of such a Protest; andhen ml
be good enough to make such arrangements as will aftord
the g people ample and easy opportunities of signing their
names to it. Let each Priest, the Sunday following the
reception of this Pastoral, explain to the people what is
going to be done; so that they may be prepared, and


wuf tesent together whMhe^p 1 ? al ? i, ; ulars and details
tbat he will’knfw exactly 1 t 0 "* *** *°
Pray. So, at’HolVNaS° Ul f r ikew f e
sung or recited in English a fW -N ar pe of Jesus be
toral Letter, before o^after Zl PaS-
every Sunday in our Churches tillfi fh P ubllc . ser ™es,
let all fervently pray that our f ther “° tlCe ; and
a peaceable triumph’in Hi s Cause B*»*
safe to open the eyes and the hearts nf\ & voucb-
turn them to Himself; and that He ron enues and
to an end the many fiercer tr tl to brin g
tions with which His Church and • Sea " :llIn " persecu-
are being assailed. Wewould „? H ' S VlCar 011 Eartb-
to pray in an especial manner for^yTcT p, e . Cler^
the prosperity of the Church during- HoC M ° hnst land 1 and
the Laity in their devrmi U ly Mass; whilst
their Spiritual Mother her s^ UmonS
sorrows of the Common {SS™ 8 */ tbe trials and
Surely, if we are in earnest- ifwe tbe Faitbfob
what we are about; if we onlV Veiy dee P ] 7
ventlyenough, our Master l°f
good things to those that ask Him I ’ d Wdl £ lve
the instrac&ns W t\hV oHol 0 Holv beS t a t b i! lity ’ C -? rried out
endeavoured to “point out” tott fijfc. W \ W
our care “the ever-increasing p * to
situation,” and “to fore warn tfr flock’’ ofo-Vf™ 1 *
crit.cal insinuation” of those who would math he h JP°-
the Pope is free and the Church w« V • belleve that
We have made it incon trover*; hi uffei ;ing persecution.
Revolution is strikingT?he that tbe
have established the Thesis which the C p lty; and
us to prove, viz., that “ The Church if 1 "" b “ glven
Italy; and that the Word of Oh*?- . persecu ted in
independent in the exercise of his Sun 18 ne i tber free
finally, following out the snirit of h ? PoWer '” And
Allocution, weLve


do our part in supporting the cause of Justice and Tiuth,
of Order and Authority, against the violence and fierce
intolerance of the Atheists, Libertines, and Revolutionists
of the present day. . ,
“ Dearly Beloved, be mindful of the words which have
been spoken by the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who told you that in the last time there should come
mockers, walking according to their own desires m
ungodliness; these are they who separate themselves,
sensual men, having not the Spirit. But you my
Beloved, building yourselves upon your most Holy b aith,
praying in the Holy Ghost, keep yourselves m the love
of God, waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ
unto Life Everlasting. . . . Now, to Him who is
able to preserve you without Sin and to present you
spotless before the Presence of His Glory with exceeding
joy in the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the on y
God our Saviour, through Jesus Christ our Lord, be
Glory, and Magnificence, and Empire, and Power, betore
all ages, and now, and for all ages of ages. Amen.
Given at Sydney, on the sixth day of July, 1877,
and ordered to be explained or read in all Churches ot
the Diocese, during the four Sundays following its
reception.
f ROGER BEDE,
Archbishop of Sydney.
* St. Jude, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25.


appendix.
the allocution
OF OUR HOLY FATHER POPE PIUS IX,
MdnSSed t 0 Me Cardinals at the Vatican, on the 12th of
March, 1877.
Venerable Brethren,
During the sad times of Our tmnLlod u* .
together in this plane the members of vn llfi . < ? t0 > "’ e have often called
that we might Seplore wia IZ ZZZ ° rfer > 80 *•*
shamefully harassed, and publish Our n ,. n + f which the Church is
have been perpetrated, whether in Italv nr * “fi™ 8 * the wrongs which
mtent of ruining the Churchtd &^
witness neVZdlZt TsT
the Church of God in various parts of fna deeper m j uries , which
at the hands of bitter foes, vfew of the haS end - ed
affairs, and of that friendlessness in Jhinh th 7 re^ clied state of Our
human aid, have deemed it a most fitf We stand ’ destitute of all
Spouse of Jesus Chrisf We ZTd f ° r the
this day to propose to your attention and ° . Venerable Brethren, on
widely diffused persecution, which in vario^T^^ 0 * tte Savage and
ragmg against the Church, but We intend on C ° U^ nes of Europe is
before you that lamentable picture • meanwbdn another occasion to set
otherwise than recount to you the Cl , °T r We cann ot do
Church day by day becoming more severe Z tht T^T^ 8 of the
unfold the dangers every day more menacing whi ° f ° Urs ’ and so
hanging Us and this Apostolic See. Cp We see to be over-
We are now in the seventh vear from j t
invaders of Our civil Princedom, all b °“ whioh
law, violating the faith of solemn trSthS and b ," man and Di ™<=
calamities of an illustrious Catholic Nation to b +1 a^ 6 ' V aecou nting the
did with armed violence


under Our rule, took by siege this Holy City, and at the cost of such
dire iniquity filled the Universal Church with grief and rnournm As
for the hypocritical and faithless promises, which in those wretched days
such men paraded before foreign Governments,-promts, We mean
in which they declared themselves determined to respect and honoui
the liberty o/the Church, and to maintain the power of the Roman
Pontiff full and free, these mighty promises did not deceive Us with any
vain hope nor prevent Our complete anticipation of the wretchedness
and misery, which awaited Us under their domination. On the contrary
knowing thoroughly well the wicked designs, which are the very breath
of men banded together by a craving for revolution, and, by flagitio s
compact, We proclaimed before the world that their sacnligeous mvasi
was intended Lot so much for the abolition of Our civil Princedom as for
the more easy destruction, Our temporal rule bemg once abolished of al
the institutions of the Church, for the overthrow of the Authority of the
Holy See, for undermining fatally that power which as Christs Vicar,
which We, although unworthy, hold upon this earth.
Already indeed this work of destroying everything which pertains
to Eclesiastical order and stability, may be said to be complete, if not to
the full extent of the designs and hatred of the persecutors, still to the
relation of those most ruinous mischiefs which they have been heaping
toother. It is enough to turn your eyes to the laws and decrees, which
from the beginning of the new domination up to the present day have
been published, in order to see most clearly that the means and safe-
guards which were absolutely necessary for Us m guiding and ruling
fittingly the Catholic Church, have been one by one, piece by piece one
after another day by day craftily taken away from Us. Indeed it is
clear that the iniquity which filled up its measure m suppressing the
Religious has ruinously despoiled Us of useful and .
assistants, whose aid We can m no wise forego m the
business of Ecclesiastical Congregations m so many departments of Our
Ministry. At the same time m this very City of Ours it has pulled
down the abodes, which used to receive *is guest: VRehgio,us me: ni from
foreign nations, who were accustomed at stated times to meet m this
Metropolis for the confirmation of their spiritual strength, and for le
purpose of giving an account of their Ministry. And thus have their
iniquitous devices tom up from the very roots, so many ™ ef " l “ d “
plants, which carried the fruits of benediction and {Mace toall
of the earth. And the very same wrong of suppression, that has st rack
down the Colleges, which had been erected and endowed m this City as
Sacral Missionary Establishments to furnish and train worthy labourers
suTasloulTSvely carry forth the light of the Gospel to
• 1 ~,1 IQTI1 QT1 J a Colleges, which were among so many nations
suclTpowerful aids to Religion and Charity, it ta shamefu%
to the huge detriment of that very human civilisation and cultuie which
have their source in the sanctity and spmtual of Our
Further these laws, already harsh enough in themselves, and tlioioi ? y
opposed’ to all progress, not only of Religion, but of Human society,


by whi ? w< j " l
selves solemnly to God forced to rmt n , ere al)out to consecrate them-
and to endure a mode of l Sf dreM o£ the 80 ™l<*r soldiery,
spirit of their vocation. What more neecbteTaM*” C? lnBtitutes . and
proceedings followed other imnnit. 1 Close u P on these
patrimony held by the Church Indpr +*fi WS W^ a l m °st the entire
ancient, that were inviolable has be lea were sacr ed, that were
it, and £* in P lace
altogether subject to the doubtful chauee Z+i, 80 ? 6 Pittances
arbitrary decision of Ws ’ to the and
which at very great cost had beeTt?'i “T*?® 0 . " ere those edifices
which were truly worthv the Gb • 6 piety of the faithful,
afforded a peaS to *?*’ “ d
of Regulars,—these edifices after tlie W 1 1 \ G ° d .° r to con g re gations
possessors, were seized upon’ and diverted Vo^nrofe BCtl ° n ° f lawful
tins, they took away from Our rule anrl f P ? £ ne uses - Resides all
Ministers of ReliJon verv mau guardianship of the
consecrated to the exercise of charif P1 ° U d if d f’karitable institutions
had been built for “here lief otTL ® ““f- some » f '-inch
miseries,—built with an admirable m ot^ er human needs and
themselves Our predecessors and T?, l^ 06 h 7 the Roman Pontiffs
nations. And if of E Xl nf ‘V'T ? enerosit y «f foreign
the care of the Church a new kw if P uWIG remain under
indeed it is plainly and positive!v Lrm * Sa^’- 1S t0 i P ro P ose< P and
which they are, either to be withdrawn ot bj
More than this; We have seen, and We speak of if eiI 7abolished,
by grief, We have seen public teacW of .bt torn
withdrawn from the guidance and rule of fl P , oSo P ll 3 ir and literature-
teaching entrusted to men o? suspected°faith Ur ° h ’ a ” d th . e office of
Church, who have not hesitated to profess publiclv° Pen - enGmies o£ t}ie
The occupation and destruction of so ' “T atW
great importance too, has not seemed enough to ehglo,lS In8 «utes of
the Church, unless they could also nlace „bsS 1 * !u a J M * tate 80118 °*
their spiritual duties in the ° £ree exe ™° °f
Matters have even gone so far as fbis fl in i P ste I P s o£ the Sanctuary,
the Legislative Assmbtoandwhth ’! A”™ jmt dis ™™‘> ■«
Abuses,” those acts of td”ofTrTifa^ft ° f ““
mischievous, and punished by severe penalties w? P d Cnminal an d
by those who have passed the aforesaid law und are comprehended
disturbance of J they Calf'S ol


-O o +iH ai the bidding of that law to which We refer,
families. Further stall hich t he Ministers of Religion
words and writings of ev *7 belie f that decrees, laws or any
S
acts ol rublic A.utnui y, £ tbe Church, are subjected to
any sacred rights or laws Gd, lties also are subjected
animadversions and penalties, an 1 wben written, or
the acts of those o rder of Eclesiastical Authority, or
circulated them fiom w been assed and
place they may ot a lay tribunal whether
promulgated it will be gacraments , in preaching the
and how a p roubled the public conscience and the peace of
Word ot broa, uas wuuuic £ f nriest will be in this
families. Also the orsilenced not less’than the voice of
condition, that it may . 1 , although it is professed that he
the Vicar of reasons, still in the
is in himself liab le to n noxt t 0 b i m in the alleged offence
person of those who shall principle, a Minister of
he i. consideredpliable to to intimate
the State m the Legi openly declared that it was
publicly, when with refer inconsistent with the aims,
neither a new nor unusual thing m isliment>
theory, and practice of criminal
bees in a public crime w t} P P t he Aut horities, the sting of
which it is understood that m the
of pretendedl crime -of We, as principal criminal
shall be accounted o n,y so many safe-guards, so
Y nstitutions Strong in their antiquity, unconquered by storms, and
tb0 U p o to^sudi 1 a
of teaching, of watching over the
height that the a what the Church has received from her
salvation of souisofe: itious manner obstructed. The most
Divine Founder, sed with the design of closing the mouths
severe penalties have b they are teaching the people to
of the Ministers of Ch , ded st they preach in season
keep all things which He , t whilst they beseech, whilst they
and out of ire doing that which is enjoined
rebuke m all patience a . n+horitv We pass over m silence
T" of the Church to whom
other plots of darkness e> a ment and counsels of some even
T 6 Hic~ie n s wtoht™ Sviewthe very object of bringing upon
of the Bishops who


preside over the CWlies of Italy. It was in consequence of this latter
iniquity that We quite lately were compelled to say that it might be
tolerated, that the processes of the Canonical institution of those Bishops
shou d be exhibited to ay Authorities, so as to meet as far as we possibly
could this most wretched state of things, in which there is no l longer
Sfnl 1 ib 7 P°T 3S1 ° US ’ but Whi ° h thG Yer y consciences of the
faithful, the peace of those consciences, the cure and salvation of souls
which is Our supreme law, are in manifest peril. But in doing this in
order to evade those direst mischiefs, We desire openly, and again and
!*T’ that * shou d Je known that We altogether condemn and abhoj
that unjust law. which is called “ regium placitum,” and declare before
the world that it strikes at the Divine Authority of the Church and
violates her liberty. And now after what We have already said’ and
passing over many other things, in deploring which we might continue
Our discourse, We ask this question—How is it possible that We should
govern the Church under the domination of that power which wrests
fi om Us. one after the other, all means and safe-guards for the exercise
of Our Apostolate, which obstructs every path, which interposes every
day hindrances and new difficulties, which is continually contriving snares
and stratagems 1 Certainly We cannot sufficiently bonder how such
men can be found, men m whom We know not whether their levitv or
their malice be the greater, men who either in newspapers, or in other
writings, or m shameless harangues delivered on occasion of iiany public
meetings, strive to thrust upon, and recommend to the
assertion that the present position of the Supreme Pontiff in Borne s
such that, even thus placed under the dominion of another power he
enjoys full liberty and can execute in tranquility and in entirety His
Supreme Spiritual Primacy. And to confirm this fiction among the
public they suffer no occasion to escape them, whether it be when the
Bishops or the faithful from other countries visit Us, or whether it be
when pmus bodies amongst them are admitted to audience, or whether it
be when We are deploring m Our addresses to them the wicked
against the Church,—they suffer no occasion to escape them witlmut
endeavouring by design and craft to insinuate that We in realitv do
Sf f ull i P ° Wei and lb i ert ?T b ° t}i in receivin g and addressing
faffhful and in governing the Universal Church. It is matter of wonder
to Us that such things can be shamelessly bandied about if +i
exercise of those acts, which We have named were fully and in all points
m Our power, and as if in such things the entire conmlexifv nf +i
government of the Church which belongs to Our Office were comprise/
Foi who does not know that the acts of that liberty which they so /uch
extol, are not m Our power, but in the power of those who ™
thS eS g aTtothat mome^l' taTno' j f ‘°
by themselves 1 What kind of OurtS WetZTIK
their power even if other proofs were wanting, is clearly signified asS
proved by that new law itself which We have been deploriagf by meZ
of which the free exercise of Our spiritual power, of the lliffishy of


Ecclesiastics is cramped and fettered by an unheard of and intolerable
oppression. And if they permit Us to exercise some acts, for the precise
reason that they are aware how greatly it is to their own advantage that
We should be thought free under their domination, still how many most
weighty things, things that are necessary, and of the highest importance
are there, appertaining to the fearful responsibility of Our Ministry, foi
the actual and suitable execution of which, subjected as We are to the
yoke of their authority, We are despoiled of every necessary faculty and
liberty 1 We could wish indeed, that those who write and speak the
things We have mentioned, would turn their eyes to what is happenmg
round about Us, and for a little while would dispassionately consider,
whether it can possibly be asserted, that the power of ruling the Church
divinely committed to Us can in any way co-exist with that state to
which the domination of the invaders has reduced Us. We wish them
to consider the revilings, the calumnies, the contumelies which even by
speakers in the Parliamentary Assembly are poured forth against Our
lowliness, revilings, which as far as We Ourselves are concerned, We
pardon in the unhappy men who utter them, but which notwithstanding
have the effect of scandalising in the highest degree the faithful who
behold their common Father rudely assaulted. And further these constant
insults have a natural tendency to dimish among them the respect, the
authority, the veneration which the Supreme Authority and sacredness
of that office of Christ’s Yicar, which We though unworthy, hold,
absolutely demand. We could wish them to behold with their own eyes
the insults and indignities by which, not only your own illustrious Order,
but also other prelates of the Church, are in every possible way attacked
with such detriment to their administration. We would have them
witness the derision and mockery with which the august rites and
institutions of the Catholic Church are dishonoured, the impertinent
levity with which the most holy mysteries of Religion are profaned,—
We would have them see how impiety and atheism are decorated with
marks of public honour in processions, whilst on the contrary they would
see forbidden those litanies and processions which the hereditary piety of
Italians has always freely been accustomed to celebrate on solemn
occasions. We could wish them to know the blasphemies which are,
with impunity, because the Public Authorities choose to ignore them,
hurled against the Church in the very Assembly of the Legislators, m
which Assembly the accusation of destroying and attacking is brought
against the Church herself, her liberty is called a nefarious and fatal
principle : her doctrines are styled perverse, and mischievous to society
and morality ; her influence and authority condemned as pernicious to
the common weal. Nor could those trumpeters of Our pretended liberty
deny the manifold, frequent, dangerous occasions devised for the very
purpose of corrupting incautious youth heated by passion, and of
uprooting from their minds every fibre of Catholic faith. If, lastly, they
could the streets of this City, which by the Chair of Peter is
constituted the seat and centre of Religion, they would readily be able to
judge whether the temples of non-catholic worship which have been


erected in these times, the schools of corruption spread in all directions
the numerous houses of perdition established up and down, the foul and
obscene spectacles presented to the eyes of the public, confute a state
of things that can be tolerable to him, who, according to the office of Ws
Apostolate ought to, and would, provide a remedy for such evils but who
on the contrary is deprived of all means and resources, of all eiercisl of
power by which he might remedy even one of them, and offer”scue to
souls hastening to destruction. This then Venemble TWfi resc . ue to
state winch We are compelled to endure by the action of the lr6n ’ 1S
which dominates in this City this is that KW, i f he ?° vemmen t
Our Ministry as they falsely Ltyle it, and which
asserting that We enjoy It is in fact the liberty of
after day a wider rum of order and organisation hf evervthta? PVd •
astical, —of witnessing the ruin of souls witl.mn or, cclesi-
labour and to strive for the seasonable repair of suchrS ST*
things being thus, is it not a bitter irony, and a reiterated 7’
say, as it is frequently said, that We To ?t d
conciliation and concord with the new powers when tl * dj means ° f
such a conciliation on Our part would be nothin- less thair^T? 6 f
betrayal of the highest rights of this Holy See which W the . wll ° lesale
sacred and inviolable deposit when We Taied I «“ *
Cathedra, but it be also and still more emphaticallv the 1 ® Up / ei ? e
Sacred Ministry committed to Us for the ° f tte
over the herita/e of Christ into the haUfof an™ u?h„ri t v w t’
directed to destroy, if it were possible, the very name of t?
Eeligion 1-Now truly the whole world may clear li-ht 6
what force, what faith there was in those enneec • ’ wliat llfe >
purpose of deluding the faithful 1^
mmation to protect the liberty and the dienitv of the P d f> 1 deter '
concessions have their foundation placed on the^ h \ R ° man which
hostile will of the rulers of the wtse ' T
to their own designs and estimate; and at their meretnod IS ’, aooordl “*
adapt them, to maintain them, to interpret them and to P ““"T to
No, most certainly no : the RomaJ Pontiffi “V eXeCUte them-
at full liberty, and in full use of his power whilst Ke *’ "“i ? Ten "’ lll be
rulers in His own City. Other conEn S nev« V‘ her
except that of Supreme Pontiff or of captive never can to “ E °T’
security, of the Universal Church exist whilst +1 tp e peace, the
Supreme Apostolic Ministry shall be exposed to thfstrifb Tf °C
to the good pleasure of rulers, to the vicissitudes of nolitt 1 ? f [™ tlonB >
the projects and machinations of men who are crffh^ lCal , ele f tlons » to
advantage above justice. a “^» and se t worldly
And yet Venerable Brethren, We would not have you to,tot to *
our courage is giving way amidst all these evil! I ■ k tha !
oppressive as they are, or that our firm ermtble • ansome and
decrees of the Omnipotent and Eternal is other Waitln g for the
In good truth, when', after ft. toSSto bas *»•
we came to the determination of abiding in Rome mther Tlian ” e7a


peaceful asylum in foreign lands, and did so with the
keeping an untiring watch for the weal of the Church by the tomb of
St Peter We never for a moment ceased by God’s help, from contending
in’ His cause, and We do contend, in no place yielding to the enemy
unless driven away by violence, so that We may maintain our right m
the very few things that are yet left by the assaults of those who are
endeavouring to plunder and destroy all. And when all other defe
failed Us by which to protect the interests of the Church and ot
Religion, We used the Ministry of Our voice and Our expostulations as
you yourselves are witness who have with Us a common peril and a
common grief. You have often listened to the words publicly uttered
bv Us whether in condemnation of iniquities, and m protest agains e
increasing violence of Our enemies, or whether by timely monitions We
mi<dit warn the faithful lest they should be deceived by the plottings o
wicked men, and the show of false religion j or by the pestilent doctrines
of false brethren. We wish indeed, that Our words could reach the
ears and fix the attention of those whose duty and most especial mterest
it is to sustain Our authority, and to defend a cause than which none
fs more ust and more sacred ! For how can it be that their prudence
should overlook the fact that solid and true prosperity m nations,
tranquillity and good order among the people, stability of power m
sceptred hands are vainly expected if the authority of the> Church
which bolds together by the bond of religion all constituted
societies is with impunity insulted and violated, and if , c
Church in the exercise of his Ministry cannot have full liberty, but
subjected to the arbitrary will of another power ?
J We have indeed, great joy in knowing how fortunately it has
happened that Our words have been received most eageily, and wi
great fruit by the Universal Catholic people bound to us m their fiiml
devotion. The earliest and repeated testimonies of affection which we
have received from them, are such as to confer the highest glory o
themselves and on the Church, and to compel us to hope that happier
days are about to dawn for the Church and this Apostolic See A
certainly We cannot give in words any adequate expression to the joy >
consolation with which We have been filled,
every side of material aid, when we nave beheld those wondert
stirrings of soul, that spontaneous generous zeal which is every day
more’widely spre’ad amongst people, even the most
eagerness of to undertake the cause of the Roman Pontificate and Our
humility and to defend its dignity. *,r T ,i,i
The liberal subsidies which reach us from every part of thei world,
in order that we may provide for the urgent necessities of this Holy
See and Ihe numerous bodies of Our faithful who flock to this Vatican
from every nation, to testify their firm devotion to the visible Head of
the Church,—these things We say are such pledges of the spirit of e
fiiithful that We feel altogether powerless to render sufficient thanksfo
them to tie goodness of God. V. would have all understand and it
would be a life-kindling lesson, the deep inner force and true signification


of those pilgrimages, which we behold so frequently repeated at this
time, this time in which the Roman Pontificate is assailed by the direst
warfare. In truth they go beyond a simple exhibition of love and
reverence for Our humility, they present manifest truth of the solicitude
and anxiety which trouble their heart, because their common parent is
placed in a position utterly unnatural and unbefitting. Nor will this
anxiety and solicitude be at rest, nay rather it must increase until the
Pastor of the Universal Church be reinstated in possesion of true and
complete liberty.
Meantime We have nothing more at heart Yenerable Brethren
than that these words of Ours should pass beyond these walls to the
uttermost limits of the earth, and should testify Our most warm
gratitude to the faithful of the whole world, for the magnificent proofs
which they are continually exhibiting of filial love and respect We
desire to thank them for the pious liberality, with which, sometimes
forgetful of them own difficulties, they send help to us, knowing that
whatever is given to the Church, if offered to God— we desire to con-
gratulate them on that magnanimity and firmness of soul, which makes
them set at naught the rage and derision of the wicked, and to
acknowledge ourselves bound to them for the eager proofs of’the love
which they are zealously offering to celebrate the anniversary of that
day now fifty years past when We, unworthy as we are, received the
giace of Episcopal consecration. Nor are We less anxious that all the
Pastors of the Churches, which are spread over the face of the world
should receive this Our protest, and by it be stirred up to make known
to the faithful under them care, the dangers, the attacks, the embarrass-
ments day by day more grievous under which We are suffering and
should assure them that We for Our part shall never cease*” from
reprobating the iniquities that are perpetrated before Our eyes whatever
result may betide. The faithful should also be forewarned that it mav
possibly happen by and by throught the law already passed, as well as br-
others still more stringent, which are announced, that Our voice mav
reach them only at rare intervals, and with much difficulty through
interposed obstacles. In this state of things We urge the Bishops
everywhere to warn their flocks lest they may be entrapped by the false
words of fraudulent men striving to misrepresent, or to contradict
utterly by diametrically untrue statements, the condition in which We
are placed, whether by concealing its hardships or by extollino- Our
liberty, as when they affirm that the exercise of Our power is subject to
no control, when all the while the real state of things may be summed
up m this brief statement,—the Church of God in Italy is suffering
violence and persecution; the Vicar of Christ enjoys neither liberty nor
the unembarrassed and full use of his power.
Such being the state of things, We judge nothing more suitable to
tbe times, We desire nothing more earnestly than that the Bishops of
tfie Church, who by repeated proofs have constantly shown their
admirable unanimity in defending Ecclesiastical rights, and their eminent
loyalty towards the Apostolic See, should urge the faithful over whom


they are placed, to strive earnestly, in the manner and measure permitted
by the laws of each country, to gam the ear of their Governments
that the sad condition of the Head of the Catholic Church may be more
duly considered, and efficacious means be applied for removing the.obstacles
that obstruct his real and perfect independence. lit now,. e
Brethren, since God alone, the Almighty can pour light into mens
minds, and bend their hearts, We entreat that not only you yourselves
would offer fervent prayers at this juncture o im, u ‘
earnestly exhort the Bishops of the Universal Catholm people to be
assiduous in assembling the faithful committed o iem > 1 „.,
to pray there, from their innermost hearts for ie sa e y
Church, for the conversion of our enemies, and foi an em
great evils, spreading far and wide. And God will accept, We feel sure,
the prayer of His people who cry to Him, for His p easui
who fear Him, and who hope in His mercy.
Lastly, Venerable Brethren, be you strengthened m the Lord and
in the power of His might, and put you on the armour of God, the
breastplate of justice and the shield of faith, do battle vigorously and
bravely against the powers of darkness and wickedness of this ag .
Now iiideed the rage for universal confusion and destruction has reac e
fiich a point that! like a torrent, it threatens to carry
headlong, and not a few of those, who stood forth as authors o
promoters of the new state of things, look bac ag as , ‘
results of their own work. But God is with Us, and
the end of the world. Let those fear of whom it is written I
seen those who work iniquity, and sow sorrows am ie 5P ’1 o f
by the blast of God, and consumed by the spirit of His wrath. But
for those who fear God, and strive in His name, and work m Hxs
power, there is laid up mercy and salvation; nor can it be doubted ~
His is the cause, since His is the battle, that His e p y
them who fight in it unto victoiy.


CARDINAL SIMEONI’S ANSWER TO THE
KEEPER OF THE SEALS,
Addressed to the Pope's Pepresentatives at
Foreign Courts.
The Circular of the Minister, the Keeper of the Seals, to the Public
Prosecutors of the Courts of Appeal on the Holy Father’s last Allocution
—a Circular published yesterday by the Ministerial papers at Rome—
will certainly not escape your attention The Circular states that the
journals which may publish the Pontifical document will not be prose-
cuted, provided they do not accompany it by any commentaiy expressing
adhesion, and this decision is put forward as the more signal proof of
the liberty insured the Holy Father in the exercise of his functions
inasmuch as the Allocution, according to the Minister, has exceeded all
conceivable limits, and is a confirmation of the Pontifical ingratitude
towards a Government which has shown itself so broad and generous
towards the Church. The truth is, that were a new argument necessary
to bring to light the deplorable state of things described in the Holy
1 athei s Allocution, the Circular in question would supply ft jjx
palpable fashion. From the time, indeed, that the publication of Ponti
fical utterances is subjected to the good pleasure of a Keeper of the
Seals, whoever he may be, the liberty accorded to those utterances is
and can only be illusory. It is the Minister himself who declares that
if he has not enforced the rigour of the laws, it is because he has to-dav
desired to exercise toleration. To-morrow the same Minister, or any
other who should succeed him in that post, instead of yielding to these
sentiments placarded to-day, might with equal right show himself to be
the strict enforcer of laws easily to be invoked, and, in default of other
grounds, might resort to the ordinary pretext which is made use of
without any justification in the recent Circular—viz., that the Roman
Pontiff goes beyond the spiritual domain, and enters on the political
domam. This pretext I say, is now, in particular, alleged without any
foundation, for to all who have read the Allocution of the 12th of March
it is manifest • that the statement of facts which it contains solelv
concerns religious interests, among which must be placed, before everv-
thmg, the claim to a full and real independence in the discharge of the
Apostolic office. If the wounds inflicted on the Church— wounds which
are now protested agamst, and which have not failed to be protested
against m the past, whatever may be the views of the author of the
Circular are the grievous effects of a policy unjustly carried into a


region which does not appertain to it, it cannot then be wdjrito
issues beyond his proper duty. Here he has a right and at the same
W a duty to protest until he obtains redress. There are, Wever,
other points in the Circular in question which show still more strongly
what is the liberty generously accorded to the Sovereign Pont .
SeSgt whCou tlTwell-disposed Press is
promised them is defined by new and more strmgei"Hierarch,
BWasSfiS^SrrisSfffi
that conduct'ail a P "“ n\STXtltion l
%£S*t£* flight to make the entire independence of the
S y rch"Slen“o tattously. The the
Sncrer‘siSe d Xsion,tS Zenjis appeal becomes a
See The stogie fact, moreover, that a Minister, m presence of a
speech solemnly delivered by the most august authority on earth puts
aside the acts denounced as so many injustices of which that authority
reliance can be placed on ms . J « lllir eme Chief of the
deference towards the may to tS be said, and that
« ss=SSSsH*r.-Ju-aKi;
pretension. It will assure y i j Tf a lv sought her true
she OW jj*.^
and sufferings bremrtd affairs to the language of
£ £ e ep“°Ws: “s°to the observations to which it gives


nse. Point out to him especially that if the Italian Catholics have iust
ground for considering themselves injured, who, despite the option
they undergo and despite certain well-known Plebiscites of which the
Circular speaks, testify a thousand ways with real spontaneif-v
every occasion .heir firm adherem/to the Tover^ToS
on this Ye| S S ubA S by te th oeHrf 0 eHrfy f so
rt4 T ts
object was m part to make these same foreign m
for the evi ls the Sovereign Pontiff cleploresln
eful to point out that, if m deploring that in his present situation the
Church cannot be governed as it should be, the Holy Father appeals to
the intervention of the faithful or their Governments, he nevertheless
wishes—although.the Keeper of the Seals is intentionally side Ton t h s
point-that this intervention should be conformable with the laws of
the diiierent countries. Authorizing you to leave a copy of th£ despatch
with the Munster of Foreign Affairs, if he wishes it, I reiterate to l vou
the sentiments of my highest esteem.
John, Cardinal Simeoni.
Rome, March 21, 1877.


“ THE SPECTATOR” (March 24, 1877)
CONDEMNS THE PERSECUTORS OF THE
POPE.
The Pope’s Advantage.
The English Press is still childishly afraid of saying anything that
appears to favour a Catholic cause, however clear may be the justice.ol
that cause. Miss Harriet Martineau tells of two occasions on
tales of hers were peremptorily refused solely on the ground tlh
had taken occasion to draw attention to the virtues of Roman Catholics,
and she declares that the late Mr. Dickens avowed to Ixlß _
never to allow anything, however true, that could ene ie P
of the Roman Catholics to appear in his journal. We must say
should have supposed that to be the policy not only o a pas a„ ,
a blundering editor, unless, indeed, the journal in w 11c ® uc P,
was adopted had circulated chiefly amongst .the ignorant and Anilgar
Englishmen of any culture understand by this time, we hope, th
duty of according equal terms to good persons o a re lgion
really be held or practised as a duty at all unless you are prepa e
practise it in the case of those who would not accept that duty *or
themselves and who would not apply it to our case. If a principle
good only for the case of those who accept it it is not goodJit all, t
nobody can really accept it who does not feel it binding on
comes to deal with those who are not of his own way of thought Now
the Pope’s Allocutions are generally very irritable and feeble pro
ductions, but in the Allocution of March 12 even his
he has at last got something to say which those who do not accept his
authority are, as reasonable beings, bound to attend to And J
there is much less of that fretfulness which marks the latent impression
thatTno onewho does not agree with the Pope already, is at all the more
likely to acree with him for anything that the Allocution says. We
will not say, indeed, that the new Allocution is a statesmanlike
document. But unquestionably it has more of the solid basis of fact
and argument than any we remember for many years back. And yet
he gets ß no credit for this from the English Press, he
reason of his better and more reticent style is obvious. If the Italian
Bill on Clerical Abuses is to pass, in anything like its; original form lit
is auite clear that Cavour’s theory of a “ Free Church m a Free btate
wolld have been completely abandoned by Italy, and that there would


be the gravest justice in the Pope’s complaint that the liberty of the
Church is a fiction, and the usurpation of the State a fact. On
February 10 last the Saturday Remew, which is, of course, quite above
the vulgar fear of bemg thought to favour Roman Catholicism, contained
a very interesting paper on the provisions of this strange outburst of
persecuting scepticism m Italy; and proved conclusively that the
measure was in many respects worse, and certainly supported by a much
more indecent demonstration of atheistic passion, than the Falck Laws
in Germany. Thus the first article of this absurd and intolerant Bill
provides that the Minister of Religion who abuses his office, so as to
offend against the institutions or laws of the State, and perturb the
public conscience or the peace of families, shall be liable to imprisonment
for a term ranging from four months to two years, with a fine which mav
extend to 1,000 lire (£4O) ” Of course, under that clause John the Baptist
wou d have been fined £4O and suffered the same imprisonment as he
actually suffered at Herod s hands, thought no doubt he would not have
been liable to the arbitrary capital punishment which he actually endured,
ndeed, any. one of our High-Church clergymen preaching that to marry
a divorced man or woman, though lawful under English law, is contrary
to the Law of CW or any Dissenting minister declaring that the
toleration of the State Church is a wickedness which must be visited in
a divine judgment upon the nation, would be punishable under this
clause with fine and imprisonment, The former could easily be shown
to have disturbed “ the peace of families,” and the latter to have dis-
turbed “ the public conscience.” Indeed, what ministers of any kind
are useful for, if they are not at times to disturb both the public
conscience and the peace of families, we cannot imagine. What have
been all the efforts to rouse the public feeling of England against the
Turkish policy of Lord Beaconsfield, except efforts to disturb “the
public conscience ? ” What can any sort of attack on the moral apathy
to evil, whether in domestic or in national morals, be, except an assault
on the private or public conscience, as the case may be ? It is clear that
a clause so vague as this can be meant for no purpose on earth except to
put a powerful weapon against Ministers of Religion into the hands of an
unscrupulous Administration, to be used by them as the opportunitv of
the moment may suggest. The second clause of the Bill is even more
explicit m the same sense, and is intended absolutely to paralyse the
pulpit. “ Any cleric who, in the exercise of his office, by discourses
spoken or read in public assembly, or by writings otherwise published
expressly censures, or by any public action outrages, the institutions or
laws of the State, a Royal decree, or any other act of public authority
snail be liable to three months’ imprisonment.” Why, half the poli-
ticians of England, probably more than half, could be imprisoned 1 for
Hl ree ™ onths un(ler such a provision as that, if they were but ‘ clerics ’
What lory gentleman is there who has not on platforms dozens of times
since it was disestablished, denounced the Disestablishment of the Irish
Church as a gross iniquity ? What Nonconformist has not inveighed in
unmeasured terms against the gross injustice of the Establishment and


_ . iin p„ PTI in Italy no such provision would be permitted
the Education Act 1 Even in 1 J F 0 f the very men
for a moment against any clasbut-the Parliament,
who supported this it h modem civilisation,’' a saying
that “ all religions are 1 P ,i i ot i, the “ public conscience ” and
certainly tending to disturb greatly ' £ monstrous measure
the “peace of familiesbut the PyP«=ot ““ 1 from Prie sts,
evidently is to take away their modl hberty and we
and from no other class in Italian
wonder that with this measur , opportunity to declare to the
Senate, before him, the liberty of the
world that the Italian a clergy in the strictest moral
Church, and intending to keep hinl and to all sorts of petty
fetters, and to suhjeet, th _ , y propogal is cer tainly not at all
persecutions. la £ can be sanctioned and promulgated a
too strong bo soon as in s the administration of the
ky tribunal must judge if q£ the fait hful and the peace of
Sacraments, disturb tk shoos an d 0 f the priests shall remain
families, and the word of the Bishop be of the y icar G f
shackled and smothered, an personally called irresponsible
J™ Christ 'in the persons of
for reasons of policy, si U nQ hesitat i o n in declarmg in public
his accomplices , as a nereoll he stated that it was neither
Parliament, when alluding 1 ’ £ t pun i s h accomplices
a novelty nor an anomaly m Inde P ed} there is, or was
‘^ c 7 d^ m ‘ ro ™ke n dS
1 bern“ eTawt ofam SL, from whatever Ecclesiastical authority
“ Tf Ih' "t - * 7*
:rr„“setl any J<& has not««di,
present Italian Parliament would to suppo-i 1 t^wn
Abuses M -ere Sir -ouse-we do not
to the winds and there w ° Government which proposed to
say justification—for any Cholic govern church
interfere in Italy tor tn p 1 worse even than the excuse
from its state of jassah*e But whatsis £™e k
for European mtervent ons which such *
proof itwouhdgrve tlhat the 1P y liberty to think and do as sceptics
favour hberty at alh (< no o£ siege ,-any one
approve. Cavoin- s lMt wo m ore Ucab l e to the subject
can govern m a state ot sieg , constraint placed on
„f moral and ITS Borne,‘or that of
physical violence. The P __ who say t b ey cannot tolerate the
-aawhTW appro™, reahy surrender the only conceivable


principle under which truth, can be arrived at. And we need not point
out that it is infinitely worse, and more illogical, for those who eagerly
pioclaim human fallibility, to take such a course, than for those who
assume that they have access to the sources of infallible truth. The
Pope has thus, gained a real advantage against the nominal friends of
liberty, but it is through the default of these nominal and very untrue
friends of liberty. If the Italians wish to deprive his Allocution of its
force, let them, as quickly as may be, defeat the Clerical Abuses Bill, do
all in their power to give real freedom to the Church, and trust to the
power of truth, and the power of discussion, and the power of experience,
to make good the cause of a religion more reasonable and nobler than
either the fierce Italian Atheism, on the one hand, or the bitter Italian
Romanism, on the other.


THE LONDON “TIMES” (March 30th, 1877),
CONDEMNS THE PERSECUTORS OF
THE POPE.
Tbe practical sense of-Italian
prudently what maybe wigd()m in see king newj statutory
secular authority. V -i-.- w hi. c h in the present eccentric
definitions »£ rights “ . lt ;, , ’; n themselves undefinable.
relations o£ Church and State
It is for this reate“ ™^ somewhat vagU ely that any clergyman who
" abuse his /ffice
peace shall be “d® For preaching against the laws of the
years, and to a fine ot , K re i ig i o us teachers may be imprisoned
State or the decrees lo imprisoned for a period ranging from
for three months. T 1 y y P . the exercise of their
four months to two years, and fined lire, We help
office, they incite the pwpl of modem Italy would
askmg what judgme 8 of tfl( . Falck Laws . Any one said
have pronounced on these c p But bis own profound
Cavour, could govern m barbaric devices of military rule,
political instincts revolted an artist to his work,
Like all real Statesmen, lie g , disturbed his sense of
and the rough, brutal expedient of them is usually as
artistic harmony. _ that political arrangements have little
fleeting as it is swift, -tie ,h in +be ouiet everyday instincts
chance of stability unless between two’ways of getting at
of human natuie. . , , ,i other slow but peaceful, no love
the same end, one short but ™ le ’ ted him to ta ke the more speedy
of theatrical effect would.ha ,£ .U sta ble results of patience. No
course. He would have trusted to \ eH)o n of the
doubt, there are times when a state of siege ma necessJ
profoundest statesmanship , < ( i ev i ces 0 f devolution. But it is
that tll6only ’ ° r
more than doubtful whether h pretensions of the Vatican was
even the best way to hght t J § et b rone ment of the Pope as a
to gag the pulpit, Jj Sov t eveign has made the clergy more zealous
temporal, no 1 » u p co id Catholicism of Italy has, among
than discreet, and that tne us y Q f the fervour which
certain classes of the peop e, pt i « The peace of families,” as the
thePapacyhasexcrtedmctecountnes W disturbed by pulpit
Bill on Clerical Abuses implies, “ J influenced by clerical denuncia-
til™ i o V r’t^ d G e ivemment ay But have the Ministers tried the slow


correcting effect of secular criticism and agitation 1 Have they
exhausted the powers of the ordinary law to punish Priests for libel, or
intimidation, or treason 1 Have they seen whether it would suffice to
punish the culprits, not as Priests, but as common citizens 1 Have they,
in one word, acted in the spirit of Cavour’s disdain for a state of siege %
If they have not, they are simply sowing the seeds of future trouble,
and giving the Papacy meanwhile the very thing it covets—a real
grievance. Nothing does more good to religious causes than what can
be plausibly, however unfairly, represented as persecution. While it
does not substantially injure them, it gives them an excuse for crying
out, so that the whole world may hear and pity.


THE SATURDAY REVIEW (March 24th, 1877)
CONDEMNS THE PERSECUTORS OF
THE POPE.
The T les S ne : of
acquainted with its provisio , Roman Catholic ecclesiastical
make the ordinary C ontinua? prospect of fines and im-
disciplme jf ere£or as the Pope is affected by acts done to
pnsonment. In so , . g £ree> t}iat is to say, to command j but
his clergy he is no • obe „ To pun i s h a priest, who, m the
they wdl be pumshed th( 7 ic cQnscience or t he peace of
exercise of hIS ' a priest who does anything under the sun
families,’ is reaily to punish a P Government . Had such a
that may chance to distastetui movements of this
law existed in England the The
and the last century any me mber of it adopts
peace of a family is P rPfFerinff from those of the head of the
religious opinions or practire‘ “'T* whenever a preacher
family ; and the public cons^ ie J Government. There are half a
commente up T ome]lt whioh English clergymen of one
striving top*
of such opposition would bring who
Italian Ministry propose a the State a Royal decree, or any
censures ” the institutions or laws ; of thejUte, ecr
more
other act of public authority. 113 gyj which makes it penal to
directly infringed by the clause * £rom whatever Ecclesiastical
publish or distribute any such c nsures To ordimiry
authority and from whateve pi V t he Italian Catholics seems
minds the freedom of the Yow m Catho , ics t 0 be
to imply as its corollary f “ Abuse s BiU 00mp letely bears
governed by the Pope Elocution ; and if the Pope had
out the description of it giv f ace of Europe against the flagrant
confined himself to “4“ of the Italian
Government 1 ; would have occupied a position from which it would
have been impossible to dislodge him.


U/fFp
AiiUD
t
P (1 £?7 5
PC OOUyJ




