

PLAGUE
AND
SECURITY.
ALFRED NEALE,
M.D., M. 8., C.M. (Ed.)
PRICE - SIXPENCE.
SYDNEY:
TU R N ETR AND •' H E N’ttE RSO N ,
HUN TER-'STREET.
1900.'




DLAIqDE AND SECURITY
ALFRED NEALE,
M.D., M. 8., C.M. (Ed.)
Author of Open Air Treatment of Consumption, Skin Diseases, &c.
Bacillus of Plague from Culture in Bouillon x 1,000.
SYDNEY:
TURNER AND HENDERSON.




PREFATORY NOTE.
We have lately learnt, as a nation, not to
underrate the enemy. We now, as a com-
munity, are learning it of sickness. To know
what we fight is to know how to fight. This
summarised account of plague and how to
regard it with respect, not fear, may, I hope,
be of value to the reader.
1 Lyons Terrace,
Sydney.


INDEX.
Historical
What is the Plague ?...
The Time of Onset
What is the Bacillus ?
How It effects a Hold on Man
Inoculation
By the Air
Flies, Fleas, Rats
Rats and the Plague ...
How to Avoid the Plague
Care of Food
Water
The House..
Air and Light
Drains and Other Means of Disposing of Excreta
Hints for those whose employment renders possible Con-
tact with Plague Infection
To Disinfect and Fumigate a Room after Plague
A Bad Habit
Agents which Destroy the Plague Bacillus —Disinfectants..
Haffkine’s Prophylactic
Suggestions to those Remote from Medical Help who fear
they have been in contact with Plague


PLAGUE AND SECURITY.
BUBONIC Plague is a disease as ancient as over-
crowding and accumulation of filth. Nature makes
provision for the destruction of dead bodies, excre-
ment, and dead vegetation with little offence to sur-
rounding life. In a wild existence the vulture, the
hyaena, and their congeners act as scavengers. The
overcrowding of animals when they live in flocks, and
the production of filth, is compensated for by their wan-
dering lives. Their removal entails no furniture van.
The vegetable world covers their trails. Man alone
has removed himself from a natural state. He lives
among artificial conditions which he has created for
himself. He alone wears clothes, with their advan-
tages and drawbacks, builds tenements to let, gathers
useful and useless stuff about him, shuts himself off
from the natural conditions which would destroy his
refuse and garbage, which he allows to lie about him
to rot and fester in his neighbourhood, until he wakes
up some day to find that nature will not do for him in
civilization what it would in a more primitive state.
Many a sharp lesson has he to go through before he


learns how to live in towns, and how close contact
with his fellow demands a new study, that of SOCIAL
HYGIENE. One of his chief instructors has been the
plague. It was the plague which gave London its
severest lesson on the consequences of overcrowding
and dirt. From that time we may date the com-
mencement of modern sanitary reform. Slow is its
progress even to-day at home, while in this colony,
where a new start might have been made, the old
conditions are actually repeated. The panic which
has aroused Sydney has revealed a condition in some
parts almost incredible, and not a whit better than
obtained in London before the great fire. The con-
victions recorded in the magistrates’ courts for filthy
dwellings will furnish interesting reading for the
sanitary reformer for years to come. To be wealthy
makes it easy to be cleanly, yet the well-to-do man’s
house is often as big a centre for inspection as the
poor man’s. Himself often owns the tenements where
his poorer brother lives, so constructed that with the
best desires in the world it is impossible to keep his
home free from filth. One foul spot is a danger to
all, and in a civilized community perfect sanitation
ought to be possible to and compulsory upon all.
Water, air, light, space, are the rights of everyone,
nor is it to the interest of any individual that another
should fall short of these. It is such fearful epidemics
alone which rouse us to a sense of our responsibilities
and improve the future for the race. The time has


gone by when plague was attributed to the wrath of
God. It is assigned to its true place—the negligence
of man.
The first recognisable description of plague, accord-
ing to Hirsch, dates about 2,000 years ago, and
occurred in Egypt and Syria. The next account
which we have, records the Plague of Justinian,
which in 542 A.D., spread all over the Roman Empire,
and lasted fifty-two years. In Constantinople alone,
within three months, there died at first 5,000, then
10,000 daily. Regarding that, it is worth while to
note the words of Gibbon, as they have a bearing on
to-day’s epidemic. He says ; —“ The citizens were
satisfied from a short and partial experience that
infection could not be gained by the closest conver-
sation ; but the fatal security, like the predestination
of the Turks, must have aided the progress of the
contagion. No restraints were imposed on the free
and frequent intercourse of the Roman provinces, the.
nations were intermingled by wars and emigrations,
and the pestilential odour which lurks for years in a
bale of cotton was imported by the abuse of trade into
the most distant regions. Many cities of the East
were left vacant, and in several districts the harvest
and the vintage withered on the ground.” From that
date until 1841 Europe suffered at intervals from the
recurrence of plague. The last great epidemic in Eng-
land was 1664-5, when in London alone over 70,000
perished out of a population little larger than that of


Sydney and suburbs to-day. We had grown to regard
plague as a thing of the past. True it has existed
for many years in our own time in such districts as
the south-west of China, where epidemics have broken
out at intervals, in India, and along the Red Sea coast
of Arabia, but it appeared to be associated only with
the lowest class of filthy living, and to a world which
hardly affected us. In 1894 it spread to Canton,
where 60,000 died. Later on the English colony of
Hongkong was attacked, and only a few weeks ago it
reached our own shores, horrifying us to learn that
the filth that invites the disease was as bad in parts
of our own city as among the less civilized people
of the East.
What is the Plague ?
Plague is an epidemic disease attacking man and
many of the lower animals, communicated by inocula-
tion and otherwise. It is a fever, characterised by the
development of buboes, by a rapid course of high
mortality and the presence of a specific bacillus in the
lymphatic glands, the organs and the blood. Any
further description of the symptoms of plague would
be out of place here. Some of them are common to
other diseases, so that where plague is not epidemic,
it would be quite possible to confound single symptoms
as read in a book with more trivial things, and raise a
scare unnecessarily in the reader's mind. Suffice it to


explain what a BUBO is. Through the body runs a
system of vessels and glands analogous to the blood
vessels but carrying a fluid called lymph, concerned in
the nourishment of the body. Connected with these
vessels and along their line in different parts of the
body are chains of tiny glands. In the normal state
they are not felt through the skin. Any irritation
of a mucous surface near them, or a cut in the skin
into which dirt has got, will start inflammation in the
nearest glands. Thus if you pass your finger on the
neck from the ear downwards in a consumptive looking
child, you may feel a chain of little knots under the
skin, and be pretty certain that he has a flabby throat
and enlarged tonsils. The knots felt are enlarged
glands, the outcome of the irritable tonsil. A Bubo is,
then, an inflamed and swollen lymphatic gland. In
plague patients it appears oftenest in the groin, less
frequently in the armpit and elsewhere. Many people
have enlarged and even suppurating glands at times,-
but it would be absurd therefrom to frighten themselves
into the fear that they were going to have the plague.
One of the cases reported recently, approached the
ludicrous. I read in the morning paper that one of the
supposed cases of plague had turned out to be
“pediculus capitis,” in other words, lice in the head.
Now, this dirty complaint, if long standing, will
irritate the lymphatic glands of the neck, make them
swell, and it is only on that ground that any possi-
bility of error could have occurred.


The Time of Onset.
The incubation period of plague, that is, the time
lapsing between exposure to contagion and declaration
of the sickness, varies from two to eight days.
Quarantine regulations require a person possibly
affected to be under observation for ten days, when he
is considered safe. Those who have actually had it
should be isolated at least a month after recovery, as
the bacillus has been found in their bodies at a date of
three weeks after the cessation of the disease.
What is the Bacillus?
A Bacillus is a vegetable microscopic organism
allied to the moulds.
The word itself means only a little rod. Some
bacilli are innocuous, others are capable of producing
disease or of flourishing in the human body where
disease is present. The mere presence of the
bacillus in a disease is no proof of its being a cause,
but if the bacillus can be cultivated apart from the
body, and it or its products in solution can by injec-
tion into another body always reproduce the same
disease, it is fair to conclude that it is then the sole
cause.
Such a position is claimed for the plague bacillus.
It was discovered by Kitasato. By him and others
conclusive experiments have been made to prove that
in it lurks the contagion. It is found largely in the
buboes alone, or with other bacilli.


It is its presence which initiates the setof symptoms
we call the plague. It is a thing which, magnified by
1000, is not so big as the head of a pin. It is shaped
like a short rod, with rounded ends, with a clear space
in the centre, and has slight motion. It absorbs cer-
tain stains, and can be grown like a fungus, on the
serum of blood outside the body, and on other media
of culture. Injected into guinea-pigs, mice, rats, and
rabbits it sets up the characteristic changes of plague
and kills them. It finds a perfect feeding and breed-
ing ground in man, multiplying rapidly in the blood,
liver, spleen, intestines, kidneys and lungs, all the
time producing poisonous products, throwing them
into the circulation. Sheep and swine are feebly, if at
all, susceptible.
How it Effects a Hold on Man.
The bacillus gains entry to the bodies of men
and animals.
1, By inoculation through an abrasion of the
skin, or an absorbing mucous membrame as the eye,
mouth, nasal passage.
2. By food and water.
3. And possibly by the air.
Once introduced to a community, the poison will
spread, or not spread, according to the sanitation., of
the district. In a clean community, living under
healthy conditions, it has no chance, but under the
opposite circumstances of filth, and overcrowding, it


spreads like wildfire. These factors imply close con-
tact of sick and healthy, abundant animal matter about
the ground, furnishing a suitable place for the culture
of the germ outside the body, and the presence of
rats and mice, and carelessness about scratches, cloth-
ing, washing and food.
I, INOCULATION. —Any broken surface of the
skin, infinitesimal in size, will, if brought in contact
with the bacillus, receive direct infection. On
the unbroken skin the poison is inert. Bits of
raised skin about the fingers-nails offer facilities,
beside actual cuts. The lining membrane of the
mouth, and the transparent covering of the eye, are
capable of absorbing the poison without abrasion.
Those who can keep remote from infected districts
and from handling infected stuffs, need have no fear.
The danger is greatest for those who attend the sick,
and are ignorant of what to do to avoid infection.
It is quite possible to move about among the sick and
to remain safe if the strictest precautions are observed.
A graze of the skin in shifting furniture mixed with
the dirt of the place containing germs gives an open-
ing for contagion. Rugs, carpets, curtains, chair
coverings, everything about an infected room is
capable of being a resting place for the germ if
handled by the sick. Bare feet and filthy floors
favour inoculation, as many coolies have found to their
cost. Fortunately the bacillus possesses little resis-
tance to destructive agents.


As regards materials which carry infection,
Manson says in his “Tropical Diseases”:—“There
is much evidence which tends to show that clothes*
skins, textile fabrics and other similar materials may
preserve the virus in an active state for several months.
Such articles, therefore, coming from an infected
district, more especially if they have been soiled by
or been near to plague patients, should be thoroughly
disinfected or destroyed.”
11. The experiments of feeding rats on the liver
of animals dead of plague has shown that infected
food may be a source of contagion. To bring it
home, rats are not unknown about slaughter-houses
or butchers’ shops, nor are the numerous hands
through which our meat passes from the slaughter-
house to the table above suspicion of uncleanliness.
Fish, which get their living on the dubious diet of an
infected harbour, are reasonably avoided, although
there is evidence that the bacillus cannot long survive
in water. Drinking water may be contaminated by
excreta of plague-stricken animals. Filtered tap
water from a healthy district carries no chance of
infection, but a public fountain with cups, common to
all, and shallow wells, may be sources of danger.
111. By the Air. —While the air is suspected by
some, there is as yet no certain evidence that it is a
medium. In any case it is hardly likely that there is
danger, except at close quarters. Everything points
to close contact with affected persons or animals, and


their excretions. The spray from the cough of a
patient with plague-pneumonia received right in the
face, as also a waft of dust from a plague house
on a passer-by would carry the virus. Yersin’s
experiment on mice inoculated with plague, shut
up with healthy mice, resulted in the death of all,
presumably more by contact than by the air breathed
in common.
Flies , bugs, fleas , lice may possibly act as carriers
of infection. They are all things of dirt, careless on
what filth they wander, and it is easy to understand
how, if they have been in contact with a plague-
stricken animal, they may bear contagion away on
their bodies. That rats’ fleas are not human fleas has
no bearing on the statement. The human flea is not
always on a man’s body, and wherever he spends his
time in his absence we may be very sure is no clean
place. Any poison carried by these pests could
easily be inserted with their bites. Flies will come
straight off a refuse heap or a dead animal on to your
butter, and drown themselves in your milk. In the
Hong Kong laboratory, Yersin found the flies died in
great numbers, “ their bodies being crowded with the
specific bacillus of plague.” He injected bouillon
containing a mash of the flies into a guinea-pig, and
the animal died shortly after with signs of plague. In
1884, in the Mesopotamia epidemic a certain species
of fly was considered an active agent in spreading
the disease.


Rats and the Plague.
What connection is there between rats and the
plague ? This only, that the disease affects them
just as it does man ; man is immune from many
diseases which affect animals. Vice versa, diseases
which trouble man, animals do not contract at all, or
only in a mild way. Other diseases they share in
common. Glanders is a dire disease to a horse,
occasionally he passes it along to his groom. Cow-
pox is frequently communicated to the milker, and
gives him more trouble than it does the cow.
Parasitic skin diseases pass from man to animals.
Consumption affects both man and animals, and is
believed to be passed from one to the other. So
plague is common to man, rats, and some other
animals. Rats thrive in filth and dirt, gaining
abundance of food from its pickings ; they travel fast,
regardless of quarantine, and have every opportunity
when they contract disease of passing it about. In
China, oxen, sheep, pigs, and dogs are often attacked
[Chin. Imp. Cir. and Gazette ), but the mortality is
chiefly noticeable among rats. Rats bring themselves
in closer contact with man than do other wild animals.
They take advantage of his civilized habits of living
in one place and leaving food and waste exposed for
their benefit. It is this, combined with their readiness
to take the disease that makes them an object of
danger.


CHAPTER 11.
How to Avoid the Plague.
In this section, considering that plague is a disease of
socially unhygienic conditions, I must, in showing
how to keep free of it, necessarily trench on the
province of general hygiene. Thus, while writing
more particularly of plague, the mode of living carried
out is also a safeguard against any other contagious
diseases. I have sought to give no advice hard to
carry out; nothing that, at any rate, people would
consider too much trouble at such a time as this, nor
should it be considered a trouble so to live that
epidemics can always be met with equanimity.
Fortunately for the community a civilized govern-
ment takes a plague-stricken spot under its immediate
control, isolating it in a fashion more drastic and
certain than individual effort can do. It is demanded
of the private citizen, as a safeguard to himself and
others, to keep his own surroundings in such a con-
dition of cleanliness that contact with the plague
bacillus becomes of no account to him, all avenues by
which it might enter being secured so as to ensure its
destruction. The atmosphere, remote from a plague


home, he can afford to neglect. Even in the same
street, the atmosphere can be breathed with safety.
It is seldom that doctors and nurses contract plague.
They breathe the same general atmosphere as the
patient, but take care not to inhale his breath.
What each one must guard is his house, his
food, water, person and clothing, and the intrusion of
rats. The last is the weakest spot, while not so weak
that it cannot be defended. Rats are enticed by food,
but it is absurd to say no food, no rats, for the rat may
live or wander in one place and feed in another. For
example, a rat was found in an office to-day where all
the workers go out for meals. The man who picked
it up, did so with tongs, gloved his hands, burnt the
old box it was found in, and washed out the spot with
disinfectant, afterwards disinfecting the gloves and
tongs. He was quite safe, although the rat might
have died of plague. No food, saving what is in
traps, will keep rats down. Poisoning is always open
to the objection of a rat dying in a hole, and the
possibility of having to pull up the floor to reach it.
Trapping is the best. The trap must be washed with
hot soda and water after each success.
Care of Food.
Let all meat, vegetable, fruit, which has been
handled by others, be subjected to a stream of water
before being cooked. Many people wash their joints,
others look upon it as a fad. Let those who take the


latter view watch the meat in the hands of the dealer.
See the flesh carried on the head of a boy next his
hair, which it keeps well pomaded, or clasped to his
breast next his clothes. The hands that touched it,
were they washed after the morning toilet ? This
sounds very unpleasant, but you can see it every
day, as I saw it a few days since going on a
boat. Cooking will probably destroy any organic
dirt it thus acquires. It is a lot better to be sure by
washing it first. Fruit from the house garden which
has to be peeled can be eaten unwashed. What has
passed through the market and been handled by
others should be washed. Salads especially should
be washed leaf by leaf (this for hydatids also). When
on the table food should be protected from flies.
When you see at a restaurant the sugar, butter and
bread black with, a cloud of flies, think of Yersin’s
flies in his laboratory and where these came from last.
The flies on the table may have never been in contact
with plague, but on the other hand they may have.
In any case it is strange if they have not settled on
garbage or dung before getting on the butter.
Everything should be covered. The nice little tray
cloths ladies put under the bread are more use on the
top to keep off the flies. Wire covers are best for
the meat, while a spare one will take in such oddments
as sugar, butter and jams. Remains of the meal
should be cleared at once or covered over to give flies
no opportunity.


In the pantry, or wherever food is stored, take
the same precautions that no fragments or crumbs
are left about to attract rats or mice. Everything
should be covered up in tins, boxes, or under wire, no
grains being left. Sweepings from the table, bits off
the plates, and all refuse food can be burnt at once at
the kitchen fire. It is far better to do this than to
store it up in an outside tin, whether covered or not,
leaving it outside for weeks to rot. In the backs of quite
otherwise clean houses can one see and smell the
outside tins containing the kitchen refuse. It has to
be burnt sometime, do it at once while the quantity is
small. Covering it in a closed tin keeps rats off but it
increases the fermentation going on inside.
Water.
No water is pure that possesses any taste, smell or
•colour. These are rough tests, but they serve the
purpose. Sydney water has a very distinct taste.
•Curiously enough some people like it and object to
flavourless water. It is best to acquire a taste for the
fatter and get it if possible. A comparatively bad
water is rendered drinkable by boiling, the flat taste
can be removed by pouring the water a few times from
one jug to another. Filters are meeting with much
abuse just now, undeserved, in my opinion. A filter
is a blessing when kept clean, otherwise a mischief.
In a house I once took in the country the sole water


supply was from the roof, the galvanised iron looked
nice and clean after the rain, but between whiles
it gathered dust from all quarters, the excrement of
birds, bits of dead insects and worms, all of which
went in solution in my tank and had been the usual
drink of the former tenant. Perhaps he had got
inoculated to it, to me it meant colic everytime I was
thirsty. However, I had all the drinking water boiled
which left it flat and dirty but drinkable without ill
effects. I got a cheap carbon filter which left it bright,
clear, and aerated. The carbon was taken out of the
filter every week and put in the fire until red hot and
there was no trouble agh.in with the water. I know
that in the bush men drink the most awful water
sometimes, not, I suppose, because they prefer it, but
they get used to it and hydatids have become so
familiar in this colony that the chance of getting them
is viewed with some contempt.
“As a medium for conveying plague, water is
only slightly dangerous, the bacilli soon getting des-
troyed therein.” (Kirchner).
The House.
The thorough cleaning of a house should not be
a casual affair, when an epidemic happens to spread
a panic around. One or more rooms in the house
should be thoroughly cleaned daily, so that the
whole can be gone over each week, in addition to the


every-day dusting and sweeping. Stair carpets, too,
should not be neglected, nor linoleum. The latter is
best fastened down by its own weight, aided by a few
drawing pins, not nailed, so that removal is easy.
Dust and dirt from the feet (the worst dust of all,
being street filth) getting matted under its edges.
Corners and cupboards require special attention, as
also cellars and all places where light is insufficient.
In these regular cleansings it is not necessary to use
disinfectants, unless there has been disease. Disin-
fectants may be abused as well as used, reliance being
placed on the smell of the disinfectant to cover
another smell. Soft soap and soda is the best and
sweetest disinfectant for ordinary use. When, how-
ever, any corner has not a perfectly fresh odour, it is
as well to finish up with a damp cloth wrung out of a
solution of permanganate of potash (two teaspoonsful
to gallon water). The same solution left in the bucket
clears the air of impurities. Its color, pink at first,
becomes brown by taking up impure volatile matter.
Air and Light.
The importance of these two cannot be over-
estimated. Light is a great destroyer of germs. The
bacillus of consumption dies on exposure to the sun.
The plague bacillus exposed to sunlight died in four
hours ; when dried on slides and kept from sunlight it
takes at least four days to die. Light should be freely


admitted to houses. In a hot climate there is too
much tendency to live in the shade. One cannot
have the blinds up when the hot sun is pouring in,
making life unbearable; still there are few rooms
where the light may not be admitted for part of the
day. The habit of living in dark rooms is carried to
the absurd extent of continuing it through the winter,
when a gleam of sun would be pleasant for its warmth
alone. There are plenty of houses where it is
rigorously excluded for perhaps the aesthetic reason
that “curtains look nice from outside,” or for no
reason beyond that of habit. Curtains and blinds
have no use at all except to exclude heat and cold.
Apart from that let them be kept aside. Their aspect
of finish to a house is merely one of custom. In
public buildings they are neither seen nor missed,
Certainly they should never be allowed to interfere
with the health of a home, which, without the constant
purifying effect of light, exists on a lower plane than
is needful. Plants do not flourish in the dark, nor
can man be at his best in like circumstances. The
colorless complexion of the residents of warm climates
may be largely traced to the habit of living in the
shade at such times when there is no extreme heat to
plead its necessity. Air we must have. It is the first
requisite of life. Few people get it as fresh as they
ought. They get used to breathe air which filters to
them through halls, stairs, or other rooms ; air that
has already been breathed and fouled. This is true of


almost every place where folks congregate in closed
buildings, seldom properly ventilated, as well as in
their own homes One should be satisfied with none
but the best and purest brand of air, that which comes
straight from the outer atmosphere. Air shut up in a
room for a week, or only admitted at second-hand, is
not fit to sustain life at its highest level. In every
room there ought to be a ventilator in or on the level
of the ceiling, as an exit for used air. The inlet for
the fresh may be the top of the window, or a special
opening made for the purpose, the larger the better
for obviating draughts. It is from cracks that draughts
are produced, not from wide open areas. Daily the
front door should be left open awhile, all day if con-
venient, while a free current sweeps through the house
just as a drain is flushed with water. Houses should
be recognised as places wherein to get cover from the
elements, not as places to live in by choice. The
open-air life is the healthiest, and the nearer we
proach to it the less need have we to dread disease.
Such a doctrine is listened to when preached as a
cure for consumption, even carried to extremes.
Were it acted up to in ordinary life there would be
little ever heard of consumption, a disease which is
far more fatal to national life than a casual epidemic
of plague. What will cure these diseases of over-
crowding will also prevent them.


Drains and Other Means of Disposing of
Excrement.
All houses properly connected with a sewage
system, with its array of traps and ventilators, are in
the best position for getting rid of slops and excretions.
Very little attention is required beyond flushing with
plenty of water. Sink pipes choked with grease can
be made to work by the aid of potash, a good odourless
disinfectant. Any bad smell can be destroyed, not
merely covered, by tar preparations. Outside drains
require regular flushing, and can be cheaply and safely
disinfected, if they smell, by means of corrosive
sublimate (16 grains to a gallon of water).
In houses removed from a water system more
trouble is required for disposing of slops. Fortunately
in those cases there is generally some ground attached,
which affords a means of utilising the slops. Slops
must not be allowed to accumulate around the kitchen
door. It saves trouble to fling out a basin full of dirty
water, but it lays up trouble for the future. A barrel on
rough wheels forms a good receptacle. It can be carted
away each day, the contents being spread on the soil,
so that no smells linger round the house. I have had
dug up the soil round more than one kitchen door, in
the country, and found it reeking and stinking with
decayed animal and vegetable matter, from plate
washings, &c., for a depth of two feet or more, and
sapping the house wall for several yards. At night,
when the house got warm with oil and fires, the warmer


air acted as a pump drawing in the foul emanations
below and around the house, to the detriment of the
sleepers.
The disposal of solid excrement, too much neg-
lected where there is no sewage system, can be largely
controlled where land is available. Very little is
required. On Dr. Poore’s experimental garden, at
Andover, one acre of cultivated ground disposes of the
sewage of one hundred persons, without any offence.
It must not be laid on top nor buried deeply, but be
thoroughly mixed with the soil. Where the pan system
is in vogue and no land is available, as is too much
the case in many suburbs, a systematic method will
reduce much of its danger and unpleasantness. Rats
get into the pans, those special plague breeders. The
pans are not emptied often enough. Thrice a week is
not too much ; daily would not be too much. Before
being replaced they need washing out with lime. The
best kind of pan has a double bottom, the upper one
perforated for liquid to filter into the lower, which
takes off. In place of using ashes, there is nothing so
satisfactory as sawdust. Some can be placed in the
lower pan, and some thrown in the upper each time it
is used. It can be relied on to obviate all smell. Saw-
dust is dearer than ashes, but not so dear as
plague.
While on this subject, it is worth while pointing
out that all outside closets should have a special
receptacle for toilet paper. Otherwise it is thrown on


the floor, subject to the dirt off boots, rats, dust, and
insect life. When supply runs short, that paper is
used, which it would not be were people aware that
the end of the bowel is mucous membrane, a surface
absorbent and liable to abrasion as the lips. Rough
and dirty toilet paper is quite capable of inoculating
poison on the anus.
Having cleaned the house it stands to reason that
outside, in the garden and yard, nothing should be
allowed to lie which smells or decomposes. Fowl
houses attract rats. They should be frequently washed
inside with lime and the soil dug up to the depth of a
foot or more now ancf again. By this means the
liquid thrown with their food, which has sunk in the
ground, gets exposed to the joint action of air and
soil. Otherwise it saps the ground, and causes an
odour bad for the fowls and horses near. Stable
refuse needs destruction by fire. Stable manure
should not lie on the surface of the ground for fer-
tilizing purposes. Mixed with the soil, it does its
work better besides being rendered innocuous. Food
boxes should be well protected from rats, broken cor-
ners mended, and tin linings used. Grain is a recog-
nised method of plague spreading. Smells arising
from neighbours’ yards should be reported to the
inspector. It is a pity one has to depend so much
for health on one’s neighbour. So long as the method
of close building, begun in the old world, repeated
in the new, is followed, that cannot be helped.


Preventible disease gets no hold where there is no
overcrowding, and I do not hesitate to say that
every house which has not half an acre round it is
overcrowded.
Further hints for those whose employment renders
possible contact with plague infection :
Cuts and abrasions of the skin must be attended
to with the minutest care. For this purpose keep an
ounce bottle of Tincture of Myrrh or of Friar’s
Balsam (obtainable any chemist) and a bit of cotton
wool. When you need to apply it twist a bit of the
wool round a wooden match end and dab it on the
abrasion. For a deeper cut leave a larger piece of
cotton wool soaked in the balsam on the spot, tying
with a light strip of bandage. Wounds that are so
sealed may be let alone until quite healed.
Should the possibility arise of your hands touch-
ing any clothing, furniture, materials that are open to
doubt, take the utmost care that you handle nothing
else before disinfecting the hands ; do not, for instance,
wipe your eye or use a handkerchief or shake hands
with a friend. Use tar solution mentioned for the
purpose. In handling rats and their nests use a pair
of tongs, afterwards dipping them in a disinfectant.
Rats can be burned or buried in lime.


To Disinfect and Fumigate a Room after
Plague.
Wash the furniture and woodwork with soft soap
and water, containing a little carbolic acid.
Strip the paper from the walls. Wash the ceiling
and walls with hot lime, to which is added 1 part of
carbolic acid to 4 parts liquid. For the fumigation
use sulphur. First paste up chinks about windows,
cover fire-place with brown paper, pasting up the
edges. Put into the room a wooden tub half full of
quicklime (this for moistening the air). Then another
wooden tub to contain the sulphur for safety from
fire. In it put water, a few bricks in the centre, on
the bricks a tin dish with a pound of sulphur moistened
with methylated spirit. Now pour on the quicklime
3 pints w'ater and set light to the sulphur. Get out
of the room,close thedoor and keyhole, and chink under
the door. Leave the room for eight hours. On
returning, hold a wet cloth over the nose and mouth
until the window's can be got open, and air enters
freely. The room is safe for occupation.
A Bad Habit.
Spitting in the streets, on the floors of cars and
passages, is a habit w'hich the refinement of to-day
could very well do without. Condemned as provoca-
tive of the spread of consumption, it is doubly offensive
when an inoculable disease like plague is about.


Spitting is a pure habit, quite unnecessary, in the
majority of cases. Smoking does not compel spitting.
If a smoker tries for a week not to spit he will find
he wants no longer. A man who must spit in the
street might at any rate choose the gutter instead of
the pavement. Saliva of people with consumption,
syphilis, pneumonia of plague contains inoculable
virus. It ought to be penal to deposit it where the
feet of animals and even the bare feet of children
pass. Such cannot always be certain they are free
of cuts, nor be always able to avoid poison-bearing
saliva. Men should keep the contents of their bodies
for their private inspection, not for public annoyance
or danger.


CHAPTER 111.
Agents which Destroy the Plague Bacillus—
Disinfectants.
Plague Bacilli from cultures are destroyed in half-
an-hour by a temperature of 176° F., in a few minutes
by steam at 212° F., in three hours by exposure to
milk of lime, while growth is prevented by one hour’s
exposure to carbolic acid, 1 per cent.
For Cleansing Drains can be used corrosive
sublimate, 16 grains to the gallon ; this is most
suitable for roads and drains, not for metal pipes. It
has NO SMELL, is poisonous internally. Chloride of
lime, half a pound to a gallon of water.
Easton’s Soluble Phenol, a miscible carbolic (has
been ordered by the Board of Health to be supplied
to Municipal Councils), is a good and convenient form
of disinfectant.
FOR Woodwork, soft soap and carbolic acid in
the water, eight ounces to the gallon.
For Clothing.— Linen can be disinfected by
boiling. Cloths and flannels which would be injured
by boiling are best disinfected by the aid of steam or
hot air. This implies apparatus, which, in the country
at least (where plague might spread), is not available.
Failing that, the clothing can be hung in a barrel and
fumigated with sulphur vapour. The sulphur powder
can be put in a tin in a lower box over which the


barrel is placed. Pour a little methylated spirit on the
sulphur before lighting, cover any aperture with sacks
to keep the vapour in ; leave fora few hours after the
sulphur is exhausted.
For Dry Closets, add carbolic acid and lime
powder to the saw dust advised.
Nurses and Cleansers will get their special
instructions from the attending doctors.
The general regulations of space ventilation and
cleanliness apply as in all sickness. Patients must
not be hung over needlessly; all wounds, however
trivial, must be regarded seriously and kept sealed up.
Nurses need much change to the open air, disinfectants
for their clothes and bodies, and the occasional use of
a mouth wash. Extra care with washing face and
hands before eating, and never take food in the sick
room. Attendants on plague duties should wear boots,
not slippers, a slip of cord round the trousers at the
ankles, and leather gloves if there is much handling of
furniture.
Haffkine’s Prophylactic.
The Indian Plague Commissioners are now
completing their full report. The subject of anti-
plague inoculation by Haffkine’s method they have
felt to be of such importance that they have consented
to its publication in advance of the complete account.
The prophylactic is prepared in a medium
obtained by artificially digesting goat’s milk. This


culture medium is inoculated with plague bacilli, and
cnltivated at the temperature of the air for from two
to six weeks. Its purity is controlled by transferring
a modicum from time to time to another culture
medium and noting the appearance of its growth.
The bottles are corked and sealed. Everything con-
nected with the process must be kept so that no
bacilli other than those of the plague can obtain
access to the prophylactic. The methods employed
are keenly criticised by the Commissioners, almost
hostilely ; so that their concession in their summary
to its efficacy may be taken as high testimony to its
value. That is as follows ; —“ The Commissioners
finally recommend that under the safeguards and
conditions of accurate standardisation and complete
sterilisation of the vaccine, and the thorough sterili-
sation of the syringe in every case, INOCULATIONS
SHOULD BE ENCOURAGED WHEREVER POSSIBLE, and
in particular among disinfecting staffs and the
attendants of plague hospitals.”
Yersin’S Serum claims to have a curative effect
when plague is already acquired. He and others
found that plague cultures in gelatine and bouillon
injected into rabbits three or four times at intervals
of fifteen days, just short of a fatal dose, rendered
them immune from plague. They further found that
the watery part of the blood of a rabbit so treated,
when injected into a plague-stricken animal, checked
the disease, and the animal recovered. A horse, so


immunised, yielded serum which was both preventive
and curative of inoculated plague in rabbits, guinea
pigs and mice.
Lustig and Galeotti, in a recent article in the
British Medical Journal , introduce a preparation
conferring immunity from plague which will probably
supersede Haffkine’s. It is a nucleo-proteid, a lifeless
vaccine, consisting of poison extracted from the bacilli
or their products. Its reaction lasts in man four days,
not rendering him incapable of following his occupa-
tion. Galeotti received three injections at intervals
of one, three and seven days, the last producing no
reaction. They claim that—
1. It is purer than Haffkine’s, and more certain
of being free from any active substances
beyond the plague toxin, and cannot become
contaminated.
2. That the dose is always accurate, which is a
weak point with Haffkine’s.
3. That immunity is more lasting.
4. That the religious objections of the natives of
India cannot be raised against their prepara-
tion.


Suggestions to those remote from Medical
Help who fear they have been in Contact
with Plague.
The ease with which townfolk can seek a doctor is
not the share of every colonist, on the one hand the
bushman is safer in his dependence on himself for his
safeguards, not on near neighbours. In handling
goods which may have been exposed to infection let
him take all the precautions that I have detailed
regarding sealed cuts, cleanliness, and rats, and not
lose his head over every trifling indisposition. At
the same time, more care may be taken than usual with
apparently trivial complaints, such as diarrhoea,
vomiting, sores on skin, slight fever. Plague, in
some cases, is preceded by a stage of chilliness and
giddiness, with dull pains in the groin. More usually
it sets in suddenly, with fever running from 103° to
107°, as tested by a medical thermometer. Pros-
tration is extreme, delirium wild, or muttering. The
bubo may develope in a few hours, or not up to the
fifth day. In favourable cases the improvement sets
in with profuse perspiration, fever abates, and the
bubo breaks as an abscess.
Hemorrhages are not uncommon, like dull red
bruises up to half-an-inch across, or rarely larger.
Vomiting, diarrhoea, and constipation have all
been observed.


Any treatment which is attempted in the absence
of a doctor must avoid everything which is depressing;
as the plague is utterly prostrating in itself.
There is no medicine which is directly curative
to Plague, except the serums which would not be in
reach where there was no doctor. Attention should
be directed to easing symptoms, and feeding up the
patient. Liquid nourishment is the best. Milk alone
can be given, not less than three or four pints a day,
in small quantities, frequently repeated, or a more
mixed diet can include sago water, barley water,
broth, egg, milk, and brandy. During convalescence
the feeding must be kept up.
In the treatment of symptoms, the thirst and fever
are relieved by sponging with warm water containing
a little brandy. Headache , by cold wet cloths to head,
or a mustard plaster to upper part of back of the
neck for ten minutes. Do not give so-called head-
ache powders. They depress the heart.
In constipation , give 4 grains of Calomel followed
by a teaspoonful of Epsom Salts a few hours later.
In diarrhoea , give an injection of 4 ozs. warm
starch and water, containing (for an adult) thirty
drops of laudanum.
For vomiting, mustard and flour, mixed in plaster
over the abdomen.
Enlarged glands may be treated with Belladonna
extract and glycerine in equal parts, w'hen painful,


and poulticed with linseed sprinkled with tar fluid
(see disinfectants).
In fainting, the heart must be stimulated. Give
strong coffee, and aromatic spirits of ammonia (dose,
5 to 60 drops in water).
Turner and Henderson, Printers, Sydney—Hlooo.




EASTON’S CONCENTRATED
SOLUBLE PHENOL
A MISCIBLE CARBOLIC.
ORDERED BY THE BOARD OF HEALTH to be
supplied to all the Municipal Councils
during the Bubonic Plague.
A Deodorising and Antiseptic
DISINFECTANT,
Is Convenient and Effective, does not injure Fabrics,
and is Non-corrosive.
It possesses all the Disinfectant Properties of Carbolic Acid
in a concentrated form, and mixes more readily with water.
DIRECTIONS.
One Teaspoonful to a pint of water makes 1 to 100.
For Flushing Drains, Watering Streets, &c., 1 to 3,000; for Ring-
worms and Skin Diseases, 1 to 70; for Wounds, Ulcers, and Boils,
1 to 12, apply with lint; to Destroy Ants, &c., 1 to 100; for Disin-
fecting Drains, &c., 1 to 100; to Disinfect Bedsteads, Furniture, &c.,
Ito 12, or one tablespoonful to pint of water ;to Disinfect Hands,
1 to 60 ; for Scrubbing Out Rooms, use one teacupful to pail of water.
In cases of Fever and Contagious Diseases, use double the
usual strength. It is well to keep a wine bottle mixed in
Lavatories, &c.
Use cold water, warm can afterwards be added; mixes in hard or
cold water.
Can be obtained from all leading Chemists, Is. per bottle and in
1 gallon tins and 5 gallon drums.
WHOLESALE AGENTS:
Sayers, Allport & Potter,
4 O’Connell Street, Sydney.
Contractors to the N.S.W. Government.
