

7 N.z 7
cJ




PLAIN FACTS
RELATIVE TO
THE LATE WAR
IN THE
NORTHERN DISTRICT
NEW ZEALAND.
AUDI ALTERAM PARTEM.
A VCKLAND :
Printed ex Philip Kunst, Shorthand Street.
1 847.


\


The following Papers have been prepared for the Press some
months, and have therefore no reference to the late commu-
nications received from England, although it will be seen that
they contain much which bears upon questions of interest at
the present time.
The principal object of giving publicity to these docu-
ments is simply the vindication of the character of a body
of men who have long been the objects of animadversion,
whether unjustly or not, the public may determine.
It is the privilege of every Englishman that he shall be
heard in his own defence, but in making use of this liberty,
every care has been taken to avoid a course which might
impugn the motives or conduct of others. A good cause
will commend itself by its own merits.


■
'
.


It is a matter of general notoriety that, during the progress of the
recent collision between some of the northern tribes and the
Government, remarks have been made, and frequently repeated,
reflecting upon the loyalty of certain individuals of the Church
Mission, and more particularly upon Archdeacon H. Williams of
Paihia; audit has been a subject of regret with many of the friends
of the Mission that the charge was not openly met in the outset,
instead of allowing it to go abroad to the world, which could not
but form an adverse opinion in the absence of any counter state-
ment. It was not however, from any unwillingness to meet the
charge, that this was not done, for an appeal was made to the late
Governor upon its first appearance, and he expressed in the strongest
language his opinion of the “ absurdity” of it. At a subsequent
date, an article was drawn up for insertion in the “New Zealander,”
but this was set aside at the recommendation of the Bishop, on the
ground that it was not a subject to be submitted to such a tribunal.
Thus then, while the friends of the parties concerned, were satis-
fied that the charges were without foundation, there remained a
variety of unanswered statements made by Editors of Newspapers,
and others, from which, persons, who had not the means of obtaining
better information, were at liberty to conclude that there must be
some truth in them.
The value of an assertion depends much upon the character of
its author, and while the observations of persons of no repute, may
be treated with indifference, it is impossible to follow the same
course, if like remarks are made by persons of respectability. After
the skirmish at Kororareka, a most serious charge was put forth
against one of the Missionaries, but the late Governor expressed
himself respecting it in a manner which sufficiently relieved the per-
son accused. The accusation however having once gone forth, and
no publicity being given to its refutation, allusions were often made
to it in different quarters, as to a matter of fact. Whether it was wise
in a case so serious, to leave any part of the community to take up
with false impressions, is a question not now to be considered. But
the subject has of late assumed a new character.
On the occasion of the visit of the Governor, 'to the Bay of
Islands, in January, 1847, His Excellency in conversation with
James Busby, Esq., expressed a wish to know why it should bo
that all the natives “against us,” should be the people of tho
Church Mission, while all " our friends” are dhe Wesleyaas and


Roman Catholics. This conversation was communicated to Arch-
deacon Williams, who, on the next day proposed, through Mr,
Busby, to furnish the fullest information upon this subject, and
upon other matters, in which the Church Missionaries in general,
and he in particular, appear to have been misrepresented to His
Excellency. The Governor, however, declined entering into this
enquiry.
Now, it may be presumed that this opinion, which seems to
have taken possession of the mind of His Excellency, has been often
repeated to others ; and strangers in the country, particularly
officers in the army and navy, who have no previous knowledge of
individuals, and to whom it is a matter of indifference on which
side of the question the truth lies, can only draw their conclusions,
in agreement with the report they hear, particularly when that
report rests on high authority. If then, the natives opposed to the
Government, were almost exclusively those of the Church Mission,
it is natural to conclude that there must be some cause connected
with the circumstance that these belong to the Church Mission, but
those friendly to the Government, to the Wesleyans, and Roman
Catholics : in other words, that the fault lies in the instructors of
the natives. And then too, this opinion put forth after the ferment
of excited feeling has had time to subside, agrees so precisely with
the many reports which have been current from the beginning of the
outbreak, that the whole might be regarded as substantially correct.
It is the opinion of many persons that the silence hitherto main-
tained by the Missionaries, ought still to have been preserved ; but
it is a fact which cannot be gainsayed, that the strongest possible
impressions to their prejudice, have taken hold of the minds of
persons, not only high in respectability, but who are not easily led
away by unsupported statements. It has been held by some that
it is a case too strong to admit of contradiction, from the simple
circumstance that nothing has hitherto been said in defence.
Such, then, being the present position of the case, there does
not seem to be any alternative, but that of openly meeting the
charge by a simple statement of facts from the commencement.
In adopting this course, it becomes necessary to speak of personal
exertions in a manner which the parties naturally shrink from, but
the circumstances of the case compel them.
By a reference to the Parliamentary papers it will be seen,
from the first establishment of the Colony, the Missionaries of tho
Church Missionary Society have had frequent occasion to take
active measures in support of the Government, which have been
duly acknowledged by the proper authorities.
At page 8 of “ Papers” laid before Parliament, and printed in
the year 1841, His Excellency the; late Governor Hobson, gives tho
following account of his first proceedings in New Zealand;
“ February 15. Soon after twelve o’clock I proceeded to the tent,
“ supported by Captain Nias and the Officers, Mr. Busby, the late
“ Resident, the Members of the Church Missionary Society, &c.
“ I then read tho Treaty, and Mr. H, Williams, of the Church Mis-


sionary Society, did me the favor to interpret, and repeated, in the
“ native language, sentence by sentence, all I said.”
All who were present at the first meeting held by Governor
Hobson are aware that there was a strong feeling of distrust on the
part of the natives, which was fomented partly by some of our own
countrymen, but chiefly by persons of influence from another nation.
It is also known, that it was principally through the exertions of the
Rev. H. Williams that the Treaty was signed on the following day.
Let the question be put to any of the natives of the Bay of Islands,
and they will all acknowledge this fact, and indeed they have often
subsequently blamed tho Missionaries for the part taken on that
occasion, having been repeatedly told by the French and the Ame-
ricans that this was the source of all their troubles. At page 15 of
“Papers” the Governor informs us, that on “ the 15th of February
he proceeded in Her Majesty’s Ship Herald to the River Thames,
“ for the twofold purpose of treating with the native chiefs, and of
“ selecting a site for a township.” In this expedition tho Rev. H.
Williams accompanied His Excellency at his request. Then we
are informed that His Excellency requested the Rev. Messrs.
H. Williams, Brown, Maunsell, and W. Williams, to secure the ad-
herence of the Chiefs of their respective districts to the Treaty of
Waitangi; and that the Rev. Mr. Taylor, accompanied Mr. Short-
land to Kaitaia for the same purpose.
At page 16 it is stated—“ At various periods subsequent to tho
“ sailing of the Herald, His Excellency received from Mr. Maun-
“ sell, and lastly from the Messrs. Williams’, reports of the entire
“ success of their respective Missions.”
At page 17 we find the following letter from His Excellency to
tho Rev. H. Williams:
“ Waimate, March 23, 1840.
“ Reverend Sir, —“ Availing myself of your kind offer, and fully
“authorised thereto by Her Majesty’s instructions conveyed to mo
“by Her Majesty’s principal Secretary of State; I hereby authorize
“ you to treat with the principal native Chiefs in the southern part
“of these islands, for their adherence to the Treaty executed at
“ Waitangi on the 6th of February, 1840. I have the honor to
“ enclose a copy of the Treaty, which I have signed, and to request
“ you will obtain the signatures thereto of such high Chiefs as may
“ be willing to accede to its conditions, &c,
“ The schooner Ariel will be ready to receive you on board on
“ the 30th instant, to convey you to your destination.
(Signed) “ William Hobson,
“ To Rev. H. Williams, &c. “Lieut. Governor.”
The state of His Excellency’s feelings toward the Missionaries,
may be gathered from the following letter dated May 20, 1840, to
Mr. Davis, Secretary of the Local Committee of the Church Mis-
sionary Society in the northern district:
“ Sir,—The period having arrived for proclaiming tho sovereign
“authority of Her Majesty over these islands, it accords no less with
11 toj public duty, than it gratifies toy personal feelings, to aoknow-


“ ledge in the most ample manner, the efficient and valuable support
“ I have received from the resident members of the Church Mis-
« sionary Society, in carrying into effect with the native chiefs, the
“ views and objects of Her Majesty’s Government. As the official
“ organ of that body, I beg you will accept and convey to every
“ member of the mission in New Zealand, my cordial and hearty
“ thanks for the very zealous and effective assistance they have
“ rendered me in the execution of my duty.
(Signed) “ William Hobson,
“ To Mr. Davis, Waimate. “Lieut.-Governor.”
That the Missionaries were actively engaged in assisting the
first establishment of the Government in this country, is a fact
which is further corroborated by the following quotation from
Captain Hobson’s speech at the opening of the Legislative Council
on the 14th December, 1841. He observed, “ Whatever difference
of opinion may be entertained as to the value and extent of the
labors of the Missionary body, there can be no doubt that they
have rendered important services to this country, and that but for
them, a British colony would not at this moment be established in
New Zealand.” It will also clearly appear, from a perusal of these
papers, that on every occasion of excitement, strenuous efforts were
always put forth by the Missionaries to allay that excitement, —
that their endeavours in this respect, were niost handsomely acknow-
ledged by those in authority,—-and that in the late disturbance at
the Bay of Islands, one undeviating course was adopted, that of
soothing, by every possible means, the irritated feelings of the
natives, by pointing out to them the error of that course which they
were bent upon pursuing. The point from which the hostile move-
ments of the natives had its rise, was a belief which had been
fostered by various ill-disposed persons, that the Treaty of Waitangi
was violated, that the country was to be seized, that the people
were to be made slaves, and that the Government only waited till it
was able to put these intentions into effect. The Missionaries com-
bated these views, which had taken so strong a hold upon the minds of
the natives that there was danger at one time, that the whole of Nga-
puhi, including Tamati Waka, would rise against the Government.
Instead of this, the larger body of the Ngapuhi either joined the
Government, or if their sympathy for Heke, who was their near
relation, deterred them from taking this course, they nevertheless
agreed to maintain a strict neutrality. In consequence of this
diversion, Heke and his followers were brought to a stand; they
were obliged to act continually on the defensive, and Auckland
which was threatened with immediate destruction, was saved.
It has been thought by those not acquainted with the matter,
that Waka Nene and the Hokianga natives are a tribe disconnected
with the Ngapuhi; but Waka Nene is not only a Ngapuhi, but was
born and brought up at the Bay of Islands, living alternately at Te
Kawa kawa, and in the neighbourhood of Waimate, and is nearly
related to Tamati Pukututu, Rewa, Tareha, and to Heke himself.
The next event bearing upon the present question, was the
murder of Mrs, Robevtoa and her family by the son of a principal


chief in the Bay of Islands, on the 20th of November of tho same
year. Tho murderer was shortly given up to the proper authorities,
and was immediately sent to Auckland. But after the Lapse of a
few days certain ill-disposed persons tried to create a reaction, and
reports were in free circulation that, as soon as the nows should he
received of the execution of the culprit, a general simultaneous mas-
sacre was to take place of tho Europeans at Auckland, and at the
Bay of Islands. How then did tho Missionaries act ? It will be found
that the Rev. H. Williams was engaged day after day in conferring
with the chiefs of tho whole district; and that he called a general
meeting at Paihia on the 16th of December, with the approbation of
the Police Magistrate and of all the Justices of the Peace ; at which
were present the chiefs not only of the Bay of Islands, hut of Hoki-
anga also, and Wangaroa, when they expressed regret that such
reports had been raised, and declared their purpose to protect tho
settlers from harm. A letter was written to the Governor on the
day following, and signed by five leading chiefs, which was after-
wards published in tho Native Newspaper by the authority of tho
Governor. It was at this meeting tho violent spirit of Ileko began
to manifest itself. He tried to excite tho assembled natives to rise
against the English, tolling them that they would all be seized as
Maketu had been ; and such was the violence of his speech, that
Pomaro and Kawiti, with their followers, abruptly left the meeting
and flew to their arms, leaving Rewa, Ururoa, and tho rest of Nga-
puhi, who had been foremost in requiring Maketu to be given up.
Towards the close of the year 18-11, the confidence of tho natives
in the Government was greatly shaken by the measures taken by
the' Government with respect to Land ; particularly the proclamation
against the cutting of Kauri timber—-the intention to take for tho
Queen the surplus of land awarded by the Commissioners, and the
proceedings of the Legislative Council on tho same subject; tho
Land Claims’ Ordinance declaring that the uncultivated lands of the
country were demesne lands of tho Crown, subject only to the neces-
sary use and occupation of the natives.
Tho following extract of a letter from tho Governor to the Rev.
11. Williams will show the views entertained by his Excellency.
“Auckland, January 24, 1842.
“My dear Sir, —I am not able to communicate much of what I
“ would say, my mind and my hand have not been at rest for many
“ jays, and I am fairly weary. But I ought not, nevertheless, to let
“ slip this opportunity of returning you my most grateful thanks,
“ for your zealous advocacy of the cause of her Majesty, in refuting
“ the wanton and unworthy insinuations, that were circulated
“ amongst the natives to create rebellion. The state of the natives,
“ if let alone, is in a fair way of becoming very much better, and I
“ am glad to find that some of tho first chiefs hold us in warm regard.
“I remain, my dear Sir, yours faithfully,
(Signed) ■‘William Hobson.
“ To Rev, 11, Williams, Paihia.”


To those who had the means of ascertaining the native feeling
at this period, it was clear that a storm was gathering, which must
soon discharge its violence over the country. Mr. Williams thus
expressed his opinion in a letter to Mr. Busby three months after
this time.
Paihia, April 20, 1842.
“My dear Sir, —I cannot refrain from expressing my deep regret
“at the present state of New Zealand. Were it confined to the dif-
“Acuities of the Europeans, 1 should not offer an observation; but
“ from an extract of a speech of the Colonial Secretary it would
“ appear, that a degree of confidence and security is reposed in
“ the state of the natives, which I fear is unjustifiable, and may lead
“ into some fatal error, which may not be seen until it is too late. The
“ disturbance arising from the arrest of Maketu was happily sup-
“ pressed, but I do not hesitate to say, that had not the grandchild
“ of Rewa been one of the victims, thus bringing all the Ngapuhi
“ tribes as auxiliaries to the Europeans in the event of war, the result
“would have been far otherwise. The assertion of the Colonial
“ Secretary, that the natives never did entertain an opinion of dis-
“ trust, as far as regards the Government, required more reflection
“ than perhaps was given to it; for the fact is too palpable to be
“ refuted. I must say that Ido not know a chief who has not ex-
pressed his “distrust” in the Europeans generally. And it has
“ required all my energies and influence, in common with other
“ Missionaries, amongst the natives, to set their minds at rest upon
“ these subjects. Frequently are expressions of distrust made to me
“as to the ultimate intention of Government towards the natives
“and their possessions, which will require every care to correct.
“Yours faithfully.
(Signed) “Henry Williams.
“ To James Busby Esq.”
We now pass on to events which are fresh in the memory of all,
and which bear more directly on our present question. Heko’s first
hostile visit to Kororaroka was occasioned by bad language used by
a native woman, as reported in tho papers at the time. Heke de-
manded a boat, from the husband of the woman, in payment for the
offence. Lord, the woman’s husband, had not a boat of his own to
give, and refused to purchase one for the purpose. Heke then began
to use threats, and spoke especially of cutting down the flagstaff. No
one, however, believed him to bo sincere in his threats, for his disaffec-
tion to the Government was not then generally known. A bag of rice
was given by Mr. Beckham, with a view of keeping him and his party
from prowling about for food, as they had none with them, This was on
Saturday, and it was hoped that they would retire on the follow-
ing morning. Not obtaining what he demanded, Heke pro-
ceeded at daylight on Monday, and cut down the flagstaff. His
party then crossed over to Paihia, where Tamati Pukututu, and
the Kawakawa natives were staying. The latter used very angry
language to Heke for cutting down the flagstaff, but Heke defended
himself by stating what he had been told by the white people respect-


ing the flag, and the reasons for which it was hoisted. Pukututu,
though highly displeased, in so much that he gave Marupo, one of
Heke’s party, a blow with a stick, admitted that Heke’s statements
were correct, as he himself had heard similar remarks from the
white people. We avail ourselves of an account of the leading
occurrences which took place at this period, kept by Archdeacon
Henry Williams, and recorded from day to day.
“ The first flagstaff was cut down by Heke, on Monday the Bth
“ of July, 1844, at which time 1 was from home, having left the Bay
“of Islands on the 6th June for Turanga in Poverty Bay. I returned
“ to Paihia on the 16th September. All was then apparently quiet;
“ but there was a feeling of disaffection towards the Government
“ rankling in the breasts of the ill-disposed, and waiting only for soma
“ cause to draw it forth. A pretext was soon laid hold of. On the
“ 3rd of October, a woman of Kawiti’s tribe was slightly hurt
“ by some of the Police, who had gone up the river Kawakawa at night
“ to apprehend an Englishman, with whom this woman was living.
“ The offended natives failing to obtain any remuneration from the
“ Police Magistrate for the assault upon the woman, withdrew
“from Kororareka, and on their return landed at Mr. Wrights
“ premises, and violently seized eight horses, although Mr. Wright
“ had not the most remote connection with the previous occurrence.
“ A request was immediately made to me by the Police Magistrate
“ and by Mr. Wright, that I should see this party of natives ; which
“ I did the following morning, it being then late in the day; but
“my eldest son went up to the party the same evening. In the
“ morning I found the party at Opua, two miles from Paihia, to-
“ gether with Kawiti, who was not present at the seizure of the
“horses. The Police Magistrate and the Subprotector landed
“ shortly after. I was the only Englishman who spoke upon the occa-
“ sion. These natives were as insolent as they could be to me and
“to the Police Magistrate, as also in their observations about the
“ Government, and against all my remonstrance, took the horses
“ away. I was closely engaged in this affair until the seventh, hav-
“ ing followed the natives up the Kawakawa ; when it was at length
“ agreed that the horses should be returned in a few days, as soon
“ as they could be collected from the different parties to whom
“ they had been distributed. Much excited feeling began now to
“ show itself in every direction.”
“ On Thursday the 31st of October a meeting was called at
“ Otuihu by Pomare, who had just returned from Auckland, which
“ was attended by most of the leading men of the surrounding tribes
“ in connexion with him, also by those who had stolen the horses
“on the 3rd. Sir Everard Home, the Chief Justice, the Police.
“ Magistrate, the Sub-Protector and myself were present
“ The disaffected gave full vent to their feelings, in language
“ extremely violent, I was again the only Englishman who
“addressed the meeting. Sir Everard considered this to be a
“ very important assemblage, as showing the disposition of
“ the natives, and the inability of the Government and of the
“ friendly tribes to preserve order in the district.


“ Subsequently to this event, four horses were taken by a chief
“ named Ruku,* from Mr. Kingston, and on Friday the 15th of
“ November Heke arrived at Paihia with some of his chief suppor-
“ ters, respecting these horses. I was disposed to hope that he was
“ endeavouring to promote peace. We had a long conversation ; af-
“ ter which Heke went to Ruku, and returned to Paihia on the 19th,
“ saying that Ruku was very violent, and declared he would not
“ return the horses, unless two were given to him for his trouble.
“January 9th Heke and his leading men arrived at Paihia, and
“ were met by the principal chief from the Kawakawa, Tamati
“ Pukututu, &c. We held a long discussion with Heke, who appeared
“ to be in a very unsettled state, and spoke grievous things of the
“ Government and of the flagstaff. Every argument was used by
“ the friendly chiefs and myself, but all was unavailing, for on tho
“ following morning at dawn of day the flagstaff was again prostrate.
“At the request of the Police Magistrate, I saw Heke daily
“at this period, at Haruru, the Waitangi Falls, wishing to
“ ascertain his real intention, and to convince him of the ruin ho
“ was bringing upon his country.
“ In the afternoon of January 13tb the Police Magistrate called
“ upon me, and expressed much anxiety as to Heke’s movements,
“as it was reported that he was proceeding that night to Korora-
“ reka, to destroy the Police Office and the Custom-house, and that
“ the women of Kororareka werro under serious alarm. I accordingly
“ undertook to pass the night ait Heke’s camp, and promised that, if
“ there were any movement, wffi would all proceed together; and that
‘ ‘ he should have notice. At his tiime there was no guard at Kororareka.
“ January 17th. The Victoria, government brig, arrived, and in
“ two hours the Union Jack of England was again floating in tho
“breeze. I felt grieved, knowing the consequence that would result
“ from this step. Heke was at this time with a large party at the
“ Wahapu, ripe for mischief. I would have gone and remonstrated
“with the authorities at Kororareka, but it would have been too
“ public a display of my zeal for her Majesty’s honor. In the even-
“ ing I communicated my opinion to the Snb-protector, who returned
“ to Kororareka and waited on the Police Magistrate, stating to that
“ officer my fears of the consequence of these measures. All were
“ now in a state of feverish excitement, every one being aware that
“ Heke would not be quiet.
“ On the 18th, the Colonial Secretary and the Police Magistrate
“ waited upon me at Paihia, relative to the question of hoisting tho
“flag. These gentlemen will remember my remonstrance, and that
“ I urged the propriety of their taking the flag into safe keeping, un-
“ til there could bo no doubt as to its protection. In short, I said
“ all I could, considering I was addressing myself to two public offi-
“ cers. I assured them of my conviction that if they did not take
“it down, it would be taken down by the natives. It was observed
“ that there was a guard of thirty soldiers, and that Heke had only
“ forty men. I replied that Heke could multiply that number by
“ any figure he chose, and was urgent that these soldiers should not
* Afterwards killed in the engagement at Mawhe.


“bo exposed, for that they would inevitably fall to a man. While
“ those gentlemen were with mo, they saw Hoke and his canoes pull
“ close past Paihia, with flags flying, one of which was an American
‘ ‘ ensign. Before daylight the following morning the flagstaff was again
“ cut down ; the military guard had been kept close in their quar-
“ ters, the flagstaff being left in charge of native allies ; but in the
“ morning, observing the Union Jack agaiu flying, I wrote to the
“ Police Magistrate the following note :
“ Sunday, January 26, 1845.
“My dear Sir, —I feel that lam out of order, but the necessity
“ of the case compels mo again to intrude my opinion respecting
“ the flagstaff. 1 learn that the top or upper end has been carried
“ away. If this be true, you need not surely any stronger argument
“to show the weakness of your position. I should recommend,
“ therefore, that you take the whole down in open day, this after-
noon, before another attack, as each must weaken the cause of the
“ government. By no means allow the military to make any display;
“ all should be as quiet as possible. You know not under existing
“ circumstances in whom to put your dependence. Your credit ip in
“ some measure saved by the flag remaining in your possession,
“ which you can explain to your sable allies.”
(Signed) “ Henry Williams.
“ To T. Beckham, Esq., Police Magistrate.”
It is a happy circumstance that this remonstrance was at-
tended to concerning the military guard, and that the thirty soldiers
were consequently preserved. The two gentlemen referred to ara
now in oflice in Auckland, and can therefore bear testimony to the
correctness of this statement.
“ On January 27th, I met Rewa and Waka Nene at Kororareka.
“ They were little disposed to enter into conversation. At last they
“ mentioned that Ururoa from Whangaroa, with all the natives from
“ that neighbourhood, were coming to Paroa, to meet them upon
“ state affairs, and asked mo to be present on the occasion.—
“On the 28th, I went to the native assembly, and found them
“ all in a very sullen mood. I went from party to party, and con-
“ tinned with them. “On the 30th, Ururoa arrived, fully bent on
‘‘ j oining Heke, and on persuading the Ngapuhi (the tribes of the Bay
“of Islands) to make common cause with them. In the evening the
“ discussion continued to a late hour. Much was said about the in-
“ tentions of Government; and Waka Nene and all the natives who
“ have since shown themselves friendly to the Government, joined
“in the feeling which showed itself. Waka had been much annoyed
“ by the prohibition against cutting kauri timber, and had said, if
“ the Governor had been at Hokianga, he would have felled a spar in
“ his presence, in order to see what would be done. Both Waka and
“ Rewa at this meeting observed,that the evils which threatened them
“ arose from their having signed the Treaty of Waitangi. The Ireaty
“of Waitangi was the only argument I used on the occasion. This
“ I read clause by clause, requesting the chiefs to notice any ox-
“ pressjons which favored the assertion that their interests had been


“ betrayed by the Government, or that there was any design to de-
“ prive them of their just rights. At length they all expressed them-
“ selves satisfied, and the last observation of Ururoa to me was, that
“ his fears respecting the Treaty were now removed, and that he no
“ longer thought it an instrument for seizing the country for the
“ Queen. He urged me to see Heke as early as possible, and give him
“an account of the meeting,and assure him that none of his(Ururoa’s)
“people would join him, and again to recommend Heke to be quiet,
“ and that he would return with his canoes to Whangaroa, and would
“ then proceed to Heke, and toll him that he was convinced of the
“ falsehood of the reports circulated about the seizure of their
“lands, and would therefore remain quiet.”
It may be safely asserted, that had it not been for the reaction
produced at this meeting, the greater number of the friendly chiefs,
together with those who adopted a neutral course, would have been
arrayed against the Government.* The journal proceeds : “ I re-
“ turned to Paihia on the 31st, haying been occupied four days in this
“matter. These parties maintainediheir neutrality according to
“promise, a few individuals only joining Heke.”
“ On Wednesday, February, sth, I met Heke by appointment
“ at Kaikohe, and gave him TJruroa’s message, and the account of
“ the meeting of the 30th of January. He was not disposed to pay
“ much attention ; but still insisted that the Treaty “ was all soap.”
“ It is,” said he, “ very smooth and oily, but treachery is hidden
“ under it.” On the 10th I attended a general meeting of Heke and
“his followers, in company with the Rev. E. Davis. We found all
“ exceedingly furious. Ururoa saw Heke as he had promised, a few
“ days after this, and I believe used every remonstrance with him,
“ but in vain.”
The Police Magistrate was constantly furnished with information
relative to the state of the natives, and the result of the various
meetings with Heke and the natives generally, both friendly and
unfriendly, and on the 20th of February, the following communica-
tion was received from Governor Fitzroy :
“ Government House, Auckland, Feb. 18, 1845.
“My Dear Sir, —I consider that this country and Great Britain
“ owe you deep gratitude for your untiring efforts to put mistaken
“ people into the right track. lam in doubt whether you have had
“ more difficulty with the natives than with our own misguided
“ countrymen.
“ The Colonial Secretary and Mr. Beckham have expressed
“ themselves warmly on these subjects, and have told me how much
* The important results of this meeting, in allaying the suspicions of the doubt-
ful chiefs, securing the assistance of some, and the neutrality of others, have
been abundantly corroborated. His Excellency's the Governor’s speech in the
Legislative Council on the I4th of October, 1847, may be adduced as bearing
evidence to the fact. He observed— “l was not in the colony at the time, but
from all that I could learn from the best authority, it appeared that this very
town was threatened with destruction, and the forces in the country, scattered
as they necessarily were, would have been insufficient to have saved it, had
Walker not watched the rebels with vigilance, and harrassed them so as to
prevent the attempt boicg successfully made.”


“ has depended on yourself alone. I was individually well awaro
“ of this, but it gratified me to read their written testimony.
(Signed) “ Robert Fitzkoy,
“ To Ven. Archdeacon 11. Williams, Paihia.”
“ February 28th.—Hearing of some depredations having been
“ committed by Kawiti, I went to him up the river, but it was too
“ evident that his mind was made up for a general trial of strength,
“ for in the afternoon of the same day, four canoes came down the
4 ‘ river, and cleared the premises of Mr. Wright.”
“On the 3rd of March, hostilities commenced. Two canoes,
“ manned with Kawiti’s natives, came down the river, and com-
“ mitted some depredations at Te TJruti, near Kororareka, at the
“ residence of Mr. B. Turner. They then pulled back again, and
“ were chased by the gun boat of tho Hazard. The boat had no
“ chance in pulling against the canoes. Many natives, in the mean
“ time, crossed over from Otuihu to join in an attack upon the boat,
“ which had unfortunately grounded wi th the ebb tide at Opua, and
“ had not the crew been very active im getting her off, she must
“ have fallen into their hands. One of her crew was
“ wounded on the forehead by a spent ball. This was the first ex-
“ change of shots, and the maories were much elated. On the 4th,
“ Heke came from the interior to the Bay, to join Kawiti. The
41 following day he passed through Paihia with his whole party, and
“ remained in the neighbourhood till the 6th, when he joined his
“ force with that of Kawiti.
“ On the Bth I accompanied the Police Magistrate to Heke’s
“ Camp, as a last attempt to stay the further progress of hos-
“ tilities, as one man had been wounded on each side. This was
“my last interview with Heke. I was told by the natives, that if
“ the Police Magistrate had not been in my company, they would
“ have had his head, and that if f had conducted him to Kawiti, he
“ would even then have been killed. This I mentioned to the Police
“ Magistrate, and told him, he must not venture again.
“ The following day, Sunday the 9th, a party of natives came
“ upon one of the distant hills, from whence they had a view of
“ Kororareka, when a shell was directed at them from the Hazard.
We now come to the period of most painful interest, when
Kororareka was destroyed by the natives on the 11th of March.
After the conflict, Archdeacon Williams went up to the block-
house at the flagstaff, and brought away the bodies of the four
soldiers who were killed, the natives even assisting in removing them
to the beach. The natives also gave up the sword and cloak of the
officer in command, and as much of the clothing, &c., belonging to
tho men as could be conveyed away. It is also worthy of remark,
that when the natives had got possession of the town, they urged
the settlers to come and fetch away their property, and many of
Heke’s men actually assisted in carrying goods to the boats. Mr.
, the baker, was afraid to go into his own house, because a
party of natives were inside plundering, until Hara, a leading chief
(at Archdeacon Williams’s request) stood sentry over him, while he


removed as much of his property,as ho had tho moans of carrying
Previous to the 11th March, tho friendly chiefs of the Ngapuhi
tribes, now residing in Paroa bay, went several times to offer
their services to protect Kororaroka against Heke and Kawiti
but were told to “clear off tho ground,” lost they should
bo mistaken for tho enemy. These chiefs have frequently
mentioned the circumstance since the fall of Kororareka. It
was asserted m one of the public prints that, “ the fears of the
inhabitants of Kororareka were in some degree allayed by the Rev
Mr. Williams informing them that ho had seen the natives, and
that they had at present no hostile intentions. The inhabitants
were therefore lulled into false security.” The communications of
Aiclidcacou Williams at this anxious period were strictly confined
to the i olice Magistrate, who was considered to bo the chief in
command. His note to that officer on tho evening of tho 10th
was as follows:
, “1 understand that the natives intend to make their attack in
four divisions. On the same evening Gilbert Mair, Esq., J. P
personally waited on the Police Magistrate, and stated, that the
attack would be made the following morning in four or live divisions
, 11® information was explicit, and was accordingly acted upon by
the brave Captain Robinson, who was on the , look out before break
of day, when the action commenced. With regard to hostile inten-
tions, there could bo no mistake. Hostilities began on tho 3rd, and
were continued in a greater or less degree daily. They were in
fact, m active operation. v
flow idle then to state that the inhabitants of Kororaroka were
lulled into false security, in consequence of its having been said that
the natives .had no hostile intentions towards them, when these ex-
pressions of hostility were reciprocal upon all opportunities.
The extraordinary charge of treason which was made against
Archdeacon W ilhams immediately after tho conflict on the 11th, wo
would gladly pass over, in consequence of the lamented death of the
person who made it, believing that it was made under the irritation
of disappointment, without any serious idea on the part of the per-
son who made it, that ho had any foundation for his assertion. No
reason for it has ever been stated, beyond that which has already
boon referred to m the extract from an Auckland paper. It is ne-
cessary however, to state, that - tho particulars of this charge were
communicated to tho Governor, who addressed tho following letter
to Archdeacon Williams °
„ d J. ' ■ v , “ Auckland, April 2, 1845.
/“ IR > 1 °,l lonorof acknowledging tho receipt of your
letter, dated i ailna March 20th, which reached me yesterday.
1 am so much accustomed to hear and read such strange
perversions of fact, and such unfounded attacks upon even tho
best characters m tho community, that they usually pass unno-
ticed by mo. But this is a startling charge.
,< ou 110 t distinctly referred to tho extraordinary language
usecl..... I should not have alluded to it in
, writing to yourself, so deeply must you be, as I am, pained that


“ such expressions, such imputations, with reference to yourself,
“ should have emanated f rom any one however ill-informed, hasty,
“ or excited.
“ To accuse Archdeacon Williams, the tried, the proved, the
“ loyal and indefatigable, of being a “Traitor,” of having acted
“ traitorously, seemed to me so utterly absurd, to say the very least.
“ that such an idea could not be entertained by me for one moment.
“ I rejected it with feelings similar to those of Sir Everard Home,
“ who, before this has, I trust, fully relieved your mind from every
“ scruple on this subject.
“ I might refer to the Bishop’s clear statement of all that he
“witnessed frequently in company with, yourself on the fatal 11th
“ of March ; to the statement also of Archdeacon Brown, who was
“ also present, and to others, but your well known character requires
“ no testimony.
“ In conclusion, I need hardly say that the charge made against
“ yourself by , is, in my opinion, as unfounded, unjustifi-
“ able, and ungrateful, as it is indeed aabsurd.
“ I have the honor to be, Sir,
“ Your obedient bumble servant.
(Signed) “ Egbert Fxtzroy,
“ The Von. Archdeacon H. Williams, “ Governor,
“ Paihia.”
After the destruction of Kororarcka, the only course left
open to the Missionaries was, to assure the friendly natives,
that their fears were groundless as to the seizure of their pos-
sessions, and that the retribution which must be expected,
would be confined to the disaffected, as there was a strong
effort made by Heke and his party to impress upon the various
tribes that all would now fare alike, and to induce them to conspire
against the Government; and there were not wanting Europeans
who hoped this would be the case. Our position at this time was
exceedingly critical. The rebels had undisputed sway in the north-
ern part of the island, and many well disposed natives were alto-
gether at a loss to know how to determine their line of conduct. It
was however the Missionaries duty still to speak of quietness and
order as ambassadors of the Prince of Peace. We return to the
Journal:—
“ The Missionaries in their respective spheres exercised all their
“ influence; but lam compelled more particularly to speak of my
“ own movements at this period ; having been thrown directly in the
“ midst of the contending parties ; while I was assailed by my own
“ countrymen as a traitor, —on what ground no one has yet been
“ able to inform me, nor has any person had the moral courage
“ either to accuse or defend me publicly.
“ On the 30th of April, a circumstance took place on board
“H. M. S, North Star, which, humanly speaking, was the preserva-
“ tion of the troops under Colonel Hulme. The troops were landed
“ at Otuihu (Pomare’s pah) at the entrance of the Kawakawa river.
“ About noon I went on board, the North Star, and learnt that all


“ was now prepared for the troops to proceed from Otuihu overland
“to Waiomio, the place of Kawiti’s residence. I obsei’ved to the
“ Colonel, ‘ I presume you arc furnished with guides, for the country
“is much broken.’ He replied, ‘Oh yes, I have European guides.’
“ After a few more remarks, some natives proceeded to chalk upon
“ the deck the rout for the troops, to which the Colonel called my
“ attention. I soon discovered that the Colonel was wholly at fault.
“ The lines which he had understood to be roads, were rivers, muddy
“ creeks, hills and swamps.
“ These I pointed out to the Colonel and to Sir Everard Home.
“ Sir Everard observed to Colonel Hulme, ‘ Colonel you are going
“you know not where! you had better re-embark your men.’ The
“ order was given accordingly to destroy the pa, and to re-embark.
“ The expedition was relinquished, owing to this mistake having
“ been most providentially discovered. What the consequence might
“ have been, is a question not unworthy of consideration ; if these
“ troops had advanced between Kawiti’s and Pomare’s tribes;
“ Pomare having that same day been made prisoner on board the
“ North Star, upon suspicion of having rendered aid and assistance
“ to Kawiti.”
It will appear from the following letters, that Archdeacon Wil-
liams was subsequently in thee habit of furnishing the authorities
with information, and even sometimes went so far in expressing his
opinion upon the movements oof the troops, as to lay himself open to
the charge of interfering withi matters that did not concern him ;
and yet Colonel Despard complains that there appeared to be a
general wish to conceal the difficulties without considering the pos-
sible waste of European Mood that might take place in con-
sequence.
When the expedition under Colonel Hulme landed at Moturoa, at
the mouth of the Kerikeri river, the weather was most unpropitious.
A strong easterly gale had set in, and the troops had a toilsome
march through torrents of rain. The scanty supplies of provisions
they brought with them were spoiled, and most of their powder
rendered unfit for service. The friendly natives at this time ren-
dered the most important assistance. They met our troops at the
point of debarkation, and conducted them to the scene of action,
and again after the termination of the affair at Mawhe, re-accom-
panied them to the boats.
On the arrival of the news that an attack had been made on
Heke’s pa at Mawhe, and that the loss on the part of the English
was considerable, the following communication was held with
Sir E. Home :
“ Paihia, May 10, 1845.
“My dear Sir, —I have had a most comfortless night. I have
“ been considering the question of Heke’s pa in all its bearings, and
“ the force appointed for its capture. I see no possibility of this
“ being accomplished without loss of life to a most fearful extent,
“ endangering the return of any part of the troops. Though as yet
“ no official return has arrived, it appears most evident that a battle
“ has been fought, and by report that the loss in killed is consider-


ct able. Of course the number of wounded must be in the usual
“ proportion. Should it be contemplated to storm the pa, the troops
“ might possibly carry it, but at an awful expense. But should they
“be repulsed, who can calculate the extent of the disaster. I fear
“ that half the force must fall in killed and wounded, and the whole
“ would be most seriously endangered in their retreat, to say nothing
‘ ‘ of any other feeling of which a military man would be acutely sensible.
“ I beg, therefore, you will excuse the liberty I take of suggest-
“ ing the propriety of a suspension of hostilities immediately. One
“ chief offender is reported to have fallen besides many others ; would
“it not then be important to stay further proceedings before the
“ evil becomes more serious, and withdraw the expedition, making
“ a virtue of necessity.
“ Should you feel that the capturing of Hoke is fearfully doubt-
“ ful, and that I may be of any service in nogooiatiug between Colo-
“ nol Hulme and Heke, I shall be most happy to do so, in order that
“ the retreat of the force may be as honorable as circumstances will
“ admit of. I shall be most happy to b<aar a despatch from you to
“ Colonel Hulme upon the subject, but of course can only proceed
“ upon a written authority from yourself, and with particular in -
“ structions how to act. I feel that delays are dangerous, and shall
“ be ready to enter upon this mission at any time you may think well.
“ Yours faithfully,
“To Sir E. Home. (Signed) Henry Williams.
Sir Everard’s answer was as follows :
“ North Star, 8.30’ a. m., May 10, off Paihia.
“My dear Sir, —I perfectly agree : When you have read the
“ contents of the enclosed,* pray put a wafer in the letter, and God
“ speed you.—Faithfully yours,
(Signed) Everard Home.
‘‘To Yen. Archdeacon H. Williams, Paihia.”
The following reply to a communication from Sir E. Home will
serve to show the opinion held by Archdeacon Williams at this time.
Paihia, May 24, 1845.
“ My dear Sir, —In reply to your note of this morning, request-
“ ing my opinion of the present state and immediate prospects of
“ New Zealand, I consider that the eyes of the entire native popu-
“ lation are directed to the issue of this war, and upon it depends
“ the quietness of the whole country. The immediate prospects of
“ New Zealand depend upon the manner in which the war is con-
“ ducted. I have just received Heke’s reply to the terms proposed
“to him, a copy of which I forward to you, by which you will per-
“ ceive that he has no disposition to accede to them. I presume,
“ therefore, that nothing short of vigorous measures will satisfy him,
“ It is my further opinion, that peace and good order will not then
“be preserved, unless a strong military force be stationed in the
“ Bay of Islands for that purpose.
(Signed) Henry Williams.
“ To Sir E. Homo, H.M.S. North Star.
A letter to Colonel Hulme.


A second and more formidable expedition soon after landed at
the Bay, under the command of Colonel Despard. On the very day
this force landed, Heke made a vigorous assault upon Waka None at
Pukenui, hoping to crush him before he could be joined by the troops.
On this occasion Heke had about 400 men, while Waka’s force was
much inferior. What they wanted in number, however, was fully
made up by the determined bravery with which they fought. They
turned out of their Pah, and boldly faced their assailants, fighting
obstinately during the greater part of the day. Every principal
man on Heke’s side was either killed or wounded, and amongst the
latter Heke himself very severely in the thigh.
On the day of the attack which was made against Ohaeawae,
July 1, 1845, Archdeacon Williams arrived at the camp, and on the
two following days held communication with the enemy at Colonel
Despard’s request.
This was the first time of his seeing the Pah. He rendered to
Colonel Despard every assistance which was required, and conducted
a conversation between that officer and Waka Nene, which termi-
nated in the Colonel consenting to remain some days longer before
the Pah, though it was publicly known that it had been determined
upon to retreat immediately to Waimate, and to abandon all further
attempts upon the Pah.
It is remarkable that, notwithstanding the natives were perfectly
well aware of the formidable preparations which were made for at-
tacking their stronghold, and had frequent opportunities of inter-
rupting the waggons conveying supplies &c. to the camp, they never
took advantage of this circumstance. On one occasion, two drays,
under a feeble escort, were met by the Rev. R. Burrows on the road
between Waimate and the Kerikeri. He had not proceeded far, af-
ter parting with the drays, when a party of armed natives started
up from the bushes. They spoke of the drays, and said, “ they did
not wish to use treachery, but he riri aivatea, (fighting in broad day-
light).” In fact, the drays passed day and night without a guard,
and without interruption, and the roads were always clear. During
the battle between Waka and Heke beforementioned, a young chief
named Patai, belonging to Heke, was conveyed to Waimate seriously
wounded in the head. On the following day he was restored to his
friends. Waka sent a message to Haratua, telling him to “remember
Patai,” and not to molest the drays. Haratua sent word back,_ “I
will remember.” Indeed, as a characteristic feature of the war, it is
worthy of record, that the provisions, stores, and ammunition were
conveyed to the camp as quietly as though it were a time of perfect
peace. The houses at the Kerikeri, and at Waimate, and the bridge,
though threatened with destruction, were saved from injury by the
intervention of Heke.
From Ohaeawai, Kawiti retreated in the night, in the direction of
the Kawakawa, and commenced immediately to erect another pah
at Ruapekapeka. In the meantime terms of peace were offered by
Governor Fitzßoy. These overtures, however, were ineffective, and
it became apparent that the haughty spirit of the rebel chiefs re-
quired to be yet further humbled.


The following communication passed shortly afterwards between
Archdeacon Williams and Colonel Despard, to which reference has
been made above.
“ PSaihia, July 14, 1845.
“ My dear Sir, I learn from Mr.. Clendon that yon have ex-
“ pressed some disappointment at not having more information from
“me on my leaving you. I assured you that I would forward to you
“ any information I might obtain, which I did, relative to Kawiti’s
“ intention to quit his pah. I have mo further information of any
“ moment, except that Kawiti’s people are about to build a pah at
“ Waiomio, or in that direction. I returned from the camp wishing
“ to intrude my opinion as little as possible, at the same time being
“ always ready to express one when it might be beneficial. My pre-
“ sent idea is, that the troops cannot be withdrawn a this time, if
“ this country is to be continued a ooloay of Great Britain. Should
“ you wish to see me at any time, I shall bo most willing to go from
“ hence for that purpose.—Yours faithfmlly.
(Signed) Henry Williams.
To Colonel Despard.
“ Waimate, July 15, 1845.
“ My dear Sir, I have been favored with your note, in which
“ you mention that Mr. Clendon had informed you that I had ex-
“ pressed disappointment at not receiving more information from
“ you. I beg to say that my observations regarding information
“ were general. I have never received any that was of use. That
“ given me regarding the roads was decidedly wrong. It was told
“ me at Auckland that there was a capital drayroad to Waimate.
“ I found it execrable. I never could obtain the slightest correct in-
“ formation regarding the localities of ithe pah itself, either of its
“ internal form or its defences, or even of the probable number of
“ its defenders. There appeared to be a general wish to conceal the
“ difficulties, without considering the possible waste of European
“ blood that might take place in consequence. As to Kawiti’s inten-
“ tion to quit the pah, I was perfectly aware without any one letting
“ me know that he and his people must quit, as I had adopted a plan
“ of making a plunging fire into it, whiich in a great measure raked
“ their ditches, and entered their undeirground habitations. I beg
“ to assure you that you were very mmch deceived when you men-
“ tioned to me that the fences were mamy of them poles not thicker
“ than your arm. There was not an ujpright stick in that pah that
“ was not composed of split Puriri woodl, and many of our six pound
“ shot were picked out of the posts, note having actually entered far
“ enough to hide themselves. As to dletaining the troops here to
“guarrison Waimate, I consider it would be a measure that the
“ British Government never will sancticon. The place is not worth
“ the expense. Auckland is the place tto be looked to ; and the set-
“ tiers ought to concentrate there if they expect military protection,
“I remain, my dear Sir, yours faithfully,
(Sigmed) H. Despard.
“ To Yen, Archdeacon H. Williams.”


It is known that a copy of this letter was given to the late Gov-
ernor, for the purpose of conveying an idea that the observation
upon the state of a pa at Ohaeawai was made by Archdeacon Wil-
hams previous to the attack on the Ist of July, and that the fatal
loss of life on that occasion was to be attributed to false information.
Tins may be inferred from the following remark“ There appeared
o g a geneial wish to conceal the difficulties, without considering
the possible waste of European blood that might take place in con-
sequence. But Colonel Despard was aware that no European had
seen the Pa until the day following the attack on the Ist of July
touch was the jealousy of the natives, that they would not allow even
a Missionary to inspect their fortifications. No description of the
tonces of the Pa was ventured upon by Archdeacon Williams before
the attack, for he had not seen them, as Colonel Despard knew,
i. he idea of detaining the troops to garrison Waimate, implying that
such a step was proposed with a view of taking care of a Mission
station originates with Colonel Despard. The public need not to
no told that the Missionaries were under no apprehension. The sug-
gestion of Archdeacon Williams was, that if the country was to bo con-
tmued a Colony of Great Britain the troops could not be withdrawn.
. , 110 following anecdote will show the nature of the remarks made
in the camp, relative to a casual observation that had been uttered
respecting the strength of the stockade at Ohaeawai, and that this
more expression of opinion was made a subject of conversation pre-
judicial to the credit of Archdeacon Williams.
On the arrival of the “ North Star,” after the conflict at Ohaea-
wai, on the Ist of July, 1845, Archdeacon Williams went on board
to wait upon ton- E. Home, where he mot one of the military officers
xom the camp, who, after some general conversation, said, in the
presence of the officers of the ship “ Why, Mr. Archdeacon, you
were much mistaken in your report of the strength of the Pa at
“Was I ?”■—“ Yes.”—“ In what was I mistaken?” .
v\ hy, you said the sticks of the Pa were not thicker than your
thigh, and the posts not thicker than your body.”—“ And did von
find any thicker Why-why_&,.”-‘‘ Then pray in what
respect was I wrong in my report ?’_No reply, and a general burst
of laughter at his expence. Ihe good officer, for he is a very worthy
man, had heard these remarks from Colonel Despard, but was too
correct to follow out the errors of his commander. He spoke with-
out consideration, and did not expect such a cross-examination.
It will bo remembered, that at the taking of the Pa at Rua-
pekapoka, a number of letters were found which were pronounced
to be of a treasonable character. An air of mystery was thrown
over this subject from high authority, which gave weight to the idle
reports which were so boldly propagated at that period, by a pro-
c amation stating, that all these letters were burnt by the command
o tiis Excellency Governor Grey. Upon this matter the following
remarks are made in the New Zealander, which, taken in connexion
with the reports circulated at the time at the Bay of Islands, seem
to be intended to have the same application ;


Extract from the Netu Zealander of January 31st, '1846.
“ Treasonable Letters.
“ Among the recent proclamations in the Government Gazette of
“ the 24th instant, is one respecting som® letters found in the Pa
“ at Ruapekapeka, and stating that his Excellency, although aware
“ that they wore of a treasonable nature, ordered them to be con-
signed to the flames, without either peirusing or allowing a copy
“ of them to be taken.
“ The clemency shown towards Heke) and Kawiti upon their
“ actual submission and application for peace, wo consider to be
“ consistent in a noble, generous, and powerful enemy as the Queen
“ of England ; and in granting a free parcdon to all concerned in the
“ late rebellion, who may now return in peace and safety to their
“ houses, where, so long as they conduct themselves properly, they
“ shall remain unmolested in their person® and houses, His Excei-
“ lency Governor Grey has acted wisely aand humanely. But with
“ those European traitors, who have beem clandestinely conspiring
“ against the peace of the Colony, and iinsidiously instigating tho
“ excited natives to direct open rebellion,, we think very different
“ policy to complete amnesty should be For the natives
“ some apology might be advanced, on account of their imperfect
“knowledge of what acts constitute treason and rebellion against
“ the lawful constituted authorities ; but not so for the plausible
“artful abettors of that rebellion, who, to serve their own individual
“ selfish views and gain, cared neither to endanger the Queen’s
“ power and authority in the Colony, nor to sacrifice the lives of
“ their fellow-countrymen. We consider these English traitors far
“ more guilty, and deserving of severe punishment than the brave
“ natives whom they have advised and misled. Cowards and knaves
“ in the full sense of the terms, they hawe pursued their traitorous
“ schemes, afraid to risk their own persons, yet artfully sacrificing
“ others for their own aggrandizement, while, probably at the samo
“ time, they were most hypocritically professing most zealous loyalty.
“ Tranquillity and subordination are not yet sufficiently estab-
“ fished in the northern district for tlhe local Government to bo
“ magnanimously clement in its condmct towards mischievous and
“ treasonable agitation of dissatisfied nattives. It has been rumoured
“ that investigation of these epistolary pn-oofs and documents, would
“ have implicated some, whose station amd previous character ought
“to have dictated more correct and scrupulous behaviour towards
“ the maories, and more consistent grattitude to the Queen’s gov-
“ ernment. If such be the fact, we deeem it to be the more power-
“ ful reason why the Governor should ireally know the truth, and
“ however he might deal leniently for past offences, his knowledge
“ of the character and extent of these treasonable acts, would operate
“ most powerfully against future repetiition. We are quite aware
“ that the direction of this proclamaticon would infer, that “ this
“ large number of letters” were from matives, as “ the Governor
“ directs it to be notified for the information of the native chiefs
“in the northern part of the island tout it is well known that not
“a few, doubtless the most important off the “ tuhituhis” were from


“ Europeans. However, the Governor may perhaps have been
“ induced to issue the proclamation to which we have alluded, con-
“ ceiving that as the contents of these epistles were known to some,
“ their purport, and the names of the writers, would not long remain
“ a mysterious secret. In such opinion we concur, not only on that
“ account, but for the further reasons, that the natives cannot long
“ keep a secret, and now these rebels have all received a full pardon
“ themselves, they will not scruple to talk of their Eangatira pakeha
“ correspondents.”
The reason why this wordy document is noticed here, is simply
this, that the report was carried by respectable parties from Te
Ruapekapeka to Russell immediately after the fall of the Pa, that
treasonable letters had been found involving the character of the
Missionaries. It happens, however, that copies were preserved of
such communications as were sent, and the following letter, which
it is presumed was the ground of these remarks, is attested by an
eye-witness as being the true copy of a letter from Archdeacon
Williams, which was picked up in the Pa;—
“ Paihia, Hepetema 23, 1845.
“ E taku hoa kuare, —Kua riro mai he kupu no te Kawana o
“ mea mai ana kahore he pukapuka a Kawiti me to Hoani Heke.
“ Ko tetahi waewae kia ora ko tetahi waewae kia mate ? E hoa Ida
“ toa koe kia ora ai to tangata. Tukua mai tau pukapuka kia ata
“ kitea eto pakeha. Na ko nga hoiho kia riro mai. Ka ngaro pea
“ Waiomio me era wahi ka ngaro ko Mawe ko Owaeawae.
“ Naku tenei, —Na to hoa na to Tupuna,
“Ki a Kawiti, Waiomio. (Signed) “Na te Wiremu.”
“ The original of the foregoing communication was picked up
“ in the Pa at the Ruapekapeka after it was taken.
(Signed) “ George Clarke, jun.”
Translation.
“Paihia, September 23, 1845.
“My foolish Friend, —A word from the Governor has come
“ hither, saying, there is no letter from Kawiti like that of John
“ Heke. Is one leg to be healed and the other leg to be unhealed.
“Be energetic (or brave) to save your person. Send your letter
“ that it may be clearly seen by the Europeans. Now let the horses
“ be given (or) perhaps Waiomio will be lost (to you) as those places
“ Mawe and Owaeawae are lost.
“ This is from me—from your friend—your Grandfather.
“To Kawiti. (Signed) Williams.
“A Correct Translation.
(Signed) “George Clarice, jun.”
To this letter Kawiti replied the following day :
“ Ruapekapeka, Sept. 24, 1845.
“ Friend Williams,—Good is your word 0 friend, saluting you.
“ Here am I feeling great regard for you. Sir, it is because you
“ have said that peace should be made, that I consent. I will not
“ continue to jump upon your word (i.e., 1 will not run counter to


“ your wishes) but then, if peace is made, it must be made with,
"respect to the land also.
“ Friend Governor, saluting you. II am willing to make peace.
“ Many Europeans have been killed, andl many natives. In as much
“ as you have said that I should makce the first advances towards
“ peace, I now do so, and hereby consemt.
“ This is all mine, I finish here.
“By me, ((Signed) Kawiti.
“ I certify this to be the correct rendlering of the foregoing letter.
(Sigmed) T. S. Foksaith.”
Extract of a letter from the Governor to Kawiti;—
“ Kawiti, —Your letter of September 24 I received last night,
“ September 30. It was addressed to imyself and to Mr. Williams,
“ who, I can plainly see, has been giiving you good advice ; you
“ have done well to hearken to him, andl 1 trust your future conduct
“ will shew that you are really sincere amd desirous of peace.
“ From me, from the Governor.
(Signed)) Robert Fitzßoy.”
The letter to Kawiti speaks for itself,, it was written by authority,
there is no ambiguity in it, and the sense in which Kawiti received
it, is shewn by his reply. The views of the late Governor also are
sufficiently explicit. Archdeacon Williams was too well acquainted
with the public service to commit himself by an unauthorised inter-
ference in matters of this nature. We may take as an instance of
the caution he observed, a note written to the Rev. Mr. Burrows a
fortnight afterwards.
“ Paihia, October 13, 1845.
“ My dear Sir, —The request you have made to me in the name
“of Colonel Despard, that I should see Kawiti as soon as possible,
“ relative to the terms for peace being established, I shall most
“ cheerfully attend to ; but I must express some surprise that no
“ communication has been made by that Officer himself to me, as
“ it is a point among official men never to act without written autho-
“ thority, and as I do not consider a mere verbal message as suffi-
“ oient authority, the duty being of a serious and delicate nature,
“ I must request you to communicate with Colonel Despard that
“ he may express his wishes to me in writing, that I may feel I am
“ acting correctly in this matter.”—Yours faithfully,
(Signed) Henry Williams,
“ Rev. R. Burrows, Waimate.”
Archdeacon Williams was called upon to take a public and ac-
tive part in the proceedings of this period, and was in daily commu-
nication with the public authorities respecting the negociations
which were then pending. These were no secret proceedings. Sir
Everard Home writes from the North Star on the 10th of October:
“ Many thanks, my dear sir, for your note. I just saved the
“ Racehorse, by which I have sent a copy of Kawiti’s letter to you,
“to Sir George Gipps, so that he and Sir Maurice O’Connell may
“be able to judge of what they may be likely to hear next. 1 expect
“ Heke’s answer to-day, and then I send all together to Auckland


“by the Osprey. Colonel Despard quite agrees with you about the
“ propriety of a deputation, with powers from the Governor to settle
“ things. He thinks it should consist of three.
“ Ever, My Dear Sir, faithfully yours,
(Signed) “ Everard Home.
“ To Yen. Archdeacon 11. Williams.
In the month of November, Colonel Despard gave authority on
two occasions, to Archdeacon Williams, to hold communication with
the rebel chiefs.
“ Camp at Kororareka, Nov. 2, 1845.
“ The Venerable Archdeacon AVilliams has authority to visit
“ Ruapekapoka, and meet Heke in compliance with a written re-
quest made to him by that chief, a translation of which has been
“ handed to mo by Mr. Clendon, Police Magistrate at Paihia.
(Signed) “H. Despard,
“Lieut. Colonel 99th Eegt., Colonel on
“the Staff, commanding the troops.
“ To Yen. Archdeacon H. Williams.”
“Camp at Kororareka, Nov. 13, 1845.
“ Sir, — I have to forward for your information and guidance,
“ the following extract of a letter from his Excellency the Governor,
“ dated the 11th instant, and received yesterday;—
“ Extract.
“ I have the honor of requesting you will authorise Archdeacon
“ Henry Williams to communicate with the rebel chief Kawiti, who
“ should have due warning that preparations are making which may
“ cause his total destruction in the event of the present opening for
“pardon and peace being disregarded.
“ The above extract will be sufficient authority for you to com-
“ ply with his Excellency’s desire, without any further communi-
“ cation from me.
“ I have the honor to be. Sir, your obedient servant,
“ 11. Despard,
“ Colonel on the Staff, Commanding the Troops.
“ To Yen. Archdeacon H. Williams.”
A perusal of these documents will satisfy every reasonable mind,
that, while much activity was shewn in promoting the interests of
the Government, all was done under the sanction of authority.
After these repeated admissions of assistance rendered to the
Government, and of efforts to promote the establishment of peace on
the part of the late Governor Fitzroy, an attempt was made to
prove a treasonable act to have been committed at Paihia on the
evening of Thursday, January 29, 1846, on the departure of 11.M.5.
North Star, when Heke hoisted his flag in compliment to the worthy
Captain, who had held a long communication with him on the pre-
ceding evening, in the presence of many of his officers, in the house
of Archdeacon AVilliams. The Police Magistrate was officially
written to on the subject, to enquire into the truth of the report,
which had been laid before his Excellency the Governor, “ that
Heke had at Paihia hoisted his rebellious flag after the establish-


ment of peace, upon seeing that 11. M. S. North Star was sailing
from the port, and that a son of Archdeacon Williams assisted him
in the act.” Had this been a yaguo report, like many others, the
circumstance would not deserve notice ; but tho Captain of tho
Government brig Victoria underwent two examinations on the sub-
ject as to his knowledge of the fact, one at Auckland, and one at
Wellington.
Had the person who gave rise to this report, understood more
of native customs, and the feelings that had been reciprocated
between Sir E. Home and Heke, he would not have been led into
so foolish a misrepresentation. But whether or not, neither Arch-
deacon Williams nor his son, had any thing to do with the matter.
The idea that has been expressed, namely, that the natives
opposed to the Government have been exclusively the people of the
Church Mission, while those who have been friendly, are tho
Wesleyans and Roman Catholics, is based upon incorrect informa-
tion, and it casts an imputation on the Church Mission, which
cannot be passed over in silence.
That many natives professing Christianity should have been
concerned in this hostility to the Government, has been a subject
of the deepest regret to the Missionaries ; and their endeavours to
allay this feeling were unceasing up to the time of active collision,
when they gave place to the hostile measures which became neces-
sary. An accurate examination of the list of natives engaged on
either side, will show that tho hostile natives were by no means
made up exclusively of people of the Church Mission ; neither were
the friends of the Government made up exclusively of Wesleyans
and Roman Catholics. Among the rebels were natives belonging
to the Church Mission, together with many Roman Catholics, and
heathen. It is a striking fact, that nearly all the chiefs of rank of their
party who were killed were heathen and profesesed Papists. Pu-
muku and Kahakaha were heathen, Ruku and his son, and the two
sons of Kawiti, were papists.
Among the opponents to the Government were the following
Papists :— Buku and his party ; — Kawiti’s sons and several of the
tribe ; —the Waikare party, mostly papists ; Atuawera and his
party, from Hokianga ; — Bona amd his party, whose canoe was tho
only one from Whangaroa at the cutting down of the flagstaff on
January 9, 1145 ; from Ngungwru, about 30 papists ; — Hakitara
from Hokianga.
Of the Natives of the Church Mission who assisted the Govern-
ment may be noticed : Tamati JPukutwtw and the Natives of Te
Kawakaiva, who broke up their old pa and constructed a new one
at the landing place of the expedition against the Ruapekapeka, for
the protection of the stores, &c., &c., and to cover the retreat; —
Hori Kingi JVharerahi and the two sons of Bewa, with many others
of their tribe, from Tc Bawhiti ;—Nopera Panakareao, and his
party, from Kaitaia ; —Faratene Kekeao and Jfiremu Kingi Kai-
tara, and their party from Pukenui; —Eruera Patuone, elder brother
of Waka Nene, who rendered very important aid, also received
Christian instruction when living at Whakatiwai, where the teachers


of the Church Missionary Society were alone residing. After a
time, he went up to Paihia, and after staying there some time, was
baptized by Archdeacon H. Williams.
A large bod} r of natives also was kept quiet, entirely through the
influence of the Church Mission, most of whom would otherwise
have joined Heke. Under this head may be mentioned a large pro-
portion of the natives of Kaikohe, Heke’s immediate relations ;
Wiremu Hau, and party at Waimate ; —the tribe of Ngatirehia,
under Tareha ; —the tribe Te HiJcutu at Tepuna, and the natives of
Matauri and Whangaroa, under Ururoa, alone forming a body of
three hundred men, who had determined to join Heke, previous to
the meeting at Paroa on January 27th, 1845.
Waka None first rose in favor of the Government, in conse-
quence of a letter from Tamati Pukututu, written from Paihia
immediately after the fall of Kororareka, calling upon him to come
and see “ Te matenga o te Wiremu,’’{“the death of Mr. Williams,”) at
the hands of Kawiti and Heke, which was received as a call to come
to the protection of the Europeans.
The various attempts to fasten upon the Missionaries the charge
of disloyalty, being capable of the fullest refutation, have been
allowed to remain long unanswered, but in the mean time, another
effort is being made, the result of which, could it be established,
would be scarcely less prejudicial to their character. It is under-
stood that the Governor has expressed an opinion recently, that the
cause of the rebellion was the purchase of land by the Missionaries.
Now, if not merely a course of treasonable practices, but the very
root and origin of all the evils under which the country has been
smarting, can be proved against the Missionaries, then surely they
deserve that the most harsh measures should be taken against them.
Much has been already said upon these land purchases, both in this
country, and at home ; and severe censures have been passed upon
the Missionary body by many of their friends, while others have set
up for them a defence grounded on the circumstances of the case.
Upon this subject, as on others, there has unhappily been much
misrepresentation.
The body of persons who come under the designation of “the
Missionaries,” is no inconsiderable part of the community. Their
children and their childrens’ children of the second generation are
now upwards of one hundred and sixty persons, for whom an impar-
tial judge will hardly consider that an excessive provision has been
sought.
In the Report from the Select Committee of the House of Com-
mons on New Zealand 1844, page 88, is found a Schedule of Claims
to Land in New Zealand. From this it appears that the lands
claimed on account of the Mission Families, with the exception of
two cases, which rest altogether on different grounds, and cannot,
therefore, be taken into the same calculation, amount to 53601 acres,
a block of land nearly 12 miles by 7 ; the children of these families,
which are 12 in number, are 120, giving an average of 446 acres to
each child. The land awarded by the Land Commissioners to these
families is 29,209 acres, which is a little less than 243 acres for each


child. This land taken in a block will be rather more than 9 miles
by 5, an amount which gives a view of the case widely different
from many statements which have been in circulation. Was it then
a ground for censure against the Missionaries that, at a time when
there was not the most remote prospect of colonization to this coun-
try, they sought provision for their children iin a savage land, rather
than apply for permission, which would nott have been refused, to
return to their native country that they misght give their children
the advantages of civilized society ? And if tthey are to be censured
for making purchases to the extent of 446 accres for each child in a
savage land, what shall be said of the Goverrnment of New South
Wales, who appropriated in a free gift, and of the chaplains of that
colony who received at their hands, for each i of their children, at the
average rate of 1600 acres, in a rising colomy, with every prospect
of increasing importance ?
There yet remains to be noticed the allegation that “these pur-
chases have been the cause of the late rebelllion.” We are at a loss
to conceive from what quarter this informattion can have been con-
veyed to his Excellency, but certain it is thsat it comes from persons
who, to say nothing of their intentions, bettray excessive ignorance
of the whole question.
This allegation may be set aside upon thee ground of its improba-
bility alone. It is well known that the halbits of the natives lead
them to cultivate wooded land, and thafc as soon as its strength
is partially exhausted, they still go back ugion the woodland. Now,
the greater part of that purchased by thee Missionaries is of this
character. In the opinion of the natives it was worn out. “Do you
think,” said a chief from whom the farm osf the Church Missionary
Society at Waimate was purchased, “that we should have sold you
land if we could have grown potatoes upon iit ?” It appears, too, from
Documentary evidence in the Parliamentarry Papers, that the Mis-
sionaries paid the natives for the land they purchased at the rate of
rather more than 3s. 4d. per acre. The nartives, therefore, had good
reason to be satisfied in this respect ; much more so than
with the purchases made on account of Government, Explicit in-
structions were given to the agents of Government during the ad-
ministration of Willoughby Shortland, Esq., not to pay the natives
more than 3d. per acre. The purchases for the New Zealand Com-
pany were at a still lower rate. In the Report of the Select Com-
mittee, 1840, p. 74, it is stated that Mr. Ward, then Secretary of the
Company, was questioned by Mr. Ilindley, as to the price per acre
of the whole quantity of laud purchased by the Company?” Mr.
Ward’s reply was, “It appears to he about an half-penny per acre.”
Surely it was never contemplated on the introduction of the sliding
scale that there should be so sudden a descent as is here shewn—a
proportion of eighty to one. How unfortunate that the records of
Parliament should have made such disclosures.
At the time when the mania among the natives for selling land
was at its height, from one to two years before tho establishment of
the Colony, the Missionaries, had great difficulty, but they succeeded,
in preventing the natives aftbut the Bay of Islands from parting


with their most valuable land, which still remains in their possession.
This remark applies to the richest portions in the neighbourhood of
Waimate, also to the district around Pukenui, to Mawhe, to Kai-
kohe, which is the land in the occupation of Heke, to Te Kawakawa,
and particularly to a large district called Okaihau, extending from
the beginning of the wood towards Hokianga down to the river Uta-
kura. If the natives of these districts were questioned upon this
matter, they would express their strong sense of obligation to the
Missionaries for the care taken in this behalf.
If any natives are dissatisfied by reason of the alienation they
have made of their lands, and on this account have been driven to
take up arms against the Government, doubtless Heke would be one
of the first to say so. The land purchased by James Busby, Esq.,
in the Bay of Islands, belonged to Heke’s tribe ; and at the Court
of Commissioners for the investigation of the Land Claims, the Na-
tives, and particularly Heke, were very indignant at the questions
put to them. Heke said, “I told you before that there was no fraud
m it, the land is Mr. Busby’s, we received the price, and were satis-
fied with it.” And this, too, when they knew that Mr. Busby had
been selling very small portions of the land for a larger sum than
he had given for the whole.
By the time the Court of the Commissioners was opened, the
natives had had time to consider the steps they had taken. But
Mr. Shortland in a letter to Lord Stanley, (published in the Papers
laid before Parliament on the 7th March 1845,) shewing that the
disturbances at the South had originated in the interference of the
Company or their settlers with lands never sold by the rightful
owners, says, that “ in the Northern District out of the seven hun-
dred and fifty claims of the old settlers, which had been adjudicated
by the Commissioners, not one single instance of any objection being
offered by the natives to the taking possession of the lands awarded
to the claimants had arisen.” A. trait of national honesty to which
it would be difficult to find a parallel.
The joint testimony of Colonel Godfrey and of Major Richmond,
in a letter to the Colonial Secretary, confirms the same statement.
See Appendix to Report from the Select Committee 1844, p. 334:
“ Sir, —In reply to the Memorandum of His Excellency the Of-
“ ficer Administering the Government, addressed to us this day,
“ demanding,
“If the conduct of the natives, in the investigation of land
“ claims, has caused a great alienation of feeling between the par-
“ ties, and a disposition in some cases has been manifested to get
“ returned to them, lands which they formerly sold.”
“We have the honor to report, that we have now examined
“ more than half the claims, yet have never remarked such a con-
“ sequence in any of our investigations.
(Signed) Edward L. Godfrey, d . .
M. Richmond, Commissioners.
“ To the Hon. the Colonial Secretary, &c.”
The total absence of any declaration of the kind by the natives
is wholly at variance with the assertion that the land purchased by


the Missionaries was the cause of the war. There is a remarkable
degree of consistency in the native character with respect to the
narrative he will give of the same event at different periods of time.
But here a reason is given, from some unknown source, as the root of
the native grievance, which has not only never been named by the
natives during a war of two years continuance, but which is directly
opposed to the statements made both by the rebels and the friendly
tribes. Then, too, the fact that the hostile natives treated with
marked respect all mission property, so much so as to lead the mili-
tary to fancy that there must be some marvellously good under-
standing between the Missionaries and the rebels. How does this
agree with the assertion that the natives rose up in rebellion on
account of injuries done them by the Missionaries ? These lands
were purchased by the Missionaries from 10 to 12 years ago. How
was it that the natives never turned ujpon them to seize their cattle
and to plunder their houses, but now afteer so many years have passed,
the said Missionaries being regarded bby them as the authors of all
their trouble, they seize the horses and! pillage the property of the
unconscious settler, and cut down the fflagstaff of Her Majesty. The
science of probabilities, which is muclh aoted upon in conducting
military operations, appears to be but imperfectly understood. A
view is here presented which is entirely new, and that which is im-
probable is to be regarded as the most probable result. No, the
natives refrained from plundering the Missionaries because—although
they were opposing the Government with which they saw the Mis-
sionaries were in league, although they had resolved to disregard all
expostulation to desist from their dangerous course—there was along
cherished feeling of regard towards thee Missionaries for kindnesses
received during a period of more than twenty years.
The answer, however, to this most; serious charge does not rest
upon its improbability alone. There iis evidence, which is explicit,
both verbal and documentary.
On July 8, 1844, when Heke cut down the flaffstaff for the first
time, he stated at Paihia to the Bishop of New Zealand, that the
reason he had cut down the flagstaff was, that certain parties in the
Bay of Islands had told him that the flag hoisted at Kororareka pre-
vented the trading vessels from frequemting the Bay of Islands, and
that it was the sign that the New-Zojalanders were made slaves to
the Queen. At a subsequent date, Heske reprobated the conduct of
Ruku and Kawiti, because they plundered the settlers of their horses
and other property. “Let us fight,” said he, “with the flagstaff
alone.” And his conduct was alwayss consistent with his proposal.
He cut down the flagstaff, and every subsequent erection of it was
the signal for successive attacks. On tihe day of the contest at Koro-
rareka, Heke made his assault upon tlhat alone, and after he had
gained his object, he did not attempt t® molest the white inhabitants,
nor even to fight with the military whco were in the town.
The opinion of the late Governor may be received as valid upon
this subject. It is a point which it was his interest to know, and
which he had the means of ascertaining. The account he gives is as
follows (p, 10, Remarks on New Zealand).


“ When Heke was agitating the Northern natives by his argu-
“ ments against the Government, he took great pains to shew them
“ that the British flag being hoisted on any territory, was a sign
“ that the land belonged to the Sovereign of Great Britain, and that
“ the people of that land were become slaves, and that to preserve
“ the freedom of the New-Zealanders, the British Flag must not be
‘•admitted on their territory.”
He further states, p. 11:—“ The natives were not only treated
“with less caution, and less kindness than previously, but they were
“ threatened, even on trifling occasions, with the punishments of
“ English law, and were told by the ill-disposed or unreflecting
“ white men, that their country was taken from them, and that they
“ were now Queen Victoria’s slaves, and that they could not even
“sell their own property—their land—as they pleased. These
“ taunts were felt deeply.”
Lastly, this question is determined by two letters sent by Heke
to the late Governor. We give his own words for the benefit of
those who understand Maori. In one which was dated May 21st,
1845. Heke says ;
“ Na nga Pakeha enei tawai Id a matou, na nga Pakeha o Hoki-
“anga, o Wangaroa, o Kororareka, o te Wahapu, o Otuihu ; na
“ ratou i wakarite,ka riro to koutou wenua i a Kawana, ko muri iho
“ka wakamatea koutou. Titiro ki Poihakena, ki Haina, Id nga
“ motu katoa, ko te ritenga ia mo tenei wenua ; na o Ingarani ki
“ mua, muri iho na te Wiwi, muri iho na te Marikena: heoi ano ka
“ wakaae ahau ki enei korero, e wha tau i mahi penei ai, no to rima
“ o nga tau, ka wakaaetia taua korerotanga maha a te pakeha ki a
“ matou. Na, ka tahi matou ka pa atu ki taua rakau, ka poutou kia
“ hinga, muri iho ka wakaarahia ano, ka tahi matou ka mea he pono
“ ina hoki ka totohe, ka mea matou kia mate matou Id runga ki to
“ matou wenua.”
The second letter was dated July 15, 1843. In this Heke writes:
“ E mara, e Kawana, ho rongo pai tenei naku ki a koe kia waka,
“ wakia aku hara e koe. Nau iho mai te ritenga naku ranei ? E mea
“ ana ahau nau ano, na te pakeha ; e kuare ana ahau, ka mea mai
“ nga pakeha ki au, ‘B Hoani Heke, ka riro tou wenua i a Kawana.’
“ Kamea atu ahau, ‘he aha te mea e riro ai,’ ka ki mai nga pakeha,
“ ‘na te kara e tu nei i Maiki, ’ ka mea atu ahau, ‘me pehea ra V ka ki
“ mai, ‘poutoa te kara.’ Ka pa ahau ka poutoa te kara ka hinga ki raro
“ te rakau, ka ki atu ahau, ‘he aha te ritenga i roto i te kara ?’ Ka ki
“ mai nga pakeha ki ahau, ‘ko te mana o te Kuini kei runga i to
“ kara, e torn iwi i roto.’ Ka mea ahau,‘ na te Atua ano tenei wenua
“ i hanga mo matou me a matou tamariki katoa.’ ”
The translation of the first letter is as follows :
“ VVe are taunted with this language by the white people, by the
“ white people of Hokianga, of Wangaroa, of Kororareka, of T©
“ Wahapu, of Otuihu ; they made the statement ‘ your land will be
“ taken by the Governor, and after that you will be killed. Look
“ at Port Jackson, at China, and at all the islands, after that man-
“ ner ; will this island be treated ; the flag takes possession of the
“land,’ The English first, after that the French, and then the


“ Americans (made this statement) tlhen I assented to these state-
«ments They did this for four ycears. On the fifth year we
« ass ent’ed to those often repeated staxtements of the white people
« ma( j e to us. Then first we touchedl the flagstaff, it was chopped
“ that it might fall. After that it woxs put up again. Wo then
“ said, it is all true for they urge the point, and we said we would
“ die upon our land.”
Translation of the second letter :
“ Mr. Governor, this is my good message to you, let my faults
“be examined by you. Was the commencement made by you or
“by me? I think it was by you, by the white man, I was in
« ignorance ; the white people said to me, ‘John Heko, your land is
“ taken by the Governor.’ I replied, ‘by what means is it taken
“ The white people answered, ‘by the flagstaff which stands at Maikn
“ I said, ‘what is to be done ?’ They replied, ‘cut down the flagstaff
“ I touched the flagstaff, it was chopped down, the tree fell. I said,
4 ‘ ‘what meaning is there in the flagstaff?’ The white people told
“ me, ‘the power of the Queen is in the flag, there are three nations
“ in it.’ I said, ‘God made this land for us, and for all our children.
Here, then, is Heke’s own account of the matter, confirmed by
the late Governor. Her Majesty’s representative, and the rebel
chief, standing at the head respectively of the powers which were
long opposed, but agreeing in this single question which is at issue.
The evidence which has been now brought forward, is not of a sus-
picious character, but it is of such a nature, that no room is left to
wish it were more complete. It has been reported, indeed, that
this assertion respecting the cause of the war, rests xipon the autho-
rity of more than forty natives. It may be so. There will be
found in every community certain persons ready to make any state-
ment which they believe will be well received by those who are
above them. The more prominent the part sustained by any indi-
vidual, whether in a good cause or a bad one, so much the stronger
wifi be the force of the tide against him when it once turns, ihere
is a remarkable instance of thio mentioned by Mr Babington Ma-
caulav in his account of the administration of Warren Hastings^.
“ An Indian Government has only to let it be understood that it
wishes a particular man to be ruined, and in twenty-four hours it
will be furnished with grave charges supported by depositions so_ full
and circumstantial, that every person unaccustomed to Asiatic
mendacity, would regard them as decisive. But let these forty
witnesses be brought forward, that their assertions may be con-
fronted with the testimony of all that is respectable m the commu-
nity, whether English or native. The Missionaries will not shrink
from the investigation. They need not ask to have a charitable
construction put upon well intentioned acts, which subsequently
have appeared to be carried out without discretion, but they may
venture to submit both their actions and the intentions from which
they sprang, to the severest scrutiny, supported by the honest con-
fidence of a conscience void of offence toward God and toward men.


appendix.
ex i ra , ct ° f a letter recently received from the
light unon Jwf’ aiK th , e . Rey - John Warren, is added, as throwing
light upon the closing subject of these papers g
<( , “ Hokianga, August 31, 1847,
“ ifii.i* of iomV'” lvS', ll,!, ij 'I 1 "® 11 '" 1 still arise it. the
“ the several tribes -it Jf ua^e ’ anc our con stant intercourse with
“ P?f^ of' facts which sX m tWs C pSL° f ™ "
" ShL” “fef “» ana sain the assistance
"SSfs **
“on the subject, that ho h ® Ti*- 1 b ° Utlecturin S
:; s\7“sr tTS 1 Ch ' irti “ c ’ = ‘‘ a ° d “Sg’s
•■waite reiterate
■ E - l ° W “ ,te ’“ “*«* ttanglltT'S
“ We are, &c,,
(Signed) “Jomr Hobbs,
“JOSif WABBEZf.”


t


»
✓
ft
