



Read Our Publications
LABOR ACTION
Weekly Newspaper of the Workers Party
THE NEW INTERNATIONAL
A Monthly Journal of Revolutionary Marxism
THE CHALLENGE OF YOUTH
Monthly Organ of the Young People’s Socialist League
WORKERS PARTY
1 14 West 14th Street
New York, N. Y.
Please send me information about:
The Workers Party □
The Young People's Socialist League □
Please send me a sample copy of
Labor Action
The New International
The Challenge of Youth
Address..
City State
Published by the Workers Party, May 24, 1941


Plain Talk on the War
BILL: Well, Lefty, I passed the physical exam
this morning. I’ll be leaving for camp next week.
So I thought I’d drop in and talk some things over
with yon before I leave.
LEFTY; Swell. Sit down. Pull over that ash-
tray. . . , Well, what’s on your mind?
BILL: You and I have hit it off pretty good
down at the local. We’ve seen eye to eye on most
things right from the time we both got fired in ’35
for starting to organize the plant, through the
strike in ’36, right up to now. . . .
LEFTY: There’s nothing mysterious about our
getting along. I like a fellow that knows how to
fight. And you sure were in there pitching against
the company.
BILL: You should talkl ... Of course, we’ve
tangled on a couple of things—like supporting
Roosevelt last year and how he was taking us into
war. As I told you at the time, though, I didn’t
think he was any great shakes, but I didn’t see any-
thing else to go for. Anyway, what I want to say
is, where we have disagreed you’ve pretty nearly
always turned out right in the end.


LEFTY; There’s nothing wonderful in that. I’ve
been able to call the shots because I’m a Marxist. I
belong to the Workers Party and have learned to
understand things.
BILL; That’s what I’m coming to. I figure that
it’s about time I found out what this Marxism busi-
ness is. God knows, I went to bat enough times for
you over it in the local when they were calling you
a red, a Trotskyite, and about everything else.
What does this Marxism and your Workers Party
say on the war business?
LEFTY; How do you mean?
BILL: Look, here’s the picture: Like probably
a lot of other fellows all over the country. I’m be-
ginning to wake up. It’s taken a long while, but
now that I’m beginning to see one or two things
1 don’t want to waste any time.
In a couple of days I’m going to be in the army.
And I’m not so sure that I’m going to be out at the
end of a year, either. It may be quite a while before
I’ll be able to take advantage of the clause in our
new contract guaranteeing us our jobs when we
return. I’ve been reading some of the remarks of
these army big-shots in the papers. This war is
being played for keeps.
I and a lot of other fellows all over the country
have suddenly been thrown face to face with the
fact that in another two or three years we may be
dead. I don’t want to die in a year or so. There
are a lot of things I want to do—get married, buy a


nice car, and start doing a little reading to find out
what makes the wheels go ’round.
That I will die is always pretty hard for me to
understand and to think about. But it’s especially
hard when I’m not sure what I’m dying for. When
the governor sent in the National Guard in ’36 I
helped fight it out. That was O.K.—you could see
what the tie up was. But God knows. I’ve got
nothing against some poor working stiff out of one
of Hitler’s mass sweat shops, or some kid who has
known nothing but unemployment all his life. And
I’m pretty sure he feels the same way about me.
Well, then, what are we fighting for?
At the same time, I know that if the United
States isn’t armed (and here’s where those who are
against building up a big army, navy, and air force
are crazy) Hitler will sooner or later take over.
And then it’s goodbye Local 342, goodbye mar-
riage, goodbye new car, goodbye everything. If you
look at it that way it does seem as if we’re defend-
ing democracy against fascism, doesn’t it?
LEFTY: Well
BILL: But at the same time I have more than a
sneaking suspicion that the slogan "defend democ-
racy against fascism” that they’re using today is the
same baloney as the slogan "save the world for de-
mocracy” that they used in the last war. Did you
sec by the papers, incidentally, that Secretary of the
Navy Frank Knox says that the slogan was used
during the last war only to whip up our war spirit,


and that it wasn’t a war for democracy at all? He
says this war is altogether different, of course.
I don’t know—the whole business doesn’t sound
too good to me. But one thing I do know—l’m
going to find out what’s going on if I have to break
a leg doing it. You’ve never steered me wrong in
the past. What’s this war all about?
LEFTY; Well, that’s a pretty big order in the
little time that we have. I think that the best way
to begin is to go back and study a factory—say the
plant where wc both work. Machine production
in plants owned and controlled by the small, ex-
clusive circles of the rich, with millions of ordinary
Joe Blows like us laboring in them—this is the
heart and soul of the system we live under . . .
BILL; Capitalism?
LEFTY: That’s right, that’s all capitalism is.
And generally speaking, what happens in our plant
shows you in a small way what is going on in the
nation as a whole. And the same rules that capital-
ism has to follow in the United States it has to fol-
low in England. Or Germany. Only there the gov-
ernment is called fascist—which means that instead
of having an ordinary labor-hater at the head of
the government they have a super-Pinkerton thug
named Hitler, and his muscle-men. But it’s still
capitalism, though in a more brutal form, and with
the nazi thugs demanding and getting a good share
of the bosses’ cut. 0.K., so far?
BILL: Right with you.


LEFTY: All*right. Now let’s look at our plant.
In that way we can get a good idea of what goes
on in the nation as a whole. Down at department
114-D they pull in a lot of sheet steel from the cars
on the siding. It’s worth, at most, seventy-five cents
a sheet. When it arrives at the shipping depart-
ment as a steel locker, neatly enameled, and
wrapped in heavy oiled paper, ready for shipping,
it’s worth about ten dollars. Where did it pick up
all that value going through the plant? There’re
only a handful of fittings on it, some other hard-
ware, and a few cents’ worth of paint. Say twenty-
five cents in all. Where did it pick up all its value?
I’ll tell you where. That locker is valuable be-
cause we’ve put our labor power in it. In other
words, it’s valuable because we’ve worked on it
with our brain and muscle.
And to look at it from the other end, that’s why
a clothespin is so cheap—it doesn’t take much labor
power to make one. Now I’m going to show you
how you have been robbed by the company all your
working life without knowing it. For what are
your wages paid to you?
BILL: Why, to use your words, for all the labor
power I put out.
LEFTY: Ah, that’s just itl Actually, you’re paid
for only a part of your labor power. The bosses
and the stockholders of the corporation take a part
of what is due you. What they take is known as
profit.


BILL: But aren’t they entitled to a little profit?
Isn’t that their share?
LEFTY: Their share of what? Remember, it’s
only the workers’ labor power that makes a prod-
uct valuable. What labor power do these Fat Boys
contribute who clip their coupons, and spend their
winters in Miami, smoking cigars on the beach and
watching the girlies walk by? Or these cafe society
dolls that you see in Life, whose brains would rattle
like a pea in a gourd if you shook them? They con-
tribute nothing to the value of a product. What
you call “their” share is nothing more or less than
wages you should have been receiving for putting
out your labor power. In short, you have been
robbed of part of your wages.
BILL: It seems awful plain the way you put it.
Why did I use to shy away from you when you
used to talk this socialism business, anyway, I won-
der?
LEFTY: Well, war and death make us all face
problems more squarely. To go on: this taking of
a share of the wages due you—we Marxists call this
share surplus value—is enough reason in itself for
the setting up of socialism. Under socialism, of
course, this surplus value, which the boss now takes,
would remain with us, the people as a whole.
We workers can never buy back all that we pro-
duce. To do this we would have to receive full
value for the labor power that we put out. But, as
we have seen, the bosses take out a cut called profit.


or surplus value. Since we can’t buy back all the
products we produce, they pile up in the ware-
houses. It’s a cinch that the bosses can’t buy up all
of these “surplus” products. What would they do
with them? Most of their profits are reinvested in
the business, where they are used to buy better
labor-saving machinery. This only makes the ware-
houses bulge more.
Since there is then what capitalists call an “over-
supply” of products, work slows, up, and some of us
are laid off. This cuts purchasing power still more.
Fewer products can be sold. Still more of us are
laid off. And that’s how depressions are born.
BILL: It’s like Tony the ditchdigger in the story
when he says; “I digga da ditch to buya da food to
maka me strong to digga da ditch to buya da food
to maka me strong,” and so on.
LEFTY: Yes, except that Tony seems to be hold-
ing his own, at least. Well, to continue—to get out
of the depressions the capitalist can try a number
of things. He can cut wages, rawhide us more, or
try to find new places in this country or abroad
where he can sell his goods. This last thing is what
interests us now.
The capitalist has to expand his market—his
places to sell his products—or his profits will peter
out. Especially if he’s a German one who has cut
wages, lengthened hours, and speeded up the men
as much as he dares even with the help of Hitler’s
sluggers, and found that the country is still in dan-


ger of collapse through terrific poverty and depres-
sion. But when-he looks around he finds that Brit-
ain, say, has a big monopoly on juicy markets like
India. So what does Germany begin to do?
BILL: To build a big army, navy, and air force
to take away this market from Britain by war.
LEFTY; That’s right. So what’s the picture?
The German capitalist system lives by robbing the
German workers. The English capitalist system
lives by robbing the English workers at home and
the native populations in its colonies abroad. Hit-
ler wants the right to rob the English native popu-
lations and the English workers. And England
wants to keep on robbing them herself.
That’s why we don’t support either the German
side or the British side in this war. Nor do we sup-
port the war preparations in this country. For the
purpose of the United States is to take over Britain,
lock, stock and barrel, in the interests of J. P. Mor-
gan, Andrew Mellon, the Rockefellers, and the rest
of that crew. That the United States capitalists are
fighting to preserve democracy is plain hooey.
Their real plan is simply to muscle England out of
her colonies and to put England itself under their
thumb—unless Hitler beats them to .the punch.
Right now they want to help destroy Hitler—that
seems to be first on the order of the day.
BILL: But if we don’t arm, won’t Hitler attack
the United States?
LEFTY: Yes, he will. But the United States will


fight him in any event, because this war is nothing
more or less than a tremendous fight for the control
of the markets of the entire globe. To fight him
successfully, however, this government in the end
will have to become fascist itself. Only by squeez-
ing the people to the starving point can capitalism
secure enough armaments to fight Hitler success-
fully. To do that means the destruction of unions
and everything that we have seen happen in Ger-
many in the last ten years.
Of course, the capitalists aren’t going to do this
all at once. They still have plenty of profits out of
which they can toss a few dollars to labor. We’ve
seen that happen in some of the aircraft strikes. On
top of that, American labor is strong. It has never
taken a real defeat. Some of the unemployed slack
is being taken up. In many ways the country is
booming. The possibilities of getting wage in-
creases—which were tough during the recent “re-
cession”—are good now. Labor’s feeling frisky.
This situation will continue, and even increase, for
some time. But sooner or later the capitalists will
have to crack down. More and more anti-labor
laws will be passed. The end result will be fascism.
Another possibility is that the United States capi-
talists, if they seem to be losing, can turn the coun-
try over to Hitler, as the French capitalists did, in
the hope of salvaging something from the deal.
Rut in both cases we get fascism.
Even if the United States won, cvcrvonc even


now admits that there would be a terrific crash
after the war, which would make the last depres-
sion seem like a pleasant picnic in the country.
And to preserve capitalism against the attacks of
the workers, who would be trying to better their
conditions, the bosses would have to call on the
fascists, even if they already hadn’t introduced fas-
cism during the war. There’s the answer to those
who say we may have to give up some of our liber-
ties in order to lick Hitler, but that we will get
them back after the war.
BILL: What’s the answer.?
LEFTY: Socialism, only socialism. Capitalism
breeds war because, to survive, capitalism must
have markets for its “surplus” goods. To get those
markets, capitalism in every country is willing to
slaughter millions of its best people, and to starve
and bring sorrow to millions of others.
Only socialism will bring peace because only so-
cialism will make unnecessary the seizing of foreign
markets to absorb our “surplus” goods. We will be
able to distribute those goods because there will be
no capitalists to steal that surplus value. Then no
one will suffer wantl
BILL: I have to admit that it sounds swell. But
what about Russia? Russia’s supposed to be social-
ist, isn’t it? But brother, I wouldn’t live there for
all the gold in Fort Knox. And believe me I want
to believe in it, I really do.
LEFTY: What has happened to Russia is a


whole evening’s discussion in itself. But briefly, it’s
this: Russia has laid a basis for socialism.
Of course, Russia cannot avoid the effect of the
world market with which she must deal. She needs
to buy machinery badly, for instance. She cannot
build socialism completely any more than we could
build it down at the plant or just in our own city.
But she has made a start. She has showed for all
time what a planned economy can be like.
Unfortunately, however, she has been taken over
by a gang of assassins, kidnappers, liars, yes-men
and plain chiselers. Their chief is Stalin. They are
not interested in world socialism. They are inter-
ested in keeping their privileges in Russia.
You can see it easier if you think of Russia as a
good union taken over by racketeers. They’re in-
terested in the union only insofar as they can use it
to shake down a nice living. If anyone begins to
question their policies in the union—and their nice
living at the expense of the members—they take
care of them—one way or the other. Stalin shoots
them. Your racketeer isn’t interested in a clean
union growing up in the same field—it might put
ideas in the heads of his members. In the same way
Stalin isn’t interested in building socialism else-
where—or even in Russia. That’s why he had to
drive a pickaxe into the brain of Trotsky.
Stalin uses his communist parties to put pressure
on various capitalist governments for whatever deal
or alliance he wants at the moment. In the end.


however, oply another state controlled by the work-
ers will be able to help Russia. Stalin has brought
Russia to the edge of ruin. By his murderous poli-
cies in Russia, and by his policies abroad, of which
the invasion of Poland, Finland and Bessarabia are
the latest, he soils the glorious name of socialism.
Stalin makes socialism seem like a slaughterhouse.
This enables Roosevelt to whip up more support
for United States capitalism, which is about to
throw us into the bloodiest war in the entire his-
tory of the world.
For these reasons we of the Workers Party have
always stood for the removal of Stalin and his gang-
sters, and for the placing of the control of Russia
back in the hands of the working class, as it was
back in the days when Lenin and Trotsky were in
the leadership of the soviet state.
BILL: What sort of game are the Stalinists, as
you call them, playing in this war?
LEFTY: Right now they’re acting as flunkeys to
Hitler. In England, for instance, they work for
peace. Not for peace through socialism but for a
negotiated peace—which means, however tough and
radical they may talk, that they are working for the
victory of Hitler. Stalin is not interested in seeing
England go socialist. He’s interested in keeping
Russia out of war so that his powerful position in
Russia and the soft berths of his pals—whoever they
are at this moment—will be secure. After all, a vic-
tory of socialism in England would set off the tre-


mendous unhappiness and anger which exists in
Russia today.
BILL: The Stalinists seem pretty radical in this
country, though.
LEFTY; Their fight against the war is as phoney
as a fifteen cent watch. It’s true that the Stalinists
say that this is a war that is unjust on both sides.
But the stress is all on England’s past and present
dirty actions. Hitler gets off pretty easy. If Stalin
felt that Germany was about to turn on Russia, the
Stalinists would be whooping it up for Roosevelt
again and for war against the Nazis, just as they
were a couple of years ago, before the Hitler-Stalin
pact. The real test is: do they come out boldly,
agitating for peace through socialism? Of course,
they don’t.
BILL: Your speaking of England a few minutes
ago reminds me of something else. I see by your
paper, LABOR ACTION, that the Workers Party
is against aid to England. Now, I can see how aid
to England can lead us step by step into war. At
the same time, if we’re for socialism, should we sup-
port the sending to England of all aid “short of
war’’? Wouldn’t that give us more time to work
and spread our ideas before we are involved in the
war, when free speech will be only a memory?
LEFTY: Supporting a policy of aid to England
would only boomerang against us. When and
where would such support stop? I’m afraid that
we would always want a little more time to plug


for socialism. And in the meanwhile we would he
supporting the British slavemasters against the ris-
ing German slavemasters. We would be supporting
the slaughter of millions of fellow workers on both
sides. The rest of the working class would consider
us no better than the war-mad bosses. The job of
educating the working class to the single, great fact
that there will be peace only through socialism
would be more difficult because of the miseduca-
tion that we had given it before.
The struggle against fascism abroad and at home
is one and the same as the struggle for socialism.
THERE IS NO OTHER WAYI Capitalism in the
United States, as we have known it, can no longer
exist in its old form. To exist under the demands
of a total war against Hitler it must take more and
more out of the hides of the workers. But to length-
en hours, decrease wages, increase taxes, and speed
up the workers means more and more dictatorial
laws against labor. Of course, it will all be done
under the pica of “national defense.” The last step
will be fascism.
But we do not wish to see a victory by Hitler.
That would mean fascism too. It is the simple duty
of every worker to his class and to the future of the
world to struggle for socialism. Only in the strug-
gle for socialism will the working class of the
United States be able to preserve the gains it has
already won. Only by the victory of socialism will
fascism be defeated.


Only socialism is worth fighting for. Only social-
ism is worth defending. Only socialism will over-
throw Hitler. Only socialism can prevent another
and more terrible world war if this one is “settled”
by a new, super-Versailles treaty, no matter if it is
dictated by Germany or by the United States.
BILL: I see what you mean. 1 guess 1 never
quite looked at it that way before. . . . Well, it all
seems pretty good. I think I agree. But how are
you going to tell all this to the average fellow down
at the shop and expect to make much headway?
He’s not ready for the program yet.
. LEFTY: That’s right, he isn’t. And that’s why
we have what we call a program of transitional
demands, which are simply easy steps leading to
socialism. Nearly every worker can go for almost
all of this program, and the more of this program
he accepts the farther he comes along the road to
socialism.
BILL: Give me an example of one of the points
in the program.
LEFTY: O.K. Flere are all fourteen of them
printed at the top of page four in this copy of
LABOR ACTION. Let’s take the first part of
Point 5. It says: “Let the people vote on war . ,
Isn’t that a reasonable demand? Isn’t it right
that the people who are going to suffer should be
allmved to say whether or not they want to enter
the slaughter? What control do the people now
have over congressmen, who are, ninety-nine out of


a hundred, pals of big business and not of the poor?
What control do we now have over President
Roosevelt, Secretary of State Hull, and Under Sec-
retary of State Welles, conniving together over
breakfast, making God-only-knows what .promises
to Britain, sending all sorts of agents all over the
world, and secretly taking steps that will throw us
into war? They can register the men of the country
for slaughter in one day. Let us have one day to
see if wc want to go to that slaughter or not!
BILL; I’m for it too per cent.
LEFTY: Or take this part of point three: “For
government ownership and workers’ control of all
war industries. . . .” We are being asked to sacrifice
our lives in the coming war. That is no small thing.
If the capitalists are sincere in their cries that this
is a holy war for democracy, and that we all must
sacrifice, let them sacrifice their blood profits in the
war industries. Let the government take over the
war industries. And let the workers control them
in order that good working conditions can be main-
tained and that the government will not sneak out
profits to business in one fashion or another.
Well, you can read the rest of them here in
LABOR ACTION or in our other literature. You
can see how once a worker takes these steps—and
they will not be hard ones to take in the coming
days—events in the shop and in the nation will
force him to take further steps just to keep the
gains he has already won. That’s how the gap


which exists between the present political conserva-
tism of the American worker and socialism will be
bridged.
BILL: Let me have some of those pamphlets
before I go tonight. I see I’ll have to get in a little
heavy reading before I leave for camp next week.
. . . Well, what’s army life going to be like? And,
as a good union man, what is yours truly expected
to do during that year at camp?
LEFTY: Before we get into that, I think that
there is one thing that you and every other draftee
have to realize. And that is that this army service
isn’t just a one year proposition. Maybe you’ll be
out at the end of a year and a new batch taken in.
I don’t know. But maybe you’ll be kept in right
through the war. Congress could pass a law to that
effect in just about two seconds.
At any rate, make no mistake about it, the capi-
talist class, and its government and miliary errand
boys, are preparing for a colossal war abroad. Step
by step we are being pushed into war with Hitler.
You can’t supply Britain with armaments and food,
repair warships in our drydocks, and convoy ships
—and we’ll be doing it—without getting into war.
Sooner or later we will all be in it, and for a long
time.
BILL: I agree with you there, all right. For the
bosses to lick Hitler will take an invasion of Europe
in the end. And to do that will take an army of
three or four million men—or more. Those 4,500,-


000 identification tags for the dead and wounded
weren’t run off just to throw the government print-
ing office a little business.
Another thing I think we shouldn’t forget is that
the bosses will have to extend the war into South
America and the Pacific. There are some nice little
business and military propositions there that they’d
sure hate to lose. Of course, they may lose their
shirts, especially in the Pacific, but they’re really
going to try to keep the Nazis and the Japanese
out. That means a navy about three times the size
of the one they have now, and a real air force. Bro-
ther, it is really a world war this time, and it isn’t
going to be settled overnight.
LEFTY: That’s right. The point that I make
here is that our contact with the army isn’t going
to be all washed up at the end of a year. Once
every one of us realizes that the chances of leading
a normal life in this terrible age are pretty slim, the
sooner we’ll buckle down and clean up the mess.
That’s the first thing.
BILL: I understand that well enough. And as
more men are drafted and as the politicians and
the so-called dollar-a-year men (dollar-a-year men I
—what a laugh!) drag us further and further into
war, I think that pretty nearly everyone will realize
that it’s a long haul ahead. The problem is, what
should fellows like me do in the army?
LEFTY: In general it will be about like in the
shop: you’ll fight for better working conditions.


Look at the army pay!—|ai to S3O per month for
the privilege of dying! How far will that money go
if you want to send a little home, go to a picture
show or two once in a while, buy tobacco, get a few
meals outside of camp, receive a newspaper, buy-
postage stamps, or take care of the other incidental
things you find necessary once you get in camp?
And don’t forget, the cost of living is shooting up.
The corporations are making money hand over
fist. Why shouldn’t we receive at least a WPA
wage—s6o per month? Yes, sir, if we’re fighting to
preserve democracy, let’s begin by having a decent
wage in the array.
BILL: I got a letter from Joe Kovac last week.
He’s an old friend of mine. We used to play foot-
ball together in high school. He’s in a camp down
South and told me about some other things that
need fixing. All during winter they lived in tents
with dinky coal stoves in them. They haven’t even
started to put up enough barracks for the men.
The toilets are terrible, and there aren’t enough of
them.
Joe didn’t use to be too particular about his
food, but he says that the stuff down there is slop.
One of his favorite jokes for a while was to look at
another guy’s plate, then look at him and say, “Are
you going to eat that—Oß HAVE YOU?”
LEFTY: And that army chow can be terrible,
believe me. I was in a CMTC camp for a couple
of summers, and I know.


BILL; Another thing Joe beefed about was that
there wasn’t much leisure time. They about drill
you to death. He said that the recreation facilities
were a joke. Another thing that Joe howled about
was the profiteering that went on at the camp
stores where you can buy a few extras—if you have
the money. Joe said he was going to write a letter
to Roosevelt about it—or maybe Willkie; he didn’t
know which—it’s so hard to tell them apart any
more. Not that he expected to get an answ r er, any-
way. Another thing was the cost of tobacco.
LEFTY: Well, there you are. One simple an-
swer to some of these things would be to have camp
stores with goods sold at cost—and tax free. As for
this business of recreation, there ought to be plenty
of time for it, and plenty of money spent for equip-
ment, instead of the dribble that is now grudgingly
spent. There ought to be facilities for swimming,
playing basketball, tennis, soft ball, ping pong,
handball, and all other sports. They shouldn’t be
limited to the officers alone. Remember—democ-
racy’s the word!
The men ought to have the right to have social,
cultural, and discussion groups, under their own
control, without the brass hats snooping around.
That brings up another thing.
The men in every outfit should have the right to
get together , and have bull-sessions on any subject,
including what’s wrong with the country, the army,
and their particular outfit. The men ought to


have the right to send out mail without any cen-
sorship whatever. And they should likewise have
the right to receive any book, magazine or news-
paper, whether Colonel Whoozis thinks the “CIO
News” or the “American Federationist” is com-
MUNist propaganda or not. The men should have
every right to discuss political problems and to
mimeograph or print camp papers containing their
opinions, without being censored by some shave-
tail fresh from the ROTC and college tea dances.
The men ought to have the right to vote in all elec-
tions.
BILL: What about the Negroes in this whole
set-up?
LEFTY; Well, what do you think?
BILL: I think that they should be treated the
same way that we treat them in the Local. They
should have all the rights that the white soldier
has. That means that they should have the right
to serve in all the services, including the air corps.
They should have the same rights as others to be-
come officers. I’m opposed to all jim-crowism in
the army. I’m opposed to Negroes being made
servants to horses and officers, to being waiters, and,
in general, to their doing the dirty work in the
army, A Negro’s blood is just as red as ours when
he’s wounded, and when he’s killed he’s just as
dead as we whites are.
It's about time that they applied a little of this
“democracy” talk to the Negro. Doggone it, I


really get hot under the collar when I talk on this
subject. When I was a kid and the old man was
blacklisted in the steel mills, we moved into a negro
neighborhood, and I know that all this they say
about the Negro is just so much baloney.
LEFTY: I agree with you too per cent. And it
makes me mad, too. During peace time, capitalists
leave to the Negro the worst shacks to live in;
break the dishes after he’s through, if he dares to
eat in a white restaurant; make him use separate
toilets in the South; curse his life with continual
unemployment or employment at filthy, under-
paid tasks; prevent him from voting by sticking
him with a poll tax that he can’t possibly pay; and
lynch him when he dares protest—or lynch him for
no reason at all except that he’s black. But when
the robbers’ war comes he’s plenty good enough
to defend that Fine Old American Democracy
against that man Hitler, who treats the Jews so
brutally.
BILL: Well, here’s a prize lot of grievances. How
are we going about settling them—through com-
mittees, elected by the men the way we do at the
shop?
LEFTY: Sure, why not? In union there is
strength. The army is just like the employer. The
brass hats like to take up the grievances individ-
ually, “man to man.” It’s easier to handle inex-
perienced persons that way.


BILL; It looks like we might have a little fun
in this army after all!
LEFTY; Whoa, not too fast! Take your time.
The first thing you have to do is to learn the ropes.
Don’t try any one-man reform campaigns, or in ad-
dition to the officers riding you, you’ll become
known as a screwball to the men. You’ve got to
learn the soldiering business from A to Z, too. The
men respect that, just as they respect a fellow who
can really put out the work at the shop. Then you
will speak with additional authority. You’ll have
to be a regular guy, too—but you won’t have any
trouble being that.
By doing all this, you and your ideas will gain
great influence among the men. That influence
will increase under the horrors of war and the
hardships at home. Then, one of these not too dis-
tant days, we will be able to stop this war and be-
gin the reconstruction of the country on a really
democratic basis.
When enough of the men understand what the
score is, discipline and a lot of other things will be
taken care of. There’s plenty of discontent right
now. You’d be surprised how not having hot water,
for instance, can change a person’s outlook on life.
And don’t worry—there are plenty of these ser-
geants who have been influenced by seeing too
many Hollywood movies about the army, who have
been given the once-over-lightly in back of the bar-
racks by one of the boys in the squad. It’s those who


don’t learn what’s behind everything and what
they should fight for within the army that find it
hard sledding. They become the suicides and the
mental cases.
BILL: Mac, down at the gas station, told me a
joke that sums up this army discipline;
“Major," the colonel yells, “take this man out
and shoot him!"
“But, colonel,” the major says, “this man is en-
titled to a fair trial.”
“O. K.,” says the colonel, “give him a fair trial,
AND THEN TAKE HIM OUT AND SHOOT
HIM!”
Speaking of officers, what if I have a chance to
become one?
LEFTY: Grab it. You can show the men a new
kind of officer. You won’t be one of those “throw
in another ten thousand men” kind. You’ll help
preserve the men, help save those who don’t want
to be heroes, especially dead heroes, but feel that
it’s expected of them. If the brass hats want to
make an officer of you, knowing what your ideas
are and that you’re going to keep them, that’s their
look-out. All the training that you and the hun-
dreds of others all over this country like you can
get will prove its worth when the time comes for
the organization of the great people’s army out of
the prisoners’ army we have now.
BILL; “People’s army”—what’s that?
LEFTY; That’s the army we work to create. It


will be controlled by us, with our own officers,
democratically elected from the ranks. It’s the
army which will be free of all those flaws that we
talked about in the bosses’ army you’re entering.
It's the army that will fight the fascists at home,
not create fascists the way the old Spanish army
created Franco. It’s the army that will really fight
Hitler, not throw in the sponge as the French cap-
italists did because they were more afraid of the
workers than they were of Hitler.
To back up a people’s army we will have to have
a workers’ government, made up of our people
from the ranks of the military services, the fac-
tories, the farms and the unemployed. It won’t be
Wall Street’s government. It will be a government
that will conclude an honest peace, destroy fascism,
and take over the land, factories, mines, oil and
gas pipelines, ships, railroads, truck, bus and air
lines, radio networks, newspapers, movies, schools
and colleges—and run them, not for the benefit of
the gilded few but for the nation as a whole.
In short, the country will be given back to those
who created it. Unemployment will disappear over-
night. The amazing possibilities of socialist pro-
duction will become plain to all. Socialism will
spread like wildfire over the western hemisphere.
Capitalist Europe wall crash under the attack of the
European working class, which will once more
show its limitless courage. A new era will begin
for the world.


BILL; You know, to some fellows the future
seems almost hopeless, but I don’t feel that way at
all. It seemed black during the last war, too. But
Russia struck off her Czarist chains. It will be the
same this time, but bigger. I know that the sol-
diers in Hitler’s army don’t feel any happier about
this war than we do. The time will soon come
when they will take things in their own hands.
One of the first steps in this country, 1 think, is
going to be, and should be, the development of an
independent labor party opposed to both the re-
publicans and the democrats.'
I don’t worry because there seem to be so few
people who know what the events of today really
mean. You, me, and Jim Morrow—just us three—
began to organize the plant. But before we knew r
it there were a lot of swell boys— smart, too—in
there pitching with us. And we didn’t even know
them before. It will be like that in the fight for
socialism. With simple ideas that reflect what
people want you can move millions. We all saw
that during the CIO drive. It’s like a ten-year-old
kid who has a jack and knows what to do with it.
He can lift a ten-ton tractor-trailer combination
off its wheels as easy as spitting.
LEFTY: That’s right. Events will change every-
thing. A time will come when the men in the army
will refuse any longer to see their friends mutilated
for life or blown to bits in a war not of their own


making, seeing in the death of their friends the
fate that all too likely will overtake them at any
moment too. Nor are working men and women
going to suffer at home—while seeing ahead the
greatest economic crash and depression the world
has ever seen ready to set in after the war. I am
convinced of that, too. . . .
BILL; Uh—oh. Lefty, it’s 11:30. I’ll have to go.
Let me have those Workers Party pamphlets you
told me about. .
Well, you’ve certainly cleared up a lot of things
in my mind. It sounds pretty good, too. I know I
don’t have any arguments to offer. I’ll write you
from camp and let you know how things shape up.
And don’t you forget to write me, either. Well, so
long, Lefty.
LEFTY: Don’t worry; you’ll hear from me. So
long. Bill.


• OUR PROGRAM
• Not a Man, Not a Cent, for Wall
Street’s War! No Convoys! Against
Both Imperialist War Camps.
• Conscript the War Industries Under
Workers’ Control!
• Thirty Hours a Week! Minimum
$3O a Week! Time and a half wages for overtime
above 30 hours. For increased wages to meet the rising
cost of living.
• No Government Contract Without a
Union Contract!
Let the People Vote on War! no dicta-
tor decision on whether or not we go to war. Let the
people decide by referendum, giving the vote to all the
people from the age of 18 upwards.
• A Capital Levy to Cover War Costs!
No Indirect Taxes on the Pople!
Down with Jim Crow and Anti-Sem-
itism ! Complete Economic, Political and Social Equal-
ity for the Negroes in the Country at Large and Espe-
cially in the Army!
• Down with Anti-Labor, Anti-Demo-
cratic, Anti-Alien Legislation!


AINST THE WAR
FOR THE DRAFTEES:
• Former Employers Must Pay the
Wage Differential and Guarantee the
Return of the Job.
Double the Wages of the Draftees!
• The Right of the Soldiers to Free
Speech, Free Press and Free Assembly
in the Camps.
• Workers’ Defense Guards! A Peo-
ple’s Army!
• . An Independent Labor Party and a
Workers’ Government!
• FOR PEACE THROUGH SOCIAL-
ISM ! For the Socialist United States of
the Americas, for the Socialist United
States of Europe, for the World Social
ist Federation.
Join The Workers Party!!


SPECIAL TXTRODUCtURY OFFE
3 Month Subscription—Only 25c .
Regular articles and news on the war, problems
affecting Negro and white workers, unemploy-
ment, trade union news, etc.
LABOR ACTION
W / eekly Newspaper of the Workers Party
Be sure to get every issue—SUBSCRIBE NOW!
