

PLAN FOR THE METROPOLITAN REGION
PERTH AND FREMANTLE 1955 REPORT




PLAN FOR THE METROPOLITAN REGION
PERTH AND FREMANTLE 1955 REPORT
This is the companion volume to the Atlas, which
contains the survey and proposals maps, and which
is separately bound




Perth from Kings Park. Through thoughtful action in the past,
the lovely setting of the Capital City of Western Australia
has been enhanced rather than destroyed.




PLAN FOR THE
METROPOLITAN REGION
PERTH AND FREMANTLE
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
1955
A Report prepared for the Government of
Western Australia by GORDON STEPHENSON,
M.C.P., B.Arch., F.R.1.8.A., M.T.P.1., A.1.L.A.,
Consultant, and J. A. HEPBURN, A.R.1.C.5.,
A.M.T.P.1., M.A.P.1., Town Planning Commissioner
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE,
PERTH, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
By Authority : REG. A. NICHOLAS, ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER




FOREWORD
By the Minister for Town Planning, Western Australian Government,
Hon. Gilbert Fraser, M.L.C.
The need for an overall Plan for the Metropolitan Region of Perth and Fremantle has
been apparent to most thinking people for many years.
These two cities, one the State Capital and one the principal seaport and the Western
Gateway to the State, have grown at a surprising rate since the first settlement took place,
and it seems clear that expansion will go forward. They now form part of a large metropolis
on both sides of the Swan River and it is important to all of us that the metropolis grows
in a way of which we can be proud.
We have, perhaps, an ideal opportunity in that while the Metropolitan Region is clearly
at the beginning of large expansion, development has not proceeded too far to prevent us
correcting many of the faults which are apparent in the large cities of the world today.
Ido not think anyone will quarrel with the principles of town planning. It is, after
all, very logical when carrying out any work, be it building a house or a boat or a city or
running a business, to look ahead, assess the difficulties, and programme the work in accord-
ance with a design or plan.
In a democracy where the rights of the individual are of paramount importance it is
not always easy to follow a set pattern of development, although there must always be cases
where community interest should override the ambitions and schemes of the individual.
We must, therefore, retain a flexibility of thought on these matters and adapt ourselves to
changing conditions and times/ Similarly, any planning scheme which is adopted must
be sufficiently flexible to meet changing requirements without losing the broad principles
of development.
No Plan for the Metropolitan Region could be adopted and work efficiently without
the support of the public.
By commissioning this Report and Plan and making it available to the public, the
Government have taken the first step in achieving an overall Plan for the Metropolitan
Region.
All aspects of past development and future requirements have been fully discussed and
are now being made available in this form for your thought, approval and criticism. Out
of this I am convinced can be achieved a workable Plan for the Metropolitan Region of
Perth and Fremantle.
It will involve full co-operation and support from all of us living and working in this
important Region and this I am sure will not be lacking.
Gilbert Fraser




CONTENTS
Page
FOREWORD iii
LIST OF TABLES vii
LIST OF DIAGRAMS ix
LIST OF PHOTOGRAPHS AND DRAWINGS xi
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS xv
INTRODUCTION K
SUMMARY 7
Chapter 1 HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT 19"
Chapter 2 THE REGION IN RELATION TO THE STATE .. .. 25“
Chapter 3 PEOPLE 37
Chapter 4 WORK 45
Chapter 5 THE LAND AND ITS USE 75
Chapter 6 OUTDOOR RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE .. .. 89
Chapter 7 COMMUNICATIONS AND PUBLIC SERVICES .. .. 105
Chapter 8 STANDARDS OF DEVELOPMENT 145
Chapter 9 CENTRAL AREAS : PERTH AND FREMANTLE .. .. 157 "
Chapter 10 SOME GENERAL AND ADDITIONAL PROPOSALS .. .. 201
Chapter 11 IMPLEMENTATION 239
Appendix I SUGGESTED FORM OF CONTROL OF RESIDENTIAL
DENSITIES 261
Appendix II THE PLANNING ORDINANCE 277
Appendix 111 SUGGESTED FORM OF DAYLIGHTING CONTROL IN
CENTRAL AREAS WITH PARTICULAR REFERENCE TO
OFFICE BUILDINGS 287
Appendix IV SPECIAL STUDY: DISTRICT CENTRES 299
INDEX 305




TABLES
Chapter 2 p age
1 : Net Value of production : Western Australia : 1948-53 .. 27
2 : Net Value of production : Western Australia : primary
industries : 1948-53 .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
3 : Net value of production : Western Australia : manufacturing
industries : 1948-53 .. .. .. .. .. .. 28
4 : Distribution of work force : Western Australia : 1947 .. 28
5 : Distribution of work force : Metropolitan Region : 1947 .. 30
Chapter 3
6 : Existing and proposed distribution of population .. .. 44
Chapter 4
7 : Employment of the population .. .. .. .. .. 47
8 : Comparative distribution of work force : 1947 .. .. 48
9 : Work force : comparative percentages : 1947 .. .. 48
10 : Projected distribution of work force : Metropolitan Region 48
11 : Employment by types of manufacturing industry : Perth and
Melbourne .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 53
12 : Employment by types of manufacturing industry : Perth and
hypothetical city .. .. .. .. .. .. 53
13 : Distribution by location of employment in each class of manu-
facturing industry : 1951-52 : Metropolitan Region .. 55
14 : Comparative factory sizes : Perth and Melbourne .. .. 58
15 : Sizes of factories : 1951-52 : Metropolitan Region .. .. 59
16 : Employment in manufacturing industry by classes and sectors :
1951-52 59
17 : Employment in manufacturing industry by classes of industry
and employment : 1951-52 .. .. .. .. .. 60
18 : Employment in manufacturing industry : proportion of males
to females : by sectors : 1951-52 .. .. .. .. 61
19 : Employment in manufacturing industry : proportion of males
to females by class of industry : 1951-52 .. .. .. 62
20 : Location coefficient : Commonwealth j Region : 1947 .. 62
21 : Comparative densities : manufacturing industry .. .. 63
22 : Land requirements for manufacturing industry .. .. 65
23 : Summary of proposed industrial zones .. .. .. 70
24 : Value of buildings erected in Western Australia : 1948-54 .. 72
25 : Employment in shops and warehouses : 1953 .. .. 74
Chapter 5
26 : Existing and proposed density of development .. .. 86
Chapter 6
27 : Requirements of sporting associations . ♦ .. .. .. 93
28 : Standards of open space provision .. .. .. .. 95
29 : Existing open space .. .. .. .. .. .. 102
, 30 : Proposed open space ... .. .. .. .. 103


Chapter 7 Page
31 : Road bridges .. ♦ • • • • • • ♦ • ♦ * *
32 : Mileage of roads .. .. ♦ • • ♦ • • • • • • 11®
33 : Fatal road accidents in Australian capital cities .. .. 11l
34: Traffic volumes .. .. •• •• •• ••
35 : Vehicle registration in the Metropolitan Region .. .. 114
36 : Growth of vehicle registration 114
Chapter 8
37 : Housing densities .. ♦ • • • • ♦ • ♦ • • • • 147
38 : Proportions of land uses and densities • ♦ • • • • 150
Chapter 9
Perth Central Area
39 : Existing use and floor space area 159
40 : Existing and proposed floor space summary 160
41 : Shopping employment, 1953 .. .. ♦ • ♦ • • • 1°“
42 : Shopping employment summary .. • • • • ♦ • 170
43 : Warehousing employment 170
44 : Estimated industrial employment .. • ♦ ♦ • • ♦ 171
45 : Estimated existing and future employment : summary .. 172
46 : Present and estimated peak traffic flow .. ♦ • ♦ • 173
Fremantle Central Area
47 : Road traffic growth .. • • ♦ ♦ • • • • • • I®9
48 : Existing and proposed floor space summary .. .. • • 194
Chapter 10
49 : Summary of proposals : residential districts .. .. • • 212
Chapter 11
50 : Personal income, public development and revenue funds .. 255
51 : Value of building construction .. .. .. • • • • 256
52 : Public developmental expenditure .. • • • ♦ • • 256
53 : State Treasury Loan Fund expenditure .. .. • ♦ 257
54 : Estimated public development funds : 1955—60 .. .. 257
Appendix 1
55 : Schedule of maximum plot ratios : residential development .. 266
Appendix II
56 : Use classes .. .. .. • ♦ • • ♦ • • ♦ ♦ ♦ 280
57: Zoning table .. .. ♦ ♦ ♦ • ♦ • • • • •


DIAGRAMS
Chapter 1 Page
1 : Growth of the South-Western part of the State .. .. 23
Chapter 2
2 : Statistical divisions : Western Australia and South-Western
part of the State .. .. .. .. .. .. 26
3 : Administrative areas : Metropolitan Region .. .. .. 29
4 : External trade flow : Western Australia .. .. .. 33
Chapter 3
5 : Population increase .. .. .. .. .. .. 38
6 : Growth of closely settled areas .. .. .. .. .. 42
7 : Distribution of population : existing and proposed .. .. 43
Chapter 4
8 : Comparative distribution of work forces : 1947 .. .. 46
9 : Percentage of work force engaged in various industries :
1901-1947 : Metropolitan Region .. .. .. .. 50
10 : Employment in Manufacturing Industry : 1908-1953 : West-
ern Australia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 51
11 : Annual increase or decrease in employment in Manufacturing
Industry : 1908-1953 : Western Australia .. .. .. 52
12 : Manufacturing Industry : proposed distribution of employ-
ment in relation to place of living .. .. .. .. 67
Chapter 5
13 : Existing density of development .. .. .. .. 84
14 : Proposed density of development .. .. .. .. 85
Chapter 6
15 : Ocean beaches .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 96
16 : Existing and proposed public open space .. .. .. 104
Chapter 7
17 : Growth of the main road system .. .. .. .. 106
18: Road traffic intensity .. .. .. .. .. .. 115
19: Communications: present .. .. .. .. .. 118
20: Communications: future .. .. .. .. .. 119
21 : Typical road sections .. .. .. .. .. .. 124
22 : Stirling Highway : hourly rate of vehicular flow .. .. 126
23 : Suggested form of treatment for improving traffic flow on
existing highways in urban areas .. .. .. .. 127
24 : Suburban railways : Perth and Melbourne .. .. .. 131


Chapter 9 Pa S e
Perth Central Area
25 : Simplified development proposals .. .. ♦ • • ♦ 162
26 : Plot Ratios : explanatory examples .. .. .. • ♦ 163
27 : Plot Ratios : existing and proposed .. .. • • 164-165
28 : Traffic flow at City cordon .. .. ♦ • • • • ♦ 173
29 : Daily accumulation of vehicles .. .. • • •• • • 177
30 : Pedestrian traffic in Hay Street .. .. • • • • • • I®®
31 : Access ways within a central city block .. .. • • 181
Fremantle Central Area
32 : Traffic flow at City cordon .. .. • • • • • • 190
33 : Daily accumulation of vehicles .. .. • • • • • • 190
34 : Simplified development proposals * * * * “ • • 192
35 : Plot Ratios : existing and proposed .. .. .. • • 196
Chapter 10
36 : Public health : distribution of public hospitals .. • • 205
37 : University environs : proposed development .. .. •. 207
38 : Secondary education : distribution of schools .. .. 209
Appendix I
39 : Siting of residential buildings : definition of terms .. .. 267
40 : Siting of residential buildings : distances to site boundaries 268
41 : Siting of residential buildings : distances to street alignment 268
42-49 : Examples of site layout : residential buildings .. 269-276
Appendix 111
50 : Natural illumination : Perth compared with London .. 288
51 : Theoretical assumptions .. .. .. .. ♦ • • • 289
52 : Daylighting control : Angles A and 8., .. .. • • 290
53 : Daylighting control : Typical examples .. .. • • 291
54 : Existing office development .. .. .. • • 292
55 : Cross section through development permitted under existing
by-laws .. .. .. .. • • • • • • ♦ ♦ 293
56 : Typical office development permitted under existing by-laws 293
57 : Possible office development in individual units .. .. 294
58 : Possible office development as a single comprehensive unit .. 294
59 : Daylighting control : tower development. Angles C and D 295
60 : Examples of possible development .. .. .. • • 296
61 : Summary of angular controls .. .. .. ♦ • • • 297
62 : Optimum site development .. .. .. ♦ • • • 297
63 : Relationship between Plot Ratio and daylighting control .. 297
Appendix IV
64 : Redevelopment of an existing centre in an inner urban area .. 303
65 : Expansion of a centre in a detached town : Armadale .. 304


PHOTOGRAPHS AND DRAWINGS
Frontispiece : Perth from Kings Park
Chapter 1
1 : Perth in 1829 "
2 : Early rural scene at Upper Swan .. .. .. .. I
3 : " Diggers ” at Kanowna, 1898 ..
4 : One of the first teams to leave for the Eastern Goldfields, 1890
Between
Pages
24
and
25
Chapter 2
5 : The Port of Fremantle : the Inner Harbour and Cockburn -
Sound
6 : Drilling for oil on Bore No. 1, Rough Range, Exmouth Gulf y
7 : Assessing the Fair Average Quality of wheat, Fremantle ..
8 : Loading wool at Fremantle .. .. .. .. .. -
24
and
25
9 : The Opening of State Parliament in Perth .. .. .. "
10 : Trotting meeting, Gloucester Park, Perth
11 : Arrival of migrant ship, Fremantle
12 : Children at play on a metropolitan beach
32
and
33
Chapter 4
13 : Market gardens and nurseries, Spearwood
14 : Part of the fishing fleet in harbour, Fremantle .. .. I
15 : Belmont: industry interspersed with housing
16 : Transition of housing to industry near Perth Central Area .. _
48
and
49
17 : Industrial congestion, North Perth
18 : Planned industrial area, Dallas, Texas, U.S.A.
19 : Kwinana : beginning of work on oil refinery
20 : Kwinana : refinery nearing completion
21 : A modem factory, Fremantle .. .. .. .. • • f
22 : A modern factory, Innaloo
23 : Work in progress on the Royal Perth Hospital
24 : Workmen engaged on the State Housing Commission project
at Medina .. .. .. • ♦ • • • • • • _
56
and
57
Chapter 5
25 : Central Perth from the air .. .. .. ..
26 : Typical landscape of the coastal plain ..
27 : Vineyards in the Swan Valley ..
28 : Mundaring Weir in the Darling Ranges .. ..
29 : Sand-dune country near City Beach
30 : Orchards, Kalamunda, in the Darling Ranges
31 : Osborne Park in 1939
32 : Flooding at Morley Park .. .. .. .. .. J
80
and
81


Chapter 6
33 : Children’s playground, Cottesloe Civic Centre .. .. '
34 : Stirling Gardens, Perth
35 : Rosalie Park, Subiaco
36 : Underpass, Greenbelt, Maryland, U.S.A.
37 : City Beach .. .. .. • • • ♦ • • • • • •
38 : Proposed coastal reservation, Point Peron
39 : The Swan River at Peppermint Grove
40 : Hovea Falls, Forrest National Park
41 : White Lake, Rockingham
42 : Kings Park, Perth .. .. .. ♦ ♦ • • • • • • -
Between
Pages
96
and
97
Chapter 7
43 : Kings Park Road, Perth ..
44 : The Causeway, Perth
45 : Stirling Highway at Nedlands
46 : Broome Street, Cottesloe .. .. • • • • • • ►
47 : Road interchange system, New York City, U.S.A. ..
48 : Car parking in Perth
49 : The front at Scarborough .. .. .. • •
112
and
113
50 : Marshalling Yards, Jolimont, Melbourne .. .. • •
51 : Diesel Railcars of State Government Railways
52 : Bus queues in St. Georges Terrace, Perth
53 : Harbour scene, Fremantle
54 : Gas Works, East Perth ..
55 : Electric Power Station, South Fremantle
56 : Canning Dam, in the Darling Ranges ..
57 : Rubbish tip at Leighton .. • • • • ♦ • -
128
and
129
Chapter 8
58 : Obsolete residential property, North Perth
59 : Detached dwellings, Subiaco
60 : Flats, North Perth
61 : Flats, Sunnyside, New York City, U.S.A.
62 : Recent housing, Scarborough
63 : Part of an informal layout, Dalkeith ..
64 : Floreat Park
65 : Medina, Kwinana New Town .. .. • • • • •• _
144
and
145


Chapter 9
66 : Lord Street and the Royal Perth Hospital, Perth .. .. "
67 : Hay Street, Perth, 1870 ..
68 : Hay Street, Perth, present day view
69 : St. Georges Terrace, Perth
70 : Aerial view of the Inner Central Area, Perth
►
71 : Murray Street, Perth
72 : Barrack Street Bridge, Perth
73 : Temporary Government Offices, Malcolm Street, Perth
74 : Modern office and flat development, Perth
75 : Sherwood Court, Perth .. .. .. .. ..
Between
Pages
160
and
161
76 : Cultural Centre Perth : area as existing and as proposed .. 1
77 : St. Georges Terrace, looking west to Parliament House .. J
176
and
177
78 : Kalverstraat, Amsterdam ..
79 : High Street, Fremantle, 1890
80 : High Street, Fremantle, present day
81 : Early two-storey terrace, Adelaide Street, Fremantle ..
82 : The Round House, Fremantle ..
83 : Church Gardens, Fremantle .. .. .. .. . . r
84 : Ocean Front, Marine Terrace, Fremantle
85 : Bus congestion in Fremantle
86 : Storage Warehouses, Cantonment Street, Fremantle ..
87 : Proposed Civic Centre, Fremantle : area as existing and as
proposed
192
and
193
Chapter 10
88 : Aerial view of Maylands .. .. .. .. .. .. '
89 : Aerial view of Medina, Kwinana New Town
90 : Albany Highway, Victoria Park
91 : Stonestown, San Francisco, U.S.A.
>
92 : Royal Perth Hospital from Wellington Street
93 : A modern secondary school
94 : The University of Western Australia ..
95 : Model of proposed development of the University Campus .. _
216
and
217




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
PHOTOGRAPHS
A cknowlegment is made to the undermentioned for the use of photographs in
the Report.
Frank Hurley (Nos. 25, 27, 53, 68, 69 and 70).
Gottscho-Schleiner (No. 61).
Gretchen Van Tassell (No. 36).
Bureau of Public Roads, Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
(No. 47).
Department of the Interior, News and Information Bureau (No. 50).
Directeur Publieke Werken, Amsterdam (No. 78).
Fremantle City Council (No. 79).
Stonestown Development Corporation, San Francisco, U.S.A. (No. 91).
The Urban Land Institute, Washington, D.C., U.S.A. (No. 18).
West Australian Newspapers Ltd. (Nos. 1,2, 3,4, 6,7, 9, 10, 12, 31, 32, 48 and 89).
The following photographs were taken specially for inclusion in the Report.
By J. C. Balmer, Government Photographer (Nos. 13, 15, 16, 29, 34, 35, 41, 43, 45,
46, 49, 54, 58, 59, 60, 62, 63, 64, 66, 71, 73, 83 and 90).
By E. Polis (Frontispiece, Nos. 22, 26, 42, 52, 57, 65, 75, 77, 80, 81, 82, 84, 85, 86,
87 and 95).
By C. L. Sexton, Lands and Surveys Department (Nos. 17, 20, 44, 76 and 88).
Other photographs are the property of various Departments of the State Govern-
merit, and have been m'ade available by the Government Printer.
MISCELLANEOUS
Acknowledgment is made to the undermentioned for information and assistance
in preparing the Report.
The Government Statistician : for the use of the Statistical and Regional Map of
Western Australia, 1954, as a basis for Diagram 2 in Chapter 2.
Lands and Surveys Department : for the use of base maps for many Diagrams.
Mines Department : for much of the information contained in Chapter 5.
The Surf Life Saving Association of Australia (Western Australian Branch) : for
information in Diagram 15.
The model of the proposed University Campus (Photograph 95) was made by
Peter Dovell.
The blocks for the photographs and diagrams were prepared by J. Gibbney and
Son, Ltd., Perth.


MEMBERS OF THE STAFF OF THE TOWN PLANNING DEPARTMENT (REGIONAL
PLANNING OFFICE) WHO HAVE BEEN ENGAGED IN THE PREPARATION OF
THE PLAN FOR THE METROPOLITAN REGION OF PERTH AND FREMANTLE.
Senior Planning Officer
T. H. Carline, B.Arch., Dip.C.D. (L’pool), A.R.1.8.A., A.M.T.P.1., M.A.P.I.
Planning Officers
K. N. Birks, B.A. ; D. J. Collins, A.C.I.V. ; P. Dovell, B.Arch., M.C.D. (L’pool), A.R.1.8.A.
A.M.T.P.1., M.A.P.I. ; G. Edwards, M.I.C.E. ; J. L. King, B.Arch., Dip.T.C. P. (Syd.),
A.R.A.1.A., A.R.1.8.A., M.A.P.I. ; A. W. Meecham, B.A.
Officer in Charge Survey and Drafting
L. A. Jones, M.I.C.W.A.
Planning Assistants
A. R. Castledine, A.M.I.C.W.A. ; W. R. Grove, A.F.S. (Eng.) ; G. H. Pedrick ;
A. G. Young, M.I.C.W.A.
Draftsman and Draftswomen
E. Polis ; Miss B. A. Edgar ; Mrs. H. M. Hoy ; Miss J. Young.
Clerks
E. G. Hodgson ; A. F. Horne, 8.A., Dip.J. *
Temporary Assistants
T. R. Davies ; Miss J. Swain ; B. Taylor.
Temporary Typist
Miss H. Farrington, M.A. (Cork). *
Secretary
Miss E. M. Russell.
* Indicates less than 6 months service.
Average number employed over whole period, 19.


INTRODUCTION
At the beginning of January, 1953, when I arrived in Western Australia at the invitation of
the Government, there was virtually no planning organisation to help prepare the Regional Plan
for the Metropolitan Area. Mr. D. L. Davidson, who had been Town Planning Commissioner
for many years, died suddenly in 1952, and Mr. J. A. Hepburn, his successor, came to Perth from
his appointment in Sydney two weeks after my arrival. The Town Planning Board under the
Acting Chairman, Mr. V. L. Steffanoni, had a very small staff which was fully occupied with
the work of subdivisional control, and there were three rooms ready for a Regional Planning
Organisation in the new Public Works Building in Malcolm Street. My terms of reference
were to act as Consultant in the preparation of a Regional Plan for the Metropolitan Area of
Perth and Fremantle.
The need for a Regional Plan had long been obvious. Parliament, local authorities, and
the public were concerned with the rapid outward expansion of the metropolis and growing
congestion in the centres of Perth and Fremantle. In 1952, an Honorary Royal Commission
of the Legislative Council had prepared a short and excellent report on the planning situation
and agreement had been reached between the Government, the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company
and, later, the Broken Hill Proprietary Company, Limited, to begin the vast works at Kwinana
which will have far reaching repercussions both on the economy of the State and the physical
pattern of the Metropolitan Region. The new town of Kwinana had been commenced, the
refinery site was being cleared, dredges were cutting deep channels into Cockburn Sound, a new
cement works was projected near Lake Coogee.
In August, 1953, the announcement was made that oil had been discovered near Exmouth
Gulf. Before this, the Regional Planning Office had estimated that there would be a population
of 1,000,000 in the Metropolitan Region well within the century. Although there was no reason
to doubt this figure, the knowledge that commercial development of new mineral wealth might
be imminent was of importance, if only because it underlined the need for clear proposals for
future development in the Metropolitan Region. In the Region, many of the problems that
beset the older and larger metropolitan areas of the world may be foreseen, and nearly all may be
greatly reduced and in large part sofved if positive and related steps are taken to promote orderly
and systematic growth.
With the arrival of Mr. Hepburn, the first principal task was to discuss ways and means
of preparing the Regional Plan and, of equal importance, the method of keeping it under review
and administering it. The planning needs of the State as a whole had also to be borne in mind.
A small and well balanced planning staff was proposed and its establishment accepted. At the
beginning of 1954 it was a working organisation. By the end of 1954, it had accomplished much
in using techniques and methods which were new to all but a small nucleus. The authors most
gratefully acknowledge the loyal co-operation and hard work of members of staff who have
responded to all demands on their time and their skills.
Although, so far, a great part of the time of the newly formed Town Planning Department
has been devoted to this regional survey and broad statement of planning principles, it will be
fully occupied in the future with a wide range of problems, including those of other regions,
country towns and the innumerable matters of detail within the framework of the Metropolitan
Regional Plan. The latter will arise because planning is a continuous process in which many
must participate. Unless this is recognised it cannot be successful.
From the beginning my relations with Mr. Hepburn have been most cordial. We quickly
established an understanding and we have worked closely together on every aspect of every prob-
lem. The Plan is in every sense an essay in co-operation and should be regarded as such. Indeed,
it is very much more than the result of co-operation between two men of different background


and experience. Senior members of the planning team have made important contributions and
so have the several government departments, local authorities and citizens’ groups of whom we
have made many demands and with whom we have spent many hours in fruitful discussion.
It is quite impossible to prepare a Plan with any hope of its successful adoption and applica-
tion if it is not the result of collective effort or, put in another way, a combination of many
conclusions and plans. Some of these, it is true, might not previously have been formulated
even in principle. Our role at times has been that of a catalyst. But now conclusions con-
cerning the future are assembled in one document embodying and relating ideas of many in-
dividuals and organisations. Although Mr. Hepburn and I must accept full responsibility for
all the proposals, and we do not want to shirk that responsibility, we feel confident that as the
Plan is studied and its implications are presented to the Parliament and the People of the State,
there will be a large measure of agreement which was in part achieved as the work progressed.
It is not possible here to mention and thank all who have helped in ways, large and small,
but particular reference should be made to those with whom we have worked in the closest
collaboration.
Through fortunate circumstances, the Regional Planning Office has been in the same building
as Mr. J. D. Leach, the Commissioner of Main Roads, and his department. Without his very
considerable assistance, as technical adviser, and almost daily contact with members of his staff
expert in traffic engineering, it would have been difficult to reach practical conclusions about a
future arterial road system. This, together with the railway system, provides the main com-
munications framework for the Plan.
The Railway Commissioners, who have had their own plans for some years, have been most
helpful in providing information, technical views, and drawings. With them we have reached
agreement on a solution of the central city railway problem and the location of new lines, but
the Regional Plan suggests an alternative to the sites proposed for the new marshalling yard and
the new goods yard. This is because we envisage the major rail-using industries being established
on the Cockburn Sound-Midland Junction axis, south of the River Swan, and big freight handling
and storage developments in the Belmont-Welshpool area, which is a key point in the Plan.
Mr. R. J. Dumas, when Director of Works and Co-ordinator of Industrial Development,
gave much of his time to discussions about major elements in the Plan, and Mr. J. W. Young,
his successor as Director of Works, has been ready on the frequent occasions when we have
asked his advice to answer all our requests concerning Region and State. His broad vision and
his ability to think well ahead of the present day have given us courage, and insight into problems.
Mr. F. M. Kenworthy, Chief Engineer of the Metropolitan Water Supply, Sewerage and Drainage
Department, with his intimate knowledge of the servicing problems in the Region, has been ready
at all times to help with advice and factual information.
Dr. T. L. Robertson, the Director of Education, and Dr. L. Henzell, the Commissioner of
Public Health, have at our request prepared outline plans for Educational and Health systems
for a metropolitan population of more than 1,000,000. These important statements of principle
are included in the overall Regional Plan. Their suggestions establish a series of major focal
points for community development. To complete the picture of very large institutional buildings
concerned with the health, safety and welfare of the community we had discussions concerning
Mental Hospitals with Dr. E. J. T. Thompson, Inspector General of Mental Hospitals, and as
regards a major prison site with Mr. A. Mackillop, Comptroller General of Prisons, and Mr.
A. H. Waterer, Superintendent of Fremantle Prison. Proposals in the Plan result from the
discussions.


Mr. W. V. Fyfe, the Surveyor General, and his Superintendent of Mapping, Mr. P. Stanley,
have given us much useful advice and, in addition, the Lands Department has helped in preparing
maps and finished drawings. Without this contribution, it would not have been possible to
complete the work. On matters concerned with the broad principles of land use and trends
of development, we have been in close touch with the State Housing Commission. Mr. R. W.
Brownlie, when Chairman of the Commission, gave us an outline of policy, and latterly Mr.
A. E. Clare, as Chairman, has given advice drawn from his many years’ experience in planning,
housing, and architecture.
Industry in the Region may be classed under two main headings, primary and secondary.
The first will continue to expand because many of the vegetables and fruits for the metropolitan
market must always be produced in the Region. Secondary industry will develop on a con-
siderable scale as the Region becomes a great manufacturing centre. Mr. G. K. Baron Hay,
Director, Department of Agriculture, has given valuable advice on the agricultural potential both
as regards soils and economic demands, and his Department has supplied us with mapped in-
formation. Mr. D. O. Temby, of the Department of Industrial Development, has acted as
adviser on the location of industry, and he has also referred projects to us.
Without the assistance of the Government Statistician, Mr. R. J. Little, and his staff, we
should have found it difficult, if not impossible, to have interpreted statistical evidence on which
the plan is based. We have also been fortunate in enjoying close relations with Mr. G. S.
Lindsay, Under Secretary of the Local Government Department, and with Mr. A. E. White,
Assistant Secretary, with whom we had fruitful discussions when he was preparing his Report
on Local Government Boundaries.
Of the several other Government officers and chief officers of Boards and Trusts who have
helped whenever we have asked for general or specific advice or information, some should be
mentioned because of their direct contribution to the Plan. Mr. F. W. E. Tydeman, the General
Manager of the Fremantle Harbour Trust not only gave generous assistance but also encouraged
us to think beyond the period envisaged in the Plan. This was wise as it should never be assumed
that growth in the Region will stop in'4o or 50 years’ time. Mr. J. H. H. Napier, General Manager
of the Western Australian Government Tramways and Ferries gave us important short and long
term views on public transport problems in the area of central Perth and the immediate suburbs.
Mr. T. C. Rowland, Manager of the Midland Junction Abattoir Board, helped with information
on the growth of the Abattoirs in the expanding Region. He also emphasised the great necessity
for adequate holding paddocks. Mr. F. C. Edmondson, General Manager of the State Electricity
Commission, has always been ready to supply information and to talk about the future, and both
he and Mr. Kenworthy are in agreement with the main proposals, which should help determine
a programme for the supply of services.
Mr. Justice Woolf, and the chief officers of the Museums and Library Board discussed their
own plans with us, and we reached agreement that the Arts, Library and Museum group should
develop in the existing central location, with expansion on adjoining land as redevelopment takes
place. On general and particular transport and traffic problems, Mr. W. H. Howard and other
members of the Transport Board, and Inspector Richardson, of the Traffic Branch of the Police
Department, have helped with information on every occasion when problems requiring solution
were put to them.
Mr. A. C. Harris, the Conservator of Forests, and Mr. G. W. M. Nunn, Management and
Working Plans Officer, gave us a lucid exposition of the economic and arboricultural aspects of
forestry in the Region, as well as drawings and constructive proposals. The National Fitness
Council agreed that the Director, Mr. E. Halliday, in co-operation with sporting organisations,


should conduct a survey of playing field needs. This has proved to be of great value in estimating
the amount of open space required in the future. Discussions with Mr. H. A. Ellis, the Govern-
ment Geologist, have helped us considerably in making our appreciation of geological factors
affecting the planning of the Region.
Special reference should be made to three chief officers, who while not proffering information
or technical advice, have been most generous in giving wider views as the preparation of the Plan
progressed. They are Mr. A. J. Reid, formerly Under Treasurer, Mr. H. E. Smith, Under
Secretary of the Lands and Surveys Department, and Mr. R. J. Bond, Under Secretary of the
Public Works Department. Their wise counsel was drawn from long experience and an under-
standing of the many problems facing both State and Region.
From time to time we have consulted Commonwealth Departments. Advice and informa-
tion were generously given by the Postmaster-General’s Department, the three Service Depart-
ments and the Department of Civil Aviation. Mr. Brentwood and his staff of the Industrial
Welfare Division, Department of Labour and National Service, Melbourne, have been extremely
helpful with investigations and data related to the daylighting of buildings. We were doubly
fortunate in that Mr. Steffanoni, the Chief Valuer, Taxation Department, was able to supply
valuable maps and information and also to present expert planning views, which he has formed
after long being a member, and at one time Acting Chairman, of the Town Planning Board.
From the beginning the closest touch has been maintained with the Town Planning Board.
This was not only through the Chairman, Mr. Hepburn, joint author of this Report and Plan,
but also in special meetings at which all aspects of the main planning problems were discussed.
The important accomplishments of the Town Planning Board during the past two decades are
not generally realised. It is true that their work has been limited, chiefly through lack of staff
and legislation which needs revision, but the improvements of details of layout throughout the
Region, and the preservation of river frontage for the public, are largely the result of their work.
Although we have not been able to meet all the local authority councils of the Region,
we have had general discussions with quite a number, and a series of technical discussions
with officers. Quite naturally, as the greatest and most urgent problems are in their central
areas, our talks with the senior officers of the Perth and Fremantle City Councils have been
numerous. At all stages, we have enjoyed close technical and professional co-operation with
Mr. W. A. Mel. Green and Mr. N. J. McCombe the Town Clerks, and with Mr. C. S. Paterson
and Mr. K. G. Bott, the City Engineers. In addition, every local authority in the Region was
asked to prepare a memorandum setting out main points or ideas concerning their district for
our consideration. Most of the local authorities sent detailed replies. These we have carefully
analysed, and it will be noted that the majority of the main points made are incorporated in the
Plan. Some of the minor points do not come within the scope of the regional study. They
should be more appropriately considered when detailed plans are prepared within the regional
framework.
Of bodies and organisations outside Government and Local Government, valuable con-
tributions have been made by the Chamber of Manufactures, the Chambers of Commerce of
both Perth and Fremantle, the Central Ratepayers’ Association, the Retail Traders’ Association
and the Surf Life Saving Association. We have had informal talks with their senior officers and
received special memoranda setting out the views of their Councils in a form which has been
most useful. As noted in the Report, the Chamber of Manufactures undertook a special sample
survey, thus filling a gap in the knowledge we were able to gather from the official statistics pub-
lished by the State and the Commonwealth.


In order to obtain a general view from the professional bodies most directly concerned with
planning, a special joint committee was set up at our request, including members nominated by
the State Councils of the Australian Planning Institute, the Royal Australian Institute of Architects,
the Institution of Surveyors, and the Institution of Engineers. We were fortunate in that the
views presented to us were, in general, very much in agreement with our own. The only major
point of difference was that the committee believed the central railway line through Perth should
be eliminated to permit the growth of the City northwards, assuming that passenger rail traffic
in the future would become obsolete. As an alternative they favoured complete sinking of the
railway below ground. For reasons which are given in the Report we recommend a partial
sinking, and are certainly convinced that far from becoming obsolete, suburban passenger rail
traffic should increase greatly in importance.
Mention must be made of assistance from the University. Professor Bayliss, when Acting
Vice-Chancellor, made introductions to staff members with knowledge of various aspects of the
development of State and Region. Mr. S. L. Prescott, the Vice-Chancellor, has assisted us
formally and informally whenever we have looked to the University for help. Professor Bayliss,
Professor Underwood and Professor Mauldon have, perhaps unwittingly, made contributions
as a result of informal but valuable conversations on different occasions and in various places.
Dr. Crowley has made a direct contribution in the form of a Chapter in the Report. His back-
ground material gives balance to the picture we have tried to present. This is also the appropriate
place to mention the students who played an important part in traffic census counts taken in
1954, and in the Survey of the Central Area of Perth, on which, although under our direction,
they were employed by the Perth City Council. Their work was not exciting but it was essential,
and it is to be hoped that they, and other students, will always take more than a passing interest
in the planning and development of the Region and State.
There are many persons and organisations, not mentioned in this Report, who deserve our
thanks for their interest in the Plan. As compared with the planning organisations for the Metro-
politan Regions of Melbourne and Sydney, we have not had a special information or public
relations branch in the planning office. Despite this, or perhaps because of it, neither Mr.
Hepburn nor I have failed to agred to a request, from any organisation or group of citizens, to
give a talk or to join in a general discussion. We have always felt it of vital importance that
there should be an informed public opinion about planning matters, being firmly convinced
that planning should be a way of doing things together after full discussion. Although there
are many special official and private interests to be taken into account, it is in the end the general
public interest which should be paramount.
The Press and the Radio are the great media which stimulate an informed public opinion
and provoke discussion. Both have been generous and fair in their treatment of any planning
matters which could, and should, be discussed before the Plan was presented to the Government
and Parliament. It would seem certain that in the immediate future, when critical decisions
must be taken, the Press and Radio will continue to be helpful in recording views as well as
information.
It is to be hoped that both Parliament and the People will agree that our proposals are
realistic and practical. We have resisted the many temptations of pure theory and, so far as is
humanly possible, we have tried to be realistic in every decision. Although the scale of the
work we present may seem great, it should always be borne in mind that growth on this scale is
inevitable. If there are doubts they can only be about the rate of growth which has been
assumed, and this factor is relatively unimportant. Whether the Region reaches the population
figure, on which the Plan is based, in 40 or 60 years does not invalidate a single proposal ; nor
should it in any fundamental way change a programme of priorities which must be established.


With or without a comprehensive Plan, the Region will continue to grow. Every year
ui mg and population sufficient to establish a substantial country town is added to the whole.
With a plan, and adequate governmental machinery at state and local levels, great waste of time
ffiTh? Mr r “If av oided, and telling economies effected. The cities and communities
of the hlondT^ ton Region could grow in a spacious and orderly arrangement on either side
ot the broad Swan River as convenient, happy places.
Decisions taken now will mean much to this as well as succeeding generations. It is a time
or practical men, but also for bold and courageous action. Western Australia has had its full
share of audacious, far-sighted men. What they achieved is truly remarkable. It is nothing
compared with what could be achieved in the future 8
GORDON STEPHENSON
February, 1955.


SUMMARY OF PROPOSALS
This summary does not attempt to include all the points made in the body of the Report,
nor does it include many facts, figures or supporting evidence. It is intended as a general review
giving a broad indication of the scope and nature of the Survey and Plan.
The Metropolitan Region of Perth and Fremantle has not yet grown beyond limits which
make improvement exceedingly difficult, if not impossible. The future, at least in terms of
population and material progress, promises to be much greater than the past. In the next half
century it would seem inevitable that the Region should grow at a greater rate than the rest of
the State. In that period the State will probably gain more than 1,000,000 inhabitants. At the
present time there are approximately 400,000 persons in the Metropolitan Region defined in
the Plan, and 250,000 in the rest of the vast State. Within 50 years the Metropolitan Region
may possibly contain 1,400,000 persons and the State as a whole 1,750,000.
The Report does not attempt to explain the modern phenomenon of massive growth in the
metropolitan areas of the world, nor does it offer advice on the many aspects of state planning
which lie in the economic, social and political fields rather than in that of physical planning. The
Plan faces facts concerning the Region and though the assumptions on which it is based may be
proved incorrect as regards time, the scale of the proposed solutions of problems should be
accepted. If anything the Plan and the assumptions are conservative.
As will be seen if the Land Use Survey and the Development Plan are compared, it is
suggested that urban growth will become almost symmetrical about the axis of the Swan River,
and that the southern part of the Region will be the more highly industrialised.
It is strongly advocated that a firm line should be drawn as a limit to the lateral expansion
of the main built-up area, and that encouragement should be given to decentralisation within
the Region as well as within the State.
Because of its youth, it is possible for the Metropolitan Region to have a road system
superior, at least in general terms, to those of nearly all other great cities. But it will require
fairly immediate action if future possibilities are to be reserved.
With youth again giving advantage, it is remarkable that there are only negligible signs of
the development of slums in the Region. But signs there are in one or two areas. If advantage
is taken of the experience of other great cities and adequate steps are taken by local authorities
to prevent the overcrowding of land as well as buildings, there is a great opportunity for Western
Australia to avoid the problem of the slum area. This not only results in bad physical con-
ditions but also has sad repercussions in human and economic terms.
Historical Development
Perth was chosen as the centre of administration and Fremantle the port when the Swan
River Settlement was founded. Albany became a major port of call for vessels making the
journey from Europe to the Eastern States. Through most of the nineteenth century Western
Australia was a neglected outpost of British colonisation in the Antipodes. It was in the last
ten years of the century that events of great importance took place.
1890 saw the establishment of government responsible to the people of the State and, shortly
afterwards, there was a great influx of migrants, largely from the Eastern States. Gold in
quantity was being discovered and worked in the region of Coolgardie and Kalgoorlie. Within
little more than a decade the population of the State quadrupled.,


During the period of the gold rush the homesteading and agricultural credit policies of the
F orrest Government did much to safeguard the economic future of the State, and three decisions
of he same government confirmed the Metropolitan Region as the hub of the Australian nation
m the West of the Continent Firstly, Fremantle was to be developed as an all-weather deep
sea port and quickly to supersede Albany as the major port of call. Secondly, railway construc-
tion tadjatmg from the Region was to make Fremantle not only the port of the goldfields and
the'rf*? 1 ’ b R “ 80 the State '- T . hlrd rn the goldfields water supply scheme, drawing water from
the Darling Ranges, was to tie the goldfields and the intervening wheatbelt to the Region.
Since the period of rapid development at the end of the nineteenth century, the Region has
grown at a greater rate than the rest of the State. Now, nearly two-thirds of the
are in the Metropolitan Region ; then, there was only one-third. In the present era of industrial-
isation it would seem certain there will be an even higher proportion.
The Region in Relation to the State
The economic development of Western Australia has largely been based on the production
of wool, wheat and gold. Wool and wheat are the main sources of export income. Trading
and transport are centred on Perth and Fremantle. More than 80 per cent, of the work force
m secondary industry is in the Region. *
The Planning Region covers about 2,000 square miles, or 1,280,000 acres. It is an oblong
imtße P are r r g y * ” ** “ int ° *"»*<** authority admi2
- The larger part of the Region is sandy coastal plain lying between the Darling Escarpment
and the coastal limestone ridges and beaches. The soil is generally of low inherent fertility
c imate is excellent and the rainfall, mostly confined to the winter months, is adequate.
Centrally situated in the agricultural areas the Region contains the administrative com-
ercial, industrial, social, educational and recreational centres of the State. The cultural and
social pattern ,s predominantly British. It has been tempered by an environment which U
fundamentally harsh even though it is most kind when highly developed.
The People
Economic expansion and population growth are closely related. In an economically ad-
W A I £fr° US inCreaSe ° f , POpulation is > P erhaps - most important premise of the Plan
Since 1901 the average annual rate of population growth in the State has been 2 3 per cent'
Natural increase accounted for 1.5 per cent., and migration 0.8 per cent. During thfs period
ofhalf a centm? the , lnc . rease “ population expressed as an average annual rate of grow* has
cent f A l?e p Ce for Australia as a whole ; 2.3 per cent, for Western Australia ; and 3 0 per
cent, for the Region. Rates of growth since World War 11. show substantial increases ' For
Australia as a whole the rate has been 2.3 per cent, per annum and, for Western Australia 3 3
per cen . Since 1947 the rate for Western Australia has been even higher a 3 5 per cent In
to pe?r t : haS been 4 '° Per Cent -’ and in the rest of the St -. - compared whh" the R lgio "


Assuming a future annual rate of growth for the Region of 3.0 per cent., which is equal to
the average rate since 1901, there will be a regional population of 1,000,000 by 1985.
Assuming a future annual rate of growth for the Region of 4 per cent., which is equal to
that experienced since 1947, there will be a regional population of 1,000,000 by 1978.
With the general increase in population in the past there has been a very significant change
in the relationship between the State and Region. In 1891 34 per cent, of the State’s people
lived in the Metropolitan Region ; in 1921 this had been increased to one-half, or 50 per cent. ;
and in 1947, it had become 60 per cent.
At the present time about 62 per cent, of the State’s population is in the Metropolitan
Region and, even assuming vigorous efforts to attract capital and population to the country
towns and the country, when the Regional population is 1,000,000 it should represent about
76 per cent, of the State’s population.
The Plan allows for a population of 1,400,000 in the Metropolitan Region. It would not
be unreasonable to assume this figure will be reached before the end of the century nor that it
will represent over 80 per cent, of the population of the State. The situation will be extra-
ordinary but, perhaps, inevitable. Superhuman efforts will be required to increase the attractive-
ness and economic strength of other towns and regions if it is to be altered.
The figures show that there has been an increasing degree of centralisation as the State has
grown and it must be assumed this will continue through the present century. Within the
limits of the Region, on the other hand, there may be an increasing tendency towards decentralisa-
tion. This is illustrated in a bold way by the sudden birth of Kwinana. The Plan suggests a
firm line to be drawn as a limit to the continuous built-up area, and the encouragement of ail
moves to establish industries and work places in towns, or centres of growth, in the outer parts
of the Region.
In the past the Swan River has acted as a barrier to growth and the greater part of the
existing development is North of the river. There is now large scale activity South of the river
and, as major industrialisation is expected to take place on the Midland Junction-Kwinana axis,
the Plan anticipates a change in emphasis. By the end of the century it is anticipated that about
600,000 will live North of the riv'er and the same number to the South, if Rockingham and
Kwinana are included. Two hundred thousand would live in the Hills or foothills.
Work
In 1947 the Region employed only 3 per cent, of the Commonwealth total of employed
persons in Manufacturing Industry. Compared with proportions of up to 47 per cent, in other
Australian capital cities, only 26 per cent, of the work force in the Region was engaged in Manu-
facturing Industry.
The percentage of employment in Building, Civil Engineering and in Service Industry is
higher than in either Sydney or Melbourne. Although the numbers employed in these in-
dustries will increase, the proportion will decline as the proportion in Manufacturing Industry
increases.
When the population is 1,400,000, the Regional work force is expected to be a little over
600,000. Employment in Manufacturing Industry is likely to increase to 45 per cent, of the work
force.
The proportion of female labour employed in Manufacturing Industry is much lower than
the proportions in more highly industrialised regions. The Plan advocates the provision of
light industrial zones in all districts, with one of the objectives the provision of employment for
females.


The major industrial zones require 11,100 acres of land. Local industries may require about
1,400 acres. A very considerable area of land for industry is proposed at Kwinana to allow for
the advent of additional large scale industries with extensive land requirements.
At the present time there are two problems, distinct yet related, which face industrialists.
Firstly, there is an insufficiency of well located land zoned for industry. Secondly, because of
traffic congestion, restricted sites, high land values and difficulties of expansion, certain industries
desire to move from the Central Area of Perth.
Industrial areas should be located on large, well drained and reasonably level sites with
access to good lines of communication. These are to be found on the periphery of residential
development where land is also cheaper and where good communications may be more easily
established. Decentralisation of central industries and the establishment of new industries on
ample peripheral sites is allowed for in the Plan. It will be seen that such sites are efficiently
served by communications, and placed so that industries and industrial traffic will cause the
minimum amount of nuisance in residential areas.
In order to allow good design and good servicing arrangements, it is desirable that industrial
land should, in the first instance, be in substantial holdings, whether owned by private companies
or public authorities. The programme of development of an industrial area should be con-
sidered at the design stage and co-ordinated at later stages.
Nearly 60 per cent, of the total number employed in shops and warehouses work in the
Central Area of Perth. This proportion may be reduced to about 45 per cent. The great
majority of office employees work in central Perth, and this is always likely to be the case during
the next several decades.
The Land and Its Use
The land provides the main setting for human activity. Development is strongly influenced
by the natural background, which in itself is the product of its position on the world’s surface,
its structure, age, history, and the degree to which it has been worked by human hands. Both
the land and its development are in turn influenced by climate, which has a continuous effect
on the life and surroundings of a people.
The geological formation of the Region has offered but few materials for exploitation, but
the superimposed soils have had quite an extensive influence on the type and intensity of land
use. Different types of soils have been found to be suitable for particular types of development.
These established relationships should have a big influence on the selection of further develop-
ment areas and use zones.
The topography of the Region is characterised by the hilly areas of the East and the coastal
plain of the Centre and West. Only in the Hills and in some wet and swampy areas on the
plain has topography had any limiting effect on settlement. The development of quite a number
of extensive areas is dependent upon the completion of drainage schemes.
With a rainfall of about 40 inches per annum, the Hills are a potential source of water supply
for a population of over 1,000,000. The limiting factor is economic rather than physical. In
the future impounding dams will have to be built at greater distances from Perth than those
which are now in use.
The existing pattern of land use shows clearly its relationship with geological and other
physical factors. The existing pattern of intensity of use shows that there is a considerable
wastage of land and services. The consolidation of many loosely settled areas before major
new areas are opened up is of economic and social importance.


The varying intensity of development and the relative attractiveness of different localities
are illustrated by the pattern of land values. Where high values coincide with low density,
intensification of development can be expected. Where high values coincide with high density,
changes in the pattern of land use, or the redevelopment of existing uses to a similar or higher
density, can be expected.
The Regional Plan takes into account physical and climatic conditions, including existing
use patterns, the intensity of land use and land values. It indicates both the direction and the
intensity of development which may be expected as a result of the working of social and economic
forces. In anticipating these, the Plan should act as a guide for development so that it may
take place in a more orderly, seemly and economical way.
Outdoor Recreation and Open Space
The greater the concentration of a people in an urban area the greater the need for open
space. With the background of the Region as it is, and with a clear idea of the extent of future
growth, it may be seen that there should be ample land for recreation and open spaces after all
the estimated needs of building development have been met. The main problem is concerned
with the reservation of open spaces which may not be needed for their ultimate purpose for quite
a number of years.
The Report suggests standards for different categories of open space required to meet the
needs of different age groups and the various kinds of recreational activity. General overall
standards are not applicable in any given segment of the Region.
The Plan does not show minor open spaces, but it suggests a network of district reservations
which is based on a balanced distribution of facilities and takes into account natural features.
In some areas it recommends an extension of regional facilities which are already established.
It is not possible to measure demand for Private Open Space. Provision in the Plan is
based on a generous allowance for such uses as golf courses, private sports grounds, large grounds
attached to institutions, etc. It is not overlooked that private gardens attached to houses form
the main category of spaces for outdoor recreation. They are particularly important for the
young and the old. Suggested density standards take this into account.
Miscellaneous open spaces which should be reasonably close to all homes are classified as
Local Open Space. They include children’s playgrounds, small public gardens, primary school
playing fields and small public playing fields. The standards suggested vary from 3.0 to 4.7 acres
per 1,000 persons, depending on the type of area.
District Open Space caters for needs which can only be satisfied by considerable and com-
prehensive facilities. It includes large parks, large public playing fields for organised sports,
and high school playing fields. The suggested standard is 5.5 acres per 1,000 persons.
Regional Open Spaces are those serving the needs of the Region as a whole. They include
ocean beaches, the Swan River and foreshores, areas of landscape value in the Hills and else-
where, and large central parks. The provision of open space in this category is not subject to a
standard.
There are approximately 21,500 acres of Public Open Space in the Region. The greater
part of this is in the form of large regional reservations. There is a considerable shortage of
public playing fields and a lack of balance in their distribution. The latter faults are rectified
in the Plan.
The total area of open space recommended in the Plan is approximately 69,000 acres. This
is to serve a population nearly four times as great as the present one.


Roads
r i The ° f Main Roads and twenty-nine local authorities are responsible for
System “ gl ° n * There i§ n ° authorit Y responsible for a Metropolitan Road
CC ° rd ! l nS ] to vari ous Acts there are four statutory classes of roads : (a) Main Roads •
( ) Controlled-access Roads ; (c) Developmental Roads; (d) Local-access Roads. The
sification is to make clear the responsibilities of the Commissioner of Main Roads rather
than to establish a classification within a system.
The roads within the Metropolitan Region are dangerous. Accidents in Australia are at
a higher rate than in any other country. The ratio of fatal accidents in Perth is higher than in
other Australian capital cities. The present annual economic loss due to road accfdents could
be valued at over £1,000,000. could
Despite the effects of a world-wide economic depression and the second world war there
as been a tremendous increase in regional road traffic in the last quarter century. Twelve hour
coun s taken on the Causeway in 1930 gave 7,526 vehicles in both directions and! in 1954 28 080
Tn 19 4* , F ~ le Bridge Similar C ° UntS gaVe 3 ’ 411 vehicles in 1930 and 13 076
in 1954. Perhaps of even greater significance, as an indication of the growth of the road traffic
pro em, is the increase in traffic on the Causeway during a recent 20-month period In al2
about C 7 MO 1 " ’ l l ’! 60 VehiCkS CTOSSed tKe bridge in b ° th directior ' s . “d in 1954 there were
about 7,000 more vehicles crossing the bridge during a comparable period.
Vehicle registration figures in the Region reveal two marked trends. The first shows a
considerable yearly increase in the total number of registrations. The second is less obvious
ut.ofgreat importance. The number of persons per vehicle is diminishing. In 1930 there
were 24,576 vehicles registered, or one vehicle per 8.2 persons. In 1953 there were 80 029
ofllmom tered ’ 7 4 ' 9 PerS T S PCT Whicle ' WitWn 40 ° r 50 years there mi ® ht be a population
tlmeS PreSent nUmber ° f Vehicles> on the basis of one vehicle to 3.5
The present road network is quite inadequate for the growing volume of traffic
ne e wM Ume P tHree rJ-T ttaeS aS in 30 y-rs time, L Pkn envis^haSt
new Major Regional Htghways will be in use. Additional reserves for these Highways whfch
ould be established as soon as possible, will total about 85 miles in length.
The new Major Regional Highways should be incorporated in a system which will include
e existing main highways. It is recommended that responsibility for the Major Regional
"IT Sh ° U dbC VeStCd in ° ne main bigW aV authority which shoulj also bl re
Highway system ” ** Im P orta t>t Regional Roads feeding the Major Regional
Railways
fonn l be State railway system has 4,200 miles of track, all at 3ft. 6in. gauge. In 1954 the total
tonnage earned by rail was 3,200,000 tons. The number of passengers carried bv mil Mt f
an annual total of 17,400,000 in 1945-46 to 9,200,000 in 1953-54. d b f fr ° m
northe n rn h s e uWbs na 'lt Plan ’ Pf° P ° Sals indud f tw ° new suburban passenger lines, both serving
ra , m , suburbs. It would seem essential that the railways should carry greatly increased
umbers of passengers to and from the Central Area of Perth. The roads and road transport


will not be adequate, even though great improvements should be made. It is noted that 44 per
cent, of the city workers of Melbourne travel by train. The Plan suggests that the railways
should attract 22 per cent, of the city workers of Perth.
On the South of the Swan River it is proposed that a new main line should run from Midland
Junction to Cockburn Sound, and that the main rail transport centre of the State should be in
the Belmont-Welshpool area. This would be at a key point in both road and rail systems,
ensuring an easy transfer of goods near the centre of gravity of a more fully developed Region.
Marshalling yards, goods yards, a port freight terminal, warehouses and wholesale markets would
be in the same vicinity, away from the mounting congestion in the Central Area of Perth.
I
The Port of Fremantle
It is envisaged that Inner Harbour extensions will provide five additional berths upstream,
immediately below a new railway bridge. Studies and plans should be made for extensions
of the Port of Fremantle in Cockburn Sound at a point South-West of the refinery.
It is essential that a comprehensive plan of the Kwinana industrial and port hinterland area
should be prepared.
Air Services
There are 81,000 passenger movements per year through the Perth Airport, which is at
present used by six air operators. The area of the Airport is 1,960 acres and it is not proposed
that this should be extended. It is, however, proposed that a site of about 3,600 acres, near
Lake Gnangara, should be reserved for future needs. The location of this site is more favourable
as it is at a greater elevation and more distant from the Hills.
Supply Services
Extending gas and electricity services presents no serious problems. The difficulties are
largely those of timing, and these could be overcome if there were a general programme of de-
velopment rather than haphazard and scattered development. The two electric power stations
have a capacity of 124,000 K.W., to be supplemented by the new Bunbury power station feeding
into the grid. It is more than likely that stations built after Bunbury will be powered by nuclear
energy.
Waste Disposal
Surface water disposal presents difficulty in some areas which have high water tables. These
are quite considerable in parts of the coastal plain, particularly near the foothills.
The Region is only partially served by sewerage systems. In nearly all new areas septic
tanks for individual houses or buildings are installed. In some areas the pan system persists.
It cannot be said that the sewage disposal position is satisfactory. Extensive sewerage networks
are necessary both North and South of the Swan River, and large new treatment works will have
to be built near the coast on both the northern and southern edges of the main built-up area.
In addition a new treatment works will be necessary at Kwinana-Rockingham and, in the near
future, both the South Fremantle and the West Subiaco works should be remodelled to provide
full treatment. The partial treatment of sewage from the growing central city results in an in-
creasing flow of objectionable effluent into the ocean below City Beach, and the sterilisation
of valuable land in the vicinity of the works.


Refuse disposal is already a serious problem in one or two of the older built-up areas where
the authorities have difficulty in finding suitable sites for disposal.
Disposal methods now being used range from tipping without any covering or burning to
controlled tipping, or tipping and burning or partial burning.
Tipping sites of a capacity of about 5,000,000 cubic yards are still available in the Region
and they should meet requirements for about 20 years.
Co-ordinated or concerted effort by local authorities would almost certainly produce more
efficient and economical disposal methods, and allow the planning of controlled tipping to
reclaim land for playing fields. The Public Health Department must be an active and important
partner m all schemes for refuse disposal.
Standards of Development
Within the general spread of development there are already a considerable number of
communities. In varying degree each has a character and atmosphere of its own. Although
physical planning on a regional scale cannot lead directly to the development of community
spirit, or a consciousness of community, it may be regarded as a first step towards their en-
couragement.
A mere collection of houses does not make a community. All members of a family have
interests outside the house, and land is required for various purposes in every locality. Overall
quantitative recommendations are made regarding the allocation of land at different levels in
the metropolitan structure. More precise relationships must be established by Local Planning
Schemes which have particular regard to local considerations.
By far the most important land requirement is for housing. The Plan makes an assessment
of the amount of land likely to be required for housing purposes, having regard to the needs of
all types of families and, at the same time, accepting as a basis present desires and demands.
Accurate forecasts over a long period are not possible because of changes which may occur in
demand, and rigid density standards for large areas cannot be laid down.
The single family house on about one-fifth acre of land is likely to be the predominant house
demand 3 Pr ° P ° rti ° n of flatS and attached houses will be necessary and in
Control of housing density should be through the limitation of building bulk by the " Plot
Ratio ” method. Density control is to ensure reasonable privacy, and respect for neighbouring
dwellings. It will not necessarily produce good and livable environment. The design of housing
estates should receive more thoughtful consideration in future. There is room for considerable
advances in layout as well as in the design of individual houses.
The character of a Region is partly formed by variations in development according to
district. Differences come from topography, the kinds of family types and the relative position
o t e district. Tentative forecasts have been made in order to assess the number of persons
who may live in the various areas suggested for development.
Adjoining the central city areas, flats housing up to 100 persons per acre are likely to pre-
dominate. The proportion of single family houses will increase with the distance from the
centre and in new areas the average net density will be about 15 or 16 persons per acre. Larger
individual lots are to be expected in the Hills and some other outlying districts, giving net densities
of about 10 persons per acre.


In each locality space is required for facilities other than housing. The Plan suggests, as a
general rule, that a little over 8 acres per 1,000 persons is required for such local facilities as
open spaces, shops, primary and nursery schools, public buildings, and parking spaces.
At a higher level in the regional structure further facilities will be required. The suggested
standard for district facilities, generally applicable, is about 10 acres per 1,000 persons. This
would allow for open space, secondary schools, shops and offices, public buildings, light industry,
parking, etc.
Overall land requirements at local and district levels may be calculated, with the housing
and other standards as a basis. It is assumed that District Gross Densities will range from 57
persons per acre in central residential areas to about nine persons per acre in outlying districts.
Intermediate gross densities will be about 18 persons per acre in inner urban areas, where a
considerable proportion of flat development can be expected, and 12 persons per acre in what
may be termed normal residential suburbs.
Perth Central Area
The centres of Perth and Fremantle are the two places in the Region which contain the
greatest concentrations of buildings and traffic and present the greatest number of closely related
and complex problems. Perth, the Capital City and heart of the Region, has a widespread and
rapidly growing Central Area in which many problems are already acute.
In order to reach conclusions leading to practical proposals, intensive and comprehensive
Central Area surveys have been made. For the Perth Central Area an inventory, or stocktaking,
has resulted in a systematic presentation of facts. The most important show the use of all the
floor space in the Central Area and the amount of floor space in each use category. From a
summary of the amounts and categories, estimates have been made, in relation to future popula-
tion, of the amount of building which may be expected in the next 40 or 50 years. These
estimates have been applied to the defined Central Area to give a clear indication as to what con-
stitute reasonable proposals for zoning and building bulk control. In addition, estimates
have been made of the number of persons who will work in the Central Area to obtain an idea
of the scale of the problem of public transport during peak periods.
The Zoning Map for the Central Area is similar in essentials to that recently adopted by
the City Council and now in force as a By-law. It anticipates the natural zoning of the City,
which is well illustrated by the existing main office and shopping areas. The primary purpose
of each zone is shown on the map, but various uses would be permitted as supplementaries.
Although zoning is now generally accepted throughout the Western World, and particularly
in the United States of America and Great Britain, it is incomplete as a method of ensuring order
in urban growth. Zoning prevents damage by an incompatible neighbour to the proper function-
ing of a property or group of properties. For example, it would not allow a factory on a
residential block. Damage, and unneighbourliness can result from the crowding together, or
piling up, of buildings in relatively cramped areas of land ; which also leads to unnecessary
traffic congestion and parking problems. To ensure fair treatment to developers throughout
the zones, as well as to combat congestion of buildings and traffic, building bulk standards are
proposed in the form of a Plot Ratio for each block. The Plot Ratios (permissible total floor
area divided by area of lot) are based on a very large increase in the volume of Central Area
building, directly related to population increase, with a further liberal allowance as a margin.
Plot Ratios of 5.0 are allowed for shop and office buildings ; of 1.5 for warehousing ; and of
1.0 for industrial and residential buildings.


Proposals are also made for the use of a modern method of ensuring that buildings do not
unnecessarily block daylight from their neighbours. An advantage of the method is the freedom
it gives to architects acting for developers. The proposed method is more scientific than that
laid down by existing By-laws, and at the same time offers greater flexibility.
The Development Proposals Map shows the proposed main road framework. The
principal commercial zones of the Central Area are surrounded by Major Regional Highways,
with Riverside Drive on the South, an enlarged Roe Street on the North, a new Swan River
Drive on the East, and a new North-South Road on the West. The latter links the Perth-
Kwinana Road, crossing the Narrows Bridge, to the Yanchep Highway. New bridges crossing
the railway are proposed at Charles, William, Barrack and Moore Streets, and at Claisebrook
Road. New river bridges are proposed at the Narrows and to the South of the Bunbury
railway bridge.
Surface parking areas for approximately 12,000 cars are shown on the Central Area Maps.
They are within the main road framework and can be fed from the main gateways to the City.
Perth is fortunate in that there is space which could fairly easily be made available for the most
economical form of parking. It is envisaged that all the surface car parks would be well designed,
with shade trees growing between the lines of parked cars.
It is assumed that road passenger transport services will pass through the Central Area with
a series of stops, mainly on Wellington Street, St. Georges Terrace and Adelaide Terrace. The
principal streets should not be used as ’bus stands or termini. If there were cross regional
routes, termini would be in suburbs. For routes ending in Central Perth the termini should be
situated at the edge of the Central Area furthest from the point of entry on the particular route.
It is considered essential that there should be a suburban railway system radiating from
the Central Area, and that the present through line should be remodelled and reconstructed at
a lower level, thus allowing crossings by modern road bridges. Frequent and fast suburban
trains would greatly contribute to the relief of road congestion. The new Country Railway
Terminal is shown on the site in East Perth proposed by the Railway Commission. It should
be planned in relation to a bus terminal, a heliport and a car park.
The greater part of the Central Area shopping expansion will be in a westerly direction.
As, or before rebuilding takes place for intensive retail trading, service access ways should be
rationalised. With a multitude of private access ways there are two main defects. Firstly,
there are unnecessary crossings which cause interference to pedestrian flows, break shopping
continuity and occupy valuable frontage. Secondly, there is a general loss of ground floor space.
Service access should be to the rear of shops. Large volumes of goods will be turned over
in the central shopping area. They should be brought to storage space at the back of premises,
leaving the front part and the street free for the flow of customers and the goods which they have
purchased.
The natural, and functional, expansion of the office area is parallel to the River. In the
East it will grow on either side of Adelaide Terrace ; in the West to the upper part of St. Georges
Terrace. West Perth, immediately behind Parliament House, is a most suitable area for
professional offices.
A completed Parliament House, with a terraced approach overlooking the City, would be
a magnificent and appropriate climax to St. Georges Terrace. The Old Barracks and the
temporary buildings below Parliament House should be removed. Government departmental
offices should be on the Observatory-Hale School site. Government offices occupying very
valuable sites in the congested commercial area should be sold, and the proceeds used to finance
the building of new offices near to Parliament House.


With the building of a new Town Hall overlooking Stirling Gardens, there will be a large
municipal auditorium adjacent to a major car park as well as the central square. The present
Government House should become a museum recording local history. Government House
Gardens, including the part already abandoned, should be conceived as a series of landscaped
open spaces for the enjoyment of the people, yet placed between tall office buildings on sites
leased by the Crown. A new Government House should be built in Kings Park.
Within the Central Area there will be growing demand and need for flats. The Mount
Street and Terrace Drive areas are in commanding positions overlooking the river. In West
Perth and East Perth there are unspoiled areas, on high ground adjacent to open spaces, which
will change in character from the original single family house pattern to a series of flat groups.
To the west of the proposed Government Offices it would be in every way appropriate if
professional chambers were allowed in the residential zone.
Although the Regional Survey includes many facts about the Central Area, and the Plan
a number of fundamental proposals, there is a great deal of planning work still to be done. The
growing Central Area will demand continuous study by the Perth City Council as well as decisive
action. It would be of great advantage if additional studies were made by private bodies con-
cerned with the growth of the City. It is also of first importance that the Government and the
City Council seek to resolve some of the administrative problems concerning transport, traffic,
parking and the provision of major roads and car parks.
Fremantle Central Area
Fremantle has been the pre-eminent port in the State, and the western gateway to the Aus-
tralian Continent, since the end of the nineteenth century. The port will continue to grow,
with increasing emphasis on the Outer Harbour in Cockburn Sound. Five new upstream berths
are possible before the limit of development in the Inner Harbour is reached.
The growth of the City and Central Area is intimately related to the increasing trade of the
port. The Central Area also has an important relationship with the residential suburbs served
by its retail traders.
It is assumed that the expansion of the Central Area will, in general, be proportionate with
that of the Central Area of Perth and that similar methods of zoning and building bulk control
should come into force.
Fremantle has a compact centre which is full of character and relatively small in scale. It
has great architectural unity partly because of its compactness, but also because buildings of
fifty years ago predominate. There are clearly defined, natural use zones, which provide a basis
for. the future. Present trends indicate a lateral expansion of the main use areas, and particularly
shopping. The zoning proposals in the Plan are based on this. The Plan also allows for an
intensification of use in the main zones. It is assumed that retail trade may expand by over
300 per cent, in volume because of the population increase in the hinterland (from 50,000 to
180,000), and that warehouse expansion will be determined by the growth of the Port.
Greater harbour and warehousing activity will increase the traffic problems in the relatively
small Fremantle " hub.” There is already serious congestion in some of the streets containing
warehouses. There will also be very substantial increases in the flow of private and public
transport vehicles. From 1948 to 1954 traffic in the main streets doubled in volume, and
vehicles wishing to park at one time numbered 470 in 1948 and 1,387 in 1954.
The Plan provides for traffic to circulate round rather than through the Central Area. A
major road linking Marine Terrace and Phillimore Street, by passing along the present railway
alignment would not only complete the system of Major Regional Highways between the Inner


and Outer Harbours, but also provide access to car parks and the lower part of High Street in
the vicinity of Arthurs Head. The latter improvement would give impetus to the regeneration
of this part of the City. Queen Street, together with improved James and Ord Streets, would
provide connections on the other flank of the Central Area.
When the population of the Region approaches 1,400,000, parking space for nearly 5,000
vehicles may be needed. About 1,000 could be at the kerbside, but 21 acres would be required
for off-street surface parking space. There is already an urgent need for off-street car parks.
It is assumed that the railway yards will be superseded by port buildings, principally for
the storage of goods, and that new yards will be provided elsewhere in a remodelling of the
railway system. With the building of the main road at Arthurs Head, the railway line could
follow a more satisfactory curve by taking a wider sweep around the rock. The suggested general
realignment of the railway between the ocean and Marine and South Terraces would result in
additional open space and road as well as rail improvements. A new railway bridge over the
Swan River, immediately downstream of the road bridge, is shown on the Plan.
It is considered important that there should be a convenient interchange point between
buses and suburban trains, and that these services should be co-ordinated.
It is suggested that the City Council should eventually take over the central and commanding
site of the Fremantle Gaol as a Civic Centre. The Gaol, which is obsolescent, is now badly
placed and on a site which is far too small for modern corrective methods which demand ex-
tensive workshops and land for cultivation. A new Gaol site of about 500 acres could be
established at South Coogee and the transfer to it accomplished gradually, with prisoners under-
taking some of the preparatory work on the new site.
The present markets are in cramped quarters on an important junction. It is suggested
that (here should be new markets on a more ample site.
Fremantle enjoys the advantage of a delightful setting on the ocean front with the fascinating
activities of a deep sea port and a fishing port ever present. The area behind Marine Terrace
should be carefully designed for its whole length and it is strongly recommended that a higher
density residential area, enjoying views across Marine Terrace and the ocean, should form the
southern flank of the Central Area.
Implementation
If the Plan is to be effective, it must be fully considered by Government, local authorities
and public. The scope of existing legislation must be broadened to make the implementation
of an approved Regional Plan practicable.
The State Government will play a large part in carrying out proposals of regional significance.
Local authorities, through local planning schemes, will be responsible for most detailed aspects.
Interim development control is necessary prior to statutory approval of a Regional Plan
and thereafter development must be in accordance with the approved Plan. Constant review
after approval is important.
New legislation should clarify financial aspects, by providing for compensation and other
expenditure arising out of the Plan. The so-called cost of planning is negligible in comparison
with the cost to the community of haphazard growth. But if long-term economies are to be
effected, capital will be required in the early stages. An additional land tax is suggested to provide
this.
Future financial resources will determine the rate and programming of development. The
Government should, by setting up a co-ordinating committee to consider regional priorities, play
an important part in giving a lead to other developers.


CHAPTER 1
Historical Development
by
F. K. Crowley, M.A., Ph.D., D.Phil.
Senior Lecturer in History in the
University of Western Australia.
The Metropolitan Region of Western Australia,
and in particular the district surrounding its water-
way, the Swan River, is intimately associated with
the genesis of the State. So obviously did this river
appear as a convenient means of transport, and so
impressed were the earliest explorers with the nature
of the country in the neighbourhood, that when a
settlement on the western coast of Australia was
decided upon, the river naturally gave it its name.
Although it was later necessary to use the official
title of Western Australia, since settlement spread
to the banks of other streams such as the Canning
and the Murray, yet for a generation or so the princi-
pal settlement from Perth to the sea in one direction,
and from Perth to the Darling Ranges in the other,
was known to its people and to the British public as
the Swan River Settlement. From being a,tiny and
neglected outpost of British colonisation in the
Antipodes—once described by its critics as the best
country ever seen to run through an hour glass—this
district has nevertheless become in the course of a
century and a quarter the Western Gateway to the
Commonwealth of Australia, and one of its principal
centres of population.
The population of Western Australia is now no
longer at the adolescent stage in which a wide variety
of possible developments exist. By reason of early
political decisions, an accelerated centralisation and
a measure of industrialisation, and the very distribu-
tion of known natural resources in the State, the
population has reached a certain degree of social
maturity. It already has the permanent elements
and forms of a community and is growing within the
framework established in past decades. This com-
munity—its way of life, its customs, its outlook and
its ideals—has developed as a blend of what has
grown up in the local environment and what was
traditional and had been brought from the British
Isles. For in almost every decade from 1829 till
1945 the United Kingdom was the chief source of
additional population, as well as the model for the
community’s law, its political system and much of its
institutional life. Only in the years after 1945 has
the immigration of eastern and southern Europeans
become significant, and of sufficient importance to
affect some inevitable changes in social patterns. The
Italian, Polish and Dutch contributions may possibly
not be great, but may well enrich cultural life and
further a spirit of tolerance.
That the community should have reached maturity
while numbers are still small, is a point of little con-
sequence. Its size appears inconsistent only by
comparison with the unusually extensive territory
arbitrarily included in the boundaries of the State.
The population is not exceptional in being so unevenly
distributed within its borders. But its density is the
lowest among all the States of Australia, largely
because agricultural resources are poor relative to its
total area. Victoria, for example, has a density of
27.9 people to the square mile. Western Australia,
in which the greater part of the rainfall and other
known resources are restricted to the South-West
corner of the State, has a density of only 0.66. More
than a hundred years of experience have shown that
the greater part of the area of Western Australia is
too dry or too rugged to support significant numbers
of people, and the opportunities for future settle-
ment on a considerable scale would seem to lie in
the fertile portions of the South-West.
Within this area the Metropolitan Region has come
to be of great significance during the successive phases
of the State’s development. At the present time
approximately three-quarters of the total population


live in the principal cities and towns, and some 61.5
per cent, are congregated in the Metropolitan Region,
which comprises the present Metropolitan and Swan
statistical divisions. This has not been a fortuitous
development, nor has it resulted solely from the
influence of climate and natural resources. The
general location of the Capital City and its port may
have been so determined, but the exact position and
functions of the Metropolitan Region were equally
determined by political decisions.
In the period of colonisation, Perth was chosen to
be the centre of administration, and Fremantle one
of the principal ports of entry into the new Colony.
Established by Governor Sir James Stirling in 1829,
the capital of the new territory was the focal point of
interest as well as the centre from which favours were
dispensed, military operations against offending
natives were organised, exploration of the hinterland
was directed, land was allocated and trade com-
menced. But the years before 1850 were relatively
devoid of progress, despite the changed appearance
of the small picturesque village on the Swan River.
Fremantle was an unsafe harbour for the sailing
ships of that era, and by the time the colonists them-
selves decided to ask for the aid of English convicts
to open up the country, the only settled areas were a
few pockets in the south-western corner of the
Colony—Albany on King George’s Sound in the
South, dating from a small military and convict settle-
ment in 1826 ; Busselton and the Vasse in the ex-
treme South-West ; and Perth and Fremantle on the
western coast. The main contribution of the 9,668
convict men who were sent from the gaols of the
United Kingdom in the years 1850-1868 was to pro-
vide the basic communications between these scat-
tered pockets. In doing so they further confirmed
the importance of the Capital City by making it more
accessible, and Fremantle the headquarters of convict
administration. The convicts also helped the
Colony’s progress by constructing public buildings
and bridges, and by working as ticket-of-leave
labourers on the scattered farms and pastoral prop-
erties.
During the seventies and eighties were felt the full
effects of the opening up of the North-West and
Kimberley districts, and the expansion of farming
and the timber industry in the South-West. But
this was in the main a period for developing re-
sources already tapped, and for extending the means
of communication. It was in these years, too, that
Albany on the southern coast, with one of the finest
harbours in Australia, was a serious rival of Fremantle.
Situated on the direct route between London and the
other colonies of Australia, it was for many years the
principal port of call in the Colony for overseas
passenger and cargo ships. Until the fifties it
functioned chiefly as a provisioning port for the
whaling and sealing industry, but after 1852 prospered
as the Western Australian port of call for the monthly,
and later weekly, mail service conducted by the
steam ships of the P. &. O. and Orient Lines.
Albany’s hey-day continued until the nineties. In
1895, for instance, 303 ships called at Albany during
the year as compared with only 177 at Fremantle.
The year 1890, which witnessed the introduction
of responsible government and democratic practices
in politics, was also virtually the conclusion of the
pioneering era of Western Australian history. The
population had increased from 6,000 in 1850 to
25,000 in 1870, and to 46,000 in 1890. The Colony
was a primary producing region—with some 70,000
acres under crop, and marketing some 7,000,000 lb.
of wool a year—but in these early years had also been
determined the later pattern of development within
the Metropolitan Region itself, as well as the relation
between the Metropolitan Region and the remainder
of the State. For the first settlements of Perth, Fre-
mantle and Guildford did not develop at the same
rate. Guildford languished in comparison with the
other two centres as the farms fanned out from the
banks of the river, and its inability ever to attain an
equivalent position was finally determined in the
later years which witnessed the growth of the ad-
jacent industrial area of Midland Junction. Nor in
this period was there an even expansion from the two
centres of Perth and Fremantle. The Swan River,
though itself an important asset in the days of
pioneering, became a hindrance because it prevented
easy access to the City from the South. Hence the
first of the residential, commercial and industrial
suburbs developed on its northern banks, and par-
ticularly along the road, and later the railway, between
the City and the Port. Only in recent years have
industrial areas grown up external to this main area,
such as Midland Junction, Innaloo, Welshpool and
Kwinana, and only in recent years has the South bank
of the river become an accessible and fashionable
residential area. This pattern is well illustrated by
the distribution of the population within the Metro-
politan Region.


Not only has Perth in the last twenty years increased
at a faster rate than that of the remainder of the State,
but at a faster rate than that of the average Australian
Metropolitan Area. And most of this increase has
been in the suburbs between Fremantle and Perth.
The discovery of gold in payable quantities in
several of the arid inland areas of Western Australia
in the eighties and nineties gave to the Colony the
first substantial impetus to expansion since its settle-
ment. Exploration of all districts had been con-
tinuous since the days of the first colonists, but little
of the country had actually been settled when the
gold deposits were discovered. The rushes to the
Kimberley districts in the extreme North of the
Colony in the mid-eighties were not of great con-
sequence, but the successive discoveries which led to
the opening of the Southern Cross, Yilgarn, Cool-
gardie and other inland goldfields confirmed an era
of prosperity for the Colony, and particularly for the
Metropolitan Region. They also focussed attention
on another area of the Colony—the Central and
Eastern districts —which for a decade challenged the
supremacy of the seat of government. So great was
the influence of the Goldfields that their threat of
seceding to form a new Colony virtually compelled
the seaboard administration to enter the Federation
of the Australian Colonies in 1901. At that time,
there were almost as many people living in the Central
and Eastern Goldfields as in the Metropolitan Dist-
rict. At the Census of 1901, while the latter district
contained some 70,000 persons, the other two dist-
ricts between them accounted for about 60,000
people. The same Census also revealed that the
population increase had been almost fourfold in a
decade, and with some 194,000 settlers, Western
Australia was more populous than Tasmania. Al-
though much of the increase was caused by immigra-
tion from the other Australian Colonies, and not
by immigration direct from the United Kingdom, yet
population progress thereafter continued unabated.
The pre-war schemes of assisted immigration from
the British Isles were partly responsible. Of greater
consequence in securing a permanent future for the
State were the homesteading and agricultural credit
policies of the Forrest Government in the nineties,
and the closer settlement and wheat-belt promotion
policies of the governments in the years before 1914.
Both of these confirmed the role of the hinterland as
provider of export staples and source of city-dwellers’
food supply. For the Goldfields prosperity was
ephemeral. The peak year of employment on the
Eastern Goldfields—lB99—had long since passed
when Western Australian volunteers sailed to the
defence of the Empire, and so had the year of greatest
gold production—l9o3. Thereafter the goldmining
industry suffered a steady decline, and subsequent
reverses have prevented it from ever again reaching
its former prosperity and relative importance in the
economy of the State. The mild boom of 1937-1941
was not due to the discovery of vast new deposits,
and production since that time has been continuous
but not startling.
The general economic prosperity which the gold
discoveries brought with them to the Colony, and
their protection of its economy from the ravages of
the depression in the nineties which were felt so
severely in the eastern colonies, were not the only
events of that period of advantage to the metropolis.
Where the seat of government lay, there also was to
be found real political power, and the decisions
which were made by the administration of Sir John
Forrest in the decade before Federation finally con-
firmed the future role of the Metropolitan Region.
Three of these decisions were of great moment. Early
in the eighteen-nineties, Charles Yelverton O Connor
was appointed Engineer-in-Chief in the Colony, and
was given the task, which he ably completed, of
converting Fremantle into an all-weather deep-sea
harbour, capable of handling any type of vessel or
cargo. The second decision was made and put into
effect only in the face of considerable hostility.
Judicious and well-timed railway construction made
Fremantle the port for the Eastern Goldfields, and
not Esperance or Albany on the southern coast, both
of which were then the more obvious and direct
outlets. Only after the issue had been debated in
Parliament for thirty years did a government consent
to provide a railway from the goldfields to Esperance.
By then, however, Perth had also become the chief
railway terminal of the State. The progress of rail-
way construction had indeed been extensive in the
generation after 1890. From a total mileage open for
traffic in 1890 of 188, there was a constant increase
until 1914. By that year nearly 3,000 miles of track
had been completed. In the ensuing years during
the opening of the eastern wheat areas and the South-
West dairying districts, the total mileage was increased
mainly by loop lines to over 4,000 in 1929. Sub-
sequent years have witnessed consolidation and
1 Chapter 3, Section E.


improvement rather than further expansion of the
railway system. The third decision, and an excellent
illustration of the politics of the period, was to con-
struct the Eastern Goldfields Water Scheme. This
involved pumping water some 350 miles through a
pipe from a source in the eastern section of the
Metropolitan Region, and not from Esperance on the
southern coast or from the areas to the north of the
Goldfields. Though constructed principally to supply
the Goldfields with water for crushing-batteries and
for domestic use, it was not completed until 1902,
and has become rather the life-line of the intervening
wheat-belt country. The provision of these utilities,
therefore—harbour, railways and waterworks—and
the gradual improvement of the road network of the
State, enhanced the Metropolitan Region’s import-
ance as the centre of radial control. The political
patronage of Fremantle, and in particular the transfer
to that port of the mail steamer contract in 1898-1900,
led to the eventual eclipse of Albany as a port. In
1901 Fremantle’s registered tonnage passed that of
Albany and in the following year her shipping tally
also passed Albany’s. In 1913 Fremantle’s tally
exceeded that recorded in Albany’s best year of 1897
an d thereafter while traffic through Fremantle grew
steadily that of Albany made more than a proportion-
ate decline. By 1920 Fremantle had become the
First Australian Port of Call. The failure of Albany’s
hinterland to justify a promising future once world
shipping patronage had been withdrawn, and, ironic-
ally for the settlers of the southern district, the
draining away of products to Fremantle by the
very railway which it was hoped would confirm
Albany as an important outlet—the Great Southern
both had a hand in the decline of the southern
port. Thus with the outbreak of war in 1914,
the pattern of population distribution, commun-
ications, and of land use throughout the State
had become clear. The population amounted to
322,000, of which some 130,000 were living in and
around the Capital City.
Since 1914 subsequent developments have furthered
this process. For the Metropolitan Region has con-
tinued to grow disproportionately compared with the
inland and other coastal districts. Many of the
children of rural families have come to seek em-
ployment in shops and offices, and there has always
been a migration from farms and stations in the
interior and North-West to the more regular type of
employment to be found in the cities of Perth and
Fremantle and their surrounding suburbs. Rural
amenities, too, have rarely kept pace with the im-
provements in the domestic economy of suburban
homes. But while the economic and leisure attrac-
tions of urban life may have been the prime in-
centives, increasing mechanisation of farming without
any corresponding decline in farm productivity has
released much of the labour formerly needed. The
history of the primary industries in the years between
the wars was in this respect a dual history. A
relative decline in rural population was accompanied
by a variable but over-all increase in the acreage
under all types of crops, and in the production of
wheat, wool and dairy products. This occurred,
too, despite the comparative failure of large-scale land
settlement schemes (soldier settlement after the war,
and group settlement in the twenties) one of the
results of which, particularly when organised in close
connection with artificially promoted immigration,
was to give a further boost to the expanding industrial
society in the Metropolitan Area. The migrants
tended to gravitate to the towns and cities, where,
during the economic crisis of the years 1929-32, they
aggravated the general unemployment. Some of the
surplus rural as well as urban unemployed were drawn
off in these years by the Government’s financial aid
to the goldmining industry, but such intra-State
population movements were only of short duration.
To some extent the increased productivity which
counterbalanced the loss of population to the Metro-
politan Region was due to the work of the State
Department of Agriculture, always, since the early
nineties, in the forefront with technical experiments
and practical advice. It was due also to the wide-
spread application of superphosphate and sub-
terranean clover in the improvement of the quality
of Western. Australian soils. The latter was of
particular importance to the dairying industry, which
by the thirties had become of great consequence in
the total income of the State, and the provider of the
Metropolitan milk and butter supplies.
As the chief entrepot of the State the Capital City
and its port have had no rival for forty years or more.
The third phase in the history of sea transport
from sail to steam, and from steam to oil—has seen
Fremantle become the largest oil refuelling port in
Australia, as well as the second city in the State.
Not one of the thirteen other principal ports on the
long coastline of the State has had an opportunity
for unlimited expansion. Each has flourished only


Diagram 1
GROWTH OF THE
SOUTH-WESTERN PART
OF THE STATE


to serve the special needs of a farming or mining
district, or as a tourist resort, or to serve the needs
of a particular industry such as pearling, slaughtering,
whaling, fishing or canning, all of which have been
seasonal and ephemeral. The lack of a sizeable
population in the North-Western and Kimberley
districts, and particularly the great numerical pre-
dominance of men, has meant that ports such as
Wyndham, Derby, Broome, Port Hedland, Onslow
and Carnarvon have existed only as convenient
outlets for regions otherwise difficult of access.
The expansion of the agricultural, dairying and
pastoral industries, producing largely for overseas,
has involved an equivalent expansion of banking,
agency and other commercial organisations which
were naturally centralised in the most convenient
place, in the Capital. There, too, many of the
profits of rural enterprises have been invested in
land, and in seasonal entertainment, as well as in
private homes to which many older pastoralists
retire. Partly, too, this increasing urbanisation has
been caused by factors incidental to the gradual de-
velopment of the secondary and service industries
during the years after 1920. The industrial boom
which followed the depression of the early nineteen-
thirties, the increased activity in the war of 1939-45,
and the effects of European immigration on the
techniques of production and the size of the work-
force since the war, have all stimulated this process.
So much so that only two out of every ten Western
Australians at work are directly connected with
primary production, whether farming, mining or
quarrying, and only four in every ten Western Aus-
tralians live in the Country and Goldfields districts.
Thus the Metropolitan Region, by reason of early
political decisions, by reason of an accelerated central-
isation and industrialisation, and by reason of the
distribution of the State’s industries, has become the
hub of the Australian nation in the West of the con-
tinent. As such it was established in the eighteen-
thirties, was confirmed in its position in the eighteen-
nineties, and has consolidated its position ever since,
while the way of life of its people has followed the
pattern of industrial civilisation throughout the
world.


1
1. Perth in 1829 : contemporary
sketch made in the first year of settle
ment.
2. The expansion of agriculture :
early rural scene in the Swan Valley.
2


3
3. " Diggers ” at Kanowna, in the
Eastern Goldfields, 1898. The great
majority of the miners and prospectors
had come from the Eastern States.
4. One of the first teams to leave for
the Eastern Goldfields in 1890. The gold
rushes of this period gave the first sub-
stantial impetus to the Colony’s expansion.


5
5. The Port of Fremantle : the Inner
Harbour at the mouth of the Swan River,
and beyond it the 32 square miles of
Cockburn Sound.
6. Drilling on Bore No. 1, Rough
Range, Exmouth Gulf, one of the areas in
which large-scale oil exploratory work is
taking place.
6


7
7. Assessing the Fair Average Quality
of wheat, Fremantle. An annual event
symbolising the function of the Region as
the commercial centre of the agricultural
industry.
8. Loading wool, the most important
product of the State, at Fremantle, its
major port, which is nearer to Europe
than any comparable Australian port.
8


CHAPTER 2
The Region in Relation to the State
A THE REGIONS OF WESTERN
AUSTRALIA
The subdivision of the State on a regional basis
originated at a Premiers’ Conference in October,
1944, when it was agreed that " States which have
not already taken action will aim at defining regional
subdivisions for purposes of development and de-
centralisation.” Western Australia was divided into
sixteen regions, the boundaries of which were de-
termined by the Public Works Department.
Although most of the regions have been accepted and
referred to by the Department of National Develop-
ment as " natural ” regions with well defined bound-
aries and, therefore, of some value as statistical and
planning entities, Western Australia does not fall
easily into well-defined regions. This is because of
the absence of important natural features such as
large river valleys or mountain ranges, and also to the
sparseness of its population, and the Zone Develop-
ment Committees set up after the war did n<?t corres-
pond to either these divisions or those used since
1929 by the Government Statistician.
Recently, as a result of a request by the Department
of National Development, the Director of Works
was asked to form a committee to report on any
alterations that might be advisable in regional, zone
or other boundaries, in order that maximum benefit
would be obtained from information collected in
statistics generally, and the 1954 Census in particular.
The committee consisted of representatives of in-
terested Government Departments and the University
of Western Australia, and it approved adjustments
proposed by the Government Statistician to the
boundaries of statistical divisions by certain re-
groupings of statistical districts. Having done this,
its members were then unanimously of the opinion
that the regional divisions should be redrawn to
coincide with the Government Statistician’s amended
Statistical Divisions. Diagram 2 shows the Sta-
tistical Divisions into which the State has been
divided.
Apart from the early activities of the Zone De-
velopment Committees, little work on a regional
basis has been attempted in this State. The De-
partment of National Dvelopment has recently
sponsored a Survey of the South-West Region,
mainly a rural area, which is being carried out by the
Department of Economics at the University. The
Survey and Plan for the Metropolitan Region is the
first comprehensive scheme to be prepared. The
two Regions being studied are the most thickly
populated, and the most easily identified.
For all practical purposes the Metropolitan Planning
Region can be considered synonymous, on a broad
regional basis, with the Metropolitan and Swan
Statistical Divisions, but minor alterations may be
necessary to its boundaries when detailed Local
Planning Schemes are undertaken. All statistical
information presented in the Report relating to the
Metropolitan Region refers to the Metropolitan and
Swan Statistical Divisions.
The Metropolitan Region is bounded on the South
by the South-West Region, and on the North and
East by two agricultural regions. It is to these three
areas that it is most closely connected, but its ties
with the pastoral and mining regions are also con-
siderable. Most of the trade and business is con-
ducted through offices in the City of Perth. Nearly
all the wool, the most important product, is shipped
through Fremantle. For the 12 months ended 30th
June, 1953, Fremantle handled 312,000 bales out of
a total production of 333,000 bales. Even though
there is a road and rail link between the Goldfields
and Esperance, and to the Eastern States, much of the
Goldfields’ trade is through the Metropolitan Region.
In addition, the water supply for the Goldfields comes
from the Mundaring Reservoir, which is only some
twenty miles from Perth.
The Metropolitan Region is centrally placed in the
main agricultural areas of the State. The Northern
Agricultural Region is closely tied through rail and


road communications to Perth and Fremantle, though
it possesses one of the main outports, Geraldton, in
its northern half. The Central Agricultural Region
is the hinterland of the metropolis.
The South-West, which is the second most highly
developed and closely settled area, is contiguous
with the Metropolitan Region. Even though it has
an important outport at Bunbury, the South-West
will become even more closely associated with the
main population area, the Metropolitan Region, to
which it will send an increasing amount of food.
The Southern Agricultural Region is more akin to
the pastoral areas in its relationship with the Metro-
politan Region. Though connected by road and
rail it is, perhaps, the best equipped to develop as a
separate entity. Centred on Albany, with expansion
of agricultural and allied industries, it should make
considerable progress.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
SOUTH-WESTERN PART OF THE STATE
Diagram 2
STATISTICAL DIVISIONS


B. ECONOMIC CHARACTERISTICS
Western Australia in the past has experienced
three major sources of economic wealth in the form
of wool, gold and wheat, and despite the recent
growth of Manufacturing Industry, the economy of
the State is still in large part supported by the sale of
its pastoral and agricultural products. As the State
grows the economy will come to depend to an in-
creasing extent on the greater exploitation of mineral
resources and the development of urban industry.
There is every indication that major oilfields may be
opened up in the northern parts of the State. These
may not only directly enrich the State but may in-
directly stimulate further industrial enterprise. The
post-war economic structure of the State can best be
appreciated from Tables 1, 2 and 3, which indicate
in terms of production value, the contribution of
pritnary and manufacturing industries to the total
wealth of the State.
From Table 1 it can be seen that there has been a
very strong economic reliance on primary production
although the value of manufactured goods has in-
creased from £21,500,000 to £49,200,000 per annum
over the period. The proportion of the net value
of all recorded production contributed by primary
industry has varied from as high as 76.5 per cent,
in the year of very high wool prices (1950-51) to as
low as 65.1 per cent, for 1952—53, when the prices of
primary products had fallen and the increased in-
dustrial activity of the last few years was beginning
to take effect.
Table 1
NET VALUE OF PRODUCTION :
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
PRIMARY AND MANUFACTURING
INDUSTRIES
Annual and Average Values : 1948-49 to 1952-53
Industry.
1948-
49.
1949-
50.
1950-
51.
1951-
52.
1952-
53.
Aver-
age 5
years.
1
r £M.
54-1
67-7
111-0
87-3
91 -7
82-4
Frimary .. -
i%
71-6
72-1
76-5
67-1
65-1
70-4
Manufac-
turing
'£M-
„%
21-5
26-0
34-2
42-7
49-2
34-7
28-4
27 v 9
23-5
32-9
34-9
29-6
Total £M
75-6
93-7
145-2
130-0
140-9
117-1
SOURCE : Compiled from data contained in Part V of
the Statistical Register of Western Australia, 1952 53.
Table 2 indicates the relative contribution of the
various primary industries, and the importance of
the pastoral and agricultural industries. These two
industries are particularly vital to the economy of
Western Australia in that wool and wheat are the
major export items. It is due mainly to the high
prices received for these commodities of recent years
that the State has enjoyed such a buoyant economy.
Mining and quarrying have also lent considerable
support.
Table 2
NET VALUE OF PRODUCTION : WESTERN AUSTRALIA
PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
Annual and Average Values : 1948-49 to 1952-53
Type of Primary Industry.
1948-49.
1949-50.
1950-51.
1951-52.
1952-53.
Average,
5 years.
Average,
per cent.
Agriculture
Pastoral
Trapping
Dairying
Poultry farming
Bee farming
Forestry
Fisheries
Mining and quarrying
Total
21,875,307
20,801,693
258,438
2,122,061
670,709
103,836
1,790,849
595,323
5,872,734
26,604,087
28,247,732
196,253
2,444,761
840,501
40,143
2,021,023
578,214
6,696,793
33,125,536
61,462,437
249,484
2,959,295
891,328
36,303
2,907,453
640,011
8,751,056
31,027,295
36,247,948
244,221
4,003,355
1,146,459
114,762
3,689,592
1,058,287
9,774,976
28,977,019
39,799,110
230,293
3,910,875
1,449,178
100,084
3,327,323
1,514,381
12,409,856
28,321,849
37,311,784
235,738
3,088,069
999,635
79,026
2,747,248
877,243
8,701,083
34-38
45-30
•29
3-75
1-21
•10
3-34
1-07
10-56
54,090,950
67,669,507
111,022,903
87,306,895
91,718,119
82,361,675
100-00
SOURCE : Compiled from data contained in Par,, V and VI of the Statistical Register of Western Australia for years mentioned.


Table 3
NET VALUE OF PRODUCTION : WESTERN AUSTRALIA
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
Annual and Average Values : 1948-49 to 1952-53
Class of Manufacturing Industry.
1948-49.
1949-50.
1950-51.
1951-52.
1952-53.
Average,
5 years.
Average
per cent.
Treatment of non-metalliferous mine and
quarry products
681,611
812,829
1,252,943
1,707,231
2,007,224
1,292,368
3-72
Bricks, pottery, glass, etc.
557,735
745,217
999,362
1,293,615
1,613,455
1,041,877
3-00
Chemicals, dyes, explosives, paints, oils and
grease
1,321,201
1,440,281
1,767,032
3,161,460
3,354,326
2,208,860
6-36
Industrial metals, machines, implements and
conveyances
6,651,569
8,396,419
12,004,772
14,078,218
16,026,139
11,431,423
32-91
Precious metals, jewellery and plate ..
122,146
134,842
177,321
214,296
249,904
179,702
•52
Textiles and textile goods (inclusive of knitted
goods) ..
375,804
685,682
844,608
774,084
1,035,667
743,169
2-14
Skins and leather (not clothing or footwear)
439,000
620,714
627,403
726,824
729,844
628,757
1-81
Clothing (except knitted)
1,639,909
1,917,280
2,493,679
2,862,804
2,791,500
2,341,034
6-74
Food, drink and tobacco
4,764,321
5,230,006
6,160,369
7,458,693
8,527,853
6,428,248
18-50
Woodworking and basketware
1,972,243
2,455,016
3,590,818
4,988,760
6,073,967
3,816,161
10-99
Furniture of wood, bedding, etc.
692,202
808,280
1,008,201
1,257,884
1,270,971
1,007,508
2-90
Stationery, paper, printing, bookbinding
1,244,905
1,658,162
1,949,531
2,417,446
2,566,094
1,967,228
5-66
Rubber
65,387
99,824
148,039
214,153
253,648
156,210
•45
Musical instruments
9,068
8,677
10,919
12,329
11,619
10,522
•03
Miscellaneous
186,253
180,257
220,652
264,119
291,188
228,494
•66
Heat, light and power ..
750,533
850,540
964,735
1,313,409
2,387,933
1,253,430
3-61
Total
21,473,887
26,044,026
34,220,384
42,745,325
49,191,332
34,734,991
100-00
SOURCE : Compiled from data contained in Part VI of the Statistical Register of Western Australia, 1952—53.
Table 3 indicates the relative importance of the
various classes of factory production. Industrial
metals and machines are shown to contribute the
highest annual value, followed by food, drink and
tobacco, and woodworking, in that order.
Table 4 sets out the distribution of the work force
in the State. The proportions show a similarity
with Australia as a whole and with other countries,
such as the United States of America and Canada,
Table 4
DISTRIBUTION OF WORK FORCE
WESTERN AUSTRALIA : 1947
Industry.
Number.
Percentage.
Primary
50,958
24-8
M anufacturing
39,012
18-9
Building and construction
15,758
7-6
Service
100,672
48-7
Total
206,400
100-0
SOURCE : Commonwealth Government, Census of the
Commonwealth of Australia, 30th June, 1947.
which have large export surpluses of primary pro-
ducts. In all these countries the proportion of
employment in primary production is declining, and
the proportion in both the manufacturing and service
industries is growing. This development of the
economy coincides with greater urbanisation. In-
creasing numbers of workers are attracted to the
growing industrial areas, and the expansion of the
great urban centres is stimulated. The probable
effect on the. State of this world-wide trend will be
to give impetus to the development of the Metro-
politan Region, though the country centres of the
agricultural and mining areas will also grow con-
siderably. On a lesser scale, the same trend will be
evident in the Metropolitan Region. This is dis-
cussed more fully in Chapter 4.
C. THE METROPOLITAN REGION
(i) General
The area for which the Plan for the Metropolitan
Region has been prepared is approximately 2,000
square miles, or 1,280,000 acres, in extent, which is
slightly less than that covered by the Greater London




Plan. The general shape is an oblong, about 70
miles North to South and, on average, less than 30
miles from East to West. Its centre falls on latitude
32 degrees South and longitude 116 degrees East.
It contains 29 separate local authorities, the bound-
aries of which are indicated in Diagram 3.
The natural resources of the Region are not large
and vary considerably in their importance. Within
an economic distance there are sources of potable
water to supply the needs of 1,000,000 to 1,500,000
persons. There is sand and gravel for all building
purposes, and supplies of building stones, such as
limestone and sandstone, granite and ironstone.
Clays suitable for brick making are available in limited
quantities within the Region, and there are con-
siderable supplies of limestone for cement making,
for which oyster shell from the river bed is also used.
Most of the original hardwood forests have been cut
over, but the pine forests planted in the district are
now beginning to provide softwood as a thinning
programme is implemented. It would be sound
economic policy greatly to extend the area of land
used for pine plantations within the Region.
Following the general Australian pattern, the
Metropolitan Region contains a very high percentage
of the total State population. An estimate of De-
cember, 1953, showed that, of the State total of
630,000, nearly 390,000 people (or 61.5 per cent.)
were living within the boundaries of the Region. The
rate of growth of the Region is greater than that of
the State as a whole, and much greater than that of
the rest of the State. If present trends continue
more than 80 per cent, of the total population of
the State might live within the Metropolitan Region
before the end of the century. It cannot be pre-
tended that this, although explicable and perhaps
inevitable, is desirable. The concentration of trade,
manufacturing industry, wealth and people in a tiny
part of the State’s vast area attracts more and more
people and capital, and causes a relative reduction in
flow to the smaller towns and country areas.
At the present time the concentration of population
in great urban areas is a world-wide phenomenon.
Although many countries have attempted to put into
effect decentralisation policies, seemingly irresistible
economic and social forces work against them. It
is not within the scope of this Report to discuss the
merits or demerits of wide-scale decentralisation.
The Plan deals with the Metropolitan Region only,
and as such must make provision for a continuation
of trends and policies which can only be varied by
decisions made on a Commonwealth and State rather
than a regional basis, and by a change in the present
direction of economic development brought about
by social and economic forces.
For reasons which are explained elsewhere, the
Plan envisages some measure of dispersal within the
Region. Fortunately, the development at Kwinana
is a step towards this.
The present-day concentration of population in
the Metropolitan Region cannot be attributed to the
growth of manufacturing industry. By comparison
with other Australian metropolitan areas, there is a
smaller proportion of workers in manufacturing
industry and a greater in those of a primary produc-
tion or service nature (Chapter 4, Table 9).
Of the primary industries, agriculture is the most
important and is made up of vegetable and fruit
production, poultry farming, pig keeping and dairy-
ing. Forestry, and quarrying for building and road
materials are also of importance.
Table 5
DISTRIBUTION OF WORK FORCE
METROPOLITAN REGION : 1947
Industry.
Number.
Percentage.
Primary
8,461
7-0
Manufacturing
31,548
25-9
Building and construction
9,956
8-2
Service
71,579
58-9
Total
121,544
100-0
SOURCE : Commonwealth Government, Census of the
Commonwealth of Australia, 30th June, 1947.
The Region’s work force comprised 121,544
persons in 1947, or some 40 per cent, of its population,
compared with the State’s work force of 206,400, or
41 per cent, of its total population. The distribution
of this work force, as shown in Table 5, can also be
directly compared with that of the State shown in
Table 4. The Region employed 17 per cent, of the
State’s workers in primary production, 81 per cent,
of its manufacturing workers, 63 per cent, of those
employed in building and construction, 71 per cent,
of those in service industries, and 59 per cent, of all
workers.


There was, in 1947, 7 per cent, of the Region’s
work force employed in primary production, and
this percentage will, almost certainly, show a decrease
in the future. Those engaged in manufacturing
industries in the Region constitute only 26 per cent,
of the total regional work force, and it is in this
sector of the economy that the most spectacular
increases are to be expected in the future. The
Region attracts and will continue to attract a very
high proportion of new manufacturing industry. It
is the great centre of population, with an ample
reserve of electric power and water. It includes the
principal port, it is the hub of the State transport
network, and it has social, recreational, and cultural
amenities which do not exist in other regions.
The 8.2 per cent, of the work force engaged on
building and construction is not expected to increase.
It may, in fact, show a relative decline. The present
period of rapid development, following the war-time
dislocation of this industry, may have attracted a
higher proportion of workers but, despite the amount
of developmental work to be accomplished over the
next half century, it is anticipated that there will be
a slight movement from building and construction to
manufacturing industries. These aspects will be
discussed further in Chapter 4.
Perth and Fremantle have grown as the adminis-
trative, commercial and transport centre of, a very
large but thinly populated State, with an economy
founded on primary production. They have served
the State as a whole and, as a consequence, over 71
per cent, of the State’s service work force, as defined
in Chapter 4, is employed in the Region. In the
future growth of the Region it must be recognised,
however, that the relative increase in the number so
employed should decline in relation to the increase
in the number in manufacturing industry.
The Metropolitan Region, both by the nature of
its geographical position in the centre of the agri-
cultural areas and by the policy of early governments,
became the centre of the State’s activities. The other
functions have naturally followed. The State pattern
of development, emphasised in the last fifty years,
has become so firmly established that few remember
there were once alternatives. In the foreseeable
future the major productive capacity of the State,
apart from primary industry, will be centred in the
Region. Much depends on its future efficiency.
(ii) Physical Characteristics
The Region forms part of the coastal plain of the
State. The predominant features are the long sandy
beaches on the western seaboard, with sand and
limestone ridges behind them, and the Darling Es-
carpment on the eastern edge. The Region is cent-
rally divided by the Swan River. This forms a
barrier but it also provides a fine recreational open
space between fairly continuously developed banks.
The greater part of the coastal plain on which most
development has taken place is very suitable for
building. Difficulties are only encountered where
there are swampy conditions or high water table
levels. In areas of the heavier soil types, including
clays, some service difficulties have been experienced.
Communications with the East and South are con-
fined to routes through depressions in the Darling
Ranges.
Nearly all the soils of the coastal plain are of low
inherent fertility, and have never been extensively
used for agricultural purposes. The areas possess-
ing moist summer land near swamps have, in the past,
been important for vegetable production, but this
industry is now mainly confined to areas of yellow-
brown sand at Spearwood, Osborne Park, Balcatta
and Wanneru where sprinkler irrigation can be used.
The use of these soils for dairying has declined. The
majority of the dairy farms supplying the Metropolitan
Region are now South of Armadale where they form
part of the northern section of the main dairy belt
of the State. The alluvial areas along the Swan and
Canning Rivers, and the slopes and valleys of the
Darling Ranges, are used mainly for fruit production
and for a relatively small amount of vegetable pro-
duction. The area along the Swan River, which was
most important land in the early days of the State, is
now nearly all used for vine growing. It is one of
the most intensively cultivated areas of the State.
The foothills, especially around Midland Junction,
are used for grazing and fat stock holding for the
saleyards and abattoirs. Poultry farming has been
successfully established on the least attractive soils,
which have also been used extensively for pine
plantations. Apart from the alluvial soils of the
valleys and slopes, the remaining soils which have
come into use have done so almost solely because
of their proximity to the market, and there are still
very considerable tracts of virgin land.


The climate of the Region, suitable for many types
of agricultural production, is Mediterranean in type
and similar to that of coastal areas in Southern Cali-
fornia and Portugal. The whole of the South-West
enjoys a warm, temperate climate, ideal for all types
of outdoor activity. Rainfall occurs mainly during
the winter months, and in Perth the average is about
35 inches per year. It is slightly less near the coast
and slightly more in the Hills. Temperatures are
seldom excessively high, and never very low. The
summers are most enjoyable, with almost unbroken
daily sunshine for four months. Although it is often
quite hot in the daytime, the sea breeze generally
makes the evenings cool and refreshing. The purity
of the air along the coastal plain allows very bright
sunshine to reach ground level, and Perth enjoys
upwards of 2,830 hours of sunshine on average each
year. It is the sunniest capital in the Common-
wealth.
The general location of the capital and port, per-
haps more than physical and climatic attributes, has
been mainly responsible for their development into
a metropolis. In the early days the river provided a
ready means of transport to the seafaring British
settlers, but it is now only used by pleasure boats.
The alluvial soils of the valleys, in the immediate
vicinity of the capial, were not unlike those the early
settlers had used to farm at home. The undulating
sandy terrain around Perth made building operations
simple. The coastal plain made for easy communica-
tion with the North and South, and there were con-
venient routes through the hills to the agricultural
areas beyond the ranges. The relatively heavy rain-
fall in the hills and the nature of the valleys has
allowed the large scale catchment of good potable
water within easy reach of Perth. Some of this is
also used, together with water from subterranean
sources, for limited irrigation schemes.
Further reference is made in Chapter 5 to the
effect of physical and climatic conditions on the
existing and proposed pattern of development in the
Region.
( iii) Administration
From the earliest days Perth has been the seat of
government. The various State Departments all
have their main offices in the Capital City. It is also
the headquarters of branches of Commonwealth
Government Departments, and the main garrison and
training establishments are within the Region. Gov-
ernmental employment is considerable and it will
grow with the State. Much of the activity in parts
of the central city area is concerned either directly
or indirectly with governmental administration. The
accommodation problem becomes more serious as
government competes with commerce for expensive
sites in a small, and already congested, part of the
Central Area.
( iv ) Agriculture
The main agricultural products produced in the
Region are vegetables, stone and citrus fruits, grapes
and eggs, while limited amounts of dairy and pig
products are also produced in the southern area.
The market gardens are located on the brown and
yellow sands of the coastal plain, where adequate
good water is available for sprinkler irrigation, and,
with the exception of potatoes, pumpkins and
tomatoes, about 60 per cent, of the State’s vegetable
production is grown in the Region. Some small
market gardens, in the majority of cases associated
with orchards, are found in the Armadale-Kelmscott
area, but the main vegetable areas are at Osborne
Park-Wanneru and Spear wood.
The orchards and vineyards are located on the
better class soils in the Hills, along the valleys of the
Canning and Swan Rivers, and in the Lower Chittering
valley. The Region produces upwards of 50 per
cent, of the State’s oranges and other citrus fruits,
and a considerably higher percentage of the stone
fruits, while almost all the grapes for both table and
other purposes are produced in the Swan valley.
Grapes, grape products and citrus fruits, are at times,
exported from the Region.
More than 70 per cent, of the State’s total recorded
production of eggs takes place in the Region, and
although many small flocks are run as a sideline with
other types of production, the tendency is towards
specialised farms with one operator managing a large-
sized flock. The sandy soil types of land in the
Region are ideal for poultry farming, and the com-
mercial industry has grown up in close proximity to
the market, and the source of supply of its main
foodstuff—mill offal.
The remaining dairying and grazing areas in the
Region provide some of the city’s milk and dairy
products, while piggeries take advantage of waste


9
9. The Opening of State Parliament in
Perth, the Capital City, seat of govern-
ment, and centre of administration.
10. Scene at a trotting meeting, Glouces-
ter Park, Perth. Most of the major
sporting events take place in the Region.
10


11
11. Arrival of migrant ship, Fremantle.
Since 1947 over 70,000 migrants have been
absorbed by the State.
12. Children at play on a metropolitan
beach. Over 100,000 children have been
born in the State since 1947.
12


foodstuffs, and obtain their store stock for fattening
from the Midland Junction Markets. Considerable
areas of grazing land around the abattoirs are used for
holding paddocks while, South of Armadale and to
the coast, a considerable volume of milk is produced.
This part of the Region merges into the main dairy
belt of the State, which meets the main requirements
of the Metropolitan Area. The agricultural economy
of the Region is discussed in more detail in Chapter 4.
( v ) Trade and Commerce
The geographical position of Fremantle, and the
decision to make it the major port, has led to the
concentration of export-import trade through the
Region. The Port of Fremantle, which includes the
whole of Cockburn Sound, is the only one equipped
to handle large volumes of goods of all classes entering
and leaving the State. For some time to come, it is
unlikely that the trade of the State will warrant more
than one deep water port able to handle all classes
of cargo. An additional factor, of course, is that
the main trading houses and warehouses are in Fre-
mantle and Perth.
The Goldfields, which might have caused the
development of Esperance as a port and supply centre,
were tied to Perth and Fremantle by the transport
and water supply systems. The transport system
may have favoured the Region in other ways. The
relatively low railway freight rates have probably
encouraged the transport of agricultural products to
the metropolis for processing, as against encouraging
treatment near the source of supply.
In the days of sailing ships, Albany was the first
Western Australian town to contain many Eastern
States and overseas business houses. When Fre-
mantle became the port for steamships, and secured
the bulk of the overseas trade, many firms moved
their headquarters either to Perth or to Fremantle.
Many have since set up branches throughout the State
but their head offices are in the Metropolitan Area.
In addition to the main commercial and banking
establishments, the large departmental and specialist
stores in the Region have become important to the
State as a whole. The mail order trade and improved
communications have encouraged their growth. Many
of the large city firms, as well as stock and station
agents, act as shopkeepers for the pastoral areas, and
many of the pastoral companies are themselves ad-
Diagram 4
EXTERNAL TRADE FLOW : WESTERN
AUSTRALIA
Average annual value in £ (000)s. of exports and
imports for five years ending 1953
ministered from Perth. The Region has become the
headquarters of the main business enterprises of the
State, and has assumed financial control of many of
the State’s resources. The flow of trade into and out
of the Region and other parts of the State is shown
graphically in Diagram 4.
( vi) Manufacturing Industry
The growth of manufacturing industry is fairly
recent, and from the beginning the great majority of
factory workers have been employed in the Region.
Secondary industries began, on a small scale, close
to the Central Area of Perth. They were at the hub
of the rail and road network and within the main
market for their goods. Others, requiring special
facilities close to a port, started in Fremantle. Some


few selected sites near main railway lines which, until
recently, were the principal transport media for all
internal trade. Factories are now growing on sites
away from both railways and port. They rely on
road transport of raw products and manufactured
goods. The industries which have grown up in the
Region to take advantage of its resources, including
the main market and the largest labour pool, have
created more employment opportunities which, in
turn, have attracted still more people to the Metro-
politan Area. With little secondary industry, apart
from that concerned with foodstuffs, sawmilling,
chemicals, and implement and automobile repairs,
located outside its boundaries, the Region is the one
major industrial centre of the State. The establish-
ment of large, new industries at Kwinana will en-
courage the regional growth of manufacturing industry,
which is dealt with more fully in Chapter 4.
( vii ) Social Characteristics
The characteristic way of life in any country or
region is a product of environment and the history
of its people. It Is neither desirable nor possible
to attempt to describe fully, in a work of this nature,
the characteritics of the people of the Metropolitan
Region. A brief appreciation of the social history
and background will, however, assist in an under-
standing of the relationship between the past, the
present and the future.
The effects of the pioneering stage on the develop-
ment of the large and isolated land area of the State
is apparent in the spirit of the outback which still
exists in the pastoral and eastern agricultural areas.
Although it is much less apparent in the urban areas
it nevertheless persists in a greatly modified form.
The gold rush brought new blood and different
attitudes. The " happy-go-lucky ” outlook of earlier
miners is still to be found in the Goldfields. The
wheatbelt has been developed in the last half-century
and a new community of interests has come into
being. The later development of the dairy areas has
given rise to another group. Now, and more par-
ticularly in the Region, the growth of manufacturing
and factory employment has resulted in yet another
group with associated interests, to be added to those
already established in the country towns and the
Capital City.
All these social groups have been influenced by
the harshness of a land formerly inhabited only by
nomadic aborigines. The pioneering phase of de-
velopment gave the early settlers a sturdy independence
and resourcefulness, and their homesteads were the
centres of social activity. It was only the growth of
rail and road transport that gave the State towns
other than those on the seaboard. Today the station
homesteads of the North-West are reminiscent of
the early settlers’ homesteads and fulfil much the
same function. The gold discoveries were all made
in inhospitable country, well inland, where extremes
of climate were often experienced, and gave rise to a
temporary, reckless type of existence. The early
development of the wheatbelt was an almost equally
hazardous procedure when development, following
the railways, pushed East into the marginal wheat-
growing country. Then came the settlement of the
dairy country and the struggle against the natural
vegetation of hardwood forests. With the smaller
holdings, distances between homes were not so great,
and the settlers were able to enjoy amenities more
urban in character. The development of all the
agricultural communities has been influenced by the
unreliability of the seasons, bringing periodic droughts
and other hardships. This alone has given their
people a different outlook to those living in the
principal towns.
From the early days immigrants, whether they
came as settlers, miners, professional and business-
men, tradesmen or industrial workers, have brought
with them the customs and outlook of their home-
lands. The British migrant has been predominant
from the time of the first settlement on the Swan to
the present. The pioneers were British migrants
from home and from the Eastern States, with a
few other Europeans and a sprinkling from Asian
countries. The British brought their customs and
clung to them in a new environment, not unlike the
early settlements in parts of North America, which
offered them a freer, more spacious life. In the
early days the landholders or farmers formed the
majority. It was not until the introduction of
convicts, and people on assisted passages, that public
works on any scale could be attempted.
The first great increase in population came with
the discovery of gold in quantity. This coincided
with a depression, or financial collapse in the Eastern
States, whence came the majority of those seeking


gold. They had a very different outlook to the
pastoralists and early agriculturalists, and were largely
responsible for bringing Western Australia into the
Federation of 1901. Many of these " tothersiders ”
settled on the land and supported their fellow agri-
culturalists, who had had dry land farming experience
in the southern Eastern States and who had moved
West. The influx during the inter-war group settle-
ment days was predominantly from Great Britain.
The migrants were settled on the dairy farms of the
South-West and they were to face hardships com-
parable with those of earlier pioneers. The partial
failure of the Settlement Scheme caused many to
migrate to the city to seek employment. After the
depression they were absorbed into manufacturing
industries which were then beginning to grow sub-
stantially for the first time.
Prior to the second world war, Southern Europeans
were becoming prominent among migrant groups and
had taken up market gardening and similar occupa-
tions, supplanting the earlier Chinese gardeners.
Since the war there has been an active migration
policy implemented by the Commonwealth and in
the five-year period 1947-51 over 570,000 migrants
were admitted into Australia, of which 48.7 per cent,
were British. 1 The non-British were mainly Italians,
Dutch, Poles and other Eastern Europeans, and con-
sisted of family groups as well as displaced persons.
In general, assisted migrants from non-British coun-
tries have been tied to rural and other primary
employment for the first two years, but many have
since moved to the metropolitan areas. The Region
now has a mixture of many types of family, ranging
from the descendants of early settlers to the newest
of .New Australians.
Because of these influences, the social and cultural
pattern is undergoing many changes, even though it
remains predominantly British in character. The
most outstanding feature which distinguishes the
Region from the rest of the State is the diversity of
its interests. Whereas in the pastoral areas, the
wheatbelt, and the Goldfields a group consciousness
is found, not unlike that which existed in the early
days, in the Metropolitan Region no similar uni-
formity of interest can be detected. Social activities
are diverse, and the demand for those facilities which
were not required during the first century and a
quarter of the history of the State is intensifying. The
task of winning a livelihood in a rugged land, with an
ideal climate for outdoor life and sports, was not in
the past conducive to the establishment of cultural
pursuits which are urban in character. Outside the
towns, whenever settlement was close enough to
warrant buildings other than those found at the
homestead, they have generally been in the form of
an agricultural hall associated with a recreation
ground. In the smaller country towns, subsequent
to the establishment of local government, Road
Board Halls were built. In the larger country towns
facilities were extended to include town halls, and
sometimes libraries or institutes, where some en-
couragement has been given to amateur bodies in-
terested in either music or drama. With greater
economic stability and increased leisure there is a
deepening of interest in music, the theatre and similar
pursuits, and a wider range of buildings is becoming
necessary. Country tours conducted by the Aus-
tralian Broadcasting Commission and the University’s
Adult Education Board are evidence of the growing
demand.
The Capital City has quite naturally become the
centre of cultural, educational and sporting activities.
It contains the University and its associated Adult
Education Board, the Public Library and Museum,
and the main theatre movement. The principal
Technical College and the Teachers’ Training College
are in the Region, as are the majority of public and
private secondary schools, and correspondence courses
are despatched from the city to children in the out-
back. There is a marked concentration of a large
part of the State’s higher educational establishments.
Major sports grounds and facilities for all outdoor
sports have been extensively developed in and around
Perth. The headquarters of the Western Australian
Turf Club, the Western Australian Trotting Associa-
tion, the Western Australian Cricket and Football
Associations are all located in Perth. Beaches, golf
courses, sports grounds, football and cricket ovals
and tennis courts are intensively used and numerous.
These activities will multiply in relation to the
continuing increase of population, the accumulation
of wealth and the influx of large numbers of migrants
with new interests and demands. The Plan takes
into account growing demands, and many of the
major land use proposals discussed in later Chapters
relate to the social and cultural aspects of the Region’s
development.
1 The millionth post-war immigrant arrived early in 1955.




CHAPTER 3
People
A. INTRODUCTION
The two preceding Chapters have discussed briefly
the history of the Region and State and, in relation
to past trends and known resources, have suggested
broadly the manner in which, and the extent to which,
the Region might develop. Economic expansion and
population growth are intimately associated ; some-
times one, sometimes the other is the determinant.
More usually the process is so complex that it is
difficult to distinguish determinant from resultant.
Natural resources can be utilised to the full only if
the requisite number of workers and capital for de-
velopment are available. Conversely, available natural
resources together with the necessary investment
capital will attract further young people and, in con-
sequence, result in a high rate of natural increase.
Economic resources will be exploited to the full only
in answer to an effective market demand. In the
past the main demand has been from overseas and
for primary products, but in the future it is anticipated
that this will be supported by an overseas or inter-
state market for manufactures and a considerably
increased home market. It is, therefore, necessary
to observe the interaction of economic expansion
and population growth in the past and to predict the
effect of their inter-relationship in the future.
The preparation of a plan on a regional scale is
essentially a matter of ensuring a workable and con-
venient arrangement and distribution of available
land between the many activities, often conflicting,
which are likely to have claims on it. The number,
nature and pattern of such activities will be de-
termined by the size of the population and its char-
acter, and by the physical possibilities and limitations
of the land within the Region. The changing char-
acter of the people of the State, itself a subject of
great interest and complexity, has been briefly noted
in the previous Chapter. The effect of the physical
background on the distribution of these activities is
discussed in Chapter 5 and other Chapters. It is
primarily with overall population growth and its
effect on the use and development of land with which
this Chapter is concerned.
In Australia, as in all young countries whose future
depends upon the extent to which new citizens can
be attracted and absorbed, population forecasts are
particularly difficult. The economic potential of the
Continent, Commonwealth Government policy, in-
centives to emigration arising out of internal con-
ditions in European countries, and the relative
attractions offered by the States of the Common-
wealth, are all largely unpredictable.
Valid assumptions can be based only on past
and present tendencies and policies, weighted where it
is appropriate, in the light of foreseeable changes.
The rate of increase, although important in a pro-
gramme for development, does not necessarily affect
the definition of land required for development,
providing that the basic assumption of continuous
increase is accepted. Thus, although in this Chapter
certain conclusions are drawn in regard to population
figures at specific dates, the validity of the Plan will
not be affected if the assumed rate of increase is
either accelerated or decelerated. Whether the Region
achieves a population of 1,000,000 in 25, 30 or 50
years, the suggested pattern of land use would, in its
general outline, be appropriate. In detail, of course,
it should be subject to modification from time to
time in the light of actual events. The main purpose
of the analyses which follow is to justify the basic
premise of continuous increase, and to establish a
reasonable and realistic objective towards which
planning proposals can be directed. The assumption
of continuous increase in itself implies that the Plan
cannot be considered as finite, and that, as the Region
progresses towards the realisation of those con-
ditions on which the proposals are based, further
consideration must be given to the development of
the outer areas of the Region, or of other areas
outside the Region, as circumstances require.
An assessment of the total rate of increase involves
an analysis of the factors that affect both natural
increase within and immigration into the Region.


Diagram 5
POPULATION INCREASE


B. NATURAL INCREASE
Prior to the second world war and in common
with the rest of the Western World, the State had
been experiencing a long term trend towards a re-
duction in the rate of natural increase, but since 1946
there has again been an upward movement. In the
ten years, 1861-1870 (the earliest period for which
figures are available) the average rate of natural
increase amounted to 18.98 per 1,000 of population.
This was when the State was receiving convict labour
and embarking on exploration and development of
its pastoral and agricultural areas. The flood of
migrants, predominantly males, attracted by the gold
rush in the mid-1890’s brought about a considerable
decline and in the decade 1891-1900 the average rate
of natural increase fell to 14.07 per 1,000 population.
The period of agricultural expansion in the 1920’s
failed to halt this trend and, by the decade 1931-40,
which contained the worst depression years, the
average rate of increase fell as low as 9.74 per 1,000
population. The war years saw a slight recovery,
and in the post-war period of eight years the average
rate of increase has risen to 16.32 per 1,000 popula-
tion, with 1953 reaching the highest rate since 1916.
Since 1901, natural increase has contributed an
average annual rate of growth of 1.5 per cent, per
annum. These fluctuations are shown graphically in
Diagram 5. ,
The future rate of natural increase in the State is
unlikely to remain constant owing to changes in
economic and other conditions which influence the
number of births per year. Forecasts are difficult
to make owing to the complexity of the problem
regarding the probable future age structure and sex
of'the population, which is dependent to a large
extent on the number and types of immigrants enter-
ing the State. However, the natural increase rate
since the last war has been between 1.6 per cent, and
1.7 per cent., and it is reasonable to assume that this
figure will apply for some considerable time, both in
the State and the Region. From this increase alone,
the population of the Region would rise from 388,000
to between 650,000 and 660,000 by 1985.
C. MIGRATION
Since 1860 there has been a net gain of 282,000
persons due to the excess of immigration over emigra-
tion. Compared with the total population gain of
587,000 during the same period, this represents
almost half the total increase.
Gain due to migration has varied considerably
during the period, but generally speaking it can be
said that three clearly defined periods have accounted
for the greater part of the total gain. The twenty
years from 1890 to 1910 saw immigration contribute
practically 170,000 to the population of the State.
The finding of gold at Coolgardie in 1892, and at
Kalgoorlie in the following year, brought about the
largest gold rush the State has seen and stimulated
immigration for a considerable time. The decade
following the First World War resulted in consistent
immigration to such an extent that the State ex-
perienced a net gain, due to this cause, of 50,000 for
the decade. The economic recession of the 1930’5,
and the Second World War, resulted in a net loss
of population by migration, but this was followed in
the post-war years with the period of Commonwealth
assisted passages. In the six years since 1947 the
State has gained 63,000 people from migration,
predominantly overseas migration.
It is apparent from this brief outline, and par-
ticularly from the graphs in Diagram 5, that the rate
of immigration into the State has varied according to
changing economic conditions, and that the greatest
influx of population coincides with periods of
economic expansion and promise. Because of this
factor, the future rate of immigration into the State
is difficult to assess. These cycles of prosperity and
insecurity are a world-wide phenomenon and it is
impossible to say whether they may become sub-
ordinate to or affected by other considerations. It
can only be assumed that the past pattern will con-
tinue to apply in principle, varying in terms of
absolute numbers as the absorption capacity of the
Commonwealth increases. Because of this, although
future immigration expressed as a flat rate of annual
intake might be applicable for a limited number of
years, over a long period such a forecast would not
be valid.
The important fact is that, despite extensive
fluctuations, the net gain from immigration has,
since 1901, resulted in an average annual increase of
0.83 per cent, in the State. With the Commonwealth
of Australia playing a more important part in world
trade and politics, with a more diverse and resilient
internal structure, and with growing congestion and
restriction of opportunities in European countries,


there is no reason why immigration into Australia
should diminish until saturation point is reached.
The maximum capacity of the Continent is a matter
of great speculation, and need not affect conclusions
relating to the comparatively limited period of the
Plan. A continuing rate of Commonwealth immigra-
tion has, therefore, been accepted as a basis for
estimating immigration into the State, and the total
rate of Commonwealth increase is plotted on the
graphs in Diagram 5 at a rate of approximately 1.6 per
cent., which is the average rate of growth maintained
since 1901.
The resources of Western Australia have been
discussed, and there is no reason to suppose that the
distribution of immigration within the Common-
wealth will vary to any degree, except perhaps to
the benefit of this, the youngest of its States which,
with Queensland, has perhaps the greatest relative
expansion potential. On the foregoing premises, a
projection of the past relationship will result in an
average net gain to the State, through immigration,
of approximately 0.8 per cent, per year.
The two rates coirjJbined give an average total rate
of growth since 1901 of 2.3 per cent, per annum,
made up of 1.5 per cent, natural increase and 0.8
per cent, migration. This rate of growth for the
State has also been plotted on Diagram 5.
The post-war experience in both Western Aus-
tralia and the Commonwealth as a whole is also of
considerable interest. Western Australia has enjoyed
a total rate of growth of 3.27 per cent., made up of
1.69 per cent, natural increase and 1.58 per cent,
migration. The comparable figures for Australia as
a whole are total rate of growth 2.31 per cent, per
annum, 1.38 per cent, natural increase and .93 per
cent, migration.
D. DISTRIBUTION OF POPULATION
WITHIN THE STATE
Diagram 5 reveals that by far the most spectacular
increase in the State has been in the Metropolitan
Region. The factors which have influenced this, and
which it is anticipated will continue to operate in the
next several decades, have been discussed in previous
Chapters. Not only has there been movement into
the State from other areas, but there has been a
continual movement into the Region from the rest
of the State. This is an experience common to all
Australian capitals, but is perhaps even more marked
in Western Australia.
Prior to the gold rush the population of the Region
was some 17,000 persons, or 34 per cent, of the State
total. In 1901, after the very rapid increase that
took place in the previous decade, the Region’s share
had increased to 40 per cent., in spite of the growing
challenge for supremacy from the Goldfields. Little
relative change took place in the next decade, but
in the period 1911-1921 the Region gained virtually
the whole of the State’s increase and at the close
contained 50 per cent, of the State’s population.
The twelve years to the next Census saw the Region
gain over 50,000 while the rest of the State gained
just under 50,000. In the period 1933-47 the rest
of the State contributed some 15,000 to the Region
in addition to 64,000 gained from elsewhere, resulting
in a distribution of 60 per cent, of the population in
' the Region, and 40 per cent, in the rest of the State.
It is estimated that the Region gained 81,000 in the
six years following 1947, and the rest of the State
40,000, and that the present day distribution .of
population is 61.5 per cent, in the Region, 38.5 per
cent, in the rest of the State.
The annual rate of growth of the Region in relation
to that of the State is also of interest : Over the
period 1947 to 1953, the Region averaged almost 4
per cent, per annum as against the rest of the State’s
3 per cent, per annum and the State as a whole 3.5
per cent, per annum. Since the 1901 Census, the
Region has averaged over 3 per cent, per annum as
compared with 2.3 per cent, averaged in the State
as a whole (Section C).
On the basis that the State will maintain the rate
of increase of the past 50 years, as suggested in Section
C, and that the past and present tendencies in the
relationship between Region and State continue, the
rate of growth to be expected in the Region is some
3 per cent, per year. This rate of growth for the
Region has been plotted on Diagram 5. Applying
this to the present population of approximately
388,000, gives a population of 1,000,000 by 1985.
This is a conservative figure, and assumes fluctuations,
similar to those of the past 50 years, which may or
may not operate before the optimum population is
achieved. If the present economic buoyancy, and
the consequent attractions offered to immigrants, is


maintained, the post-war rate of 4 per cent, may
continue to apply to the Region for many years, and
a population of 1,000,000 could be attained by 1978.
It should be emphasised that these forecasts are
subject to the provisions set out in Section A.
Although an average increase of about 3 per cent, can
be expected, the actual year to year change will be
affected by Governmental policy decisions relating
to migration and the opportunities for migrants in
the Region.
Relating the anticipated population increase in the
Region to that in the State as a whole, it will be seen
from Diagram 5 that the present proportion of the
State population in the Region (61.5 per cent.) is
likely to increase to somewhere about 76 per cent,
when the regional population reaches LOOO,OOO, or
over 80 per cent, when the population reaches
1,400,000. Whether this relationship is desirable or
capable of adjustment was discussed in Chapter 2 (C).
If the regional rate of increase is accepted as a con-
stant, an increase for the whole State greater than the
2.3 per cent, suggested above would result in a lower
proportion living in the Region. Alternatively,
assuming the State rate of increase as constant, if
over a long period a deliberate policy of fostering
the development of other Regions were successful, a
similar result would be obtained. However, any
variations in the relationship, in whatever way
effected, could result only in modifying the period
within which the planned regional population will
be achieved. Present trends indicate that 1,000,000
persons will be living in the Region by 1985, and that
at this date 305,000 will live in the rest of the State.
The validity of the Plan will not be impaired if these
proportions are not realised, or if the proportions
are realised before or after the date estimated.
E. DISTRIBUTION OF POPULATION
IN THE REGION
The growth of the main residential areas with-
in the Region is illustrated in Diagrams 6 and 7.
Starting with small settlements at both Perth and
Fremantle and then later at Guildford, close settle-
ment had spread by 1901 to take in parts of Cottesloe,
Claremont and Peppermint Grove along the railway
line, through parts of Subiaco, and southwards to
parts of South Perth and Victoria Park, and to
Midland Junction. At that time, out of the Region’s
total population of 76,000, over 40,000 lived in
Perth and over 20,000 in Fremantle, and a total of
about 70,000 in the area covered by Diagram 6.
The period from the beginning of the century to
the outbreak of the first world war saw mainly an
expansion of these earlier settlements with develop-
ment commencing in Nedlands, and between Perth
and Guildford on the railway line.
The period between the two world wars saw con-
siderable development both North and South of the
river and along the main lines of communication, and
it was from this base that the rapid post-war housing
pattern developed. Fremantle had expanded both
North and East as well as to the South-West ;
Cottesloe, Claremont and Nedlands had linked up ;
Perth had expanded to the West, North and East and
housing had started at Scarborough and North
Beach ; Bassendean had developed ; South of the
river Victoria Park linked with South Perth, and
settlement had taken place on both banks of the
Canning River where it enters the Swan River ;
building had occurred along the Albany Highway
and in the Hills at Kalamunda.
Post-war building has filled in many of the areas
previously by-passed in the older suburbs and has
made rapid progress in the newer suburbs such as
Scarborough, Floreat Park and northwards from
Perth, while South of the river, Belmont, East
Victoria Park, South Perth, Como, Applecross and
Melville have also expanded rapidly.
For the purpose of establishing comparative popula-
tion figures, tentative districts have been defined.
Factors influencing choice are discussed in Chapter 5
and Chapter 8, but for the purposes of this Chapter
it is sufficient to note that the districts represent
convenient units for which population data could
be obtained and applied. As far as future proposals
are concerned, Diagram 7 anticipates conclusions
drawn elsewhere in the Report, but has been included
in this context in order to effect a direct comparison
between the existing and future distribution of popula-
tion.
An appreciation of the rate and direction of growth
within the districts referred to in Diagram 7 and
Table 6 can best be obtained by comparing this
Diagram with the historical maps. A brief com-
parison of estimated existing populations with the


Diagram 6
GROWTH OF CLOSELY SETTLED AREAS
district populations as estimated at the time of the
1947 Census is also of interest. Starting from the
most heavily developed areas where the greatest
density of population is found, such as the central
parts of Perth, Fremantle and Subiaco we find that
since 1947 there has been an actual reduction of
population as overcrowding has been relieved by
people moving out into the newer districts. In
Perth, the Central Area and Districts 15, 12, 14 and
part of 4 have shown losses of between 1,000-2,000
persons each. Fremantle Central Area and Districts
34 and 8 and parts of 31 and 33 have lost 500 to 1,000
persons each, and Subiaco District 5 has lost about
3,000 persons. Other closely developed Districts
such as 6,7, 25 and part of 23 have maintained their
1947 populations, while the newer Districts, 2,3,
11, 13, 21, 22, 24, 26 and 29 and parts of 4, 31 and
33 have shown increases ranging from 3,000-10,000


Diagram 7


Table 6
EXISTING AND PROPOSED DISTRIBUTION
OF POPULATION IN THE REGION
(District Numbers refer to Diagram 7)
District No.
Existing
Population.
Proposed
Population.
1
1,870
64,000
2 ..
7,750
34,800
3
4,720
35,800
4
16,040
42,500
5 ..
15,190
21,800
6 ♦.
19,120
26,200
7
21,030
33,300
8
1,400
1,700
9 ..
50
44,400
10
1,280
37,100
11 ..
9,100
31,400
12
30,100
30,900
13
28,100
64,600
14
15,140
12,800
15
2,990
2,900
16 ..
*
14,500
17
600
33,100
18
3,930
38,300
19
4,320
15,200
20
2,800
5,200
21 ,, ##
9,700
39,300
22
15,340
57,300
23
* 20,040
33,500
24
11,300
54,300
25
8,460
17,400
26 ..
14,670
32,000
27
980
42,100
28
550
36,600
29
6,570
37,800
30 ..
1,840
39,400
31 •.
17,600
45,400
32 ..
200
30,300
33
14,930
31,400
34
1,770
1,600
35
5,760
4,000
36 . •
6,740
39,300
37 ..
6,930
45,000
38
5,900
16,000
39
7,440
39,600
40
2,000
41
55,700
42
9,770
40,000
43
43,000
44
42,200
Perth Central Area
18,800
5,000
Fremantle Central Area
2,540
ljooo
Agricultural, Institutional and
others in Districts 1—34
14,260
Rural
25,500
Total
387,620
1,447,200
NOTE :
(0 Districts 1—34 (inclusive) are residential districts
within the main urban concentration. Districts 35-40 (in-
clusive) are detached districts which, in most cases, include
minor urban concentrations. Districts 41-44 (inclusive) are
the residential districts of Kwinana-Rockingham.
(2) In Districts 1—34 (inclusive) the figure of existing
population shown for each district includes only urban popula-
tion. The remainder, including the agricultural and insti-
tutional population appears as a total figure. In Districts
35—44 (inclusive) the figures for the existing population, as
shown, include both urban and rural population.
(3) Proposed District populations are urban populations
only and the rural population is shown as an overall total for
the Region.
persons each. The remaining Districts up to number
34 have remained either at about their 1947 figure
or have made slow progress. Districts 35 to 44
include the Hills and outer area settlements and the
new residential districts near Rockingham and
Kwinana, where considerable progress has been
made.
Chapter 5 discusses in more detail the actual
density of the population living in the existing
residential districts, and in Chapter 8 standards of
residential development leading to suggested appropri-
ate future densities are discussed. Chapter 5 also
describes the physical and other factors which will
influence the future distribution of population.
Subject to the more detailed consideration of this
problem in that Chapter, it is reasonable to assume
that once adequate communication with the South
of the Swan River is established (Chapter 7), and
allowing for the distribution of industry proposed
in Chapter 4, peripheral expansion North and South
of the river will be roughly in proportion to the
existing population. Anticipating proposals outlined
in further Chapters, peripheral expansion North of
the river would accommodate a population of 590,000
persons where to-day there is an existing population
of 200,000 persons. South of the river, the existing
population of about 120,000 would increase to some
460,000. Together with peripheral development as
a continuation of present trends, expansion is also
anticipated in the settlements East of Guildford, in
the Hills areas of Kalamunda, Gosnells and Armadale,
and at Kwinana and Rockingham, the extent of which
will be considered later in the Report.
* Included in Perth Central Area.


CHAPTER 4
Work
PART 1: INTRODUCTION
The Plan for the Metropolitan Region suggests a
physical background which will provide adequate
space for productive activity of all kinds, and the
appropriate use of land in relation to economic
factors. The creation of employment opportunities,
whilst in itself not a function of physical planning,
can be influenced in terms of distribution, location
and scale by planning measures. Similarly, whilst
the economic future of the Region cannot be pre-
determined by town and country planning, economic
trends play such an important part in the utilisation
of land that an assessment of these is essential before
any effective proposals can be made.
In this Chapter an attempt is made to forecast
probable future changes in the industrial economy
of the Region, to relate these changes to employment
and land requirements in various areas, and to
suggest how industry may best be assimilated into
the general development pattern. The land require-
ments of the many potential sources of employment
and wealth are often conflicting, and in order to strike
a reasonable balance between Agriculture, , Com-
merce, Manufacturing Industry and other employers
of labour, it is necessary to make some forecast of
the probable employment pattern in the Region when
it contains some 1,400,000 persons, for whom space
is allowed in the Plan.
The work force of the Region in 1947 comprised
40 per cent, of the population—a lower percentage
than that of either the State (41 per cent.) or the
Commonwealth (42 per cent.). 1 On the other hand
Melbourne and Sydney, with work forces of 45.4 per
cent, and 44.9 per cent, respectively, were considerably
above the Commonwealth average (Table 7).
Allowing for changes in the economic pattern of
the Region (Chapter 2) it may be expected that the
percentage of the population in the future work
force will lie somewhere between the existing figures
of Sydney and Perth. Assuming that 43 per cent,
represents a reasonable figure, then the work force
when the population reaches 1,400,000 will be
602,000.
For the purpose of considering the future dis-
tribution of this work force, it is convenient to use
four broad classifications—Primary Industry (agri-
culture, mining and quarrying), Manufacturing In-
dustry, Building and Construction (civil engineering
and building) and Service (transport and storage,
communications, commerce and banking, finance and
property, public authorities, professions, entertain-
ment and hotels). In the past, and at present, the
greater part of the working population has been, and
is, employed in the Service category. In 1947, nearly
60 per cent, of the Region’s work force were in the
Service category and less than 26 per cent, were
employed in Manufacturing Industry. 1
The State distribution within the four categories
differs somewhat from the Commonwealth figures—
employment in Primary Production and Service
being higher than average, and employment in Building
and Construction and Manufacturing Industry lower.
Comparison between the Commonwealth and
Region as shown in Table 8 and Diagram 8 does not,
however, clearly show the differences between the em-
ployment pattern of Perth and other capital cities.
As previously noted, Sydney and Melbourne, the two
largest cities, have a much greater percentage of the
work force engaged in Manufacturing Industry.
Comparative figures for these cities, the State of
Western Australia and the Commonwealth, based
on the 1947 Census, are set out in Table 9. 1
The figures relating to Melbourne are of particular
interest in that the population (in 1947, 1,200,00 c) is
approximately the same as the future population of
the Metropolitan Region as envisaged in the Plan.
Whereas in New South Wales and Victoria there
are large towns, other than the capital cities, acting
as centres of supply and administration, in Western
Australia there is a high degree of centralisation in
Perth. It may be expected that, as the State develops,
more supply and administrative functions will transfer
to growing country towns, thus reducing the per*
centage of the Service work force in the Metropolitan
Region.
1 Commonwealth Government, Census of Commonwealth of Australia,
30th June, 1947, Canberra, 1947.


Diagram 8
COMPARATIVE DISTRIBUTION OF WORK FORCES : 1947
The post-war expansion of Manufacturing Industry
is very apparent. It will continue to grow, and
refining and other possible developments in the oil
industry may give further impetus to the rate of
expansion and bring new industries to the Region and
State. It is also to be assumed that improved methods
and further mechanisation may reduce the percentage
of those engaged in Primary Industry (Part II).
Manufacturing Industry grows in importance in
the economy of virtually all countries. The cities
of Sydney and Melbourne have developed employ-
ment patterns similar to those of other large cities
throughout the western world. As Perth grows it
may be expected to conform more and more closely
to the employment pattern of larger cities, the most
important aspect being the increase in industrial
employment.
Because of the geographical location of Perth, and
its relationship with the rest of the State, the ultimate
proportion of the work force in industry might be
slightly less than the average for large cities. It is
suggested that 45 per cent, of the total work fore
should be the basis on which the quantity of land
required for industrial purposes should be assessed.
With an increase in the proportion of industrial
employment, it follows there will be a smaller percent-
age in other groups. In agriculture and quarrying,
employment may be expected to increase at a
slower rate than in Manufacturing Industry, so that
ultimately only about 2.5 per cent, as compared with
7.0 per cent, in 1947, of the total regional work force
will be employed in primary industries. 1
In the building and civil engineering industries,
new materials and methods (including mechanisation
and prefabrication of larger components) may result
in a slight reduction in the percentage of the work
force employed in these industries. In 1947, Perth,
compared with other capital cities, had a considerably
higher percentage of its work force in the building
and civil engineering industries. 1 Taking these factors
1 C °£L r £°? Wealt , h n Govemmern, Census of Commonwealth of Australia,
30th June, 1947, Canberra, 1947.


into account, it is estimated that future employment
in these categories will be about 6.3 per cent, of the
total work force.
Similarly the percentages employed in other cate-
gories are at present higher than those of the other
capital city regions, and may be expected to reduce
proportionately as the percentage employed in Manu-
facturing Industry increases. Estimated changes are
tabulated in Table 10, which may be compared with
the 1947 pattern in Table 8.
An important feature of the present employment
pattern is the concentration of office, retail trade and
industrial employment within a mile radius of the
General Post Office, in an area bounded on the South
by the Swan River. Within this area there worked
some 17,000 retail trade employees, 1 16,000 industrial
employees, 1 and 2 and 29,000 office employees, 3 and
3,000 employed in miscellaneous occupations, in all
approximately 42 per cent, of the Region’s total work
force.
It is inevitable that a large part of the total work
force employed in trade and commerce will continue
to be located in the city centre. But as the Region
expands, lengthening journeys to work, increasing
traffic and site congestion, and rising central area land
values, will encourage the movement of industry to
more spacious sites adjacent to new residential
districts. One of the basic considerations in the
definition of sites for industry has been the journey
to work. It is Manufacturing Industry which will
make considerable demands for space in new built-up
areas, but some further decentralisation of retail
trade from the central areas can be expected. This
will not be nearly so marked and is likely to be much
more gradual. It will depend, to some extent, on
the rate of improvements in the central areas and the
development of adequate, modern, suburban shopping
centres.
Table 7
EMPLOYMENT OF THE POPULATION
Commonwealth.
State.
Region.
Industry.
Persons.
Persons.
Persons.
Males.
Females.
Total.
Males.
Females.
Total.
M ales.
Females.
Total.
PRIMARY—
Primary production ..
Mining and quarrying
509,046
57,870
26,661
603
535,707
58,473
38,577
10,745
1,532
104
40,109
10,849
7,508
566
363
24
7,871
590
MANUFACTURING ..
694,075
200,829
894,904
31,822
7,190
39,012
25,209
6,339
31,548
BUILDING AND CONSTRUC-
TION
248,443
1,417
249,860
15,700
58
15,758
9,906
50
9,956
SERVICE—
Transport and storage
Communications
Finance and property
Commerce
Public authority and profes-
sional
Amusement, hotels, cafes, per-
sonal service, etc. ..
Other industries
249,953
37,120
56,370
298,846
225,120
102,372
54
15,096
15,990
23,203
139,092
152,055
142,183
33
265,049
53,110
79,573
437,938
377,175
244,555
87
18,119
2,365
3,841
20,799
14,662
7,305
2
896
784
1,499
10,092
10,770
9,538
19,015
3,149
5,340
30,891
25,432
16,843
2
10,596
1,754
2,874
15,651
11,577
5,132
2
702
364
1,360
7,704
7,990
5,873
11,298
2,118
4,234
23,355
19,567
11,005
2
Total Work Force
Not in Work Force
2,479,269
1,318,101
717,162
3,064,826
3,196,431
4,382,927
163,937
94,139
42,463
201,941
206,400
296,080
90,775
56,960
30,769
124,464
121,544
181,424
Total
3,797,370
3,781,988
7,579,358
258,076
244,404
502,480
147,735
155,233
302,968
Work Force as Percentage of
Total Population
65-29
18-96
42-17
63-52
17-37
41-08
61-44
19-82
40-12
SOURCE : Commonwealth Government, Census of the Commonwealth of Australia, 30th June, 1947.
NOTE • To enable a direct comparison to be made between Commonwealth, State and Region, those cases where the industry
was either not stated or was inadequately defined in the Census have been distributed pro rata throughout the other categories.
1 Government of Western Australia, Department of Labour, Factories
and Shops Inspection Branch, 31st December, 1953.
* Compiled from information supplied by the Western Australian Govern-
ment Statistician for the year 1951-52.
8 Sample Survey, Town Planning Department, Perth, 1954.


Table 8
COMPARATIVE DISTRIBUTION OF WORK FORCE, 1947
EXPRESSED AS PERCENTAGE OF TOTALS
Commonwealth.
State.
Region.
Industry.
Percentage.
Percentage.
Percentage.
Males.
Females.
Total.
Males.
Females.
Total.
Males.
Females.
Total.
PRIMARY—
Primary production
20-55
3-71
16-83
23-61
3-64
19-51
8-28
1 -19
6-46
M ining and quarrying
2-36
0-11
1-83
6-56
0-21
5-30
0-64
0-07
0-54
MANUFACTURING
28-06
28-13
28-05
19-47
16-94
18-88
27-85
20-51
25-94
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION ..
10-00
0-22
7-87
9-52
0-11
7-64
10-86
0-16
8-18
SERVICE—
Transport and storage
10-11
2-07
8-31
11-00
2-14
9-23
11-72
2-27
9-26
Communications ..
1 -51
2-18
1-62
1-48
1 -82
1-48
1-94
1 -19
1-72
Finance and property
2-26
3-27
2-48
2-33
3-54
2-55
3-12
4-43
3-44
Commerce ..
12-04
19-41
13-59
12-70
23-80
14-95
17-20
25-05
19-27
Public authority and professional
Amusement, hotels, cafes, personal ser-
9-03
21-16
11-76
8-89
25-40
12-30
12-80
26-02
16-15
vice, etc.
4-08
19-70
7-66
4-44
22-40
8-16
5-59
19-11
9-04
Total ..
100-00
100-00
100-00
100-00
100-00
100-00
100-00
100-00
100-00
SOURCE : Commonwealth Government, Census of Commonwealth of Australia, 30th June, 1947.
Table 9
WORK FORCE : COMPARATIVE
PERCENTAGES, 1947
Area.
INDUSTRY.
Primary.
Manu-
factur-
ing.
Building
and Con-
struc-
tion.
Service.
Total.
Perth*
3-6
26-9
8-3
61-2
100-0
Melbourne* ..
1-6
41-4
6-5
50-5
100-0
Sydney*
1-2
39-5
7-3
52-0
100-0
W estern Aus-
tralia
24-8
18-9
7-6
48-7
100-0
Commonwealth
18-7
28-0
7-9
45-4
100-0
Perth Region..
7-0
25-9
8-2
58-9
100-0
SOURCE : Commonwealth Government, Census of
Commonwealth of Australia, 30th June, 1947.
Table 10
PROJECTED DISTRIBUTION OF WORK
FORCE
METROPOLITAN REGION
Industry.
Percentage.
Approximate
Number
Employed.
PRIMARY—
Primary production ..
2-2
13,000
M ining and quarrying
0-3
2,000
MANUFACTURING ..
45-0
271,000
BUILDING AND CONSTRUC-
TION
6-3
38,000
SERVICE—
Transport and storage
7-2
43,000
Communications
1-5
9,000
Finance and property
3-0
18,000
Commerce
15-0
90,500
Public authority and profes-
sional
13-0
78,500
Amusements, hotels, cafes, per-
sonal service, etc. ..
6-5
39,000
Total
100-0
602,000
NOTE : The above figures are for a projected population
of 1,400,000.
* Metropolitan Statistical Division (1947).


13
13. An important primary indus-
try : market gardens and nurseries,
Spearwood, South of Fremantle.
14. Fremantle is the centre of the
fishing industry. Part of the fleet in
harbour.
14


15
15. Belmont : an example show-
ing industry interspersed with hous-
ing, to the detriment of both.
16. Transition of housing to in-
dustry : a small furniture factory
near the Perth Central Area.
16


PART II: PRIMARY INDUSTRY
A. INTRODUCTION
In 1947, employment in Primary Industry in the
Region accounted for 7.0 per cent, of the work force,
or 8,461 persons. 1 Primary Industry may be con-
sidered in four groups : fishing, agriculture, forestry,
and mining and quarrying, of which agriculture is
the most important employer.
Of the four groups it is unlikely that any will
increase in direct ratio to the population, and it is
estimated that only about 2.5 per cent, of the Region’s
work force will be engaged in Primary Industries
when the population reaches 1,400,000.
B. FISHING
In 1947, only 300 persons in the Region were
employed in the fishing industry, including ad-
ministrative functions for State-wide organisations.
Expansion in this branch of Primary Production
would affect only persons engaged in the catching of
fish, and not those canning or preserving fish. Em-
ployment in the fishing industry will probably be
between 1,000 and 1,200.
C. AGRICULTURE
In 1947, there were 6,883 persons engaged in
agriculture in the Region, including administrative
functions. 1 Employment (in terms of farm workers)
on actual holdings, used for market gardening, fruit
and vine growing, poultry farming, dairying, pig
raising and grazing, in 1952, accounted for 5,500, or
3.5 per cent, of the Region’s work force. 2 In
addition to these permanently employed persons,
there are a number of seasonal workers engaged at
various times during the year, but these represent
only a small percentage.
The classification of holdings is difficult owing to
the mixed activities on some properties. According
to the predominant use of the 3,700 holdings in the
Region there were some 700 market gardens, 1,000
orchards, 600 vineyards, 1,000 poultry farms and 400
grazing, dairy or other farms.
The following estimates of future expansion are
based on assumed divisions and cannot take into
account changes in method or technology which may
take place in the future. It is estimated that :
(a) 2,400 market gardens (5-10 acres each) em-
ploying 3,000 persons will be required to
meet the needs of the Region ;
(b) expansion of orchards in suitable areas in
the hills would provide employment for
1,500 ;
(c) there will be little expansion in employment
on the Region’s vineyards ;
(d) poultry farming may employ 4,000-5,000
persons ; and
(e) another 1,000-2,000 will be employed on
dairy and other farms.
It seems probable that 10,000-11,000 persons will
be employed on agricultural holdings when the pop-
ulation reaches 1,400,000.
D. FORESTRY
In 1947, the forestry industry in the Region em-
ployed 694 persons. This figure includes those
engaged in timber cutting (including firewood) and
administrative duties, but excludes sawmill employees.
With the establishment of further forests on areas
indicated in the Regional Plan, it is anticipated that
employment in forestry might be about 2,000 when
the regional population reaches 1,400,000. There
will be every economic justification for this expansion,
especially in the production of timber for manu-
facturing purposes.
E. MINING AND QUARRYING
Mining employment in the Region is restricted
mainly to administrative functions. Fluctuations in
regional employment will be due to developments in
mining centres in the State. In 1947, only 411
persons were employed under this head.
Quarrying is mainly related to the building and
civil engineering industry and, it is expected, will
expand in a similar way. Employment (164 in 1947)
may not total more than 400-500.
The above considerations indicate that the future
employment in Primary Industry will be 14,000-
15,000 or 2.5 per cent, of the Region’s work force.
1 Commonwealth Government, Census of the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia, 30th June, 1947, Canberra, 1947.
* Compiled from information supplied by the Western Australian Govern-
ment Statistician for the year 1951—52.


A. INTRODUCTION
Employment in Manufacturing Industry in the
State during the first half of the century, rising from
13,000 to 45,000, has more than trebled, but as a
percentage of the total work force the increase has
been only about 2 per cent.
During the same period the regional work force
has increased nearly fourfold, and employment in
Manufacturing Industry from 7,300 in 1901 to over
36,000 in 1952.
However, this increase does not indicate any
marked difference in the degree of industrialization,
most of the increase in industrial workers being
taken up by service-type industries. Changes in the
PART III: MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY
percentage of the work force engaged in various
categories are shown in Diagram 9. Little change
in the structure of the regional work force is indicated,
the major difference being some exchange between
Manufacturing Industry and the Building and Con-
struction Industry.
Annual fluctuations in the percentage of the State
population engaged in Manufacturing Industry are
shown in Diagram 10, and Diagram 11 shows the
annual increase or decrease in industrial employment
in the State.
Twice in the 50-year period employment in Manu-
facturing Industry in the State has fallen to its 1908
level ; in 1917 due to the effect of World War
I. and, in 1932, due to the world-wide depression.
Diagram 9
PERCENTAGE OF WORK FORCE ENGAGED IN VARIOUS INDUSTRIES : 1901-1947 :
METROPOLITAN REGION


Diagram 10
EMPLOYMENT IN MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY : 1908-1953 :
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Both of these deviations were followed by a very
rapid recovery. Since 1932, apart from a levelling
effect during the early years of the second World
War, growth has continued until the present time.
During 1952-53 only a very slight increase occurred,
due possibly to the credit restrictions which were
applied. (It is expected that the two years ending
in June, 1955, will show a substantial increase.)
Industrially, Western Australia has suffered from a
number of disadvantages ; notably the limited nature
of the local market and a shortage of capital and raw
materials. Local ventures in the past have been
made in the face of competition from the larger
manufacturing States and overseas. In 1947, Manu-
facturing Industry in Western Australia absorbed
only 3.5 per cent, of the Commonwealth total of
industrial employees.
It is interesting to compare employment in Manu-
facturing Industry in the cities of Perth and Mel-
bourne. Table 11 sets out the percentage of the
total of industrial employment in each city engaged
in the different types of Manufacturing Industry.
With one or two notable exceptions the comparison
gives results which might reasonably be expected.
More apparent are the differences when Perth’s
employment figures are compared with a hypo-
thetical city of the same population having the same
industrial pattern as Melbourne.
Although Western Australia has been, and is still,
largely a primary producing State, there have been
changes consequent upon the second
Difficulties about post-war supplies and shipping,
economic prosperity, and big increases in population
have had a stimulating effect on local Manufacturing
Industry.
Whilst it is unlikely that the State will ever be a
large exporter of manufactured goods the consumer
demand of the expanding State itself, the availability
of a growing labour potential, and a greater exploita-


Diagram 11
ANNUAL INCREASE OR DECREASE IN EMPLOYMENT IN
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY : 1908-1953 :
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
tion of natural resources will, together, encourage
the growth of Manufacturing Industry and give
impetus to the changing pattern of employment.
The establishment of an oil refinery and steel
rolling mill at Kwinana will result in a flow of new
materials and by-products which have not previously
been made in the State. The two large, new in-
dustries are symbolical of the growing interest shown
by industrialists in the State. The Region, as the
centre of trade and manufacture employs 81 per cent,
of the State’s industrial workers. 1 The majority of
new industries will undoubtedly seek sites in the
Metropolitan Region in preference to other regions,
which are more distant from the main market and
have a much more limited labour supply.
The requirements of expanding Manufacturing
Industry have an important bearing on the physical
planning of the Region. Modern factories make
heavy demands upon the public services—power
(generally in the form of electricity), transport (road,
rail and sea), water and waste disposal—and, in
addition, on the supply of labour and land. Plan-
ning proposals must help to ensure that such demands
can be satisfied, in the form of adequate supply
services, a satisfactory road and rail system, efficient
sewage disposal methods, a reasonable relationship
between industry and source of labour, and a suf-
ficiency of suitable land.
There should be no difficulty in meeting industrial
requirements as far as electrical power is concerned,
particularly with the growing possibility of nuclear
generating stations in the not too distant future.
Industrial processes requiring large quantities of
1 Compiled from information supplied by the Western Australian Govern-
ment Statistician for the year 1951-52.


Table 11
EMPLOYMENT BY TYPES OF
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY
PERTH AND MELBOURNE
Perth, 1952
(a).
Melbourne, 1949
( b ).
Industry.
Number
Em-
ployed.
Per-
centage.
Number
Em-
ployed.
Per-
centage.
Engineering
14,502
39-7
79,799
33-4
Clothing
4,537
12-4
41,952
17-5
Textiles
466
1-3
24,961
10-5
Food ..
4,505
12-3
24,818
10-4
Paper and printing ..
2,002
5-5
14,079
5-9
Timber and furniture
4,130
11-3
13,435
5-6
Chemicals
1,306
3-6
10,595
4-4
Skin, leathers and furs
713
1-9
5,202
2-2
Rubber
136
0-4
4,272
1-8
Heat, light and power
Mine and quarry pro-
800
2-2
2,148
1-0
ducts
2,772
7-6
6,419
2-7
Miscellaneous..
664
1-8
10,955
4-6
Total
36,533
100-0
238,635
100-0
SOURCES : (a) Compiled from information supplied
by Western Australian Government Statistician.
( b ) Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works, Mel-
bourne Metropolitan Planning Scheme, 1954.
NOTE : Number employed includes working proprietors.
Table 12
EMPLOYMENT BY TYPES OF
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY
PERTH AND HYPOTHETICAL CITY
Industry.
Persons employed in each class
of industry.
Perth
Population
368,000.
Hypothetical
Australian City
Population
368,000.
Engineering ..
14,502
25,130
Clothing
4,537
13,167
Textiles
466
7,900
Food
4,505
7,825
Paper and printing
2,002
4,439
Timber and furniture
4,130
4,213
Chemicals
1,306
3,311
Skin, leather and furs
713
1,655
Rubber
136
1,354
Heat, light and power
800
752
Mine and quarry products
2,772
2,031
Miscellaneous
664
3,461
Total
36,533
75,238
water have, in other parts of the world, made ex-
tensive use of streams and rivers as sources of supply.
In the Region these demands will have to be met
largely from the public supply mains. Normal in-
dustrial requirements of a population of 1,400,000
can be met by a full and efficient use of sources within
an economic distance of Perth, but certain types of
industry, such as that producing synthetic fibres,
would be precluded from operating in the Region
unless completely new sources of water supply are
found.
An associated problem occurs in the disposal of
liquid trade wastes. If, in some areas, there are large
quantities for disposal, sewer mains may have to be
increased well beyond the size required for normal
domestic disposal. The planning and systematic
establishment of a comprehensive sewage disposal
scheme is essential. Solid and semi-solid wastes
from industry can also create difficulties for the local
authority responsible for the provision of dumping
areas. These problems are discussed more fully in
Chapter 7.
More intensive use of road transport for the con-
veyance of raw materials and finished products has
led to the use of bigger trucks, requiring wider roads
of heavy construction. The Plan defines a system of
road communications and standards of road design
adequate to meet the demands of industry. Similarly,
an increasing use of existing and new rail facilities
should result from industrial growth. The relation-
ship between industrial growth and a road and rail
development programme is discussed in more detail
in Chapter 7.
Modern industry requires ample land. Contempo-
rary factories are spacious, with production lines
demanding single storey buildings. Allowing for
reserves for the expansion of individual factories,
and for the development of attractive surroundings,
densities in terms of workers per acre will tend to
be low. It is, therefore, necessary to reserve large
areas of level, well-drained land closely related to
residential areas and main lines of communication.
The following sections deal in more detail with the
factors influencing the choice of industrial sites in the
Region.


B. SOURCES OF INFORMATION AND
STATISTICS
Because of the limited time and resources available
it has not been possible to carry out many special
surveys, and use has been made of existing records
such as the Census of the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia, 1901 to 1947, and Part VI. of the Statistical
Register for Western Australia, for 1951-52 and
preceding years. The major difference between these
two sets of data is that the Census is based upon
place of residence and the Statistical Register upon
place of employment. In considering the statistics
on a regional basis it has been assumed that any
variation due to this difference would be very small,
as virtually all persons employed in industry in the
Region also live in the Region. It is realised that
important changes have taken place since 1947, but
it is necessary to compare Western Australia with
the Commonwealth and other States, and the 1947
Census figures are the latest source of correlated data
available. At the request of the Town Planning
Department, a supplementary sample survey was
conducted by the Chamber of Manufactures, W.A.,
Inc., during February, 1954, to provide later in-
formation of a more detailed character.
For the purposes of comparison, reference is made
to figures quoted in the County of Cumberland
Report, 1948, 1 and the Melbourne Report, 1954. 2
The latter is important because the present population
of Melbourne is similar to the ultimate population
of the Region as envisaged in this Report.
The following assumptions have been made in
respect of the calculation of future requirements of
industry :
(i) That the population of the Region may
reach 1,400,000 by the end of this
century (Chapter 3).
(ii) That the percentage of population engaged
in the work force will increase from 40
per cent. (1947) to a maximum of 43
per cent. (Part I.).
(iii) That the percentage of the work force
engaged in Manufacturing Industry will
increase from about 26 per cent. (1947)
to about 45 per cent., which is approxi-
mately that of present-day Sydney and
Melbourne.
C. CLASSIFICATION
The classification of Manufacturing Industry in
relation to future proposals is dealt with more fully
in Appendix 11.
Four main classifications are suggested :
(i) Light Industry : Industries which do not
create nuisance and which, because of
their appearance and the processes in-
volved, could be sited without prejudice
as part of a residential area, and which
make no demands upon public services,
such as roads and mains, beyond those
normally required in residential develop-
ment.
(ii) General Industry : All other industries,
excluding Special Industry.
(iii) Special Industry : Offensive, noxious and
hazardous industries.
(iv) Industries requiring waterside facilities :
Specific zones for waterside industry have
not been provided. This is because the
most suitable land for this type of industry
is at Kwinana and under Government
control. The growth of waterside in-
dustry depends on a number of un-
predictable factors. It would, however,
be most unwise to allow land with water
frontage to be occupied by industries
which could be sited elsewhere.
D. LOCATION
The principal concentrations of industry in the
Region occur at East Perth, West Perth, Subiaco,
Fremantle, Bassendean, Midland Junction and the
new areas of Welshpool, Hilton Park and Innaloo.
Their importance may be more readily appreciated
when it is considered that, in 1952, 86 per cent, of
the Region’s industrial workers were employed in
these nine areas, and over 46 per cent, in the two
oldest areas of East Perth and West Perth. 3 The
distribution of various classes of industry within the
Region is set out in Table 13.
Within the Region 39.7 per cent, of industrial
workers were employed in light and general engineer-
ing establishments, mostly in the West Perth, East
Perth, Midland Junction and Welshpool areas.
1 Cumberland County Council, " The Planning Scheme for the County
of Cumberland,” New South Wales, Sydney, 1948.
* Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works, " Melbourne Metro-
politan Planning Scheme, 1954,” Melbourne, 1954.
* Compiled from information supplied by the Western Australian Gov-
ernment Statistician for the year 1951-52.


Table 13
PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION BY LOCATION OF EMPLOYMENT IN EACH CLASS OF
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY IN 1951-52 : METROPOLITAN REGION
-
Per-
SECTOR.
centage
of
Total
Employ-
Class of Industry.
South-
West.
North-
East.
Arma-
ment
in each
West.
South.
East.
North.
Central.
dale.
Hills.
Total.
Class—
all
Sectors.
I. Treatment of non-metallifer-
ous mine and quarry pro-
18-25
4-79
0-31
36-32
2-52
16-66
20-78
0-37
# *
100-00
4-45
II. Bricks, pottery, glass, etc. ..
III. Chemicals, dyes, explosives,
13-54
0-70
14-93
4-67
14-24
36-99
6-77
0-46
29-87
26-10
17-99
0-96
100-00
100-00
3-13
3-60
paints, oils, grease
26-96
4-82
• •
• •
IV. Industrial metals, machines
0-22
0-04
100-00
39-69
and conveyances
14-40
6-34
0-25
10-39
24-34
5-04
38-98
V. Precious metals, jewellery,
71-74
2-17
100-00
0-63
plate
3-04
5-22
. .
14-79
1-74
1-30
• •
VI. Textiles and textile goods
5-15
13-74
23-39
100-00
(including knitted goods)
19-53
35-83
..
2-36
• •
• •
1 -28
VII. Skins and leather (not cloth-
7-15
34-37
100-00
1-95
ing or footwear)
17-40
37-44
0-56
3-08
..
• •
• •
VIII. Clothing (except knitted
goods)
IX. Food, drink and tobacco ..
8-75
2-89
0-13
5-20
2-29
6-75
73-99
# *
0*09
100-00
12-43
10-20
24-64
0-69
6-66
7-39
8-98
40-82
0-53
100-00
12-34
X. Woodworking and basket-
35-50
5-62
2-16
100-00
7-21
9-89
6-57
0-27
15-97
5-95
18-07
XI. Furniture, bedding, etc. ..
5-50
9-71
0-13
14-58
1-68
16-33
42-07
••
100-00
4-09
XII. Paper, stationery, printing,
book-binding, etc.
1-00
10-94
0-45
0-90
2-30
84-47
, *
100-00
5-48
XIII. Rubber
2-94
0-74
✓
14-70
• .
4-41
77-21
• •
• •
100-00
0-37
XIV. Musical instruments
22-73
, *
• .
* .
2-18
9-09
68-18
• •
• •
100-00
0-06
XV. Miscellaneous products ..
1-21
19-18
• .
1-70
17-97
57-76
0 13
100-00
1 • 13
XVI. Heat, light and power
••
5-25
• •
• •
94*62
• *
100-00
2 • 19
Percentage of Total Employment
in each Sector—All Industries ..
11-90
9-33
0-25
9-87
13-39
7-61
46-28
1-15
0-22
••
100-00
SOURCE : Compiled from information supplied by Western Australian Government Statistician.
NOTE : Number employed includes working proprietors.
Clothing and food each accounted for over 12 per
cent. Clothing manufacture is mainly located in the
East and West Perth areas, with smaller concentra-
tions at Welshpool, Subiaco and Maylands. Manu-
facture of foodstuffs is largely confined to West
Perth and Fremantle.
Sawmilling, woodwork, joinery, etc., employed
7.2 per cent, of the industrial work force, with the
main concentrations at West and East Perth, Welsh-
pool, Subiaco, Maylands and Innaloo. Printing and
stationery accounted for a further 5.5 per cent.,
mainly at East and West Perth and Fremantle.
Cement and plaster production, more widely dis-
tributed, with concentrations at Welshpool, Subiaco,
West Perth, East Perth, Innaloo and Maylands,
employed 4.5 per cent. The furniture and bedding
industries are also widely distributed, but accounted
for 4 per cent., principally at East and West Perth,
Victoria Park, Belmont and Fremantle.
The chemicals and fertilizer industry employed
3.5 per cent., mostly in the manufacture of fertilizers,
at North Fremantle and Bassendean. West and
East Perth accounted for most of the remainder.
Manufacture of bricks and earthenware products is
usually carried out at the source of raw materials,
and these are widely distributed in the Region. There


are two principal sources of raw materials for these
products : the Cardup shales, with works at Arma-
dale, Cardup and Byford, and the alluvial clays of
the valleys of the Swan, Canning and Helena river
systems, with works at East Perth, Belmont, Subiaco,
Armadale, Midland Junction, Maylands, Guildford
and Kenwick.
Early industries in the Perth and Fremantle areas
were established in their present locations because
of the nearness to transport, markets and labour
source, and because of the comparative cheapness
and ready availability of land. The Subiaco industrial
area has the same advantages, with the land leased
from either the Railway Department or the Subiaco
Council. This area provided an ideal site for in-
dustries wishing to be close to Perth, with good
transport facilities and ready labour source, but free
from the congestion of the city area. Subsequent
events have somewhat altered the circumstances :
further housing development and road transport are
causing some traffic congestion in the area, whilst
post-war development has taken place on sites which
allow little or no room, for expansion.
Welshpool, in the post-war period, offered a
unique opportunity for new and expanding industries
in the form of ready-built factories. The " Mu-
nitions ” area, although lacking some of the ad-
vantages, may be likened to the planned Industrial
Estates of England and the United States of America,
in that buildings suitable for different industrial
purposes were available, together with power and
supply services and railway facilities. This develop-
ment has formed the nucleus for further industries,
attracted by the availability of sites, rail access, con-
venience to the city and to a good labour source and,
at the present time, reasonably good road com-
munication to either Fremantle or Perth. Industrial
development in the Midland Junction area, apart from
extractive industries, is confined mainly to the Rail-
way Workshops.
Hilton Park and Innaloo have met the post-war
need for industrial land away from the congested
inner areas. These are both within reasonable
distance of the cities and adjacent to rapidly
expanding residential areas. The former is provided
by the Fremantle City Council which has taken
active steps to encourage development. The latter
is provided by private enterprise.
The enterprise of the Fremantle City Council has
resulted in the best planned industrial area in the
Region, which has brought advantages both to in-
dustrialists and the city. The estate is a pointer to a
more methodical, economical and generally satis-
factory way of industrialisation. The basis is initial
land ownership by one authority, whether it be
public or private. The alternative is haphazard
development which, almost inevitably leads to the
blighting of residential areas and the uneconomic use
of land. The poor connections to the Fremantle
industrial area will be corrected when the proposed
new major highways are established.
In addition to these areas, which represent the first
steps towards a comprehensive and balanced industrial
pattern, scattered industrial development is taking
place in Morley Park-Inglewood, Belmont, Melville
and Osborne Park-Tuart Hill. This scattering is
due to a number of reasons : nearness to transport,
labour sources, cheapness and availability of land.
Much of the blame for scattering is attributable to
an absence of adequate planning and, where there is
zoning, to the practice of optional zoning which
allows all types of development to mix indiscrimin-
ately. Unplanned industrial development results in
traffic congestion, inadequate public services, and
generally unsatisfactory residential and business areas.
With few exceptions, factories in unplanned areas
or " optional ” zones are built on land subdivided
for residential or agricultural use, with the result that
lots are more often than not unsuitable in respect
of size, orientation and access. Roads designed for
residential use are inadequate in width or in strength
when used by modern industrial traffic. Residential
and industrial development taking place in optional
areas are inevitably to the detriment of both.
In some cases scattering is occurring in zoned
industrial areas, principally because of the size of the
zoned area and lack of effective measures for reserva-
tion. Although areas are zoned as industrial, res-
dential development is allowed to take place, with a
resulting pattern similar to that of an optional area.
While some residences must be expected in industrial
areas, they should be limited to those required by
caretakers and key workers who must be available, at
short notice, to control or maintain plant.
In 1952, the inner areas of East and West Perth,
forming the largest concentration of industry in the
Region, employed nearly 17,000 industrial workers.


17
17. Congestion : industrial prem-
ises on cramped sites, North Perth.
18. Spaciousness : a planned in-
dustrial area, Dallas, Texas, U.S.A.
18


19. Kwinana: the beginning of work
on the 900-acre oil refinery site, 1953.
20. Kwinana : the refinery nearing
completion. The effect of this develop-
ment on the Region will be far-reaching.


21. A modern factory in a
garden setting, Fremantle.
22. The administration block
of a modern factory, Innaloo.


23
23. construction : work in
progress on the Royal Perth Hospital. An
increasing number of buildings of this
scale will make heavy demands on the
building industry.
24. Housing : workmen engaged on
the State Housing Commission project at
Medina, the first neighbourhood of the
Kwinana New Town.
24


These areas are already suffering from difficulty of
access, the narrowness of roads, congestion on small
lots which were designed for residential purposes,
and lack of space for expansion.
A number of factories have already moved from
congested areas to more spacious suburban sites.
In some cases, lack of room for expansion has been
a main influence, in others high land values and high
rates. Some industrialists with factories in the
Central Area have acquired land in outer areas, whilst
others, looking for suitable sites, are handicapped
because of the paucity of adequate industrial zones
in the outer areas. Despite this, new factories are
being erected in these inner city areas and in adjoining
older residential areas.
Welshpool, apart from land drainage difficulties’
has much to commend it. Railway and other service
facilities are available and could be fully developed
in the area ; it is adjacent to large and expanding
residential districts and, therefore, labour potential ;
and there is adequate room for expansion, provided
action is taken to set aside a sufficient zone for
industry only.
Similarly the new area at Hilton Park is well
located in most respects. Although lacking rail
facilities it is within two and a-half miles of the port,
with reasonable road access to it. In addition it
has four large residential areas from which to draw
its labour requirements.
Innaloo, although adjacent to potential labour
sources, is unhappily situated astride the only direct
route to Scarborough, a rapidly developing residential
area. Even at this early stage of development con-
gestion in the Innaloo area is apparent. The mixing
of industrial and through traffic on a narrow road is
a problem requiring early solution. Here again the
use of part agricultural and part residential land
subdivisions for industrial purposes is creating some
difficulty.
The Bassendean area is well situated ; requirements
for transport, expansion, and labour supply may
easily be met. As further development takes place
in the expanding Bayswater, Meltham and Morley
Park areas, there should be homes within easy reach
for the majority of employees.
Belmont and Melville are two districts in which
there are existing large industrial zones. At this
stage of development the areas are far too large, and
scattering is occurring as both are optional zones.
Unless preventative action is taken, they will become
mixed housing-industrial areas. The local authorities
are now alive to the situation and, it is expected, will
shortly take steps to correct it.
The principles which should govern the location
of industry have been briefly discussed in Section A
of this Part. Of importance is the availability of
suitable labour. Equally important is the necessity
to dissociate main industrial developments from
residential areas in order to minimise nuisance from
noise, smell, dirt and heavy traffic. The satisfaction
of these requirements inevitably leads to compromise,
and whilst endeavouring to locate industrial areas as
close as possible to residential areas, an effective
relationship can only be established through a com-
prehensive system of communications. Industry re-
quire-' the transport of goods in two directions ; raw
or semi-manufactured materials inwards and pro-
cessed goods outwards. Usually only extractive
industries are established at the source of raw
materials. Hence the general requirement is good
transport facilities from the source of supply and to
the centre or centres of distribution.
Heavy industries generally require rail sidings or
good access to rail, and sometimes wharfage. Modern
methods of road haulage have, to some extent, over-
come the heavy engineering firms’ difficulties in
respect of rail transport. But, as a consequence,
wider roads of heavier construction are necessary to
handle the increased number and size of vehicles.
In most cases lighter industries can be served by
road transport alone, but much depends upon the
sources of supply and the markets as to whether
road or rail is the more economical form of transport.
It is apparent, therefore, that the location of
industry must to some extent be determined by the
existing framework of road and rail communications,
and by realistic proposals for the extension of the
framework. Proposals relying for their validity on
unrealistic modifications to existing communications
are not practicable, but on the other hand, a re-
stricted appreciation based only on the availability
of existing facilities must be rejected.
In defining proposed industrial areas, consideration
must be given to the capacity of the areas selected
for expansion as industrial needs grow ; firstly,- in
relation to individual sites to meet the expansion of


a single industry, and secondly, in relation to the
expansion of the area to accommodate new industries.
The major industrial zones are, therefore, located in
areas where such expansion is possible with the
minimum of conflict with other uses.
The congestion and difficulties due to the aggrega-
tion of industries in East Perth and West Perth have
already been mentioned. Fortunately, the peripheral
expansion of residential areas will encourage de-
centralisation. Traffic congestion, and tedious jou-
neys for both workers and goods, can only be reduced
if industrial decentralisation is given every en-
couragement.
Because of the large area of land required by
industry in relation to its floor area, the cost of land
has some bearing upon the location in which the
majority of industries can economically be estab-
lished. Industries wishing to establish close to a
city centre will find themselves competing for sites
with wholesale and retail businesses and these,
having a smaller land to floor area relationship, can
more readily afford to pay higher prices for the land.
Whilst high prices may be within the means of
large and well-established industrial concerns, with
relatively small land requirements, they are pro-
hibitive to the small industrialist. Consequently, if
industrial areas can be located suitably in a lower
value area, then the industrialist is better able to
provide a site sufficient for his future as well as his
immediate needs.
In determining the location of industrial areas
nuisance caused by smell, smoke or grit must be
considered. Despite the advances made with modern
techniques for the elimination of smoke and grit, not
all industries using solid or liquid fuel have installed
equipment for this task. Damage caused by smoke
and grit is causing concern in many cities and the
nuisance can be greatly offset by the correct siting of
areas in relation to prevailing winds. The most
effective measures, however, must be those that
ensure the installation of firing equipment which
properly consumes the fuel used, and arrests grit or
other waste matter which might otherwise be air-
borne. In some large cities, spectacular changes have
been brought about by the introduction of adequate
controls over the type of equipment used. In the
Metropolitan Region there are but few sources of
nuisance at the present time. If adequate steps are
taken there should be no others.
The above considerations indicate that industrial
areas should be located on well-drained and level
sites large enough to allow reserves for expansion ;
that such suitable sites are likely to be found only
on the periphery of residential development ; that
on the periphery, land is likely to be cheaper and
more acceptable to industrialists ; that the establish-
ment of adequate communications is likely to be
easier than in central positions ; that the tendency
towards decentralisation from congested central sites
should be encouraged ; that only on the periphery
can an effective compromise be established between
the need for accessibility to residential areas and the
need to avoid nuisance.
E. SCALE
By comparison with other Australian capital cities
the scale of the Region’s Manufacturing Industry,
taken as a whole, is quite small. There are few large-
scale producers and employers, and there is no pre-
ponderance of any one industry. Within the Region
only 19 factories (including Government factories)
employ over 200 persons and, of these, eight are
engineering establishments (including the Midland
Junction Railway Workshops). l
In Table 14 a comparison is made between Perth 1
and Melbourne 2 factory sizes.
Table 14
COMPARATIVE FACTORY SIZES
PERTH AND MELBOURNE
No. of
Employees.
Perth (a).
Melbourne (b).
Factories..
Employ-
ment.
Factories.
Employ-
ment.
1-10
or
/o
69-8
0/
/o
17-6
0/
/o
63-7
°/r
11-8
11- 50
23-9
31-5
27-7
26-5
51-100
3-9
15-7
4-6
13-7
101-200
1-5
12-3
2-2
13-0
200 and above
0-9
22-9
1-8
35-0
Total ..
100-0
100-0
100-0
100-0
SOURCES : (a) Compiled from information supplied
by Western Australian Government Statistician.
( b ) Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works, “Mel-
bourne, Metropolitan Planning Scheme, 1954.” Melbourne,
1954.
NOTE : Number employed includes working proprietors.
1 Compiled from information supplied by the Western Australian Gov-
ernment Statistician for the year 1951-52.
a Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works, " Melbourne Metro-
politan Planning Scheme, 1954,” Melbourne, 1954.


Table 15
SIZES OF FACTORIES BY NUMBERS EMPLOYED AND SECTORS, 1951-52
METROPOLITAN REGION
Sector.
Number
Employed,
1-4.
Number
Employed,
5-10.
Number
Employed,
11-20.
Number
Employed,
21-50.
Number
Employed,
51-100.
Number
Employed,
101-200.
Number
Employed,
201 and over.
Total.
Fact-
ories.
Per-
sons.
Fact-
ories.
Per-
sons.
Fact-
ories.
Per-
sons.
Fact-
ories.
Per-
sons.
Fact-
ories.
Per-
sons.
Fact-
ories.
Per-
sons .
Fact-
ories.
Per-
sons.
Fact-
ories.
Per-
sons.
W estern ..
South-West
South
East
North - East
North
Central
Armadale ..
Hills
128
114
8
104
67
162
344
26
7
327
311
21
274
149
405
914
50
13
64
45
8
54
25
86
254
6
2
438
327
51
376
186
656
1,884
41
19
34
25
1
29
14
26
152
2
2
503
366
19
419
207
374
2,250
35
22
19
28
19
13
19
127
5
1
610
936
623
383
625
3,952
155
25
7
12
”4
7
11
41
2
449
860
288
418
713
2,858
140
6
2
' *6
3
*16
774
257
967
488
2,012
4
1
* 1
3
*io
1,247
356
660
3,061
3,039
262
227
17
217
132
304
944
41
12
4,348
3,413
91
3,607
4,892
2,773
16,909
421
79
Total
960
2,464
544
3,978
285
4,195
231
7,309
84
5,726
33
4,498
19
8,363
2,156
36,533
SOURCE : Compiled from information supplied by W estern Australian Government Statistician.
NOTE : Number employed includes working proprietors.
Table 16
EMPLOYMENT IN MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY BY CLASSES AND SECTORS, 1951-52
METROPOLITAN REGION
✓
SECTOR.
Class of Industry.
West.
South-
West.
South.
East.
North-
East.
North.
Central.
Arma-
dale.
Hills.
Total.
I. Treatment of non-metalliferous mine
and quarry products
II. Bricks, pottery, glass, etc.
III. Chemical, dyes, explosives, paints,
oils, grease
IV. Industrial metals, machines and con-
veyances
V. Precious metals, jewellery, plate
VI. Textiles and textile goods (including
knitted goods)
VII. Skins and leather (not clothing or
footwear)
VIII. Clothing (except knitted goods)
IX. Food, drink and tobacco
X. Wood-working and basket-ware
XI. Furniture, bedding, etc.
XII. Paper, stationery, printing, book-
binding, etc. ..
XIII. Rubber
XIV. Musical instruments ..
XV. Miscellaneous products
XVI. Heat, light and power
297
155
352
2,088
7
91
124
397
459
261
82
20
4
5
5
78
8
63
918
12
167
267
131
1,110
173
145
219
1
*79
42
5
36
4
6
31
7
2
591
171
61
1,507
34
11
22
236
300
421
218
9
20
’*7
41
163
483
3,531
4
24
104
333
157
25
18
*9
271
89
6
730
3
64
51
306
405
476
244
46
6
2
74
338
342
341
5,654
165
109
245
3,357
1,839
936
778
1,690
105
15
238
757
6
206
32
5
*24
148
11
6
4
57
*1
1,627
1,145
1,306
14,502
230
466
713
4,537
4,505
2,636
1,494
2,002
136
22
412
800
Total
4,347
3,413
91
3,608
4,892
2,773
16,909
421
79
36,533
SOURCE : Compiled from information supplied by W estern Australian Government Statistician.
NOTE : Number employed includes working proprietors.


Table 15 presents a detailed study of factories (by
number of employees) in the Region. It will be
seen that over 63 per cent, of the total number of
factories have no more than 50 employees, and the
majority of these are very small.
The expansion of existing industries and the
coming of new industries, such as the refinery and
the rolling mill at Kwinana, are indications of changes
in the nature and scale of industry to be expected in
Western Australia. It is reasonable to assume that
petro-chemical industries may be established adjacent
to the refinery, making use of the by-products.
Similarly, industries using steel for fabrication may
develop near to the rolling mill.
There will certainly be an increase in the scale of
individual industries for various reasons. It follows
that large zones capable of accommodating extensive
factories must form an essential part of the Plan, and
it is considered advisable that ample, rather than
purely adequate, provision should be made for the
siting of future industry.
F. EMPLOYMENT
In 1952, the employment in the Region of 36,533
industrial workers represented 81 per cent, of the
State’s industrial employment. l In 1947 the Metro-
politan area, according to the Census, employed
29,771 industrial workers—3.3 per cent, of the
Australian total. 2 Sydney and Melbourne accounted
for 29.4 per cent, and 25.8 per cent, respectively.
The relatively small proportion in the Metropolitan
Region is understandable. Industrialisation in West-
ern Australia has been late, but it is gaining impetus.
The present nature of the Region’s Manufacturing
Industry is of importance, even though it is under-
going change. Table 16 sets out the numbers em-
ployed in the various classes of Manufacturing
Industry for each sector in the Region, and should be
read in conjunction with Diagram 12, which defines
the sectors.
Table 17
EMPLOYMENT IN MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY BY CLASSES OF INDUSTRY AND
EMPLOYMENT, 1951-52 : METROPOLITAN REGION
Class of Industry.
W orking
Pro-
1 prietors.
M anagers
and
Clerical.
Profes-
sional.
Foreman
and Over-
seers.
Factory
Workers.
Carters.
Total.
| M.
F.
M.
F.
M.
F.
M.
F.
M.
F.
M.
F.
M.
F.
Per-
sons.
I. Treatment of non-metal-
liferous mine and quarry
products
II. Bricks, pottery, glass, etc.
III. Chemical, dyes, explosives,
paints, oils, grease
IV. Industrial metals, machines
and conveyances
V. Precious metals, jewellery,
plate
VI. Textiles and textile goods
(including knitted goods)
VII. Skins and leather (not
clothing or footwear) ..
VIII. Clothing (except knitted
goods) ..
IX. Food, drink and tobacco
X. Wood-working and basket-
ware
XI. Furniture, bedding, etc. ..
XII. Paper, stationery, printing,
bookbinding, etc.
XIII. Rubber
XIV. Musical instruments
XV. Miscellaneous products ..
XVI. Heat, light and power ..
71
11
7
574
36
15
17
249
187
170
151
67
16
5
29
1
1
1
1
5
5
2
78
17
1
2
2
77
47
86
768
8
24
35
70
230
114
42
123
9
20
59
33
9
40
415
11
17
19
65
149
32
42
106
12
23
10
10
7
54
132
2
1
2
22
5
1
29
9
1
1
5
2
3
68
29
45
556
4
17
28
79
154
108
46
64
8
2
22
47
i
4
3
1
34
12
3
4
1,360
982
929
11,862
146
170
512
918
2,668
2,184
1,122
1,237
89
14
220
642
2
55
135
153
17
215
97
3,020
1,055
9
85
393
*96
5
3
5
27
1
4
11
13
1
3
2
1
2
9
1
17
1,591
1,079
1,126
13,919
196
226
594
1,322
3,272
2,594
1,362
1,495
124
22
293
787
36
66
180
583
29
240
119
3,215
1,238
42
132
507
12
119
13
1,627
1,145
1,306
14,502
225
466
713
4,537
4,510
2,636
1,494
2,002
136
22
412
800
Total
1,606
115
1,712
?83
165
21
1,277
62
25,055
5,332
87
18
30,002
6,531
36,533
SOURCE : Compiled from information supplied by W estern Australian Government Statistician.
1 Compiled from information supplied by the Western Australian Gov-
ernment Statistician for the year 1951-52,
! Commonwealth Government, Census of the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia, 30th June, 1947, Canberra, 1947.


Table 17 sets out the numbers employed in each
class of Manufacturing Industry according to type of
employment headings, and shows the distribution of
various categories of employment. Sufficient in-
formation was not available to allow a more detailed
break-up of the factory workers’ section, which
reflects a most important aspect of industrial em-
ployment.
From the sample survey taken during February,
1954, a shortage of skilled labour was evident in all
classes of Manufacturing Industry, particularly notice-
able being the clothing and building material in-
dustries. 1 The shortage is attributed to the avail-
ability of highly paid, unskilled and semi-skilled
employment, which attracts the young trainee and
potential apprentice, as well as to the present general
demand for labour. The continued growth of
Manufacturing Industry will make heavier demands,
and the present shortages are early indications of
problems yet to be met. In order to develop the
skill demanded by modern industry, considerable
expansion will need to be made in facilities for
technical education.
Employment opportunity for females in Manu-
facturing Industry is limited to the food, textile and
clothing industries, all of which are concentrated in
the Perth and Fremantle areas. In 1952, one female
was employed in Manufacturing Industry to every
4.6 males. 2 In 1947, the proportion was one to
every 3.9 males. 3 This shows a decline, and the
proportion is now well below those for Sydney (3.1)
and Melbourne (2.8).
The large increase in the proportion of males to
females in the period 1947-1952 is due to the more
rapid expansion of industries employing only a
small number of females, and particularly those
associated with building and engineering.
Table 18 sets out the totals for each district of
male and female employment, and the proportion
of males to females.
The figures vary considerably ; proportions of
4.2 : 1 and 3 : 1 in Fremantle (South-Western Sector)
and Perth (Central Sector) respectively indicate a
concentration of industries employing females ; pro-
portions of 46 : 1 and 27 t 1 for Bassendean and
Midland Junction (North-Eastern Sector) indicate
the concentration of heavy industries. The lack of
opportunities for females in the outer industrial
Table 18
EMPLOYMENT IN MANUFACTURING
INDUSTRY : PROPORTION OF MALES TO
FEMALES BY SECTORS, 1951-52
METROPOLITAN REGION
Sector.
Males.
Females.
Total.
Number
of Males
to each
Female.
Central
12,734
4,175
16,909
3-0
West
3,812
536
4,348
71
North
2,312
461
2,773
5-0
North-East ..
4,691
201
4,892
23-3
East
3,244
363
3,607
8-9
South
86
5
91
17-2
South-West..
2,632
781
3,413
3-4
Hills
78
1
79
78-0
Armadale ..
413
8
421
51 -6
Total
30,002
6,531
36,533
4-6
areas is evident. Girls desiring industrial work must
travel to the central areas. Similarly, because of the
lack of light industrial employment in the vicinity
of residential areas, married women wishing to work
full or part-time, provided the employment is near
to home, have not the opportunity to do so. The
distribution of female labour in industry is shown
in Table 19.
In order to gain maximum advantage from its
location and to reduce long journeys to work, an
industrial area should provide a reasonable cross
section of employment opportunities for workers
living in the districts adjacent to it. Employment
should be available for both males and females,
skilled and unskilled.
Within the Region as a whole the balance of
Manufacturing Industry as compared with the pattern
of Australian industry is best compared by means of
a location coefficient, i.e., the local ratio between the
labour force of an industry and the total labour force,
divided by the Australian ratio for the same industry.
The summary of coefficients based on 1947 Census
1 Sample Survey, Chamber of Manufactures lnc., Perth, 1954*
2 Compiled from infornmation supplied by the Western Australian Gov-
ernment Statistician for the year 1951—52.
8 Commonwealth Government, Census of the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia, 30th June, 1947, Canberra, 1947*


Table 19
EMPLOYMENT IN MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY : PROPORTION OF MALES TO FEMALES BY
, CLASS OF INDUSTRY, 1951-52 : METROPOLITAN REGION
Class of Industry.
Males.
Females.
Total.
Number of
Males to
each Female.
I. Treatment of non-metalliferous mine and quarry products
1,591
36
1,627
44-1
II. Bricks, pottery, glass, etc.
1,079
66
1,145
16-3
III. Chemicals, dyes, explosives, paints, oils, grease
1,126
180
1,306
6-2
IV. Industrial metals, machines and conveyances
13,919
583
14,502
23-8
V. Precious metals, jewellery, plate
196
29
225
6-7
VI. Textiles and textile goods (including knitted goods)
226
240
466
0-9
VII. Skins and leather (not clothing or footwear)
594
119
713
5-0
VIII. Clothing (except knitted goods)
1,322
3,215
4,537
0-4
IX. Food, drink and tobacco
3,272
1,238
4,510
2-6
X. W ood-working and basket-ware
2,594
42
2,636
61-7
XI. Furniture, bedding, etc.
1,362
132
1,494
10-3
XII. Paper, stationery, printing, book-binding, etc.
1,495
507
2,002
2-9
XIII. Rubber
124
12
136
10-3
XIV. Musical instruments
22
22
XV. Miscellaneous products
293
119
412
2-5
XVI. Heat, light and power
787
13
800
60-5
Total ..
30,002
6,531
36,533
46
SOURCE : Compiled from information supplied by Western Australian Government Statistician.
Table 20
LOCATION CO-EFFICIENT
COMMONWEALTH j REGION, 1947
Type of Industry.
Common-
wealth.
Region.
Coeff.
1. Cement, glass, stone, coke,
oil, etc. ..
30,810
1,700
1-95
2. Founding, engineering and
metal working ..
208,605
5,271
0-92
3. Manufacture, repair and
assembly of vehicles ..
68,462
3,609
1-87
4. Textiles
50,968
142
0-10
5. Clothing ..
89,213
593
0-24
6. Boot and shoe making ..
27,774
655
0-84
7. Food and drink ..
113,983
3,523
1-10
8. Tobacco ..
6,016
75
0-44
9. Furniture and woodwork
58,162
2,744
1-67
10. Paper, printing and photo-
graphy
57,705
1,803
1-10
11. Paints, oils and grease
(non-mineral) ..
9,818
161
0-58
12. Chemicals and dyes
17,527
656
1-33
13. Explosives
1,177
, ,
14. Jewellery and watchmaking
7,815
301
1-36
15. Skins and leather
15,164
518
1-21
16. Rubber
11,337
139
0-43
17. Musical and scientific in-
struments
4,281
156
1-28
18. Plastic goods
4,024
22
0-19
19. Other manufactures
7,529
143
0-66
20. Gas and electricity
30,585
940
1-09
SOURCE : Commonwealth Government, Census of
Commonwealth of Australia, 30th June, 1947.
NOTE : Unity indicates a balance comparable with the
Commonwealth as a whole.
figures set out in Table 20 shows the major de-
ficiencies to be in textiles, clothing, rubber and
plastics. 1 In the future expansion of Manufacturing
Industry it can be expected that those industries with
low coefficients will expand at a more rapid rate
than those with high coefficients.
The high coefficients, in general, can be attributed
to the concentration in the Region of the State’s
Manufacturing Industry. This particularly applies to
Groups 1, 3 and 12. That for Group lis a result of
the remarkable regional building activity and the
subsequent demand for building materials. That for
Group 3 is due to the concentration of railway engin-
eering work at Midland Junction, and that for Group
12 is because of the three large fertilizer works in the
Metropolitan Region.
Based on the assumptions that the Commonwealth
Industrial structure is reasonably well balanced and
it will be advantageous to achieve more equilibrium
in the West, rapid expansion may be expected in the
textile, clothing and rubber industries in the Region.
This would have an important effect in providing
manufacturing employment for females, which is at
present well below the average of Sydney and Mel-
bourne.
1 Commonwealth Government, Census of Commonwealth of Australia,
30th June, 1947, Canberra, 1947.


G. USE OF LAND
In order to make specific recommendations re-
garding the quantity of land required for industrial
purposes, appropriate densities must be suggested, in
terms of workers per acre. Having established a
theoretical distribution of total ultimate employment
between the various categories of Manufacturing
Industry, it will then be possible to prescribe land
needs in terms of acreage. The determination of
appropriate densities is not easy, owing to wide
variations in the type of industry likely to be attracted
to the Region and also to the differences between
working densities which may be found in any one
type of industry. An examination of existing con-
ditions in the Region and of tendencies in other parts
of Australia and the World will give some indication
of the densities likely to obtain in the Region.
Because of the small number of factories engaged
in some classes of production an examination of
existing employment densities has been restricted to
the numerically stronger industries. The results of
investigations made are compared, in Table 21, with
Table 21
COMPARATIVE DENSITIES
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY
Expressed in Terms of Employees per Net Acre
Industry.
Existing Densities.
Recom-
mended
Density
United
Kingdom
(c).
Perth
(a).
Melbourne
(b).
Basic cheniicals ..
2
3
1- 5
Fertilizers
8
15
5- 20
Soaps, matches, etc.
42
135
50-100
Heavy engineering and
foundries
34
98
20- 50
Light engineering
40
135
100-200
Electrical engineering
100
203
200
Agricultural machines ..
11
30
..
Sheet metal
36
139
• ♦
Clothing ..
150
523
100-500
Food and drink
70
120
100-500
Timber, joinery and saw-
milling ..
27
30
20- 50
Furniture
44
118
100-200
Printing, stationery, etc.
83
306
100-200
SOURCES : (a) Sample Survey, Chamber of Manu-
factures (W.A.)> Inc., Perth, 1954.
( b ) Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works, “Mel-
bourne Metropolitan Planning Scheme, 1954,” Melbourne, 1954.
(c) Gordon Logie, “ Industry in Towns, ” London, 1952.
existing densities for similar industries in Melbourne,
and with some recommended densities for industries
in the United Kingdom.
Generally, the density of employment in Western
Australian Manufacturing Industry is low. In the
new, outer areas of Innaloo, Bassendean, Welshpool,
and Hilton Park, the majority of industries have
densities of less than 20 persons per acre of site,
whereas in the older, more congested areas of East
and West Perth densities are generally much higher
for the same type of industry. This is to be expected
in the older established areas where sites have been
almost entirely covered and where, as a result, there
are often cramped working conditions. The low
density outer areas have been developed in the post'
war period, and most industries established in them
are growing concerns, with sites sufficiently large to
allow future expansion. These factors, indicative of
a transitional stage, together with the small scale of
local industry, make it difficult to determine future
land requirements based upon employment densities
and a known or calculated industrial pattern.
Nearly all contemporary factories are single storey
buildings, and they should be set in spacious sur-
roundings, but reasonable assumptions regarding
industrial densities can only be made in relation to
the requirements of different types of industry, as
exemplified by current practice both here and abroad.
Subsequent paragraphs analyse industrial densities at
present applicable in the Region.
Extractive industries in most cases are established
at the site of raw materials. The type of buildings
used in industries of this nature vary according to the
product, but single storey structures predominate.
Generally their area is small in relation to site area.
Because of the usually large areas required for the
extraction of the raw material, densities are not more
than five persons per acre, and covered areas vary
from 300-2,000 sq. ft. per person.
Storage of raw materials is an important factor
influencing existing densities. Furniture and joinery
works use a large portion of the site for the storage
of timber. At the present time manufacturers in
this class are storing more timber than would be the
case in countries where softwoods are more readily
available, and kiln drying is developed to a higher
degree. Buildings used in this class of industry are
mainly single storey, with a low building area to
site area ratio. Employment densities are, in the


case of sawmills and joinery works, about 25 persons
per acre and, in the case of furniture factories, about
40—50, while covered floor area is about 500 sq. ft.
per person.
Heavy engineering works are also in the low density
class, employing from 30-40 persons per acre. Here
again the storage of bulky components and raw
materials is a factor influencing this low density.
Buildings generally are single storey with 200-800
sq. ft. of covered space per employee. Industries in
the light engineering categories, as a rule, use smaller
areas of land and buildings occupy more of the site.
Employment densities vary from 40—100 persons per
acre and covered space from 200-400 sq. ft. per
person.
Factories concerned with the processing or packing
of food and drink are generally economical users of
land, the storage is normally under cover and this, in
most cases, is essential. The amount of covered area
per person is high, ranging from 500-1,500 sq. ft.
Clothing factories are mostly economical users of
space and services. Raw materials and finished
products are relatively small in bulk and high in
value. Little outdoor storage is used and the building
area to site area ratio is high. Densities, because of
the closeness at which employees may work, are
about 150 persons per acre with a -floor area of 100-
200 sq. ft. per person. Buildings used by clothing
factories vary from single to multi-storey buildings,
the latter being evident in the inner areas, which
offer advantages to the industry because of the
proximity of wholesale and retail business establish-
ments.
A further factor in the establishment of appropriate
industrial densities is the problem of car parking.
The survey conducted during February, 1954, dis-
closed that one in every six industrial workers drives
to work. 1 In the older industrial areas where sites
are more fully developed and space is not available
for off-street parking, narrow streets and the limited
access to sites are further congested by parked cars.
It is essential that people wishing to transact business
should be able to park within reasonable distances,
and that adequate parking space is provided on all
sites for employees’ cars and goods vehicles.
It is assumed that on-site parking will become
general in the new industrial areas and, in the calcula-
tion of land requirements for Manufacturing Industry,
provision is made for parking at the rate of one
vehicle for every five employees, with an allowance
of 240 sq. ft. per car.
In determining densities for the calculation of
future land needs the following figures have been
taken into account :—-
(a) Existing densities in the Region discussed in
previous paragraphs ;
(b) existing densities in Melbourne and the
recommended future densities ;
(c) densities as recommended in the United
Kingdom ;
(d) the densities proposed in the County of
Cumberland Plan for Sydney.
Because it is not expected that large industrial
areas will develop close to the city centres, the figures
quoted for Melbourne include only those recom-
mended for the outer areas.
The above recommendations, generally, apply to
sites developed to full capacity and, in Table 22, the
various densities suggested for different industries
are net densities also based on this assumption. The
actual gross land requirements of industry will, how-
ever, include areas for parking (referred to above),
for roads and rail sidings, and for recreational
facilities.
Land requirements have been based on an industrial
work force of 271,000, of whom some 3 per cent., or
8,000, will probably be engaged in the extractive
industries. As the latter are generally located at the
site of the raw materials they have been excluded
from calculations. The percentage of employment
in each industry has been assumed to be similar to
the existing percentage in Melbourne, with the ex-
ception of electricity and gas (Perth, 2.2 per cent.),
asbestos, cement products, cement and plasterboard
(4.5 per cent.), bricks and earthenware products
(3.0 per cent.).
On this basis, the total net area required for
Manufacturing Industry will be about 10,100 acres, to
which must be added 320 acres for parking and 2,085
acres (20 per cent, of the gross area) for roads, sidings
and amenities, resulting in a total gross area of some
12,500 acres.
There are additional factors, however, which will
determine the actual area required by Manufacturing
Industry during the period of the Plan. It is unlikely
1 Sample Survey, Chamber of Manufactures (W.A.) Inc., Perth, 1954.


that industrial sites will simultaneously develop to
full capacity. Some industries will always hold a
reserve of land for future expansion even after the
full employment potential of the future population
of 1,400,000 has been absorbed. Further, adequate
freedom in the choice of sites will mean that at any
stage a greater area than that theoretically required
should be available for selection by industrialists.
The percentage of employment in different types of
industry may vary considerably from that suggested
in Table 22, in the event of economic or technological
changes not foreseeable at the present. A further
important aspect is the possibility of single large
concerns requiring special siting conditions and ex-
tensive sites which, at the state of partial development
of the zoned industrial areas, could not be found
within those zones.
The effect of these factors on land requirements is
difficult to assess, and to make a generous allowance
in respect of each of them would undoubtedly result
in over-zoning. In Chapter 2 it has been suggested
that during the period of the Plan, and particularly
when it is seen that the population is nearing 1,400,000
and likely to go beyond, consideration must be given
to the possibility of developing new or expanded
towns outside the limits of the residential zones
defined in the Plan. This point is discussed further
in Chapter 10. The creation of these entirely new
Table 22
LAND REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY: METROPOLITAN REGION
Industry.
Percentage of
employment
in each
industry.
Calculated
number of
employees
in each
industry.
Suggested
density.
(Persons per
acre.)
Land
required.
(Acres.)
Electricity and gas
2-2
6,000
20
300
Asbestos, cement products, cement plasterboard
4-5
12,000
20
600
Bricks and earthenware products ..
3-0
8,000
8
. .
Basic chemicals and explosives
1-9
5,000
2
2,500
Fertilizers
0-5
1,500
8
200
Soaps, matches, etc.
1-9
5,000
50
100
Heavy engineering and foundries .. .. .. .. ✓ ..
9-5
26,000
20
1,300
Light engineering and tools
3-4
9,000
50
180
Electrical engineering
3-0
8,000
100
80
Motor vehicles and accessories
91
24,500
25
980
Agricultural machines
1-6
4,500
15
300
Non-ferrous rolling and foundries
1-0
2,500
50
50
Sheet metal and wire
3-1
8,500
35
250
Spinning and weaving
3-9
10,500
50
210
Hosiery and knitted goods
3-7
10,000
100
100
Miscellaneous textiles
1-8
5,000
50
100
Furriers and leathergoods ..
0-7
2,000
100
20
Tanners and fellmongers .. ..
1-4
4,000
15
270
Clothes, hats, shirts, etc.
10-1
27,500
100
275
Boots and shoes
3-7
10,000
100
100
Miscellaneous clothing
2-0
5,500
100
55
Millers, sugar refining, meat slaughtering and export, canned foods
7-1
19,000
25
760
Bakeries, bacon, butter, ice-cream, etc. ..
1-6
4,500
50
90
Breweries, tobacco, milk
0-8
2,000
50
40
Timber, joinery and sawmilling
2-5
7,000
15
470
Woodwork and wood carving
0-4
1,000
20
50
Furniture
2-3
6,000
50
120
Tyres and rubber goods
1-6
4,500
20
225
Paper and paper-board
0-9
2,500
30
85
Newspapers
1-0
2,500
500
5
Printing, stationery, etc.
3-6
10,000
80
125
Precious metals
1-3
3,500
100
35
Plastics .. .. .. .. '
Scientific and musical instruments, photography, toys and sport-
1-0
2,500
100
25
ing goods . .
4-0
10,500
100
105
Parking
• •
..
..
320
Roads and amenities
2,085
Totals
100-0
271,000 .
••
12,510


development areas will, in effect, provide the reserve
for the various unknown factors referred to above.
The industrial zones in the Plan have, therefore, been
defined in accordance with the density calculations
in Table 22, with the exception of Kwinana, where
the zoned area includes an allowance for large
scale, low density industries.
If, at some distant date in the future, the unlikely
situation of a completely balanced relationship be-
tween population and employment is achieved, and
all residential and industrial zones developed to full
capacity, the industrial zones suggested in the Plan
should prove adequate. The important point is that
unless such an ideal position were achieved, it will
be wise at all stages to ensure that ample land for
industry is always available, and that industrialists
are able to consider the merits of alternative locations.
The establishment of the refinery and steel rolling
mill at Kwinana and port developments in Cockburn
Sound herald a new phase in industrial development.
The advent of these low density, large users of land,
brings to the Region a new conception of scale.
Industries of this nature may require sites as large
as 1,000 acres, an area bigger than any previous single
industrial area in the State. It is not possible to
predict requirements on this scale but, although each
case must be taken on its merits, there is some margin
allowed in the land set aside in the Kwinana-
Rockingham area. This should provide for port
extensions in Cockburn Sound and for the possibility
of large-scale industries in addition to those already
established.
H. ZONING PROPOSALS
Having come to conclusions about general prin-
ciples governing the location, size and density of new
industrial areas, it is possible to define actual sites.
In the Regional Plan only the major industrial zones
are shown, as smaller zones for light industries can
best be located when more detailed local plans are
drawn up. An allowance of one acre per 1,000
persons has been made in the calculation of District
Gross Densities to cover the land requirements of
light industry. This provision means, in terms of
land use and employment provided, that 1,400 acres
of the total of 12,500 acres, and 42,000 employees of
the total of 271,000 are to be in residential districts
for which no detailed proposals are made at this
stage. No special provision is made for 8,000 em-
ployees in extractive industries as these would not
necessarily be in an industrial area as such, but
generally in open country. Major sites for industrial
development are, therefore, required for the re-
maining 11,100 acres and 221,000 employees.
The siting of industrial zones and the creation of
employment opportunities may conveniently be con-
sidered in relation to the sectors defined in Diagram 12.
In this way an assessment can be made of the balance
between residential and working population.
The size of industrial areas has been related to the
probable work force available from areas in the
vicinity. In the case of certain industrial areas, such
as Subiaco, which is limited in size, this has not
always been possible. Where this problem has
occurred the transport facilities to an alternative
area have been given careful consideration.
In Chapter 5 reference has been made to the
topographical considerations influencing the choice of
areas for new development. Physically, suitable sites
in satisfactory locations are limited, and whilst new
industrial zones have, as far as possible, been located
in undeveloped areas, in the case of extensions to
existing areas industrial zoning must embrace some
land which has already been partially developed with
other uses.
Within the Central Sector, the industrial areas in
East and West Perth have been largely determined by
the consideration of transport and traffic problems,
as well as the requirements of other zones which
must be close to the central business area. The
proposed size of the industrial zones in this sector
is 300 acres. At higher densities, about 26,000
industrial employees could find employment in the
Central Sector. It is expected that only about 3,000
industrial employees will live nearby, leaving 23,000
to travel from other sectors.
The Western Sector contains three industrial
zones : Innaloo, where growth cannot be great
because of its location, the effect of existing and
future roads, adjacent market garden areas and
Herdsman Lake ; Subiaco, which is limited, by
residential growth about it, to the area bounded by
Salvado Road, Jersey Street, Hay Street and the
railway ; and North Fremantle, a very restricted area
containing scattered industries.


Diagram 12


At Innaloo a zone of 500 acres is proposed, with
an employment potential of 11,000. At Subiaco the
zone contains 150 acres, sufficient to provide em-
ployment for about 3,500. The North Fremantle
zone is confined to the area East of the railway and
is restricted to its present size partly because of the
topography. It covers 55 acres and allows for 1,000
employees.
The employment potential of the industrial zones
in the Western Sector is about 15,500, whilst the
number of industrial employees living in the sector
may be as high as 38,000.
Having regard to transport problems and locational
difficulties it is not possible to establish suitable zones,
within the Western Sector, to cater for the whole of
the theoretical needs. But it should be assumed
there will be a high proportion of city workers living
in the sector, and a smaller than average percentage
of industrial workers. Nevertheless, it would be
advisable to establish one or two fairly substantial
light industrial zones in the area between Swanbourne
and Scarborough.
Of the 38,000 industrial workers living in the
sector it is expected that 5,000 will be employed in
light industry within the district zones, and 15,500
in the three regional zones. A substantial number
will find employment in the Central Sector, or in the
industrial zone in the Northern Sector.
There are difficulties about the establishment of
industries in the Northern Sector. These are not
due to lack of suitable land but rather to the fact that
the main " industrial axis ” is likely to lie between
Kwinana and Midland Junction. In addition, com-
munications to the populated parts of the State, as
well as to the expanded port, will be better on the
southern flank of the built-up area. The Northern
Sector will have the heavily trafficked Central Area
between it and the South. It is a strong reason for
the development of the Beechboro’-Gosnells main
highway which would, in effect, by-pass the Central
Area.
The Northern Sector, in which it is estimated
37,000 industrial employees will live, has a large
industrial zone within its north-eastern boundary.
This zone has an area of about 2,300 acres and an
employment potential of 50,000. Allowing for 4,000
being employed in light industries in district zones,
there would be a surplus of some 18,000 jobs in this
industrial zone. A portion of the zone should be
set aside for special (hazardous, offensive, or noxious)
industries. It is anticipated that in the early stages
of development industries in this special zone will be
restricted to those without liquid trade wastes.
When an adequate sewage disposal system is available
in the area all trades should be catered for. It is
proposed that the zone be served by a railway from
the main line at Bayswater. This service, and fast
road transport to the port on controlled access high-
ways, together with a large labour potential in adjacent
residential areas, should give the northern industrial
zone advantages over the central zone.
The North-eastern Sector contains two zones, in
Bassendean and in Midland Junction. It is proposed
that the Bassendean area should be extended to cover
approximately 860 acres, with an employment po-
tential of 18,000. In close proximity to the railway
and sidings, it is well situated for heavier industries.
The proposed extension is northwards into the
practically undeveloped country held by the Railway
Commission. Midland Junction requires further
industrial areas to provide for the expansion of railway
and associated industries. The proposed industrial
zone should accommodate approximately 12,000
workers, making a total of 30,000 for the Sector. It
is expected that many industrial workers of this
zone will live in the popular Hills area to the East.
Including the Hills area the potential industrial labour
force is about 38,000. Allowing- for 2,500 employed
in local industries about 4,000 will need to seek
employment in one of the adjacent zones.
The Eastern Sector contains four industrial zones :
a major zone at Welshpool of 2,600 acres, with an
employment potential of 58,000 ; and subsidiary
areas at Rivervale (60 acres, 1,000 employees), Bel-
mont (280 acres, 6,000 employees) and South Guild-
ford (220 acres, 5,000 employees).
The expansion of the Belmont-Welshpool industrial
area constitutes one of the key proposals of the Plan.
The establishment of major industries and port
facilities at Kwinana, and the effect of the pattern of
communications and general economic structure of
the Region, has been discussed in previous Chapters,
and will be dealt with at greater length in Chapter 7.
The development of a great rail centre and freight
terminal at Belmont-Welshpool should create highly
satisfactory conditions for the growth of a major
industrial area. Communications to all parts of the


Region will be excellent, the large labour potential
of the southern sectors is within easy reach, and the
site is suitably located from the viewpoint of pre-
vailing winds and distance from the city. After
appropriate areas have been set aside for railway
and associated uses, approximately 2,600 acres remain
for industrial purposes, which gives the zone an
employment capacity of 58,000 persons. Drainage
difficulties exist in part of the area, and a com-
prehensive land drainage scheme will be necessary
before the site can be fully developed. This should
be commenced in the near future with the construc-
tion of the railway marshalling and goods yards.
The combined industrial zones of the Eastern
Sector total 3,185 acres with an employment potential
of 70,000 persons. It is expected that these areas
will provide employment for industrial workers
from Kalamunda, Maddington and Gosnells as well
as for those from within the Sector. Allowing for
2,500 employed in local light industries it is expected
that about 35,500 industrial workers living within
the Sector will seek employment. Industrial zones
in this sector will, therefore, be capable of absorbing
about 34,500 persons from other Sectors.
The Southern Sector contains no major industrial
area, but industrial workers living within it would
not be far distant from industrial areas in the Central,
South-western and Eastern Sectors. Allowing for
2,500 employed in light industries within the districts
about 18,500 will seek employment in other zones.
In the South-western Sector there would be no
major zone close to central Fremantle, but five zones
are proposed for the Sector. These comprise :
(a) An extended Hilton Park area giving a total
of about 370 acres to provide industrial
employment for 8,500 persons ;
(b) a South Fremantle special industrial area of
about 450 acres, to provide employment
for 10,000 (the boundary is established
West of the coastal ridge, which provides
some protection from smells carried by
the prevailing South and South- \Vest
winds) ;
(c) a small zone of about 30 acres at Fremantle,
which would not provide employment for
more than 1,000 ;
(d) an area of 140 acres at Melville containing
most of the established industries, and
having an employment potential of 3,000 ;
and
(e) a new major zone at Bibra Lake of 820 acres,
with an employment capacity of 18,000 and
with provision for special industry. The
zone has been located on the most suitable
area of land with access to the existing and
proposed railways. Because of difficulties
in disposing of liquid trade wastes only
noxious trades with dry waste or no waste
will be able to move into the zone for
special industry before there is a sewerage
scheme.
Allowing for 4,000 in light industry, it is assumed
that 30,000 will seek employment in the five industrial
zones, which have a combined area of 1,700 acres and
employment potential for 40,000 persons.
An area of 350 acres, to contain industries which
could employ 7,500 industrial workers, is situated
West of Armadale, adjacent to the road and railway
to the port. At Kwinana a total of 5,400 acres has
been zoned for industry, railways and port facilities.
With the favourable conditions for industrial and
residential development, about 47,000 industrial
workers could be attracted to the Kwinana-Rocking-
ham area, of whom some 6,000 might be employed
in light industries, and 41,000 in the major industrial
zone. The reasons for prescribing the major zone
have been explained in Section G.
In preparing the Plan careful consideration has
been given to all the possibilities of industrial de-
centralisation within the Region as well as within
the State. The conclusion reached was that Armadale
and Kwinana-Rockingham would provide favourable
conditions and that there would be difficulties else-
where. Nevertheless the Region would benefit if
there were a greater degree of decentralisation, and
every encouragment should be given to industrialists
to locate their factories near any community which
is at some distance from the main built-up area.
A summary of the sectors and industrial zones,
with capacities and expected distribution of industrial
workers, is set out in Table 23.


Table 23
SUMMARY OF PROPOSED INDUSTRIAL ZONES BY SECTORS, SHOWING ESTIMATED NUMBER
OF INDUSTRIAL WORKERS LIVING IN THE SECTOR AND EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES
Sector.
Estimated
industrial
workers
living in
sector.
Industrial Zone.
Area in
Acres.
Employ-
ment
capacity.
Central
3,000
West and East Perth
300
26,000
3,000
26,000
West
38,000
Innaloo
Subiaco
North Fremantle
Light industry
500
150
50
250
11,000
3,500
1,000
5.000
38,000
20,500
North
37,000
Northern
Light industry
2,300
200
51.000
4,000
37,000
55,000
North-East ..
32,000
Midland Junction ..
Bassendean ..
Light industry
560
860
125
12,000
18,000
2,500
32,000
32,500
East ..
38,000
Welshpool ..
Belmont
Rivervale
South Guildford
Light industry
2,600
280
60
220
125
58,000
6,00.0
1,000
5,000
2,500
38,000
72,500
South .. * ..
21,000
Light industry
125
2,500
South-West ..
34,000
Fremantle
South Fremantle
Hilton Park
Melville
Bibra Lake ..
Light industry
30
450
370
140
820
200
1,000
10,000
8,500
3,000
18,000
4,000
34,000
44,500
Hills
6,000
Light industry
35
1,000
Kalamunda ..
7,000
Light industry
35
1,000
Maddington-Gosnells
4,000
Light industry
20
500
Armadale .. ..
7,600
Armadale
Light industry
350
35
7,500
1,000
7,600
8,500
Rockingham-Kwinana
Total
47,000
Kwinana
Light industry
5,400
200
54,000
4,000
47,000
58,000
274,600
16,790
322,500


L IMPLEMENTATION
The assessment of the land needed for industry and
the zoning of suitable areas is not generally sufficient
to ensure either the best or most efficient use of the
land so zoned. Unless areas zoned for industry are
suitably subdivided to make adequate allowance for
the specialised needs of industry, many of the prob-
lems evident in existing industrial areas will be
perpetuated. Similarly, unless the land is controlled
by a body willing to help and encourage industry, it
may not be made available to industrialists requiring
land, but may be held for speculation. Zoning in
itself does not ensure that the land is available to
those requiring it for the zoned use. Assuming that
all land zoned was available there is still the problem
of scattering within a zone, placing an undue strain
on servicing authorities. A programme of develop-
ment is desirable. This is a matter of great im-
portance. Steps in the right direction have already
been taken by the Fremantle City Council which,
fortunately, had both the land and the courage to
take them. It is most desirable that their action
should be emulated by Government, Local Govern-
ment and private corporations if success and economic
efficiency are to be achieved.
The proper development of an industrial estate
requires consideration of the availability of land, the
extension of supply services, housing facilities to
provide the necessary labour and the provision of
amenities. Each must be related to the other and
form part of a general programme of development.
Because of rapid changes which may occur in the
industrial structure, the programme must be suf-
ficiently flexible to meet changing needs, for a speeding
up or slowing down of works or development. Not
all of these factors are under the direct control of
any one authority and co-operation between the
various authorities is essential.
In Great Britain, the United States of America,
and in other countries, there are now many examples
of well planned and managed industrial estates.
They illustrate the modern way of achieving both
particular and general efficiency ; and because of
the advantages they offer, both to the large and small
industrialist, they encourage development which
might not otherwise take place. The advantages
include : superior layout of roads, services and sites,
better and more economical transport facilities,
common buildings with show rooms, conference
rooms, medical facilities, recreational areas and
canteens. In addition, close contact with other
industries provides a quick interchange of products,
encourages the study of new methods and ideas and
the setting up of special marketing facilities. Tech-
nical education, which grows steadily in importance,
can also be provided economically and close at hand.
In short, facilities are provided in a manner which
makes for both greater efficiency and greater economy.
It is recommended that the Government, local
authorities and industrialists give close consideration
to this method of development of industrial land.
It would be of considerable advantage if a joint
committee, representing the three main interests,
were to study the recommendations of the Plan in
order to suggest lines of action which should quickly
be taken.


Detailed statistics of employment in the building
and construction industries are not recorded prior to
the 1947 Census, and the history of employment in
the industries is difficult to trace. In Diagram 9,
which is based upon Census records for the Region,
the rapid increase during the depression period when
large numbers of men were employed on construc-
tion works is indicated by the 1933 figures.
Records for the distribution of employment be-
tween the two sections of the industry, i.e., building
and construction, are obtainable only from recent
Census reports. In 1933, 67 per cent, of the work
force employed in these categories were engaged on
construction works and only 33 per cent, on building. 1
By 1947, only 40 per cent, were engaged on construc-
tion works. 1
In the post-war period the emphasis has been on
the erection of dwellings and only in the past two
years has commercial and industrial building gained
impetus. The trend in building since 1948 can be
seen from values of buildings erected in the State
(Table 24).
During the period 1948 to 1954 the number of
houses built in the region varied from 65 per cent, to
75 per cent, of the State total. Assuming labour to
-be distributed in the same ratio, some 7,000-8,000
were engaged in the building trade in the Region at
30th June, 1954. If the distribution between building
and construction works is taken on a similar basis to
1947 then the total regional employment for the
two industries would be 11,000-12,000.
In estimating likely future employment in these
industries comparisons have been made with records
from other capital cities in the Commonwealth. In
1947, building and construction industries in Sydney
and Melbourne employed 6.8 per cent, and 6.4 per
cent, of the respective work forces. In Perth, in
1947, 8.2 per cent, of the regional work force was
employed in these industries.
PART IV: BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION
Table 24
VALUE OF BUILDINGS ERECTED IN
WESTERN AUSTRALIA, 1948-1954
Houses and dwellings.
Other buildings.
Year.
Value.
Percentage
of total
Expenditure
on
buildings.
Value.
Percentage
of total
expenditure
on
buildings.
1948 ..
£
2,935,000
88-2
£
393,000
11-8
1949 ..
3,822,000
81-2
884,000
18-8
1950 ..
4,619,000
86-3
733,000
13-7
1951 ..
7,832,000
87-5
1,116,000
12-5
1952 ..
12,402,000
86-0
2,024,000
14-0
1953 ..
19,415,000
84-7
3,503,000
15-3
1954 ..
20,482,000
79-4
5,303,000
20-6
SOURCE : Compiled from data contained in Part XII of
the Statistical Register of Western Australia and Quarterly
Bulletins of Building Operations.
As explained in Part I, it is expected that the
increase in employment in Manufacturing Industry
will be at the expense of other categories of employ-
ment, including the building and construction in-
dustries. It is estimated that about 6.3 per cent, of
the regional work force, or some 38,000 persons, will
be engaged in these industries when the regional
population reaches 1,400,000, as compared with 8.2
per cent. (10,000 persons) in 1947.
The programming of development, in accordance
with the Plan, should be carefully considered and is
dealt with in Chapter 11. The building and con-
struction industries will play an important part in
the development of the Region and an analysis of the
potential of these industries is essential in making
recommendations regarding short and long term
programmes for development.
1 C ,°“ m ? nw ca|th Government, Census of Commonwealth of Australia,
30th June, 1933, Canberra, 1933.


PART V: COMMERCE, PROFESSIONS, PUBLIC AUTHORITY AND
FINANCE
The Central Area of Perth contains nearly all of
the main financial institutions and professional and
public offices of the State. It is most unlikely that
any new major administrative centre will be estab-
lished in the Region and, in the foreseeable future,
the bulk of the administrative functions will continue
to be carried out in the Central Area.
Although employment in the Central Area will
steadily increase it will be at a rate which is somewhat
slower than that in Manufacturing Industry (Table
10, Part I). The numerical increase, however, will
still be considerable and the problems associated with
a large work force, employed in a relatively small
area, are dealt with more specifically in Chapter 9.
Employment in shops and warehouses in the Central
Area of Perth totals 17,425 persons, or nearly 60 per
cent, of this class of employment in the Region. They
are employed in 1,614 shops and warehouses, or 30.8
per cent, of the total number of such establishments
in the Region. Details of the types of shops are
given in Chapter 9.
The remainder of the Region has 3,625 shops and
warehouses employing 11,822 persons. The numbers
and types of shops with employment are set out in
Table 25.
Some change is expected in the shopping pattern
of the Region and, consequently, the distribution of
employment in retail trade. Comparison with Mel-
bourne and other large cities indicates that, as the
City and Region grow an increased proportion of
shopping can be expected in regional shopping centres,
serving outer suburbs and the expanded towns.
It is expected that when the population of the
Region reaches 1,400,000 employment in shops and
warehouses will be 15 per cent, of the work force
(19.27 per cent, in 1947). This decrease in pro-
portion will be brought about in several ways, but
principally through the introduction of new methods
in retail trading, storage and supply.


Table 25
EMPLOYMENT IN SHOPS AND WAREHOUSES, 1953 : METROPOLITAN REGION
Classification.
Excluding Central Area.
Total
employment
in Region.
Percentage of
Class
employed
outside
Central Area.
Number
of
Units.
Employment.
Males.
Females.
Total.
FOOD AND DRINK—
Butchers
Fish
Grocers
Greengrocers
Cafes, milk bars, etc.
Wine saloons
Total
CLOTHING—
Drapers and mercers
Shoe sales
Shoe repairs
Total
PERSONAL—
Office equipment, stationery supplies,
booksellers, etc. ..
Florists
Tobacconists
Jewellers
Optical and other medical services
Hairdressers ..
Chemists
Sports goods
Photographic supplies
Total
HOUSEHOLD—
Electrical and radio
Furniture
Hardware
Leather goods
Total
DEPARTMENT STORES
MOTOR VEHICLES—
Car and cycle sales and accessories
Service stations
Total
HOTELS—
MISCELLANEOUS—
Machinery and engineering supplies
Scientific instruments
Produce merchants ..
Secondhand shops ..
306
54
1,085
119
246
28
562
77
1,480
160
232
28
89
42
1,687
166
580
25
651
119
3,167
326
812
53
772
150
3,653
466
1,870
105
84-3
79-3
86-7
70-0
43-4
50-5
1,838
I
2,539
2,589
5,128
7,016
73-1
259
21
78
226
29
85
388
42
10
614
71
95
1,737
373
124
35-3
190
76-6
358
340
440
780
2,234
34-9
205
40
19
35
9
230
116
7
4
200
17
16
42
12
195
174
9
4
299
66
12
18
5
260
150
7
3
499
83
28
60
17
455
324
16
7
875
164
89
408
100
805
512
43
90
57-0
50-6
31-5
14-7
17-0
56-5
63-3
37-2
7-7
665
669
820
1,489
3,086
48-2
106
74
134
2
161
144
452
2
70
48
98
1
231
192
550
3
1,281
601
1,733
87
18-0
31-9
31-7
3-4
316
759
217
976
3,702
26-4
6
49
61
110
3,549
3-1
99
153
191
328
18
44
209
372
1,437
527
14-5
70-6
252
519
62
581
1,964
29-6
85
466
687
1,153
2,310
49-9
10
' 37
24
97
' * 146
23
27
24
15
124
170
38
639
54
226
100
19-4
75*2 *
38-2
Total
71
266
66
332
1,019
32-6
TOTAL SHOPS
WAREHOUSES
3,591
34
5,607
1,166
4,942
107
10,549
1,273
24,880
4,367
42-4
29-1
GRAND TOTAL
3,625
6,773
5,049
11,822
29,247
40-4
SOURCE : Compiled from information supplied by Factories and Shops Inspection Branch, Department of Labour.


CHAPTER 5
The Land and Its Use
A. INTRODUCTION
A brief outline of the effect of the physical character-
istics of the Region on the pattern of development
has been given in Chapter 2. Planning must recog-
nise existing development and the manner in which
this has been influenced by the natural background.
The land and the climate have together produced an
environment which is particular to the Region.
Experience has shown that in general the founders
of the State and their immediate successors were
right in their choice of sites for various activities,
and that, even without the geographical, climatological
and geological data which is now available, their
appreciation of the possibilities and limitations of
the land was acute. Since those early days, the
increasing momentum of development has tended
to override many of the basic principles of land
usage and some recent developments have been most
unsatisfactory. It is an important function of the
Plan to examine established and accepted patterns, to
analyse to what extent they are the logical and
reasonable result of physical environment, and to
recommend continuation of what is good and the
rejection or re-shaping of what is bad.
The influence of climate and the land on the dis-
tribution and intensity of development can be either
direct or indirect. Surveys have been carried out
with a view to establishing this relationship, as
below.
Present land use pattern Plate 8 (in the Atlas).
Existing density of de- Diagram 13, Table 26,
velopment and Section H.
Relief Plate 1.
Geological survey .. Plate 2.
Existing land values .. Plate 3.
Soil classification and Plate 4.
vegetation
Suitability of land for Plate 7.
development
This Chapter attempts to analyse and interrelate
the evidence and makes general recommendations
regarding the selection and planning of new develop-
ment areas.
B. CLIMATE
The indirect influence of climate on the way of
life of the people, through its effect on topography,
vegetation, basic food products and water supply is
ever present. There is, for example, the chain of
relationships between rainfall, topography, water
resources and population capacity. The influence of
the long, sunny summers on the way of life of the
people partly determines appropriate standards of
urban development (Chapter 8).
One particular aspect of climate must be em-
phasised as having a direct bearing on the choice of
living areas and the manner in which they have
developed, and will continue to develop. In the
heat of summer, the cool ocean breezes which often
do not penetrate far inland make the coastal areas
very attractive. Fortunately, physical conditions in
these areas are also particularly favourable for de-
velopment, and with an improvement in road and
rail communications there is no doubt that the already
rapid development in the Scarborough area will
increase in momentum and extend northwards. This
also applies to the Rockingham - Warnbro Sound
area, with the stimulus of industrial and other de-
velopments at Kwinana and Cockburn Sound.
A further direct effect of climate on the intensity
of land use will be noted in Section H.
C. RELIEF
The Region comprises, broadly, the flat coastal
plain, which occupies the greater part of the western
and central portions, and the western fringe of the
Darling Ranges, an area of broken country which


dominates the eastern portion. The point of junction
between these two features is in the form of a well-
defined escarpment.
In the past, building in the Hills has been limited
by the rather difficult nature of the terrain in com-
parison with the plain. However, in very few areas
are the contours such as to preclude development in
the future. In fact, the character of the topography,
with its interesting landscape features, dramatic
views and sites which encourage the development
of varied housing layouts, is such as to encourage
development on a far greater scale than hitherto,
particularly as interesting sites within the coastal
plain become more scarce and as communications
improve. A basic principle in the planning of the
Region should be, therefore, to make adequate pro-
vision for building in the Hills without encroaching
unnecessarily on areas of potential value as permanent
parkland. It would seem that the most reasonable
compromise would be to plan for the consolidation
and expansion of existing centres such as Darlington,
Kalamunda and Roleystone, as far as practicable
excluding development from the actual escarpment.
This would allow an almost continuous belt of open
country —varying in depth from a narrow strip of
parkway to broad acres of parkland—approximately
between the 500 ft. and 800 ft. contours. The actual
definition of suitable residential areas, and the pro-
posed extent of this open space belt, is discussed more
fully in Chapter 6 and elsewhere.
Ip the rest of the Region, the factor of relief plays
a less important part in the choice of development
areas. Parts of the coastal limestone ridge, which
are rough and expensive for building, could provide
valuable breaks in the continuity of development
if left as public open space. This fact has already
been recognised by those responsible for the reserva-
tion of Bold Park, and the Plan envisages similar,
perhaps smaller, reservations northwards towards
and beyond North Beach. Similarly, a strip of broken
country between Fremantle and Coogee, if kept free
from building, would provide a valuable gap between
the area of special industry on the coast and other
development to the East.
In the preparation of Local Planning Schemes, it
is likely that a large proportion of local amenity open
space will be situated in those areas where there is a
combination of difficult contours and attractive
landscape.
D. GEOLOGY
The geological formation of the Region is the
physical factor having the most important single
effect on the pattern of past, present and future land
use. The influence of the basic? rock formation is
indirect, in that there are no extensive areas in which
the winning of rock or other raw materials by mining
or quarrying impose limitations on development.
The extraction of coastal limestone is confined largely
to a triangle whose base is at Yanchep and apex at
the northern end of Lake Joondalup, and an extensive
area South of Fremantle. Both these general areas
should be contained within a rural zone so that
quarrying can proceed where proved suitable by
survey.
In the Darling Ranges, dimension stone and
aggregate materials are obtained from the basic Pre-
Cambrian rocks and their erosional derivatives.
Existing quarries should be protected by appropriate
zoning, but it is unlikely that the scale of residential
development anticipated in the Hills will impose any
significant limitations on potential future sources.
Of far greater importance are the superimposed
soils and other deposits, the influence of which on
the distribution and intensity of land use has been
most striking. A study of the relationship between
the various soil associations (Plate 4) and the land
use pattern (Plate 8) has provided some guiding
principles for future development.
From the viewpoint of commercial exploitation
of deposits, and its limiting effect on the choice of
development areas, the most important materials are
gravel, clay and sand suitable for building. Lateritic
gravels occur on the scarp face and foot. Limited
in extent, they have already been heavily exploited.
The occurrence of gravel in this general area strength-
ens the suggestion already made (Section C) that as
far as possible close development on the escarpment
should be restricted.
The distribution of clay in the Region has had a
two-fold effect. On the one hand, areas of alluvial
or residual clays are generally associated with poor
drainage and unsuitable building conditions. Except
in isolated places, past development has avoided such
areas. On the other hand, supplies of clay suitable
for brickmaking are very restricted. Information re-
garding the exact definition of these deposits is


limited, so that it is necessary in planning the Region
to incorporate broad safeguards regarding future use
of clay areas. Both considerations indicate that, as
far as possible, extensive building should be excluded
from areas of clay deposits. These areas are confined
to parts of Maylands, North Belmont, Bassendean,
North Midland Junction, Cannington, Kenwick and
Maddington.
There are fairly widespread deposits of sand
suitable for the manufacture of sand-lime bricks.
Technical advances in the production of this type of
brick indicate that it may soon provide an economic
and plentiful alternative to the more traditional
clay bricks, and any zoning proposals should have
regard to the necessity of ensuring that sufficient
areas are available to manufacturers for exploitation.
Deposits which appear suitable exist in the Wanneru-
Gnangara area in the North and in the Banjup area
to the South. Their inclusion in the rural zone, or
in an open space belt, is desirable.
Apart from the limitations imposed by the neces-
sity to provide for the commercial exploitation of
surface materials, the inherent characteristics of the
various soils, together with related characteristics
usually found in association, have had a vital effect
on selection for various types of development.
Already described briefly in Chapter 2, it is appropri-
ate to discuss these characteristics in greater detail,
with particular reference to Plate 4 (Soil Classification
and Vegetation). The index numbers of the soil
associations are those in the key to this map.
(l) Kalamunda .Association
The sandy and gravelly soils of this group cover
most of the Darling Ranges within the Region.
Generally very suitable for building, the soil is also
of considerable agricultural value for orchard and
forest development. Coinciding with some of the
most interesting landscape in the area, it is apparent
that claims for land within this Association are likely
to be diverse and conflicting. Building in the past
has tended to be sporadic and wasteful of land, but
intensification of development is to be expected. An
equitable distribution of available land must be a
primary aim. Existing and potential orchard areas
are generally confined to the valleys, and in con-
sultation with the Department of Agriculture, tenta-
tive orchard areas have been defined in the Plan.
Existing forest lands should be retained and, in the
remainder, a reasonable balance struck between the
claims of housing and open space (Section C).
(2) Helena Association
This Association consists of fairly narrow strips of
shallow brown stony soils of the Darling Escarpment
and Helena Valley, and contains frequent rock
outcrops. Often conterminous with contours not
suitable either for residential building or agriculture,
this group of soils has been developed residentially
only in the Greenmount-Darlington areas and the
western fringe of Gooseberry Hill and Kalamunda.
Except for the consolidation of these areas it would
appear advisable to make use of the scenic rather
than the developmental qualities of this Association,
as suggested in Chapter 6 and elsewhere.
(3) Forrestfield Association
Consisting of gravelly soils and lying approximately
between the 150 ft. and 250 ft. contours, this Associa-
tion forms a broken strip extending from Upper
Swan to Serpentine, and includes the lower slopes of
the Roleystone and Wungong Brook valleys. The
strip has developed largely with mixed agricultural
areas, but is not unsuitable for building. The
greater part of Armadale and Kelmscott is built on
these soils, and part of the scattered development at
Greenmount. However, because of its inherent
qualities as orchard and pasture land, it is suggested
that no major developments be permitted in this
area other than the consolidation and expansion of
these existing centres.
(4) Guildford Association
This is an area of fertile alluvial soils, often corres-
ponding with the alluvial clay areas, containing
vineyards and orchards where building has not taken
place. The greater part of Midland Junction and
Guildford lie on these soils, but development has
generally avoided the clay areas except at Midvale
and Bellevue. The agricultural qualities of this land
support the suggestion, made in the opening para-
graphs of this Section, that its further development
for building should be severely limited.


The Association also underlies most of Cannington,
Kenwick, Maddington and the north-eastern part of
Gosnells. As in Midland Junction, areas of sand,
loam and clay are intermixed, and development has
been able to proceed only in comparatively small
pockets. In the loam and clay areas, without ex-
tensive drainage schemes only limited expansion is
possible, and then only at the expense of potentially
useful agricultural land. Part of Armadale (to the
West of the railway) is also built on this type of
land, but the clay characteristics of the other areas
are not apparent here. Nevertheless, any further
extensive development should be predominantly on
the higher and drier lands to the East and South.
As a generality, it would appear that large-scale
residential or other close development is not desirable
within the area of this Association.
(5) Serpentine Association
A complex group of heavy textured soils, with
clay and gravel patches intermixed, this Association
forms a belt of varying width, running South from
Forrestdale and broadening out to cover most of the
area between Mundijong and Wellard Townsite.
Poorly drained and often waterlogged in winter, it
has attracted little building development. No major
development proposals should be located within
this Association.
(6) Southern River Association
The soils comprising this Association are mixed,
ranging from sandy soils on the river banks to heavy
soil in the flats. It consists of three areas : (a) a
strip running South from Gosnells to Forrestdale,
(b) an area North of Mundijong and, (c) an area
West of Serpentine, none of which have been found
suitable for development. Scattered housing has
occurred in the south-western part of Gosnells, but
has been restricted to pockets of high land. Further
extensive development in any part of this Association
would not be economic and should not be en-
couraged.
(7) Bassendean Association
This Association occupies a major part of the
coastal plain, and consists of deep sands associated
with a pattern of wide flats and undulating sand hills.
The flats are often poorly drained and the water
table usually high. North of the Swan River, the
Association forms a wide belt with its western edge
following the line of Lakes Mariginiup, Jandabup and
Gnangara to the northern part of Mount Lawley.
The eastern edge runs South from the northern
boundary of the Region to Caversham. Most of
Bassendean, Beechboro and Morley Park lies within
this area.
South of the Swan River the Association continues
as a wide belt to the Welshpool Road, swings west-
ward as a narrow strip to Riverton, and fans out
again to cover most of the area between Bibra Lake
and the Southern River as far South as Wellard.
Except for the more concentrated parts of Bassen-
dean and North Belmont, the characteristics of this
Association have encouraged scattered development
on the higher and drier parts. The close and con-
tinuous development which is necessary if essential
services are to be provided economically (Chapter 8)
is only possible if extensive drainage schemes are
carried out. However, much of this Association
occupies geographically important positions in close
proximity to the City which it would be unreasonable
to exclude permanently from development. Selected
areas must, therefore, be zoned for housing and other
purposes, having regard to the drainage problems
discussed in Section E and other strategic factors
discussed elsewhere in the Report. The selection
and programming of the most appropriate areas
within this most contentious Association is of prime
importance.
It is understood that the soils of the Bassendean
Association are eminently suitable for the develop-
ment of pine forests, and except in those selected
areas referred to above where the necessity for close
development is apparent, it is recommended that
their most economic use would be for this purpose.
(8) Karrakatta Association
The deep yellow sands of this Association, generally
in the form of undulating sandhills, form a wide belt
running South from Lake Mariginiup to include an
area two to three miles each side of the Wanneru
Road, and widening out, North of the Swan River,
to include all the developed area from Claremont to
Bayswater. South of the river, the area contains
the whole of Victoria Park, South Perth, Applecross
and Attadale, and continues southwards in the form
of a narrow strip immediately to the West of a line
Bibra Lake - Jilbup Lake - Wellard.


As the present land use pattern indicates, close
development is possible over virtually the whole of
this group of soils. However, when these soils are
associated with underground water, conditions are
also eminently suitable for market gardening. One
of the functions of the Plan will be to strike a
reasonable balance between the claims of agriculture
on the one hand and housing requirements on the.
other.
(9) Herdsman Association
The peats of this Association, limited to low-lying
patches northwards from Herdsman Lake, are capable
of cultivation and generally unsuitable for building.
As the areas are very level, parts may be most suitable
for playing fields, particularly in areas such as Herds-
man Lake itself, where drainage conditions have
hitherto precluded successful cultivation.
(10) Cottesloe Association
This Association forms a coastal strip, varying in
depth from about one mile at Fremantle to about
four miles at Wanneru, stretching continuously from
Yanchep in the North to Kwinana in the South. It
consists of sandy soils of varying depths superimposed
on coastal limestone. It is only comparatively
recently that the belt has attracted extensive develop-
ment North of the Swan River, but the whole of
Fremantle was built within it. As in the case of the
Karrakatta Association, the soil is suitable for market
gardening where, subsoil water is present, and has
been extensively used for this purpose in the Spear-
wood area.
North of the river, it would appear that land
within this Association provides some of the most
attractive building sites in the Region, largely because
conflicting demands on it are limited. Its inherent
characteristics, together with its location from a
geographical and climatological point of view, indicate
that its extensive development is both inevitable and
desirable.
Similar conditions apply South of the river, except
that here the interests of market gardening must be
safeguarded, and an equitable distribution of land
effected as between this and other competing uses.
(11) Rockingham Association
A treeless area of coastal limestone stretching from
Kwinana to Mandurah, the white sands generally
provide good level building land, to which develop-
ment has already been attracted at Rockingham.
The geographical location of Rockingham in relation
to other important proposals discussed elsewhere in
the Plan suggests that further large-scale development
can be expected in the future. It should be located
as far as possible within the area of this Association,
in preference to the Cottesloe Association where
this coincides with the limestone ridge further East,
and which is understood to be potentially good
market gardening land.
To summarise, it can be seen from a comparison
of Plates 4 and 8 that the present pattern of develop-
ment shows a remarkably close relationship with the
pattern of Soil Associations. Apart from early
agricultural settlement, building was attracted to the
most satisfactory groups of soils, the Karrakatta and
Cottesloe Associations, and with certain exceptions
development on other Associations has given rise to
many difficulties. Further development should, as a
general principle, be located within Associations of
poor agricultural value where close, continuous
development can proceed smoothly and economically.
Only when geographic and other factors override
this consideration should large-scale development be
proposed on groups of soils where building con-
ditions are less suitable.
E. NATURAL DRAINAGE
Climate, topography and geology combine to pro-
duce an unusual system of natural drainage which,
together with the individual influences of the three
factors, has had an important effect on the pattern
of development. In approximately 80 miles of
coastline between the Moore River and the Peel
Inlet, although several streams originate in the Darling
Ranges and flow into the coastal plain, there is only
one outlet to the sea. The comparatively recent
formation of the coastal limestone ridge has un-
doubtedly been an important factor in preventing
these streams from reaching the coast. The large
areas of swampy, badly drained soils described in the
previous Section are a result of this system.


Apart from any other consideration, the lower
reaches of the Swan River are extremely important
to the Region in that the river provides the main
surface water drainage channel for a large part of the
coastal plain. Generally, all areas which require
drainage must be drained either to the river or to the
ocean, and reclamation cannot economically be under-
taken piecemeal. This is an important factor in the
choice of areas for development where strategic and
other factors necessitate the use of land less suitable
than the soils of the Cottesloe, Karrakatta and other
Associations. This problem is most pressing in
those areas situated in the Bassendean Association,
including Morley Park, South and East Belmont and
the Riverton-Bulls Creek area, and is discussed further
in Chapter 7.
The strip of land lying below the 50 feet contour
North of and including Herdsman Lake is another
area with complex drainage problems. Here, the
otherwise good building soils of the Karrakatta
Association are interspersed with the heavier and less
satisfactory soils of the Herdsman Association.
Separated from the coast by the limestone ridge
referred to in Section C, and from the Swan River
by high land to the South, already difficult drainage
problems in this area may be aggravated if extensive
close development in its northern parts were per-
mitted. The increased stormwater run-off would
seriously overload the existing system, and additional
costly tunnels to the coast, together with a system of
compensating basins, might be necessary. The com-
bination of soil and subsoil water conditions makes
this area particularly suitable for market gardening.
In view of the drainage complications it is suggested
there should be no extensive building development.
In Plate 7, further areas are defined where drainage
difficulties are likely to be encountered, due to the
presence of a water-table too high for the satisfactory
use of septic tank installations. The defined areas
are restricted to those which have been the subject
of survey by the Metropolitan Water Supply, Sewer-
age and Drainage Department. Other areas exist,
but have not been surveyed in detail. Where the
possibility of difficulty is apparent from a study of
air photographs and other available material, a note to
this effect is superimposed on the Map.
F. WATER RESOURCES
•
The water resources likely to be available for the
Region will help determine the limits of growth.
Perth is situated towards the northern extremity of
the good rainfall area, and the potential sources from
which water can be obtained are not unlimited.
However, adequate water at reasonable cost could be
made available for a population of over 1,000,000.
Provision of water has not, in the past, had a direct
effect on the detailed pattern of land use within the
Region. Broadly speaking, development in the more
outlying areas has in some cases been retarded because
of supply difficulties, and peripheral expansion of the
inner urban areas has been encouraged. In the
future, it is unlikely that water supply problems will
influence to any extent the choice of suitable de-
velopment areas, except in those cases referred to
in Chapter 7. A more detailed consideration of
this subject appears in that Chapter.
An interesting aspect is the effect of underground
water supplies on land use and is dealt with in
Section H.
G. THE PATTERN OF LAND USE
The influences described in previous Sections,
together with historical and other factors noted
elsewhere, have combined to produce the pattern
of development recorded in Plate 8 (Land Use
Survey). The information has been obtained by
actual ground survey in the case of those areas largely
or partially developed, and by an examination of
aerial photographs in the case of the more remote,
largely undeveloped areas. The surveys were begun
in June, 1953, and completed in June, 1954. A
certain amount of development has occurred since
then, but the general pattern is unchanged. Con-
stant revision of the Land Use Survey should form
an integral part of the continuous planning process.
The size of the area covered in relation to the
maps selected has necessitated the use of certain
conventions. The more important are listed below.
In the case of industrial areas, as far as possible
all sites which can be shown to the scale used have
been included. Very small areas are not shown. No
differentiation is made between types of industry.


25
25. Central Perth from the air. In
the commercial heart of the Region build-
ing intensity and land values reach their
peak.
26. Typical landscape of the coastal
plain. Large tracts of this good building
land exist on the fringe of the urban area.
26


27
27. Vineyards on the alluvial soil of
the Swan Valley, which has been in-
tensively cultivated from the earliest days.
28. Mundaring Weir. The natural
landscape of the Darling Ranges changed
and enhanced by a large-scale engineering
project.
28


29
29. Near City Beach : typical sand-
dune country which is increasing in
popularity as residential land, and in some
parts has been spoiled by premature de-
velopment.
30. Orchards, Kalamunda : typical of
many small valleys in the Darling Ranges.
The attractiveness of these valleys as
residential land competes with their value
as agricultural land.
30


31
31. Osborne Park in 1939. Illustrating
a manner of development which is wasteful
of land and services.
32. Flooding at Morley Park. Some
areas are at present unsuitable for building
because of drainage difficulties.
32


For residential areas, a distinction has been made
between areas which are largely built-up and those
which contain only scattered development. There
is no hard and fast division between the two cate-
gories. Generally, street blocks or parts of street
blocks which are developed with four or more
dwellings to the acre are coloured with the notation
for the former category, with unused parts of the
block left uncoloured. Where the pattern is too
confused for exact representation, the proportion of
developed and undeveloped land is shown dia-
gramatically. Areas which consist predominantly of
development at a density of less than four dwellings
per acre, or where closer development occurs only
in small pockets within large areas of unused or
agricultural land, have been classified as scattered
development.
In street blocks of mixed commercial and residential
development, the proportion of each use is generally
shown diagrammatically, except where groups of any
particular use (such as shopping) are large enough
and sufficiently well defined to be shown accurately.
Small individual commercial or public buildings have
not been shown separately. Where a single building
occupies a large area of private open space, the
emphasis in the notation is on the predominant use,
i.e., the open space, with a red edging to denote the
presence of a building.
Open space is shown in two categories—open
space to which the public normally has access without
payment, and open space which is not generally
open to the public, such as golf courses and enclosed
playing fields. In the case of State Reserves, where
the land is specifically reserved for playing fields,
and has not yet been developed for this purpose, the
land is not classified as Public Open Space. Land
reserved for general recreational purposes, even
though not commonly used by the public, is assumed
to be available for the purpose intended, and is
classified accordingly.
Agricultural land has been subdivided into two
categories : land used intensively for agricultural
purposes (e.g., for market gardening, vineyards and
orchards) and land not so intensively used (e.g., for
pasture).
The Land Use Survey, partly because of the
simplification necessitated by the scale of the maps,
indicates quite dramatically present development
tendencies, both good and bad, which must influence
planning recommendations and decisions. Much of
the essential information furnished by the survey has
been, and will be, discussed in other parts of the
Report. Some of the more important aspects require
emphasis and are summarised below, together with
reference to the relevant Chapters. These are best
dealt with in the general order of uses appearing in
the key to Plate 8.
Industrial Areas . Apart from the recent large-
scale development at Kwinana, the dispersion and
relatively small scale of manufacturing industry is
emphasised by the survey. Medium-sized concentra-
tions appear at Subiaco, Bassendean, Fremantle and
Welshpool, but for the rest the pattern is confused.
In North Perth, industry and other uses are seen to
be haphazardly intermixed, and at Innaloo and Bel-
mont the wasteful scattering of industrial sites is
quite clearly shown. The weaknesses of the present
pattern, together with proposals for the future ex-
pansion of industry, have already been discussed in
Chapter 4. The proposals have been formulated
having regard to present tendencies, and in relation
to physical, economic and other factors discussed
elsewhere.
Residential Areas . The changing residential pattern
is shown by the contrast between the close develop-
ment of the older established areas and the more
scattered development of the newer areas. The
belt between Fremantle and Perth, North of the
river, including Cottesloe, Claremont, Nedlands,
Leederville and Subiaco, shows little vacant land.
These were amongst the first districts to attract
development, because of their location and the nature
of the land, and consolidation here is almost com-
plete. To the East, expansion has been comparatively
recent, as the broken pattern of development in-
dicates. The difficulties of the terrain in parts of
Maylands, South Bassendean and Morley Park
(Section D) have resulted in an extremely disjointed
and uneconomic utilisation of land.
South of the river, the effect of comparatively poor
accessibility from Perth is evident. Except in Vic-
toria Park and immediately North-East of Fremantle,
close development is restricted to a narrow belt
along the river. Even on the good building land
between Applecross and Bicton, housing is as yet
scattered, except along the river frontages. The
tendency for this area to develop is, however,
apparent, and with improved communications be-


tween North and South of the river, the good building
land lying between Fremantle and Bulls Creek will
rapidly be occupied.
Further from the city centres, the climatic ad-
vantages and good building land of the coastal areas
are resulting in widespread building, with the be-
ginnings of consolidation taking place in the Scar-
borough area. Further North it can be seen that
development is still in its early stages, but expansion
and intensification are inevitable. The suburban
growth towards Mount Yokine is quickly reaching
the stage where the whole area will be closely de-
veloped, but to the North-East the limitations of the
land, in terms of suitability for building, have had
the effect of restricting development and perpetuating
scattered building. It is in this area, so obviously
of geographical importance, that the greatest effort
will be necessary to minimise these physical diffi-
culties. Similar conditions are seen to apply to the
Cannington-Kenwick area, where development has
spread on pockets of good land down the Albany
Highway, with fingers tentatively exploring the
doubtful land on each side. It is likely that, in
addition to the drainage difficulties in this area, the
opening up of better building land to the West will
have the effect of slowing down its development, as
geographically it will be no more conveniently
situated than the Applecross-Attadale area when
direct contact with Perth is established (Chapter 7).
It is anticipated, therefore, that only limited expansion
is to be expected beyond Cannington.
The many physical difficulties in the Guildford-
Midland Junction area have resulted in severe limita-
tions to expansion. The pattern is characterised
by well-defined boundaries to fairly close develop-
ment. It is unlikely that the major operations neces-
sary to bring further extensive areas into use will be
justified.
Outside the main urban concentration, the be-
ginnings of small residential areas can be seen along
the lines of communication running East, at Dar-
lington, Parkerville, Mount Helena and other centres.
Limited as yet because of factors discussed previously
in this Chapter, the gradual attraction of further
development to these settlements is envisaged. Further
South, Kalamunda, Kelmscott, and Armadale have
already reached the proportions of small towns, and
conditions have been shown to be such as to en-
courage further rapid expansion.
Southwards from Fremantle, the distances from
Perth and the utilisation of a large part of the available
land for agricultural purposes have resulted in only
a scattering of housing areas. But at Rockingham
and Safety Bay there are obvious signs of incipient
large-scale development. Despite the distance from
the city centres, this area is rapidly expanding, as
the long tongue of development southwards from
Safety Bay indicates, chiefly because of its very
attractive building land and its pleasant situation
adjacent to fine sheltered beaches. Industrial growth
at Kwinana will undoubtedly accelerate progress, and
provision should be made for extensive development.
To summarise, the present pattern and indications
of the future direction of residential growth are
recorded in the Land Use Survey. They form a
basis for recommendations in the Plan regarding the
location of future development. Recommendations
as to quantity and character result from a study of
the existing intensity of land use (Section H), and the
application of development standards suggested in
Chapter 8.
Central Areas and Principal Subsidiary Centres .
The scale and importance of the two regional centres
of Perth and Fremantle contrast vividly with the
minor nature of other centres. The fairly well-
defined shopping area of Midland Junction stands out
clearly, and the growing centres of Kalamunda,
Armadale and Rockingham are obvious focal points
for future commercial development. Elsewhere the
pattern of commercial and public buildings is hap-
hazard. The tendency for shops to spread sporadic-
ally down the major highways, with greater consolida-
tion near the regional centres, is clearly indicated.
On the Albany Highway, shopping is practically
continuous through Victoria Park. Groups of shops
at convenient intervals are more apparent in the older
established areas along the Stirling Highway. In
these areas there is a considerable number of public
building groups, but they are widely dispersed through
the residential districts. In the 'newer areas the
number of public buildings is very limited, but a
similar pattern is developing. The lag between the
completion of houses and the provision of essential
community buildings is the main cause of this dis-
persion, for reasons discussed in greater detail in
Chapter 8. The surveys provide sufficient general
indications for proposals to be made regarding the
distribution and size of future centres (Chapter 10).


Open Spaces . The framework upon which an
impressive open space system can be established is
clearly evident in the survey. With Kings Park as
focal point, a series of disconnected open spaces
stretch along both banks of the Swan River. Par-
ticularly to the East, many of the breaks in continuity
consist of unused or agricultural land. The linking
and extension of riverside reservations form an
essential part of the proposals (Chapter 6).
In the Darling Ranges, the attractiveness of the
escarpment as the site of major regional parks is
marked by the series of open spaces stretching from
the great mass of the Forrest National Park to the
smaller reserve at Serpentine. Also clearly indicated
in the survey is the present opportunity of extending
these reserves to form a more or less continuous
belt—an opportunity which can be seen to be rapidly
disappearing as scattered development approaches the
areas in question.
With the exception of the large open spaces on the
river, major urban parks are few. Kings Park and
Bold Park are the only examples. Forming a distinct
break in the continuity of residential development,
similar features would be desirable in all sectors of
the urban area. In some districts, existing small
public open spaces can be extended into adjoining
areas of land as yet not built on. At the Scaddan and
Collier Plantations, for example, existing open spaces
can ultimately be extended to absorb parts of the
pine plantations. Deficiencies are most apparent in
the newer areas. The visual evidence of the Land
Use Survey is confirmed by the figures quoted in
Chapter 6.
Agriculture. The present distribution of agri-
cultural activities is dramatically illustrated, because
the pattern is not so easily appreciated from the
ground. Market gardening, vineyard and orchard
areas are clearly defined, and their relationship with
conditions of soil and relief is apparent. Indications
as to likely areas of consolidation and expansion are
given, and have led to the definition of suggested
agricultural zones in the Plan.
H. INTENSITY OF LAND USE
It is important that available land should be used
economically, even in a Region where it might appear
that building land is unlimited. It is, on the other
hand, desirable that the present intensity of land use,
insofar as it reflects a particular way of life, should
be recognised in the formulation of planning pro-
posals. The Region is fortunate in that there is
probably sufficient land to enable present basic
housing densities to be continued, but where economic
factors require that wasteful methods be discontinued,
accepted and established patterns should be modified.
Plate 7 (Land Suitability) indicates that first class
building land within reasonable distance of the
centre of the Region is, in fact, comparatively limited.
An indication of limitations imposed by physical
conditions has been given in Section D. Further
probable restrictions are suggested in Plate 7. Some
are factual and indisputable, such as swamps, land
covered permanently with water, and land already
largely developed. Others arise from the need to
reserve land for purposes other than building (areas
suggested for market gardens, timber plantations,
etc.). These areas often coincide with land which is
otherwise unsuitable for building, but sometimes a
potential direct conflict has to be resolved by planning
decisions. Further limitations are imposed if the
best use is to be made of areas of natural beauty.
The remaining land (uncoloured on the map) is that
which is generally suitable for building and within
which development should be encouraged to proceed
in an orderly manner.
As part of the planning process, it is necessary to
equate this available area of suitable land with the
quantity of development anticipated, and to suggest
appropriate densities which would allow spacious
living conditions and generous community facilities
without incurring unnecessary wastage. It should be
emphasised that in an overall Regional Plan of this
nature, precise density restrictions cannot be pre-
scribed. These should be determined in Local
Planning Schemes operating within the framework
of an accepted regional pattern, which only suggests
broadly what densities would be appropriate if
certain populations are to be accommodated in
certain areas. These broad suggestions are made in
Chapter 8 of this Report. Incorporating desirable
standards for non-residential uses, the recommended
District Gross Densities are based on a study of existing
densities operating in the Region.
Diagram 13 and Table 26 set out these existing
densities, expressed in terms of the number of persons
per gross acre of land over areas which include all
playing fields, shopping areas, school sites and other


Diagram 13


Diagram 14


Table 26
EXISTING AND PROPOSED DENSITY
OF DEVELOPMENT
(District Numbers refer to Diagram 7)
District
Number.
Existing
District
Gross
Density
(persons
per
acre).*
Suggested
Future
District
Gross
Density
(persons
per
acre).*
District
Number.
Existing
District
Gross
Density
(persons
per
acre).*
Suggested
Future
District
Gross
Density
(persons
per
acre).*
1
6-6
12-0
23
9-0
12-0
2
9-1
12-0
24
5-3
12-0
3
6-6
12-0
25
11-0
18-0
4
13-1
12-0
26
10-1
12-0
5
16-9
18-0
27
2-1
12-0
6
9-3
12-0
28
1-8
12-0
7
9-4
12-0
29
3-9
12-0
8
10-7
12-0
30
12-2
12-0
9
t
12-0
31
6-4
12-0
10
5-3
12-0
32
2-5
12-0
11
6-3
12-0
33
8-6
12-0
12
13-1
12-0
34
22-1
18-0
13
10-0
12-0
35
t
9-0
14
23-7
18-0
36
t
9-0
15
20-8
18-0
37
t
9-0
16
t
57-0
38
t
9-0
17
2-5
12-0
39
t
9-0
18
4-1
12-0
40
f
9-0
19
5-9
12-0
41
t
12-0
20
9-4
12-0
42
t
12-0
21
7-0
12-0
43
t
12-0
22
* *
8-2
12-0
44
t •
12-0
local and district uses as defined in Chapter 8. The
figures can, therefore, be compared directly with the
future District Gross Densities set out in Diagram 14.
During the initial stages of the study, it was apparent
that the Region could not easily be divided into
convenient districts of similar overall densities. Nor
were there, in the main urban concentration, many
obvious communities separated by well-defined
physical or other boundaries. Local authority areas
were similarly unsuitable units for study. Building
densities were found to vary considerably from one
street block to another, and between immediately
adjacent areas. An exact representation of building
density would have resulted in a far too complex
picture. The areas of different densities which appear
in Diagram 13 are, therefore, based on fairly arbitrary
divisions. They represent, as far as possible, areas
where similar Net Housing Densities (Chapter 8)
occur over most of the area, and have where possible
been made coincident with obvious physical bound-
aries. Further factors influencing the choice were
the districts for which Census statistics were available,
and a consideration of future district boundaries to
which community standards could be applied, so that
a direct comparison between existing and future
patterns could be made. The resulting picture of
existing development, however, is clear and indicates
the main trends.
Densities are highest, as might be expected, in the
older areas adjoining the cities of Perth and Fre-
mantle, particularly in North Perth and Subiaco.
Further from the centres, densities diminish—largely
owing to the increased size of plots in newer sub-
divisions, partly to increases in the area of playing
fields and other non-housing uses, partly to the larger
number of vacant lots. In the closely settled areas
of Districts 4,6, 7, 12, 13, 23 and 25 (Diagram 7),
District Gross Densities range between just over 9
persons per acre (in the Nedlands-Claremont-
Cottesloe group) to about 13 persons per acre (in the
Mount Lawley-North Perth group). The older, more
congested areas of Subiaco and North Perth show
densities of 16 and 23 persons per acre respectively.
Further out, densities drop sharply to about 5 persons
per acre (for example, District 24, Cannington).
The closely developed part of Scarborough shows
a density of about 9 persons per acre. Densities in
the Hills appear still to be well below 5 persons per
acre, but in these areas it has been extremely difficult
to define limits within which calculations would be
valid.
The densities of the more settled areas can, with
certain reservations, be regarded as reasonable averages
to expect in the near future, even though an analysis
of future gross densities shows different standards
for individual housing lots and communal facilities.
Where densities are low, due to scattered building,
every effort should be made to minimise the economic
weakness inherent in loose residential development.
The pioneering instincts inherited from the early
days (Chapter 2) has enabled families to accept, with
far more tolerance than one would find in older
countries, the disadvantages of an isolated home not
supplied with essential services. The presence of
underground water has, in many cases, encouraged
* Refer to Table 49.
t Detailed densities have not been calculated for the
outlying districts owing to the scattered nature of development
and the difficulty in establishing satisfactory boundaries to
which calculations could be applied.
t Not applicable [Perth Central Area].


this independence. With increasing urbanisation and
improved standards of living, such a tolerance will
decrease. Already in many loosely settled areas the
demand for essential services, not apparently required
when settlement first took place, is growing. By
applying suitable density standards and an orderly
programme designed to achieve reasonably close
development before entirely new areas are released,
the unsatisfactory effects of sporadic growth can be
avoided.
The intensity of industrial land use has already
been discussed in Chapter 4, and recommendations
made as to appropriate densities for future develop-
ment.
L LAND VALUES
The relationship between location and intensity
of development is well illustrated by the pattern of
land values in the Region (Plate 3). Residential
land values are generally higher in the older, closely
developed areas (North Perth, West Perth, parts of
Subiaco and South Perth) or in those areas where
climatic, scenic and geological conditions are such
that the inherent building quality of the area is high
(the river frontage and hinterland West from Perth,
part of the coastline at Cottesloe and Scarborough,
Floreat Park, and part of the southern bank of the
river). The lowest values often coincide with areas
previously demonstrated to be of poor potential as
building land (parts of Belmont, Bassendean and
Maylands).
The main indications provided by this survey are
in relation to probable changes in intensity of use.
In where high values coincide with relatively
low densities it can be expected that greater intensity
of use will gradually be achieved by the erection of
flats or the further subdivision of large lots. Thus,
in Districts 6, 7 and 25 increases in the present density
can be forecast with some certainty. In the highest
value residential areas adjoining the Central Area of
Perth, the highest residential density can be ex-
pected (Chapter 8). In the intermediate areas of
North Perth and Subiaco it can be expected that,
whilst the congestion of old housing on inadequate
sites will be relieved by redevelopment, existing
overall densities will be maintained by the inclusion
of a high proportion of flats and other types of de-
velopment appropriate to high value land.
J. CONCLUSIONS
The estimated overall population growth in the
Region has been dealt with in Chapter 3. The
relationship between place of work and place of
living has been discussed in Chapter 4. This Chapter
has given further indications as to the direction and
intensity of development to be expected, having
regard to physical factors, climatic considerations,
existing patterns and intensities of land use, and
land values.
The Chapters following will translate these general
indications into more specific proposals, incorporating
the further factors of open space provision, com-
munications, public services and standards of com-
munity development, culminating in a detailed
description of particular proposals in Chapter 10.




CHAPTER 6
Outdoor Recreation and Open Space
A. INTRODUCTION
The need for open space—too often neglected in
the past—becomes more pressing as the growth of
a metropolis spreads across the country. This need
may take the form of participation in some kind of
group activity, or individual sport, or the passive
enjoyment of the hills, river or beaches. Generally,
young people seek active recreation, while those to
whom vigorous physical exercise is no longer attractive
prefer less active games such as golf or bowls, the
more leisurely process of watching sporting events,
or quietly enjoying the country, the beach or the
local park. This generalisation applies to all coun-
tries, and particularly to the more highly industrial-
ised, even though the relative importance of each
activity may vary with climate and cultural pattern.
In countries where open land is limited, and in
cities where extensive urban sprawl has reduced
enjoyment to an occasional glimpse of park, country-
side, river or sea, the lesson has been learnt and the
painfully difficult process of trying to reclaim enough
open land for a minimum amount of recreation has
begun. Where urban development is still on a
limited scale, the effect of an absence of accessible
open space is difficult to appreciate. In Western
Australia, where climate and topography have to-
gether produced a way of life in which outdoor
activities are fundamental, it is hard to imagine such
a situation arising. But unless further enlightened
action is taken on a scale comparable with that of
the farsighted men who set aside Kings Park, Forrest
National Park, Bold Park and the main playing field
areas, future generations may well be faced with a
position similar to that of the larger and less fortunate
cities in other countries. A recent survey of public
playing fields by the National Fitness Council has,
for example, revealed considerable existing de-
ficiencies. 1 With the pace of development increasing
it is imperative to make good such deficiencies and
to anticipate the further needs of a growing popula-
tion.
Although the scope of surveys to assess the quantity
of land required for open spaces has been limited,
the general conclusion is unassailable that in the
Region there is sufficient land to meet all reasonable
needs for building development and still leave ample
for open space requirements. The problem lies in
giving direction to development so that recreational
areas may be brought into use in the right place and
at the right time. Authorities could achieve this
aim without undue difficulty, and the recommenda-
tions are sufficiently liberal to ensure enough open
space throughout the Region. If it is found in the
future that demands have been over-estimated, it is
far simpler to free areas for development than to
embark on the expensive and inadequate policies
forced on communities where a narrow and meaner
view had been taken.
B. OPEN SPACE CATEGORIES
In a planning scheme, the method of calculating
the area required, and the manner in which provision
is made, will vary according to the kind of open
space under consideration. It is not practicable to
prescribe a single overall standard, nor to define
actual areas in all cases. It is necessary to begin by
classifying the many kinds of open space which cover
a full range of human needs.
This Report distinguishes between Private Open
Space and Public Open Space, and within the latter
category, between Local, District and Regional Open
Space. Generally speaking, the term Private Open
Space applies to all areas to which the public is not
admitted except on payment, or which are available
only to limited and selected numbers. The term
Public Open Space applies to areas accessible to all.
Local Open Space includes areas which, to be effective,
must be situated in close proximity to the home.
1 Table 27 and Section E (i) e.


The small children’s playground is one of the more
obvious. District Open Space caters for needs which
can be satisfied only by facilities more elaborate than
can be provided near the home, and where the dis-
advantage of travel is more than balanced by a com-
prehensive range of attractions. Regional Open Space
includes the major recreational centres used by, and
forming focal points for, the Region as a whole.
Within these categories, the demand for certain
types of open space can be assessed quantitatively
in relation to accepted standards, and appropriate
areas set aside. The need for other types cannot,
however, be measured and no definite standards can
be recommended. For example, various authori-
tative standards have been suggested for the provision
of public playing fields. Deficiencies can be meas-
ured, likely population increases taken into account,
and the necessary areas reserved or acquired. In
contrast, the provision of regional parks cannot be
related to measurable needs, and their provision will
depend largely on topographical and other con-
siderations. Similarly, Private Open Space , the
quantity of which can only partly be predetermined
by positive planning, will come largely from the
initiative of private individuals or groups as compared
with public authorities. It is necessary in a planning
scheme to allow sufficient land for this purpose and
to make some assessment of the effect of its pro-
vision on the amount of Public Open Space ultimately
required. -
It is also essential to regard the various types of
open space as parts of a single system, and while
dealing with each category separately, to build up a
co-ordinated pattern in which each unit plays its
part and in which the demands of each age group
are satisfied in every locality and district of the
Region.
C. OPEN SPACE SYSTEM
To achieve a system, after the theoretical quantity
of open space required for a given population has
been determined, it is necessary to ensure that its
distribution is closely related to the general pattern
of development. It is not within the scope of the
Regional Plan to define every site for every local
playing field, but overall local, district and regional
requirements have been assessed and appropriate
allowances made in the calculation of local and
district densities. Sites for major open spaces only
are suggested in the Plan, in relation to anticipated
building development and to the proposed regional
system of communications. The aim has been to
define, as far as possible, a network of open spaces
so as to allow of an equitable distribution throughout
the urban areas, to ensure easy access, to limit un-
necessary travel, to make full use of natural features
and to allow flexibility when the Plan is being carried
out. To help achieve the last objective, proposed
open spaces are comparatively large areas forming
physical breaks between residential communities.
D. PRIVATE OPEN SPACE
In this category is included a wide range of types,
each contributing in some degree to the general
satisfaction of open space needs, but which are not
readily measurable and for which only broad safe-
guards in the form of liberal density standards can
be achieved.
(i) Private Gardens
The primary source of outdoor recreation is the
individual private garden. Where land is abundant
and of comparatively low agricultural value, the
almost universal desire for a garden can be satisfied.
A garden is the first outdoor playground for the
young child, the rest-park on the doorstep, the meeting
place for friends and neighbours, even the small
sporting arena for tennis and other games not re-
quiring much space. It is, therefore, one of the
basic assumptions of the Plan that the present demand
by many people for relatively large lots will continue,
and that those who want large gardens will not be
prevented by planning restrictions from having them.
This is effected by suggesting basic Net Residential
Densities (Chapter 8), which will allow for a high
proportion of spacious residential development, whilst
providing also for the smaller lots and flats which
are likely to be desired by a growing number of older
and younger households without children. When
the population of the Region is 1,000,000 the average
overall Net Residential Density should give an approxi-
mate total area of 35,000 acres of private gardens,
or about 35 acres per 1,000 persons. This figure is
considerably in excess of standards applying in other
countries (for example in England, where large areas


of new development at average net densities of up
to 14 houses per acre result in a standard of about
6 acres of garden space per 1,000 persons). Because
of this, standards for providing incidental open space
and children’s playgrounds originating in England are
not applicable in Western Australia.
( ii ) Private School Playing Fields
It has not been possible fully to investigate the
present contribution made by playing fields in this
category, nor to estimate their future extent. In
relation to overall needs it is assumed that the con-
tribution, however valuable, will be comparatively
small, and unlikely to affect the area of public playing
fields required.
(iii) Private Club Grounds
At present few large grounds are privately owned,
and the majority of clubs operate on publicly-owned
playing fields. There are exceptions, and the future
may bring changes as the population increases and
larger clubs emerge. It is also possible that the
European custom of attaching recreation grounds to
factories, for the exclusive use of employees, may
find favour. The only safe course, however, is to
plan for a continuation of existing conditions. If
sufficient land is reserved for public playing fields,
flexibility in future administration and use would
enable adjustments to be made.
This emphasises the need for liberality, because
an area sufficient for a given number of players under
present conditions would cater for a far smaller
number if exclusively used by one club or by a
factory team.
In recommending appropriate densities for in-
dustrial zones (Chapter 4), allowance has been made
for small recreational areas within the zones, and in
most cases the proposed buffer areas of open space
between industrial and residential development could
contain private as well as public playing fields.
( iv ) Swimming Pools and Lidos
Although the beaches and the river will probably
always be the major attractions for surfing and
bathing, the demand for fully equipped, attractively
designed and properly maintained outdoor swimming
pools will undoubtedly increase. Existing facilities
are limited and usually provide no more than the
bare necessities for changing and swimming. The
Plan makes no specific suggestions for the location,
size and design of such establishments, but recom-
mends that within areas defined as Public Open Space,
particularly the riverside reserves, the beach areas,
and the large natural parks, there should be swim-
ming pools with sun-bathing terraces, gardens, rest-
aurants and paddling pools, whether developed by
private groups or public authorities.
(v) Major Racing, Trotting and Cricket
Facilities
The Western Australian Turf Club has recently
acquired an area for a major race course. The new
course would cater for very large meetings and,
together with existing courses, will probably meet
all the future needs of the Region. Centrally situated
in a regional sense, it can be served adequately by
proposed road and rail communications. The new
course may eventually be visited on special occasions
by 60,000-80,000 racegoers. No inconvenience
should be caused to those living in adjacent residential
areas as the expansive race course area would form
a link in the chain of open spaces in the Bulls Creek
area.
With an extended Riverside Drive and the in-
cidental provision of parking space it has been
assumed that the Gloucester Park Trotting Ground
and the Western Australian Cricket Association
Ground will have room for future improvements.
They are well placed within the regional road system
and their further development will be within the
framework of the existing roads and the new Swan
River Drive.
( vi ) Golf Courses
For the existing population of some 400,000
persons, the total area occupied by golf courses is
about 1,750 acres, or more than 4.0 acres per 1,000
persons. The Plan allows for an increase pro-
portional with the estimated growth of population,
resulting in a total provision of 5,600 acres. As the
final choice of golf courses is very dependent on
local demand and technical considerations, no actual
sites have been suggested, but the proposed open
spaces provide room for courses as required.


(vii) Large Grounds attached to Institutions,
etc .
It is considered that these areas (hospital grounds,
private parks, etc.) will not form an effective con-
tribution to overall needs. Many additional in-
stitutions will undoubtedly come into being, and
although the amount of land required for some,
such as public hospitals, may be estimated, a less
specific allowance for others must be made. If
properly sited, large private grounds can form an
effective visual relief in continuous urban develop-
ment. In defining buffer zones between residential
districts, the space requirements of suitable private
establishments as well as public playing fields have
been considered.
Institutions with very large land requirements are
best placed outside the main built-up area. If they
are within it, their extensive area increases the lines
of communication and acts as a barrier between
residential communities. The Mental Hospital at
Claremont illustrates this point. A new Mental
Hospital at Pyrton would be just beyond the edge
of the proposed limits of the built-up area and should
not impede other development. The same would
be true of a new Prison at Coogee (Chapter 10).
A Summary of the provisions made in the Plan
for probable Private Open Space requirements is
given at the end of this Chapter.
E. PUBLIC OPEN SPACE
Providing open space for use and enjoyment by
the public in general is a more tangible problem than
providing for private open spaces. Needs can be
assessed, standards suggested and action taken by
appropriate authorities to implement agreed pro-
visions of a planning scheme, particularly with regard
to public playing fields. As previously indicated,
open spaces in this category have been further sub-
divided into Local, District and Regional Open Spaces .
( i) Local Open Space
(a) Incidental Open Spaces in Housing
Estates
This category covers a wide range of miscellaneous
open spaces located within residential areas. Pro-
vision is essentially a part of the problem of detailed
estate design, and further reference is made in Chapter
8 to standards of housing development. Assuming
some measure of control over the layout and appear-
ance of housing estates, it is recommended that,
where possible, provision should be made for minor
open areas as visual attractions, sometimes as an
alternative to the übiquitous and often unsightly
verge, and as a setting for fine native trees. In local
authority housing estates in England it is currently
recommended that approximately one acre per 1,000
habitable rooms be provided in the form of small
greens and common gardens. l In this State, where
maintenance difficulties must be taken into account,
and where large private gardens will generally be
normal (Section D (i)), a lower standard would be
adequate. It is therefore recommended that, in
addition to any areas given to grass verges, a standard
of 0.5 acre per 1,000 persons be adopted in calculating
desirable local requirements.
(b) Children’s Playgrounds
No local surveys have been undertaken to establish
the possible future demand for children’s playgrounds,
but the recommendations of the War Housing
Division of the Department of Labour and National
Service 2 have been adopted in principle. Standards
suggested range from 1.0 acre per 1,000 persons for
high density areas where individual gardens are
limited in size, to 0.2 acre per 1,000 persons in low
density areas where private gardens are larger.
Whilst particular sites for children’s playgrounds
are not suggested, it is recommended that in detailed
planning proposals they should be distributed through
the locality in the form of small subsidiary play-
grounds, with one central playground associated with
other centralised local facilities, in such a way as to
ensure that there is a playground within a quarter-
miles radius of every home.
Further reference is made in Chapter 8 to the
factors influencing the choice of site and grouping
with other uses.
1 Ministry of Housing and Local Government, “ The Density of Resi-
dential Areas,” London, 1952.
2 housing Division, Department of Labour and National Service,
Wartime Housing, Bulletin No. 6, Melbourne, 1945.


(c) Small Parks and Gardens
This item should not be confused with (a) which
comprises the small decorative features ancillary to
house groups, but considered largely in relation to
the design of local shopping and other centres. Small
rest parks with seats and shade trees are desirable
for pleasure and convenience. It is recommended
that of an overall district standard of 1.0 acre per
1,000 persons, 50 per cent., or 0.5 acre per 1,000
persons, should be distributed where possible through-
out residential localities.
(d) Primary School Playing Fields
Generally situated within residential localities,
primary schools with their attached playing fields
will form an effective contribution to overall playing
field requirements. Reference is made in Chapter 8
to the sizes of school sites recommended by the
Education Department. These recommended mini-
mum areas include sufficient land for organized games,
and result in an approximate standard of 1.4 acres per
1,000 persons for this purpose. Efforts are being
made by the Education Department to make up de-
ficiencies on existing sites, where conditions permit,
and the ultimate pattern when achieved will con-
siderably lessen the demand made on public playing
fields by children of school age.
(e) Public Playing Fields
As a result of a recent questionnaire circulated by
the National Fitness Council to various sporting
associations (May-June, 1954), it is estimated that a
total of about 1,450 acres is required to meet the
present requirements of organized sporting bodies
(Table 27). The figures are based on the number of
grounds stated to be required in order to field the
maximum number of teams that present membership
could support. They assume the exclusive use of
each ground for the particular sport concerned, and
Table 27
REQUIREMENTS OF SPORTING ASSOCIATIONS *
Association.
Playing
Members.
Number of
Teams.
Grounds
Used.
Potential
Teams on
Present
Membership.
Number of
Grounds
required for
Potential
Teams. J
Total area
Required.
W.A. National Football League (Australian
Rules)
2,000
84
37
104
53
Acres.
384
Sunday National Football League (Australian
Rules)
560
14
6
30
17
123
Amateur Football Association (Australian
Rules)
1,000
25
30
55
26
195
W.A. Rugby League ..
1,150
70
8
90
30
90
W.A. Rugby Union ..
520
21
6
35
13
39
W.A. Soccer Football Association ..
1,187
59
18
67
36
122
W.A. Hockey Association (Men) ..
♦ .
153
23
200
40
70
W.A. Baseball League
500
46
10
55
24
96
W.A. Lacrosse Association ..
350
29
11
29
12
42
W.A. Women’s Hockey Association
1,000
89
25
115
32
51
W.A. Women’s Basketball Association
1,458
162
38
182
45
5
W.A. Women’s Softball Association
700
68
17
• •
34
68
South Fremantle Junior Football Association
* ,
3
8
4
29
Fremantle Ex-Scholars’ League
180
6
5
7
50
W.A. Junior Soccer Football Association ..
♦ .
24
..
..
215 (courts)
36
W.A. Lawn Tennis Association
4,307
26 (clubs)
24
..
21
Perth Polo Club
30
4
6
2
25
Total ..
14,9421
••
••
••
••
1,446
SOURCE : Replies to questionnaires circulated by the National Fitness Council, May-June, 1954.
NOTES : * Figures relating to exclusively summer sports are not included, on the assumption that the satisfaction of winter
sports requirements would adequately cover summer sports requirements,
t Total number of playing members makes no allowance for possible duplication of membership in certain cases.
J Total number of grounds required based on assumption that grounds are not shared.


do not allow for the sharing of facilities. Related
to the existing population, this means that to provide
grounds for all the teams that could be fielded on
present-day memberships, a standard of about 4.0
acres per 1,000 persons would be required. In fact,
the existing grounds provide about 2.4 acres per
1,000 persons.
Assuming 4.0 acres per 1,000 persons as a minimum
standard for public playing fields, it is suggested that
this should be raised to 4.5 acres per 1,000 persons,
which would allow for an increase in the popularity
of sport and for possible increases in the demand
for private recreation grounds (Section D (iii)). As
discussed in E (ii) (b), the provision of grounds for
sporting associations would normally be in the form
of district centres. In addition, however, it is
suggested that a further 1.5 acres per 1,000 persons
be provided as Local Open Space in the form of small
units distributed through residential localities to
cater for more informal games. There are always
many school children who just want to " kick a ball
about ” without taking part in competitive matches.
This suggested provision has, therefore, been taken
into account in calculating Local Gross Densities .
A summary of the provisions made in the Plan
for Local Public Open Space is given at the end of
this Chapter. Local facilities are in general not
shown as separate reservations in the Plan (except
in the case of large existing open spaces which could
be considered to be of local rather than district
significance). The precise amount and pattern within
housing estates will vary according to the social
character, natural features and local administration
of different localities. Provision has been made by
making a total allowance of from 3.0-4.7 acres per
1,000 persons when calculating desirable local den-
sities, the detailing and implementation being left to
subsequent larger-scale Local Planning Schemes, or to
the normal requirements of land subdivision. General
recommendations for co-ordinating various elements
of residential localities into a convenient and satisfying
pattern are outlined in Chapter 8.
(ii) District Open Space
(a) District Parks
An overall standard of 1.0 acre per 1,000 persons is
recommended to provide district, as compared with
regional, parks and gardens. It has already been
suggested that 0.5 acre per 1,000 persons be dis-
tributed through residential localities. The remainder
should be in the form of district centres, which could
be planned in association with public playing field
areas, except in the case of rest gardens and formal
squares related to district shopping centres.
(b) Public Playing Fields
Of the overall recommended standard of 6 acres
per 1,000 persons, 1.5 acres per 1,000 have already
been dealt with under Local Open Space requirements.
The remaining 4.5 acres per 1,000 (approximating
to the estimated requirements of sporting associations)
should be concentrated in district centres large
enough to ensure a full range of alternative grounds,
ample changing rooms and economical maintenance.
These centres will be used predominantly by district
clubs who draw their membership from a wide area
and whose games may attract considerable numbers
of spectators. A proportion of the ultimate total
provision will consist of existing centres such as
Rosalie Park, Subiaco, while other new and attractive
centres should be located where suitable land is
available and within easy reach of members and
spectators.
(c) High School Playing Fields
The suggested distribution of State High Schools
(Chapter 8, J (ii)) will result in the provision of
playing field areas to a standard of 0.5 acre per 1,000
persons. These have been considered to be of
significance in the assessment of overall public playing
field requirements, and have been allowed for in the
calculation of gross densities. No allowance has
been made under Public Open Space for private
school playing fields.
(d) Minor Open Space Links
Open spaces forming breaks between adjacent
residential areas, or between industrial and residential
areas, are a necessity in their own right, and they
should not remain as waste bushland. In general
they will be suitable for various types of recreational
use. They may contain some of the District or Local
Open Spaces . In defining their extent an attempt
has been made to strike a balance between what is
ideal as a buffer zone and what could be expected to
be developed and maintained as usable. In some
cases links are required between major park areas.
They may consist of either motor parkways (de-


scribed in Chapter 7) or park strips, narrow enough
to keep down maintenance costs but wide enough to
allow effective landscaping.
A summary of District Public Open Space provision
is given at the end of this Chapter. It is generally
shown in the Plan by specific reservations, except
in the case of the elements such as small gardens in
district shopping centres, and has been considered
in determining appropriate district densities. A total
standard of 5.5 acres per 1,000 persons is proposed,
except in Central Residential Districts (as defined in
Chapter 8, H), where the provision of large areas of
playing fields would be uneconomical (Table 28).
Where this figure is apparently exceeded because of
open space link proposals no adjustment to the
density has been made, in order to ensure a uniform
approach throughout the Region.
(lii) Regional Open Space
The provision of open space in this category is
not subject to the imposition of theoretical standards.
The quantity and distribution derives largely from an
examination of areas considered suitable for par-
ticular uses, independently of any calculation of Local
or District Open Space.
(a) Ocean Beaches
The importance and value to the Region of its
ocean beaches needs no emphasis. They are one of
its greatest assets in terms of human enjoyment and
in maintaining a high level of physical fitness. Their
preservation and improvement should be regarded
as a regional responsibility. The views of the Surf
Life Saving Association of Australia (W.A. Branch)
Table 28
STANDARDS OF OPEN SPACE PROVISION
(a) Local and District Open Space : All Types
Type of
District
(Chapter 8,
Section H).
Local Open Space. (Acres per 1,000 persons.)
District Open Space.
(Acres per 1,000 persons.)
Total,
Local and
District
Open
Space.
(Acres
per 1,000
persons.)
Minor
open
spaces in
housing
estates.
Children’s
play-
grounds.
Primary
school
playing
fields.
Adult
playing
fields.
Parks
and
gardens.
Total.
High
school
playing
fields.
Adult
playing
fields.
Parks
and
gardens.
Total.
A ..
0-5
1-0
1-0
0-5
3-0
0-5
0-5
3-5
B ..
0-5
0-8
1-4
1-5
0-5
4-7
6-5
4-5
0-5
5-5
10-2
C
Not applicable (Chapter 8, Section H).
D ..
0-5
0-8
1-4
1-5
0-5
4-7
0-5
4-5
0-5
5-5
10-2
E ..
0-5
0-2
1-4
1-5
0-5
4-1
0-5
4-5
0-5
5-5
9-6
F ..
0-5
0-8
1-4
t
1-5
0-5
4-7
0-5
4-5
0-5
5-5
10-2
(b) Local and District Open Space : Playing Fields
Type of District.
Local Playing Fields.
(Acres per 1,000 persons.)
District Playing Fields.
(Acres per 1,000 persons.)
Total, Local and District Playing
Fields.
(Acres per 1,000 persons.)
Primary
school
playing
fields.
Adult
playing
fields.
Total.
High
school
playing
fields.
Adult
playing
fields.
Total.
School
playing
fields.
Adult
playing
fields.
Total.
A
1-0
1-0
1-0
1-0
B
1-4
1-5
2-9
6-5
4-5
5-0
1-9
6-0
7-9
C
Not applicable.
D
1-4
1-5
2-9
0-5
4-5
5-0
1-9
6-0
7-9
E
1-4
1-5
2-9
0-5
4-5
5-0
1-9
6-0
7-9
F
1-4
1-5
2-9
0-5
4-5
5-0
1-9
6-0
7-9


Diagram 15


33
33. An attractive children’s playground
in Cottesloe Civic Centre, formerly a large
private house.
34. Stirling Gardens, Perth. Small
parks are essential for the convenience and
recreation of city workers.
34


35
35. Rosalie Park, Subiaco. A fine new
sports centre, of which many more will
be required as the Region expands.
36. Greenbelt, Maryland, U.S.A.
Underpasses as part of an open space
system provide safe and convenient routes
for children to and from school.
36


37
37. City Beach. The ocean beaches
are valuable and popular centres of outdoor
recreation which will continue to develop.
38. A proposed coastal reservation,
Point Peron. The more rugged stretches
of coastline contrast with the sandy beaches
and are equally attractive.
38


39
The Swan River at Peppermint Grove. An excellent
example of riverfront improvement for public
enjoyment.


40
40. Hovea Falls, on an
attractive walk near the centre
of Forrest National Park.
41. White Lake, Rocking-
ham. A proposed regional park
of a different character.
41


42
Kings Park. A large regional park in the heart of
the metropolis.


have been sought, and their suggestions have proved
most helpful. The description of the ocean beaches
which appears in Diagram 15 is based on information
supplied by the Association. While it is beyond
the scope of the present Plan to put forward detailed
proposals in respect of each beach, the following
general recommendations are made as an integral
part of the Plan.
(1) To a depth of at least chains, the foreshore
between the following points should be retained as
open space permanently available to the public, as
shown in the Plan :
Yanchep to the northern limit of the extended
North Fremantle harbour area, excluding the
strip abutting the Claremont Military Reserve.
The Jetty, Marine Terrace, Fremantle, to Island
Street.
Ocean Road, Coogee, to the northern limit of the
Woodman Point Reserve.
Southern limit of Woodman Point Reserve to
northern limit of Kwinana industrial area.
Victoria Street, Rockingham, to Beecher Point.
(2) In consultation with the appropriate local
authorities, further detailed surveys should be carried
out, with a view to preparing a co-ordinated plan
and report on the future development of the beaches
and their immediate hinterland.
(3) Particular reference should be made to :
priorities for development as major regional
beach centres ;
responsibility regarding financial matters and
public works required ;
the improvement of facilities such as shopping
centres, gardens, restaurants, etc. ;
the provision of car parks ;
protection against erosion ;
safeguarding against pollution ;
their administration and control, and the extent
of reservations or resumptions necessary in
detail to guarantee effectively that the recom-
mendations are achieved.
Carrying out these proposals should result in
adequate protection for about 53 miles of ocean
beach, and pave the way for translating this pro-
visional measure into positive action in respect of
selected stretches.
(b) Rivers and River Foreshores
The river, about which the Metropolitan Region
has developed, provides a setting matched by very
few cities in the world. Not only does its cool, blue
expanse appear in delightful views from many points,
but its waters also give infinite pleasure to thousands
of children, yachtsmen, fishermen and swimmers.
It is in effect a vast and magnificent wedge of open
space driving right into the heart of the metropolis
and, together with the beaches, it provides the frame-
work upon which the Regional Open Space system
is based. The River requires continuous action
against pollution, stagnation and encroachment. In
the past, thoughtful planning has afforded a very
large measure of protection from development which
would have denied to the public free access to its
banks. This policy should continue and, in addition,
strong measures should be taken to ensure that the
river will remain, as it is now, not only the dominating
but also the most attractive feature of the regional
landscape.
In amplification of these broad principles, the Plan
proposes the extension of those foreshore areas
already held for Public Open Space , sufficient to allow
to the public continuous and unrestricted access
along its banks from Point Roe to Guildford on the
North side, and from Preston Point to Guildford on
the South side. It is recommended that where
suitably situated, any reclamation be directed towards
the provision of parks, riverside walks and playing
fields, and areas for this purpose are included in the
Plan. It is further recommended that the reservation
of riverside areas as Public Open Space should not
preclude their containing additional amenities for
the public. Incidental developments such as rest-
aurants, swimming pools and car parks should be
permitted, subject to their siting and design being
carefully considered by the appropriate authority.
Particular proposals regarding that part of the river
immediately adjoining the Central City area are
dealt with in Chapter 9.
No standards can be established for the amount
of land which should be reserved for riverside open
space but, suitable areas having been selected, their
contribution towards measurable needs has been
taken into account when calculating the total open
space acreage required.


(c) Areas of Landscape Value
Already competing with the beaches and the river
and enjoying great popularity in the winter, the Hills
have a considerable potential as centres of recreation
and leisure. The Forrest National Park is the
nucleus to which further areas should be added until,
as proposed in the Plan, there is a general belt of
permanently protected open country along the edge
of the Darling Escarpment, and through which
scenic drives may be taken to picnic grounds and
camping sites. It is recommended that a more
detailed survey of resources in this area be carried
out to define :
1. Areas to be reserved and left as natural
bushland.
2. Areas to be reserved and utilised for forestry
purposes.
3. Areas to be reserved and developed as land-
scape parks.
4. Areas to be reserved or leased for recreational
centres, camping or picnic grounds, etc.
Areas for close residential development are defined
in the Regional Plan and haphazard development
along the open hillsides, resulting in a great loss in
natural beauty to future generations, should be pro-
hibited.
A considerable northward extension of the Forrest
National Park is proposed. This will not only make
this popular and attractive wild area a size more
appropriate to a population of more than 1,000,000,
but also it will enable a second main entrance to be
provided on the Toodyay road in the North. With
the two main entrances there would be a great loop
drive through the Park easily accessible from the
northern and southern parts of the Region. It is on
this drive that a new, spacious, Zoological Park (g)
would be well placed, at a point near the station.
In addition to the Hills there are two important
areas which may be further developed for public
enjoyment. In Yanchep National Park there are
already facilities and attractions for visitors. As the
number seeking enjoyment in the Park increases, the
amenities and the area of the Park should be extended
to embrace a section of the beach. In the southern
part of the Region the two large lakes on the Man-
durah Road at Rockingham abound with bird life
and are a great visual attraction. On the Plan they
are shown as a proposed National Park.
(d) Picnic Areas, Camping Grounds, Tourist
Cabin Areas, etc.
Generally, all forms of Public Open Space other
than playing fields are suitable for picnicking, and no
specific proposals are made in this respect. The
selection and definition of camping grounds, tourist
cabin areas, caravan parks, etc., would follow the
surveys of beach, riverside and hills areas suggested
above. No detailed proposals regarding this type of
use have, therefore, been put forward at this stage.
(e) Nature Reservations
Similarly, no specific areas have been shown
separately for this purpose. It is considered that
adequate provision could be made, within the general
open spaces in the Plan, to restrict the access of the
public to areas selected for carrying out scientific
studies and the protection of wild life. This is a
problem of administration capable of easy solution.
(f) Central Parks
In Kings Park, the Region has a magnificent,
centrally placed natural park of a size and character
likely to meet many recreational requirements of the
foreseeable future. The Perth City Fathers of the
last generation had the courage to emulate the states-
men who established Kings Park. Bold Park, which
they set aside for recreation, is even greater in extent
than Kings Park. It may gradually assume a role
and character different from those of Kings Park.
It is assumed that it will contain areas of both natural
landscape and extensive facilities for recreational
activity.
Whilst it is strongly recommended that Kings
Park should continue to be most jealously guarded,
this need not preclude development which would
enhance its recreational value. It already contains
a restaurant on a fine site, and this may have to be
reconstructed before long to meet a growing demand.
The siting and design should be carefully considered
and ample parking space away from the road pro-
vided.
In the longer term other restaurants and attractive
open air facilities, such as the half-formed natural
amphitheatre and the proposed bathing pool, may be
needed. It is also suggested that a new Government
House should be in the Park where the setting would
be entirely appropriate to the function. Further
reference to this proposal is made in Chapter 9.


(g) Zoological Gardens
At this stage serious consideration should be given
to the future of the Zoological Gardens. When the
metropolis was small and communications limited,
the South Perth site was most appropriate. In the
future there will be two factors which should weigh
heavily against it. First, it is too cramped a site for
the full development of modern zoological gardens
in which animals should be given ample and natural
quarters. Secondly, with the completion of a bridge
across the Narrows, the South Perth peninsula will
greatly increase in population. It is assumed that a
considerable number of flats will be built, particularly
in the part facing the City. There are strong argu-
ments against having a zoo immediately adjacent to
a residential area, particularly in the climate of
Western Australia. Point Walter Reserve has been
suggested as an alternative site, but this is likely to
suffer the disadvantages becoming apparent in South
Perth.
With the continued growth of the urban area, and
the improvement of the road network as suggested
in the Plan, the Forrest National Park would be well
placed, in relation to population both North and
South of the river, as a site suitable for the develop-
ment of a modern Zoological Park. It is served by
the main railway line from Fremantle and Central
Perth and, if the suggestion made earlier in this
Chapter is accepted, it would be served by two
excellent roads. Land in the immediate vicinity of
National Park Station would be appropriate for
modern, spacious zoological gardens. An area of
about 200 acres should be set aside and laid out to
provide large paddocks as well as smaller enclosures.
Exhibits should gradually be transferred or brought
into the new and more appropriate area.
(h) Regional Sports Centre and Stadium
The National Fitness Council is anxious that
provision should be made for the future development
of a comprehensive centre for sporting activities, and
that all the facilities provided should be of full
Olympic standard. There are lessons to be learned
from Melbourne, where preparations are now being
made for the Olympic games. As a result Melbourne
will have a permanent range of facilities of which the
most important will be the greatly improved arena
normally used for cricket and Australian Rules foot-
ball. It would be wise to anticipate large gatherings
of spectators in the Region, particularly for football.
A large oval or stadium should be the main feature of
the Centre for sporting activities. None of the
existing major ovals offer opportunities for com-
prehensive development, which involves many facil-
ities, good communications, and the provision of
really adequate car parking. When the reclamation
of that part of Burswood Island South of the railway
is completed, it could be developed as an admirable
centre well served by both regional highways and
railway. It is, therefore, suggested that the future
use of this area should be as a comprehensive sports
centre, including a major oval with provision for the
eventual accommodation of 80,000-100,000 spectators.
(i) Motor Parkways
The interconnection of the major elements in the
Regional Open Space system is a matter of importance.
Drives give pleasure both to citizens and visitors, and
the attraction of being able to tour safely through
areas of fine landscape cannot be over-estimated.
Whilst the river itself will form the major line of
beauty throughout the Region, as many regional
roads as possible should be designed as scenic drives.
This principle is particularly applicable in the Hills.
(j) Open Country
In the modern world the Green Belt idea was first
put into practice in Australia, when Adelaide grew
according to the famous layout prepared by Colonel
Light. In the post-war plan for Greater London the
Green Belt ring is an important concept. It is being
maintained as a belt of open country, with an average
depth of five to six miles, in which agriculture is the
predominant use. It also contains recreational and
landscape areas of importance. The concept of a
belt of open country around the main built-up area
and within striking distance of the central city is
an important one.
At a late stage in their development, many cities
have attempted to plan a Green Belt around an outer
limit with various degrees of success. The proposal
in the Plan is that the outer limits should be at some
considerable distance from the present periphery and
in land which for a long time to come must remain
rural. Any attempt to classify land beyond this as
Green Belt space would unnecessarily raise the
question of public ownership. It is considered that
the proper approach is to determine the suitable


limits of development having regard to the length of
communications, the cost of transport and other
services, the nature of the land and its use, and natural
or man-made barriers. Beyond these limits land is
zoned as rural. The various factors determining
the limits have been discussed in the appropriate
Chapters and a description of the resulting pattern
will be found in Chapter 10.
F. CEMETERIES
In consultation with the Metropolitan Area Ceme-
tery Sites Committee, an assessment has been made
of land requirements for cemeteries. Estimates have
been based on a probable future rate of 10.1 deaths
per 1,000 persons and a suggested average of 500
graves per acre. The proportion of cremations is
increasing yearly, the present figure being about 27
per cent, of all deaths. An average proportion of
30 per cent, has been adopted for calculating future
totals of yearly burials.
On this basis an area of about 465 acres is estimated
to be required for additional graves during the period
of the Plan. The Karrakatta Cemetery is capable of
meeting demands for a further 10 years, but after
that time its use will be severely restricted. The
Fremantle Cemetery has approximately 50 acres still
available. In addition there are smaller cemeteries
at Guildford, Kelmscott, Kenwick and Midland
Junction: It is suggested, however, that at least the
calculated area of 465 acres be provided without
deducting any allowance for the use of the smaller
cemeteries.
The Cemetery Sites Committee, having regard to
present practice, recommends that one new regional
cemetery would be preferable to two or more ceme-
teries. A site of about 500 acres East of Perth
Airport has been examined and is recommended,
subject to further detailed surveys of soils and water
table. It is important that a regional cemetery site
such as this should be readily accessible to all parts
of the Region, and yet be in such a position that it
does not encroach upon valuable building land.
The Guildford site fulfills these requirements.
In addition, a cemetery of about 50 acres will
probably be required in the Rockingham-Kwinana
area, but in view of the detailed surveys which would
be necessary prior to final selection, no specific site
has been defined in the Plan.
G. OPEN SPACE PROPOSALS
Previous sections of this Chapter have dealt mainly
with general standards of open space provision, and
have discussed the manner in which the recom-
mendations might be realised. Certain specific pro-
posals have been mentioned, but it remains to describe
briefly the relationship between the quantity of
existing open space, the standards recommended, and
the areas for Public Open Space shown in the Plan.
This relationship is summarised in Tables 29 and 30.
A survey of existing Public Open Space indicates
that there is a total of approximately 21,500 acres in
the Metropolitan Region. It has been difficult to
classify the various areas which make up this total.
Many are used for more than one purpose, some are
as yet undeveloped, and the majority function simul-
taneously as Regional , District and Local Open Spaces.
But in Table 29 a broad assessment of use types and
distribution has been made in order to facilitate
comparison with the proposals. For convenience,
figures have been related to the residential districts
defined in Diagram 7 of Chapter 3. The greater
part of the total is seen to consist of the larger regional
parks and undeveloped reservations in the Hills and
elsewhere, amounting to some 16,300 acres. A
further 1,750 acres are devoted to golf courses. Of
the remainder, approximately 2,530 acres consist of
local and district parks or reservations, and 930
acres of playing fields. Related to a regional popula-
tion of 387,600, the 2,530 acres represents a pro-
vision of 6.5 acres per 1,000 persons, and the 930
acres represents 2.4 acres per 1,000 persons. Apart
from indicating a considerable overall shortage of
playing field space, the Table shows a lack of balance
in its distribution. For example, Districts No. 18,
26 and 29 have less than 1.5 acres per 1,000 persons,
whereas Districts No. 6, 19, 20, 24 and 25 have
over 4.5 acres per 1,000 persons. The proposals
seek to rectify the lack of balance.
Table 30 summarises the open space proposals,
and has been compiled on the basis that :
(i) theoretical standards for Local Open Space
will be achieved, in undeveloped or
partially developed districts, in the im-
plementation of Local Planning Schemes ;
(ii) the major open space reservations will
largely comprise district playing fields, with
the smaller district parks located within
residential zones ;


(iii) any surplus remaining in the open space
reservations, after the appropriate area of
playing fields has been provided, will
contribute to the overall demand for
further golf courses, private playing fields,
large grounds of public institutions, etc.
The ultimate disposal of the reserved
areas for these purposes will be a matter
of administration, and will vary through-
out the Region according to local needs
and topography.
The total area of open space which should result
if the recommendations of the Plan are adopted is
69,000 acres. The increase from the existing total
of 21,500 acres is roughly in proportion with the
probable increase in population for which the Plan
is designed. Of this total, approximately 47,000
acres will consist of open spaces of regional sig-
nificance—landscape parks, nature reserves and camp-
ing grounds—representing an increase of about
30,000 acres in this category. The most important
Regional Open Spaces proposed in the Plan include :
(i) an extension of the Yanchep Park to the
coast to embrace an ultimate area of
10,000 acres. (The northern limit of this
area is outside the boundary of the Region
as defined, and must be a matter for
further consideration.)
(ii) a reservation of approximately 4,260 acres
in the White Lake area of Rockingham.
This area will also contain most of the
district playing fields for the Rockingham
residential areas ;
(iii) the reservation of further areas on the
Darling Escarpment as an extension of
the present Forrest National Park system,
resulting in an ultimate total of 27,800
acres between the Toodyay Road and the
Serpentine Falls ;
(iv) the reservation of a large area adjoining
Bibra Lake (approximately 710 acres as
combined regional park and district play-
ing fields) ;
(v) the reservation of 1,100 acres at Herdsman
Lake, primarily for playing fields, of
which it is suggested that a part might be
utilised as a central sports area for State
Schools ;
(vi) the reservation of 445 acres at Burswood
Island as a Regional Sports Centre (Sec-
tion E (iii) h).
Local and District Open Spaces constitute about
20,000 acres of the total. If proposed school playing
fields are excluded, it is about 17,500 acres. The
provision of further playing fields to the standard
recommended will result in a total of 8,800 acres,
other Local Open Spaces (including children’s play-
grounds) 2,400 acres, and district amenity open
space 800 acres. If these totals are deducted from the
17.500 acres for which provision is made, about
5.500 acres in open space reserves will be available
for other purposes. As suggested in Section D (vi),
it is likely that about 3,850 acres will be required for
further golf courses, leaving about 1,650 acres for
unforeseen requirements. A detailed description of
the open space provision in individual districts is
given in Chapter 10. Diagram 16 shows the existing
and proposed distribution of Public Open Space.
The relevant tables and the totals outlined above
indicate that, if the standards for essential open
spaces are accepted, the overall provision is not
unduly liberal. Every effort should be made at this
stage of the Region’s growth to ensure that future
generations will not be deprived, through a lack of
foresight or through faulty planning, of adequate
space for outdoor recreation of all kinds. The ad-
ministrative aspects of carrying the programme into
effect are discussed in Chapter 11.


Table 29
EXISTING OPEN SPACE
District
Number.
Popula-
tion.
Local
or District Open Space.
Regional Open Space.
Amenity open
space.
Playing fields.
Total.
Amenity
open
space.
Golf
Courses.
Total.
Area.
Acres
/1.000.
Area.
Acres
/1,000.
Area.
Acres
/1,000.
Area.
Area.
Area.
1
1,870
39
20-86
39
20-86
2
7,750
82
10-58
18
2-32
100
12-90
361
361
3
4,720
8
1-7
* .
8
1-7
230-5
230-5
4
16,040
150
9-35
24
1-50
174
10-85
940
940
5
15,190
26
1-71
40
2-63
66
4-34
1,005
1,005
6
19,120
19
1 -00
95
4-97
114
5-97
50
50
7
21,030
200
9-51
65
3-09
265
12-60
174-5
174-5
8
1,400
* .
* ,
14
10-00
14
10-00
9
50
10
1,280
, ,
11
9,100
20
2-22
14
1 -54
34
3-78
105
105
12
A*
30,100
121
4-02
45
1-50
166
5-52
13
28,100
55
1-97
21
0-75
76
2-71
207
207
14
15,140
57
3-76
30
1-98
87
5-74
15
2,990
2
0-67
••
••
2
0-67
16
Included in Perth Central Area.
17
600
14
23-33
14
23-33
1
18
3,930
31
7-75
2
0-51
33
8-25
19
4,320
33
7-64
22
5-09
55
12-73
20
2,800
16
5-71
14
5-00
30
10-71
21
9,700
50
5-15
20
2-06
70
7-21
22
15,340
68
4-43
39
2-54
107
6-97
23
20,040
44
2-20
42
2-10
86
4-30
151
151
24
11,300
23
2-04
55
4-87
78
6-91
25 r.
8,460
5
0-59
67
7-92
72
8-51
ioo
71
171
26
.. '
14,670
43
2-93
13
0-89
56
3-82
27
.. -
980
28
550
16
29-09
* #
16
29-09
29
6,570
16
2-44
7
1-07
23
3-51
30
1,840
* *
, ,
, ,
, ,
31
17,600
84
4-77
61
3-47
145
8-24
170
170
32
200
. .
* ,
45
45
33
14,930
ioo
6-67
21
i-41
121
8-08
220
220
34
1,770
35
5,760
59
10-2
21
3-7
80
13-9
4,313
4,313
36
6,740
363
51-9
46
6-6
409
58-5
4,494
4,494
37
6,930
321
45-9
11
1-6
332
47-5
1,970
40
2,010
38
5,900
158
26-3
39
6-5
197
32-8
560
169
729
39
7,440
200
26-9
71
9-5
271
36-4
2,056
2,056
40
41
42
i- 9,770
107
10-9
13
1-3
120
12-2<j
80
120
200
43
*
267
267
44
15
15
Perth Central Area
18,800
137
137
Fremantle Central Area
2,540
••
••
••
24
••
24
Total
••
••
373,360
2,530
6-78
930
2-49
3,460
9-27
16,327
1,748
18,075
Population in Agricultural Areas,
Institutions,
etc.,
Districts
1-34 ..
••
••
14,260
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
Grand
Total
••
387,620
••
6-52
••
2-4
8-92
••
••


Table 30
PROPOSED OPEN SPACE
District.
—
Local Open Space (Acres).
District Open Space (Acres).
Regional Open Space
(Acres).
No.
Type.
Estimated
Future
Popula-
tion.
Minor
open
space.
Children’s
play-
grounds.
Play-
ing
fields.*
Parks
and
gardens.
Total.
Play-
ing
fields, t
Parks
and
gardens.
Remain-
ing
zoned
open
space.
Total.
Amenity
and
recrea-
tional
open
space.
Golf
courses.
Total.
1
2
3
4
5 ..
6 .. !
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
Perth Cent
Fremantle
Area
Rural popu
Total
D
D
D
D
B
C
C
C
D
D
D
C
D
B
B
A
D
D
D
C
D
D
C
D
B
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
B
E
E
E
E
E
E
F
F
F
F
ral Area
Central
lation ..
64,000
34.800
35.800
42.500
21.800
26,200
33.300
1.700
44.400
37.100
31.400
30,900
64.600
12,800
2,900
14.500
33.100
38.300
15,200
5.200
39.300
57.300
33.500
54.300
17.400
32,000
42.100
36.600
37,800
39.400
45.400
30.300
31.400
1,600
4,000
39.300
45,000
16,000
39.600
2,000
55.700
40,000
43,000
42.200
5,000
1,000
25.500
32
17-4
17-
21-2
10-9
13 1 i
16-6
0-8
22-2
18-
15-7
15-
32-3
6-
1-
7-
16-
19-
7-
2-
19-6
28-7
16-8
27-1
8-
16
21
18-3
18-
19-
22-7
15-2
15-7
0-8
2
196
22-5
8
19-8
1
27-8
20
21-5
21-1
51-2
27-
28-
34
17-4
21
26-6
1-
35-
29-
25-
24-
51-7
10-2
2-
14-5
26-
30-
12-2
4-2
31-
45-8
26-8
44-4
13-9
25-
33-
29-
30-
31-
36-
24-2
25 1
1-3
0-8
7-9
9
3-
7-9
0-4
44-6
32
34-
33-8
185-6
100-9
103-8
123-3
11
8
3-5
1
128-8
107-5
91 - 1
4
187-3
2
14-5
95-9
111-1
44-1
1
113-
116-2
9
157-4
2
92-8
121-8
106-4
109-7
114-
131-7
87-8
91-1
ii-6
114
130-5
46-4
114-8
5-8
161-5
116
124-7
122-3
32
17-4
17-
21-2
22-2
18-
15-
32-3
*7-3
16-
191
7-6
19-
28-7
27-1
16
21
18-3
18-
19-
22-7
15-2
15-7
'i
.19-6
22-5
8
19-8
1
27-8
20
21-5
21-1
300-8
163-5
168-2
199-7
39-3
42-1
46-7
3-2
208-7
174-2
147-6
44-2
303-6
18-7
3-8
43-6
155-4
179-9
71-5
7-
184-6
269-4
52-6
256
24-6
150-4
197-
172-4
177-7
185-2
213-4
142-4
147-6
2-1
16-4
161-1
184-5
65-6
162-3
8-
261-7
188
202-1
198-
307
174
179
221-2
72
124-5
319
14
222-2
185-
150-
416-5
323
46
165-5
191-1
76
244-5
196-3
287
339
271-4
86-5
160
210
183
186-
197
217-7
151-
157
20
196
225
80
180-2
10
277-8
200
215
211
32
17-4
17-
21-2
20
11
62
22-2
18-
15-
37
32-3
41
*7-3
16-
191
7-6
11
19-
28-7
15-2
27-1
\6
21
18-3
18-
19-
22-7
15-2
15-7
"l
19-6
22-5
8
19-8
1
27-8
20
21-5
21-1
55-4
823-9
605
278
161-3
211
8
46-6
88-3
131-7
24-7
56
181
475-3
165-7
312-7
198-6
95-5
184
81-6
1,290
4
339
246-8
1,020-8
242-4
92
135-5
381
14
849-4
482
166-4
453-5
516-6
87
*7-3
393
218-2
130-2
255-5
304-2
447-4
354-2
323-2
86-5
232
412
676-6
205-8
382-4
240-4
166-7
485-4
22
414-2
343 0
272
281-6
11
1,595-6
224
236-5
232-1
225
430
940
1,005
76
445
190
170
573-7
10,070
9,099
6,712
5,927
6,088
598
2,166-5
2,270
228
49
361
230
50
174-5
105
207
71
219
40
152
120
225
791
230
940
1,005
50
174-5
105
207
76
445
261
170
573-7
219
10,070
9,099
6,752
6,079
6,088
718
2,166-5
2,270
228
49
1,447,200
707-7
1,048-8
»
3,576 1
613-9
5,946-5
7,690-0
811-1
5,478-3
13,979-4
47,262-2
1,729-5
| 48,991-7
NOTE : Estimated future populations of residential^ r ° nl^ ) off°cours l e°snrdate only to (see Section D vi).
Plan. The total rural population appears as a separate figure, ihe ti„ures g
t Including secondary school playing fields.
* Including primary school playing fields.


Diagram 16


CHAPTER 7
Communications and Public Services
COMMUNICATIONS
Although Perth was established in 1829 as the
headquarters of the Colony, the port of Albany was
for many years the principal calling place for the
sailing ships of the period. This was doubtless due
to the favourable anchorage conditions at Albany and
to its situation on the England-Australia voyage via
the Cape. A road link between the two settlements
was therefore a first essential, the carriage of mails
being of primary importance in this respect.
As other areas became settled in the course of
time, especially in the coastal region, so roads or
tracks were made to connect them, and the present
pattern of roads started to develop in mid-nineteenth
century. The bulk of the clearing and road con-
struction was done by convict labour, there being
nearly 2,000 convicts employed on this work in 1867.
Ten years later Governor Ord reported to the Sec-
retary of State there were only 233 convicts available
for road work, and road deterioration was taking
place. Travelling at an average speed of 3 j miles
per hour, it took the mail carrier three days to bring
the mails from Albany to Perth. From eight to ten
days were required to journey along the track between
Perth and Geraldton.
Until the advent of the motor vehicle there was, of
course, no economic justification for roads of the
present day standard. The development of Western
Australia depended largely upon the extensive in-
stallation of railways, which started in the eighteen-
nineties. Modern roads are of comparatively recent
introduction, for little real attention was paid to
their development until after the first world war.
An idea of the growth of the road system in the
south-western part of the State may be gained by an
examination of the small maps (Diagram 17).
The pattern of the railway system in the South-
West is very similar to that of the road system. In
fact, almost throughout the country the two systems
lie parallel and practically contiguous to one another.
The reason for this was the need for speed and sim-
plicity in the construction of railways when the
country was being opened up for agriculture or
mining. The railways were built close to the already
accessible tracks and followed similar contours.
Road and rail systems provide for the free flow of
goods and persons throughout a settled community.
They may also be designed to give access to un-
developed areas with the object of bringing them into
useful production. Maximum economic efficiency
is achieved when the two systems are complementary
to one another, i.e., where short haul road transport
feeds and serves long-distance rail transport. This
was the general situation in the early years of this
century when the railways were loaded from horse-
drawn waggons, which provided the link between
the source of production or supply and the railway
truck.
With the development of the motor truck in the
last 40 years, a more flexible and individualistic form
of transport has come into being. A motor truck
is able to haul substantial loads at higher speeds than
those achieved on the railways, and it can transport
goods from door to door. In consequence, a com-
petitive, rather than a complementary condition has
arisen, with the result that considerable statutory
support has to be afforded to the railways. At the
present time the railways are over-capitalised and,
as they struggle to recoup the heavy outlay on con-
struction and to meet higher running costs, more and
more capital is demanded for road construction and
maintenance.
In metropolitan areas, competition is apparent in
regard to the mass transportation of persons, par-
ticularly those having employment in the centre and
residing in the suburbs. A well-planned system of
communications should be one which produces the
most economic and efficient results from all its com-
ponents, whether railway, truck, bus, private car or
aircraft, and the layout of roads, airports and rail-
ways and the controls exerted over their usage should
all be designed to this end.


Diagram 17
GROWTH OF THE MAIN ROAD SYSTEM
PART 1 : ROADS
A. GENERAL
The provision of an adequate road system within
the Metropolitan Region is particularly important in
the economy of the State because of the great con-
centration of traffic at the capital city and major
port. Without good roads, materials and merchan-
dise could not easily be carried between producer,
importer, wholesaler and retailer, and the majority
of employees would spend much useless time in their
daily travel to and from work. The economic loss
caused by an inadequate road and transport system
is considerable—a fact that is recognised by all re-
sponsible road authorities.
The Regional Plan proposes an efficient road
system as a vital framework for development and
activity. The principal highways act as direct links
between the main land use zones. The major in-
dustrial zones are connected to Port, City and State
by the road system, which also affords direct con-
nections between the several industrial zones. The
location, shape and size of the many residential
districts is partly determined by the pattern of major
roads, which not only ensures convenience of access
to places of work and recreation, but also determines
their boundaries and, to some extent, internal arrange-
ments. The regional road system will greatly in-
fluence the detailed structure of the city centres of
Perth and Fremantle (Chapter 9) as well as the
choice of sites for major institutional, educational
and recreational centres.
In a young metropolis where the proportion of
car users is high, and where a rapid expansion of
Manufacturing Industry is to be expected, the im-
portance of constructing road systems capable of
carrying the full volumes of anticipated inter-zonal
traffic cannot be over-estimated. In conjunction
with the Department of Main Roads, extensive
surveys have been carried out in order to forecast
the amount of traffic and the movements it may
make when the Region contains a population of over
1,000,000. A study of present day traffic flow and
volume is a first essential in the process of evaluation.
The application of the findings to future conditions
has resulted in the proposals for new highways or
other important roads, shown in the Regional Plan
and described in a later section of this Chapter.


B. CONTROL AND ADMINISTRATION
OF ROADS
( i ) Statutory Control of Road Works
The principal Statutes governing the administration
of metropolitan roads are the Municipal Corporations
Act, 1906-47, the Road Districts Act, 1919-48, the
Main Roads Act, 1930-53, and the Traffic Act,
1919-53. Funds received by the State Government
under the Commonwealth Aid Roads Act, 1954,
may also be spent on metropolitan roads.
The Commissioner of Main Roads constructs and
maintains the gazetted main highways and, under
certain conditions, constructs developmental roads.
All other roads are the responsibility of the local
authorities, although roads in new subdivisions must
initially be constructed or paid for by the subdivider.
Within the Metropolitan Area prescribed by regula-
tion under the Traffic Act, 1919-53, the Commissioner
of Main Roads is responsible for the maintenance of
roads and bridges constructed under the Public
Works Act, 1902-45, and listed in the Traffic Act,
1919-53, as follows :
Albany Highway, from the City of Perth bound-
ary at Welshpool Road junction, to the
junction with the South-Western Highway at
the Old Narrogin Inn, Armadale ;
Canning Highway, from the eastern boundary
of East Fremantle to the City of Perth bound-
ary at Mill Point Road ;
Great Eastern Highway, from the City of Perth
boundary at Rivervale to the Metropolitan
boundary ;
Stirling Highway, from the City of Perth bound-
ary at Crawley to North Fremantle Bridge ;
Bridges—The road surface and decking of the
Causeway, Canning and North Fremantle
bridges. (In actual fact the complete structures
of these bridges are maintained.)
In addition to roads listed above, the Guildford
Road, between Mt. Lawley railway subway and
Johnson Street, Guildford, was included in 1953 in
the roads to be constructed and maintained by the
Commissioner.
The Commissioner of Main Roads may also
undertake the construction of developmental roads
at the request of a local authority, and the execution
of any work connected with transport, as authorised
under the Commonwealth Aid Roads Act.
The cost of road construction and maintenance
is met from funds made available from the receipts
of vehicle registration fees, commercial transport
licences and permits, grants from the Federal Petrol
Tax Fund, and rates levied by local authorities.
In addition to the Commissioner of Main Roads,
no less than 29 other authorities in the Metropolitan
Region execute road works within their respective
districts. As there is no system of road classification
there are great variations in standards of design,
construction, and maintenance.
(ii) Control of Road Traffic
Licensing of passenger and private goods vehicles
and of drivers is carried out by the Police Depart-
ment, which also exercises the control of vehicles
on the roads within the area prescribed by regulations
under the Traffic Act, 1919-53, and investigates
accidents and road traffic offences. The appropriate
local authorities exercise similar powers in those
districts of the Region not covered by the Traffic
Act, as listed below :
Wanneru Road District.
Rockingham Road District.
Darling Range Road District.
Serpentine-Jarrahdale Road District.
Kwinana Road District.
Swan Road District.*
Armadale-Kelmscott Road District.*
Mundaring Road District.*
* Those Wards not included in the Traffic
Act Area.
Trams and trolley buses are subject to the Tram-
ways Department’s regulations and not to the Traffic
Act.
The carriage of goods and passengers by road is
controlled by the Transport Board, which issues
permits and licences for such purposes under the
State Transport Co-ordination Act, 1933-48, after
considering any effects which might be caused to
the State Railway system.


" The efficiency in use of metropolitan roads de-
pends on the extent to which 28 1 Metropolitan Local
Authorities, three State Government Departments,
and two Boards can co-operate to solve the traffic
problem. To a degree, such co-ordination of effort
is obtained through the representative Traffic Ad-
visory Committee which advises the Minister for
Works.” 2
[Note. —The Traffic Advisory Committee now
advises the Minister for Local Government.]
The study which contained the above paragraph
drew attention to the complicated structure of the
administration of roads and the control of road
traffic, and indicated the difficulties of introducing
any changes or suggested improvements where so
many authorities are concerned.
One step towards simplification of the present
conditions under which road administration and
road traffic are controlled would be to place re-
sponsibility for all matters concerning roads and
transport within the State under the aegis of one
Minister. This should lead to a more speedy
rationalisation of powers and a re-arrangement of
the authorities necessary to exercise efficient control.
In the United Kingdom, one Minister is responsible
to Parliament for rail and road transport and for all
classified roads. Largely because of this, important
advances in administration have been made in recent
years. .
Mention must be made of the State Road Author-
ities of Australia Conference of Principal Technical
Committees. This Conference, in which the Main
Roads Department of Western Australia participates
is, as its name implies, a technical body which formu-
lates policies for the design of modern roads.
Such policies, when accepted by all the States will
give uniformity in road design throughout Australia.
Whilst every State will have its individual problems
of location and layout of new roads, the standards
adopted in respect of vehicle speeds, horizontal and
vertical road curvature, visibility, widths of carriage-
way, etc., will progressively conform to those recom-
mended by the Conference.
(in) Classification
Much has been heard of the express motorways in
America, the autobahnen in Germany, and the pro-
posed motorway system in Great Britain. It becomes
increasingly evident that the growth of motor traffic
will soon justify the provision of motorways (limited
access highways) in the Metropolitan Region, if road
transit is to be accomplished without unnecessary
waste of time or undue risk of accident.
The Government of Western Australia has not
been slow to appreciate this need, and legislation
enabling the construction of controlled access and
local access roads was contained in the Main Roads
Act Amendment Act of 1952. A controlled access
road is defined in the Act as a " road which is for
use by prescribed traffic without avoidable hindrance
by traffic from intersecting or adjoining roads or by
other avoidable hindrance.” It is a road " which
may be entered and departed from at specified places
only.” The local access road in that Act means
" a road designed to provide access to, or over, or
under a controlled access road.”
Notwithstanding these important steps towards a
comprehensive classification of roads, many anomalies
still exist. At present four classes of roads are in-
cluded in Statutory definitions, viz :
Main roads (for which the Commissioner of
Main Roads is responsible).
Controlled access roads.
Developmental roads.
Local access roads.
Although it is beyond the scope of this Report to
make detailed suggestions regarding classification, it
is considered that problems of road classification,
standards, and administration should be examined
by the appropriate authorities and recommendations
made as a matter of urgency.
A more rational classification and designation of
responsibilities would not only facilitate the estab-
lishment of a road system, but it should also lead
to the general raising of standards in design details.
In the Plan it has been assumed that roads may be
divided into three principal classes. Because of the
nature of the Plan, proposals are made only for the
two which may properly be regarded as of regional
significance.
(a) The Major Regional Highways form the
arterial system to provide for heavy or important
traffic movements through the Metropolitan Region.
The existing Main Roads are incorporated in the
1 Now 29.
2 J. R. H. Johns, “Metropolitan Government in W.A.,” University
of Western Australia, Perth, 1950.


arterial system but, although they will be con-
tinuously improved, they cannot be brought up to
the high design standard which would be justified by
increasing traffic flow. The proposed Major Regional
Highways, forming new sections of the arterial
system, should be of the highest design standard.
Even though this may be achieved in stages it should
be the objective when first stage plans are prepared.
In order to ensure maximum safety and efficiency the
new Major Regional Highways should be controlled
access roads as defined in the Act.
(b) Important Regional Roads are the principal
feeders and connectors to the Major Regional High-
ways. They form a sub-arterial system. Although
they may vary in importance and character they
should be designed for through traffic movements,
and intersections should be limited in number.
(c) Roads in the third category serve localities
and, in principle, provide a network in the interstices
formed by the arterial and sub-arterial systems.
They will vary in importance : some, for example,
may be bus routes or main spine roads in residential
or large industrial areas ; others will be minor
residential roads.
The Major Regional Highways can only properly
be designed, built, maintained and administered by
an authority concerned with arterial roads throughout
the Region and State. The second category must at
least be planned and designed at regional level by the
same authority, and built and maintained to standards
which prevail throughout the Region. The third
category should quite clearly be the concern of the
local authorities.
A description of the principal recommendations
for adoption in relation to the design and construction
of proposed roads appears in Section G of this Part.
C. EXISTING ROAD SYSTEM
The main road system for Perth and Fremantle is
essentially radial in its layout. The Yanchep Road
and the Great Northern Highway are the two main
northern arteries. A third artery, the Albany High-
way, proceeds from the eastern end of the City
through the closely developed district of Victoria
Park to Armadale 17 miles out, where it meets the
South-Western Highway, the main road from Bun-
bury, which lies 100 miles to the South-West. The
Albany Highway continues to the town of that name,
some 240 miles from Perth.
On the South bank of the Swan River, between
Guildford and Fremantle, are the Great Eastern and
Canning Highways, the two main roads which meet
at the eastern end of the Causeway. Linking Perth
with Fremantle, and serving the substantial residential
suburbs lying on either side of it, is the Stirling
Highway, a four-lane traffic artery extending some
seven miles between the North Fremantle Bridge and
Table 31
ROAD BRIDGES
River.
Location of Bridge.
Type.
Length.
Roadway.
Footway.
Swan ..
99 * • * * * *
99 • • * • * *
Helena
Canning
99 * * * *
99 • * * •
99 * • * *
99 • • ♦ ♦
Great Northern Highway
West Swan Road, Guildford .. • •
Guildford Road ..
Garratt Road
Causeway ..
North Fremantle ..
Guildford ..
Station Street, Gosnells ..
Albany Highway, Gosnells
Nicholson Road, Beckenham ..
Riverton
Canning Highway
Royal Street, Kenwick ..
Timber ..
99 * ♦
99 * *
Steel
and
Concrete ..
Timber ..
ft. in.
498 0
440 0
460 0
780 0
376 0
and
671 0
733 0
60 0
and
300 0
219 0
220 0
220 0
323 0
520 0
260 0
ft. in.
18 0
22 0
18 8
18 8
62 0
40 0
18 8
18 8
16 0
16 0
24 0
22 0
26 0
22 8
ft. in.
5* 0
5 0
8 0
6 0
5 0
5* 0
5 0
5 0
5 0
5 0


Table 32
MILEAGE OF ROADS
Authority.
Bitumen
Surface.
Other
Surface.
Cleared but not
Surfaced.
Total.
City Councils and Municipalities
Road Boards
Total
m. ch.
512 46
1,277 79
m. ch.
37 74
1,017 66
m. ch.
6 15
516 54
m. ch.
556 55
2,812 39
1,790 45
1,055 60
522 69
3,369 14
the City of Perth boundary at Crawley. This road
continues, as Mounts Bay Road, into the City of
Perth area.
The remaining important road artery from Perth
is the Guildford Road, starting at Mount Lawley
railway subway and proceeding through the populous
suburbs of Maylands and Bayswater and the industrial
centre of Bassendean to Guildford, where it joins
the Great Eastern Highway.
Subsequent Sections will indicate how far the
present system of main roads satisfies the require-
ments of present traffic, describe apparent deficiencies,
and make recommendations as to immediate and
long-term improvements.
Within the Metropolitan Region only three rivers
call for bridging to any appreciable degree : the
Swan, Helena and Canning Rivers. Table 31 gives
brief particulars of the road bridges over these rivers.
It will be seen that, with the exception of the
newly-completed Causeway bridges, all structures
are of temporary timber type, and as circumstances
permit must be replaced by more permanent struc-
tures. It is important that carriageways of bridges
should not be narrower than their respective ap-
proaches, otherwise the effectiveness of the road as
a whole is reduced.
Practically all city streets and suburban residential
roads are the responsibility .of the respective local
authorities. Legislation stipulates that, unless with
special consent of the Minister for Lands, no road
shall be set out within a reserve less than 66 feet
wide. The mileage of roads in the Region at June,
1953, is given in Table 32.
The total of 3,369 miles gives a regional ratio of
116 persons to one mile of road, assuming the popula-
tion of the Region at 388,000.
Comparable ratios 1 are :
Birmingham (U.K.)
(1938) 1,380.0 persons per mile
Great Britain (1938) 248.0 „ . ~
All Australia (1938) 13.8 „ ~
Western Australia
(1938) 6.0 „
Western Australia
(1951) 7.5 ~
It will be seen at once that the low densities pre-
vailing in Australia must entail high costs, per capita,
in the provision of good carriageways, traffic control
signals, lighting and all the other essentials of a road
system. Even the more populous city areas do not
escape this handicap, for the Report on Town Plan-
ning of the City of Fremantle, 1950, states that there
was a population of 18,791 in 1947 for a road mileage
of 63.3 miles, or only 296 persons per mile. 2 Against
this it may be said that the construction of roads in
the populated parts of Western Australia is eco-
nomical because of the abundance of cheap road-
making materials.
In Australian cities and towns, the great amount
of road required in relation to population is due
largely to a combination of low density residential
development and the planless scattering of residential
units. Reference is made in Chapter 10 to the great
number of vacant blocks still existing in built-up
areas, and to the effect of uncontrolled spread of
development on the cost of sewers and roads. Whilst
the Plan does not propose any significant changes in
the density of housing (Chapter 8), the operation of
1 H. R. Kempe, Engineers’ Year Book, London, 1948.
2 H. Boas, Report on Town Planning of the City of Fremantle, Perth,
1950.


an accepted zoning scheme, together with effective
programmes of development, will minimise the effect
of scattering and result in great economies in the
construction of roads.
Before the passing of the Town Planning and De-
velopment Act, 1928, suburban residential roads
were generally constructed by the local authority,
accompanied only by a chainage fee from the sub-
divider. Many subdivisions made before 1928 still
exist, with the roads surveyed but unmade. These
roads remain as an increasing burden to be borne
by the local authority as road costs rise. Since the
passing of the Town Planning Act all subdivisions
are required, unless the Minister rules otherwise, to
have the roads constructed by the subdivider before
they are taken over as public roads by the local
authority. This is the logical procedure of making
the land pay for the roads constructed to serve it and,
because of it, the burden of the local authorities and
ratepayers has been greatly eased during the last two
decades.
It should be noted that in the subdivision of land
into residential or other building blocks in the past,
the location and alignment of the roads appears to
have depended more upon attaining rectangular
blocks than upon consideration of the natural to-
pography of the terrain. This has been further
accentuated by the rectangular shapes of some of the
original grants and locations of land. Consequently,
the " grid ” method of subdivision predominates,
with the result that the majority of the earlier de-
veloped areas are laid out with straight, parallel
roads, often going up hill and down dale, and inter-
sected at regular intervals with cross-roads at right
angles. This often results in a very monotonous
layout in the flat lands and dangerous grades and
expensive servicing in the more hilly terrain.
Early developers of land had no means of foreseeing
the enormous and rapid growth of motor traffic and
the effect which the rectangular layout would have in
creating accident hazards at the road intersections.
Grade separation of conflicting streams of traffic, or
even classes of traffic, received little consideration
because of costs involved, with the result that there
still remains a large number of railway level crossings
within the Metropolitan Region.
The sponsors of the arterial roads known as the
Great Eastern, Canning, Albany and Stirling High-
ways could not be expected to visualise the effect
which the multiplicity of intersecting roads, and the
large numbers of parked vehicles, would have on the
free flow of traffic along such highways. Moreover,
they were not able at that time to appreciate that
the type of frontage development very seriously
affected the efficiency of the road. A number of
local authorities are still permitting types of de-
velopment which must induce accidents as well as
reduce traffic flow.
D. TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS
The deplorable toll of fatal and other injuries due
to road accidents continues day by day and, in the
Police Reports on 17,724 accidents in Western Aus-
tralia in the year 1953, it is shown that 192 persons
were killed and 3,664 were injured. Of these
numbers, 99 were killed and 2,430 were injured, in
the Region.
Table 33
FATAL ROAD ACCIDENTS IN AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL CITIES
1951.
1952.
1953.
Deaths.
Per
100,000 of
Population.
Deaths.
Per
100,000 of
Population.
Deaths.
Per
100,000 of
Population.
Sydney ..
Melbourne
Adelaide
Brisbane
Perth
Hobart ..
321
276
103
91
91
14
20-0
20-4
23-2
20-2
27-6
16-1
333
263
109
90
98
13
20-2
18-8
24-2
19-5
28-0
14-5
301
207
71
101
99
14
17-9
14-
15-
21-0
26-0
15-0
SOURCE : Commonwealth Bureau of Census and Statistics, R.oad Traffic Accident Statistics, Canberra.


In three past years the recorded deaths from road
accidents in capital cities of Australia have been as
shown in Table 33. It will be seen that the Region
has an unenviable record. The fatal road accident
rate is the greatest in Australia.
The World Health Organization in Geneva recently
issued some important comparative figures on trans-
port accidents. 1 They showed that, in 1951, Aus-
tralia was at the head of the table in the mortality
rate for motor traffic accidents. An extract of the
figures is as follows :
Australia (1951) .. 24.4 deaths per 100,000
population
U.S.A. (1949) .. 20.8
New Zealand (1952) .. 13.1 ~ „
England and Wales 10.0 ~ „
(1951)
Italy (1951) .. .. 9.5 „
Japan (1951) .. .. 4.0
In the 1951 Annual Report of the Commissioner
of Public Health, Western Australia, it is stated that
in the year ending 30th June, 1951, 12,022 bed-days
were occupied by traffic accident cases in the Royal
Perth Hospital. At 725. per bed-day the annual
cost of their hospital care alone was £43,000, but
this element of cost is only a fraction of the total loss
to the community arising from traffic accidents. The
estimated monetary value of all the components
which comprise the total loss in this regard is not
available in Western Australia, but some American
figures may be studied. 2 In the city of Lansing,
Michigan, for the year 1945-46, the estimated total
cost was analysed from questionnaires on each
accident and the value of such losses, including
medical bills, vehicle repairs, loss of salary and other
related costs, together with time lost from work was
as follows :
Average non-injured driver £33. Job time
loss, 6 hours.
Average injured driver £lB5. Job time loss,
16 days.
Average injured passenger £93. Job time loss,
29 days.
Average injured pedestrian £212. Job time
loss, 35 days.
In comparing the economic losses due to traffic
accidents, crime and fire, one small Michigan city
in one year arrived at the following figures :
Economic loss due to :
Fire .. .. .. .. £24,400
Crime £5,050
Traffic accidents .. .. £204,000
In assessing the economic loss due to fatal accidents
the National Safety Council of U.S.A. bases its
estimates on the use of mortality tables and the
average earning capacities for different ages and
classes. The schedule derived from this assessment
is :
Average cost
Age. per person.
0-14 years .. .. £6,800
15-54 years .. .. £ll,BOO
55 and over .. .. £2,750
If the economic loss to the community caused by
fatal road accidents in the Region in the year 1953
were estimated on the foregoing average figures, it
would total £1,133,390. This does not allow for the
much more numerous non-fatal accidents. If they
were assessed and included the figure would be very
much greater. In addition, of course, there is the very
considerable loss due to vehicle damage. Insurance
claims paid for motor vehicles in the State now
average about £1,000,000 per annum. 3 This state of
affairs should be regarded as alarming, and it must
not be overlooked that unless proper steps are taken
to cater for modern traffic, the rate at which it is
growing will create conditions which may tend to
overtake all remedial efforts.
As a first step in relating the incidence of traffic
accidents to road layout and design, it is essential
that traffic accidents in the Region should be recorded
in such a way that the frequency and type of accident
may be related exactly to the place of occurrence.
Although complete statistical records are kept by
the Police Department, it has been found difficult
and, in many cases, impossible to get a true picture
of an accident in the place where it occurred. It
should be fairly easy to arrange for the cartographical
recording of accidents. If this were done bad spots,
1 Contractors Record and Public Works Engineer, London, March, 1954.
2 Accident Prevention Department of the Association of Casualty and
Surety Companies, Manual of Traffic Engineering Studies, New York,
1953.
3 Statistical Register of Western Australia, 1952-54.


43
43. Kings Park Road, Perth. A well-
designed urban traffic road near to the
centre of the City of Perth.
44. The Causeway, Perth. Traffic flow
at the south-eastern gateway to the City
has been facilitated by the completion of
the rotary system.
44


45
45. Stirling Highway at Nedlands. A
major highway which is losing its efficiency
through parked cars and numerous inter-
sections.
46. Broome Street, Cottesloe. An un-
necessarily wide residential street which is
not only wasteful in land but also very
costly to maintain.
46


47
An example of a road interchange system at an
approach to New York City, U.S.A.


48
48. Car parking in Perth. With a
steady increase in the number of vehicles
using the Central Area, the congested
parking spaces are already inadequate.
49. The front at Scarborough. An
attempt has been made to deal with park-
ing, but congestion and conflict between
pedestrians and vehicles are evident at
peak periods.
49


Table 34
TRAFFIC VOLUMES
Road.
Vehicles moving in both directions in 12 hours : 7
(cycles excluded).
a.m. to 7 p.m.
1930 (a).
1948 (b).
1952 (c).
1954 (d).
Causeway
7,526
21,160
28,080
Canning Highway ..
1,634
« ,
* *
12,965
Stirling Highway ..
3,889
. *
• .
11,907
Mounts Bay Road
3,610
, .
8,892
11,093
Queen Victoria Street, Fremantle
5,600
, ,
11,869
North Fremantle Bridge ..
3,411
5,835
• •
13,076
SOURCES : (a) Report of Metropolitan Town Planning Commission, 1930, Perth, 1931.
( b ) H. Boas, Report on Town Planning of City of Fremantle, Perth, 1950.
(c) Traffic Census by Department of Main Roads, Western Australia, 1952.
( d ) Traffic Census by Town Planning Department, Western Australia, 1954.
and the reasons why they were dangerous, would
be immediately apparent to the police and traffic
engineers. The frequency of accidents on certain
stretches of road would indicate faults in the road
layout as well as in the judgment of drivers and
pedestrians. If there were a single traffic authority
much more effective action might be taken.
E. TRAFFIC MOVEMENTS AND
INTENSITIES
As stated above, the early road authorities had
little guidance as to the volumes of traffic which
their roads would be destined to carry. Table 34
gives figures extracted from dounts made over the
past 24 years and illustrates the rapidly increasing
volume of traffic on some of the main thoroughfares.
The distribution of the present and the probable
future metropolitan road traffic during a normal day
and at the peak period of the day is shown graphically
in Diagram 18.
It should be noted that Table 34 refers to con-
centrated flows of week-day traffic occurring in the
normal course of week-day public and private trans-
port, which create entirely different problems from
those experienced in respect of recreational or week-
end traffic. A popular sporting event or a hot Sunday
will generate a volume of traffic at a location where
facilities would be deemed adequate for only a fraction
of it on ordinary days. The economics of providing
for easy movement of vast numbers of vehicles for
comparatively rare occasions have therefore to be
studied carefully. On the one hand lavish expenditure
on wide roads may create heaVy burdens on the
financial resources of responsible authorities ; on
the other hand, the absence of proper and adequate
road facilities may restrict free vehicular movement
and tend to increase the already heavy toll of road
accidents.
F. TRAFFIC GROWTH
The numbers and categories of vehicles registered
within the Region at December, 1953, are shown in
Table 35.
The growth of vehicle registration over the past
32 years is clearly seen in Table 36.
The meteoric rate of increase shown in Table 36
has been achieved in spite of periods of petrol ration-
ing and the curtailment of imports.
In Great Britain a planned forecast of vehicle
growth, from 2,600,000 to 6,100,000 in 32 years
(1938 to 1970), shows a per capita increase from
1 vehicle : 17.7 persons to 1 : 7.5 persons. 1 Recent
American figures give much higher ratios. Three
examples are shown below. 2
1 R. Nicholas, “ City of Manchester Plan,” Manchester, 1945.
2 Ohio Department of Highways, Traffic Survey Reports of 1949, 1950,
1952, Columbus, Ohio.


Area. Population. Vehicles. Ratio.
Franklin County, Ohio 460,000 (1947) 117,000 1 to 3.9
(539 sq. miles)
Mahoning Valley, Ohio 358,530 (1950) 89,249 1 to 4.0
(400 sq. miles)
Mansfield, Ohio (36 sq. 63,000 (1951) 19,763 1 to 3.2
miles)
N.B.— These figures do not include any public service
vehicles or motor cycles .
The ratio in American cities averages one vehicle
to five persons, and in the counties the average is
higher. Many cities attain a figure as high as 1 to 2.5,
and Los Angeles is now said to have reached 1 to
2.06. 1
Many signs of the difficulties which will be rapidly
increased by the growing volume of traffic are already
being witnessed on streets and roads in the Region.
Traffic counts were made in 1952 and 1954 and
increases in the volume of traffic at some points were
as high as 30 per cent, in the short intervening period
of 20 months. A selection of the actual traffic flows
on certain roads has already been shown (Table 34).
Relatively low densities throughout the Region
make long journeys necessary and, as one consequence,
public transport costs are high and the routes widely
spaced. In order to achieve freedom to move easily
about the Region, whether on business or for pleasure,
every family aspires to have a car of some kind, and
for the* average person with a steady salary or wage,
the acquisition of a car has become a comparatively
simple matter. In estimating, therefore, what volume
of traffic is likely to be imposed upon the regional
roads within the next three or four decades, it coulp
reasonably be assumed that the ratio of 1 to 3.5 might
eventually prevail and, indeed, it might be higher.
For a regional population of 1,000,000 a vehicle
ratio of 1 to 3.5 would mean a registered total of
285,000 vehicles, or some 200,000 more than in
1953. When the population increases to 1,400,000,
for which the Plan has allowed (Chapter 3), the total
number of vehicles would be some 400,000 or an
increase of 320,000.
Noticeable in regard to the figures of vehicle regis-
tration is that during the years 1947 to 1953, the
proportion of passenger cars to the total number of
vehicles has remained practically constant. If the
ratio, which is 58 per cent., persists, and the present
rate of population increase is maintained, by 1974
there might be 122,000 passenger cars on the regional
Table 35
VEHICLE REGISTRATION IN THE METROPOLITAN REGION, 1953
Area.
Cars.
Wagons.
Buses.
Motor Cycles.
Total.
Metropolitan Traffic Act
Armadale-Kelmscott
Darling Range
Mundaring
Rockingham
Ser pentine-Jarrah dale
Swan
Wanneru ..
44,513
216
595
290
388
186
411
113
1^,429
340
620
345
346
274
585
322
567
2
21
3
4
2
3
3
9,817
100
181
64
80
48
137
24
74,326
658
1,417
702
818
510
1,136
462
Total ..
..
. •
46,712
22,261
605
10,451
80,029
Percentage of Total..
••
58-37
27-81
0-76
13-06
100-00
Table 36
GROWTH OF VEHICLE REGISTRATION
Year.
Population.
Vehicles
Registered.
Ratio of
Motor Vehicles to
Population.
1921
154,873
3,409
1 to 45-5 persons
1930
202,888
24,576
1 to 8-2 ,,
1942
265,000
24,200*
1 to 11-0
1948
330,000
37,820
1 to 8*7 ,,
1953
388,000
80,029
1 to 4-9
*
War years.
1 Bulletin of Division of Highways, Department of Public Works,
California


AVERAGE HOURLY FLOW (7 A.M.-7 P.M.)
PROBABLE AVERAGE HOURLY FLOW (7 A.M.-7 P.M.)
PEAK HOUR FLOW (5 P.M. - 6 P.M.)
PROBABLE PEAK HOUR FLOW (5 P.M - 6 P.M.)
Diagram 18
ROAD TRAFFIC INTENSITY


roads. By 1985, again assuming the present rate of
increase, the population would be 1,000,000, with
some 166,000 passenger cars on the roads. These
figures should be accepted as reasonable possibilities.
It would seem that only a serious and sustained
slump or economic setback would appreciably reduce
the rate of growth. The highways and associated
proposals of the Plan, on the basis of a total of
400,000 vehicles of all kinds by the year 2,000, might
each in turn be taxed to capacity in the inner areas
soon after completion.
G. PROPOSED ROAD SYSTEM
(i) General
The general pattern of the future regional road
system can be described as a system of arteries radiat-
ing from the centres of the two main cities, with
major cross-regional perimeter roads at approximately
eight miles North and South of Perth. Within the
segments enclosed by radial and perimeter arterial
roads there will be a sub-arterial system and resi-
dential or local roads. Whilst the majority of the
older areas will retain the rectangular or chess-board
plan, it is anticipated that the newer areas will be
developed in accordance with the principles outlined
in Chapter 8.
Perth and Fremantle will not differ greatly from
other cities of similar character and size in that the
volume of the normal daily road traffic attracted to,
or having business with the main centres, will form
the most important regional traffic movements. Even
with a large measure of decentralisation of central
business this would continue to be so. During the
traffic census taken over 12 hours in March, 1954,
some 97,000 motor vehicles passed through the
cordon surrounding the one square mile central
area of Perth, and 29,000 through a similar cordon
around the business area of the City of Fremantle.
With a regional population of 1,000,000, and with
vehicle ownership increasing from the present ratio
of one vehicle to 4.9 persons to a ratio of perhaps
1 to 3.5, the foregoing daily movements might be
trebled in 30 years. There is, therefore, every
reason for the early provision of main arteries, and
substantial off-street parking areas, which will deal
adequately with these heavy city-bound volumes of
traffic.
The Regional Plan shows only the two highest
categories of roads (Section (B) (iii)), described as
Major Regional Highways and Important Regional
Roads . These proposals are indicated in a simpli-
fied form in Diagram 20 and may be compared with
the existing pattern of communications shown in
Diagram 19. It should be emphasised at this point
that precise surveys of the alignments of these roads
have not been possible, and that variation in detail
will undoubtedly be necessary as more accurate in-
formation becomes available. The widths of the
roads shown on the maps are, of necessity, diagram-
matic, and in no way represent the dimensions of the
land required for their construction.
The routes, in particular of the Major Regional
Highways, have been carefully selected in conjunction
with the Main Roads Department. The guiding
principles have been :
to provide the best location and direction ;
to avoid areas of improved land where possible ;
and to bear in mind always that it is much
cheaper and more effective to create a new
road, of adequate width, rather than attempt
the costly widening of existing roads with
expensive buildings bordering them.
In some few cases, of course, it has not been
possible fully to put into effect the last principle.
( ii ) Major Regional Highways
(a) Perth-Kwinana Highway
The influence of Kwinana and the increasing
activities in that part of the Region, coupled with the
high proportion of Causeway traffic which proceeds
to or from South Perth, Melville and the adjoining
rapidly growing areas, demonstrates that the first
need is for a further bridge over the Swan River at
the Narrows, and a major road in a southerly direc-
tion.
Calculations made on the basis of expected resi-
dential and industrial development in the area to be
served by the proposed road, and utilising the factors
indicated by the traffic trends mentioned earlier,


show that within a relatively short period there would
be a peak flow of over 5,000 vehicles per hour, in
one direction, over the Narrows Bridge. Such a
flow could not be carried by a normal developmental
type of approach road, and a properly designed
controlled access highway will be essential. On
such a highway the points of access to it would be
spaced at intervals of not less than one mile. The
carriageways would be designed for safe vehicle
speeds of up to 60 miles per hour. The greater the
distance between access points the greater the carrying
capacity of the road.
The impact of a mounting additional flow at the
western gateway to the city, added to an increasing
flow along Mounts Bay Road, would result in " con-
fusion worse confounded ” unless proper means
were provided to disperse the flows, either into the
roads and streets on the northern and southern flanks
of the City, or into car parks where vehicles could
be accommodated during business hours. The
suggested ways of dealing with this problem are
dealt with in Chapter 9.
The proposal to locate a new southern gateway
to Central Perth near the Narrows is an obvious one
for the following reasons :
(1) There is an urgent need to relieve the Cause-
way and the eastern part of the Canning
Highway. Over 50 per cent, of the traffic
now using the Causeway comes from the
Canning Highway, and the major part of
this traffic would use a Narrows bridge.
(2) A bridge over the Swan River at the Narrows
would be shorter and consequently less
costly than at any other point near the
city, unless investigations disclose un-
expected and considerable foundation diffi-
culties.
(3) The location is at the end of an alignment
which provides a direct connection be-
tween the City and the quickly growing
southern suburbs and Kwinana.
(4) The shallow bay between Point Lewis and
Barrack Street Jetty is one which can and,
perhaps, should be reclaimed in part. It
would provide the area necessary for the
bridge approach roads, and for car parking
at a location most advantageously situated
in. relation to the City.
(5) The reclaimed area would lie behind a new
river wall which, because of its alignment,
would improve the flow of water in the
river. The land gained would replace an
expanse of shallow water which is more or
less stagnant for a great part of the year.
(6) It is expected that material for the reclama-
tion would be obtainable from, and effect
an improvement to, the main river channel.
(7) The land between the new river wall and the
system of approach roads could be laid
out as a park, and so form part of a land-
scaped water frontage extending from the
Causeway to Point Lewis.
From every aspect the Narrows Bridge is likely
to be the most important river crossing. It would
carry more traffic than any other bridge and it would
be a prominent feature in the splendid urban scene
which may be enjoyed from many vantage points.
There should be little doubt that, visually, the most
satisfactory design solution would be a single span
bridge with open viaduct approaches. This may
not be possible for technical or economic reasons.
Nevertheless, every effort should be made to ensure
that the design has the longest possible spans and is
structurally light, simple and elegant. The road
platform of the bridge should form a continuous
flat curve, unbroken by extraneous details such as
ornamental pylons. The views under the bridge,
with the structure silhouetted against the City or the
downstream background, will be more important to
bear in mind than those from above.
At the southern, or Mill Point, end of the bridge
access to and egress from the bridge would be pro-
vided by approaches from existing roads as well as
the Highway, which would continue South to Can-
ning Bridge almost parallel with, but on the river
side of, Melville Parade. Access to the popular
beaches at Como and elsewhere would be by means
of pedestrian underpasses or overbridges. The in-
tersection of the proposed new Highway with Canning
Highway, near Canning Bridge, would be designed
with full or partial grade separation, depending upon
the traffic flows, land available and other factors
controlling the design.
The Regional Plan shows the next part of the
Highway crossing the Canning River over a bridge
near Mount Henry, but until more investigations are


Diagram 19


Diagram 20


carried out it is impossible to determine the final
location of this crossing. Further South the High-
way would continue to serve the residential areas
lying on either side of it, and intersections of the
Highway with other major roads would have gyratory
traffic control.
The section South of the Canning River would
provide an opportunity to design a highway as a
" parkway,” with the dividing strip between the two
carriageways varying considerably in width. The
separated carriageways might also be at different
levels, according to the slope of the land and, with
the retention of natural vegetation on the median
strip and shoulders, a scenic drive, or parkway,
would result.
In the vicinity of Bibra Lake the proposed Perth-
Kwinana Highway turns West to become coincidental
with the Fremantle-Midland Junction Highway as
far as Spearwood. The point at which it will have
fulfilled its function as a controlled access highway
will be at Kwinana (the Spearwood-Kwinana con-
trolled access highway has already been designated).
Continuing as a Major Regional Highway it extends
to Mandurah with a branch to Rockingham and the
neighbouring developments.
A necessary extension of this Highway would be
in the form of a spur road running in a northerly
direction from Forrest Road for some 2\ miles. The
northern end of this spur would embrace Stock Road
as far as Canning Highway. The extension would
thus form a link between Canning Highway and the
Perth-Kwinana Highway at Spearwood, part of the
extension being controlled access.
(b) Yanchep Highway
The second major artery for which it is recom-
mended early provision should be made is one which
will serve the rapidly extending suburbs in the North
and North-West. It should be regarded as the
northern equivalent of the Perth-Kwinana Highway.
As the Region expands to a population of 1,000,000
or more, it is expected that residential areas lying
from Scarborough northwards to Sorrento and
beyond, then easterly to Hamersley, Killarney,
Tuart Hill and Mount Yokine, will house some
216,000 persons.
The city-bound traffic likely to be generated by
such a population would be, at peak hours, in the
region of 5,000 vehicles per hour in one direction.
A volume of this nature could not be handled by any
practicable improvement of Scarborough Beach Road,
Wanneru Road, or any of the other old-fashioned
roads which at present serve these districts. The
second proposed major artery is therefore envisaged
as a controlled access highway starting at a point
near the 71-mile peg on the Wanneru Road, and
proceeding South, via the South-East corner of Lake
Monger, to a new bridge crossing the railway on
the George Street-Charles Street line. Access points
would be located, where suitable, to admit the traffic
from the East and West sides of the Highway. In
the earlier stages of the use of this Highway, inter-
sections with the major roads might be permissible
at grade, but as the volume of cross traffic developed
grade separation might become essential. The route
of this Highway follows the only practicable " gap ”
in development left in the north-western part of the
City. It is fortunate that it is there.
The approach to the north-western city gateway
would present most difficulty in the location and
planning of this Highway. The proposal suggests
that it should approach the City by extensively re-
modelled Sutherland and Aberdeen Streets, and
distribute its traffic to the City and the South via
Roe Street and a new bridge crossing the railway to
George Street. Proceeding outwards from the City,
the traffic would cross over or under the new bridge,
converge in Sutherland Street, and pass under a road
bridge at Loftus Street to Oxford Street. The pro-
vision of a bridge or viaduct at this point would
eliminate the conflict between the lesser traffic of
Loftus Street and that of the controlled access high-
way. At the Oxford Street crossing limitations of
space may preclude similar grade separation. The
treatment of this intersection can only be decided
after more detailed study.
The heavy influx of traffic consequent upon the
provision of this road must, as in the case of the
Narrows Bridge approach, be capable of distribution
to other streets, or to adjacent car parks, if intolerable
congestion is to be avoided. In this case the re-
modelling of the central railway system (described in
Chapter 9, Part I), will release land between Roe and
Wellington Streets. This should be allotted to car
parking for the growing numbers visiting the retail
business area, and for whom street parking is gradually
being reduced. Dispersal of the traffic from the


North-West to the East and South of the City will
also be facilitated by the provisions suggested for the
widening of Roe Street, leading to the eastern end
of the City, and the all-important connection through
George Street to the Narrows Bridge, by-passing the
City on the West.
(c) Beechboro-Gosnells Highway
As the areas to the North and South-East of the
City develop, and more especially as industries become
established in the localities recommended for them,
so will the need for an efficient main North-South
arterial road become apparent. If it is not provided,
heavy cross-regional traffic movements may be added
to those which will cause so much difficulty and con-
gestion in the central city area. Provision should
be made for a controlled access highway to link the
residential and industrial areas at Welshpool, Belmont,
Bassendean and Benara Road. In the event of a
major airport for Perth being established in the Lake
Gnangara district such a road might have added im-
portance for this reason.
The location of the Beechboro-Gosnells Highway
is suggested to be as follows. Starting at its inter-
section with the proposed North Perimeter High-
way, North-West of Beechboro Road, the controlled
access road would run southward through Morley
Park and, after skirting the western end of the in-
dustrial area at Bassendean, intersect the Guildford
Road near the present railway crossing at Whatley.
Before reaching the Great Eastern Highway, the road
would cross the Swan River on a new bridge East
of the present railway bridge, passing, en route, the
intersection with the eastern terminal of the proposed
Swan River Drive, leading to the western end of the
Causeway.
At the junction with the Great Eastern Highway
there would be a rotary traffic system, and the con-
trolled access highway would continue therefrom in
a south-easterly direction for some 4i miles parallel
with Hardeys Road, to an intersection with the
Fremantle-Midland Junction Highway. This section
would skirt the important Belmont-Welshpool in-
dustrial freight terminal, and railway marshalling
yards area. The road would continue beyond the
Fremantle-Midland Junction Highway, in a southerly
direction, to join the Albany Highway South-East of
Gosnells.
From Gosnells to the proposed Swan River Drive,
the Beechboro-Gosnells Highway would form an
important alternative to the increasingly inefficient
section of the Albany Highway passing through the
built-up area. It would be a faster and more attract-
ive approach route to the heart of the metropolis,
and a safe and direct road for cross-regional industrial
traffic.
(d) Fremantle-Midland Junction Highway
This Highway would function as a high speed route
on the southern perimeter of the main area of close
settlement in the metropolis. It would have several
functions. Firstly, it would act as an efficient link
between Fremantle and Midland Junction and all
the main highways to the northern, eastern, and
southern parts of the State. Secondly, it would
provide quick interchange between the main radial
highways leading to Perth from the part of the Region
South of the Swan River. Thirdly, it would be the
major road link between the Inner and Outer harbours
of the Port of Fremantle, the road and rail freight
terminals in the Belmont-Welshpool area, and the
large industrial areas in the eastern sectors of the
Region. In addition to the speedy transit afforded,
there would be the added advantage that the Highway
would draw heavy traffic away from the less efficient
roads nearer the city centre, which must all, eventually,
pass through a series of residential districts.
The suggested route is as follows. Leaving the
Great Eastern Highway at an intersection near
Bellevue, the new Highway would proceed via Bush-
mead, Maida Vale and Forrestfield, to its intersection
with the Beechboro-Gosnells Highway at the eastern
end of Hardeys Road. Continuing in a south-
westerly direction, to intersect Welshpool Road near
the Williams Street junction, it would cross over the
railway and the present Albany Highway at Ken wick.
The proposed intersection with the Albany Highway
is situated on a deviation, some two miles long, of
that road. The village of Kenwick would be by-
passed by both highways, leaving the shopping and
other village interests to be pursued undisturbed by
heavy traffic. After crossing the Canning River and
Nicholson Road, the new Highway would continue
South-West until it joined the Perth-Kwinana High-
way near Bibra Lake. From this point the two
highways would continue as one to Spearwood,


where the Perth-Kwinana Highway turns South.
The Fremantle-Midland Junction Highway would
proceed along the general line of Forrest Road and
Rockingham Road to the foreshore, near the junction
of Island Street and South Terrace, Fremantle. It
would continue to the Central Area of Fremantle
along the foreshore.
For direct road communication between the port
and industries at Kwinana-Rockingham, and the
hinterland served by the Great Northern and Great
Eastern Highways beyond Midland Junction, this
road would form an essential through route, avoiding
all city and suburban traffic and saving mileage and
journey time to its users. Furthermore, the justifica-
tion and need for this road would be intensified were
the proposals for the establishment of a port freight
terminal and commercial warehousing in the Belmont-
Welshpool area put into effect. Trucking of goods
between either the Inner or Outer Harbour and
Belmont-Welshpool would be accomplished without
delay by using a high-speed controlled access highway
of the type proposed. Finally the line of the Fre-
mantle-Midland Junction Highway runs through
largely virgin country, and the land could be secured
now without much difficulty.
(e) Swan River Drive
Mention has been made of a riverside drive or
highway extending from the Causeway, via the
northern bank of the Swan River, to a point where
it would intersect the Beechboro-Gosnells Highway
at Whatley. The function of this Highway is two-
fold. Firstly, it would constitute a pleasant ex-
tension of the present Riverside Drive and, secondly,
an attractive route to resident and tourist alike. The
major economic justification will result, however,
from the growth of the residential areas between
Mount Lawley, near the City, and Beechboro and
Bassendean to the East. The daily travel to and from
the City, of road transport generated by a much
greater population in the eastern suburbs, could not
properly be superimposed upon the traffic using the
present (or improved future) Guildford Road. A
peak traffic volume of some 4,000 vehicles an hour in
one direction is to be expected, and the construction
of this controlled access highway would cater for
the ultimate traffic needs.
CO North Perimeter Highway
As the Region expands to the North and North-
East there will be a need for a cross-regional highway
between Midland Junction, towards which the Great
Northern and Great Eastern Highways converge, and
the very large populated areas of Hamersley, North
Yokine and the north-western beach communities.
It should be noted that an important industrial area
is strategically placed in relation to these large resi-
dential districts. It is proposed that a perimeter
road should be designed to function in a somewhat
similar way to the important one to the South. It
would act as a fast and safe traffic route by-passing,
yet linking together, residential communities and
industrial areas, and drawing traffic away from central
area congestion. At week-ends it would serve as a
safe, yet fast main highway to the beaches on the
north-western flank of the Region, and to the hills
and an extended Forrest National Park, on the
eastern flank.
It is suggested that the starting point, as a controlled
access highway, should be at an intersection with the
Yanchep Highway, near the 71-mile peg on the
Wanneru Road. Proceeding due East, the Highway
would meet the Great Northern Highway near Herne
Hill and, eventually, close the circuit of the metropolis
by skirting Midland Junction to link with the Great
Eastern Highway at Bellevue.
(g) Burswood Highway
By the time a bridge at the Narrows and the road
approaches are completed, congestion on the Cause-
way will have become intolerable, if not impossible.
At first the Causeway will be relieved, and the need
for a third new bridge over the Swan River in close
proximity to the Causeway may not immediately be
apparent. Expanding populations and growing in-
dustries to the South of the river in the Welshpool
and Queens Park area will, however, assume such
proportions that their additional traffic demands will
amount to much more than the Causeway could
accommodate. With the port freight terminal and
the railway goods yards, and their attendant com-
mercial warehousing, together with metropolitan
markets at Belmont-Welshpool, there will be heavy
road trucking traffic generated, with a proportion
destined for the wholesale and retail establishments
on the northern side of the City.


As described in Chapter 9, the main East-West
traffic artery on the northern flank of the City will
be via Roe and Wittenoom Streets, in their widened
and modernised form, terminating at the eastern end
in a bridge head near the present Gas Works. To
complete the proper functioning of this artery a
bridge over the Swan River to Burswood Island, and
a road thence to a major intersection with the Great
Eastern Highway at Rivervale, will be necessary.
From this intersection traffic would either follow the
Great Eastern Highway, or would continue along
the route to the Belmont-Welshpool industrial area.
This route would be formed by an improvement of
part of Kitchener Avenue and a bridge over the rail-
way, just North of Victoria Park Station. It would
continue southward by widening and improving
Rutland Avenue alongside the railway.
(h) Kwinana-Mundijong Highway
In the longer term there should be strong justifica-
tion for a direct cross-country link between the
Kwinana industrial area and harbour and the highways
leading to the South-West and the South.
A route has been selected which leaves the Perth-
Kwinana Highway, south of the New Town of
Kwinana, and proceeds in an easterly direction to
an intersection with the South-Western Highway to
the South-East of Mundijong.
This route would continue across the Darling
Escarpment to the Albany Highway, on a line through
Jarrahdale, which is now largely in existence. (The
major part of this route is not shown, as it runs
through the Water Supply Catchment Area, which
is outside the limits of the Plan.)
(j) Standards
Mention has already been made of the technical
body which advises the State road authorities on the
standards to be adopted in road design. As the
Main Roads Department of Western Australia par-
ticipates in the deliberations and decisions of this
organisation it follows that future major roads should
be laid down within these standards.
Reference to Diagram 21 will show that Major
Regional Highways, whether controlled access or
otherwise, should, wherever possible, ultimately
comprise dual carriageways, each of three lanes with
median strips not less than 40 feet wide. A strip
of this dimension permits landscaping with shrubs
and trees, which is important for aesthetic reasons,
for reducing headlight glare at night, and for economy
in earth-work on sloping ground. Where land is
available, the widening of the median strip renders
possible the treatment of main highways as parkways.
The need for such roads may be difficult to visualise
in open country, where traffic is at present almost
negligible, but it is because of this that the oppor-
tunities may be taken now to make reservations for
such road development. Authorities and the people
of the Region will be well rewarded when the full
impact of road traffic is experienced at a later stage.
Important Regional Roads should eventually be
completed to a dual carriageway standard, with each
carriageway of two lanes, excluding waiting or speed
change lanes, and with a median strip as wide as the
reservation will permit. Little effective growth, to
minimise headlight nuisance can, however, be expected
on a strip of less than 12 feet wide. Such a width
should be regarded as the minimum, even in highly
urbanised districts. In central areas a width of six
feet, to provide central refuges only, may be required
as the minimum.
For residential or developmental roads there should
be two main categories. The first, where the road
is planned to carry traffic only to and from the houses
on the road, need not be wider than one chain, and
possibly less, with a single carriageway of 16 to 18
feet. The second, where the road may be required
to serve more than a local purpose and may be a bus
route, will need a carriageway of 24 to 40 feet and a
chain reservation should be regarded as a minimum.
In this connection the location of underground
services of gas, water, etc., is important, and agreement
as to relative positions has been reached between the
authorities concerned. It is hoped, as the Region
develops that more and more electric services will
be transferred from overhead to underground, and
so reduce the unsightly forests of poles and wire
that so often offend the eye, and cause authorities
to mutilate or destroy fine, mature native trees.


Diagram 21
TYPICAL ROAD SECTIONS


(k) Parking
Car parking accommodation must be provided
concurrently with road developments, if the latter
are to function successfully rather than be a further
cause of intolerable and dangerous traffic congestion.
Although the parking problem is most acute in the
central areas (Chapter 9) it is none the less a problem
in other parts of the Region and it will grow worse
as road traffic steadily increases. Kerbside parking
is unsatisfactory in several ways. It impedes the
free flow of traffic on busy roads and is a nuisance
to abutting property owners, drivers of vehicles and
pedestrians. In some positions it is dangerous, un-
sightly and the most expensive form of parking.
Wherever cars are likely to accumulate, off-street
parking spaces should be provided, for example,
adjacent to district and local shopping centres, sports
grounds, hotels and cinemas.
(1) Summary of Proposals for Major Regional
Highways
The proposed Major Regional Highways may be
listed in the order of likely priority which would be
determined by the growth of the Region :
(1) Perth-Kwinana Highway (including (a) the
Narrows Bridge and the first stage of the
internal by-pass West of the Perth Central
Area, and (b) the extension from Forrest
Road to Stock Road, Melville).
(2) Yanchep Highway (including first stage de-
velopment of connections to the George
Street-Charles Street Bridge over the rail-
way). /
(3) Beechboro-Gosnells Highway.
(4) Fremantle-Midland Junction Highway.
(5) Swan River Drive (the first section, to con'
nect with East Perth, should be completed
at an early stage).
(6) North Perimeter Highway.
(7) Burswood Highway.
(8) Kwinana-Mundijong Highway.
At first sight this list of proposals may present
rather a formidable picture, but when reduced to a
stage by stage programme, spread over, say, 25-30
years, the task should be well within the capabilities
of the Region. Some 85 miles of Major Regional
Highways and six new bridges are envisaged, or about
three miles of road per year and one bridge every
four or five years.
(iii) Important Regional Roads
The function of the Important Regional Roads is
to serve as links between the Major Regional High-
ways, and to collect traffic moving through different
sectors of the Region.
Among the new roads proposed in this category
will be one running approximately North and South
and about two miles inland from the coast to afford
a fairly direct route through the extensive residential
areas between Hamersley and Claremont. At present
North-South movement to the West of the City is
confined to the West Coast Highway. Two others
will radiate in north-easterly and easterly directions
respectively from Mount Yokine, to serve the ex-
panding residential and industrial areas around
Morley Park. The continuous extension of housing
South of Scarborough indicates the need for a direct
route to the city, via Herdsman Lake and thence
connecting with the proposed Yanchep Highway.
In the South the proposed industrial area near Janda-
kot should be connected to the Fremantle-Midland
Junction Highway by a new road of importance.
This would establish a link with the present Fre-
mantle-Armadale Road and provide improved com-
munication between these two centres.
A further important improvement would result
from the redesigning of Hampton Road, Fremantle,
and its extension northwards, via Ord Street, to
Queen Victoria Street at the James Street junction.
This road would relieve the Fremantle city centre
of unnecessary and increasing traffic and provide a
direct connection from South Fremantle to the
Stirling and Canning Highways. The majority of
the remaining proposals in this category would be
implemented by improvements to existing roads and
streets.
( iv ) Improvement of Existing Roads
Concurrently with the programme of new road
development and construction it will be necessary
to improve existing roads and highways, to render
them safer and capable of carrying the greatly in-
creased volumes of traffic which will be imposed


upon them. For example, the Stirling Highway is a
major artery, with a first-class running surface, linking
Perth and Fremantle, but it lies almost throughout its
length within a one-chain reserve. Between Broad-
way, Nedlands, and the North Fremantle Bridge
there are no less than 108 intersections with other
roads, and five busy shopping centres at Nedlands,
Claremont, Cottesloe, Mosman Park, and North
Fremantle. The four-lane carriageway is not less
than 40 feet wide overall, but with one lane occupied
by stationary vehicles, for one reason or another,
throughout much of the Highway, the effective
carriageway is reduced to one lane in each direction.
No central refuges for pedestrians exist at any point
on the Highway, but pedestrian crossings have
recently been painted. Part-time police traffic control
is exercised at two major intersections, and opposite
two State schools.
The recorded peak traffic movements, in one
direction, vary from 1,235 vehicles per hour at the
Ford Works, Leighton, to 851 vehicles at Claremont,
with a total 12-hour flow ranging between 13,076
vehicles at North Fremantle Bridge and 9,904 at
Mosman Park. The peak rate of flow at selected
census points is indicated in Diagram 22. This rate
is twice the maximum half-hourly flow.
An analysis of police accident reports shows that
an average of 50 accidents per month occur on this
Highway, including, generally, one fatal accident.
As traffic volumes develop, so will the hazards in-
crease, and means of reducing them must be sought.
Kerbside parking, with its consequent effect on the
free flow of traffic, should be more restricted, especially
at peak hours. The beneficial effects of such re-
striction may be appreciated at the Mosman Park
shopping centre, following action by the local author-
ity.
Diagram 22
STIRLING HIGHWAY : HOURLY RATE OF VEHICULAR FLOW


SUGGESTED FORM OF TREATMENT FOR IMPROVING TRAFFIC
FLOW ON EXISTING HIGHWAYS IN URBAN AREAS
To reduce the hazards caused by the number of
entrances and exits from the Highway it is suggested
that consideration be given to closing the ends of
some of the residential side-roads, forming them into
culs-de-sac. Some of these culs-de-sac might be
made into small car parks so that car owners living
some distance from the Highway could leave their
cars in these parks, do their local shopping, or even
take public transport into the City and avoid parking
difficulties there. A possible form of treatment is
indicated in Diagram 23.
Access from residential areas to the Highway
would be gained at selected intersections which
would, in turn, be controlled by traffic lights, so that
the concentrated flows into and from the Highway
would be very much safer than at present, when
vehicles break into the main traffic stream at each
and every intersection, often at risk of collision. A
further suggestion in regard to the maintenance of
free traffic flow along this and similar highways would
be the greater provision of bus " pull-in ” bays.
Where these have already been installed the con-
venience to bus drivers and passengers, and the
reduced hindrance to other road traffic have been
most valuable.
The Stirling Highway has been selected as an
example, but the types of improvement would be
applicable to the Canning and Albany Highways and
to some of the heavily trafficked approaches to the
centre of Perth.
H. PUBLIC ROAD TRANSPORT
SERVICES
The public motor bus and trolley bus services are
operated under the State Transport Co-ordination
Act, 1933-1948. Control is exercised by the Western
Australian Transport Board, comprising a Chairman,
who is a Government official, and two members, one
representing city and the other rural interests.
The Board has introduced a Zoning Plan which
has been accepted by all metropolitan operators.
" The plan divided the metropolitan area into seven
zones and had as its objective the making of each
zone the province of a single operator. Depending
as it does upon the willingness of operators to
negotiate amalgamations or purchases, the plan is
essentially a long-range one.” 1
1 Western Australian Transport Board Annual Report, Perth, 1953.


At the end of June, 1953, the number of passenger
vehicles licensed by the Board for operation in and
from the metropolitan area was 640, and the licences
were distributed among some 20 operators. It is
apparent, therefore, that the policy of " one operator
per zone ” would take some considerable time to
accomplish.
In the metropolitan area for the year ending 30th
June, 1953, there were 63,667,057 passengers carried
by buses and trolley buses, of which number private
companies carried 52.5 per cent., the State Govern-
ment services 38.5 per cent., and the Fremantle
municipal organisation 9 per cent.
Government bus, tram and ferry services are
operated under the Western Australian Government
Tramways and Ferries Act, 1948, and the system is
controlled by a General Manager who is directly
responsible to the Minister for Transport. In Fre-
mantle, all tram services have been replaced by
omnibuses and a similar policy applies in Perth,
where the last remaining tram services are operating
through the City between East Perth and Subiaco,
with one spur line along Beaufort and Fitzgerald
Streets from the Barrack Street Square terminus.
Regret may be expressed at the passing of the
trams, for as a unit of mass transportation they were
not without their advantages. Their economy in
operation was perhaps the most important of these
factors. However, it was obvious that the traffic
carrying capacity of the streets served by trams could
not be utilised to the full, whilst the system of
" centre-of-the-road ” tram tracks remained, and all
the hazards and delays connected with boarding,
alighting from and passing the stationary trams
existed.
Arising, therefore, from the Government’s de-
cision to discard the trams is the resultant question
of what form of mass transport should be developed
to serve a region of over 1,000,000 people. Trolley
buses suffer under the disability of their movements
being restricted to the overhead line which supplies
their power, and lack of flexibility, although not as
great as in the case of trams, is inherent in such a
system. The solution, therefore, appears to be in
the development of motor bus services, or train
services or a combination of both. The possi-
bilities of the development of rail services are dealt
with in a later section of this Chapter.
Passing reference should, perhaps, be made to a
possible increase in demand for ferry services. Even
with the Narrows Bridge there is likely to be a section
of the public who will wish to travel across the river
in more leisurely fashion by ferry. Ferry boats are
able to deliver passengers at a point near the busiest
part of the City, and there may be many who will
prefer to avoid the hurly burly of other forms of
transport.
To afford easy appreciation of the task confronting
future public road transport organisations, some
figures on the existing (1954) bus movements are
quoted. There are now some 6,500 public road
transport movements in and out of central Perth
every working day between 6 a.m. and 10 p.m.
These movements represent a capacity of about
78,000,000 full distance passengers per year.
During the peak hour of 4.30 to 5.30 p.m. approxi-
mately 440 buses leave the city block (i.e., at the rate
of over seven a minute). Of this number 156 pass
over the Causeway, meeting 153 others coming in
the opposite direction, so that there are 309 buses
weaving at the traffic rotaries in that period, or one
every 20 seconds.
As the regional population expands, so will the
daily mass movement of city workers increase, not-
withstanding the concurrent growth of smaller local
business and large industrial areas which should cause
outward and local movements. The peak hour
outward traffic when the population reaches about
1,400,000 may be four times its present volume, and
the capacity to deal with an outflow of over 1,700
buses in the peak hour would have to be available on
the main exits from the City. Alternative facilities
for dealing with part of the daily movement of
150,000-160,000 city workers must be found in the
railway system.
The effect on the central city areas of the anticipated
growth of the Region cannot be visualised without
some alarm. During the period of expansion some
drastic changes in the public road transport system
will have to be brought into effect. It is evident
that the present system which allows nearly all routes
to terminate at a stand on a main city street, and to
radiate individually in the several necessary directions
towards the suburbs, will fail to function. At present
not one public bus service carries passengers into the
City and out at the other side. Many passengers are


50
50. Marshalling Yards, Jolimont, Mel-
bourne. An example of a suburban traffic
marshalling area which is a serious obstacle
to the proper development of the city.
51. Diesel Railcars of Western Aus-
tralian State Government Railways. The
introduction of these is encouraging the
use of the suburban railways.
51


52
52. Bus queues in St. Georges Terrace,
Perth. The presence of bus terminal
points in the heart of the City results in
unnecessary congestion of carriageways
and pavements.
53. Harbour scene, Fremantle. The
rapid expansion of the State makes heavy
demands on existing port facilities.
53.


54
54. Gas Works, East Perth. The
major source of gas supply in the
Region.
55. Electric Power Station on the
coast at South Fremantle.
55


56
56. Canning Dam. Forming the present
main source of the metropolitan water
supply. Further sources must be used as
the Region expands.
57. Rubbish tip at Leighton. A badly-
sited tip which disfigures the coastline and
is a nuisance to neighbouring residential
areas.
57


required to change into another service, often in-
volving a long walk in order to complete their
journey. In addition more and more of the surface
of the main city streets is in demand for bus stands
or termini.
Whether the system continues to develop as a
series of individual services under the general direction
of a transport authority or whether, eventually, the
whole system comes under one single trust or cor-
poration, or is publicly owned, it seems clear that a
" through ” service of buses in the City should be
the final solution. All depots would then be at the
outer ends of routes, and in the central city area
there would be only some holding areas for peak
periods. In this way, there would be several stops
for each route in the expanding central city, the needs
of " through ” travellers would be met, the bus
depots would be in the suburbs with operational
staff living close by, and the short distance city
passengers catered for by the increased number of
buses traversing the City.
The vehicle accommodation needs within the City
would be reduced practically to those of parks for
the storage of buses which have to be withdrawn from
service in the off-peak hours. The effect of these
general recommendations on the design of the Central
Areas of Perth and Fremantle is discussed in Chapter
9.
I. CONCLUSIONS AND SUMMARY
§
For convenience, the suggestions made and con-
clusions drawn in respect of road development are
summarised as follows :
(a) The existing road facilities are already show-
ing signs of inadequacy to deal with present-
day traffic.
(b) Economic loss due to road accidents may
already have reached the equivalent of
more than £2,000,000 in one year. Treat-
ment of accident cases at the Royal Perth
Hospital alone cost £43,000 in 1951.
(c) Traffic growth is extremely rapid—at some
points the flow has increased by 30 per
cent, in 20 months.
(d) Vehicle : population ratio is now 1 : 4.9 and
it should be assumed it may be 1 : 3.5
within two or three decades.
(e) Passenger cars are a fairly consistent pro-
portion of the total vehicles registered,
viz., 58 per cent.
(f) Road, rail and air services should be com-
plementary to achieve the most efficient
results.
(g) It would be an advantage if one Minister
were responsible for all matters concerning
roads, railways, transport and traffic.
(h) The comprehensive classification of roads,
and the rational assignment of responsi-
bilities, should be determined after study
by appropriate authorities.
(j) Adequate facilities should be afforded to
week-end, holiday, and recreational, as well
as week-day traffic.
(k) Several major traffic roads should be designed
and constructed as controlled access high-
ways for speedy, safe and efficient transport.
(l) The " grid ” pattern for developmental roads
is not always appropriate. More attention
should be paid to topography and the re-
duction of traffic hazards.
(m) New bridges should have carriageways as
wide as the roadways which approach
them.
(n) Eight major arterial and perimeter highways,
totalling about 85 miles, should be con-
structed in the forthcoming 25 to 30 years.
(o) Four bridges should be constructed over the
Swan River and two bridges over the
Canning River.
(p) Improvements to traffic flow and increased
safety on existing highways would be
effected by the reduction in number of
street intersections, and by further re-
strictions on the kerbside parking of
vehicles.
(q) Public road transport services should be
united in one system. Bus services should
pass through the Perth Central Area,
stopping at intervals, rather than terminate
on main streets in the heart of the City.


The Metropolitan Region is the focal point for
railway activities. The 4,200-mile State railway
system radiates as far North as Meekatharra, East to
Laverton, and South to Esperance. The State system,
of 3ft. 6in. gauge, meets the Commonwealth Govern-
ment, standard gauge, transcontinental system at
Kalgoorlie, and through it links with the railways of
South Australia and the Eastern States.
Six main lines constitute the State system, viz. :
Eastern Goldfields, Eastern, East Northam-Mullewa,
Northern, Great Southern and South-Western Rail-
ways. The furthest terminal point is at Wiluna 709
miles from Perth on the Northern Railway, and the
highest station is Paroo, 1,916 feet above sea level, on
the same line. The general layout of the system is
shown on Diagram 1 (Chapter 1).
The suburban or metropolitan section of the rail-
ways comprises the lines from Fremantle, via Perth,
to Chidlow on the Eastern Goldfields route, and from
Perth to Serpentine on the South-Western line, with
a connection between Armadale, on the latter route,
and Fremantle, via Robbs Jetty (Diagram 19). A
spur line runs South from Robbs Jetty to Woodmans
Point, and is at present being extended to serve the
new industrial area of Kwinana.
One of the first steps towards extending the standard
(4ft. 81 in.) gauge railways throughout Australia may
be the remodelling of the section between Perth and
Kalgoorlie. Railway improvements and extensions
in the Metropolitan Region should provide for track
widths and clearances to allow for standard gauge
rolling stock and overhead electrification.
The 1954 Annual Report of the Railway Com-
mission shows that the annual gross tonnage of goods
carried over the State railway system increased from
2,730,000 tons to 3,200,000 tons between the years
1946 and 1954. Figures for passenger traffic are not
so satisfactory, showing a fall from 17,400,000 passenger
journeys in 1945-46 to 9,200,000 in 1953-54. This
fall is the more disturbing considering that the State
population increased from 493,000 to 630,000 in the
same period.
Plans for the expanding Metropolitan Region must
take into account both the goods-carrying capacity of
the railway system, and the mass transportation by
railway of a large section of the public, travelling to
PART II: RAILWAYS
and from their places of work or recreation. In a
city of over 1,000,000 persons large numbers of
workers have to be moved to and from their work
daily and it has been shown (Part I, Section H) that
the public road services accounted for 63,600,000
passenger journeys in the Metropolitan Region alone
in the year 1952-53. In the previous year, when the
railways carried 10,500,000 passengers, the corres-
ponding road transport figure was 59,400,000.
The problem of the daily movement of a pro-
portionately higher number of passengers by road
vehicles alone, when the Region has expanded to
over 1,000,000 persons, has been referred to in the
previous Part of this Chapter. With such expansion
it would seem inevitable that the railways must carry
a larger proportion of passengers.
It may be suggested that short distance suburban
rail travel is not an economic proposition. On the
other hand we have the example of Melbourne and
other Australian cities where very large numbers are
moved by train at peak hours. As the regional
population and, consequently, road transport in its
various forms increases, movement on the roads will
become slower in the inner areas. With speedier
rail services, using modern rolling stock, the railways
will attract more passengers, relieve the roads of
some part of the increasing volume of traffic, and
reduce the need for extensive, expensive and dis-
turbing road improvement works. The road pro-
posals in the Plan are based on the assumption that
a remodelled and extended railway system will carry
a large proportion of suburban passengers. Diagram
24 illustrates the relative extent of the suburban
railways of Perth and Melbourne.
Within the Perth Central Area the present estimated
number of daily workers is 60,000 of whom at least
55,000 need some form of transport to carry them to
and fro. Most city workers travel in or out during
morning and evening peak hours when, in either
hour, the bus capacity is some 15,000 persons, and
the railway carries less than 2,000. About 25,000
workers, averaging about two persons per vehicle,
travel to work in cars, trucks and utilities.
The work force in the Perth Central Area now
represents 15 per cent, of the regional population,
but the dispersal of industry throughout the Region


Diagram 24
SUBURBAN RAILWAYS : PERTH AND MELBOURNE
as it expands will influence this proportion, not-
withstanding the more highly concentrated business
and other activities in the future Central Area. It is
expected that a figure of 12 per cent, will more closely
represent the future city work force. Taking the
regional population figure as 1,400,000 this would
mean approximately 170,000 persons.
To transport this mass of workers on a basis pro-
portionate to the numbers now moved by respective
modes of travel would involve movements somewhat
as follows :
t
60,000 by bus (with 1,300 buses in the peak
hour) ;
6,000 by train ;
15,000 on foot, cycle or motor cycle (living
accommodation within the City for
foot passengers is not likely to increase
proportionately) ;
89,000 by car, truck or utility (involving about
45,000 vehicles).
If this form of mass movement were expected to
materialise, the central city parking problem would
be beyond solution and the congestion on the inner
roads would be appalling.
This forecast of what could happen in half a century
must, therefore, lead to consideration of the con-
tribution the railways must make to meet the transport
situation, and to the proposals in the Plan which
are designed to improve the movement of city
workers during peak periods as the Region continues
to expand. There are already promising signs that
the railways will carry more passengers in the im-
mediate future, through the use of new rolling stock,
the creation of new stations, and the speeding up of
services. At the present time public road transport
may be nearing its maximum in terms of proportion
of passengers carried in relation to the railways.
Public road transport has the great advantage of
flexibility. Routes can be established to meet most
reasonable demands. Private road transport will
meet increasing difficulties, in the city centre where
problems of road transport as a whole will become
most apparent. Today the position is more or less
" on balance,” but the problem of parking becomes
more acute, and congestion on the roads is increasing
with every new vehicle registered.
It has been estimated that the future city work
force will represent some 12 per cent, (as compared
with the present 15 per cent.) of a population of
1,400,000. In Chapter 8 it is also estimated that


the density of population in suburban areas will be
about 12 persons per acre, and the assumption may
be made that the proportion of city workers will
therefore be 12 per cent, of 12 persons, or 1.5 persons
per suburban acre.
There are 30 stations on the suburban railway
system at present, and within a radius of 10 minutes
walk of these stations, at 3| miles per hour, lie
residential areas of about 15,000 acres. The potential
daily number of city workers to whom travel* by
train should appeal, as far as convenience of access to
their homes is concerned, is therefore 15,000 x 1.5 or
22,500 persons. Put in another way this is 45,000
passenger journeys.
It is envisaged it will become more convenient and
economical for nearly all of this number to use the
railway and, in addition, there will be others who
may be driven or carried by feeder buses to the
nearest station. Removal of the transcontinental
and country passenger traffic to a new terminal at
East Perth will enable the present central station to
be used solely as a most important point in a fast
suburban rail service (eventually electrified). With
an improved West Perth station, and a new suburban
station alongside the country terminal, the Central
Area would be well served by three conveniently-
placed stations.
The growth of the residential areas along the
northern beaches from South City Beach to Whitfords
Beach will, in all likelihood, produce a more than
average percentage of city workers housed in these
localities, possibly two to the acre, owing to their
relative proximity to the City and their distance from
major industrial areas. This population is expected
to reach over 150,000 persons of whom there should
be a work force of some 60,000. A need is therefore
seen for a medium of transport which will provide
an adequate and speedy service to meet the ultimate
demand of this area. That there may be other heavy
calls on this service, such as week-end or special
holiday excursion traffic, is not to be overlooked.
The proposal of the Plan is to construct a suburban
line leaving the present railway near Daglish which,
skirting the east or west flank of Reabold Hill, would
proceed north through City Beach, Scarborough,
North Beach, etc., to Whitfords Beach on a location
approximately three-quarters of a mile from, and
parallel to, the coast. This new line would be about
12 miles long, and with eight or nine stations located
at advantageous points, it should tap a populated
area of 5,000 acres, giving, on the assumptions
previously taken, a potential City passenger traffic
of at least 9,000-10,000 persons per day (or, say,
20,000 passenger journeys).
At the north-eastern part of the metropolis, in-
cluding the present Morley Park, Beechboro and
Bayswater districts, and the large new State Housing
Commission area between Wanneru and Morley
Park, considerable residential expansion is envisaged.
The ultimate population is estimated to reach some
80,000 persons. There is also the proposal for a
major industrial area north-west of Morley Park.
The provision of rail services to meet the demands
arising from these two factors will have strong
justification. The proposed line would leave the
present main line at Bayswater and turn northwards
to Morley Park. After crossing Walter Road it
would proceed in a north-westerly direction, travers-
ing the new industrial area, and terminate in the
State Housing Commission residential district at the
east side of Wanneru Road. This line would be
about 71 miles long, and six stations placed at strategic
points would serve a residential catchment of about
3,500 acres. The locality traversed would be in-
habited predominantly by industrial workers and
their families, so that it would not be unreasonable
to assume a potential train-using proportion of two
persons per acre, which is 7,000 passengers per day,
or 14,000 passenger journeys.
The two new suburban lines to serve the areas to
the north-west and the north-east of the City follow,
in large part, the recommended lines for which
a strong case was made by the Railway Commission
in 1951. The Commission’s project envisaged a
loop line. Although this is not shown in the Plan,
the loop, if it offers a better working arrangement
would serve the same purpose as the two radials. In
the supporting figures given above no account has
been taken of possible through movements using
both existing and proposed lines. These, especially
to the beaches or to the Forrest National Park, would
be important at week-ends and at holiday times.
It may be of interest to compare the proposals just
outlined, and the potential suburban railway demand,
with figures relating to the 1951 suburban rail traffic
of Melbourne. In that year Melbourne had a popula-
tion of 1,368,000 and an estimated number of 163,600


city workers (12 per cent.). The proportion of city
workers who travelled to their work by train was
estimated at 44.2 per cent, or some 72,000 persons. 1
In the Plan it is estimated the work force of the Perth
Central Area will amount to 170,000, and the total
potential train travelling workers has been put at
38,500 persons (22 per cent.), or only half of the
Melbourne proportion.
This is a conservative estimate. It is to be hoped
that every possible step will be taken to induce an
even greater number to travel to work by train, and
thus reduce road passenger transport congestion in
the Central Area. Present-day Melbourne, with
wider central streets than those of Perth, would be
hopelessly congested if large numbers were not
carried to and from work in trains.
Goods Transport by Rail
Insofar as goods transport by rail is concerned,
the future effect of Kwinana as an industrial area and
Cockburn Sound as an extension of the Port of Fre-
mantle must be a decisive factor, even though precise
estimates as to the extent of their effect cannot be
made at this stage. If, as suggested in Chapter 4 and
Part I of this Chapter, this important area expands
as an industrial centre and port extension, it is likely
that the centre of gravity of heavy goods traffic will
soon shift South of its present position. Con-
tributing to this trend is the already noticeable increase
in rail traffic between Perth and the South-West of
the State, and it is in the South-West of the State
that there will be the most appreciable population
growth, outside the Metropolitan Region, and a
steadily increasing production of food for the Metro-
politan market.
To serve immediate needs at Kwinana, an extension
of the Robbs Jetty-Woodmans Point railway line is
being constructed. Before long, a rail link South
of the Swan River, between Midland Junction and
Kwinana, will be necessary to provide a direct route
between the Cockburn Sound activities and the
hinterland, and this proposal is included in the Plan.
Decisions have already been made concerning the
removal of the railway marshalling yards from the
most inadequate and inappropriate site in the centre
of the City. The probable future of Kwinana and
the growth of the Port of Fremantle in Cockburn
Sound, point to a reconsideration of the choice of
Bassendean as the location for new marshalling
yards. With changes in the volume and direction of
goods traffic, which may now be more clearly antici-
pated, it is not too late to consider an alternative site
for a marshalling yard. A secondary factor in-
fluencing a decision against implementing the Bassen-
dean proposal is that the area available there would
not permit the installation of an unrestricted system
of marshalling tracks.
From studies and discussions it would seem
certain that the future major regional generators of
goods traffic will be located south of the Swan River,
and an area in South Belmont has been considered
as a possible alternative site for marshalling yards.
It is recommended in the Plan as a more suitable
location than Bassendean or elsewhere. Full length
marshalling yards could be laid there, and sidings
to serve a major industrial area and a goods terminal
could also conveniently be contained on the Belmont-
Welshpool site. With the construction of a railway
line between Welshpool and West Midland station,
the new terminal and yard would be linked to the
present rail system, and a further new line between
Cannington and Jandakot would complete a South
of the river rail service between Midland Junction
and both parts of the Port of Fremantle.
The proposal for a goods terminal station at
Belmont-Welshpool is directly related to the recom-
mendations made in Part I, regarding proposed new
arterial roads, and the growing traffic problems of the
Perth Central Area (Chapter 9). The location of
the new passenger terminal station at East Perth,
together with a re-arrangement of the rail approaches
to the station, would release an area of land which
might, at first sight, be deemed suitable for a goods
terminal. With the accent on port extensions and
major industrial developments south of the river,
and on goods traffic from the South-West, however, a
terminal on the North side of the river would appear
to be wrongly sited, and the heavy road transport
connected with such a terminal would add con-
siderably to the load on central streets. In many
large cities of the world steps have been taken to
re-arrange railway freight handling facilities so that
they are on extensive sites at some distance from the
central area and its congestion.
1 Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works, “Melbourne Metro-
politan Planning Scheme, 1954, ” Melbourne, 1954.


Establishment of a goods terminal at Belmont-
Welshpool, if accompanied by construction of com-
mercial warehouses would provide an efficient com-
bination in the goods handling service for importers,
wholesalers and manufacturers. The terminal and
warehouses would be in the heart of the Region and
on a fast road system. From the new location,
central Perth, central Fremantle, major industrial
areas, and the more thickly populated south-western
part of the State, could easily be served.
The needs of the growing metropolis for such
commodities as meat, timber, dairy products, fruit,
etc., should be at least three times the present intake
by the end of the century. The South-West of the
State, with its assured rainfall, will be the area to
provide the bulk of these necessities.
Within the foreseeable future the Metropolitan
Markets in Wellington Street will become inadequate
to deal with the demands of an increased population,
and the Belmont-Welshpool area could provide a
most suitable site for new wholesale markets with
good rail and road access, leaving the present site for
retail markets. The transfer of wholesale market
traffic from congested city streets would relieve the
overall city traffic problem and, if the wholesale
markets were at the hub of the goods transport
system, it would be to the benefit of producers and
distributors.
Finally, mention must be made of the handicaps
suffered by the Fremantle Harbour Trust because of
the insufficient transit shed accommodation at the
wharves of the Inner Harbour. The depth of land
behind the wharves is severely limited and there is
little room for buildings to facilitate the classification,
storage and handling of goods. This being so, the
possibilities of instituting a system of direct transfer
of general cargoes in bulk from ships’ holds to a
port freight terminal, located at a key distribution
point in the Region, have been considered. Space
exists in the Belmont-Welshpool area for such a
terminal, with the possibility of its being planned in
close proximity to central warehousing, the railway
goods yards, and the wholesale markets.
Goods in bulk could be transferred direct from
ships in the Inner Harbour and, eventually, from the
Outer Harbour at Kwinana, to goods trains and moved
in train loads. The grouping of freight classifying
and storing facilities, at a point where both rail and
road systems are clear of central area congestion,
would make for economic efficiency. The proposed
area at Belmont-Welshpool is only some five miles
from central Perth, and would be linked to both
parts of the Port of Fremantle by controlled access
road as well as rail. If fruit and other perishable
foodstuffs, and manufactured goods, are to be ex-
ported in increasing quantities, there would be
additional advantage in the wholesale markets, storage
warehouses, and the port freight terminal being
together at a central distribution point.
The area of land which could ultimately be made
available in the Belmont-Welshpool area would
accommodate several important and related uses.
No other area of comparable size, so satisfactorily
sited in relation to other factors, appears to be
possible. If it is agreed that the centralisation of
these closely-related functions is desirable, not only
from the point of view of the efficient functioning
of the railway, but in the general economic interests
of the State, then it would seem that action to secure
this site must be initiated immediately. The area
would contain :
(a) Marshalling yards, locomotive sheds, etc.
(b) New industrial area, with rail access as re-
quired (about 2,600 acres).
(c) Port freight terminal, with rail service and
access to major arterial roads (about 55
acres).
(d) New metropolitan markets with rail and
arterial road access (about 150 acres).
(e) Railway goods terminal and yards with both
open and covered loading areas.
(f) Storage warehouses (about 230 acres).
The final proposal for new railways hinges on the
ultimate development of Kwinana and Cockburn
Sound as a major industrial centre and extension
of the Port of Fremantle and, as need arises, for a
close rail link with the South-West of the State.
The reconstruction and, in some places, possible
relocation of the old Rockingham-Jarrahdale Timber
Company’s railway between Kwinana and Mundijong
is suggested in the Plan as the means of providing
this service.


Summarising the proposals for development of
railway services in the Region, they are :
(i) Belmont-Welshpool area development as
detailed above.
(ii) New line from West Midland to Belmont'
Welshpool.
(iii) New line from Belmont via Cannington to
Jandakot on the Armadale branch line.
(iv) New line from Jandakot to Kwinana, with
sidings in the industrial area.
(v) Suburban rail extensions from Subiaco to
Scarborough and Whitfords Beach, and
from Bays water to Morley Park, etc.
(vi) (Dealt with in Chapter 9.) Remodelling
the railway through the City, and the pro-
vision of a passenger terminal station at
East Perth.
(vii) Reconstruction of the Rockingham-Jarrah-
dale railway.


The history of Fremantle as a port is as old as the
history of the State. From the year 1837, when
Governor Stirling proposed cutting a passage from
the sea at Leighton into Rocky Bay, in the knowledge
that Melville Water could accommodate the British
Navy, to the present day, there is a story of proposals,
too numerous and varied to be detailed here. The
vital decision concerning the Inner Harbour was
reached in 1891, when the scheme of Mr. C. Y.
O’Connor was put in hand to construct the break-
waters, dredge the river mouth to form a channel
with 30 feet of water, and provide the quays prac-
tically as they are today. This major undertaking
was not completed until 1914, and subsequent
dredging to a depth of 36 feet was finished in 1920.
Protecting the Inner Harbour from many of the
adverse conditions of wind, weather and sea is the
Outer Harbour formed by a chain of islands and
reefs. These extend from Point Peron on the main-
land in the South, via Garden Island to Rottnest
Island in the North, and enclose an area of 73 square
miles. The major portions of this large enclosed
bay are known as Gage Roads, of 43 square miles,
and Cockburn Sound, of some 30 square miles.
Although part of the latter was used for defence
purposes in the second world war, it was not until
the Kjvinana Oil Refinery project came into prom-
inence in 1952 that , the present and future develop-
ment of the Sound, as a new section of the Port of
Fremantle, demanded the highest consideration.
The Port of Fremantle is operated under the
Fremantle Harbour Trust Act, 1902, by a Com-
mission of five members, including the Chairman,
appointed by the Governor. The wharves at Victoria
Quay and North Wharf comprise 18 berths for cargo
and passenger vessels, and are provided with transit
sheds.
The volume of cargo handled in and out of the
Port in the year ended June, 1953, was 2,500,000
tons of a value of £165,000,000 ; 943 vessels entered
the Port and 947 cleared in that period. The surplus
earnings over working expenses of the Trust were
£224,000 in 1946-47 and £514,000 in 1950-51.
Development of the Inner Harbour to a total of
19 berths is at present proceeding by the construction
of an additional marginal berth at the North Wharf.
PART 111 : PORTS AND HARBOURS
This berth will be in the form of a prolongation of
that Wharf to the present practical limit of develop-
ment, viz., to the existing railway bridge. The Plan
proposes that the Inner Harbour should be extended
in the next few years by the addition of five further
berths, and the removal of the railway bridge crossing
to a point immediately below the road bridge, and
that this is a reasonable and maximum limit of
extension.
The construction of the oil refinery at Kwinana,
with its ancillary jetties which will accommodate
30,000-ton tankers, is the first step in the extension
of the port to Cockburn Sound. In Chapter 4 the
future of this area as an industrial centre has been
discussed. The rail facilities needed to serve industry
should also be designed to deal with port traffic.
There exists in the south-eastern part of Cockburn
Sound area a vast hinterland capable of accommodat-
ing all the uses associated with a major port and
industrial area without any of the restrictions on
space, becoming more and more apparent, in the
vicinity of the Inner Harbour.
The southern end of Cockburn Sound, with a
land frontage, extending from the oil refinery limits
to Palm Beach, Rockingham, has five fathoms of
water at a distance varying from 400 to 2,000 feet
only from high-water mark. The development of
wharves backed on the landward side with ware-
houses, rail sidings and all the other necessary
ancillaries for efficient working of a port would not
present any engineering difficulties. There are several
thousand acres of open flat land, much in Crown
ownership and undeveloped, and as has been demon-
strated on the Refinery site, it is excellent land for
engineering and building work.
The effect which the establishment of the oil
refinery at Kwinana and the opening up of Cockburn
Sound would have on proposed developments of
the Port of Fremantle have been the subject of two
recent Reports to the Government. The first,
prepared by Messrs. R. J. Dumas and D. W. Brisbane,
was submitted in 1953. The second, prepared by a
Technical Sub-committee, was submitted in 1954,
and resulted in a Government decision that the
Inner Harbour should be extended upstream to a
point below the North Fremantle road bridge. In


both Reports the authors were concerned with the
long term as well as the immediate port require-
ments. 1
The proposals in the Plan are in general agreement
with the conclusions reached by the Inter-Depart-
mental Committee. They envisage that :
(i) In the immediate future the Inner Harbour
should be extended upstream to a new
railway bridge adjacent to the existing
road bridge.
(ii) The study of the movement and berthing
of the large tankers in Cockburn Sound
should be commenced in 1955 with a
view to plans being prepared for port
extensions South of, and adjacent to, the
Refinery.
(iii) Plans should be prepared for a large in-
dustrial area and port hinterland facilities
in the Kwinana-Rockingham area, and
that the plans should take into account
the layout of railways and roads, estate
management and financial problems.
Future Trends
An outstanding feature of the present-day handling
of general cargo (not to be confused with cargoes
for which special facilities are available, e.g., oil,
wheat, superphosphate) is that by far the greater
part of the general cargo discharged at Fremantle is
carried from the Port by road. Congestion exists
at the wharves due to inadequate transit and ware-
housing accommodation. It is difficult, if not im-
possible, to contemplate the classification of general
cargoes, and their storage in classes behind the
wharves, because of the lack of space for appropriate
buildings and facilities.
The prospect of handling three times as much
tonnage in general cargoes within 50 years raises
many problems, and although an increase in the
number of berths within the Inner Harbour may
afford the ship-to-shore facilities, for the short term
future, some major expansion and improvements in
the Region as a whole must be considered at this
stage.
Experience will soon accumulate of the berthing
conditions at the Refinery jetty within Cockburn
Sound, and this will provide knowledge for con-
sideration in the provision of further port facilities
for general cargo. Rail and road services of the
most modern pattern would join port extensions in
the Outer Harbour to the port facilities of the Inner
Harbour. Both parts of the Port would in turn be
connected by rail and road to the large and spacious
freight-handling facilities at Belmont-Welshpool in
which a port freight terminal would be an important
feature. It would be possible to unload general
cargoes from ships directly into trains or road trucks,
by which means they would be carried in bulk to the
port freight terminal, and there classified and stored
in an orderly manner. At Belmont-Welshpool, with
its grouping of facilities, trains and road vehicles
could more quickly unload and load general goods
for distribution in the Region, and to various parts
of the State. The saving through greater economic
efficiency would be beneficial to distributors, retailers
and the general public, as well as the State and private
transport organisations.
1 R. J. Dumas and D. W. Brisbane, Report upon the Changes in the
Fremantle Harbour Development, 1953. Report of Inter-departmental
Committee on Harbour Development, 1954.


Air transport needs in respect of services within
Western Australia, interstate and overseas, are all
catered for at Perth Airport. This covers some
1,960 acres, and is situated in the Belmont Park and
the Swan Road Board Districts. Its location is about
eight miles to the North-East of the City of Perth,
the Great Eastern Highway gives a direct road
approach to a point near the airport, and the Com-
monwealth Government has acquired land for a
better approach from the Highway to the airport
buildings. Administration of the airport is in the
hands of the Commonwealth Department of Civil
Aviation ; the ownership of the land and all the
buildings thereon will eventually be vested in that
Department.
#
Three bitumen-sealed runways laid out approxi-
mately in the form of a triangle, of lengths ranging
from 1,600 to 2,200 yards, provide for take-off and
landing in six principal directions. Hangar accom-
modation and aircraft servicing facilities are provided
and provision is also made for customs and health
examinations for overseas passengers.
Six aviation organisations operate from this airport
in the following capacities :
(a) Two within Western Australia only.
(b) within Western Australia and the
Northern Territory.
(c) Two interstate services.
(d) One overseas service.
The number of scheduled passenger and freight
departures at October, 1954, varied from 6 to 12 per
day, with a similar number of arrivals, so that there
was, generally speaking, an average of 18 scheduled
aircraft movements, in and out, per day. Special
charter flights also take place as occasion demands,
at the present time mainly in connection with the oil
exploration in the North-West of the State, and at
holiday periods and week-ends there are additional
passenger services to Rottnest and other holiday
centres. Official statistics record that 44,755 air
passengers travelled on the interstate services in the
12 months ended 30th June, 1954. The companies
operating passenger and freight services within
Western Australia transported 36,460 passengers
during the same period.
PART IV: CIVIL AVIATION
Space is available within the existing airport
boundaries for the extension of the principal run-
ways to 2,700 and 2,800 yards respectively, should
the demand arise. Limitations may, however, be
imposed by the " approach angle ” at which future
aircraft can safely take-off and land. It is understood
that large jet-powered aircraft need a flatter angle
than conventional propeller-type machines. Such
changes in the design and capabilities of future air-
craft, which envisage considerably bigger unobstructed
approach " funnels,” are therefore more likely to
dictate the necessity for an early move from the
present airport to a larger one than expansion in the
volume of traffic by present-day types of aircraft.
Although statutory legislation might be enacted
which would prohibit any artificial obstruction arising
on four of the six possible approaches, the existence
of the Darling Escarpment on the line of the other
two approaches imposes limitations which could not
be overcome.
The possibility of developments taking place in
aircraft design has not been overlooked, and possible
sites for airports, which would satisfy the more
stringent requirements of jet propulsion, have been
investigated by the Department of Civil Aviation.
Following these investigations, and arising from
consultations with the above Department, an area of
approximately 3,600 acres to the East of the Wanneru
Road near Lake Gnangara is defined in the Plan as
the proposed site for a new airport. Amongst other
advantages of this site, it would be further away from
developed areas, it would be linked to central Perth
by the Yanchep Highway, and to the southern part
of the Region by the Beechboro’-Gosnells Highway.
Caversham Airport contains a war-time airstrip
not now used. It may have some future for training
or other aviation purposes, but is not intended for
use for commercial flying.
The Civil Aviation authority is watching the de-
velopment of helicopters and considering their
possible use in Western Australia. Air transport by
helicopter may develop quickly for travel over
relatively short distances between towns in the
south-western part of the State, and where normal
airline service and the provision and maintenance of
large runways would not be economic. To take


full advantage of the use of helicopters a station or
" heliport ” would need to be as close as possible to
the centre of Perth. In formulating proposals for
the Central Area of Perth several sites were con-
sidered, and it is suggested that a heliport be provided
in conjunction with the new railway terminal station
at East Perth. Such a location would afford all the
advantages of quick intercommunication between
the air, rail and road bus services. Consideration
was also given to the provision of a heliport near the
centre of Fremantle, but no suggestion is made as
this would require further study.


A. GENERAL
One of the factors which should strongly influence
the direction and restrict the expansion of develop-
ment in the Region is that relating to the provision of
water, gas, electricity, drainage and sewerage services.
Whilst it is generally true that provision of the first
three services will not impose any serious difficulties,
consideration of the relative costs of servicing alterna-
tive areas must influence decisions as to which area
is most suitable for development. Other things being
equal, extensions to existing reticulations are eco-
nomically preferable to the establishment of entirely
new areas which will necessitate long runs of trunk
mains. This is one of the chief reasons why large-
scale decentralisation in the Region could not be
implemented economically unless there were power-
ful compensating factors in other respects. In the
highly-developed parts of Europe and America, where
distances between established centres are com-
paratively short, the creation of new towns is a
relatively simple undertaking in terms of providing
the essential services. Large areas are traversed by
water and gas mains and by the electricity grid. In
the Region a major step has already been taken at
Kwinana. This will be economically justified by the
introduction of very large-scale industries which will
act as a growing point for further industries and
related development. It is not possible to forecast
another move of such magnitude in regional de-
centralisation.
The proposals in the Plan have, therefore, been
related to the existing facilities available in various
areas and to the ease with which they could be ex-
tended. Proposed development generally takes the
form of the consolidation and expansion of existing
centres. A study of Plates No. 5 and 6in the Atlas
will indicate the relationship between existing services
and proposed development.
A further consideration of vital importance is the
necessity to utilise existing facilities fully before
new areas are thrown open for development. The
cost of providing services becomes astronomical if
haphazard and scattered building is permitted. The
programming of the proposals of the Plan by effective
subdivisional control is, therefore, a paramount
PUBLIC SERVICES
necessity. As a general principle, public authorities
should not be called upon to provide services in new
areas until partially developed areas are largely built-
up, allowing always an ample margin for freedom
in the choice of sites. Conversely, an agreed defini-
tion of proposed development areas, together with
continuous liaison on programmes between re-
sponsible authorities, allows reticulation plans to be
prepared in advance, and mains of the appropriate
capacity to be laid prior to building. This aspect
of the Plan is discussed more fully in Chapter 11.
Within the Metropolitan Region the public services
of water, gas and electricity supply, with storm-water
drainage (other than local drainage) and sewerage,
are practically all supplied and administered by the
State Government. The only exception is the gas
service of the Fremantle Gas and Coke Co., a private
undertaking operating under the Gas Undertakings
Act, 1947, and serving Fremantle, its suburbs, and
the areas between Fremantle and North Cottesloe.
The Metropolitan Water Supply, Sewerage and
Drainage Department, together with the State Elec-
tricity Commission provide the other services, as
their titles imply. Centralised control of these two
large public undertakings facilitates maximum
efficiency in operation, as opposed to the possibility
of waste, overlapping and other deficiencies where
there is a multiplicity of small concerns providing
similar services. Nevertheless, it is important that
these State organisations keep in constant touch
with developmental and planning authorities.
B. WATER SUPPLY
The Region is fortunate in that adequate water
for a population of over 1,000,0CX3 is available within
reasonable distance of the main centres of demand.
For the major part of the supply to the Region,
water is obtained from the Canning impounding
reservoir and some subsidiary sources elsewhere in
the Darling Ranges, augmented to a small degree by
pumping from artesian wells. Annual consumption
is about 12,000,000,000 gallons which, for an estimated
total of 303,000 persons served with water (in 1951)
represents 108 gallons per head per day. For an
expanded population of 1,400,000 persons the con-


sumption, at the same rate, will average 151,000,000
gallons per day. This average would, of course, be
greatly exceeded in the summer months.
In addition, an average of 8,000,000 gallons daily
is supplied by the Mundaring Reservoir through the
Goldfields Water Supply system to Kalgoorlie, 340
miles away, the Greenmount-Chidlow area within
the Region, and a proportion to the remainder of
the Region. There is a potential of some 15,000,000
gallons daily average from Mundaring Reservoir.
In the immediate future, and as a matter of urgency,
the principal development in extending the supply,
to meet the needs of the rapidly growing population,
will be the exploitation of the Serpentine River.
This river will become the major source of supply
and, eventually, the North and South Dandalup Rivers
will be brought into use.
The development areas proposed in the Plan have
been determined after consultation with the Metro-
politan Water Supply and Goldfields Water Supply
Departments. Generally, all areas can ultimately
be supplied with water, subject to a well-devised
programme of development by stages. Exceptions
to this generality are the small coastal settlements
to the North of Whitfords Beach, where subdivision
must, for many years, if not for all time, be on the
basis that piped water will not be an economic proposi-
tion. Some of the smaller country centres within
the Region must also be subject to similar restrictions
for some considerable time. In the preparation of
Local Planning Schemes, the definition of residential
districts in the Hills may require modification as
problems of water supply are j*iven detailed technical
consideration. It is here that difficulties are most
likely to arise from questions of altitudes and water-
head, but obviously difficult areas have been omitted
from the Plan on advice from the appropriate
authority.
One further restriction requires mention. In-
dustries involving abnormal water consumption,
such as rayon and paper mills, could not economically
be located in the Region.
An excellent outline of the water supply problems
in the Metropolitan Region, and their possible
solution, is given in a paper prepared and presented
by Mr. F. M. Kenworthy, as Chairman’s address to
the Institution of Engineers of Australia, Perth
Division, Western Australia. 1 In his paper, Mr.
Kenworthy, who is now Chief Engineer of the Metro-
politan Water Supply Department, shows the possi-
bilities and economic limits of development and
advocates maximum decentralisation to selected parts
of the South-West.
C. SEWERAGE AND SEWAGE
DISPOSAL
Generally, the built-up areas, which have been
established for many years in the central part of the
Region, are served by sewers, the flow in which is
directed to three main treatment works at West
Subiaco, Swanbourne and South Fremantle. Building
operations, both residential and industrial have,
however, outstripped the provision of sewers. One
of the consequences is that the sanitary pan system
remains in evidence in many areas. For all new
buildings the owners have, however, been compelled
to instal septic tanks to Health Department standards,
and such installations are almost invariably on a
single building basis. One of the results of absence
of sewerage in new development is that subdivisional
layouts rarely take into account the eventual eco-
nomical provision of sewerage.
The topography of the sewered localities does
not permit a complete gravitational layout of main
sewers and, because of this and the grid-iron layouts,
there are numerous pumping stations and ejector
stations dispersed throughout the system. At West
Subiaco and Swanbourne the treatment works com-
prise detritus tanks, sedimentation tanks, and sludge
digesters. The effluent from both works is conveyed
to a combined outfall which discharges into the
Indian Ocean, below low water level, at a point
between Swanbourne Beach and South City Beach.
The treatment at South Fremantle is by septic tank,
and the effluent is discharged into the ocean at Robbs
Jetty. Regular analysis of effluents is made at all
works, and periodical beach surveys and ocean
analyses are carried out in the interests of public
health. The present system is stretched to its limit,
with sewage having to be carried to Swanbourne
from as far away as Midland Junction.
Major proposals for the future include a southern
main sewer on the South side of the Swan River,
to collect all subsidiary flows in that area, and the
construction of full-scale sewage disposal works
1 Chairman’s Address, The Institution of Engineers of Australia, Perth
Division, W.A., Perth, 1949.


South of Fremantle to replace the present septic
tanks. In the north-western part of the Region
there should be a main sewer to serve Scarborough,
North Beach and other northern suburbs, with a
treatment works and outfall within easy distance of
the coast near the northern edge of the main metro-
politan area. In the South a major treatment works
will be necessary to deal with the sewage and trade
wastes from the Kwinana industrial area, Rocking-
ham and the new town of Kwinana.
Bearing in mind the amenity of ocean bathing and
beach recreations enjoyed by vast numbers of people,
the continuance of present methods of treatment and
ocean discharge raises serious problems. As the
population expands, and sewerage facilities are ex-
tended throughout the Region, the need for improved
and extended treatment works will arise. Main-
tenance of satisfactory health conditions along the
beaches may not be possible under the present treat-
ment systems, and large areas of land may become
essential as a prerequisite to the construction of
modern sewage treatment works capable of producing
unobjectionable effluents before release into the
ocean. Economic considerations suggest that such
sites may be located within open land where the
disposal of valuable sludge could be advantageously
arranged, and any offensive aspects of such sewage
treatment works would be mitigated by the surround-
ing buffot zones of agriculture or open space.
The existing sewage treatment works near the
developing hospital at Shenton Park are due for
extensive improvement. Although it cannot be ex-
pected that the site should be abandoned, there are
three very good reasons why sewage should be fully,
rather than partially, treated at the works. Firstly,
the works must continue to take all the sewage from
the expanding heart of the Region, including central
Perth. Secondly, offensive odours permeate the
area in the immediate vicinity of the works and must
seriously retard, if not entirely prevent, develop-
ment in an excellent position between the central
city and the ocean beaches. Thirdly, the increasing
amount of effluent discharged to the South of City
Beach may, before long, affect the use of the beach,
which should become part of the best-planned and
most-used ocean front recreational area.
Consideration of the problem of sewage disposal
must play a large part in the definition of residential
zones. In many ways the Region is fortunate in
that subsoil conditions generally permit of septic
tank installation, so that development in the early
stages is not dependant upon the provision of com-
prehensive sewerage schemes. If the position were
otherwise, many areas would be most uneconomic
to develop because of the cost of installing sewerage
before it was possible to recoup even a small part of
the cost. Particularly in the Hills, economic gravita-
tional systems would not be possible, and develop-
ment can only be undertaken if it is accepted that the
septic tank system will continue to operate for many
years. On the other hand, many areas which would
be suitable for development, if immediate sewerage
could be provided, must be rejected because of
subsoil conditions unsatisfactory for septic tank
installation, without extensive and expensive land
drainage schemes. It is necessary, therefore, to
have regard to these factors in the selection of suitable
areas. It must be envisaged that all but the more
remote country areas must ultimately be sewered,
and the limitations imposed by temporary septic
tank systems must be recognised. Plate 7 in the
Atlas defines broadly those areas where such limita-
tions operate.
D. LAND DRAINAGE
A brief description of the natural drainage features
of the Region has been given in Chapter 5. It has
been shown that large expanses of land exist, par-
ticularly near the foot of the Darling Escarpment,
where the water table level is very close to the surface
of the ground. Comprehensive main drainage
schemes are prerequisites to close settlement.
The influence of a high water table is two-fold.
It may be such as to render physical development
impossible because of swampy conditions, or it may
preclude the use of septic tanks on sites which are
dry at the surface. In general, swampy areas, if
well placed in a built-up area, might appropriately
be used for recreational open space, in that com-
paratively minor drainage and tipping schemes could
render them quickly suitable for these purposes,
whereas operations on a scale adequate to permit
building might take many years. Herdsman Lake,
Lake Monger and Butler’s Swamp are examples of
this type of area. Similarly, smaller swampy areas
in or adjacent to good building land are suggested for
minor open spaces. Their definition in Local Plan-


ning Schemes may vary from that in the Regional
Plan, as local surveys more exactly establish economic
limits of development.
It should not be assumed that all areas subject to
drainage difficulties are automatically excluded from
development. Other factors must be weighed against
this disadvantage and, if potent enough, allowed to
justify the implementation of drainage schemes. In
all cases, however, the cost of a drainage scheme must
be related to the value of the land which it would
free for development. An expensive scheme which
would only open up a limited quantity of land must
be rejected. For example, land drainage schemes in
Morley Park, Belmont-Welshpool and South of
Riverton would open up large areas in strategically
important positions, and must be considered as
essential projects. Their order of priority should be
determined by the appropriate Government Depart-
ment in relation to the proposals in the Plan. On
this basis, it would appear that a scheme for Belmont-
Welshpool requires first consideration in view of the
industrial and other proposals dependent upon its
implementation. The subsequent establishment of
programmes for further drainage scheme areas is to
a large extent dependent upon the economics of each
case. These problems are discussed further in
Chapter 11.
Statutory powers exist under which comprehensive
drainage operations may be designed and carried out
by the appropriate department, and the cost be made
recoverable from a rateable levy on the landowners.
E. ELECTRICITY
i
With the exception of a few small privately-owned
installations producing power for their owners’
consumption, all electric power within the Region
is generated and distributed by the State Electricity
Commission, operating under the State Electricity
Commission Act, 1945. The Commission also
operates the Perth Gas Works, and supplies steam
from its East Perth Power Station to the Royal Perth
Hospital. The electric power is generated by steam
raised from Western Australian (Collie) coal at the
two power stations of East Perth and South Fre-
mantle, the two stations having a combined capacity
of 149,000 kilowatts. Over 450,000,000 units (KWh)
were generated during the year ended 30th June,
1954, and the Commission’s revenue, from all sources,
was over £5,500,000.
It is understood that the supply of electricity to a
population of over 1,000,000 would not present any
undue difficulty. This aspect has not, therefore,
imposed any restrictions on the selection of areas
for development. In the short term, the new Bun-
bury Power Station will generate a large amount of
electricity to supplement, through the grid, the power
now supplied from the two existing stations. In
the longer term, the advent of generating stations
powered by nuclear reactors can be envisaged, and
any possible future limitations in the supply of coal
or water power can largely be ignored. However,
careful attention to programmes is just as essential as
in the case of water supply, particularly in the de-
velopment of industrial zones.
F. GAS
Two undertakings operate gas services in the
Region. The State Electricity Commission supplies
the City of Perth and some of its suburbs, as far South
as Claremont, and the Fremantle Gas and Coke Co.
serves the Fremantle neighbourhood and suburbs
North of the Swan River to North Cottesloe. An
increasing proportion of Western Australian coal is
being used in gas production, the bulk of the other
coal needed being from the Eastern States.
The supply of gas is not considered to have any
restrictive effect on the definition of residential or
other developmentareas.
G. REFUSE DISPOSAL
The disposal of household and trade refuse in the
Metropolitan Region is the responsibility of the local
health authority, which is generally the local author-
ity. Each authority usually operates its own collec-
tion and disposal service, although in some cases two
or more authorities work conjointly.
This Report is concerned primarily with two
aspects :
(i) The provision of efficient and economical
collection and disposal services.
(ii) The land requirements imposed by (i) and
the possibility of reclamation of unusable
land by properly controlled tipping.


(i) Collection and Disposal
The very fact that some authorities find it necessary
to combine to provide these services indicates that
some degree of centralisation would make for greater
efficiency. This does not apply so much to refuse
collection, but the method of disposal used will have
a bearing on the way in which the collection service
is organised.
In 1953, when the disposal of refuse was causing
concern, and the installation of incinerators was
under consideration, a survey of metropolitan local
authorities by the Public Health Department revealed
that some 350 tons of refuse per thousand people
was disposed of annually. This means that at present
some 136,000 tons of refuse requires to be disposed
of each year.
(a) Incineration
In recent years, local authorities with highly de-
veloped areas have had some difficulty in obtaining
suitable sites for tipping, and serious consideration
has been given to the installation of incinerators.
Although the site required for an incinerator is
relatively small, in addition to the high installation
and operation cost of the plant, it was found that
tipping sites would still be required to dispose of
non-combustible materials. As a result, no in-
cinerators have yet been established in the Region
by a local authority.
.(b) Composting
Investigation into the possibility of composting
by the Fremantle City Council has revealed that,
provided there is an assured market for the end
product, composting of refuse can be carried out
economically. Again a costly plant is involved and
there is the problem of disposing of refuse which is
not suitable for treatment.
(c) Tipping
This is generally accepted as the cheapest method
of disposal, although many factors affect the cost,
and it has advantages, particularly where the tipping
is properly controlled. In the Region, disposal by
this method costs local authorities from £1 to £5 per
ton. Briefly, the method is to tip refuse into ex-
cavations or low-lying areas in layers of not more
than 6 feet deep, and over a face sufficiently small
to be entirely covered with a layer of earth at the
end of each day’s operations, preventing the release
of unpleasant odours and restricting the prevalence
of rats in tipping areas. The danger of fire and
smoke nuisance is limited. The chemical break-
down of the refuse is quite rapid if the necessary
precautions are observed.
Incineration and composting both require costly
specialised plant, whereas a controlled tip can be
operated with equipment owned at present by many
local authorities. The value of this method is
demonstrated by the Perth City Council’s activities
at Lake Monger, where playing fields are in the
course of establishment on land reclaimed by the
tipping of refuse.
(ii) Land Requirements
Apart from depots for collection vehicles and
plant, which normally require fairly small areas,
the main requirements are the actual areas where
tipping can take place without greatly increasing trans-
portation costs or affecting the amenity of residential
areas.
Suitable areas for tipping comprise three cate-
gories— (a) deep excavations, (b) shallow excavat-
ions, (c) low-lying and swamp areas.
An assessment of the capacity of existing excava-
tions of the first two categories in close proximity
to the proposed main urban area shows that some
5,000,000 cubic yards could be tipped in these alone.
Assuming the compacted weight/volume ratio of
refuse to be two-thirds of a ton per cubic yard 1 , a
rough calculation shows sufficient tipping capacity
to meet the Region’s requirements at the expected
rate of growth for the next 15 to 20 years. As a
result, a number of areas which are now excavated
and unusable would gradually be reclaimed.
The success of controlled tipping as an aid to
reclamation of derelict areas in the development of
the Region is dependent upon a co-ordinated pro-
gramme. It is therefore important that general
control is exercised by one authority. It is accord-
ingly recommended that the Public Health Depart-
ment, in consultation with the other authorities
concerned, should prepare a co-ordinated programme
for the collection and disposal of refuse by controlled
tipping in the Metropolitan Region.
This should be closely related to the programme of
development arising out of the proposals in the
Plan.
1 Contractors Record and Public Works Engineer, London, 1954.


58. Residential property ready for re-
development. This example is in North
Perth, but there are many others in the
Region.
59. Detached dwellings on inadequate
sites : Subiaco. Well-designed terraced
housing would be a more satisfactory
alternative.


60
60. Unsatisfactory flats on single house
lots : North Perth. The distance between
side walls is quite inadequate.
61. Spacious planning of flats. Sunny-
side, New York City, U.S.A.
61


62. Recent housing : Scarborough.
The monotony of excessively long straight
streets is apparent.
62
63. Part of an informal layout : Dal-
keith. A more interesting street scene.
63


64
64. Floreat Park. The retention of
natural features and successful landscaping
make this a very attractive estate.
65. Medina. When established, this
corner will be a pleasantly informal part
of Kwinana New Town.
65


CHAPTER 8
Standards of Development
A. INTRODUCTION
Previous Chapters have indicated the scale of
development anticipated in the Region. Against the
background of an expanding economy, an assessment
has been made of the probable population to be
accommodated. Proposals for the size and location
of industrial areas have been described. A study
of the nature of the land and existing development
has suggested the general direction and form of de-
velopment to be expected. The road and rail com-
munications proposed in Chapter 7 form a framework
for the various elements of the expanding metropolis
which have to be served by essential services. A
study of the economical provision of services has
suggested limitations and possibilities. Consideration
of the requirements for outdoor recreation has
resulted in a broad definition of the amount and
location of land which should remain free of building.
There are still further considerations to help de-
termine the total area of land required for the antici-
pated population and give more definition to the
pattern of development.
These considerations are discussed in this Chapter,
which suggests how the many aspects of development
may be related to provide a basis for community
planning.
B. COMMUNITY STRUCTURE
Although the recommendations are put forward
in terms of standards, densities, and use zones, it
should be appreciated that these are only convenient
ways of describing measures and elements in com-
munity planning. The starting point is the study of
the life and activities of people and the physical
environment they wish to create.
Throughout history there have been examples of
well-balanced communities, whether villages, towns
or great cities. Many were thoughtfully planned and
built, often with protection and security uppermost
in the minds of those responsible, although con-
venience, economy and pleasure have each at times
been among the first thoughts. Organic development
cannot be generated by planning alone ; but the
laying down of a framework within which develop-
ment can proceed in an orderly fashion has always
assisted, rather than restricted, the process of growth,
and reduced the possible occurrence of frustrations
and errors. Although it has been suggested in
Chapter 5 that the present regional pattern does not
lend itself easily to a definition of existing com-
munities, in the older established areas people have
the sense of belonging to a place and they develop
and take part in many activities. Given the oppor-
tunity, the newer areas coming, and to come, into
being will in turn acquire a consciousness of com-
munity. Even though the motor car has radically
altered the way of life, there remains a deep rooted
desire to share interests and pleasures in the company
of neighbours. It is, therefore, suggested that in the
planning of further residential areas this must be
taken fully into account, and that the sprawling,
formless, inconvenient development, which is often
the unhappy corollary of a rapid expansion, at all
costs should be avoided. A careful consideration of
relationships between homes, places of work, places
of recreation, worship and culture, shops and schools,
should suggest patterns not only for physical de-
velopment, but also for convenient and pleasant
living.
C. COMMUNITY PLANNING
The achievement of well-balanced development is
a long and continuous process. The present pro-
posals are only a first step. They provide a back-
ground, or framework, for local study and local
decisions. They can only set the stage for further
action. The proposals are based on actual and
foreseeable requirements. The estimated quantity,


location and grouping of individual buildings and
uses in all parts has been assessed in a broad way,
and appropriate areas for various purposes are
suggested.
It has been necessary to establish levels at which
each particular need is to be met. The basic unit in
any community is the home and its immediate en-
vironment —the street block with its combination
of lots containing dwellings, their gardens and access
streets. The size of dwellings, the size of plots and
widths of streets determine the area required for a
given number of homes, and families. The aim has
been to define acceptable standards which may be
expressed as the number of persons per acre of land.
In the small unit containing only houses, gardens and
roads this is called Net Residential Density .
At the next level, further provision is made for
family activities away from the home. Facilities
common to groups of families include local shops,
parks and children’s playgrounds. This level is
defined as the locality and the number of persons
accommodated on each acre of land in a locality
(which embraces more than houses, gardens and
streets) is defined as Local Gross Density .
Groups of localities combine into districts, at
which level larger shopping centres, recreation parks,
small industrial areas, etc., are to be found. The
overall number of persons per acre of land, inclusive
of all district uses, is referred to as District Gross
Density.
These divisions are not inflexible, and the pro-
posals neither attempt to define actual boundaries of
localities nor imply that the districts as suggested are,
at this stage, any more than convenient units to which
population calculations can be applied. Adjust-
ments will undoubtedly be necessary when more
detailed proposals are considered. There is never a
marked and clear dividing line between districts or
communities. Local characteristics develop only over
an appreciable period of time. The Plan suggests
how the growth of community feeling may be facili-
tated by a convenient arrangement of physical elements
in relation to natural features and likely barriers,
such as planned main roads and railways.
This Chapter deals only with quantitative aspects
of the problem and with general principles. Chapter
10 discusses more specific proposals, and describes
how, within a broad framework, sites have been
selected for major non-residential elements—open
spaces, district centres, secondary school sites and
industrial areas—based on a calculation of the likely
populations which the defined districts can be ex-
pected to accommodate.
D. THE PROVISION OF DWELLINGS
The number of persons to be accommodated in the
various districts will depend upon the numbers and
types of dwellings to be contained in the residential
areas. Although this is not the place for a com-
prehensive study of housing design, and although it
is impossible to forecast with any degree of accuracy
what types of residence future generations will
require, consideration must be given to the kind of
housing which will meet social and economic deeds
in the immediate future. Conclusions have been
drawn about housing types, site arrangements, desir-
able frontages, lot sizes and resulting housing densities
(Appendix I, summarised in Table 37).
Theories relating to housing design and housing
densities vary in different countries. They are in-
fluenced by climate, availability of land, and social
habits. But good housing in any country fulfills
certain conditions. It is suggested that these are,
briefly :
(i) The provision of a full range of housing
types to meet the requirements of different
households—the single person, young or
old, the small, medium and large family,
and the old married couple.
(ii) The provision of adequate space about
buildings compatible with any limitations
imposed by economic factors.
(iii) Site arrangements to ensure that all dwellings
make good neighbours, in the sense that
visual discordance is avoided and that
light and air for one building is not ob-
tained at the expense of the one next door.
(iv) Flexibility (through various methods) in
providing homes, which allows for pos-
sible changes in the proportions of houses
built for sale or for letting, by private or
public enterprise.


Table 37
HOUSING DENSITIES : SUMMARY OF MAXIMUM PLOT RATIOS, MAXIMUM AND AVERAGE
NET RESIDENTIAL DENSITIES
Reference
(from
Appendix
I).
Minimum
Plot Size
(sq. ft.).
Minimum
Frontage
(ft.)
Maximum
Plot
Ratio.
Type of development
generally appropriate.
Maximum
Net
Residential
Density
(persons
per
acre).
Average
(Working)
Net
Residential
Density
(persons
per acre).
Remarks.
a
20,000
155
1-0
Multi-storey flats ..
130
120
Maximum density for resi-
dential development.
b
15,000
115
0-75
Multi-storey and 3-storey
100
100
flats
c
12,000
95
0-65
3-storey and 2-storey flats
85
85
d
9,000
75
0-55
3-storey and 2-storey flats
75
75
e
8,000
65
0-40
2-storey flats, attached pairs
55
55
Minimum plot size for flats
and terraced houses
and 2-storey attached pairs
and terraced houses.
f
6,000
49
0-25
Detached dwellings
27
20
Minimum plot size for de-
tached dwellings.
g
4,000
33
0-20
Single-storey terraced houses
28
25
Minimum plot size for single-
and attached pairs
storey terraced house or
one of pair.
Typical
Typical
Maximum
Not
Plot Size.
Frontage.
Plot Ratio.
Applicable.
h
8,170
61ft. Oin.
0-25
Detached dwellings
, *
15
Typical 30-perch plot.
i
10,890
Varies
0-25
Detached dwellings
. *
12
Typical |-acre plot.
j
21,780
Varies
0-25
Detached dwellings
• •
6
Typical £-acre plot.
The following paragraphs summarise the manner
in which both variable and constant factors suggest
a range of types and densities suitable for the Region,
but it should be stressed that whilst such recom-
mendations and forecasts are necessary for the reasons
outlined in Section C, it should not be implied that
the general validity of the proposals will be impaired
if adjustments are made as new factors are taken into
account. Although the suggested proportion of
different types of development may vary in practice,
the resulting overall density will be approximately
correct, and the number of persons who may be
expected to live in an area can be forecast with some
accuracy. Constant review of the Plan in relation
to development actually carried out will enable
adjustments to be made from time to time.
E. DWELLING TYPES
For a long time to come, the majority of families
will expect to live in a single house in its own garden,
although it is apparent that there will be an increasing
minority which will wish to live in other types of
dwellings. Economic, social and population changes,
including a relative increase in the number of smaller
families, particularly those comprising older couples,
will necessitate the adequate provision of flats or
similar dwellings which require less land per unit
than the single family house. An examination of the
1947 Census Report in relation to previous Reports
reveals an increase in this demand. In the Metro-
politan Statistical Division, flats in 1933 represented
5.4 per cent, of the total number of private occupied
dwellings, while in 1947 the figure increased to 7.3
per cent. 1 This is still far less than the percentage
for Australia as a whole (13.3 per cent.). 2 It is
suggested that as the urban area increases in scale and
spreads, and journeys become longer and more
tedious, the demand for dwellings close to the main
centres will create a need for flats to a scale of at least
10 per cent, of all private dwellings. 3
1 Commonwealth Government, Census of the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia, 1947. Census Bulletin No. 21. Dwellings Summary for the
State of Western Australia, Canberra, 1947.
* Commonwealth Government, Census of the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia, 1947 : Part XXVII (Dwellings), Canberra, 1947.
* The meaning of " flat ” in this Report is defined in Appendix I, and
does not include attached pairs of dwellings and terraced housing as
defined in Appendix I.


It is further suggested that there will be an increasing
need to provide attached pairs of dwellings, either of
one or two storeys, and modern terrace houses, as a
satisfactory intermediate between flats and detached
single dwellings. There will be several reasons for
this. Many families, not wishing to have a large
garden, but preferring a house to a flat, would wel-
come a more economical home of one of these types.
There is an understandable prejudice against terrace
housing. This is largely, if not entirely, because
virtually the only examples seen are some of the
earliest which are now delapidated and in congested
areas. Important advances in design and site planning
have now been made, and the modern terrace house,
with its small garden, would make a happier family
home than a flat in a two or three-storey building.
The ultimate requirements of the people will un-
doubtedly be made known, and it is sufficient to
draw attention at present to the apparent lack of
variety of dwelling units between the detached single
dwelling on the one hand and the flat on the other.
In redevelopment areas it may often be more
economical, and socially more satisfactory, to provide
a proportion of houses at higher density rather than
nothing but flats. In lower cost housing, and par-
ticularly rental housing, initial economies in site,
service and construction costs can be made, with a
consequent reduction in rentals, where pair or ter-
raced development is included. The needs of old
people can be satisfied particularly well in single-
storey terrace houses with small garden spaces. The
appearance of housing areas can be improved by the
provision of terrace houses in selected positions.
Detached houses will, however, form the con-
siderable majority for many years to come, and only
a small proportion of other types is suggested (in
Section H) as being a reasonable estimate of probable
future demand. The bulk of new building will take
the form of individual houses. Present practice
indicates that plots of about one-fifth acre are likely
to be more popular than larger or smaller areas,
although there will continue to be a demand for
smaller sites, and also for larger sites of one-quarter
acre and more. It is suggested that more considera-
tion should be given to providing a variety of lot
sizes in the subdivision of residential land than has
been the practice in the past.
F. HOUSING DENSITIES
Average Net Residential Densities (Section C) re-
sulting from different types of housing development
will depend on maximum building densities regulated
by building by-laws or some form of statutory plan-
ning control. Alterations to existing by-laws are
necessary, as some were designed for conditions which
are now radically changed, and a suggested form of
density control is included in Appendix I. The
following recommendations are based on studies,
discussed in more detail in this Appendix, relating to
the securing of adequate daylighting and sunlighting
conditions, the protection of adjoining properties
from loss of privacy, the establishment of reasonable
building lines, and the visual effects of mixed de-
velopment.
As a basic recommendation, it is suggested that
housing density should be regulated by the limitation
of building bulk in relation to site area (plot ratio),
and that appropriate plot ratios should be established
for any given site conditions. This method (de-
scribed in Chapter 9, D (ii)) ensures equitable treat-
ment for developers, is easily understood and applied,
and is more effective than standards based on the
limitation of habitable rooms, persons, or dwelling
units per site or acre.
The essence of this form of control, as compared
with those in present use, is that building types should
be related to sites which are suitable for them. It
would, for example, prevent the development of high
flats on narrow sites and minimise the nuisance
caused by such flats overlooking and shading adjoining
properties. The plot ratios suggested result in a
comprehensive range of residential densities which
afford a wide choice to intending developers and
which, it is felt, constitute desirable maxima, in
terms of persons per acre, in a Region where land is
plentiful, where people enjoy spacious surroundings,
and where unnecessary congestion should be avoided.
G. GROUPS OF DWELLINGS
Density control will not, however, in itself secure
satisfactory site planning. Whilst the detailed design
of housing layouts cannot be considered in an overall
plan of this nature, general recommendations re-
garding questions of principle should be considered
by developers and authorities responsible for the
preparation or approval of housing layouts.


In particular, attention is drawn to the defects of
the rigidly geometric system of " gridiron ” planning
when applied to housing estates. The main criticism
is that of inflexibility and monotony when the system
is repeated over large areas. It tends to overlook all
physical conditions of the site and often results in
excessive road gradients, blind intersections and
drainage difficulties. With a lack of differentiation
between streets of different traffic value, estates laid
out on this system become traffic warrens, with every
street requiring a uniform degree of structural quality,
and liable to become extremely dangerous and noisy,
as it may become known as a short cut or a parallel
alternative to a major highway.
Within the range of suggested densities it should be
possible to design housing layouts which are con-
venient, economical and visually satisfactory. Street
layout should be considered in relation to the function
of the various streets rather than as a grid containing
standard lots. Many devices are available to the
designer to achieve good results—the use of curved
streets following contours, the inclusion of a number
of short loops and culs-de-sac, the avoidance of over-
long streets, the carefully considered intermixing of
varied housing types, and the subtle use of small
open spaces and tree masses to achieve variety in
layout. To ensure greater safety and convenience,
increased use should be made of staggered inter-
sections where minor residential streets join more
important traffic roads, and the number of inter-
sections with major roads should be reduced to a
minimum by increasing the length of street blocks.
Purely residential streets should > always be arranged
in such a way as to discourage through traffic.
H. APPLICATION OF NET
RESIDENTIAL DENSITIES
In order to assess the number of people who may
live in the various areas suggested for development,
it has been necessary to make provisional estimates
of the proportions of different types of housing likely
to be provided. For this purpose, the Region has
been divided into a number of districts (Section C),
each of which has been classified, according to its
location and its present character, as one of six main
types, viz • :
CLASS A. Central residential districts.
CLASS B. Districts where considerable changes
in character can be expected follow-
ing redevelopment.
CLASS C. Districts where limited changes can
be expected due to consolidation
and intensification of development.
CLASS D. Districts containing large unde-
veloped, or partially developed
areas, where considerable new de-
velopment can be expected.
CLASS E. Detached residential districts in the
hills and foothills.
CLASS F. The large townships in the Kwinana-
Rockingham area.
These proposed districts are indicated in Diagram 7.
CLASS A. Central Residential Districts
Limited in size and number, the central residential
districts are immediately adjacent to central com-
mercial areas, where land values are high. Flats of
good quality yet at a high density can be expected.
Multi-storey flats will probably predominate, and it
is suggested that an appropriate average Net Residential
Density would be 100 persons per acre (Table 38).
CLASS B. Areas of Redevelopment
Areas containing older properties may be largely
rebuilt during the period of the Plan. They are
situated close to the main city centres and, because
of the age of the subdivisions, they have densities
higher than average. It is suggested that these areas
should be re-developed with medium density flats
predominating. They would be at a higher density
than that to be expected in new development areas.
An average Net Residential Density of 27.7 persons
per acre would be appropriate (Table 38).
CLASS C. Areas of Limited Change
Certain districts which are already largely built-up
contain areas where the demand for land, and its
reflection in land values, encourages greater intensity
of use in the form of flat development, or the sub-
division of present large lots for additional houses.
It has been assumed that the existing Gross District
Density (Diagram 1), will increase by a limited amount


Table 38
PROPORTIONS OF LAND USES AND DENSITIES
(Acres per 1,000 persons)
PART A : RESIDENTIAL LAND ONLY
Housing Types
(from Table 37).
Type of District.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
0/
/o
Acres.
0/
/o
Acres.
0/
/o
Acres.
0/
/o
Acres.
0/
/o
Acres.
0/
/o
Acres.
a
50
4-20
5
0-40
CO
b
20
2-00
10
1-00
-J
1
o-io
1
o-io
c
15
1-80
10
1-20
w
<r<
1
0-10
1
0-10
d
15
2-00
10
1-30
O
2
0-25
# #
2
0-25
e
• .
10
1-80
-4
)
3
0-55
3
0-55
f
• .
20
10-00
eu
14
7-00
5
1-80
14
7-00
g
. .
11
4-30
**
4
1-60
# #
4
1-60
h
• .
24
16-00
50
33-50
15
10-00
50
33-50
i
• .
. •
♦ .
H
25
20-80
60
50-00
25
20-80
j
*•
••
D
2;
20
33-30
• •
Total
100
10-00
100
36-00
100
63-90
100
95-10
100
63-90
Average Net Residential Density
(persons per acre)
100
27
•7
15
•7
10-5
15
•7
PART B : ALL LOCAL USES
Land Use.
Type of District.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Area for housing only
10-00
36-00
w
63-90
95-10
63-90
Public open space
3-00
4-70
►J
4-70
4-10
4-70
Primary school and nursery school sites ..
0-70
0-70
CQ
4*4
0-70
0-70
0-70
Private schools
0-40
0-40
0-40
0-40
0-40
Shops
0-20
0-35
0-35
0-35
0-70
Community and public buildings
0-30
1-00
PU
1-00
1-00
1-00
Main roaids
1-00
1-00
PU
<
1-00
1-00
1-00
Total.: non-residential uses ..
5-60
8-15
H
0
8-15
7-55
8-15
Total : all uses
15-60
44-15
Z
72-05
102-65
72-05
Local Gross Density (persons per acre)
66 |
23 j
14
10
14
PART C : ALL DISTRICT USES
Land Use.
Type of District.
A.
B. .
C.
D.
E.
F.
Total area : local uses
15-60
44-15
72-05
102-65
72-05
District open space
0-50
* 6-20
W
6-20
6-20
6-20
Secondary school sites *
0-10
0-10
PQ
0-10
0-10
0-10
Private secondary schools f ..
0-15
0-15
<
0-15
0-15
0-15
Shops and offices
0-50
0-50
0-50
0-50
0-50
Community and public buildings
1-00
►-3
P-l
1-00
1-00
1-00
District industry
1-00
PU
1-00
0-50
1-00
Main roads
i -oo
1-00
<
f-l
1-00
1-00
1-00
Total : non-residential district uses
2-25
9-95
0
z
9-95
9-45
9-95
Total : all uses
17-85
54-10
82-00
112-10
82-00
District Gross Density (persons per acre)
57
18
12
12
9
12
* Excluding playing fields.
t Including playing fields.


up to an approximate figure of 12 persons per acre.
This figure is fairly low because a large part of each
area is occupied by houses in good condition on lots
of one-quarter acre or more.
CLASS D. New Development
In those suburban districts which are at present
only partially developed, and in entirely new districts,
it is anticipated that, whereas allowance should be
made for a wide range of housing types, the pre-
dominant groups will be the one-fifth acre and one-
quarter acre single dwelling sites, and only a small
percentage of higher density development should be
catered for. The average Net Residential Density
will be about 15.7 persons per acre (Table 38).
CLASS E. Hills Districts
Even after considerable growth, larger lots will
probably remain popular in the Hills districts. On
this assumption a Net Residential Density of 10.5
persons per acre is suggested (Table 38).
CLASS F. Kwinana-Rockingham
Densities similar to Class D are suggested.
It should again be stressed that these average net
densities are forecasts arising out of an assessment
of the probable effect, in practice, of the adoption
of the basic recommendations in Section F. They
should not be interpreted as restrictive limitations,
either as maximum or minimum figures, and should
be constantly re-examined and revised in the light of
changing circumstances and actual development. It
is not considered desirable to make any specific
recommendations regarding the exclusion from certain
areas of any particular type of housing development.
Subject to any local considerations which may require
special planning action, it is suggested that any type
of housing development would be suitable in any
district, provided it fulfilled the site conditions re-
quired and provided that architectural and site plan-
ning aspects were satisfactory. It follows that the
areas suggested for open space and other non-resi-
dential uses will undoubtedly require adjustment as
future population patterns become clearer. With
the foregoing forecasts and recommendations as a
basis, the following Sections suggest standards for
these uses and describe resulting Local and District
Gross Densities .
L THE LOCALITY
Whilst the term “ neighbourhood ” has not been
used, because of size limitations associated with it in
other countries, it is nevertheless apparent that popula-
tion groups of various sizes require a range of local
facilities within easy reach of every home. The
location of these facilities, the area served and the
detailed local pattern will be subjects for the con-
sideration of authorities responsible for Local Planning
Schemes. In the paragraphs which follow, recom-
mendations are restricted to quantitative standards,
and factors influencing their implementation confined
to broad generalisations likely to be appropriate in
most areas.
( i ) Local Open Space
In Chapter 6 it was recommended that from 3.0
to 4.7 acres per 1,000 persons should be earmarked
for Local, as compared with District and Regional,
Open Space of various types, including primary
school playing fields. The particular local standard
would depend on the type of district (Table 38).
These areas should be carefully sited in relation to
other local uses, and in particular it is suggested that
consideration be given to the establishment of Local
Open Space systems, linking by footpath the schools,
shops, churches and other centres, in such a way that
the daily walk to school or shops is made less hazard-
ous and more attractive. Systems of this type have
been proved successful in the United States of
America, where conditions are in many ways similar
to those in Australia.
(ii) Primary and Nursery School Sites
In consultation with the Education Department,
standards for the provision of school sites were
established, and are set out in this Section for primary
and nursery schools, and in Section J (ii) for second-
ary schools. Forecasts are based on the assumption
that 171 per cent, of the total population will be of
school age (age groups 6 to 15 inclusive), and that
of this figure 80 per cent, will attend State Schools.
It is further estimated that only about 10 per cent,
of the 16 to 17 age group will continue the 4th and
sth year State High School course.
On this basis, a locality of 10,000 persons would
require a primary school accommodating about 575
pupils, and requiring a site of 10 acres. Seven acres


of this ten would be for playing fields, and this figure
has been included in the total of Local Open Space
(Table 28) as being contributory to the satisfaction
of overall playing field demands. The remaining
area of three acres for each school building site is
equivalent to 0.6 acres per 1,000 persons. Individual
sites for primary schools are not defined in the
Regional Plan, but as a general recommendation it is
suggested that no child of the 6 to 12 age groups
should be required to walk more than three-quarters
of a mile to school. In practice, given a reasonable
distribution of primary schools, there would be one
to one-and-a-half miles between schools for all areas
of new development other than in the Hills districts,
where lower densities would necessitate wider spac-
ing, and journeys of up to one mile.
A rational and convenient distribution of primary
schools would determine key points in residential
neighbourhoods. Shops, community buildings, pre-
school centres and local playing fields, might well be
related to those points. They should also be at a
centre of gravity and within easy walking distance
of all houses in the locality. It should be the aim, in
the preparation of detailed schemes, to group these
uses as far as possible in order to provide well-defined
local centres. Local authorities should make com-
prehensive reservations for local centres, otherwise
non-housing uses will come into the picture only
when scattered, inadequate sites are left for develop-
ment other than housing.
It is further recommended that sites for infant
health centres and nursery kindergartens be made
available on the scale of 0.1 acres per 1,000 persons, 1
resulting in a total provision of 0.7 acres per 1,000
persons for primary school and pre-school buildings,
excluding playing fields (Table 38).
An additional allowance of 0.4 acres per 1,000
persons is made for private schools, including playing
fields, on the assumption that about 20 per cent, of
all school children will continue to go to private
schools.
( iii ) Shops
It is a matter of debate whether larger groups of
shops are best provided at local or at district level.
With the growing use of the motor car and the coming
into being of the " supermarket,” it is possible that
the district centre, providing a wide range in the
choice of goods and retail outlets, will gain in popu-
larity. However, for the family without a car, the
local group of shops will always be necessary, and
even for families with cars, the proximity of local
shops, particularly if related to schools and other
potential daily family rendezvous, will always be
attractive. Whether the provision of shops on a
local level will take the form of a wide distribution
of corner general shops, or consolidated groups of
shops, will depend on local planning circumstances.
There is no doubt that the small general store ** just
around the corner ” is a convenience that should not
lightly be ruled out by a planning decision. The
wise course might be to allow for small local groups
of shops, with adequate parking space for customers’
cars, and back service lanes, and at the same time
allow for an occasional corner shop. Overall land
requirements would be about the same for any
arrangement, and the detailed interpretation of the
suggested standards would depend on local con-
ditions.
The number of shops in the whole Metropolitan
Region, excluding Central Area specialised shops,
was approximately 3,350 in 1953 (115 persons per
shop, or nine shops per 1,000 persons). 2 Assuming
that present consumer demand is relatively well met,
and in the absence of any indications of possible
changes, it is suggested that this figure should provide
the basis for the calculation of future requirements.
The " shop,” it should be noted, is a convenient
form of measurement. It might equally well be
called a retail trade outlet. With changes in retailing
method the' numbers of separate shops may diminish
in relation to population but the land requirements
are unlikely to show a relative diminution.
As indicated above, the distribution within districts
of the total provision of shops will vary according
to local conditions. In order to calculate average
land requirements, it has been necessary to make an
assumption as to the future proportions to be ex-
pected, and it is suggested that of the total of nine
shops per 1,000 persons, 5.5 might be of a local
nature and 3.5 of a district nature. Further con-
1 War Housing Division, Department of Labour and National Service,
Wartime Housing : Bulletin No. 7, Melbourne, 1945. This Bulletin
recommends a site area of 0.45 acres, for a combined infant health
centre and pre-school centre, for each neighbourhood of 5,500 persons.
The standards which form the basis of this recommendation are
similar to those adopted by the Kindergarten Union of Western Aus-
tralia.
* Table 24. Note : In the fgure of 3,350, hotels and service stations have .
been excluded.


sideration of the factors influencing this suggestion,
and recommendations regarding the distribution,
size and layout of shopping centres, appear in Ap-
pendix IV.
It should be noted (Table 38) that these propor-
tions do not apply to central residential districts,
where central shopping facilities are easily accessible.
( iv ) Community and Public Buildings
The prescription of standards for this category of
use is extremely difficult, as the ultimate provision
of churches, church halls, meeting halls, etc., will
depend entirely on the demand in the locality.
Although there are notable exceptions to the rule,
existing buildings are often very scattered and on
badly located sites left over after housing needs have
been met. In most cases they cannot easily be
related to any particular catchment area. The stand-
ards suggested are tentative only; they are not based
on a close study of local conditions.
The figure suggested for use in the Metropolitan
Region is 1.0 acre per 1,000, except in central resi-
dential districts, where a lower figure would be
applicable (Table 38), and includes allowance for
such facilities as local churches, halls, cinemas, clinics,
health centres, branch libraries and hotels. On this
scale, a typical local centre serving 10,000 persons
would cover about 10 acres, excluding open space
and parking areas, and could consist of:—
Church 0.75 acre
Meeting Hall .. .. .. 0.50 acre
Cinema 1.00 acre
Hotel .. .. .. .. 1.00 acre
Clinic and Health Centre .. 2.00 acres
Branch Library .. .. .. 0.50 acre
Community Centre .. .. 3.00 acres
Spare 1.25 acres
Note. —lt should be emphasised that this total of
10 acres excludes public parking space, and that the
figures as between one use and another might vary
considerably.
( v ) Main Roads and Parking
Most of the area required for streets has already
been included in the calculations of Net Residential
Densities. The remainder —main shopping streets,
regional roads passing through localities, together
with parking facilities in local centres, has been
assessed at 1.0 acre per 1,000 —an extremely variable
figure according to local circumstances, but liberal
enough to cover most normal cases.
( vi ) Local Standards—Summary
The total suggested standard of non-residential
local uses is from 5.60 to 8.15 acres per 1,000 persons,
and results in Local Gross Densities varying from 10
to 66 persons per acre, according to the situation of
the locality (Table 38).
J. THE DISTRICT
For the purpose of making planning calculations,
groups of localities have been combined into districts.
Of different sizes, depending on many factors (Section
C), they generally contain populations of between
20,000 and 60,000 persons. In Diagram 7 tentative
district boundaries are defined, and the proposed
standards for district uses which follow have been
related to these areas in order to assess the size of
the population they may contain. Future changes in
the pattern of local government in the Region would
be bound to have some effect on the definition of
district boundaries. If a more satisfactory pattern
of homogeneous districts is achieved there will be an
increase of interest in local affairs which, in turn, will
have considerable influence on the functioning of
local administration.
(i) Open Space
It has been suggested in Chapter 6 that, generally,
a total of 6.2 acres per 1,000 persons be provided for
District Open Space. In central residential areas,
however, it is suggested that this amount would not
be practicable, and that a standard of 0.5 acres per
1,000, for parks and gardens only, would be all that
might be achieved. There is compensation for this
small provision in the nearness of the large central
open spaces of regional importance.


(ii) Secondary School Sites
State High Schools will be required on the theo-
retical basis of one school accommodating 1,200
pupils for each district of 40,000 persons. In practice,
in order to provide for detached districts of less than
40,000 persons, and to make allowance for the re-
stricted site areas of many existing schools, the overall
distribution of State High Schools suggested in the
Regional Plan represents a standard of one school
for each 35,000 persons. Each school will require a
total site area of 20 acres, of which 16.5 acres will be
used for playing fields. The remaining 3.5 acres, for
school buildings, represents a standard of approxi-
mately 0.1 acre per 1,000 persons. In addition,
provision has been made for private secondary schools
on the basis of 0.15 acre per 1,000 persons, including
private playing fields. The standard for State High
School playing fields, approximately 0.5 acre per
1,000 persons, has already been included as an open
space provision (Chapter 6, Section E (ii) (c)).
In the Plan, both existing and proposed new sites
are accurately defined where possible, but in many
cases where sites are either too small to be drawn to
scale, or not yet finally determined, they are shown
symbolically. Summarising the provisions of the
Plan, it is proposed that four existing High Schools
(Modem, Kent Street, Perth Girls’ and Forrest) con-
tinue in use on their present sites. Sites for a further
13 schools are either established, or under negotiation,
in Applecross, Melville, Mount Lawley, Belmont,
Hollywood, Fremantle, Midland Junction, Claremont,
Tuart Hill, Churchlands, South Fremantle, Stock
Reserve and Lake Monger. An additional 14 sites
are proposed, seven North of the Swan River, seven
South of the River, resulting in a total of 31 schools
in the inner metropolitan area. In the detached
outer metropolitan areas, a further eight schools are
indicated on the Plan, three in the Rockingham area,
one each at Kwinana, Armadale, Kalamunda, Mount
Helena and Glen Forrest. (Diagram 38).
The distribution of Technical Schools and Teachers’
Colleges, being of regional rather than district signifi-
cance, is dealt with in Chapter 10.
In calculating District Gross Densities , therefore,
allowance has been made for secondary education to
a standard of 0.25 acre per 1,000 persons for State
school buildings and private school sites (which, in
this case, include playing fields).
(iii) Shops and Offices
It has already been suggested that district shopping
facilities should be provided on a scale of 3.5 shops
per 1,000 persons, or 0.2 acre per 1,000 persons.
The overall standard suggested for district business
purposes (Table 38) is 0.5 acre per 1,000 persons.
This is a generous allowance. Trading in district
centres will tend to be more intensive, or, put in
another way, land will be more intensively used.
The " supermarket,” with its selling highly system-
atised, will deal with a greater number of buyers per
unit of floor space than the traditional individual
shop. Therefore, because existing average shop
sizes have been used as the basis for calculating
standards in terms of area, it is likely that the resulting
total will be more than sufficient in many districts,
particularly if the office requirements fall below the
average. This latter figure is quite unpredictable and
no separate calculation has been undertaken.
District centres are shown in the Plan by symbols
indicating their approximate desirable location, which
takes into account the pattern of communications
and likely catchment area. It will be one of the
functions of the detailed planning schemes, following
this Plan, to define actual sites and areas, and in
particular to make specific recommendations regard-
ing the consolidation and expansion of existing
centres. With a few notable exceptions, these are
largely ill-defined ribbons, fulfilling a range of func-
tions varying from those of a local to those of a
regional character. The current tendency for shops
to spread haphazardly along major traffic routes is
to be deplored as a thoroughly unsatisfactory arrange-
ment for shoppers, road users and, in the very near
future, for retailers. Unnecessarily long distances
are involved in movements from shop to shop, car
parking is difficult, through traffic is hampered and
crossing the road by foot is both a dangerous and
time-wasting venture, The situation will undoubtedly
deteriorate as the volume of traffic on the roads in-
creases. The tendency will then be for the shopper
to go to the centre where a car may easily be parked
and where it is no hazard to proceed from shop to
shop.
In the design of new centres, and in the further
development of existing shopping areas, shops should
be sited off major roads, though adjacent to them,
and, after full provision has been made for the parking


of cars, centres should be planned for the convenience
of pedestrians. Adequate service roads and loading
facilities should form an integral part of the design.
More detailed recommendations are made in Append-
ix IV.
The provision of district centres is regarded as
essential to the establishment of satisfactory com-
munities. As the central regional shopping areas in
in Perth and Fremantle grow and become more special-
ised in character, catering for occasional and luxury
as distinct from daily and essential requirements, the
need for district centres will become more apparent.
The city centres will be crowded with activities of
all kinds and the outer suburbs will be at a con,
siderable distance from them. The shopping centre
of an intermediate size but containing a full range of
shops will be both more convenient to many house-
wives and more economical for retailers. In a
district of 30,000 persons, the main shopping centre
would contain from 100 to 120 shops or the equivalent
number of retail outlets, together with other district
uses as described in the following sub-sections.
(iv) Community and Public Buildings
As at local level, it is extremely difficult to forecast
the probable future need for buildings in this category.
Requirements will vary according to the location and
character of the district, but in general terms allow-
ance must be made for buildings connected with
local government, for churches, t drill halls, cinemas,
libraries, and unforeseeable and diverse uses all
requiring convenient sites in the district centre.
The standard suggested for new areas is 1.0 acre per
1,000 persons. This would provide, in districts of
30,000, some 30 acres for the establishment of groups
of these buildings. Together with the district busi-
ness area of 15 acres, parking facilities occuping, say,
10 acres, and ornamental gardens of 10 acres, a typical
district centre would require about 65 acres if all
community buildings were concentrated there. In
practice a certain amount of dispersion is bound to
take place, but this should be discouraged by zoning.
A real attempt should be made to achieve fine archi-
tectural groups in each district. They would form
the heart or core, the centre where all the inhabitants
of the district would meet. Such a centre would
include the following :
Public Hall and Social Centre .. 3.0 acres
District Library .. .. .. 1.0 acre
Health Centre 4.0 acres
Cinemas 3.0 acres
Hotels 3.0 acres
Police Station .. .. .. 1.0 acre
Fire Station .. .. .. 1.0 acre
Telephone Exchange .. .. 0.5 acre
Town Hall or Local Government
Offices 5.0 acres
Dance Hall 1.0 acre
Private Clubs, etc. . . .. 1.0 acre
Gymnasium and Squash Courts .. 2.0 acres
Churches 2.0 acres
Miscellaneous .. .. .. 2.5 acres
Total for Community Buildings 30.0 acres
As a comparison, it is interesting to note that in
the City of Subiaco, with a population of about
20,000, the total area occupied by community build-
ings, dispersed through the district, is approximately
24 acres. Many of the building sites are cramped,
and there is no provision for a number of possible
uses. On the basis of the standards suggested in
this Chapter (including one acre per 1,000 for local
uses), the requirements of a district of 20,000 popula-
tion would be 20 acres for district community uses
and 20 acres for local uses, or 40 acres in total.
(v) District Industry
Reference has been made in Chapter 4 to the
necessity of providing sites for certain industries
within areas zoned in the Plan primarily for resi-
dential purposes. The amount suggested is 1.0
acre per 1,000 persons. This provision is intended
to cover the location requirements of the smaller
factories and workshops, which would require sites
in small zones for light or local industry or, in certain
cases, individual sites within the residential localities.


The selection of suitable areas can only be the subject
of detailed planning schemes, and in general they are
not defined in this Plan.
( vi ) Main Roads and Parking
Additional provision must be made for main roads
not already included in local housing and other uses,
and for car parking not included in sites for com-
munity and public buildings. A figure of 1.0 acre
per 1,000 persons is suggested as an approximate
requirement for these purposes.
(vii) District Standards : Summary
The amount of land required for district develop-
ment, other than residential, varies from 2.25 to 9.95
acres per 1,000 persons. Taking everything into
account, District Gross Densities vary from 9 to 57
persons per acre (Table 38). The latter figure
is only applicable to very limited areas immediately
adjacent to the central commercial area of Perth.
For nearly all areas of both existing and new develop-
ment, a density of 12 persons per acre is used in
calculating district populations. Particular areas are
described in Chapter 10. It is quite clear that a
future population of more than 1,000,000 could
quite comfortably be accommodated, at acceptable
densities, in the residential districts defined in the
Plan. ‘
The Plan, in fact, shows that there is adequate
space in the residential districts for a population of
about 1,400,000. A considerable margin is thus
allowed for vacant blocks which may be fairly
numerous in the newer residential areas at the time
when the population reaches the figure of 1,000,000.
K. THE REGION
To complete the picture of development in the
Metropolitan Region, it is necessary to note im-
portant buildings and uses which will be required
to serve the needs of a much larger population.
Many of these have already been mentioned in the
Report. They include areas required for regional
open space, forestry, market gardening, mineral
extraction, the armed forces, government depart-
ments, manufacturing industry, harbours and docks,
airports and railways which have been described in
other Chapters. Chapter 9 discusses the buildings
and uses appropriate to the city centres of Perth and
Fremantle. Reference must also be made to regional
hospitals and other buildings in the field of public
health ; the University and other centres of higher
education ; miscellaneous establishments and insti-
tutions which cannot be provided for by specific
proposals. Some of these buildings or groups of
buildings are, or will be, established within residential
districts, but the majority, requiring large sites, will
generally be in the buffer zones between districts or,
perhaps, in the open country outside the main urban
concentration. On this assumption, no reductions
in District Gross Densities have been made to allow
for their inclusion, but buffer zones are adequate in
area to contain both recreational areas and large
institutions, as suggested in Chapter 6. Generally,
the application of theoretical standards to regional
requirements is not appropriate. The picture is
completed, therefore, in Chapter 10, in which the
actual patterns of development resulting from the
application of standards to the various residential
areas, together with additional proposals of regional
significance, are discussed.


CHAPTER 9
Central Areas: Perth and Fremantle
Land development reflects a continuing conflict
between the advantages of concentration and a desire
for spacious surroundings. Concentration and dis-
persal are the major forces affecting urban growth ;
concentration occurring at points where there is an
ever increasing range of activities, and as a con-
sequence a greater number of people come together.
For this reason central areas of any city demand more
detailed survey and analysis than generally devoted
to suburban or regional areas, on the premise that
solutions for the difficulties of central area congest-
ion which is perhaps the most urgent problem, should
be considered in greatest detail first.
In all large cities, the pattern of development has
been unable to keep pace with the rapidity of growth
and technological progress. Changes to the detriment
of the efficient working of a city are often made. In
city centres, buildings on inadequate sites, with
notable exceptions, have become more and more
bulky, accommodating more and more workers in
less congenial surroundings. Firms have expanded
into adjoining property, often unsuitable, in the
belief that any inconvenience of arrangement and
working conditions would only be temporary. An
increasing number of car owners have found it difficult
to find parking space near their place of work.
Road systems, designed for light horse-drawn traffic,
fail to allow a reasonable traffic flow. These are
some of the difficulties of which most people are
aware, but preoccupation with the urgent problems
of the present tends to prevent rational thinking
about the future. Problems are continually being
posed, and for a city to function efficiently these
should be solved as soon as possible, but solutions
can be sensible and long lasting only if the changing
details are seen in relation to each other.
The relationship that exists between the problems
of the Central Area and that of the Metropolitan
Region are similar to those existing between Perth
and Fremantle : complementary to each other, yet
having their own distinctive characteristics. For this
reason Perth and Fremantle have been studied
separately. Although the centre of Fremantle is now
very much smaller than that of Perth, and will remain
so, it has many similar problems. The main differ-
ence is one of scale.
PART I: PERTH
A. INTRODUCTION
Perth, the capital city, is the administrative, com-
mercial and cultural centre of the State, and though
most of its central area problems are as yet only
incipient —as it is only recently that Perth has begun
to move rapidly towards being a large city many
problems are already acute and increasing in number
and extent.
It is necessary, however, to appreciate that the
present stage of growth is transitional, and the seem-
ingly insuperable problems of the great city lie largely
in the future. Because of this, many difficulties may
be avoided. It is possible for Perth to make pro-
vision for its future without going through all the
intermediate stages of growth in which costly mis-
takes are made. It is growing at such a speed that
it is in a position to leap forward through the time
scale and make now, what are regarded by larger cities
as most desirable but almost impossible major moves.
The great cities of Australia and the world, have
realised only when it is virtually too late, that these
major moves should be made. In a concentrated
central area, problems of development and redevelop-
ment are always difficult of solution. Much money
has been wasted in all cities on moves which have
proved to be but temporary palliatives.


The Central Area of Perth is the heart of the Metro-
politan Region. It contains the principal com-
mercial streets and the main public buildings. An
area difficult to define in precise terms, it embraces
large and small shops where purchases of every kind
may be made ; offices for business and public ad-
ministration ; storage and specialist commodity
warehousing ; entertainment and cultural facilities ;
restaurants and hotels ; places of worship and
assembly ; and small open spaces for relaxation. It
may be assumed to be within a framework formed
by Havelock Street, Wellington Street, Colin Street,
Oxford Street, Newcastle Street, Charles Street,
Stuart Street, Forbes Road, William Street, New-
castle Street, Lord Street, Summers Street, the Swan
River to the East and South, and Kings Park to the
West. This is an area greater than that regarded by
most people as the city centre, but it includes all the
scattered central public buildings, some of which
are North of the railway.
An essential first step in preparing a plan is to
ascertain the facts of the present situation. On this
basis, the main problems may be determined and
posed as a whole. Within the Central Area, in-
tensive special surveys have recorded not only the
existing use of all buildings, or parts of buildings, but
also the floor areas in use for the various central
area purposes. These facts and figures, after cor-
relation and assessment, show the location and extent
of all central area activities in maps and tables, and
give a clear indication of the existing pattern and
general trends of development. Without this in-
tensive factual survey as a starting point central area
planning would be mere guesswork. It is also
essential to appreciate the significance of the past.
The future may then be seen not as a stage out of
reach, but as part of the continuous process of evolu-
tion, to some extent conditioned by history.
B. THE PAST
The historical background to the development of
the State has been described in Chapter I. Here it is
perhaps sufficient to mention that, in 1829, Captain
Stirling decided that Perth should be the seat of
Government. As in other Australian capitals the
original townsite has become the Central Area. It
is difficult to select a site for a new town but now,
136 years later, it can be seen that Captain Stirling’s
decision was wise. Perth was sited on rising ground
overlooking the Swan River, with the bluff of Mt.
Eliza to the West and the promise of rich agricultural
land in the river flats to the East. Fresh spring
water was available, adding to the natural advantages.
Perth has been similar to most " Outposts of
Empire,” evolving through good times and bad,
through periods of privation and hardship and initial
reliance upon supplies and resources from England,
to an increasing independence. Physical development
at the beginning was unusually slow. The State was
vast, communications poor, and great areas of land
were inhospitable. The first considerable impetus
to building came with the discovery of the major
goldfield. Until then Perth was little more than a
country town containing administrative headquarters.
The initial subdivisional lots were large and gave each
settler adequate land for building. With the influx
of gold-seeking immigrants, and the rise in economic
prosperity of the State, the town spread outwards
and land values increased. Original subdivisions
within the Central Area were re-subdivided at the
very moment when large buildings were being erected,
and this process can now be seen as the beginnings of
a pattern of congestion. From the turn of the
century there has been continuous expansion until
today, when the State appears to be entering a new
period of rapid development, which is giving great
impetus to Central Area activity and building.
C. THE PRESENT
The existing pattern of metropolitan development
is shown on the Regional Land Use Map, but for the
Central Area a more detailed Land Use Map has
been prepared, and included in the Atlas accompany-
ing this Report. It shows the existing distribution
of major activities and trades in a comparatively
simple form and should be studied in relation to the
amount of floor space summarised in Table 39.
Some difficulty has been experienced in determin-
ing the land use pattern in detail. Although it is
comparatively simple to distinguish an office from a
warehouse or an industrial concern, in a consideration
of their characteristics and physical disposition there
is much that is seen to overlap and interact. This is
especially true in the area of mixed development to
the West of the City, where some offices form part
of the warehousing pattern and others may be re-


Table 39
EXISTING USE AND FLOOR SPACE AREA
PERTH CENTRAL AREA
Use.
1
Area of Floor Space in thousands of sq. ft.
Percentage of
Grand Total.
Ground Floor.
Other Floors.
Total All
Floors.
Shops and showrooms
Cafes, sandwich bars, etc. ..
Petrol filling stations without workshops
Total Shopping
Private offices
Banks
Local Government offices ..
State Government offices .. .. . • • • • •
Commonwealth Government offices (including Post Offices) ..
Total Offices ..
Wholesale markets ..
All warehousing
Total Warehousing ..
TOTAL COMMERCIAL
Cinemas
Other recreational
Total Recreational
Total Public and Assembly
Total Cultural
Total Worship
Total Medical
TOTAL CIVIC AND CULTURAL
TOTAL SCHOOLS AND EDUCATIONAL ..
»
Single dwelling houses
Flats, including hostels
Hotels ..
TOTAL RESIDENTIAL
Petrol filling stations with workshops
Industry
TOTAL INDUSTRIAL
Military
Railway
Public utilities and depots
Car parking
Public transport parking
Stables
TOTAL MISCELLANEOUS
GRAND TOTAL, all uses
1,860
123
10
1,516
32
2
3,376
155
12
13-67
•63
•05
1,993
1,550
3,543
14-35
809
143
70
479
244
2,031
154
27
355
389
2,840
297
97
834
633
11-51
1-20
•39
3-38
2-57
1,745
2,956
4,701
19-05
241
904
13
702
254
1,606
1-03
6-51
1,145
715
1,860
7-54
4,883
5,221
10,104
40-94
60
75
87
76
147
151
•60
•61
135
163
298
1-21
225
348
573
2-32
70
87
157
•64
95
11
106
•43
157
394
551
2-23
682
1,003
1,685
6-83
291
223
514
2-08
2,054
2,033
299
l’,407
625
2,054
3,440
924
8-32
13-93
3-75
4,386
2,032
6,418
26-00
162
4,266
42
775
204
5,041
•83
20-42
4,428
817
5,245
21-25
47
264
255
39
58
4
17
26
7
64
290
262
39
58
4
•26
1-17
1-06
•16
•23
•02
667
50
717
2-90
15,337
9,346
24,683
100-00
SOURCE : Field survey as at 31st December, 1953.


garded as self-contained units. An existing office
area stretches in an almost unbroken line along both
sides of St. George’s Terrace, and light industrial
development is obvious North of the railway, but
there are large areas of the town in transition, where
no one particular city function is predominant, or
where on one site no specialization of use has occurred
and diverse activities of a single trading firm are
carried on. Unless it has been possible to eliminate
certain uses as strictly incidental to a predominant
use, all uses have been shown on the Land Use Map
proportionately equal in area to the notation colour.
Where upper floor uses differ from ground floor uses,
both colour notations have been shown separated by
a diagonal line.
In a stable community which is only changing its
building pattern slowly, particular areas are attractive
to particular uses. In the aggregate, business chooses
its location with care, following an established se-
quence of development. Trends are perhaps more
clearly discernible in the shopping pattern than any
other. All shops group themselves initially around
the centre of the town’s activity—usually the town
hall or the central cross roads. With the growth of
the town, land values increase and a number of
factors, largely economic, complicate a grouping
which initially was simple. In the modern city,
retail outlets for bulky goods or products which are
bought only on infrequent, special occasions tend
to move to the edge of the intensively used shopping
area. There they find the large floor area required
for display may be provided more economically.
This centrifugal dispersal can be seen in Perth in the
siting of car showrooms. Eventually they will
probably re-group at the approaches to the heart of
the City.
Where land values are continuously rising, wise
businessmen have bought sites, anticipating develop-
mental trends, in advance of the existing pattern.
Others less willing or unable to make capital invest-
ment, or enjoying peculiar site trading advantages,
remain in premises not achieving the full potential
value of the site. This creates a confused pattern
(as between King and Milligan Streets, for example),
which will become simpler, so far as use is con-
cerned, as further general expansion takes place.
Table 40
EXISTING AND PROPOSED FLOOR SPACE SUMMARY
PERTH CENTRAL AREA
Use.
Existing
Floor Space,
in thousands
of sq. ft.
Gross Zoned
Area,
in thousands
of sq. ft.
Proposed
Maximum
Plot
Ratio.
Theoretical
Maximum
Floor Space
available,
in thousands
of sq. ft.f
Possible Future Floor Space required,
in thousands of sq. ft., based upon :
Direct
increase of
population
(X 3-6).
Possible
Future
Employment
(Table 45).
Comparison
with existing
statistics for
Melbourne.
Shopping
2,800
5,500
5
27,500
j- 12,600
14,906
7,000
Showrooms
700*
1,900
5
9,500
Offices (excluding Government
offices)
3,100
4,800
5
24,000
11,160
10,086
6,900
Warehousing ..
1,600
2,900
1-5*
4,350
5,760
6,059
..
Industrial
5,200
11,900
1
11,900
♦ .
8,667
5,700
Civic and Cultural
1,700
/
6,120
3,100
Government offices ..
1,600
> 4,yuu
* *
*• l
5,760
4,924
4,400
Residential
6,400
5,000
1
5,000
• •
3,800
NOTE : * Survey of existing land use made no detailed classification of showroom accommodation. For the purposes of this
table, total floor space of 3,500,000 sq. ft. for all shopping uses has been apportioned 2,800,000 sq. ft. to shopping use, 700,000 sq.
ft. to showroom use.
f The future total floor space of zoned use within any zone will be less than the theoretical maximum floor space available, owing
to (i) existing development likely to remain and future development likely to be built within the zone at low densities, especially in
outer fringe areas ; (ii) the continuation and expansion within the zone under consideration, of uses other than the zoned use; and
(iii) the continuation and limited expansion of the zoned use under consideration in other zones, where such uses are permitted.


66
Transition. The early domestic architecture
of Lord Street contrasting with the recently com-
pleted Royal Perth Hospital indicates the rapid
change of scale in the Central Area.


67
67. Hay Street : 1870.
Adequate 80 years ago.
68. Hay Street : present day
view from the same position.
68


69
69. St. Georges Terrace, the main street
of Perth in the heart of the office area.
70. The Inner Central Area. This view
illustrates the growing congestion of the
commercial centre.
70


71
71. Service access difficulties,
Murray Street.
72. Traffic congestion : Earrack
Street Bridge.
72


73
73. Temporary Government Offices,
Malcolm Street. Their relocation on a
more adequate site is an important recom-
mendation of the Plan.
74. A modern office and flat develop-
ment in the Central Area, achieving high
density in a layout made spacious by tower
buildings.
74


75
LOOKING DOWN SHERWOOD COURT.
The Swan River and adjoining open space
provide a valuable contrast with the close de-
velopment of the Central Area.


Central Area expansion has been in a general
westerly direction. This is not only because of the
main transport routes of the past but also because
the many public buildings to the East of Barrack
Street have provided an effective stop to growth.
Owners of houses, showrooms, warehouses and light
industrial buildings have continually found it ex-
pedient to sell their properties as shop or office sites
and resume their activities elsewhere. This leapfrog
action has been very marked during the past few
years and the fringe of the Central Area, defined both
by conversion and new building, is noticeably further
West than it was before the War.
D. PRINCIPLES
Many diverse factors affect the detailed pattern of
building within a city. Of these, three have been
made the subject of independent studies.
(i) Zoning—a study of land use, its location
and relationship with other uses.
(ii) Intensity of use—a study of building bulk
and the amount of accommodation within
specified areas.
(iii) Daylighting—a study of the detailed dis-
position of building blocks to ensure
reasonable working conditions and ade-
quate ventilation, especially in office build-
ings.
( i ) Zoning
For the efficiency of the City, it is desirable that all
parts of the whole should function as smoothly and
as simply as possible ; confusion is undesirable.
Zoning should anticipate the changes which result
from growth, and working with natural economic
forces, it should ensure that each part of the Central
Area performs its function to the best advantage. It
may be necessary, for example, in some areas, on the
grounds of equity to all, to restrict any expansion in
industrial activity which would by reason of its
noise, smoke, or the traffic generated, react unfairly
to neighbouring traders.
Although the present pattern of development may
seem confused in detail there is a striking clarity in
the grouping of main uses. It may be said that there
is a " natural zoning,” and that a zoning scheme
should pay due regard to this, aiming to clarify and
make more efficient the developing natural pattern.
Certain uses remain in areas now unsuited to their
particular function, but nearly all of these (bulk
stores in the shopping area for example), will in
time move to more appropriate zones as the result
of normal economic forces.
The requirements of the Central Area of Perth
have been discussed at some length with the Town
Planning Committee and officers of the City Council,
and a zoning scheme very similar in essentials to that
proposed in the Regional Plan has been incorporated
in a By-law drawn up by the City Council. Broadly
this suggests a rational use of available land, and
ensures enough land in the most desirable location
for all foreseeable activities. At the same time, con-
trol is exercised to prevent incompatible uses en-
croaching upon land that is best reserved for other
purposes.
The Regional Plan suggests four main zonal classi-
fications within the Central Area : Industrial ;
Residential ; Business ; Civic and Cultural Building.
Additional railway requirements, car parking and
other necessary uses are also classified. The area
reserved primarily for business use is further sub-
divided into five distinct categories each with their
own particular characteristics and requirements ;
Shopping ; Showrooms ; Markets ; Offices ;
Warehousing. These areas are shown on the Zoning
Proposals Map in the Atlas accompanying this
Report, and are shown in simplified form in Diagram
25.
Industrial zones are located North-West and
North-East of the City, to the North of the railway
reservation. The existing land use pattern indicates
that industry is well established within these areas,
and unless comprehensive redevelopment proposals
are made by the local authority, consolidation of
industry should be allowed.
Residential zones are suggested in three distinct
areas : to the West of the City bordering Kings
Park ; and to the East below Adelaide Terrace facing
the river ; and a larger area mainly between Bennett
and Plain Streets, with all the advantages of con-
siderable existing open space in the neighbourhood.
Shopping is expected to consolidate within present
areas, served in part by warehousing close to the


Diagram 25 SIMPLI FIED DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS : PERTH CENTRAL AREA.
City on the northern side of the railway. The estab-
lishment of a warehousing zone will help to prevent
any disruption of the shopping pattern.
Offices will continue to spread eastwards along
Adelaide Terrace, with an additional area South of
the future main line railway station.
Special zones are suggested for showrooms, located
at three points of entry to the city, to the North, East
and West, at the fringe of the Central Area. In-
creasing economic competition for central city space
will preclude showrooms having large floor space
requirements retaining their present sites, and with
special zones allocated for their use, an already existing
tendency will be continued.
A zoning table and suggested ordinance, listing the
various types of land use considered to be permissible
or undesirable, within each zone, is included in
Appendix 11.
( ii ) Intensity of Use
In the Central Area it is particularly desirable that
the total amount of building in any one block, street
or area should be distributed fairly evenly. An
equitable distribution of volume resulting from an
agreed control, based on facts, would not only ensure
that all developers started on even terms, and were
able to design and erect modern, spacious buildings,


Diagram 26
PLOT RATIO : EXPLANATORY EXAMPLES
but also it would go a long way toward solving the
problem of pedestrian and vehicular traffic congestion,
now becoming serious where building density is at
its highest. An established relationship between* use,
building bulk, and circulation space should be basic
to central area planning. It is true that a certain
degree of congestion cannot be avoided. This is
inevitable in the one place where concentration is
justified on grounds of both economy and con-
venience. But at the present time there is great
unevenness in development. In some places there
is over-concentration ; in others there are extra-
ordinarily low densities.
The historical difficulty of equating the individual
desire to concentrate as much floor space as possible
on a given site with the public need to preserve good
working conditions, safety and amenity, is at the
root of the problem of more intensive development.
As the calculations show, there is room for an enorm-
ous increase in the total volume of building. The


Diagram 27 (a)
EXISTING PLOT RATIOS : PERTH CENTRAL AREA
Plan suggests how this may be disposed to the benefit
of all concerned, now and in the future. It is to be
hoped that general agreement is quickly reached on
the reasonable principles of development put forward.
Existing Building By-laws may have been appropri-
ate to conditions prevailing in the past, but no longer
effectively control the bulk and shape of central area
buildings in a manner that is both reasonable and
rational. Some measure of the amount of accom-
modation, or floor space, on a given site must be an
integral part of such a control.
Floor space may be measured by :
(a) the Floor Space Index which relates the
total floor space of a building or group of
buildings, to the area of the site plus half
the width of the adjoining street or streets ;
or
(b) the Plot Ratio which relates the total floor
space, to the area of the site, without any
consideration of the adjoining street widths.
(Diagram 26)


Diagram 21 ( b)
PROPOSED PLOT RATIOS : PERTH CENTRAL AREA
For simplicity of operation the Plot Ratio control
has certain advantages over the Floor Space Index
and is considered to offer the simplest method of
measuring the existing, or establishing the proposed
intensity of use of a particular plot or street block.
To understand its application it is necessary to
define a number of terms used.
Area of Site : The size of the allotment as shown
on the title deeds.
Total Floor Space : For any floor this is taken
as the sum of the roofed areas, including all
wall thicknesses, and in total includes all floors
other than basements used exclusively for
parking, services, or storage.
Plot Ratio : For any building or buildings, this
is obtained by dividing the total floor space
by the area of site.
Permissible Floor Space : Obtained by multiply-
ing the area of site by the Plot Ratio.


The existing Plot Ratio for each city block varies
according to local conditions, location, and the exist-
ing building pattern. Within the Central Area the
existing maximum Plot Ratio is slightly over 3.0.
Expressed in other terms this indicates that the street
block containing the most accommodation has a
total floor space in building development slightly
greater than three times its own area. In only three
street blocks of a total of nearly 200 does the existing
Plot Ratio exceed 3.0 ; in only 10 does it exceed
2.0 ; and in only 20 does it exceed 1.0 (Diagram 27).
On individual sites within the framework of the
street block, variation in the intensity of use is more
noticeable. On some sites the present By-laws would
permit buildings with a Plot Ratio of approximately
10.0. This it should be noted is almost twice the
permitted maximum (of 5.5) within the intensively
used City of London.
The folly of building to a Plot Ratio of 10.0 may
not be immediately apparent, as there are only one
or two examples of individual buildings at this ratio,
and on three sides they " borrow ” light and air
from their neighbours. But it should be remembered
that the right to build at this intensity exists for all,
and if this is perpetuated every developer at points of
greatest concentration may build to the maximum,
and there will be no light to be " borrowed.” A
concentration of exceptionally high site values in one
or two street blocks which might result from a high
Plot Ratio would be unwise. A more equal dis-
tribution of bulk at a lower Plot Ratio would have the
beneficial effect of spreading values and development.
A whole street block 10 storeys high, with relatively
minute and totally inadequate light courts to internal
offices, would cause extreme and unnecessary traffic
congestion and undesirable working conditions for
thousands of employees, with an appreciable loss of
overall efficiency. It would, in addition, constitute
a serious fire hazard as the interior of the block would
be virtually inaccessible to fire fighting equipment.
Further development should be spread equitably
throughout the length of the City and advantage
taken of the magnificent sites available to build in-
telligently and well. Surprising as it may seem there
is ample space in the Central Area for large modern
buildings.
Within the Central Area of Perth defined in the
Regional Plan, for a population of some 1,400,000,
it is shown that in both the office and shop zones
sufficient space is provided for the Plot Ratio not
to exceed 3.5. It might be argued that this would
be unreasonably restrictive after the latitude allowed
by existing By-laws. It is, therefore, suggested that
a maximum Plot Ratio of 5.0 for both office and shop
zones alike (for simplicity and ease of administration)
would be acceptable to developers generally, and still
provide a measure of equity to all. It would restrict
abnormally excessive building, and produce a guiding
control to ensure that central Perth continues to
enjoy the possibility of becoming one of the finest
administrative and commercial centres in the world.
The proposed form of control, relating floor space
to site area, with consideration given to the provision
of adequate daylighting conditions, has three ob-
jectives : (a) bulk should be related to site and the
volume of traffic generated ; (b) adequate working
conditions should be assured within each building ;
and (c) all developers should have equitable treat-
ment and full knowledge that their interests will not
be affected by unneighbourly buildings.
Adherence to any proposed Plot Ratio only con-
trols the building bulk, with the aim to ensure good
working conditions and to relieve pedestrian and
vehicular traffic congestion. It places a limit on
traffic to and from the site. Governing angles to
ensure adequate daylight, in the case of an office
building, will help to determine the form of individual
buildings.
(iii) Daylighting
Ventilation, access and daylighting are all dealt with
in existing By-laws which have come into being in
piecemeal fashion over many years. It is generally
agreed that revision has long been overdue, and a
Technical Committee has been examining existing
By-laws with a view to their revision. l Conditions
have changed greatly in the past twenty or thirty
years. There has never been a survey of conditions
or a comprehensive picture of the Central Area as
it might be, and in recent years considerable scientific
study has been devoted to the problems of daylight-
ing and ventilation. The facts and the Plan suggest
a major revision of the present arbitrary rules.
1 " Committee to make recommendations to the W.A. Government for
the adoption of a uniform set of building regulations to have effect
throughout Western Australia.”


Existing by-laws exercise a rigid control and the
resulting shapes of buildings are poor. The by-laws
demand the provision of so-called light courts. These
are a misnomer, and with intensification of develop-
ment, would not ensure anything more than token
lighting and the poorest of ventilation. In new high
density office building, even with the use of light
reflecting surfaces and agreement with neighbouring
offices to build reciprocal courts, design according to
the by-laws ensures little more than vertical tubes
open at the top, which by no stretch of the imagina-
tion could be called either adequate light wells or
satisfactory channels for fresh air. Because office
building in central Perth has only just begun to result
in large units, the worst effects of the by-laws are
not yet apparent. With the notable exception of
the C.M.L. Building, new office buildings have so
far relied on taking advantage of low densities on
neighbouring plots, on the assumption that these
may not be developed, or if they are, there would be
a need for artificial lighting in a large part of the
building. In future, if redevelopment continues on
present lines, the majority of office employees will
work eventually under artificial lighting, and obtain
air from high, narrow shafts. This will make poor
working conditions in the psychological as well as
the physical sense.
It should be taken for granted, that the many
thousands of people working in offices should have
good working conditions. In Great Britain this is
now fully accepted and, in central area redevelopment
office building is taking forms which allow not only
good lighting conditions and ventilation to all rooms
used as offices, but also ensure that one building does
not rob a neighbouring building of light and air. In
the City of London where 500,000 people work in
an area of one square mile, new office buildings give
adequate standards of light and air and are good
neighbours. It would be regrettable and unnecessary
if central Perth, which is much less confined than the
City of London, and which enjoys light and air the
envy of visitors, should continue to grow in an
obsolete manner. To this end it is more logical to
encourage the development of office buildings which
are tall, well-ventilated, and adequately lit. Narrow,
internal light courts should be regarded as things of
the past. Light and air should come from large
spaces at the back and front of buildings on small
sites, and from all sides in the case of large units on
large sites.
The expansion of the Central Area, much of it on
underdeveloped land, will be considerable, whereas
in London, as an example, there will be comparatively
little expansion. There is every reason why central
Perth, now at an early stage of growth, should be a
truly modern city. The opportunity is there to be
accepted.
Much of the intensity of lighting to be obtained
within a building is directly conditioned by the size
and detailed position of all windows ; the reflective
qualities inherent in the textures, colour and materials
of all walls, ceilings, floors and fittings ; and the
position of any internal partitions and furniture.
Reflected light from opposite facades of buildings
and other external sources, and the quality of light
itself, will also affect the amount of internal day-
lighting available in any particular office.
Some of these factors, if not all, should be under
the control of the occupier, or prior to building, the
architect, and effective measures may improve other-
wise poor lighting possibilities. It is, however, the
external characteristics and disposition of building
elements on adjoining sites that most affect the
ultimate daylighting conditions. It is obvious that
with all the artifice in the world little can improve
the daylight obtainable in a room whose window
faces the blank wall of a neighbouring building 10
feet away.
A form of daylighting control would ensure that
offices on an external wall have access to sufficient
daylight to secure reasonable working conditions
within the building.
To achieve some form of equitable control it is
necessary to define daylighting requirements quanti-
tatively. This is difficult, and the subject is lengthy
and complex. It is nevertheless possible to relate
the amount of daylight available during normal
working hours for most of the year, to the amount
of daylight necessary for an individual to perform
simple unexacting duties. A considerable amount
of scientific study relating to Australian conditions
has been undertaken by the Industrial Welfare Di-
vision of the Commonwealth Department of Labour
and National Service, Melbourne, and they have
tentatively established a daylighting relationship for
Perth, which has been incorporated in a suggested
form of daylighting control in Appendix 111.


Research into this problem is being continued by
the Department of Labour and National Service and
the form of daylighting control suggested should be
regarded as an interim measure. Although it is
subject to modification it should give results much
superior to those now being achieved under existing
by-laws. It is of interest to note that some de-
velopers and their architects have for some time been
seeking solutions which give much better results
than those resulting from a direct application of the
by-laws, even though by doing so they must get a
by-law waiver from the local authority. In the
United States of America there are world-famous
groups of buildings, e.g., the Rockefeller Centre, in
which adequate daylighting of all offices has been
achieved despite the high density.
E. FUTURE: GENERAL
Whilst it must be recognised that the past, present
and future are all part of a continuing process, after
consideration of the present and a study of existing
trends, it is possible to make a conjectural forecast
of the future, and in doing this offer recommendations
so that the transition from present to future may be
accomplished with comparative ease.
Every- feature of urban life contributes to the
future, but this Report can only make recommenda-
tions on major matters, leaving many of the details
though important, to be clarified later. For the
same reason certain of the drawings that accompany
this Report, especially the Central Area Proposals
Map, must be regarded as only indicating tentative
building design and grouping. Detailed considera-
tions must be left to those responsible for the de-
velopment of these suggestions, and particularly to
architects, whose freedom to solve design problems
within the broad framework of the Plan must not
be unduly restricted.
To prevent undue repetition it is proposed to con-
sider the future under 10 headings.
(i) Employment
It has not been possible in the time available to
obtain comprehensive statistics for employment within
the defined Central Area, but an attempt has been
made to assess the present shop, office, and industrial
employment from the following sources of informa-
tion :
(a) W.A. Government, Department of Labour,
Factories and Shops Inspection Branch
Registrations, as at 31st December, 1953.
(b) Survey of office employment based on 10 per
cent, floor area sample taken by the Town
Planning Department in May, 1954.
(c) Commonwealth Government, Census of
Commonwealth of Australia, 1947.
(It has been necessary to group subsections on
" communications/’ " finance and property,” " public
authority and professional,” appearing in the 1947
census —as " office employment ” ; and similarly
" commerce,” " amusements, hotels, cafes and per-
sonal services ” appearing in the Factories and Shops
Act figures—as " shopping employment.” This has
been done to reconcile desired with available sta-
tistics.)
Differences in classification and definition occur,
but within these limits of accuracy it can be shown
that over 40 per cent, of the available labour force
of the Metropolitan Region work within the Perth
Central Area. This is a large proportion, but it is
to be expected, as Perth acts as the focus and point of
maximum concentration for all activity within the
State.
(a) Shopping Employment
Reference to the number of shops alone does not
give a true indication of the scope of shopping activity,
especially within a central area. Shop units may
vary from exceedingly small shops with minimum
floor area and frontage, employing few assistants, if
any, in addition to the proprietor, to large department
stores operating on many floors with hundreds of
employees. A total of nearly 1,400 shop units
operate within the central survey area, employing
over 14,000 employees, representing over 57 per cent,
of those employed in retail trade in the Region.
These figures are given in detail in Table 41 and
summarised in Table 42.
With the anticipated increase in population it is
estimated that over 125,000 persons will seek em-
ployment in retail and wholesale trade within the
Region, but to assess the percentage relationship that


Table 41
SHOPPING EMPLOYMENT, 1953
PERTH CENTRAL AREA
Type of Shop.
Number of
Number of Employees.
Percentage
of Total
Shop Units.
Male.
Female.
Total.
Employ-
ment.
FOOD AND DRINK
Butchers
Fish
Grocers
Greengrocers
Cafes, milkbars, etc.
Wine saloons
..
27
9
104
34
153
20
98
19
205
81
330
20
23
12
281
59
728
32
121
31
486
140
1,058
52
•84
•22
3-39
•98
7-38
•36
Total ..
347
753
1,135
1,888
13-17
CLOTHING
Drapers and mercers
Shoe sales ..
Shoe repairs
..
173
17
17
436
103
18
687
199
11
1,123
302
29
7-84
2-11
•20
Total ..
..
207
557
897
1,454
10-15
PERSONAL
Office equipment, stationery supplies, booksellers, etc.
Florists
Tobacconists
Jewellers
Optical and other medical services
Hairdressers
Chemists
Sports goods
Photographic supplies
102
20
31
54
25
103
37
8
9
228
21
27
144
40
169
92
22
49
148
60
34
204
43
181
96
5
34
376
81
61
348
83
350
188
27
83
2-62
•56
•43
2-43
•58
2-44
1 -31
•19
•58
Total ..
..
389
792
805
1,597
11-14
HOUSEHOLD
Electrical and radio
Furniture ..
Hardware ..
Leather goods
..
72
46
56
15
678
272
847
42
372
137
336
42
1,050
409
1,183
84
7-
2-85
8-
•59
Total .. • '
..
189
1,839
887
2,726
19-02
DEPARTMENT STORES
..
10
1,342
2,097
3,439
24-00
MOTOR VEHICLES
Car and cycle sales and accessories
Service stations
..
91
38
956
140
272
15
1,228
155
8-57
1-08
Total ..
..
129
1,096
287
1,383
9-65
HOTELS
..
43
396
761
1,157
8-07
MISCELLANEOUS
Machinery and engineering supplies
Scientific instruments
Produce merchants
Secondhand shops
..
25
11
10
26
367
37
41
43
148
17
15
19
515
54
56
62
3-60
•38
•39
•43
Total ..
..
72
488
199
687
4-80
GRAND TOTAL ..
..
1,386
7,263
7,068
14,331
100-00
SOURCE : Compiled from statistics supplied by Factories and Shops Inspection Branch, Department of Labour.


Table 42
SHOPPING EMPLOYMENT SUMMARY
PERTH CENTRAL AREA
Type of Shop.
Number of
Shop Units.
Number of Employees.
Percentage
of Total
Employ-
ment.
Male.
Female.
Total.
Food and drink
347
753
1,135
1,888
13-17
Clothing
207
557
897
1,454
10-15
Personal ..
389
792
805
1,597
11-14
Household
189
1,839
887
2,726
19-02
Department stores
10
1,342
2,097
3,439
24-00
Car sales and service stations
129
1,096
287
1,383
9-65
Hotels
43
396
761
1,157
8-07
Miscellaneous ..
••
••
72
488
199
687
4-80
Total ..
••
••
••
1,386
7,263
7,068
14,331
100-00
SOURCE : Table 41.
Table 43
WAREHOUSING EMPLOYMENT
PERTH CENTRAL AREA
Type of Warehousing.
Number
of Units.
Number of Employees.
Percentage
of Total
Employ-
ment.
Male.
Female.
Total.
Warehousing (including Metropolitan Markets) ..
94
1,300
494
1,794
57-98
General merchants (wholesale and retail)
12
507
319
826
26-70
Agents (wholesale and retail)
122
321
153
474
15-32
Total ..
228
2,128
966
3,094
100-00
SOURCE : Compiled from statistics supplied by Factories and Shops Inspection Branch, Department of Labour, as at 31st
December, 1953.
will exist between those working within a future
Central Area and those working elsewhere is more
difficult.
Some decentralisation of shopping will occur and
district shopping centres are likely to develop where
there are existing nuclei, and in new areas, as pro-
posed in Chapter 8. Recent American examples of
large regional out-of-town shopping centres have
succeeded as a major result of Central Area traffic
chaos. If proposals made are effected, suburban
shopping centres are not likely to influence the Central
Area shopping pattern to the same marked extent.
For this reason it is estimated that approximately
45 per cent. (58,000) of the total number of em-
ployees engaged in retail and wholesale trade within
the Region will work within the Central Area.
(b) Office Employment
From the total floor space devoted to office use,
found by a detailed survey made in December, 1953,
a 10 per cent, random sample was taken and office
employment obtained by questionnaire and sub-
sequent interview. From these figures a relationship
of between 5.8 and 6.6 office workers per 1,000


square feet of office space was established, and in
conjunction with census records provided a statistical
base for possible future office space and employment
standards.
Approximately 29,000 office workers appear to be
employed within the Central Area, and the greater
proportion of these work in offices having access from
a short though clearly defined section of St. George’s
Terrace. This concentration of office employment
poses a number of related problems. Considerable
demands are made on the resources of the public
transport authorities, who attempt to provide suf-
ficient vehicles and stops within the area to cope
with the morning and more especially evening peak
conditions. To the same extent normal traffic
movements to and from this area are correspondingly
high, and parking space is exceedingly difficult to find.
Some suggestions to alleviate the worst of the existing
conditions are made in Sections E (ii) (d) and E (iii)
of this Chapter.
In 1947, within the three census groups considered
as " office employment,” 9 per cent, of the total
population within the Region were engaged. On
the assumption that this percentage has remained
reasonably constant, over 33,000 persons were em-
ployed in offices within the Region in December,
1953, the great majority in Perth and Fremantle.
With a regional population of 1,400,000, the regional
office employment total, even allowing for a slight
proportional decrease due to a change in the re-
lationship between employment demands, may be
over 90,000 persons. Of this total by far the larger
number would work in the Central Area of Perth.
(c) Industrial Employment
In existing factory development, the relationship
of floor space to persons employed establishes a ratio
of 3.2 persons per 1,000 square feet of floor space.
Table 44
ESTIMATED INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT
PERTH CENTRAL AREA
Number
of Units.
Number of Employees.
Percentage
of Total
Type of Industry.
Male.
Female.
Total.
Employ-
ment.
Basic building materials
Chemical and paints
General engineering
Automobile assembly and services ..'
Radio and electrical
Manufacturing jewellers and watchmakers
Canvas goods
Furriers and leatherwork
Clothing
Food and drink
Woodworking ..
Furniture and furnishings
Printing ..
Stationery and engraving
Tyre retreading
Musical instruments
Photographic
Optical ..
Instrument makers and repairers
Government transport
Public utilities ..
Miscellaneous
24
9
122
127
47
20
4
13
163
85
35
61
42
24
15
4
17
7
12
7
4
17
814
202
2,222
1,566
342
84
12
119
681
1,447
692
761
1,547
184
96
49
86
37
72
520
626
42
34
103
184
53
27
6
16
41
1,911
555
15
83
410
50
3
1
122
2
2
5
8
848
305
2,406
1,619
369
90
28
160
2,592
2,002
707
844
1,957
234
99
50
208
39
74
520
631
50
5-36
1-
15-
10-23
2-
0-57
0-18
1-01
16-
12-64
4-
5-
12-35 «
1-48
0-63
0-32
1 *31
0-25
0-47
3-
3-98
0-32
Total ..
••
••
859
12,201
3,631
15,832
100-00
SOURCE : Compiled from statistics supplied by Factories and Shops Inspection Branch, Department of Labour,
December, 1953.


Existing regional population ; 387,000
Existing regional work force ; 155,000
Table 45
ESTIMATED EXISTING AND FUTURE EMPLOYMENT : SUMMARY
PERTH CENTRAL AREA
Future regional population ; 1,400,000
Future regional work force ; 602,000
Type of Employment.
Number
of
Employees.
Percentage of
Central Area
Work Force.
Percentage of
Regional
Work Force.
Workers
1,000 sq.
per
ft.
Total Floor Space
in thousands of
sq. ft.
Existing.
Future.
Existing.
Future.
Existing.
Future.
Existing.
Future.
Existing.
Future.
SHOP
Commerce
Hotels
Cafes .. ..
14,331
47,700
22-1
25-6
9-2
7-9
3-2
3-2
4,467
14,906
OFFICE
Finance ..
Communications
Professional
18,280
58,500
28-2
31-4
11-8
9-7
5-8
5-8
3,137
10,086
OFFICE
Government
10,338
32,500
15-9
17-4
6-7
5-4
6-6
6-6
1,564
4,924
WAREHOUSE
3,094
10,300
4-8
5-5
2-0
1-7
1-7
1-7
1,860
6,059
INDUSTRIAL
15,832
26,000
24-4
13-9
10-2
4-3
3-0
3-0
5,245
8,667
OTHER
Amusement
Cultural ..
Medical ..
Public and Assembly ..
3,000
11,600
4-6
6-2
1-9
1-9
*
*
*
*
Total . *
64,875
186,600
100-0
100-0
41-8
30-9
••
••
••
••
Accepting a standard of 3.2 persons per 1,000
square feet of floor space, and that 8,500,000 square
feet may be expected as a reasonable estimate of floor
space within the proposed zones of approximately
300 acres, the Central Area would offer employment
to about 26,000 industrial workers.
( ii ) Central Area Traffic
(a) The Road and Parking Problem
The effects of rapid expansion and growth that lead
to congestion and ultimate confusion are nowhere
more discernible than in the present road system.
Peripheral suburban housing and high personal
incomes have made an increasing car ownership
inevitable, which in its turn has resulted in an ever-
growing number of vehicles attempting to journey
to and from Perth, along roads and across inter-
sections not designed for traffic volumes now being
experienced.
It is apposite here to re-state some of the figures
and estimates of present and anticipated future traffic
demands given in Chapter 7, so that suggested pro-
posals for the provision of major roads within the
City may be more readily appreciated.
A census of vehicular traffic, excluding bicycles,
passing in and out of a cordon around the central
city area, was taken in June, 1952, and repeated in
February-March, 1954. On both occasions the counts
were conducted during a twelve-hour period on a
* Too many variables exist to make any rational relationship possible between " Other Employment ” and ” Total Floor
Space.”


Diagram 28
TRAFFIC FLOW AT CITY CORDON : PERTH
7 a.m. to 7 p.m. March 1954
normal week-day. In the short period of twenty
months the total number of vehicles, passing into
and out of the Central Area, increased by 21.3 per
cent., from about 80,000 in 1952, to 97,000 in 1954.
This is an increase of more than 12 per cent, per
annum or 1 per cent, per month. The evening peak
flow between 5 p.m. and 6 p.m., in an outward
direction only from the City, was 8,600 vehicles in
1954 (Diagram 28).
For a regional population of 1,400,000 and with
motor vehicle ownership attaining a possible ratio
of one vehicle to 3.5 persons as against one to 4.9
persons at present, the corresponding " cordon
flow ” and evening exodus could be in the vicinity
of 475,000 and 43,000 vehicles respectively.
Table 46 indicates the volume of traffic which
might be expected at the principal city " gateways ”
when there is a regional population of 1,000,000.
It should be noted that this figure may be reached
within 30 years.
Vehicular concentrations, as indicated in Table 46,
cannot rapidly disperse to the main radial highways
and the residential suburbs unless the " gateways ”
are designed to accommodate the streams of traffic
emerging from car parks and business centres, and
the general traffic flow is unobstructed.
Table 46
PRESENT AND ESTIMATED PEAK TRAFFIC
FLOWS
PERTH CENTRAL AREA
" Gateway ” or route
from City.
Present
Peak Hour
Flow,
1954.
Estimated
Peak Hour
Flow for
City of
1,000,000.
Estimated
Traffic
Flow,
vehicles
per
minute.
Mounts Bay Road
1,400
3,200
53
West Perth. Subiaco, etc.
1,550
5,100
85
North-West Highway ..
980
5,200
87
(subway)
2,800
47
North Perth (3 roads) ..
1,220
East Perth
530
3,600
60
Causeway
Narrows ..
2,950
4,600
5,600
77
93
Other routes
2,700
_
(b) The Central Railway
The principal barrier to free flow between the
City and the northern suburbs is the present railway
line and the small number of inadequate rail crossings.
To bridge the railway at its present level would


involve the construction of steep, hump-backed
structures, or alternatively, better graded crossings
which would spring from points too far away from
the railway to fit into the existing street system.
Other solutions lie in modifying the level of the
railway itself. A basic factor in the proposals for
major road layout within the city is the adoption
of a scheme to lower the railway, and so facilitate the
construction of bridge crossings which will be of
acceptable grade and good design.
Discussions have been held with the authorities
concerned, whether it would be preferable to elevate
the railway through the centre of the City and pass
the road traffic under it at appropriate points, or
whether it would be better to depress it, and so
reduce the level of any bridges crossing the railway.
The proposal to elevate the rail tracks as a viaduct
was rejected because of the blighting effect such
structures tend to have on the surrounding area. A
viaduct would be a fairly noisy element, act as a
visual barrier, and almost certainly be higher in cost
than an alternative solution involving the lowering
of the railway. Because the railway land in the
centre of the City was formerly a chain of swamps,
lowering the track might result in some water table
disturbance and necessitate pumping surface water
which could not be drained naturally. An under-
ground railway would be prohibitive in cost, but a
partial lowering would allow the main problem to be
overcome by constructing that part of the track
which would be below the normal water table in a
reinforced concrete trough. Pumping from the
trough would only be necessary during periods of
heavy rainfall. The longitudinal extent of the pro-
posed depression of the railway would be from a
point West of Thomas Street Bridge to the present
East Perth station. The length of the trough would
be, approximately, from Milligan Street to Lord
Street.
The maximum depth of the track depression which
would afford grades within normal railway practice
would be lift, to 12ft. only, and the clearance re-
quired for rolling stock above rail level to the soffit
of any overbridges, 16ft. 6in. This clearance would
allow for an eventual change to standard gauge track
and overhead electrification.
It can be seen at once that the advantage gained by
lowering the tracks lift, in respect of overbridge
road approaches graded at 1 in 30, is a reduction in
length of some 330 ft. of graded approach on either
side of the bridge. This would enable the con-
struction of overbridge approaches to be contained
within the distance between Wellington Street and
James Street.
The central railway would consist of four tracks—
two suburban and two freight, and the width of
the reserve need not exceed 100 ft. The remainder
of the railway bordering Wellington Street, now
used as marshalling and goods yards, could be re-
leased on the transfer of these functions to other
sites, and proposals are made in Chapter 7 for the
siting of very much more adequate freight handling
facilities.
The removal of the obsolete marshalling and goods
yards would make available an extensive area of
land on the flank of the central shopping district, and
adjacent to the North and North-West " gateway ”
to the City. This land is ideally placed as a site for
a large car park, essential to the future successful
functioning of the road system as well as the Central
Area. The approach to one part of the car park,
from Roe Street, and the egress from the other section
of the park could be by means of overbridges and
graded ramps down to Roe Street.
(c) The Road System
Advantage has been taken of the modification of
the railway to propose widening Roe Street for its
full length to enable it to function as a main through
route on the northern flank of the Central Area.
To permit the William Street bridge approach to
•commence South of James Street, and to have a
reasonable grade, it will be necessary to depress Roe
Street at this point.
Sinking the railway at Barrack Street will necessitate
a new road overbridge. This should form part of
a general improvement at the southern ends of
Beaufort and Stirling Streets to provide a gyratory
traffic system, facilitating traffic flow and helping to
direct the main North-South flow along Stirling
Street.
Eastward from Roe Street, the next major construc-
tion on this route would be a bridge over the railway
on the line of Moore Street, the approach to the
bridge from the West having just enough length to
provide an up-grade of 1 in 30. The eastern end


of the bridge approach would be near to Lord Street
and in front of the proposed new passenger terminal
station for country and trans-continental trains.
Further eastward the through route would continue
along a widened Wittenoom Street to a rotary at
Claisebrook Street, and another at Trafalgar Street,
where traffic would move in three principal direc-
tions : (a) over a new bridge to Burswood Island,
Rivervale and beyond, (b) down to the East Riverside
Drive and thence North or South, and (c) to Trafalgar
Street and the roads serving the eastern end of the
Central Area, including the Trotting and Cricket
Grounds.
An extensive one-way traffic system has been
suggested for the northern approach and exit from
the central area of the City, by the new bridge over
the railway, proceeding direct to Sutherland Street.
The majority of existing streets in the vicinity would
not have direct access to the Main Highway. This
should be an essential part of the design, as over 5,000
vehicles per hour would use the route during peak
periods.
The complex arrangement of roads which eventually
will be required on the reclaimed area in Mounts
Bay has already been mentioned in Chapter 7. With
a city of over 1,000,000 inhabitants, some 10,000
vehicles might leave this corner of the Central Area
in the evening rush hour. It is estimated that about
2,000 would come from the northern part of the City
and the northern flank of the Central Area. A
switch road for cross-town movement is essential,
and it should not be through the shopping or office
districts. If it were along the lii>e of George Street
it would lie on the western flank of the shopping
area. It would also serve as an important through
route connector for north-bound vehicles, and be
much used at week-ends as well as on normal week
days. At week-ends many people from the South
would use the Perth-Kwinana Highway as a main
approach to the northern beaches, continuing their
journey to the north-western gateway along the
link road.
The proposed link road between the south-western
and north-western gateways is an essential extension
to the Narrows Bridge and the limited access high-
way to the South. Without it the bridge would
merely serve more rapidly to increase confusion and
congestion in the Central Area. From the bridge-
head the link road would rise to a bridge spanning
Mounts Bay Road, continuing northwards with no
access to Mount Street. From this point the road
would pass under Malcolm Street and Hay Street,
and as an overbridge across Wellington Street. For
a large part of its length it would be in an open cutting
with landscaped slopes. The two-level road system at
the western end of St. Georges Terrace should be
incorporated in a fine civic place immediately below
Parliament House. The eventual removal of the
Barracks, and the temporary State Government
buildings adjacent to them, should be rendered
possible by the development of the Observatory site
as the headquarters for all Government Departments.
This would offer an adequate traffic solution, and
provide a clear vista to Parliament House along the
length of St. Georges Terrace. The most important
street in the State demands an appropriate terminal
treatment. The position of Parliament House
suggests that such treatment was in the minds of
those who selected the magnificent site which is un-
surpassed in Australia.
George Street would be widened to accommodate
the necessary divided carriageway, and after crossing
Wellington Street (widened on its northern side),
the cross-town route would proceed by a new bridge
over the railway to the north-western gateway.
The cross-town link road described would be
about three-quarters of a mile in length and, although
there are difficulties to overcome, it must be con-
sidered as one of the most vital elements in the frame-
work of the City’s major roads. The line suggested
offers the best solution among the many alternatives
which have been considered. Any other would be
a costly palliative, useful only for a short term.
Riverside Drive to the South, between the Cause-
way and Mounts Bay Road, is already a most valuable
traffic route on the remaining flank of the City. It
is efficient because it has virtually limited access. It is
of tremendous importance because it intercepts and
distributes traffic approaching from the West, East
and South and affords great relief to the central city
streets. The main road proposals in the Central
Area envisage the completion of a ring encircling the
Central Area, each part performing the function
clearly demonstrated by Riverside Drive.
Every endeavour has been made to plan major
roads along routes where the least disturbance of
permanent buildings will be caused. A long view
must obviously be taken of such a large programme


of construction, and the phasing of the accepted
proposals could extend over some twenty or thirty
years, in relation to the growth of the City. An
increase in the volume of traffic cannot be escaped,
and without early provision for it —including the
necessary resumption of land—the chaos and con-
gestion of the City’s roads and streets in the near
future may be beyond rectification.
(d) Parking
This has become known throughout the world as
" the problem of the standing vehicle.” It con-
tinuously exercises the minds and the ingenuity of
every relevant authority, and can best be discussed
in relation to actual traffic volume counts and other
statistics.
In 1930, as noted in the Report of the Metropolitan
Town Planning Commission, a census was taken of
vehicles parked for eight hours in the area bounded
by the railway, Milligan Street, Pier Street, and the
river. l The Report records, "On an average day
. . . the number would be at least 1,000 whilst at
certain periods of the year it would possibly be 1,100
or even 1,200.”
During the year 1952, the Main Roads Department
made an examination of the city parking problem
and produced figures to show that between Havelock
Street on the West and Victoria Avenue on the East,
kerbside parking space existed for approximately
3,000 vehicles and, in addition, off-street parking
areas to accommodate about 3,700 vehicles. As the
" accumulation ” of vehicles within the city area at
the same period showed a peak of approximately
6,700 vehicles, the situation then could be described
as about " on balance,” or with no parking space to
spare. Since that time kerbside parking space has
been reduced and the process of reduction must
continue. The results now evident, are double
parking in central city streets, and the spread of
parked vehicles into streets, such as Mount Street
and Malcolm Street, which lie some distance from
the business centre.
The problem at the present time is best gauged by
analysis of the daily vehicle flow across the city
perimeter each half-hour between 7 a.m. and 7 p.m.
Diagram 29 shows that the excess of inflow over
outflow on a normal working day in March, 1954,
assumed a peak of 9,300 vehicles at 3 p.m. In other
words, 9,300 vehicles were somewhere in the Central
Area at that hour, and between the hours of 9.15 a.m.
and 5 p.m. there was a constant " accumulation ” of
vehicles, exceeding 8,000 in number, all requiring
parking space.
The area covered by 9,300 vehicles, allowing only
the barest minimum (7ft. x 20ft.) for each one, is
approximately 30 acres, or 2\ times the area of the
Perth Esplanade. Alternatively, in line ahead,
bumper to bumper, 9,300 vehicles would stretch
35 miles, or nearly twice the distance from Perth to
Armadale.
In the short period of 20 months, the situation has
become worse to the extent of some 2,600 additional
vehicles seeking parking space inside the area bounded
by Havelock Street, Wellington Street, Victoria
Avenue and the Swan River, and catered for only in
the permitted public parking spaces of Terrace Drive,
Governor’s Terrace, Barrack Square, Riverside
Drive to Bazaar Terrace, and Victoria Avenue itself.
In the present situation there are hundreds of vehicles
milling around the busy streets hoping to find a gap
created by a departing car, or in desperation, resorting
to double parking or other illegal practice, in order
that the drivers may transact their business without
walking any appreciable distance.
On the basis of 80,016 vehicle trips daily across
the city perimeter in 1952, the " accumulation ”
figure of 6,700 vehicles represents 8.4 per cent, of
the trips. By 1954 the number of trips had increased
to 97,013 and the " accumulation ” to 9,300 vehicles,
or 9.5 per cent, of the trips (Diagram No. 29). With-
in the next 30 years it is not unlikely that the total
number of daily trips across the same perimeter will
reach a figure of 360,000, and adopting a factor of
9 per cent., 32,000 vehicles will require parking space.
With the increased number of vehicles on the
road in 30 years’ time, and a corresponding develop-
ment of business within the Central Area, there will
be a proportionate increase in the number of vehicles
requiring to circulate within the area, and at the same
time, comply with all statutory traffic requirements.
To permit this increased circulation it seems
obvious that the present privilege of kerbside parking
will have to be curtailed in the busier sections of the
1 Report of the Metropolitan Town Planning Commission, Perth, Western
Australia, December, 1930, Perth, W.A., 1931.


76
76. Cultural Centre, Perth : The photograph shows the existing
area of mixed development north of the railway, which it is suggested
could be redeveloped as shown in the drawing.


77
St. Georges Terrace looking west to
Parliament House. The existing view
should be compared with the sketch and
plan showing Parliament House as a
fitting terminal feature to the finest and
most important street in the State.


Diagram 29
DAILY ACCUMULATION OF VEHICLES
WITHIN PERTH CENTRAL AREA
City, and the area lost to parking would need to be
compensated for, by the provision of equivalent
parking space elsewhere. If this parking space is
taken into account, the parking demand may be
expected to increase from 32,000 to 35,000 vehicles
a net increase of 28,300 vehicles. Kerbside space
along the roads of the outer fringe of the Central
Area, is unlikely to be available for more than a
small fraction of this number. Other car parking
space must be found.
In 1946, British traffic authorities agreed that the
space required for each car in a properly laid out
ground level parking area was 200 sq. ft. 1 . This
allowed for access lanes within the parks, manoeuvring
space, room to open car doors, and the minimum
essential amenities. Since then the trend has been
towards longer cars, and in America higher figures
are accepted as necessary. As a basis for parking
space calculations, it is therefore essential to allow
at least 240 sq. ft. per car.
For an ultimate additional demand of 28,300
vehicles, a minimum area equivalent to 156 acres
would be needed, or nearly six times the area of
Langley Park between Victoria Avenue and Plain
Street. The report of the committee appointed to
advise the British Ministry of Transport on the design
of roads in built-up areas states 1 :
" The adequacy of car parking facilities clearly
depends not only on the number of parking places
available but also on their disposition. The public
may reasonably expect that, if limitations are to
be imposed on the periods during which cars may
be left stationary at the kerbside, accommodation
will be available in car parks within a short distance
of shopping or other centres. As a general rule
it will be preferable to provide a greater number
of small car parks dispersed about these centres
rather than a few large ones, despite difficulties of
administration. ”
Whilst agreeing that such provision might form the
ideal solution it is obvious that conditions in Perth,
as in most cities, make it impracticable. Other than
the open space along Riverside Drive, and land which
can be gained by further reclamation from the Swan
River, and from railway land no longer needed for
railway purposes, there are no areas in the shopping
or business centres which could readily be trans-
formed into car parks without great expense and
disruption of property. But because of the large
spaces which could be made available, and because
of the transitional stage of development, Perth is
more fortunately placed than the large cities of Aus-
tralia, the United States of America and Great
Britain.
In the proposal for girdling the city area with
" distributor ” or " collector ” roads, it is envisaged
that part of the railway goods yard will be needed
for the widening of Roe Street to become the main
through route on the northern flank, equivalent to
Riverside Drive on the South. The remainder of
the goods yard, on the southern side of the future
rapid-transit railway system, will be available for car
parking, approached either from Roe Street, Wel-
lington Street, or from the new bridge over the
railway, connecting the City with the North-West.
There is an area sufficient for approximately 3,000
cars at surface level.
Traffic from the East, via the present Causeway
or over a new traffic bridge which will ultimately be
needed up-stream in the vicinity of the existing
1 Design and Layout of Roads in Built-up Areas. Report of the De-
partmental Committee set up by the Minister of War Transport,
London, 1946.


Bunbury (railway) Bridge, could be provide width
parking space at the western end of the Causeway.
These car parks, for about 1,500 vehicles, will also
serve spectators at Gloucester Park and the
Cricket Association Ground. A smaller car park
should be provided as a necessary adjunct to the
new country railway terminal station.
Considerable parking space, for over 2,500 cars,
may also be provided in the central section of River-
side Drive, to serve the needs of traffic associated
with the growing demands of Adelaide Terrace and
the eastern end of St. George’s Terrace. Part of the
proposed area already serves on occasion as a car
park, and the remainder would occupy part of the
present Langley Park. Sporting facilities displaced
by this proposal would use the large reclaimed area
adjacent to the Causeway bridgehead which, because
of its greater depth, is more suitable for sports.
To meet the traffic requirements arising from the
completion of the Narrows Bridge, a fairly extensive
reclamation of land from the Swan River will need
to be carried out between Point Lewis and Mounts
Bay Road, and Barrack (or Union Jack) Square at
Riverside Drive. In addition to creating the space
required to construct roads serving the new Narrows
Bridge and Mounts Bay Road, this reclamation,
together with the existing and the " unofficial ” car
parking area, would provide space for an extensive
car park to accommodate nearly 3,500 vehicles. It
would be used largely by motorists domiciled in the
southern and south-western sections of the Region.
Although these and other proposed car parks may
individually be larger than the ideal size, all parts of
the Central Area would be within easy walking
distance of car parks, or easily accessible from cross-
town bus services.
Careful design of the new car parks would ensure
that they were not vast expanses of bitumen and
shimmering metal-work. They should be laid out
in sections, interplanted with suitable trees which
provide shade to vehicles, and give cover to footways
for motorists to and from their vehicles. The aim
should be to enhance the visual attraction of the
area which is now, in part, spoiled by indiscriminate
parking. Car parks should not be located on the
river frontage of the perimeter road, in order to
ensure undisturbed river views from the length of
Riverside Drive.
Finally, the figures show that, over and above what
might be called the basic car parking provision, there
will be a need for additional parking space under
the control of public authorities or private enterprise.
It could take the form of smaller parking lots, or
eventually, multi-storey parking stations. It is also
reasonable to require that large office buildings should
make some provision for private vehicles, and that
departmental stores and other buildings should pro-
vide for off-street loading and unloading.
(iii) Public Transport
The public omnibus and rail transport authorities
have a complex if not insuperable problem to solve.
They have to maintain an efficient service in the face
of increasing difficulties, as the urban area spreads
further and further afield at a very low density.
Bus transport is provided by the Government and
a number of independent companies, which nearly
all use the central city streets as bus termini. It is
particularly unfortunate that the finest street, St.
Georges Terrace, is used in this way. It is to be
hoped that a unification of the public transport
services is not far distant. Without this, the estab-
lishment of through routes, and a closer relationship
between suburban train and bus services, will not
be achieved. As the Region grows, and the central
city streets become more congested, unification will
become more imperative. Perth, as a large city,
must be almost alone in having bus termini stretched
along important central streets. It is a most wasteful
use of valuable road space and an extravagance that
should not continue. The Plan envisages the main
bus routes crossing, but not terminating in, the
Central Area. St. Georges and Adelaide Terraces
on the South, and Wellington Street on the North,
would be the principal bus routes.
As a natural corollary to a public transport service
which is difficult of solution, many people make the
journey to the City in their own cars. This is a
possible alternative at the present time, but only just.
Even with an extensive provision of new car parks,
public transport services must be prepared to carry a
higher proportion of workers and visitors to and from
the Central Area. With the volume of road traffic
steadily and considerably increasing, the public road
transport services are likely to slow down, par-
ticularly at peak periods when they will always be


overtaxed. It is for this reason that the Plan pro-
poses extensions of the railway system to provide
new suburban services to the growing northern
suburbs, and a remodelling of the railway facilities
on the flank of the Central Area. With faster and
more frequent suburban services, provided by diesel-
electric or, eventually, electric trains, the railways
must occupy a prominent position in any future
development and organisation of public transport
facilities. In the Central Area there would be three
stations available to passengers and all would be
designed to cope with peak flows. A comparison
between Perth, as it is, and present day Melbourne
(which in size is about what Perth may be in 50
years’ time) clearly shows how important the railway
services could be in the relief of central congestion
(Diagram 24). Traffic conditions in central Mel-
bourne, already difficult, would be well nigh im-
possible if a high proportion of passengers were not
carried to and from the centre over the extensive rail
network. At present over 70,000 passengers per day
travel by train into and out of central Melbourne.
Consideration of the existing problems of public
transport, as they affect the Central Area, has already
been given in detail in Chapter 7. To reiterate some
of the proposals, a unified public transport system
is envisaged, with bus routes through the Central
Area operating in conjunction with an extended and
faster suburban train service. The buses on each
route would make several stops in the Central Area,
mostly in Wellington Street, St. George’s Terrace
and Adelaide Terrace. The railway would provide
three stations within the Central Area : at West
Perth, at Forrest Place (the principal station for
suburban traffic), and at East Perth adjoining the new
country terminal station. Adjacent to the new rail-
way terminus would be a large bus station for both
suburban and long distance buses, and a car park.
Another bus terminus should be provided at the
north-western corner of the Central Area, near
Delhi Square.
Looking into the future one other means of public
transport is envisaged. Helicopters may come into
use within the next ten or twenty years. If they are
to be used to advantage a heliport should be located
within the Central Area, in a position where noise
will cause the least disturbance. It is proposed that
a site should be reserved adjacent to the new main
railway station and bus terminus. Wellington Square
would act as a buffer space for any noise, and the
country terminus should be regarded as the main
interchange point for passengers.
(iv) Shopping
Central Perth acts as the principal shopping centre
in the State. It offers the widest selection of goods
within a small area and, in addition to shops, pro-
vides other attractions. In simple terms there are
only two distinct types of shops: those selling neces-
sities and those selling luxuries, and the Central Area
will always provide more opportunities for special
and luxury purchases than any other shopping centre.
Shopping "in town ” will always be popular.
With an increasing population and a wider range of
cultural and entertainment facilities, the magnetic
attraction of the Central Area will be even greater.
It is not to be assumed, however, that central shop-
ping will necessarily increase in direct relation to
population. Without positive effort by the City
Council in co-operation with the retail traders, and
constant readjustment to new conditions, its trading
potential will not show the increase that is possible.
In America it can be seen that the relative turnover
in many " downtown ” city stores has declined
during the past 25 years with the advent and success
of the " out-of-town ” regional shopping centres.
New regional shopping centres have been built in
suburban areas, on spacious sites demanding lower
rates and rentals. They are more modern in design
than older centres and are easily approached from
suburban areas along new major highways. They
provide all the retail outlets of the central shopping
area, and in addition, have very ample parking space.
This trend towards decentralisation on a minor scale
can already be appreciated in the Region. Improved
suburban shopping is of course essential and it could
partially help to relieve Central Area congestion.
As outward expansion continues it will become
increasingly necessary to provide a wide range of
stores, shops, and other facilities, in a number of
district centres. The housewife, especially with
children, cannot be expected to make frequent long
and costly journeys to town. Some of the regional
centres, existing and new, should be planned in the
very near future. It is likely that Fremantle will
continue to be the most important, particularly as
the Fremantle City Council is taking active steps to


improve facilities. New centres are also being de-
signed for Kwinana, and on a lesser scale, by the
Perth City Council.
A great deal of the success of the outer suburban
regional shopping centres in the United States of
America is due to the generous provision of parking
space in relation to commodity selling space. Ade-
quate parking space for the use of patrons is desirable
in all shopping areas, and there is a growing demand
for this with the rising percentage of car ownership.
The rapidly increasing volume of traffic has already
made Central Area movement most difficult for
shoppers with cars, and it is absurd to assume that
more than a tiny fraction of the total number of
shoppers’ cars may be parked in the main shopping
streets. Unless the position is remedied the shopper
will seek more easily accessible shopping areas with
adequate parking space. In an intensively used
shopping centre it is obviously impossible to provide
parking space outside all premises, but nearby car
parks should be provided, and in the case of the
Central Area, it has been shown previously that it
is possible to make extensive provision.
In Perth, expansion of the larger department
stores has not been to the exclusion of the small
shop. There is, and it is likely there will continue
to be, a large number of small shops, especially in
the pedestrian arcades, forming very valuable links
between shopping streets, and encouraging the shop-
ping area to be in depth rather than in a linear street
form. The city block bounded by Hay, William,
Murray and Barrack Streets has, through the arcades
and service lanes, many alternative pedestrian con-
nections between Hay and Murray Streets. The
larger stores also encourage shoppers to use their
premises as ways through the block. There is,
therefore, considerable concentration of shopping
activity within a confined area.
Central Hay Street has a carriageway width of
36ft., and quite inadequate pavements for pedestrians.
Of the major city streets it is the narrowest as well
as the busiest. Parked kerbside cars restrict the
movement of cars, and pedestrians wishing to cross
the street are forced off the pavement by the shopping
crowds. One way vehicular traffic in Hay Street
does not alleviate conditions to any marked degree,
for the problem may be more attributable to pedes-
trians than vehicles. The volume of pedestrian
movement weaving between cars across central city
streets and between department stores and arcade
entrances, in addition to those crossing at controlled
intersections, causes considerable delay to vehicles.
A pedestrian count made in March 1954, indicated
that nearly 28,0CX) persons used the crossings over
Hay Street, between the William and Barrack Street
intersections, during the mid-day hour (Diagram
30). Over 80,000 persons used the crossings during
a four-hour counting period at selected intervals.
Diagram 30
PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC IN HAY STREET
The number of shoppers in the Central Area may
be more than trebled in the next 50 years if the
shopping centre is to grow in a manner which is
reasonable and to be expected. It is true that the
flow will extend over a wider area as the shopping
centre spreads, but it is evident that all possible steps
should be taken to facilitate movement. Pavements
in central Hay and Murray Streets will have to be
widened if pedestrians are not more and more to
be forced to walk on carriageways ; with the con-
sequent need for severe restrictions on kerbside
parking and vehicular movement.
There are two ways in which the pavements may
be widened. The first would entail the setting back
of shop fronts to form a continuous colonnade.
The second would allow pedestrians eventually to
take over the carriageways, or part of them, possibly


Diagram 31


between Barrack Street and King Street. In neither
case would, or should, the building lines above the
ground floor be set back. It is not by accident that
shopping has flourished in relatively narrow streets.
The shopper is a pedestrian, and it is of great con-
venience to be able easily to cross a street from one
shop to another. Many of the world’s best shopping
streets are narrow. The Kalverstrcictt in Amsterdam,
one of the finest shopping streets in Europe and a
continuous source of pleasure every day and evening
to thousands of citizens, is now a pedestrian parade
in which it is almost impossible for a vehicle to make
headway. The new and large regional shopping
centres in the United States of America are designed
for the movement of pedestrians exclusively on wide
parades between shops.
It is urgently necessary that physical and financial
studies should be made of the increasingly difficult
central area shopping problem. It is not yet in-
superable and it should not be forgotten that an
important part of it is concerned with the delivery
of goods to shops. As trade increases this will
become more and more intractable.
Within the central shopping area building bulk is
very unevenly distributed and service is in many
cases duplicated, with a consequent loss of shopping
area. Minor service access improvements through
simplifications and the provision of new links should
be possible, even in the most intensly developed
blocks. By the elimination of bad and unnecessary
alleyways, considerable additional area for shopping
could be provided and increase the total shopping
frontage. For street blocks as yet lightly developed
a combined service access road serving the backs
of all shops should not be difficult to provide. Even
in fully developed blocks many buildings are obso'es-
cent and due for renewal, and common service roads
could be provided according to a long term plan.
Such schemes would help to alleviate the present
traffic congestion that exists, with lorries backing in
and out of restricted service lanes, and double park-
ing in the main thoroughfares, waiting their turn
for delivery (Diagram 31). The problem of service
access is serious at present ; with a future consolida-
tion of the shopping area its solution is imperative.
Concentration and consolidation of building de-
velopment will continue, but the shopping area will
inevitably extend its outer boundaries within the
foreseeable future. At present, shops occupy more
than 3,500,000 sq. ft. of floor space, which represents
over 14.0 per cent, of the total floor space within the
Central Area, and including service warehousing,
offer employment to over 17,000 workers. If im-
provements are made in the shopping centre layout
and adequate parking space is provided, it is estimated
that with a population of 1,400,000 within the
Metropolitan Region, there may be a need in the
Central Area for approximately 12,000,000 sq. ft. of
floor space devoted exclusively to shopping, an
increase of nearly 8,500,000 sq. ft. The main spread
is likely to be in a westerly direction, with considerable
consolidation within the present intensively de-
veloped centre, and between William and Milligan
Streets. The larger showrooms and minor light
industrial concerns will gradually give way to shop-
ping and move to more spacious sites either on the
fringe of the Central Area or in new suburbs. This
process is already in evidence. With the growth of
the City, economic conditions will demand a more
intensive use of expensive central sites.
Proposals for the control of building bulk have
been mentioned in Section D (iii) of this Chapter,
and a Plot Ratio of 5.0 has been suggested as a de-
sirable maximum within the shopping zone. Calcula-
tions have been made relating the existing total floor
space to anticipated future floor space requirements,
employment, and the future regional pattern. These
indicate that within the proposed zoned area, and
despite the very great increase forecast, a maximum
Plot Ratio of approximately 3.0 would be sufficient.
For many years some areas within the zone are un-
likely to be developed to the maximum permissible
density. Conversely, on a few central sites, where
department store development would be desirable,
a restriction of building bulk equal to three times
the site area would be irksome for physical and
economic reasons. With a Plot Ratio density control
of 5.0 however, all reasonable claims of developers
would be more than satisfied.
(v) Offices
The present Central Area contains over 3,000,000
sq. ft. of private office space and it is expected a
demand may exist for approximately 10,000,000 sq.
ft. within the period under consideration. Apart
from consolidation and regrouping within existing
areas, a relatively rapid extension will take place along
both sides of Adelaide Terrace for business offices


and professional chambers. The change in Adelaide
Terrace is already taking place, and will become more
marked as congestion increases in St. Georges Ter-
race. In the past there has been little need for
additional land for office building, and Stirling
Square, Government House, the Treasury Building,
and the Cathedral have impeded development, but
with the proposed regrouping of all Government
departments, eastward expansion along Adelaide
Terrace will be encouraged.
It is not altogether fortuitous that office develop-
ment flanks the widest central street, parallel and
immediately above the river frontage. It is an
excellent example of natural functional zoning.
Adelaide Terrace still retaining old houses and large
grounds as reminders of past history is in a similar
situation to St. Georges Terrace ; and both, com-
pared with Hay Street for example, benefit to the
full from the south-westerly breezes in the height of
the summer. It is also fortunate that the main views
of the City, from the river and beyond, present the
office area in the forefront.
The major problems of the office zone concern the
retention of the right to light and air, and the pre-
vention of congestion. Detailed reference has been
made to these, and the related problems of excessive
unneighbourly development, in Section D (iii) of
this Chapter, and Appendix 111. There is little need
to restate the validity for a density control in con-
junction with zoning and daylighting requirements.
Building bulk should be 'restricted to a Plot Ratio
of 5.0 within the office zone. This is in excess of
theoretical future requirements, but will ensure that
developers can secure adequate economic returns,
compatible with the most appropriate land use, in
relation to long-term values and the best interests
of the City.
( vi) Warehouses
Within the Central Area there is a need for some
service warehousing near to the shopping centre,
but there is no need for large bulk storage or transit
warehouses. In larger cities the latter have moved,
or are engaged in moving to sites which are cheaper,
more spacious and more easily served by transport.
There are numerous small wholesalers and minor
agencies, serving an important function, scattered
throughout the westerly end of the Central Area.
With improved road bridges across the railway they
will tend to find sites North of the railway line. A
zoned area, to contain nearly 3,000,000 sq. ft. of
warehouse floor space, is provided in this locality.
A Plot Ratio of 1.5 should prove fully adequate for
all future needs.
The Metropolitan Markets at the moment should
be considered as fulfilling a wholesale function. The
benefits that are made possible to the individual by
collective group effort and a concentration of activities
are clearly seen in the market area. All merchants
are responsible to a committee, and they share storage,
selling, delivery and cartage facilities. This is of
value to buyers and sellers alike, enabling buyers to
make selective purchases at competitive prices.
Traders congregating together offer more collective
efficiency and more attraction to buyers than a greater
number of individual units. Historically, in nearly
all cities, markets were generally held in the main
square, with finer wares sold on the lower floor of
the Town Hall. In the building of the Perth Town
Hall provision was made to hold a daily market
with stall-holders on the ground floor. In this way
growers were able to offer their goods direct to con-
sumers. In the expanding City, marketing has become
less direct, acting as an intermediary between pro-
ducer and retailer. From the early days of settlement
until recently, Perth always had a retail market, but
this is no longer so. The market is now primarily
for wholesalers dealing with perishable goods in
particular. The retail function is a minor one.
The present market site is near the existing railway
goods yard, but the greater flexibility of distribution
offered by road haulage services, and the inadequacy
of the existing railway arrangements, has now almost
removed this initial siting advantage. As the Central
Area grows, access by road will become more difficult
and expansion of the wholesale markets will create
further traffic congestion at a place where ever-
increasing difficulties are inevitable.
With the expansion of the Region envisaged in
the Report there would be economic justification in
moving the wholesale market to a much larger site
equally convenient for the reception and distribution
of perishable goods. The proposed Belmont-Welsh-
pool freight terminal area is at such a point. It
should become the hub of the transport and distribu-
tion system. It would provide a most appropriate


site for a market which must grow to three times its
present size, and will require parking space for several
hundreds of vehicles. The present site and buildings
would gradually become available for extension of
the present retail marketing facilities, comparable
with those existing in other Australian capitals.
( vii ) Industry
The economy of Western Australia is essentially
based upon primary production, but stimulated by
demands during and following the recent war, manu-
facturing industry has expanded and developed until
at present it employs nearly 26 per cent, of the total
work force within the Region.
Industry has tended to localise itself at Innaloo,
Bassendean, Belmont, Welshpool, Melville, Fre-
mantle and Subiaco, and within the last four years
over £3,000,000 worth of industrial buildings have
been erected in these areas, in addition to develop-
ments within the inner areas of East and West Perth.
Within the Central Area, industry has for the most
part developed on relatively cheap residential land
on inadequate sites with poor access. For the great
majority of industries such sites have no advantages
over a planned suburban industrial estate, and their
development for industry quickly disintegrates any
residential character that remains within the area.
In larger many expanding central industries
have been steadily relocating their activities in outer
areas over a number of years. By doing so they aid
themselves, and at the same time abate the road
congestion in the central city. Furthermore, as they
cause an outward rather than inward movement of
workers, the public transport services are in better
balance and more economical to run at peak periods.
Industry within the Central Area can be classified
into three main groups. Firstly, those industries
that meet essential central city needs as a whole,
for example, printers, or industries closely associated
with the retail trade. Many operate on inadequate
and relatively costly sites, and working conditions
often leave much to be desired, but they are able
to balance these drawbacks by speedy delivery and
convenience to nearby wholesale suppliers and re-
tailers. The second group are mostly retail or minor
light engineering concerns acting as their own manu-
facturers, or servicing agents. The third group,
usually operating on a larger scale than the other two,
includes those industries that have established them-
selves on land once outside the Central Area, and are
either heavy engineering works, or industries which
combine office, manufacturing, and warehousing
functions within the same building.
Some minor manufacturing and light industrial
groups will always be most conveniently placed near
to the Central Area, but most light, and virtually all
heavy industries will leave for more spacious and
economical sites when a better alternative offers
itself. Many industrial concerns, unable to expand
except at prohibitive cost, recognise that for their
own business organization and efficiency they are
offered better facilities in new industrial zones, with
full service and transport facilities. Spacious sites
should be available at a reasonable price, in contrast
to the majority of cramped, often awkwardly shaped,
and costly, Central Area industrial sites.
Approximately 330 acres of land is zoned in two
separate areas as suitable for industry : one at the
western fringe of the Central Area, and the other
within the existing East Perth railway yards. This
is more than sufficient for Central Area needs but
it would be impossible to alter the established natural
zoning pattern except by considerable acquisition
and re-development proposals, well beyond the scope
of the local authority. The proposed Plot Ratio of
1.0 should be more than sufficient for all foreseeable
needs.
(viii) Civic and Cultural Buildings
In addition to private offices, various departmental
offices are maintained in Perth for the Common-
wealth and State Governments, and Local Authorities,
acting as centres of administration and service. Their
functions differ in detail, but collectively they have
common characteristics and from a town planning
viewpoint can be considered as one class of building.
It is therefore logical to consider possibilities that
exist for their unification into a group, or groups,
within the Central Area as a whole.
Due to accidents of history, Government buildings
in Perth are widely scattered and movement from one
Government department to another is difficult. It
is as inconvenient for the Government official as it
is for the public. Close personal contact between
official departments is an essential requisite of
efficiency. Apart from any inconvenience of layout,


Government departments at present occupy generally
antiquated buildings which provide poor working
conditions, on sites which now have very high com-
mercial value. These sites are mostly in the centre
of greatest congestion, and many of them in their
present use, act as an impediment to commercial
growth, at points which should be passed by the
expanding shopping and office areas. It is most
undesirable that costly competition for space should
take place in the area of greatest congestion. It
should be borne in mind that both governmental and
commercial demands for space will be generally
in direct relation to the expanding population.
The Plan suggests that sites in the commercial
centre should gradually be vacated by the State
Government departments concerned, the sites sold,
and the money obtained used for new buildings in
the area proposed for Government offices adjacent
to Parliament House. Here there is ample space for
greatly extended Government services in a position
which has everything to commend it. Nearly all
the land is held by the State and it is perfectly placed
in relation to Parliament House, the seat of Govern-
ment. It is also as much in the heart of the Region
and State as the Barrack Street-St. Georges Terrace
intersection, and this, it cannot be too strongly
emphasised, will grow more and more congested,
even though planned improvements may be carried
out. On the Observatory site, which is at a key
point in the Central Area communications system,
all Government departments will be in juxtaposition,
there is ample room for parking, and much needed
office space could be provided immediately on land
which is now vacant. An assessment has been made
of the unimproved value of land at present occupied
by Government offices in the commercial area or
about to be occupied. The total value is surprisingly
large, and rising.
For vital traffic needs and for the general improve-
ment of the City, the Old Barracks, an inadequate
and obsolete office building, together with the tempo-
rary buildings adjacent to it, should be displaced.
Although there may be a sentimental attachment to
the Old Barracks, which for reasons long since passed
was placed in a commanding position, it is not a
building of distinction or architectural merit.
Parliament House, when completed, should be the
fitting climax to the finest and most important street
in the State. The Observatory itself, as the City
grows, will be better placed in the hills where there
will be less interference from artificial light at night,
and where there will be no atmospheric pollution.
It is also suggested that the present Government
House should become a City Museum and Art
Gallery, and that the eastern part of the grounds will
lend themselves to a magnificent commercial office
development along St. Georges Terrace. If the
Crown were to retain control of the land, leasing only
building sites, and lay out the grounds as verdant
squares or rest gardens, there would be three im-
portant results. Firstly, the break between the
St. Georges Terrace and the Adelaide Terrace office
areas would be considerably lessened ; secondly,
much needed open spaces in the office area would
be provided ; and thirdly, the land improvement
would provide finance for a new Government House
and contribute to the development of the Observatory
site.
The only important suggestion in the Report for
the further development of Kings Park is that a
new Government House should be built in the Park
on a high point overlooking the river. This symbolic
building would be admirably placed in a dignified
position, similar in many respects to those found in
other Australian capitals. The Governor would be
within a short distance of Parliament House, and the
Park would be an excellent place for ceremonials
and parades, away from traffic congestion.
The term " civic and cultural buildings ” is meant
to include most of the major buildings of the City,
all Government offices, places of assembly, meeting
rooms, churches, hospitals, non-residential clubs,
cinemas, and all entertainment facilities. These are
scattered throughout the Central Area, built on sites
that were available at the time of building. Few
sites have been reserved in advance of building
requirement, and no attempt has been made to group
any of these buildings together to form a possible
civic group.
It is impossible, even were it considered desirable,
to alter much of the existing pattern. Cinemas and
other entertainment buildings in all towns are always
to be found established close to the principal shop-
ping area, and in Perth where By-laws permit cinemas
to be built at first floor level, causing little loss of
shopping space, they add architectural scale to the


development. It would, however, be wise for
safety and other reasons if cinemas were built in
streets which were not intensively used for shopping.
Reference has been made to the location of State
Government offices and Government House. The
offices of the Perth City Council, now inadequately
housed in Murray Street, will, of course, be removed
to the new City Hall to be built on the eastern flank
of Stirling Square. They will form part of a group
of buildings which should provide an admirable
focal point for City as distinct from State activities.
It is suggested that the ownership and use of the
present Government House should eventually be
transferred to the City Council. It is adjacent to
the new City Hall site and it could most appropriately
become an Art Gallery and Museum devoted to
local history.
Partly because of its isolation, Perth has developed
a healthy cultural life, in the sense that many amateur
groups and organizations have grown up to practice
and to stimulate interest in the arts. One of the
results is that the number of visiting artists of world
renown is increasing every year. Whenever they
have given performances the response has been
excellent. Public response is also good to most
theatrical and musical groups, and the University
has provided outdoor auditoria for concerts and
theatrical performances. It is to be hoped that
these will be extended in scope. The University
campus is a delightful setting,, and it is in every way
appropriate that citizens should look to the Uni-
versity as a centre of artistic life.
A proposal of the Plan is to expand the existing
Museum, Library and Art Gallery facilities, which
urgently require additional space, to form the nucleus
of a cultural group to the North of the present central
railway station. Consideration has been given to
the relocation of these facilities, but, partly due to
the investment in existing buildings, and more par-
ticularly because of their excellent position in relation
to transport facilities, their retention on the present
site is suggested. It is true that the buildings are in
an area which tends to be blighted, but this is a
further argument for expansion and improvement.
Extensive redevelopment is due within the area
bounded by William and Beaufort Streets, and as a
considerable part of the land is owned by the Crown,
and occupied by buildings which no longer adequately
serve their purpose, a redevelopment scheme should
easily be established. The acquisition of privately
owned property, nearly all obsolescent residences,
should be part of the scheme.
The schools, existing at the present in the proposed
cultural centre, as recommended in Chapter 8, should
be moved to more spacious sites at some distance
from the Central Area. The Police Department
would be much better placed at a main gateway to
the City. It is for this reason suggested that the
Police Department should eventually occupy the
site which would be vacated by the Government
Tramways at the western end of the Causeway. The
site is unsuitable for the storage and maintenance of
public transport vehicles ; firstly, because there is
little room for expansion, and secondly, because
such a purpose must always lead to unsightliness.
In the full development of the Cultural and Educa-
tional Centre North of Forrest Place Station, there
should be adequate room for the Central Technical
College (now largely in temporary buildings, yet
occupying valuable commercial space on St. Georges
Terrace) and a Central Technological and Com-
mercial Library.
With the new Forrest Place station at a lower level,
a broad footbridge could be designed to pass over
the station and Roe Street to link the Cultural Centre
with the City Centre. The footbridge would act as
station concourse and might be lined with shops.
(ix) Outdoor Recreation and Open Space
Few cities in the world have so much open space
and such an attractive river frontage within walking
distance of the Central Area. Many cities in their
original planning have made provision for central
parks and recreational spaces only to relinquish some
of their ideals and civic holdings under the pressure
of various interests. Subsequently in an attempt to
relieve the intensity of urban environment, small
spaces have had to be acquired at great cost.
There is considerable value in the provision of
minor open spaces, in the heart of a city, and though
major recreational areas and grassed open space is
readily available in Perth, effort should be made to
develop minor paved courts of an intimate character
and shopping arcades that take full advantage of the
excellent climate, providing rest space for shoppers,
and office workers during the midday break. Minor
open spaces may be felt to be too difficult to acquire


in view of high land costs, but with control over
building bulk, encouragement is offered to architects
to make the surrounding land to buildings more
attractive, which, quite apart from any aesthetic
consideration, enhances the property value.
For sport and other recreational activities, con-
siderable areas are available close to Riverside Drive,
to the South and South-East of the City. The river
frontage itself should be reserved primarily for open
space, but this should not preclude the admission of
cafes and other projects to be treated in a sensitive
architectural manner, preserving the open space, and
offering family entertainment facilities on a minor
scale reminiscent of the Tivoli gardens at Copen-
hagen.
(x) Residential Buildings
It is difficult to visualise the centre of Perth as
an almost exclusively residential area, but from the
early days of settlement until late in the 1800’s multi-
storey commercial development was unknown. It
is only in the last sixty or seventy years that it has
grown upward.
Small single-storey houses on large lots have
gradually been replaced by shop or office buildings,
though it is still possible to find traces of this early
domestic architecture. Vestiges remain, and even
in the most intensely built office area, single-storey
buildings in the colonial style may be seen, some
still used as housing but more generally as interim
office accommodation, dwarfed by large buildings
on either side. The occasional notice/* site reserved
for proposed offices ” indicates the transitional
period of development.
This process is inevitable and is a measure of the
rising capital investment in the State. Housing,
through the years, has been moving to the suburbs,
where conditions are more suited to normal domestic
demands. Most families wish to live in a quiet
area, away from the dangers of traffic, and in reason-
able proximity to a school. It is difficult if not
impossible to provide these amenities in the Central
Area, and even if it were, land economics would
dictate otherwise. It is unlikely that anyone would
desire to build or occupy a dwelling house in the
Central Area, for all social and financial forces are
against this eventuality.
Accommodation must, however, be provided for
businessmen and visitors who come to the City for
short periods. The provision of adequate hotel
accommodation must keep pace with the demands
created by the growth of the City.
There is also a need for flats or alternative high
density residential development, close to the centre
of the City, for those who prefer to live within
walking distance of their place of business, and
particularly for those without children. As the
City develops in size and the distances involved
between the place of work and home become greater
the need for this kind of residential accommodation
will become greater. Superb sites exist close to the
Central Area, some of them Commanding good views
of the Swan River. It would be reasonable to expect
that flats should be in the form of tower blocks, in
scale with the broad sweep of the river and new city
office buildings. Well designed and set in green
surroundings, they would enhance and enrich the
central urban scene (Chapter 8 (H)).
F. GENERAL
An attempt has been made to record the existing
Central Area pattern, indicate main principles for
future development, and suggest how re-development
could be carried out.
There is a great deal more to be done in the near
future. All proposals should be considered in terms
of priority and a staging schedule should list those
projects that demand immediate further study or
action, and those that may without undue harm be
left temporarily in abeyance. Essentially the time
element is also that of economy, and public and
private investment should be encouraged to be put
into the right project at the right time. But a con-
tinuous detailed analysis of all the diverse and inter-
acting aspects of redevelopment must remain largely
the responsibility of the Perth City Council.


PART II: FREMANTLE
A. INTRODUCTION
Before the first world war, Fremantle was firmly
established as the pre-eminent port in the State. The
city area was being built up with warehouses to store
the primary products for export, and to contain
imported merchandise for consumption and use
within the State.
Of great importance in the Metropolitan Region
and with its immediate hinterland extending over
50,000 square miles, the Port of Fremantle, including
both the Inner Harbour in the Swan River and the
Outer Harbour of Cockburn Sound, handles the
greatest tonnage of goods entering and leaving the
State, and will always be one of the major ports of
the Commonwealth. With the recent establishment
of large-scale industries at Kwinana and new industrial
undertakings in Fremantle itself, the residential
suburbs will continue to grow at an appreciable rate,
and a corresponding increase in commercial activity
can be expected.
The Regional Plan anticipates the effect of these
developments, and suggests what extensions and
modifications to the existing Central Area pattern
should be made to secure its efficient functioning in
the future.
B. THE PAST
The first landing at Fremantle was probably on
the sandy beach between Arthur Head and Anglesea
Point. With the bar to the river entrance being
generally impassable, it was the place where boats
could approach with safety throughout most of the
year. A jetty was built shortly after Captain Stirling
and his party arrived. Until the Inner Harbour was
in working order at the turn of the century, a jetty
in a similar position was the main feature of the port.
The area in the immediate vicinity of the landing
was surveyed and subdivided and, on sth September,
1829, the first town lots, numbering 24, were sold.
One of the main conditions of sale was that within
one year of allotment the occupant was to erect a
building to the value of at least £IOO. As might be
expected, conditions were a little chaotic in the early
days and, in 1833, a naval officer, recalling his im-
pressions of the scene in October, 1829, wrote :
" Tents and huts in every variety ; goods of all
descriptions scattered about in disorder ; the
emigrants employed, some in cooking their pro-
visions, and others in sauntering about, or landing
their effects ; many looking very miserable and a
few equally happy ; different kinds of animal,
just landed, and showing evidently how much they
must have suffered during so long a voyage ; such
was the scene I witnessed on landing at the spot on
which the future principal seaport of Western
Australia was to stand.” 1
In a relatively short space of time the serious dis-
order was overcome. It is recorded that by De-
cember, 1832, the town was " laid out in regular
streets of stone houses with low walls . . . two or
three large well-kept inns or hotels . . . . ,” x for the
most part built of the local limestone which was in
abundant supply.
In 1832, Captain Fremantle, according to a writer
of the time, " was much surprised to see the spot
which he took possession of 3 years ago . . . making
a very respectable show of promising soon to be a
large town . . . . M 1 Captain Fremantle was dis-
appointed in Perth, for he writes that " it does not
appear to have made much progress, very few houses
having been built, and many of those scarcely worthy
of the name . . . Perth has not kept pace with Fre-
mantle as the latter has many pretty tolerable houses
and several are in progress, and in spite of its sandy
and unpromising appearance at landing, I have no
doubt, if the Colony continues, of its being in time
a place of consequence.” 1 Among the new buildings
in Fremantle was the gaol, commonly known as the
Round House. Still standing on the rock at the
end of High Street, the Round House is now probably
the oldest building in Western Australia.
The eighteen years before 1850 were difficult and
progress was disappointing. A writer of the period
found that " Fremantle was a small, insignificant
place, scarcely worthy of the name of town.” 2 High
1 John K. Ewers, ” The Western Gateway,” Fremantle, 1945.
* J. W. B. Stevens, “ The History of Fremantle,” Fremantle, 1929.


Street had a few respectable looking houses as well
as several hotels, but the rest of the settlement con-
sisted of a scattering of stringy bark cottages.
The institution of the convict system gave great
impetus to Fremantle, but later there was a setback
when a number of good colonists left for the newly-
discovered Victorian goldfields. The discovery of
gold in Western Australia resulted in the return of
many who had been attracted to Victoria, and with
them came thousands of new settlers eager to make
their fortunes on the golden mile. New businesses
were established in Fremantle, Perth, and the newly
settled districts. Fremantle enjoyed a large share of
the prosperity resulting from the gold rush. It was
reduced somewhat by the removal of the railway
workshops to Midland Junction, and with unfavour-
able trading conditions from 1901 to 1911, business
in Fremantle was in the doldrums. At the end of
that period the world’s markets again became favour-
able, and Fremantle was definitely established as the
main port and warehouse centre, and as such has
continued to grow.
C. THE PRESENT
( i ) Central Area Uses
The prosperity resulting from the role of Fremantle
as the port and major warehouse centre for the
Region and State, and as the focal point of a con-
siderable suburban hinterland, is relatively recent
and has not manifested itself to any great extent in
terms of intensive building activity. With the ex-
ception of the storage warehouse area, development
is still small in architectural scale, but'it is coherent,
compact and full of character. This smallness of
scale and compactness gives the city certain ad-
vantages as a trading and commercial centre, and
they are emphasised by the relatively clear cut pattern
of land use which makes for convenience. The
retail traders have concentrated in a small area in
High Street, Adelaide Street and Market Street, and
office buildings are in the vicinity of Phillimore
Street. This present pattern should be extended
to cater for the inevitable expansion of principal
uses. New development could result in confusion
and inefficiency if warehousing, commercial and
trading establishments moved haphazardly into the
areas of obsolete development on the fringe of the
existing central shopping area.
(ii) The Road Pattern
With the expansion of facilities in the Inner
Harbour and a continuation of the steady increase
in freight handled in the Port as a whole, there will
be an intensification of road traffic. This will create
new problems and accentuate existing difficulties.
Vehicles entering and leaving the Harbour precinct
do so on an inadequate road system which includes
several blind intersections. Dock traffic makes an
immediate impact on the City Centre, in which
nearly all the side streets are congested by trucks
serving the warehouses. Dock traffic to and from
the South finds its way as best it can through narrow
Cliff Street or the retail shopping area. Traffic
from the East moves with difficulty through the area
between Marmion Street and South Street. It first
finds its way through the area between Swanbourne
Street and Queen Victoria Street and then crosses
the traffic of Queen Victoria Street. These faults
will be aggravated as traffic increases in volume.
( iii ) Traffic Growth
Previous reports on town planning have recorded
traffic counts on city streets and these, added to the
information gained from a traffic census in 1954,
reveal the remarkable increase in road traffic over
the past 24 years. This increase is seen in Table 47.
Table 47
ROAD TRAFFIC GROWTH ; FREMANTLE
Total vehicles at
Census
Point in 12 hours
: 7 a.m.
Census Point.
to 7 p.m.
1930 (a).
1948 ( b ).
1954.
North Fremantle Bridge
3,411
5,835
13,076
Queen Victoria Street ..
5,600
11,869
South Terrace . .
2,606
5,027
Marine Terrace . .
1,003
2,144
High Street
1,327
3,324
Beach Street
863
1,030
Harbour Entrance (Cliff Street)
1,537
4,042
SOURCES : (a) " Report of the Metropolitan Town
Planning Commission, 1930,” Perth, 1931. (Figures adjusted
to exclude bicycles.)
( b ) Harold Boas, " Report on Town Planning of City of
Fremantle,” Perth, 1950. (Figures adjusted to comparable
census periods.)


During the 51 years between the two latest traffic
counts the figures show that in many busy streets
the traffic has more than doubled in volume in
the comparable 12-hour periods. In relation to
street capacity, the volume of traffic carried during
the morning and evening peak periods is of more
serious consequence than the total daily movement.
In March, 1954, Queen Victoria Street was carry-
ing an evening peak volume at the rate of 1,256
vehicles per hour in one direction ; a flow slightly
greater than that from Perth under the West
Perth subway. Over the North Fremantle Bridge,
during the same peak period, the rate was 1,034
vehicles per hour, whilst vehicles were proceeding
in the opposite direction at the rate of 950 per hour.
Diagram 32
TRAFFIC FLOW AT CITY CORDON
FREMANTLE
7 a.m. to 7 p.m. March 1954
(iv) Parking Demand
Commensurate with the spectacular increase of
vehicular movements is the increased demand for
parking space. In the 1948 traffic census it was
ascertained that between the hours of 9 a.m. and
5 p.m. there were, on average, some 470 vehicles
parked within the central city area, presumably all
at kerbside spaces. The statistics added that in the
streets where the parking count was taken, over 50
per cent, of the kerbside space was so occupied.
Diagram 33
DAILY ACCUMULATION OF VEHICLES
WITHIN FREMANTLE CENTRAL AREA
In the 1954 traffic census, the parking demand
was assessed from the difference between the inflow
to and the outflow from the Central Area, on figures
taken half-hourly. The maximum accumulation
according to this method was 2,154 vehicles at 10
a.m. to 10.30 a.m., with an average hourly figure of
1,873 vehicles, of which passenger cars accounted
for an average of 1,228.
By a separate study of the traffic in and out of the
Harbour Trust enclosure, it was found that there
was an average hourly accumulation of 486 vehicles
in this area, so that the demand in the other part
of the Central Area could be correspondingly re-
duced by that number to 1,387 vehicles.


Thus readily comparable figures for parking demand
in the kerbside and off-street spaces in 1948 and
1954 are 470 and 1,387 vehicles respectively. This
could mean that in the streets where 50 per cent, of
the kerbside was occupied in 1948, the whole of the
kerbside (or its equivalent) was utilised in 1954,
plus further kerbside or off-street parking equal to
the whole of the 1948 demand.
D. PRINCIPLES
It is not sufficient merely to guide Central Area
users into their respective zones. This alone will
not ensure that all the activities that take place within
the Central Area do so under the best practicable
conditions. Use zoning should be accompanied by
regulation of the density of building, and other con-
trols necessary to ensure that there is no monopoly
of light and air by some buildings at the expense of
others. It should also ensure that there will be no
undue concentration of building development at
points in the Central Area, which would lead to
unnecessary congestion of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic in some parts and the reverse condition in
others. Suggested forms of control are explained
in detail in Part I (D) of this Chapter and in Appendix
111.
Reasonable conclusions can only be reached after
an extensive survey of existing conditions has been
made. The necessary facts must be assembled as a
basis for forecasting probable future development.
The form of the survey has been fully explained in
Part I (A) of this Chapter. The area surveyed in
Fremantle was, as far as could reasonably be as-
certained, large enough to allow for the full extension
of Central Area uses.
E. THE FUTURE
(i) General
The growth and development of the Fremantle
Central Area will gradually bring about two main
changes. There will be a spread of central area
uses, particularly shopping, and there will be an
increase in the total amount of building. In the
case of Perth it has been possible to relate the future
growth of the Central Area to probable increases
in employment in the office and retail trade groups.
Perth is, and will remain, the focal point of the
Region in terms of commerce, administration and
retail trade. It is likely that increases in regional
employment in these categories will result in a pro-
portional increase in employment in the Perth Central
Area, subject to provisions outlined in the relevant
sections of Part lof this Chapter. It is not possible,
however, to assess the relationship between regional
expansion and Fremantle Central Area expansion in
the same manner. For this reason, a detailed exam-
ination of employment statistics and forecasts of
future changes in the employment structure have
not been made. The assessment of the scale of
expansion likely to take place in Fremantle has been
based on the broad assumptions that retail trade will
increase in proportion with the increase in the popula-
tion for which Fremantle will be the centre, and that
commerce and other activities associated with the
port will expand in relation to the growth of the
port itself. It is estimated that the population of
the residential areas of which Fremantle is the natural
centre will increase from some 50,000 to 180,000,
an increase factor of about 3.6. The effect of these
general assumptions on particular aspects of the
Central Area is discussed at greater length in the
appropriate parts of Section E.
The Central Area has definite limits to growth on
three flanks, and on the eastern side, where there is
likely to be a spreading outwards of the shopping
centre, there are a number of open spaces and build-
ings which will form a partial barrier to growth.
These include the Oval, Queen Square, the Bowling
Green, the Catholic Church and the State schools.
Together, they will effectively discourage and re-
strain the spread of development away from the
existing Central Area and this may lead to the revival
of the area adjacent to Arthur Head. It may be
said that this revival is more desirable than a move-
ment eastwards, although that might have been
inevitable if the terrain and its uses were favourable
to change. The Plan shows that all the anticipated
requirements can, in fact, be accommodated easily
at reasonable densities within these broad limits.
The City Council, with the co-operation of com-
mercial interests, has already done much to increase
the attractiveness of shopping in High Street. If
road improvements are carried out, and parking space
provided, the western end of High Street should
come back into its own. The office zone, now con-
centrated on Phillimore Street, could extend in the
vicinity of the Round House.


Diagram 34
SIMPLIFIED DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
FREMANTLE CENTRAL AREA
( ii ) Roads and Parking
The intensification of road traffic will lead to in-
creasing congestion and difficulty in the Central
Area of Fremantle if provision is not made now for
road improvements to allow heavy vehicles to go
around, rather than through, the Central Area.
The greatest need is for a link road at the western
end of the Central Area, approximately on the line
of the present railway. The prolongation of this to
the South is shown in the Plan as a Major Regional
Highway. It would be the main road connection
between the two parts of the Port of Fremantle, the
Inner Harbour and the proposed port extension in
the Outer Harbour at Kwinana. It would also
connect Fremantle with the proposed freight-handling,
storage and distribution centre at Belmont-Welshpool
which should include a port freight terminal, the
main railway goods yards, the wholesale market,
major storage warehouses and important industrial
establishments. The Major Regional Highway would
form, with Phillimore Street in the North and Marine
Terrace in the South, the western side of two ring
road systems. The inner ring would be completed
by improvements starting with the junction of South
Terrace and Henderson Street, and continuing along
Henderson Street, Holdsworth Street, and Parry
Street. This would allow heavy vehicles bound
for the eastern dock entrance and the North
Fremantle Bridge to keep clear of the Central Area.
The outer ring is formed by linking James
Street to Ord Street. It would be part of an Im-
portant Regional Road, acting as a by-pass and dis-
tributor road.
The diversion of through traffic should encourage
further development in the Central Area by leaving
the internal roads for movements to and from business
premises. The ring roads will also allow public
transport vehicles to set down and pick up passengers
at several points near the Central Area shops. It
is very necessary to achieve this if the full length of
High Street is to flourish as a major part of the
shopping centre.
There is also another important need. If the
road improvements are to allow greater and easier
traffic flow, then kerbside parking must gradually be
restricted. The ring roads, particularly, will lose
greatly in efficiency if the carriageways are used for
parking. The provision of parking areas is therefore
an urgent necessity, and they must be within easy
reach of the buildings they are to serve. Ideally
they should be in very close proximity to them.
But the ideal is rarely attainable. The existing
pattern of development must, to a large extent,
dictate their location.
When the population of the Metropolitan Region
reaches 1,400,000, 4,800 vehicles may require to be
parked within the Fremantle Central Area. As
available kerbside space will be sufficient only for
about 1,000 vehicles (after allowance is made for taxi
ranks, bus stops, fire hydrants and prohibition of
parking at street corners) there will be a minimum
demand for parking space for some 3,800 vehicles.
The area required to accommodate them will be 21
acres or more.
The City Council has already provided two car
parks. Though both are at present somewhat distant
from the shopping area they will be fully used within


78
Kalverstraat, Amsterdam. The plan shows a half-mile section of the
major shopping street in one of the most important European towns. The
total length of the street is about one mile, and its average width is less than
thirty feet. Vehicular traffic is virtually excluded, and pedestrians move
in comfort and safety from shop to shop. The main traffic arteries are
situated on each flank of the shopping area.


79
79. High Street, Fremantle, looking
West, 1890, immediately before the gold
rush was rapidly to increase its importance.
80. High Street, Fremantle, looking
West, present day. A busy shopping centre
of distinctive character.
80


81
81. Early two-storey terrace, Adelaide
Street, Fremantle. In high density areas,
well-designed terraced houses could provide
better family homes than multi-storey flats.
82. The Round House, Fremantle. An
historic and admirable terminal feature
closing the vista down High Street. It is
suggested it should be retained.
82


83
83. Church Gardens, Fremantle. A
most important open space in the heart of
the City, adjacent to the shopping and
transport centre.
84. Ocean Front, Marine Terrace, Fre-
mantle. A fine opportunity for reclamation
and redevelopment as a housing and
recreational area.
84


85
85. Bus congestion in Fremantle.
Early morning movement in Canton-
ment Street.
86. Storage Warehouses, Canton-
ment Street, Fremantle.
86


87
The proposed Civic Centre, Fremantle. The photograph shows
the approach to the prison, Fairburn Street, as existing. The draw-
ing below illustrates the same view after the suggested redevelopment.


the next ten years and they should attract develop-
ment towards them. The provision of further
parking areas on the old Base Hospital site, in the
vicinity of the future Civic Centre, and adjacent to
the Railway Station, together with the extension of
the two existing parking areas will allow for the off-
street parking of about 1,650 cars. This, however,
is only sufficient for a relatively short term solution,
and as the demand arises for further space it will be
necessary to consider other measures. The capacity
of the suggested parking areas can be increased either
by lateral or multi-storey extension. The cost of
building upwards must be weighed against that of
the acquisition of land and the demolition of build-
ings.
(Hi) Public Transport
(a) Railway
General proposals concerning the railway are
outlined in Chapter 7, but mention should be made
here of those which form an integral part of the
Central Area Plan. The most important suggestion
is that the line now laid between Arthur Head and
the western end of the Central Area should be re-
placed by a new connection encircling Arthur
Head on the seaward side. This would bring benefit
in several ways. Firstly, and most important, it
would permit the construction of the link road at
the western end of the City Centre. Secondly, with
the railway traffic between Fremantle and Kwinana
growing in volume, the new alignment would result
in curves of sufficient radius to allow faster and
heavier traffic in a position removed from central
area activities. Thirdly, the Round House would
not be severed from the City Centre by the railway
line. If it were adapted for use as a nautical museum
it would be visited by many people, including tourists,
and an adequate approach for pedestrians would be
essential.
Other railway improvements would take place
within the boundaries of the areas administered by
the Harbour Trust and the Railway Commission.
With the removal of the goods yard from Fremantle
there would be space for buildings required for the
improvement of port facilities. With the upstream
extension of the Inner Harbour a new railway bridge
should be built immediately below the road traffic
bridge, requiring substantial remodelling of the
railway system at the bridgehead.
(b) Road Transport
As in Perth, there are serious problems in Fre-
mantle arising from public transport services which,
in the present transitional stage, are limited by the
existing road system and the lack of terminal facilities.
The Plan envisages public transport routes radiating
from the City Centre and, in addition, routes passing
through central Fremantle. The inner ring road
would allow routes to encircle the main shopping
and business district. If they did, a complete revival
of the western end of the City would be greatly
encouraged. At present it would be difficult, if not
impossible, for buses to cross the lower end of High
Street from Phillimore Street and Marine Terrace.
An earlier proposal of the City Council that a bus
station should be established adjacent to the railway
terminal as a means of co-ordinaring road and rail
transport, and keeping buses out of the Central
Area, has much to commend it. A proposal to this
effect is incorporated in the Plan. This bus station
need be no more than a holding or interchange point
for buses if they were able to skirt the Central Area
on the inner ring road.
(iv) Shops
As a commercial centre primarily concerned with
shipping, Fremantle will continue to grow, but the
greatest expansion in the Central Area will be for
shopping. An even wider range of shops would
attract a large proportion of the population which is
steadily increasing in the suburban hinterland.
In the past, the shopping centre of Fremantle has
developed in an easterly direction along High Street,
and it has now spread beyond Market Street. During
the nineteenth century, with port facilities focussed
on the jetty at Arthur Head, and with Fremantle
relatively small in area, it was natural that the western
end of High Street should be most important. With
the development of the Inner Harbour, the re-location
of the railway terminal and the building of the Town
Hall, the centre of gravity shifted to the Market
Street-High Street crossing. The routing of buses
and the location of the bus terminal points confirmed
the change in emphasis. Unless further attractions
are offered at the western end of High Street it will
always be at a disadvantage as a shopping area. The
building of the ring road link to the West of Cliff


Table 48
EXISTING AND PROPOSED FLOOR SPACE : SUMMARY
FREMANTLE CENTRAL AREA
Use.
Existing
Floor Space
in thousands
of sq. ft.
Gross Zoned
Area
in thousands
of sq. ft.
Proposed
Maximum
Plot
Ratio.
Theoretical
Maximum
Floor Space
available
in thousands
of sq. ft."f
Likely expai
due t
Population
Increase.
asion factor
o :—
Harbour
Extension.
Possible
Future
Floor Space
required
in thousands
of sq. ft.
Shopping (including Show-
rooms)
380*
1,550
3-0
4,650
3-6
1,368
Offices (excluding Government
offices)
275
270
3-0
810
3-6
990
Wholesale warehousing
665
790
3-0
2,370
3-6
2,394
Storage warehousing ..
1,380
1,110
4-0
4,440
i -23
1,697
Civic and Cultural
Government offices
595
115
| 2,505
3-6
2,556
Industrial
590
445
1-0
445
Residential
1,160
1,690
1-0
1,690
Street, by providing easy access to the western end
by bus and car, will in large part alleviate the present
disadvantage.
The great majority of shop buildings have no more
than two floors, with only the ground floor used as
selling space. In some cases the first floor is used
for storage space, in others for living accommodation,
offices or small scale industries. In the Central
Area at present, shops of various kinds occupy a
total floor area of about 380,000 sq. ft. In the Plan
it is assumed that the ultimate demand will be for
about 3.6 times the present floor area (Section E (i)).
The length of frontage required is a more uncertain
figure as it will be directly affected by the rate of
turnover in shops, which should increase. Taking
the shopping area as a whole, a tripling in the total
turnover will not necessarily demand three times
the amount of frontage. There is also another factor
to be considered. In general, shops do not now
occupy full lots. The backs of the lots are in some
cases unused, and in others they are occupied by
minor industrial undertakings or warehouses. There
is, therefore, room for shopping space expansion
behind the existing frontages.
Existing hotels, church buildings, cinemas and
offices of various kinds will probably remain in the
shopping zone, and other buildings of a non-shopping
nature will be erected from time to time, both in
existing and new shopping areas. The Plot Ratio
which is suggested for the shopping zone has been
based on this assumption, and would allow for a
proportion of non-shopping uses in addition to the
estimated future demand for shop premises.
It is suggested that a maximum Plot Ratio of 3.0
be adopted in the shopping zone (Table 48) although,
theoretically, a much lower average Plot Ratio would
be sufficient to provide for all estimated needs, if
it could be assumed that the zone would be de-
veloped to full capacity. However, because of the
probability that buildings of lower density will
remain for some time, individual sites for new build-
ings must not be subjected to undue restriction.
The Plot Ratio of 3.0 would enable the present
practice of erecting two and three-storey premises
to continue, and should prove adequate to meet the
needs of developers who wish to build to a greater
height. If there were unnecessarily high densities
in some places they would lead to needless building
* Survey of existing land use made no detailed classification of showroom accommodation. For the purposes of this Table
the figure of 380,000 sq. ft. includes both shopping and showrooms.
t The future total floor space of zoned use within any zone will be less than the theoretical maximum floor space available, owing
to (i) existing development likely to remain and future development likely to be built within the zone at low densities, especially in
outer fringe areas : (ii) the continuation and expansion within the zone under consideration, of uses other than the zoned use : and
(iii) the continuation and limited expansion of the zoned use under consideration in other zones, where such uses are permitted.


and street congestion, and would tend, in the long
term, to create pockets of development grossly out of
scale with adjacent, older buildings, destroy the
existing pleasant uniformity of character in shopping
streets, and encourage the entry into the zone of
elements which would disrupt the continuity of
shops. The size of the shopping zone suggested can
only be justified if related to a maximum permitted
density based on its full development.
The existing market building, at the corner of
Henderson Street and South Terrace, is inadequate
and not very well placed at a critical junction which
in the future will carry a heavy flow of traffic. With
the consolidation of Fremantle as the second most
important commercial centre in the Region, a new
and larger market in a less cramped position will be
required. The existing market should give way to
a major road improvement and a better approach to
the central sports oval. The Plan suggests that the
new market should be placed on the ample site
between Collie and Essex Streets, opposite the end
of Market Street. The market would then be at
the end of the ultimate shopping development, and
bounded by wide streets which are not heavy traffic
routes. Service access to the market would be
simple to arrange, with car parking space nearby.
The main front of the market building would face
Market Street, and it is from this side that the retail
trading facilities should be approached. On the
western side the market could contain an upper
floor restaurant overlooking the Ocean.
(v) Offices
t
Commercial offices in Fremantle are to a large
extent occupied by firms concerned with the business
of the port. Perth contains a very wide range of
offices, and there has been a tendency for firms in
Fremantle to seek accommodation in the Capital
City. In spite of recent moves on the part of some
firms to return to Fremantle from Perth, there is
not a large concentration of office space in Fre-
mantle, and it must be assumed that there will not
be a demand on the scale of that in Perth.
At the present time the amount of office floor
space in commercial and professional use in central
Fremantle is a little over 275,000 sq. ft. (Table 48),
whereas in central Perth there is over 3,100,000 sq.
ft., or over eleven times as much. There may be,
in addition, some office space in warehouse and
industrial premises which it has not been possible
to dissociate from the major use during the survey,
but being limited in extent, its omission will not
affect the general conclusions drawn.
The existing office floor space in Local, State or
Commonwealth Government offices is not included
in the figure of 275,000 sq. ft. (Table 48). In Fre-
mantle there are approximately 115,000 sq. ft. of
office floor space in governmental use.
The private office space figure of 275,000 sq. ft. is
lower than might be expected for a port handling
the tonnage which Fremantle does. It is almost
certainly due to the city’s proximity to Perth. Be-
cause of this, an accurate estimate of office expansion
in Fremantle is difficult to make. It is always pos-
sible that there will be some future movement of
offices from Perth to Fremantle as the port develops
in Cockburn Sound. It should also be borne in
mind that, although an increasing number of people
shop in Fremantle, many of them now go to Perth
for specialist commercial and professional services.
The growth of the Fremantle Central Area as a
whole, and in particular the shopping area, will in
itself create a demand for a more complete range of
services. There are already signs that professional
men, who have hitherto regarded Perth as their
appropriate centre, are now ready to establish offices
in High Street and its vicinity.
In the Plan for the Central Area of Fremantle a
very liberal allowance has been made for office
accommodation because of unpredictable factors,
and it will be seen that there is ample room for a
considerable expansion of business premises, includ-
ing commercial and professional offices.
For reasons similar to those applying to shopping
areas a low Plot Ratio would impose unnecessary
restrictions on developers and so a Plot Ratio of
3.0 is, therefore, suggested (Table 48) although, having
regard to the estimated increase in population and
to the extension of the port, a proportionate increase
of up to 3.6 times the existing amount of office space
could be achieved within the areas zoned for offices,
with a much lower Plot Ratio.
One of the interesting and important points about
central Fremantle is that the original subdivision into
lots, generally of about one-eighth acre in size, is


Diagram 35 (a)
EXISTING PLOT RATIOS
FREMANTLE CENTRAL AREA
Diagram 35 ( b)
PROPOSED PLOT RATIOS
FREMANTLE CENTRAL AREA


substantially unaltered. This is not the case in
central Perth where, unfortunately, there are now
many small subdivisions which do not lend themselves
readily to re-development on efficient and modern
lines. The partial explanation may be that Fre-
mantle has grown slowly as compared with Perth
during the present century. Because of this, old
buildings have been adapted and there have been
comparatively few new developments. Where new
buildings have been erected it has generally been on
an original subdivision as the cost of land has been
relatively low. The survival of the original pattern
of subdivision gives Fremantle an advantage in re-
development, and controlling this with a Plot Ratio
of 3.0 would be conducive to the development of a
pattern of good buildings, which is difficult to achieve
where frontages are narrow. The increase in bulk
which is to be expected and is allowed for can be
attained without loss of light and air if buildings are
increased in height and arranged in a rational manner
on the sites. The daylighting of buildings has been
discussed earlier in relation to Perth Central Area.
The office area in central Fremantle, if it were to
continue to grow around the western and southern
flanks of the Central Area, would have the added
advantage of continuous open space, and it would
be in close proximity to car parks.
(vi) Warehouses
Following the expansion of the Inner Harbour
there will be a greater volume of materials and goods
to be handled in Fremantle. It is difficult to assess
the effect this may have on warehousing. That
there will be a need for increased accommodation
for this and other reasons is certain, but the location
is not easy to forecast. Additional warehousing
space will be built in Fremantle, some will be in
Perth and, as recommended elsewhere, an appreciable
amount in the Belmont-Welshpool freight inter-
change area. Although it is reasonable to assume
that most of the new warehouse building in Fre-
mantle will be on sites more spacious than those in
the immediate vicinity of High Street, a limited
allowance for warehouse expansion in and adjacent
to this area is suggested in the Plan. A distinction
has been made between warehouses related to the
retail trade, and bulk storage warehouses and transit
warehouses related to the port and other activities.
(a) Wholesale Warehouses
The wholesale warehouse zone must be considered
as being complementary to the shopping zone because
of its function as supplier of goods to retail shops
and, ideally, it should be located for easy access to
the shopping zone and the office zone. The ware-
house areas West of Market Street satisfy this pro-
vision and give warehouses the advantage of access
to the ring road, which will permit of circulation
without passing through the shopping zone.
A permissible Plot Ratio of 3.0 in this zone will
allow for an expansion factor of 3.6 in wholesale
warehouses, even assuming that some of the per-
missible uses other than wholesale warehouses will
continue to establish themselves in the same zone.
(b) Storage Warehouses
Normally, large transit and storage sheds should
be considered as an undesirable use in a central area
because of the necessary associated road and rail
communications and traffic. But because of the
prominent part this type of business plays in Fre-
mantle as a port, it has been accepted as inevitable
that some bulk storage facilities will be necessary
in or on the fringe of the Central Area.
At the present time there is a considerable number
of small warehouses, both storage and wholesale, in
the immediate vicinity of High Street. Whereas it
is likely that there will be an increase in the total
volume of wholesale warehouses, for which pro-
vision has been made, an increase in bulk warehousing
in this area should be strongly discouraged. The
movement, loading, and off-loading of trucks disrupts
the flow of pedestrians and shoppers’ vehicles. If
bulk warehousing were to spread in extent, and
increase in volume, on either side of High Street it
would seriously diminish the chance of revival of
the western end as an effective and attractive shopping
street.
The tendency will be for the large storage ware-
houses, in their own interests, to move away from
the business and shopping area. Indeed, some have
already done so. The larger and newer of these
warehouses are behind the railway goods yard along
Beach Street and Elder Place and, in the long term,
this will be their best location if they wish to be
near the Inner Harbour rather than the freight inter-


change point at Belmont-Welshpool. In the zoning
of the Central Area very little additional land has
been allowed for storage warehouses on the assump-
tion that this type of business is more directly related
to actual port activity than are other Central Area
uses. The up-river extension of the Inner Harbour
will increase the existing South side wharfage length
of approximately 5,270 feet by about 1,200 feet, an
increase of 23 per cent. A Plot Ratio of 4.0 in this
zone will allow for an expansion factor of approxi-
mately 3.2 for storage warehouses,, which should be
more than enough for future increase resulting from
harbour extensions and greater port activity. Any
accommodation above this expansion of 3.2 should
be located outside the Central Area of Fremantle.
( vii ) Industry
Within the defined Central Area, 9.75 per cent.»
or about 590,000 sq. ft. of the total floor space, is
occupied by industrial establishments of various
types. This figure does not include the industrial
floor space in buildings which are on State or Com-
monwealth land adjacent to the waterfront. Land
in this category is outside the survey area, but it must
not be overlooked that the industrial establishments
on it are an important source of employment and a
very necessary part of the port.
It is doubtful if expanding and larger industries
should be encouraged to grow, or will wish to grow,
in the Central Area. The City Council has already
established an important industrial area in the south-
eastern part of the City. It stands as an excellent
example of a combined operation, in which a local
authority and private enterprise join forces to promote
better civic development. It is anticipated that the
larger industries will leave the growing Central Area
to move to more spacious sites, away from the traffic
and servicing problems which arise in the congested
inner area. As a long term policy, only the smaller
light industries should remain within the orbit of
the main commercial and shopping centre, and the
proposed industrial zone is therefore restricted in
area.
(viii) Civic and Cultural Buildings
Because it is the site of the first important landing
and settlement on the western side of the Continent,
Fremantle is rich in historical associations. The
compact Central Area has a unity and a character
which are rarely found in cities little more than a
century old. The harbour containing the growing
fishing fleet adds colour to the Central Area scene,
and every year people from all over the Region
assemble at Fremantle for the Blessing of the Fleet,
an occasion for pageantry. Fremantle, as befits a
port in a fine setting, provides a good background for
special occasions. The City has a wealth of spirit
and a very distinctive community life, flavoured not
a little by the cosmopolitan character of its inhabit-
ants and its close contact with sailors and visitors
from all over the world.
(a) The Civic Centre
With the continued growth of the City, a more
noble Civic Centre on a central yet spacious site
would symbolise the community spirit and at the
same time provide facilities for an even richer com-
munity life. The existing Town Hall, when allow-
ance has been made for a considerable increase in
the staff and activities of the City Council, will be
very inadequate. Although it was well sited when
built, it is now an impediment to the growth of the
shopping centre and it is at a critical traffic junction.
At this stage, it would be wise for the Fremantle
City Council to consider the establishment of a group
of civic buildings including a new Town Hall. It
is proposed in the Plan that the gaol site would be
most appropriate. The site and the gaol buildings
could be transferred to the City Council if a new gaol
were constructed on part of the land at Coogee which
has recently been transferred to the State. 1 The
principal building of the gaol, although about one
hundred years old, is an impressive example of
monumental architecture. It and the other buildings
are now obsolescent for gaol purposes and, in a
rapidly growing State, may very soon be inadequate.
The principal building, and some of the ancillary
buildings, might well be converted for use as Local
1 Advantages of transferring the gaol to the very spacious site at Coogee
would be that s—
(a) It is within relatively short distance of the present gaol ;
(b) prisoners in Fremantle Gaol could work on the new site and
new buildings ;
(c) prisoners could be transferred gradually and by stages ;
(d) there is some excellent land for cultivation by prisoners ;
(e) it would be adjacent to the Perth-Kwinana Highway and yet the
buildings would not be seen from it or any other public road.


Government and Government offices, an art gallery,
library, and club rooms. There is space on the site
for other major civic buildings. The high stone
wall surrounding the gaol should be demolished in
whole or in part.
(b) Other Public Buildings
Within the Central Area there are several other
buildings of historical or architectural interest. The
most notable of these is the Round House, closing
the long vista of High Street. Although originally
built for a grim purpose it is now a rather gay monu-
mental feature because of its shape and the sweep
of the baroque staircase leading to it. The State
schools and Catholic Church could form an im-
pressive introduction to the north-eastern end of
the Central Area, and the ring road route around
Parry, Holdsworth and Henderson Streets will
provide ample sites for other Public buildings and
places of entertainment, when the market and other
buildings are relocated or become obsolete.
(ix) Open Space
The Bowling Green and recreation area off Parry
Street will form part of a series of public and private
open spaces defining and limiting the extent of the
Central Area. They would include the State School,
Catholic Church, Queen Square, The Civic Centre,
the Oval and the extended open space along Marine
Terrace to the Round House, although this belt will,
in part, be occupied by various public buildings,
they should be sited in ample gardens and lawns
which, as well as providing much needed open space
for city workers, will tend to confine the central
area development to its zoned area and prevent any
sprawling of central area uses. Kings Square and
the park near the railway station should also be
preserved as essential open spaces in the Central
Area itself.
(x) Residential Buildings
Within the survey area there are, at present, about
1,160,000 sq. ft. of floor space in residential buildings,
of which 620,000 sq. ft. are in areas zoned for other
than residential use. It must be assumed that, in
the long term, the 620,000 sq. ft. will be displaced
by other central area uses. At the same time there
will always be people who prefer to live near the
ocean, within a short walking distance of the central
shopping and business area. Many, indeed, already
find such a situation most convenient.
The residential areas to the North and East of the
Central Area are suitable for flats, although detached
dwellings may well remain in the majority. The
area on the South side of the Central Area, which
is now predominantly residential in character, should
gradually be re-developed according to a neighbour-
hood plan, with many of the dwellings designed as
flats. A modest amount of reclamation along Marine
Terrace would allow the curve of the railway line
to be improved, and at the same time, add ocean
front recreational space. Fremantle provides the
only opportunity in the Region for planning and
development of a residential area which would enjoy
the proximity of a City Centre and an ocean outlook.
The City would be much less pleasant and con-
venient if the encroachment of industry into the
well-situated residential areas were not halted.
In all residential areas included in the Central
Area proposals, a maximum Plot Ratio of 1.0 has
been suggested, but it is unlikely that such a high
density would ever be achieved except in the Marine
Terrace area. As suggested in Chapter 8, the de-
velopment of flats on suitable sites should not be
unduly restricted by the imposition of low maximum
densities, and whilst it should not be implied from
the density recommendations that high blocks of
flats will predominate in these areas, their erection
if required should not be precluded.
F. CONCLUSIONS
Fremantle, the Second City of the Region and
State, is rich in historical association. It has physical
and social unity, and all planning steps should be
taken with a view to strengthening rather than break-
ing down these assets.
The Plan suggests road links with key points in
the Region, and with the main highways which
radiate from the Region to the other parts of the
State. The road pattern within the Central Area
should be improved. Perhaps the most important
of the several proposals is that there should be a
road encircling the western end of the commercial
and shopping area and that this should pass at right


angles to High Street and between it and the Round
House. As part of a scheme for improving traffic
facilities car parks should be provided on the outer
edge of the Central Area.
The calculations show that densities in the Central
Area need not be as high as those which may become
necessary in Central Perth. It would be to the
advantage of Fremantle to allow some lateral ex-
pansion of the various parts of the Central Area, and
to keep a great degree of uniformity of scale rather
than to have one or two points of congestion, and
some parts problem areas, in the sense that their
best future use might be in doubt.
Finally, it should be stressed that the ocean front
setting is of great importance. With the picturesque
fishing harbour in the foreground it would be wise to
encourage residential rather than industrial building
immediately adjacent to the Central Area.


CHAPTER 10
Some General and Additional Proposals
A. INTRODUCTION
It is convenient at this stage to give a general outline
of some of the proposals which have been made in
the earlier Chapters of the Report; to see how the
various pieces of the jig saw puzzle fit together to
form a whole ; and, at the same time, to draw
attention to other proposals of a regional or a local
nature which have not already been described.
Chapter 9 deals in detail with the Central Areas of
Perth and Fremantle. The purpose of this Chapter
is to integrate some of the proposals for the Region
as a whole.
(i) Urban Areas
Many theories have been advanced from time to
time as to the way in which a city should grow.
Attempts have been made to define optimum popula-
tions for cities, and various partially successful
methods have been devised for achieving this end
by establishing limits to the spread of development.
A living organism such as a city and its suburbs
will continue to expand while there is a healthy
economic and social life. Although there are con-
flicting theories about the form a modern metropolis
should take, in practice growth will very largely be
conditioned by existing physical characteristics, and
the demands and decisions of many authorities and
private individuals.
In preparing a plan for action, these and many
other factors have to be taken into account, although
the plan must, of necessity, look well beyond the
immediate future. Almost the first question to be
answered is concerned with size, and a reasonable
estimate can be made if the assumptions on which
it is based are realistic.
During the first 50 years of the present century,
the Metropolitan Region has grown at a remarkable
rate, despite the intervention of two great wars and
an economic depression which nearly brought disaster
to a large part of the world. In Chapter 3 it is shown
that the rate of increase since the last war has been
greater than the average of the last 50 years. The
evidence suggests that, during the next 50 years, the
Region will continue to grow at the rate achieved in
the first half of the century. This means that Perth
and Fremantle will be at the centre of a large urban
region at the end of the century, and decisions made
by the present generation will have a tremendous
effect on future generations.
Bearing in mind the examples of the larger cities
in Australia, America and Europe, where develop-
ment has spread in monotonous fashion along radial
roads for distances of 15 to 30 miles from the centre,
often without a break, it should generally be agreed
that there is great advantage to be obtained by limiting
the radius of the main urban area of close settlement.
If it does not spread beyond a reasonable distance
from the main city centre, there is economic gain in
addition to social and physical convenience.
The urban areas shown on the Plan were defined
after considering population estimates, the location
of industry and the other factors mentioned in
previous Chapters. Beyond the various urban limits
it is proposed that the general zone should be rural,
and that there should be no close settlement other
than in small groups. Scattered settlement would
not only be costly and wasteful but also would
inevitably take the form of ribbons along the principal
roads. The roads would be less efficient and re-
duced in value and, as time went on, the people of
the Metropolitan Region would find the open country
receding. The metropolis would sprawl more and
more loosely across it. Yet easily accessible open
country is essential for the recreation and well-being
of the city dweller as well as of economic importance.
Allowing for the spacious living demanded in
Australia there is room in the defined urban areas of
the Plan for over 1,400,000 persons and all their
social and recreational requirements to standards


suggested in Chapter 8. By far the greater part of
the population would live in the main urban area
within relatively easy reach of the centres of Perth
and Fremantle, and yet be within seven or eight miles
of the rural area in any direction.
Outside the main urban area, development should
be in the form of reasonably compact communities
which are generally self-dependent although forming
part of the Metropolitan Region. Such communities
or towns would be at Kwinana-Rockingham, Arma-
dale and Kalamunda. It is not the purpose of the
Plan at this stage to look beyond a reasonable time
limit and a possible population of about 1,400,000
persons, but if and when additional land is needed,
over and above that set aside in the Plan, then it
should occur as either an addition to one or more
of these communities or towns or as an entirely new
community, and should not become a remote sub-
urban addition to the main urban area.
Although decentralisation within the State was
beyond the scope of the study, an appraisal was
made of the possibilities of decentralisation within
the Region. The amount suggested may be dis-
appointing to some, but is considered to be realistic
and it should be pointed out that the Plan is flexible
beyond the limits of the main urban area and also in
the time scale. If there is an opportunity, through
the advent of major industry, to build up new towns
which are self-contained, then the opportunity should
be seized. If it were, the effect would be to slacken
the rate of outward suburban growth.
The general pattern of the Plan is based on the
central Cities of Perth and Fremantle and their
suburbs growing within defined limits. On the
West the ocean is a very clear boundary, and full
advantage is taken of the coastal ridges for develop-
ment. On the East and South-East the proposed
Fremantle-Midland Junction Highway and the Mid-
land Junction-Kwinana railway together form a
limiting barrier. They would be a disruptive element
if lying between residential communities and the
City, and a main objective has been to locate them
so that they do not sever suburbs. Perth Airport,
near Guildford, and the poorly drained land in the
vicinity are also limiting factors in the East.
To the North, natural barriers are not so clearly
discernible, but the limit of development need not
be beyond the upper edge of the extensive area now
held by the State Housing Commission, South of
Wanneru. Further East the proposed new airport,
to be used by jet planes, together with the poor land
in the vicinity, suggest further limits. To the South,
the expansion of Fremantle is checked by the special
industrial area at Robbs Jetty and the important
Spearwood market gardening area.
Outside the limits of the main urban area centred
on Perth and Fremantle, is the rural area containing
within it some towns or small communities which
should all be developed as complete entities within
the Region. The larger ones already referred to are
at Kwinana-Rockingham, Armadale and Kalamunda.
Midland Junction and Guildford, although con-
tiguous, may be regarded as in this category, but
their future extension is limited because of poor
terrain (Chapter 5).
Considerable expansion is foreseen in the Hills
area between Greenmount and Chidlow, where a
fast railway service to the City is possible and good
building land is available. The density of develop-
ment may be lower than in other areas.
Maddington and Gosnells are among the small
centres where limited expansion can be expected,
and where quite an appreciable amount of settlement
has already taken place. It would be inadvisable
to extend the development of these two centres so
that eventually they form a ribbon between Perth
and Armadale. In any case, further expansion is
difficult and, ultimately, would be very costly because
of the poorly drained land (Chapter 5).
Finally, there are the smaller villages or town-
ships which already have a small nucleus of develop-
ment, such as Coogee (a beach resort), Wanneru,
Jandakot and Maida Vale (small rural centres with a
few shops and a school). Possible beach resorts
have also been suggested along the North coast at
Burns Beach, Wanneru Beach and Yanchep.
These settlements are an integral part of the rural
area and are suggested either because they are already
established, with a group of buildings forming a
local centre, or else because they are adjacent to
physical features, such as a good bathing or fishing
beach, which will lead to close settlement.
Within the urban area generally, subdivision should
ultimately be permitted into blocks of residential
and commercial size but it should not be expected


that such subdivision can necessarily occur im-
mediately. While it is essential that there should
always be a very adequate supply of home sites to
meet demands at any given time, it would be most
unwise to subdivide land ahead of a planned pro-
gramme of roads and the necessary supply services
such as water and electricity. In addition, some
parts of the urban area will require a comprehensive
drainage scheme before they can effectively be used
for close settlement.
It is often forgotten that land which may be quite
adequate for dwellings on, say, two-acre or five-acre
blocks may be quite unsuitable for close settlement
without the provision of further supply services and
drainage. The dweller on the two-acre block is
nearly always able to obtain his water from the
ground and he can bury his nightsoil. This is
probably quite impracticable, and certainly most
undesirable, on a 30-perch block surrounded by
others of a similar size.
It is essential that there should be continuous and
close liaison between the authorities responsible for
subdividing, building and supply services. It is a
waste of public money to provide roads and services
and then not fully to utilise the available building
land. It is worth while pointing out that, at the
time when the Regional Planning Survey was made,
there were approximately 23,000 vacant residential
blocks, which were within the existing built-up areas
and provided with the essential supply services.
( ii ) Rural Areas
The term " rural area ” may be considered a mis-
nomer, suggesting as it does the following of rural
pursuits such as agriculture. In fact, " rural ” is
the opposite of " urban,” an area of relatively sparse
settlement as compared to the closely settled urban
areas.
Generally the rural area can be considered as pro-
viding for the farmer, the market gardener growing
vegetables, the orchardist and viticulturist, the poultry
farmer and the pig keeper, and for the householder
who requires a relatively large area of land around
his house. It should also provide for rural industries,
such as woodyards, fruit packing and handling plants,
servicing of agricultural implements, and others
connected with treating, processing or packing primary
products grown in the locality. Extractive industries
must also find a place in the rural area where gravel,
sand, limestone and brick clay can be taken without
interference with close settlement (Chapter 5).
The most important parts of the rural area are
those proposed for intensive agricultural use. These
areas have been defined after consultation with the
Department of Agriculture, and bearing in mind the
land requirements necessary for providing a popula-
tion of some 1,400,000 persons with fresh vegetables
and fruit from a nearby source. The areas shown as
suitable already contain a large proportion of land
which is already very productive, and they are
relatively small.
In the South, the market gardening area of Spear-
wood is a model of patient and intensive develop-
ment. The Plan shows it extended southwards to
Hope Valley, and beyond Kwinana to the East of
the Mandurah Road. In the North, the Osborne
Park area, already quite intensively cultivated, stretches
from Herdsman Lake over rather swampy country,
across Balcatta Road and on both sides of the Yanchep
Highway, to the areas North of Wanneru and Lake
Joondalup.
These areas should be protected and extended for
market gardening, and other types of development
should not generally be allowed to intrude. Close
subdivision of this important but limited land should
not be permitted. In the past a minimum area for
cultivation by a single family has been about 2.5
acres, but improved methods of working and mech-
anisation are tending to increase the economic mini-
mum to about 7 or 10 acres.
The vine-growing district of Middle and Upper
Swan includes some of the oldest cultivated land in
the State. It is also the centre of the wine industry
and, again, it is desirable that other uses which could
be located elsewhere should be excluded. A mini-
mum land subdivision of about 10 to 12 acres is
suggested for this area.
Conditions favouring fruit growing are to be found
in the Hills between Greenmount and Chidlow, from
Kalamunda to Pickering Brook and Carilla, from
Kelmscott to Roleystone and Wungong Brook, and
in some places between Maida Vale and Gosnells.
These limited areas, which are very necessary as a
source of fresh fruit for the metropolitan market,
are generally scattered and in the sheltered valleys
and hillsides. As a result of discussions with the


Department of Agriculture, the Plan proposes a
series of orchard areas in which the subdivision
should not normally be less than about 10 to 12
acres.
To the South of the Abattoirs at Midland Junction
lie extensive holding and grazing paddocks, mainly
along the Helena River. As long as the Abattoirs
and Saleyards remain at Midland Junction —and the
Plan does not envisage their removal—holding pad-
docks such as these will be needed, and must be
extended to meet the needs of the growing metro-
politan market. Further land subdivision in the
area of the holding paddocks should not be envisaged.
With the exception of the pasture and dairying
land South of Armadale, between the South-Western
Highway and the coast, the remainder of the rural
area is generally of poor land, and largely unsuitable
for close settlement. It is proposed, therefore, that
the general minimum subdivision of rural land should
be 5 acres.
Finally, extensive areas of poor quality land may
be put to good economic use. Pine plantations
provide softwood for many manufacturing purposes.
Before very long the relatively small, inner pine
plantations, now fringed by suburban housing, must
give way to building development or be converted
to recreational open space. Already, a new planta-
tion of several thousand acres is being developed
North of Gnaitgara Road. In the southern part of
the Region it is evident that very large scale planta-
tions should supersede the existing Collier and
Somerville plantations. The economics of softwood
production have been discussed with the Forests
Department, and it seems clear that not only will
the greater part of all softwood grown be destined
for the metropolitan area, but also the cost of trans-
portation is a most important factor.
It would be economical and wise to acquire land
and establish systematically new, large scale, pine
plantations in the poor and virtually unused country
between Beechboro and Gnangara Road, and also
immediately to the South of the Fremantle-Midland
Junction Highway and the Midland Junction-Kwinana
railway between Canning Vale and Forrestdale. The
land is suitable for pine growing, transport costs
would be minimised, and it would provide the most
valuable use of an extensive area. In addition, large
pine plantations would enhance the appearance of
otherwise dull country.
B. OTHER REGIONAL PROPOSALS
(i) Hospitals and Regional Health Services
As a result of consultations with the Public Health
Department, broad proposals for the future dis-
tribution of hospitals are incorporated in the Plan.
A complete hospital system to serve a population
of more than 1,000,000 persons has been envisaged.
It is estimated that five beds per 1,000 persons
are required in acute general hospitals and, after
making allowance for private hospitals and their
further development, it would appear that five new
major hospitals should be established within the
next 30 or 40 years. A site of 20 to 40 acres for
each hospital should be reserved, at an early stage,
near the geographical centre of the area to be served.
A central position is convenient both for general
practitioners and visitors. Initially each hospital
would have 200 beds. With an adequate site there
would be room for expansion as the area served by
the hospital grows. The proposed location of these
major hospitals and other existing hospitals is shown
symbolically in the Plan and Diagram 36. In the
main urban area there are two new hospital sites
North of the Swan River, at Hollywood and near
Mount Yokine, and two South of the river, at Bentley
Park and Hilton Park. The fifth new site is South
of Kwinana, to serve Rockingham, Kwinana and the
surrounding district.
There is also an established hospital site at Arma-
dale but the development of this is likely to be
problematical for some time, particularly in view of
the other regional hospital proposals.
With a metropolitan population of over three
times the present size there will be a need for at
least four general hospitals. The Royal Perth Hos-
pital will shortly be completed, and a second general
hospital could grow from the proposed community
hospital at Fremantle. It would also be wise to
assume that the community hospital at Kwinana
should be planned so that it could be extended to
provide additional facilities of a specialist nature.
On the completion of the Royal Perth Hospital,
and in the early stages of the Plan, a start should be
made in building a general hospital at Hollywood.
This should be conceived as the main teaching hos-


Diagram 36


pital, and it is ideally placed for the purpose. On
the edge of Kings Park and at a short distance from
central Perth, it is in a spacious setting and yet in
the centre of gravity of the metropolis. It is also
adjacent to the University which is of great import-
ance to medical students, the medical profession as
a whole, and the University. It means, amongst
other things, that medical students would follow
their pre-clinical studies on the main campus with
other students of the biological sciences, and that
at the clinical stage of their courses they would be
within the University and yet in the main teaching
hospital.
It is to be expected that medical research in the
State will be centred in the teaching hospital, and in
clinics and research institutes adjacent to it. There
are strong arguments in favour of the Public Health
Department and an Institute of Public Health forming
part of the same group. Because the University
has land at Hollywood, adjacent to the Repatriation
Hospital and the new Qhest Hospital, there is the
opportunity for Western Australia gradually to build
up a really fine medical centre which would be of
enormous benefit to the State. It would be difficult
if not impossible to find a site in any great city as
well placed in every respect.
By historical accident the proposed medical centre
site is within a very short distance of various existing
public and private hospitals of a general and specialist
nature. This adds to the many other advantages.
There is only one serious disadvantage. The site,
almost as if by accident, is bisected by a traffic road,
which has grown in importance because the twin
carriageway Winthrop Avenue has never been com-
pleted as a through road. When it is, University
Avenue should be closed so that the hospital, and its
ancillary buildings, are on a large rectangular block
of land rather than on two irregular pieces. It would
also be an advantage, and farsighted, if the virtually
unused recreational reserve on the northern edge of
the site were brought within the hospital precinct.
Now that this reserve is to be within the City of
Subiaco a transfer should easily be arranged, as the
extensive and highly-developed Rosalie Park is ad-
jacent to the site.
Of the specialist hospitals near to the University
one requires special mention. Accommodation in
the Claremont Hospital for patients suffering from
mental ailments is now over-taxed, and it would be
unwise to add further accommodation to an insti-
tution which is already too large. The advice of the
Public Health Department is that another hospital
is urgently required. After several years search a
site at Pyrton, South of Caversham, has been
suggested by the Department as the one most suitable
to meet a set of difficult requirements. Although a
more detached site would have been preferable from
some viewpoints, Pyrton is just beyond the edge of
the proposed built-up area and within easy reach of
suburbs where employees might live. The institu-
tion set in farmland would be inconspicuous in its
setting and would not break into a residential area.
Before the Region’s population reaches 1,000,000,
a third mental hospital should have been commenced.
An admirable site could be found in the extensive
area of Crown Land North of Kwinana, and it is
recommended that consideration be given to this
area when a third hospital is required. Further
sites could be considered at a later stage.
%
No particular proposals are put forward in respect
of general health centres. Present medical opinion
is that the facilities associated with health centres
are best incorporated in out-patients’ departments of
community hospitals. However, the standard
suggested for district community and public buildings
is sufficient to provide sites for health centres, if
required (Chapter 8, Section J (iv», and allowance
has been made at local level for the provision of
smaller clinics (Chapter 8, Section I (ii) and (iv)).
(ii) The University and the Technical College
With the growth of the State, the University will
continue to expand at a rate which would astonish
the farsighted group of men who established it.
Before the end of the century, and perhaps before
1990, it is estimated that there might be 8,000 full-
time students. Judging by the development of the
Universities in the Eastern States and in New Zealand,
this should be regarded as the limit in size. It would
therefore be wise, in the near future, to decide on a
site for a second University elsewhere in the State,
even though building need not commence for another
20 or 30 years. When decisions are made regarding
Teachers’ Training Colleges for the growing south-
western part of the State, land sufficient for a Uni-
versity might be set aside adjacent to one of the
Teachers’ Colleges.


Diagram 37
UNIVERSITY ENVIRONS : PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT
As the economy of the State becomes more com-
plex, the need for a greater degree of research and
scientific method in primary and secondary produc-
tion will become more obvious. Government, com-
merce and the professions, including teaching, will
require an increasing inflow of graduates. With a
rapid tempo of economic expansion, the University
will send more and more of its graduates into em-
ployment in Western Australia, and there should be
less need for the importation if highly-qualified
executive and professional persons, although it would
be shortsighted deliberately to impede the flow in
either direction across State and Commonwealth
borders. The most obvious immediate demand on
the University will be for scientists, technologists,
secondary school teachers, and men and women
qualified in medicine. A complete medical school is
an urgent necessity and this has now been recognised
by the Government.
The University of Western Australia is an active
centre of community life. Its encouragement of the
theatre and the arts is great in relation to means and
population. It should continue to develop not only
as a centre of research and learning but also as a
focal point in the life of the State. Its importance
to the community cannot be overestimated.
Fortunately the University is both in a central and
a superb position on the bank of the Swan River.
The first buildings and the landscaped campus give


a foretaste of seemly and attractive development
which need not be confined to the University. The
combination of a well-designed group of buildings
and landscape suited to the climate attracts visitors
at all times of the year. It is the spirit of the design
which impresses. Although slavish imitation by
other developers would end in failure, the marriage
of good buildings and landscape should encourage
emulation.
The plan which has been prepared for the Uni-
versity campus shows that there is ample room on
the main campus for all the foreseeable needs of
teaching and research. It is possible that the land
set aside for residential colleges will not be adequate,
and it is certain that additional land for playing fields
will be required. The Hollywood site, within five
minutes walk of the main University buildings has
already been mentioned. If, as suggested earlier,
the existing University Avenue is closed and replaced
by a completed Winthrop Avenue two very im-
portant improvements will be achieved. An adequate
and finely-placed rectangular site for a teaching hos-
pital and medical centre will be available and Win-
throp Avenue, a boulevard similar to Kings Park
Road, will be a traffic route much superior to Uni-
versity Avenue, yet fulfilling the same function.
Winthrop Avenue, lying between Kings Park and
the medical centre, and with the main University
buildings closing the vista, could take its place as
one of the most splendid roads in Australia. This
is illustrated schematically in Diagram 37.
Serving a purpose in the field of higher education
which is in many ways akin to that of the University,
the Technical College will grow into an even larger
institution than the University. The emphasis will
be on vocational and professional training, and it
will include departments and courses which would
not be proper to a university with its emphasis on
fundamental teaching and research. Provision in
the Plan has been made for a technical college in the
centre of Perth, and a technological institute on part
of the land now occupied by the Collier pine planta-
tion. Trade schools and technical schools are to be
on appropriate sites within the Region.
The Central Technical College will be admirably
sited in the vicinity of the Museum, Library and Art
Gallery. The new Forrest Place station would serve
it, and it would be most convenient for part-time
students who work in the City Centre. The in-
adequate site on St. Georges Terrace is of very high
commercial value. A large part of a new building
programme could be financed from the proceeds of
the sale of the site.
A technological institute on the Collier pine planta-
tion site should develop as a centre of technological
teaching with the majority of the Students following
part-time courses. It would fulfil requirements which
cannot be met at the University, where the full-time
attendance of students in the technological field is
demanded, and which must provide facilities for
advanced research which directly and indirectly
could be of great benefit to the State.
(iii) Technical Schools and Teachers' Colleges
Sites for suburban technical schools are suggested
in the Plan on the basis of six schools in addition to
the existing schools in Fremantle and Midland Junc-
tion ; three North and three South of the river.
These are additional to the Technical College and
Technological Institute referred to in the preceding
Section. An essential part of the Education De-
partment’s programme is in the establishment of
trade schools in appropriate areas, but these are not
shown in the Regional Plan and must take their place
in the general pattern of land use, in some cases in
industrial areas as occasion demands.
Three new teachers’ colleges are proposed, the
main one on a site already selected on Pelican Point,
where it would be an adjunct to the University, and
others in the Mount Lawley and the Collier pine
plantation areas. .
In the Rockingham-Kwinana area, two technical
schools and one teachers’ college are proposed in
addition to the above.
The suggested distribution of State High Schools,
Technical Schools and Teachers’ Colleges is shown
in Diagram 38.
( iv ) General
(a) Throughout the Plan areas of land, which are
held by the Commonwealth or State Governments
for specific purposes, have been shown by special
notation where they do not conform to the general
pattern of land use proposals in the area. Examples
of this are the Military Reserve at Swanbourne, the
sewage treatment works at Jolimont, and some areas
reserved for water supply reservoirs.


Diagram 38


Some of these reserves are quite extensive, but
consultations have indicated that they will all be
required for use. If in the future, requirements
change and the full areas are not needed, the parts
released should normally revert to the adjoining
land use proposals.
(b) Rottnest Island and Garden Island, the first
owned by the State Government and the second by
the Commonwealth Government, are worthy of
special mention.
Rottnest is sufficiently removed from the mainland
to remain as a unit in isolation. It is a holiday centre
of great attraction administered by a Board of Control
appointed by the State Government, and the pro-
posals in the Plan do not envisage any changes in the
purpose for which it is so successfully used. It must
be expected that as time goes on there will be pressure
for further development in the provision of additional
facilities, and the present method of administration
should ensure that this is very carefully carried out,
and its present delightful character maintained.
Garden Island forms the western limits of Cockburn
Sound, and is in much closer proximity to the main-
land from which it is separated by a reef at its
southern end. At present it is in large part virgin
territory, containing only a small tourist establish-
ment serving those making pleasure trips to the
island, and some Commonwealth Government build-
ings. If the proposals for the further large-scale
industrial development of Kwinana and the creation
of new harbour facilities eventuate, part of the island
may eventually be required for harbour purposes.
Garden Island will always be the protective outer
frame to Cockburn Sound.
(c) Mention has been made in Chapter 9, Part
11, of the proposal to relocate the State Prison on a
more spacious site outside the main urban area. The
site suggested, after consultation with the prison
authorities, lies immediately South of the Common-
wealth Reserve at Woodman Point and stretches
from Naval Base Road to Rockingham Road and the
proposed Perth-Kwinana Highway.
The western portion of the site on the coastal
limestone ridge would be well suited for staff housing
and the like. The main prison, workshops and
service buildings, could be immediately to the East
of the ridge where they would not be seen from any
road. The eastern portion of the site is potentially
good market garden land, and could be cleared and
used for that purpose under prison administration.
This site offers the advantages of a large area of
land sufficient for future development, and direct
access to a Major Regional Highway. Although it
is reasonably close to settled areas at Fremantle and
Kwinana, it would have the merit of a considerable
degree of isolation.
C. DISTRICT PROPOSALS
(i) General
The Regional Plan is intended to provide the basic
framework for local or detail planning.
For the purpose of making overall calculations of
space requirements, which must be the starting point,
it has been necessary to divide the Region into
measurable districts, as shown in Table 49. Neither
these districts nor the groups of districts referred to
in the subsequent sections necessarily form separate
communities on their own, although some, in fact,
do so. They should be considered more as a basis
for convenient calculation and analysis than as form-
ing an ideal community pattern.
Table 49 also shows the existing and future popula-
tions of each district, based on the application of
density standards suggested in Chapter 8. From
these overall figures it is possible in the detail planning
which must follow, to determine ways and means of
achieving a reasonable balance of various types of
land use.
In the following sub-sections an attempt has been
made to describe the proposals of the Plan, in as much
degree of detail as is possible, in relation to the local
development pattern. Various proposals have already
been referred to in other Chapters and in some cases
are repeated to give additional emphasis.
The districts referred to in the following sub-
sections are shown on Diagram 7. District 16, the
higher density residential areas adjoining the central
city, is dealt with in Chapter 9, Part I.
Particular reference must be made to the proposals
for district centres, which are indicated in principle
only except where they coincide with centres already
established. In detail planning, the location and size


of district and local shopping centres will be difficult
to determine. Their size, location and design must
be related to the economics of retail trade as well
as to consumer needs.
It seems clear that the old concept of shops spring-
ing up in haphazard fashion wherever the demand
of the moment may seem to prevail should be re-
placed. It has been pointed out on several occasions
that the shopping centre astride a main traffic artery,
carrying increasing volumes of traffic, is a combina-
tion of two functions which mix only to the detriment
of both. The solution to this in respect of the
established centres is difficult, but not impossible.
In the creation of new district shopping centres
there are three major points to be borne in mind.
Firstly, the shopping centre should not straddle a
main road. Secondly, there should be ample pro-
vision for off-street parking. Thirdly, when pur-
chasing goods shoppers are pedestrians, and they
should not be exposed to traffic hazards. Recent
American examples of new suburban shopping centres
are well worth examination.
(ii) District Proposals
(a) Whitfords Beach, Watermans Bay,
North Beach and Scarborough (Districts
1, 2 and 3)
All the development in this area is of com-
paratively recent origin, it has been attracted by the
presence of good beaches and it fulfils the desire
of many people to have homes near the coast. The
land is very suitable for residential development
(Chapter 5).
At present it is only in Scarborough that there is
development in depth. In other localities houses
have been built either fronting the coast or to a
depth of one or two streets back. This may have
been caused, in part, by the existence of extensive
State Government reserves at a short distance from
the coast, but it is quite clear that further develop-
ment in depth on these reserves and elsewhere must
take place very shortly.
The main interest in the area must continue to
centre on the beaches of which there are some of
the finest in the Region. Scarborough, Trigg Island
and Whitfords Beaches have great potentialities for
surfing, whereas the pools and rocks of North Beach
and Watermans Bay offer enjoyment to children
and rock fishermen.
It is important that no time should be lost in
reserving land adjacent to the beaches for recreational
and holiday purposes, and provision should be made
for adequate access and parking. In certain parts of
the area, notably at North Beach, development is
such that there is now barely room for a rather
inadequate road between the foreshore and the
houses. On the eastern, or landward, side there is
low-lying and swampy land, already extensively de-
veloped for market gardening. It is proposed that
this land be retained for that purpose (Section
A (ii)).
Although there is still a tendency to consider
Marmion and Sorrento, and even North Beach, as
pleasant coastal areas far removed from the City,
where any type of " shack ” can be erected, it is
clear that they are fast becoming suburbs of Perth.
Their proximity to the City causes an ever-increasing
demand for residential land.
It is envisaged that close residential development
will extend northwards as far as Whitfords Beach
and eastwards in depth. The present population in
the three districts is some 14,000 persons. The
proposed residential area between Wembley Downs
and Whitfords Beach could accommodate an ultimate
population of some 134,000 persons at reasonable
densities.
The land on either side of Scarborough Beach Road,
East of Scarborough, was subdivided many years
ago on the gridiron system without much regard for
contours. As a result what could have been a most
attractive area has, generally, been spoilt and the
impression is one of monotony. It is to be hoped
this error in layout will not be repeated.
Throughout its length, the West Coast Highway
should gradually be improved to the standard of an
Important Regional Road. It will always act mainly
as a tourist and recreational route, and should be
extended to the North of Sorrento, even though
there may be some minor engineering difficulties.
Beyond Sorrento it may be simpler to form a junction
with the Whitfords Beach-Wanneru Road, just
North of the Wireless Station.


Table 49
SUMMARY OF PROPOSALS ; RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Existing.
Proposed.
District
Number.
Local authority areas in which residential
district is situated.
Approx,
acreage
of closely
settled
areas.
Estimated
Population.
District
Gross
Density
(Persons
per acre).
Gross
Residential
Area
(Acres).
Population
Capacity.
District
Gross
Density
(Persons
per acre).
1
Perth and Wanneru Road Districts . .
250
1,870
6-6
5,000
64,000
12-0
2
Perth Road District
810
7,750
91
2,720
34,800
12-0
3
City of Perth and Perth Road District
690
4,720
6-6
2,800
35,800
12-0
4
City of Perth, Perth and Nedlands
Road Districts
1,220
16,040
13 -1
3,320
42,500
120
5
City of Perth, Subiaco Municipality
and Nedlands Road District
900
15,190
16-9
1,090
21,800
18-0
6
Subiaco and Claremont Municipalities
and Nedlands Road District
2,050
19,120
9-3
2,050
26,200
12-0
7
Cottesloe, Claremont and North Fre-
mantle Municipalities and Nedlands,
Mosman Park and Peppermint Grove
Road Districts
2,230
21,030
9-4
2,600
33,300
12-0
8
North Fremantle Municipality
190
1,400
10-7
130
1,700
12-0
9
Perth and Wanneru Road Districts . .
50
• .
3,470
44,400
• 12-0
10
Perth Road District
240
1,280
5-3
2,900
37,100
12-0
11
City of Perth and Perth Road District
1,360
9,100
6-3
2,450
31,400
12-0
12
City of Perth and Perth Road District
2,290
30,100
13-1
2,420
30,900
12-0
13
Perth and BaysVater Road Districts ..
2,540
28,100
10-0
5,050
64,600
12-0
14
City of Perth and Perth Road District
640
15,140
23-7
640
12,800
18-0
15
City of Perth ..
140
2,990
20-8
140
2,900
18-0
16
City of Perth ..
Included
in Perth Central Area
140
14,500
57-0
17
Perth and Bayswater Road Districts ..
200
600
2-5
2,590
33,100
12-0
18
Bassendean, Bayswater and Swan Road
Districts .. ..
680
3,930
4-1
2,990
38,300
12-0
19
Bassendean and Bayswater Road Dist-
ricts
640
4,320
5-9
1,190
15,200
12-0
20
Guildford Municipality and Swan Road
District
280
2,800
9-4
410
5,200
12-0
21
Midland Junction Municiaplity, Swan
and Mundaring Road Districts
1,280
9,700
7-0
3,070
39,300
12-0
22
Belmont Road District
1,220
15,340
8-2
4,480
57,300
12-0
23
City of Perth ..
2,200
20,040
9-0
2,620
33,500
12-0
24
City of Perth, Canning and Gosnells
Road Districts
1,790
11,300
5-3
4,240
54,300
12-0
25
City of Perth and South Perth Road
District
770
8,460
110
870
* 17,400
18-0
26
South Perth and Canning Road Dist-
ricts
1,440
14,670
10-1
2,500
32,000
12-0
27
Fremantle, Canning and Melville Road
Districts
270
980
2-1
3,290
42,100
12-0
28
Canning Road District
50
550
1*8
2,860
36,600
12-0
29
Melville Road District
1,390
6,570
3-9
2,950
37,800
12-0
30
Melville Road District
120
1,840
12-2
3,080
39,400
12-0
31
Fremantle and East Fremantle Munici-
palities and Melville Road District
2,710
17,600
6-4
3,550
45,400
12-0
32
Fremantle Municipality and Fremantle •
and Melville Road Districts
40
200
2-5
2,370
30,300
12-0
33
Fremantle Municipality and Fremantle
Road District
1,500
14,930
8-6
2,450
31,400
12-0
34
Fremantle Municipality
80
1,770
22-1
80
1,600
18-0
35
Wanneru and Swan Road Districts ..
5,760
430
4,000
9-0
36
Mundaring Road District
6,740
4,180
39,300
9-0
37
Darling Range Road District ..
, ,
6,930
4,790
45,000
9-0
38
Gosnells Road District
, ,
5,900
1,700
16,000
9-0
39
Armadale-Kelmscott and Serpentine-
Jarrahdale Road Districts ..
7,440
4,210
39,600
9-0
40
Fremantle and Kwinana Road Districts
1
210
2,000
9-0
41
Kwinana Road District
4,350
55,700
12-0
42
Rockingham Road District
f 9,770
3,100
40,000
12-0
43
Rockingham Road District
3,350
43,000
12-0
44
Rockingham Road District
J
3,300
42,200
12-0


NOTES :
Only by considerable condensation has it been possible to summarise in simple tabular form the procedure adopted to calculate
the population capacities of zoned residential areas. An explanation of these calculations is necessary to clarify the Table.
1. EXISTING CONDITIONS.
The only residential areas whose acreage is of any significance are those which are closely settled, and the only density
figures of any value are those derived by equating these areas with their estimated populations. The only population
figures of significance, however, are total figures in each district, including the population in areas of scattered housing.
A direct equation between total population and total district area would have resulted in density figures which were not
a true measure of the intensity of development in the built-up parts of the district. As expressed in the Table, the acreages
of existing closely settled areas are comparable with proposed Gross Residential Areas (which are in effect future closely
settled areas), existing density figures are comparable with proposed District Gross Densities, and existing population
figures are comparable with future population figures.
Areas and densities for outlying districts have not been calculated owing to the scattered nature of development and
the difficulty in establishing satisfactory boundaries to which calculations could be applied.
Population estimates are based on 1947 Census figures adjusted for additional building since that date.
2. PROPOSALS.
Proposed Gross Residential Areas are those areas zoned for residential purposes, not overall district areas as shown
in Diagram 7, so that a direct comparison can be made with existing closely settled areas. The density standards recom-
mended in Chapter 8, however, include allowance for Public Open Space, which in most districts is situated outside the
zoned residential area. Because of this, District Gross Density figures were applied, not to the proposed Gross Residential
Areas set out in the Table, but to areas which include the appropriate standards of Public Open Space. It would not
have been possible to apply density standards either to overall district areas (which often include non-district uses and
surplus open space), or to residential zones only.
A second proposed Important Regional Road
skirts the three districts on the East and runs parallel
to the West Coast Highway, crossing the Scarborough
Beach Road at Liege Street and the Balcatta Beach
Road East of Lake Gwelup. At its southern end
this road crosses the Wembley Downs Golf Course
and the Boulevard, proceeding South to Claremont
via Bold Park.
Five other proposed Important Regional Roads
run in an East-West direction, acting as feeders to
the Perth-Yanchep Highway from the extensive
residential areas. Of these the Boulevard and Scar-
borough Beach Road are almost certain to carry
the heaviest traffic. While the former is capable of
improvement the latter is much more difficult owing
to ribbon development, coupled with unsatisfactory
curves and intersections.
The present Balcatta Beach Road is something of
a nightmare with its twists and turns, and eventually,
it should be replaced by two Important Regional
Roads. In passing, mention should be made of the
old section of the Balcatta Road which was originally
constructed of timber blocks by convict labour.
It is hoped that a recent proposal to preserve a section
still surviving will be accepted by the authorities
concerned.
The Plan proposes that a new suburban railway
line should run from Subiaco northwards, to pass
through City Beach, Wembley Downs, Scarborough
and all the beach resorts North to Whitfords Beach.
In principle, it follows a line selected by a govern-
mental committee set up to consider the matter some
years ago, and generally follows the only practicable
route. Had the land been reserved at that time the
position now would be very much easier. It could
not now be put into effect without some disturbance
of property. The proposal has only been made after
considerable discussion and thought, and because
it is strongly felt that an alternative to road transport
must be provided if the extensive future population
of these coastal areas is to be carried satisfactorily
to and from the City and the inner areas.
If road transport only is relied upon the traffic
density at the north-western end of the Central Area
could reach frightening proportions towards the end
of the period of the Plan. Apart from the difficulty
of providing a major road in addition to the Perth-
Yanchep Highway, the internal road pattern of the
Central Area of Perth would be further overtaxed.
No major industrial zones are proposed in this
area although provision must be made for local light
industry in detail planning.


The only shopping centre of any importance is at
Scarborough. This will undoubtedly increase in
size, but its scope is limited by the physical nature
of the ground and development which has already
taken place. It is considered that district centres,
with full facilities, should be established in positions
between the coast and the railway, which are indicated
in principle on the Plan.
Four high school sites and one technical school
site will eventually be needed in the area, and a large
site is reserved for Hale School, which may not
require all the land at present in its ownership.
Recreational open space has not been a matter of
much concern in the past in view of the close prox-
imity of the beaches. The need for recreational
space is now being increasingly felt, particularly in
Scarborough, and further provision must be made.
A major area is suggested between Scarborough and
Trigg Island, part of which could be made available
fairly readily. The western section is very broken
country and quite unsuitable for subdivision in its
present state. Further areas are suggested around
Lake Gwelup, South of North Beach, around Carine
Swamp and South of Whitfords Beach. This last,
together with the area North of Scarborough, has
been expressly reserved as a coastal area of some
magnitude.
(b) City Beach, Floreat Park, Wembley,
Leederville, Subiaco and West Perth
(Districts 4, 5 and 15)
The area is bounded on the North by the Wembley
Downs Golf Course, Herdsman Lake and Lake
Monger and on the South by the Cottesloe Golf
Course, Claremont Mental Hospital, the sewage
treatment works, the Infectious Diseases Hospital
and Kings Park.
Housing ranges from some of the oldest, in Subiaco
and West Perth, to some of the newest in Floreat
Park and City Beach. In the heart of the area are
more than 3,000 acres of virgin land of which more
than 1,000 acres have been set aside as a park by the
Perth City Council. The major part of the land now
available for building is endowment land of the City
of Perth or the University. The whole of the coastal
strip is backed by City Endowment Land, which,
together with City Beach, is now being laid out by
the City Council as an extensive residential and
recreational area lying between Bold Park and the
coast.
It is fortunate that the coast and hinterland, so
near to the City Centre, is virtually unspoiled. City
Beach will not only become the most important of
the ocean front recreational areas but also it will
be the only one which will enjoy a spacious, planned
layout. Bold Park, when developed, will add to
the general attractiveness of the area. From Reabold
Hill, within the Park, extensive views of the City
and the coast may be obtained.
The University Endowment Land, West of Daglish
and North of the sewage treatment works, is far too
valuable and close to the City to remain in its present
semi-derelict state for long, and it is proposed
generally for residential development which should
be related to the residential development of the City
of Perth Endowment Land.
At the present time there are some 34,200 persons
living in the area comprising Districts 4, 5 and 15.
When the residential sections are fully developed a
total of about 67,200 persons might be expected at
varying densities. West Perth and Subiaco are
likely to change in character. Proximity to the City
Centre and to Kings Park will encourage considerable
flat building, but with the provision of additional
amenities the increase in population will not neces-
sarily be very marked.
Similarly, changes will occur in Leederville, par-
ticularly in those parts nearer the City. Wembley
and Jolimont, relatively new areas designed on the
" grid ” system, will not change so much during the
period of the Plan. Daglish, a very pleasant little
community West of the railway, will be extended by
the development of the University Endowment Land
to the North-West, but it would be divided by the
coast railway line, unless an alternative route is to
be found. Floreat Park, with its roadside lawns
and fine groups of trees, is an outstanding example
of estate development and management. Finally,
City Beach, and the areas North and South, can
become the best beach suburbs, if the same attention
to detail and wise management is maintained by the
Perth City Council.
The proposed Yanchep Highway, fed by the
Important Regional Roads, forms the eastern edge
of the area. The main East-West road is Oceanic


Drive-Cambridge Street, a direct route which will
eventually demand considerable improvement. In
Floreat Park, it is joined by the Boulevard at an
acute-angled intersection which should be remodelled
at the earliest opportunity.
Consideration has been given to extending the
West Coast Highway southwards nearer to the
coast, but the Commonwealth Military Reserve and
the difficult contours near the Cottesloe Golf Course
prevent this. The West Coast Highway enters a
normal chain-wide residential road, Servetus Street,
at the north-eastern corner of the course. This
will shortly prove to be very unsatisfactory. It is,
therefore, proposed that the Highway should be
connected to the new North-South route which,
after crossing Bold Park, would skirt the western
flank of the Claremont Mental Hospital.
Selby Street forms an important North-South link
closer to the City and should, when completed,
connect to Railway Road. Finally, Thomas Street
has a major role to play, not only as a perimeter drive
around Kings Park, but also as an important through
connection West of the City area. It should be
raised to the same standard as Kings Park Road, with
Aberdare Road forming a connecting link acfoss to
Railway Road.
The main industrial area is that at Subiaco, which
has been developed largely through the initiative
of the Subiaco Council. It is now nearly completed
and no further extensions are proposed. The intro-
duction of a further volume of industrial traffic in
this already rather congested location would be
unwise. A relatively large light industrial area might
suitably be established near the Commonwealth
rifle range to be served by the West Coast Highway,
which carries pleasure traffic chiefly at week-ends
and in the evenings.
Only two district centres are suggested, one at
Subiaco and the other at City Beach. The former
is already well established, but should be improved
by the provision of car parks and service access
roads. City Beach is the only district centre suggested
on the coast. It could serve an extensive residential
area and be combined with recreational and enter-
tainment facilities forming part of the comprehensive
ocean front development scheme which will be
undertaken by the Perth City Council.
Two high schools are included in the area, one
being the existing Perth Modern School at Subiaco
and the other a new one in the City Beach area. A
new technical school is also proposed.
The main regional open space is Bold Park, an
area of more than 1,000 acres, centred on Reabold
Hill and lying between Floreat Park and City Beach.
Both the Boulevard and Oceanic Drive, which run
through the Park for part of the length, should be
designed as parkways from Floreat Park to the coast.
Herdsman Lake is a problem area presenting con-
siderable drainage difficulties. The fringes are used
at present for market gardening but the central part,
despite attempts to drain it, is swamp. It is probably
composed of solid peat to some depth. More in-
formation is needed about the lake, but its most
suitable use certainly appears to be as a major recrea-
tional open space and as such it is proposed in the
Plan. It may be found possible, with an adequate
drainage system, to release certain parts of the fringes
for other development, but such areas should be
relatively minor.
At the present the southern end of Herdsman
Lake is on the boundaries of the Perth City Council
and Perth Road Board areas and, with some scattered
industries on the lake fringes, it appears to be
" unwanted.” It is important that early agreement
should be reached between the two authorities on
the detail planning of this area. If any light industrial
zone is permitted, it should be clearly defined at an
early date.
Of the minor regional open spaces, Henderson
Park, Shenton Park and Rosalie Park are probably
the most important. Rosalie Park is particularly
well laid out as a combined recreation ground. Lake
Monger Park is an excellent example of what can be
done by reclamation. This is producing a pleasant
park surrounding a sheet of water.
Discussions with the appropriate Commonwealth
Department made it clear that the Commonwealth
Military Reserve and Rifle Range at Swanbourne
should remain, in view of the extensive military
development that has already taken place, and the
need for having citizen military force training facilities
relatively close to the City. The fact that this section
of the coast also contains the main outfall sewer, is
an additional argument in favour of it remaining
in its present use.


(c) Nedlands, Claremont, Cottesloe and
Mosman Park (Districts 6 and 7)
Occupying the narrowing peninsula from Swan-
bourne and Crawley Bay down to Leighton, this
area owes its early growth to the railway line linking
Fremantle with Perth. The influence is clearly seen
in the older types of housing near the railway station.
It is a most favoured residential locality of high
value benefiting by the fact that on the West are the
excellent Leighton, Cottesloe and Swanboume ocean
beaches, and on the East the equally delightful river-
side beaches, which in some parts are below banks
rising steeply out of the water to provide picturesque
building sites. The Districts are now almost fully
built up, apart from some small sections in the North
and South and some 1,700 scattered vacant allotments.
There will certainly be some intensification of de-
velopment in the areas of increasing value adjacent
to the river and the ocean, and along the main lines
of communication. Ap assessment of the capacity
of potential flat sites in these areas has shown that
the present population of some 40,000 in the two
districts could increase to some 60,000 persons in
the next 40 or 50 years. There is already a modest
amount of flat development at the eastern end of
Nedlands, along the Stirling Highway, and at points
on the ocean frontage.
Stirling Highway, the main road link between
Perth and Fremantle, bisects the area from North-
East to South-West. Although the Plan suggests
ways of giving some relief to the Highway, the traffic
using it will continue to increase in volume. This
will require a series of steps to be taken to improve
its safety and traffic flow. Good results could be
obtained by traffic light control at key intersections,
the elimination of parking on the Highway, and the
stopping up of many of the minor streets now causing
traffic frustration and friction. Proposals on these
lines are made in Chapter 7.
As a relief road to the Stirling Highway, the im-
provement of a route starting at the intersection of
Aberdare Road and Railway Road is suggested.
This would follow Railway Road as far as Claremont
Show Ground where it would underpass the railway
and proceed along Claremont Crescent, Cottesloe
Avenue and Marmion Street to the North Fremantle
dock area. Here it would rejoin Stirling Highway
at a selected point. The two advantages of this
route are that the roads are already there and for
the most part additional land can readily be made
available for widening. Because of the fact that the
road adjoins the railway it is in effect a controlled
access road on one side. The proposed Important
Regional Road from Carine Swamp southwards to
Claremont, passes the Claremont Mental Hospital
to the West, and joined by the West Coast Highway,
crosses Alfred Road, then follows the line of Davies
Road to Claremont Crescent where the route to the
South is continued.
At some point in the future it may be necessary
to bridge the Swan River between the Narrows and
Fremantle. A crossing from Point Walter to Point
Resolution has been given some thought. The
difficulty really arises as to the route which should
be followed from the northern approaches of such a
bridge to the City, and it seems clear that it would
have to follow the various reserves along the river
bank. Through traffic following such a route would
eventually join that in Mounts Bay Road, thereby
adding to the already heavy flow at peak periods.
But relief would be afforded to other bridges because
local traffic making cross river movements would
greatly benefit from a bridge in the suggested position.
In view of the provision of the Narrows Bridge, the
Point Waiter-Point Resolution project may not be
necessary during the period of the Plan. It should
be considered as a future possibility.
This area is well served by rail, and there is little
doubt that rail passenger traffic between Perth and
Fremantle will greatly increase in volume. As a
result of new policies of the Railway Commission
noticeable increases have already taken place. If only
because of difficulties with road traffic great ad-
vantages, and certainly great economies, will ensue
if the railway carries a high proportion of passenger
traffic.
Apart from those in the southern part of Mosman
Park there are few industries in the area, nor are any
industrial sites proposed. There is little suitable,
vacant land available, and the area is so placed that it
is readily accessible to industrial areas in Perth and
Fremantle.
Two major industries, however, are situated on
the banks of the Swan River at Point Roe and Rocky
Bay in the form of the sugar refinery and the super-
phosphate works. Both have been established some
considerable time, and while originally they may


88
88. Maylands. An example of mono-
tonous " gridiron ” development typical of
many parts of the Region.
89. Medina. Layout suited to the
topography and resulting in a more in-
teresting environment.
89


90
90. Albany Highway, Victoria Park.
Ribboned shopping development covering
long stretches of an important traffic route,
to the detriment of both shopping centre
and highway.
91. Stonestown, San Francisco, U.S.A.
A large shopping centre planned for the
convenience of shoppers, with adequate
parking space and no traffic hazards.
91


92
92. Royal Perth Hospital from Wel-
lington Street. Several large hospitals will
be required in the future.
93. The expansion of secondary educa-
tion will require further spacious Technical
and High Schools.
93


94
94. The University of Western Aus-
tralia. Main entrance and Winthrop Hall
from Stirling Highway.
95. A model showing the proposed
future development of the University
Campus on Matilda Bay, Crawley.
95


have been well sited for their purpose, it is con-
sidered that this is no longer the case. Housing
development is approaching from the North and is
establishing on the opposite side of the river, which
at this point is most attractive, lying as it does between
rocky banks.
The two industrial sites will become more and
more hemmed in by housing, and while their prox-
imity to Fremantle is an advantage, the extension of
the port to include Cockburn Sound could possibly
lead to there being more suitable and ample sites in
the Kwinana area. While these changes might take
some considerable time, the ultimate use of the land
at this point on the river should be for residential
purposes.
The motor assembly plant in Victoria Street is
on a comparatively restricted site with little room
for expansion, and entirely surrounded by residential
development. It seems likely that a more com-
modious site elsewhere must eventually be found.
Good local shopping centres are established at
Stirling Highway, Mosman Park ; Napoleon Street,
Cottesloe ; Swanbourne ; and Claremont. The
Cottesloe and Claremont centres are almost ideally
situated between the main highway and the railway.
The remaining shops are much more scattered, par-
ticularly along the Stirling Highway, which with its
ever-increasing traffic flow cannot be considered a
suitable location. Two district centres are proposed,
one being an enlargement of the existing Cottesloe
shopping centre between the railway and the High-
way. The other, it is suggested, should be near the
Stirling Highway in the Nedlands area.
The University and the Teachers’ Training College
at Crawley have been referred to earlier. Two high
schools are proposed, one adjoining Karrakatta
Cemetery and the other on the site of the existing
Teachers’ Training College. This area is notable
for the number of private secondary schools with
large grounds, situated largely in Swanbourne, Clare-
mont and Peppermint Grove.
The proposed Butlers Swamp Park area, initiated
by the Claremont Council is shown in the Plan.
This could become a most important park with
sports grounds in a very accessible position.
The principle of preserving the river foreshore for
public use should extend through the whole area.
Already large parts are reserved for public recreation
and there are some excellent beaches and bathing
places. This provision need not and should not
prevent the continued use of the river for sailing,
fishing and boating, and allowance must be made for
these requirements. In addition, it is becoming
very obvious that radical improvements should be
made to those sections of the foreshore which are
greatly used by the public. The Crawley Bay fore-
shore, for example, becomes a paper strewn sandy
waste after the Australia Day celebrations. This is
largely because little thought has been given to the
landscaping and the layout. A plan, including per-
haps some reclamation as part of it, is being prepared.
The ocean foreshore, similarly, must remain in
public ownership and be progressively improved.
Allen Park should be extended through to the coast.
The Royal Show grounds at Claremont will un-
doubtedly increase in importance as the years go by.
Although used for only a short time in each year for
show purposes, they are a popular venue for spectator
sports throughout the year. The site, although well
located, has become quite restricted by surrounding
development and there is little prospect of expansion.
With continuous growth, traffic and parking prob-
lems in relation to the show grounds will increase.
The situation should be closely watched and if there
is opportunity to obtain a more spacious site, with
better approaches, it should be taken. If the oppor-
tunity does not arise the show ground could, with
advantage, be extensively remodelled in order to
provide simpler and more ample lanes for pedestrians,
and space for parked cars.
(d) North Perth, East Perth, Mount
Lawley and Mount Hawthorn (Districts
12 and 14)
The boundaries of this area are formed by the
proposed Yanchep Highway on the West, Green
Street on the North, the Scaddan pine plantation in
the North-East, the Central Area on the South, and
the Swan River on the South-West.
It is an area of extremes in development, ranging
from the very old in North and East Perth, to the
very new in Mount Hawthorn and the northern
parts of Mount Lawley. There is a scattering of
small industries, which are numerous near to the
Central Area, and there is a network of quite im-
portant roads of obsolete design. There is a sur-


prising variation in levels. From some areas there
are extensive views, and because of this and proximity
to the City they are much sought after for residences
of all types. The character of the older parts of
North and East Perth, Leederville and Mount Lawley
is changing. Single family dwellings in many places
are giving way to flats. Although some new flats
are now being erected, the change generally starts
with a conversion of the older and larger houses
to flats and tenements. In parts near the Central
Area demand, expressed in higher land values, will
increase the rate of change to a more intensive use.
There is an existing population of about 45,000
persons in the area but, although a progressively
higher density is to be expected on many individual
sites, the provision of additional amenities will,
perhaps, counter-balance this. At the time of the
survey there were about 1,400 vacant residential
blocks, chiefly in the outer parts of the area.
The tendency for industrial development to spread
loosely through the older areas of North and East
Perth should be strongly resisted. If the blighting
of a large inner belt is to be avoided, a firm line
should be drawn in the vicinity of Newcastle Street.
As explained in Chapter 9, there is ample room for
central industries South of this line.
The main northern outlets from the Central Area
are Charles Street (leading to Wanneru Road),
Fitzgerald Street, William Street, Beaufort Street
and Stirling Street (leading to Guildford Road).
They are all built-up, of limited width and with
numerous intersections. Their improvement will
be difficult and progressively more costly. Essential
relief in the North-West can only be provided by
the proposed Yanchep Highway. On the East, an
extended Riverside Drive will become an important
outlet from the north-eastern part of the Central
Area.
Beaufort Street, while forming a very direct route
to Morley Park, is extensively developed com-
mercially at its inner end. It is accordingly proposed
that Stirling Street, which is of much greater width,
should be extended to link up with Beaufort Street
North of the Mount Lawley shopping centre to form
the major outlet in this direction. William Street
will always be an important outlet and should be
improved, but no extension North of Walcott Street
can be envisaged.
Fitzgerald Street has been selected as the most
suitable North-South route for extension through
the Scaddan plantation, North of Walcott Street, to
Morley Park and Beechboro. Charles Street and
Wanneru Road should gradually be improved as
opportunity offers.
The route from the Central Area to Guildford Road
is provided by the proposed Claisebrook Road over-
bridge to Lord Street. Bulwer Street is proposed
as the main inner route linking Claisebrook Road
with Vincent Street, Loftus Street and Thomas
Street, thus providing a northern circuit of the City.
Further out, Walcott Street and Green Street provide
a direct connection between Guildford Road, Wan-
neru Road and the Yanchep Highway.
It can be said that all these roads should be im-
proved by widening and intersection treatment.
Three intersections need special mention. The Green
Street-Wanneru Road-Walcott Street junction has
already proved to be dangerous. The connection
between Lord Street, Walcott Street and Guildford
Road, at the Mount Lawley subway, demands radical
improvement. The proposed connection to River-
side Drive would join these roads in a remodelled
intersection at the subway. Improvement to the
dangerous junction of Scarborough Beach Road,
Main Street and Green Street is long overdue.
There are no proposed industrial zones in these
districts although the West Perth and East Perth
zones are immediately to the South. Areas for light
industry should be reserved in the Local Planning
Schemes.
Three district centres are proposed ; at Mount
Hawthorn, North Perth and Mount Lawley. They
are all thriving shopping centres at present, but a
series of small improvements in the future would
greatly increase their efficiency and attractiveness.
Two high schools are shown : one, the existing
Forrest Park School, which at present has a limited
site ; and the other on a new site in Melrose Street,
Leederville. The new Mount Lawley High School
on the fringe of the Scaddan plantation adjoins the
area on the North, together with a proposed technical
school.
The open space proposals are limited to existing
parks, and recreation grounds, and additional pro-
vision eventually to be made in the Scaddan planta-
tion. Some of the existing parks, such as Hyde


Park and Robertson Park, offer diverse facilities, are
well laid out and delightful. The eastern end of
Lake Monger Park will also be a great asset. The
Leederville Oval and Perth Oval are two of the main
city sporting arenas. The car parking difficulties
at both will have to be overcome in the future.
(e) Osborne Park, Tuart Hill and Mount
Yokine (Districts 9, 10 and 11)
This extensive area is developed at present only
in the southern section. It embraces the new housing
areas of Tuart Hill and Mount Yokine, North of
Green Street, and those around the Mount Yokine
Golf Course. It is bounded on the East by the
Yanchep Highway and the extensive market gardening
areas of Osborne Park, and includes at its northern
end the extensive areas held by the State Housing
Commission for future housing development. The
northern limits of the proposed residential area fall
just short of the 10-mile peg on the Wanneru Road,
and extend eastwards to Emu Swamp.
The present population is about 10,400 persons,
and when the area is fully developed, a total of some
112,900 persons can be accommodated at reasonable
densities.
Generally, the land is very suitable for housing,
being for the most part high and well drained. Diffi-
culties, however, will be encountered in the lower
areas East and South-East of Mount Yokine Golf
Course, where subsoil water levels tend to be high,
and this land should not be closely settled until a
drainage scheme has been carried out.
The existing main North-South road is the Wanneru
Road which, although reasonably wide in the outer
areas, is restricted where building has taken place
and is difficult of improvement. While it should
be brought up to the best standard possible and will
always be an important route, the proposed Yanchep
Highway is intended as the main fast traffic route into
the City for the greatly increased population. This
Highway joins the existing Wanneru Road, just
South of the wireless station, at an intersection with
the proposed North Perimeter Highway, which
would skirt the main built-up area on the North and
run eastwards to join the Great Northern Highway
at Middle Swan.
An Important Regional Road runs in a north-
easterly direction from the Wanneru Road, at Dog
Swamp, along the general line of Flinders Street,
and past Mount Yokine Reservoir to the North
Perimeter Highway.
East-West routes run from the Yanchep Highway,
in the vicinity of Balcatta Beach Road, past Mount
Yokine Reservoir to Morley Park, and from the
northern edge of the housing area to the proposed
new airport. A further important road, passing the
proposed major industrial area, links the airport
with the North Perimeter Highway.
Further scattering of small industries in the Tuart
Hill-Mount Yokine area should be prevented, and
zones for light industry should be established in
detail planning. Although no new major industrial
zones are included in these three districts, one is
proposed on the East of the State Housing Com-
mission area, adjoining the North Perimeter High-
way. Part of this zone is low-lying and will need
drainage, and on the eastern end an area is set aside
for special industries.
The Innaloo industrial area already exists, with
most of the Scarborough Beach Road frontage de-
veloped. In consultation with the local authority
it has been enlarged to include most of the scattered
industry in the vicinity. It is not very happily
situated astride this important road, and efforts
should be made to improve the Scarborough Beach
Road, to provide better access to the industrial sites,
and to encourage off-street parking.
Two district centres are proposed, both North of
Mount Yokine Reservoir. Being in country at
present virgin, it should be possible to locate them
well and design them carefully in all details. Apart
from a small centre in Main Street, Osborne Park,
shops are scattered or in very small groups. A
tendency for shops to ribbon along the Wanneru
Road should be arrested by zoning proposals of
the Perth Road Board, but some damage has already
been done.
New high schools are proposed at Tuart Hill
between Banksia and French Streets, and East of
Mount Yokine Reservoir, partly serving the area
to the East, and adjoining the district centre in the
North. A further technical school is also proposed
situated near the industrial area.


The Plan shows a site for one of the proposed new
community, or acute general, hospitals, on the
western side of the Wanneru Road immediately
South of the wireless station. The detailed siting
of this hospital is subject to further consideration, and
adjustments may be necessary in the light of more
detailed investigation.
While provision can be made for adequate District
Local Open Space in the new residential areas, existing
developments at Tuart Hill and Mount Yokine are
at present underprovided, having a total of only 34
acres, excluding the Mount Yokine Golf Course.
District 11 should eventually have some 300 acres
of various types. Although some of this can be in
the major open space occupying part of the Scaddan
plantation, a considerable amount should be provided
locally. ‘
A further major open space is suggested at the
eastern side of the State Housing Commission hous-
ing areas. The site was selected, firstly, because of
the hilly nature of the land, and secondly, because
it would act as a buffer to the industrial zone and to
the proposed airport. In the longer term the latter
will almost certainly be used by jet-powered aircraft,
and nearby residential areas must be protected from
the noise caused by aircraft.
An open space area is also suggested West of
Yanchep Highway. In this location there are some
valuable sand deposits which can be removed prior
to the use of the land for recreational purposes.
(f) Inglewood, Maylands, Bayswater and
Morley Park (Districts 13 and 17)
The older settled areas of Inglewood, Maylands
and Bayswater were laid out mainly on a " grid ”
system which disregarded the nature of the land.
Unfortunately, the same system of subdivision is
being carried out in the new areas. To a large
extent this has been unavoidable in view of the shape
of the original subdivisions into large holdings, but it
results in monotony and fails to differentiate between
residential and traffic roads.
The older areas have had many drainage troubles
in the past and, although they are now largely sewered
and drained, there are still problems in certain parts.
In North Bayswater and Morley Park the same
difficulties are in evidence. There are areas of
relatively high land, and others with high subsoil
water and swampy conditions. In spite of this,
the proximity of these districts to the City and to
industry create a heavy demand for land.
The Morley Park area, and particularly District 17
to the North, requires comprehensive drainage before
general subdivision and building is permitted. A
drainage scheme is a matter of urgency. Drainage
problems are also apparent in parts of the Maylands-
Bayswater area, South of Guildford Road. Assum-
ing developmental difficulties are overcome, the
present population of 28,700 persons may increase to
some 97,700 persons.
The North Perimeter Highway skirts the northern
area and joins the Beechboro-Gosnells Highway,
which proceeds southwards to cross the river at
Belmont. Before this, it is joined by Swan River
Drive, an extension of Riverside Drive, which runs
along the northern bank of the Swan River, crossing
the Maylands Peninsula at its narrowest point.
Other Important Regional Roads are the existing
Guildford Road and Beaufort Street, both of which
are capable of limited improvement, and Walter
Road, which extends westwards towards Mount
Yokine.
There is a small industrial concentration in May-
lands which is restricted by other development and
should not increase in size. As the districts are
adjacent to the large industrial zones on the North
and the West, there are no local proposals for the
location of industry.
The Maylands Peninsula presents a special prob-
lem. It contains some industry ; the Maylands
Airport is situated on the western flank ; and large
clay pits occupy the central portion. Housing is
limited in extent. It has been suggested that the
peninsula should be given over to industry, but
because of its strategic position in a very fine stretch
of the Swan River this suggestion is considered to
be wrong in principle. The major part of the area
should eventually be used for recreational open
space, of which there is a deficiency, and further
housing could be permitted at a much later stage.
Brick clay is of such importance that the deposits
should be worked out, and the area gradually re-
claimed by controlled tipping as a long term proposal.
A new high school is proposed South of Morley
Park and the Mount Lawley High School will serve
part of Inglewood and Maylands.


Large Regional Open Spaces are suggested on the
Maylands Peninsula, to the West of Morley Park,
and between the residential area and the northern
industrial zone, and provision must be made for
Local and District Open Space in detail planning.
(g) Bassendean and Beechboro (Districts 18
and 19)
Centred on the Bassendean industrial area, these
districts stretch from the Swan River, in the South
and East, to the North Perimeter Highway in the
North. Beyond the proposed Highway the area is
swampy but eminently suitable for afforestation.
There are drainage problems, particularly near the
river and in the area North of Walter Road, and as
a result development in the past has been scattered.
The Beechboro area should be included in the com-
prehensive drainage scheme for Morley Park. A
large section East of Beechboro Road has been
purchased for Commonwealth purposes.
Taking these factors into account, the existing
population of about 8,200 persons can be increased
to about 53,500 within the proposed residential area.
To the East, the residential zone is bordered by
the vineyard areas of Caversham and Middle Swan
and by the suggested Mental Hospital site at Pyrton.
The Beechboro-Gosnells Highway forms the western
boundary. Walter Road is continued eastwards as
far as Pyrton, and then branches North and South
to jdin the Middle Swan Road and Guildford Road
respectively. Guildford Road by-passes the shopping
centre of Bassendean by continuing in a straight line
adjacent to the railway, in part along the edge of the
park laid out by the Bassendean Improvement Com-
mittee, to rejoin its present route further East. While
this may be viewed with some concern by the local
authority in view of the very pleasant park that has
been achieved, it is considered of importance that the
through traffic should be diverted from the Bassendean
shopping centre. The road, under the trees adjacent
to the railway, would cause little disturbance to the
park.
The main railway line serves the Bassendean in-
dustrial zone. With the addition of further housing
areas South of Guildford Road, consideration should
be given to the provision of further passenger stations
along this line.
The existing industrial area of Bassendean fronting
Railway Parade is extended northwards covering the
land at present held for marshalling yards and form-
ing an extensive and centralised zone.
District centres are proposed at Bassendean,
focussed on the existing shopping centre, and in the
new area North of Walter Road. A site for a new
high school is suggested to adjoin the latter.
While both sides of the Swan River should be
treated as recreational areas with riverside walks,
playing field provision should be made on the low-
lying land South-West of Ashfield. A major recrea-
tional area will also be needed North of Walter Road.
(h) Guildford, Midland Junction, Middle
Swan, Greenmount and Swan View
(Districts 20 and 21)
Guildford, the centre of the earliest agricultural
settlement in the State, is a compact little community
bounded on three sides by the Swan and Helena
Rivers. It makes an interesting contrast with Mid-
land Junction, also an early settlement, which has
grown up as a railway centre, with the large Railway
Engineering Workshops, and to a lesser extent, the
State Abattoirs, providing an industrial background.
The Great Eastern Highway winds its way through
both towns and, at Bellevue, starts to climb the
Darling Escarpment to Greenmount and Darlington,
which command extensive views over the coastal
plain. To the North lie the vineyards of Middle
and Upper Swan, and to the South the stock resting
and holding paddocks around the Helena River.
Because of its " island ” location, Guildford’s
expansion must be limited. Midland Junction is also
contained, near its centre, by the Railway Work-
shops on the South and the Swan River on the North-
West. Expansion to the East and North-East seems
logical, but the impervious clay soil makes develop-
ment difficult, and that which has already taken place
at Midvale has proved expensive.
Additional housing land is required for workers
at Midland Junction and the alternatives appear to
be in the vicinity of Swan View, Greenmount or in
the area North of Maida Vale, bounded by Kala-
munda Road. The latter area is not recommended
in view of its proximity to the holding paddocks and
the possible need for their extension in the future.


The State Housing Commission has already started
development at Greenmount, and an extension around
Greenmount Hill is suggested, together with further
development of the residential area North of the
Great Eastern Highway.
A State Housing Commission estate is also estab-
lished at Morrison Road, Swan View, but expansion
of this in the immediate vicinity is not recommended
as the land is very suitable for intensive agriculture.
In view of the scarcity of good agricultural land an
extension of the railway housing area is greatly to be
preferred.
If all the areas suggested for residential purposes
are fully developed at reasonable standards, the exist-
ing population of some 12,500 persons, could be
expanded to about 44,500.
The Great Eastern Highway runs right through the
centres of Guildford and Midland Junction, with the
Great Northern Highway branching off at Midland
Junction Town Hall. Extremely heavy vehicles use
these roads, with considerable danger, and at certain
periods, congestion.
With a threefold or fourfold expansion, these
routes will be very important internal roads. The
Plan proposes that through traffic should be diverted,
South of the Helena River, on to a by-pass joining
the Fremantle-Midland Junction Highway South of
Bushmead, and returning to its original route just
West of Bellevue. This by-pass forms part of the
Main Regional Highway system. The Northern
Perimeter Highway joins the Great Northern High-
way at Middle Swan, and then forms an eastern
by-pass to Midland Junction by joining the Fre-
mantle-Midland Junction Highway at Bellevue. The
existing Great Eastern and Great Northern Highways
in the town areas, the Middle Swan Road running
North from Guildford, and the Toodyay Road would
be classified as Important Regional Roads.
The town areas are bisected by the existing railway
lines and the level crossings are dangerous. In
Guildford there are six in 11 miles. The two cross-
ings of the Great Eastern Highway by the Midland
Railway at Midland Junction, and particularly the
one close to the town centre are most undesirable,
and present severe limitations on future development.
While it is clear that one at least must be retained,
it is recommended that consideration be given to
removing the crossing at Helena Street as soon as
practicable. In any case, improvements should be
effected to obviate the need for shunting operations
over the Highway. The crossings at Niland Street
will be difficult to improve other than by a warning
system, but it is further removed from the commercial
centre.
The proposed new Midland Junction-Kwinana
railway link branches from the existing line at West
Midland, swinging in a southerly direction across
the Helena River.
The proposed main industrial zone embraces the
Railway Engineering Works and the Abattoirs.
Room for expansion is limited, but the zone could
extend to the Helena River. Further land for
industry is available on both sides of the railway at
Bellevue, West of the Fremantle-Midland Junction
Highway. The scattered housing in the area should
give way to industry.
District centres are suggested at Guildford arid
Midland Junction. The Midland Junction com-
mercial centre serves a wide area. In view of its
considerable expansion in the future it should be
carefully planned. There is an existing high school
at West Midland on a rather limited site. A technical
school will also be needed at Midland Junction. The
proposed regional hospital at North Midland is
already partly established.
There is a shortage of Local and District Open
Space in this area. Proposed major open spaces
are shown adjacent to the Swan River at Guildford,
and East of the Midland Railway around Blackadder
Creek.
(i) North Fremantle (District 8)
This small district, directly related to the City and
dock area of Fremantle, forms a community on its
own. It is cut off from Fremantle by the Swan
River in the South, and from Mosman Park, by a
large area of Commonwealth land at Buckland Hill
and major industries. Because of its proximity to
the Inner Harbour a number of small industries are
mixed with housing and these, coupled with an
abundance of narrow streets, small subdivisions, and
a large proportion of obsolescent houses, detract
from its general appearance. It is, however, a very
live community and its situation on rising ground in


a bend of the Swan River, suggests that gradual re-
development into an attractive residential area near
the Inner Harbour would be relatively easy to
accomplish. /
A firm line must be drawn in the North between
industry and housing, and the Stirling Highway on
the West should be the dividing line between housing
and dock ancillaries. Scattered industry in the main
housing area should eventually be located elsewhere,
with the possible exception of those industries con-
nected with boat building which require river front-
age.
The present overall population is about 2,850
persons. Gradual redevelopment will change the
pattern as port facilities and industry intensify on
the western side of the Stirling Highway, and the
final population in the zoned residential area would
be in the region of 1,700 persons.
Leighton Beach, which enjoys great popularity,
lies immediately to the North. Access to the beach
is extremely difficult, foreshore space is very limited,
and its future is in doubt. It is clear that if railway
interchange sidings are built in connection with the
North Fremantle dock area, the beach will be virtually
inaccessible. Because of the recreational value of
the beach all aspects of the problem must be con-
sidered before a decision is made. It may be pos-
sible, through careful planning in detail, to incorpor-
ate improved access to the beach, and parking, in a
scheme for more adequate railway facilities. If a
new road, as suggested in the Plan, is carried from
the North Quay alongside the railway to Cottesloe,
the planning of the area as well as dock traffic move-
ment would be facilitated.
The shopping area will eventually need reorgan-
ising as its present position on both sides of the
Stirling Highway, which bisects the area, will become
more and more difficult as traffic increases. An
essential part of the remodelling of the dock and
industrial area North of the Inner Harbour should
be the provision of a safe and adequate road system
connecting with Stirling Highway.
The Government has decided that the ancient
railway bridge should be removed to allow for an
upstream extension of the Inner Harbour. The
Plan shows a new railway bridge immediately below
the road bridge.
The proposed industrial zone is largely occupied
by industry at present. No further industry should
be permitted on the vacant Crown Land on the
western side of Stirling Highway near the Ford works.
This " open space ” forms a welcome break which
provides magnificent views of the ocean. They are
the only ones to be obtained from the important
Stirling Highway.
Mention should be made of the North Fremantle
Primary'School, which is at present most unhappily
situated on the wrong side of the Highway. When
rebuilding takes place it should be re-located on the
eastern side.
No major open space is proposed because of the
small size of the district, but the existing recreational
areas should be extended, if opportunity offers, and
attempts should be made to provide further public
access to the river front.
(j) East Fremantle, Bicton, Palmyra, Attadale,
Melville, Applecross and Mount Pleasant
(Districts 29 and 31)
This extensive area stretches from High Road
and Bulls Creek Road in the South to the Swan
River in the North. The Canning River and Fre-
mantle form the eastern and western boundaries.
While East Fremantle is almost entirely built-up,
the remainder of the area is mainly in process of
development, and contains a considerable amount of
open country. Good building land is available,
much of it elevated and adjacent to the river, and in
recent years residential development has been ex-
tensive, although there are still vacant blocks and
consequently the gross density is low. In spite of
the undulating nature of the ground, the earlier
subdivisions were laid out on the " grid ” system
with some extraordinary routes and intersections.
Fortunately, the newer areas are now being laid out
with regard to the land contours, and considerable
improvement is apparent.
Reservation of the river foreshores for public
access and open space has resulted from the control
of land subdivision. The greater part of the fore-
shore is now available to the public and is rapidly
becoming a popular regional rendezvous. If this
popularity increases, greater attention will have to
be paid to the space requirements of the heavy week-
end influx.


On final development the present population of
about 24,000 persons in the districts could increase
to 83,200. In the existing built-up areas, with roads
and services already provided, there were over 3,600
vacant blocks at the time of the survey.
The Canning Highway runs across the area from
East to West. It is rapidly growing in importance
and there is still time and space to effect considerable
improvement in its design. The Main Roads De-
partment is already at work on the section East from
Stock Road. The western section, which is mostly
built-up, is difficult to improve.
To the East of the area runs the Perth-Kwinana
Highway, mostly on the eastern side of the Canning
River. The point of crossing will depend on the
selection of a suitable bridge site. Plans for the
improvement of Stock Road southwards to join the
Perth-Kwinana Highway near Spearwood are already
in hand. This will become a very important link
road as development increases in the South. It
provides an alternative route to Carrington Street,
which cannot properly be improved because of the
bad vertical curves and dangerous intersections.
The route along High Street, High Road, and Bulls
Creek Road is an Important Regional Road between
Fremantle and the inner southern suburbs. It should
gradually be improved in standard, and the right
angle bends just North of the Fremantle Cemetery
eliminated. North Lake Road is a further Important
Regional Road which should gradually be improved.
Reference has been made earlier to a long-term
possibility of bridging the Swan River at Point
Walter. Although this is considered to be outside
the period of the Plan it would be wise to make
provision for this by envisaging the ultimate extension
of Stock Road North of the Canning Highway and
by laying down a building line as a safeguard.
A scheme for the improvement of Riverside Road,
from North Fremantle Bridge to Point Walter, has
already been initiated by the Lands Department. If
this road were extended through the Point Walter
reserve to Attadale, it would form a delightful tourist
route along a most interesting stretch of the river.
An industrial zone is proposed North of High
Road in the vicinity of North Lake Road. This is
based on industries already established and the local
authority’s proposals for the area. Because of the
good residential land in the vicinity considerable care
is needed in the definition of the boundaries of this
zone. Other small zones for light industry should
be determined when detail planning is undertaken.
Although a number of shopping centres exist, they
are all small. District centres are proposed near
the High Road-Stock Road intersection and South
of the Canning Highway at Applecross. No further
shopping centres should be permitted on the Canning
Highway.
Two high schools are proposed, one at Applecross
on a site which has already been earmarked at Ardross
Street, and the other to the South-West near Bulls
Creek Road.
District 29 is short of Local and District Open
Space, the total provision at present being only 23
acres. District 31 is better provided, but it is below
the standard suggested. Point Walter Reserve is in
an admirable position and should become one of
the most frequented recreational areas in the Region.
It can be linked, by means of the Attadale foreshore
reserve, with a further area in the vicinity of Alfred
Cove. It is suggested that a certain amount of
reclamation could take place here to provide a quite
extensive reserve. At present there is a narrow
strip of land between Canning Highway and the
river which is difficult to use.
The foreshore reserves to the West around Preston
Point, and to the East as far as Canning Bridge,
should all be public open space and improved as
conditions permit. The site of the wireless station
South of Canning Highway at Applecross occupies
a most commanding position. Should this at any
time no longer be required for its present purpose,
it would make an admirable recreational reserve and
vantage point, with extensive views across the river.
(k) South Fremantle, Hilton Park, Hamilton
Hill, Willagee, North Lake and Bibra
Lake (Districts 30, 32, 33 and 34)
This area lies immediately to the South of Districts
29 and 31, the dividing line being High Street, High
Road and Bulls Creek Road. The eastern and
south-eastern portions contain very little develop-
ment, and it may be some time before they are fully
in demand. The western end comprises older
settled areas of Fremantle City, and contains obsoles-
cent housing interspersed with industry and ware-


housing. Through careful zoning in detail, re-
development should be predominantly residential.
Light industrial or commercial zones should in-
corporate the larger groups of industrial buildings
and warehouses.
The ocean frontage, with its magnificent prospect,
requires careful consideration. Marine Terrace and
Wellington Terrace could become fine ocean front
esplanades. The railway line which meanders across
them at various points will carry greater volumes of
traffic. With foreshore reclamation, the railway, for
which there is no alternative route, could be kept
clear of the road in a special reserve adjacent to a
modified sea defence wall.
The State Housing Commission has been active
in Hamilton Hill and Hilton Park, and the Fremantle
City Council are providing housing land East of
Hilton Park. The State Housing Commission’s
Willagee Park estate lies to the East of Stock Road
and occupies a large area. To the East of North
Lake Road lies the extensive Somerville pine planta-
tion. In view of the location and quality of the
land it is recommended that this plantation must
gradually be turned over to housing as and when the
timber reaches maturity. To the East and South of
the pine plantation, there is some excellent building
land, particularly to the West of North Lake and
Bibra Lake. At the present time this is mainly
virgin bush.
The present total population is about 18,700
persons, and the final population envisaged in the
planned residential areas is about 102,700. Most
of the increase is in the eastern and southern portions.
District 34, which contains some 17,000 persons
may, in fact, have a slightly reduced population as
re-development to better standards takes place.
The Fremantle-Midland Junction Highway joins the
Perth-Kwinana Highway East of Bibra Lake. The
two run together for some distance to separate again
North of Spearwood. From this point the Fre-
mantle-Midland Junction Highway continues along
the line of Forrest Road to the Newmarket Hotel,
extends westward along Island Street, and thence
along the remodelled ocean front to Fremantle.
Hampton Road is an important connector to Fre-
mantle, at present carrying most of the traffic from
the South. It would be difficult if not impossible
to improve it to an appreciable extent. The Island
Street-Marine Terrace line offers the only opportunity
for the provision of a high standard Major Regional
Highway.
The Perth-Kwinana Highway forms the western
boundary of the area and, at its junction with the
Fremantle-Midland Junction Highway, an Important
Regional Road continues South to join Forrest
Road. Stock Road joins the Fremantle-Midland
Junction and Perth-Kwinana Highways North of
Spearwood. South Street forms an important East-
West route from Fremantle to the southern inner
suburbs. It is a direct route but considerable im-
provement is needed at various points.
The Fremantle City Council industrial estate lies
in the area between Carrington Street and Stock
Road. The Council have gradually provided roads
and services, to create a well-organised industrial
area, and have made sites available to industrialists
at a time when they have been difficult to obtain.
A small extension eastwards is proposed despite the
difficult terrain. Another small industrial zone, in-
cluding existing factories, is provided South of High
Street, with Amherst Street serving it.
In order to meet the employment demands of the
greatly increased local population, a further extensive
industrial zone is provided South of Bibra Lake and
related to the Fremantle-Armadale Railway. Care
has been taken in defining the northern boundary of
this zone so that it is well clear of Bibra Lake. Part
of the zone is low-lying and will require drainage
before it can be fully used.
The Robbs Jetty special industrial area is intended
for industries of a noxious or offensive nature, and
particularly those which need to dispose of liquid
trade waste. It already contains abattoirs, meat
export works, tanneries, wool scouring, and skin
drying establishments.
It has been suggested that some of the special
industries in the vicinity of Robbs Jetty should be
relocated elsewhere, and there have certainly been
complaints from householders at Bakers Estate and
Hamilton Hill. It would not be practicable to change
the use of this area, but it is proposed that it should
remain within strict limits, and be confined to the
western side of the coastal limestone ridge to the
East of Naval Base Road, with Ocean Road as a


southern limit. It is also proposed that there should
be no extension of the housing areas South of the
Fremantle-Midland Junction Highway and the Perth-
Kwinana Highway, thereby allowing a " buffer ”
area of relatively sparse development to windward of
this industrial zone. The northern limit is difficult
to define as the whole of the area between Douro
Road and Robbs Jetty Road needs some reorganisa-
tion as regards layout and use. In principle, the
northern limit of the zone should be the northern
boundary of the meat works.
Although there are a number of small groups and
scattered shops in the built-up areas, there are none
of any great size, the influence of Fremantle being
felt in the western portions. A district centre is
proposed, near the junction of North Lake Road and
South Street, to serve the large new residential areas.
A new high school will be required near this
centre, and a technical school further to the East.
Another high school will ultimately be required near
Forrest Road, on the eastern side of Hamilton Hill.
The site for a new regional hospital, to be situated
North of Winterfold Road at Hilton Park, is at
present under negotiation. The existing Fremantle
Hospital will remain in use, although its character
may be changed when the larger hospital is function-
ing.
A Major Regional Open Space on the scale of
Kings Park or Bold Park is proposed, to incorporate
the fine stretches of water known as Bibra Lake and
North Lake. It is an area which could readily be
adapted to recreational purposes. A link of open
space northwards along the Perth-Kwinana Highway
to the Canning River is also proposed, and a large
area is suggested further to the East, South of Bulls
Creek Road. Hilton Park and the Melville reserve
adjoining Stock Road are two open spaces already
coming into use. Reclamation and the restitution
of land North of the Robbs Jetty special industrial
zone could eventually provide another recreational
area, and the low-lying land West of Hamilton Road
could also be put to similar use.
South Beach is the only beach readily available to
the people of Fremantle and, because of this, it is of
great importance. The development at its rear is
unfortunate, but reorganisation of road and rail, as
suggested earlier, and some reclamation would im-
prove the position.
The Fremantle Golf Course is retained as a valuable
" lung ” in an already built-up area. There is still
space for further burials in the Fremantle Cemetery,
although part of the ground is rocky.
(1) South Perth, Como and Manning Park
(Districts 25 and 26)
Bounded on the North and West by Perth Water
and Melville Water, on the South by Canning River,
and on the East by the Collier pine plantation, this
is a compact area almost entirely residential in
character. The older settled areas are on the north-
western side of the Canning Highway and offer a
variety of excellent building sites, many with ex-
tensive river views to central Perth, Kings Park and
Pelican Point.
The newer areas are on the south-eastern side of
the Highway, in large part developed by the State
Housing Commission. The Canning River has only
a small frontage available for residential use, the
remainder being occupied by Aquinas College,
Clontarf Orphanage and Mount Henry Women’s
Home.
The construction of the Narrows Bridge, giving
easier access, will encourage an increasing density of
development in the South Perth peninsula. This
may be most marked on the river frontage facing the
City. The Collier pine plantation, in view of its
close location to the City, must gradually give way
to other more appropriate uses. A large part can
be used for housing, but the Plan shows a very
adequate proportion for open space use as well as
for Government buildings of various kinds.
The present population of some 23,000 persons
could eventually increase to about 49,400 within
the areas zoned for residential purposes.
The Canning Highway runs from North-East to
South-West through the area, and will always be a
road of major significance. Improvement will be
difficult, even though a building line for widening
is in existence. It suffers from the same faults as
the Stirling Highway in that there are numerous
intersections and ribbons of commercial development
on both sides, often at points where vertical curves
restrict the vision of drivers. Gradual improve-
ment, aimed towards limiting roadside shopping
activity and reducing intersections, is necessary if
it is to be maintained as an efficient Major Regional
Highway.


The proposed Perth-Kwinana Highway runs from
the Narrows Bridge along the western river frontage.
If the traffic from this Bridge were to spread through
the existing chain wide residential streets of the
South Perth peninsula, it would have a most damaging
effect and would be exceedingly dangerous. Ample
land is available on the western foreshore for a fine
riverside drive, and additional reclamation is easy
because of the shallow depth of water. It is im-
portant that the popular Como bathing beach should
be re-formed on the western side of the new High-
way, provision being made over or under the High-
way for safe pedestrian access. With through traffic
completely segregated, there would be no direct
connections between the Highway and the beach.
The existing Melville Parade, often a hazardous
street for children to cross, would become an access,
rather than a through road.
At the Canning bridgehead, where two main
streams of traffic will meet, there should be a spacious,
and perhaps complex, intersection. South of Canning
Bridge, the Major Regional Highway follows the
foreshore to Mount Henry. Fremantle Road, as an
Important Regional Road, will eventually require
considerable improvements, which should Include
straightening in some places.
A proposal of long standing which might have
some traffic importance in the future is the proposed
riverside drive from the Narrows Bridge, along the
southern edge of Perth Water, to Canning Highway.
It will certainly have scenic importance, and it should
be designed and built to a good standard.
No major industrial zones are proposed, although
provision must be made for light industry, when
planning in detail is carried out.
There are a number of small groups of shops and
a few larger ones in South Perth. While some of
these centres may grow considerably in size, only one
district centre is proposed. It should be on the
south-eastern side of the Canning Highway. Further
expansion of shopping on the Highway frontage
should not be permitted.
On the eastern side of the Collier pine plantation
a site is reserved for the technological institute,
referred to earlier, a teachers’ training college and a
technical school. Additional land should also be
reserved for governmental purposes of an educational
or scientific nature. There is already a proposal for
a laboratory for the Department of Agriculture. A
site for a regional hospital is reserved on the south-
eastern extremity of the plantation. New high
schools adjoining the district centre to the West, and
on the South Perth peninsula, will also be required.
If the proposal to move the South Perth Zoological
Gardens is accepted, the site would be adequate and
ideal for a high school. The removal of the Zoological
Gardens has been under discussion for a long time.
Various alternative locations have been suggested.
The recommendation in the Plan, that they would
be better placed in the Forrest National Park, is
discussed in Chapter 7.
The Regional Open Space proposed along the fore-
shores, and already generally in public ownership,
should be developed as conditions permit to provide
valuable recreational space as well as fine landscape.
Perhaps, better placed than any other potential public
open space, the former " Chinese gardens ” facing
central Perth should be most carefully considered
and designed. It may be that the area should be
developed along the lines of the famous Tivoli Gardens
in Copenhagen. It is certainly admirably placed for
such a purpose.
Richardson Park and South Perth Oval are already
well developed. But further Local and District Open
Space is needed and this must be obtained from the
Collier plantation and in further detail planning.
The old mill at Mill Point has been the subject of
much controversy. There would seem to be no
case for retaining it in its present ruinous state.
Either it should be removed entirely or else it should
be retained and reconstructed as an historic monu-
ment. In view of the fact that this is one of the
relatively few links with the early settlement, the
latter course is recommended.
The Canning River frontage should be reserved
for public use, wherever possible, and this principle
should apply if any of the institutional land is sub-
sequently alienated.
(m) Victoria Park, Carlisle, Rivervale, Bel-
mont, Redcliffe and South Guildford.
(Districts 22 and 23.)
The boundaries of this area are defined by the
Swan River on the North-West, the Collier pine
plantation, the Welshpool industrial area on the
South-East, and Perth Airport and Helena River
on the East and North-East.


While parts of Victoria Park are relatively high,
the land falls generally towards the East, and Belmont
contains large areas of low-lying and swampy land
which present a series of drainage difficulties. Settle-
ment in the southern and outer Belmont areas is
sparsely scattered, and intensive development will
depend on a comprehensive drainage scheme.
The present population is about 35,000 persons.
Full development of the residential areas shown on
the Plan, at reasonable standards, could give a total
population of 90,800 persons.
Generally, the existing layout is a rather monotonous
series of " grids ” covering a wide area, and further
subdivision may have to accord with the same pattern.
While Victoria Park and Carlisle are rapidly nearing
complete development, there are still very sub-
stantial stretches of open country in Belmont.
In future subdivision, it would be wise to break
from the general pattern of through roads running
every 10 chains from' the Great Eastern Highway in
a south-easterly direction. A few of these roads
should be selected as routes for through traffic and
buses, and the others, where they are as yet un-
constructed, should join roads parallel with the
Highway, with subdivision at right angles to the
original line.
The Albany Highway at present runs through the
south-western part of the area, connecting Perth (via
the Causeway) with Armadale, Albany and Bunbury.
It is a most important traffic route, but because of
ribboned shopping development along both sides
which, at Victoria Park, has grown into a major
shopping centre, its adequacy as a through traffic
route has been considerably diminished. As a
result two roads parallel to the Highway, Berwick
Street and Shepperton Road, have come into use as
by-passes to the busiest section of the Highway.
Both of these alternative routes were designed as
residential streets, however, and suffer from all the
disadvantages and dangers resulting from frequent
intersections and continuous residential development
on both sides.
Of the two alternatives, Shepperton Road offers
the greater scope for improvement. Because of the
subdivisional design it contains fewer intersections.
It should therefore be improved to a higher standard
to give further relief to the Albany Highway, even
though it discharges traffic on to the Highway at
some distance from the Causeway.
Although it is not practicable greatly to improve
the Canning Highway, the southernmost section of
the Great Eastern Highway can be radically altered
between the Causeway Circus and the railway line
at Rivervale. A new section of controlled access
highway should be inserted on the open land border-
ing the river. The Highway should pass under the
railway, thus eliminating a dangerous crossing, and
at Belmont, cross the proposed Beechboro-Gosnells
Highway before continuing past Perth Airport to
Guildford and Midland Junction. The southern
by-pass to Guildford and Midland Junction branches
off South of Helena River bridge. Throughout its
length, from Rivervale to Guildford, the Highway
is capable of improvement. Shopping development
is mainly confined to the south-western sections, but
further shops are now being erected, often at im-
portant bends. In the detail planning steps should
be taken as soon as possible to arrest incompatible
development of this kind.
The proposed Burswood Highway crosses the
Swan River, via a bridge North of the Causeway, to
form a north-eastern outlet from the centre of the
City. It joins the Great Eastern Highway near the
Rivervale crossing, and from this point an Important
Regional Road continues South-East along Kitchener
and Rutland Avenues, to form one of the main con-
necting roads to the proposed goods yard, freight
terminal and marshalling yards at Belmont-Welshpool.
This route has been selected, after much considera-
tion, as offering the best possibility for improvement
without disrupting the already well-settled residential
area. The existence of the railway limits access on
one side. Careful attention will have to be given
to the important intersections, particularly those at
Rivervale and Welshpool.
Another Important Regional Road lies along the
south-eastern limits of the area, separating the resi-
dential zone from the main Welshpool industrial
zone and the marshalling yards. Generally, it follows
the line of Downsborough Avenue and May Street,
joining the Beechboro-Gosnells Highway at Hardey
Road.
The Beechboro-Gosnells Highway follows the line
of Hardey Road, or is in close proximity to it, to
cross the river East of Belmont Racecourse. The
new bridge site was selected as being in a much
better position than the existing Garratt Road Bridge


which has a limited approach from the North, now
rendered impossible to improve because of recent
development. In the South-East, the Highway skirts
the Welshpool industrial area to join the Albany
Highway at Gosnells.
The proposed Beechboro-Gosnells Highway serves
a number of functions. Firstly, it affords important
relief to the Albany Highway for country and in-
dustrial traffic. Secondly, it allows cross-city traffic
to move in a North-West South-East direction with-
out passing through the congested Central Area, and
provides quick access from the South to the northern
parts of the City. Last, but not least, it connects
the three major industrial zones of Welshpool,
Bassendean and the new zone North of Beechboro.
The main industrial zone is at Welshpool. It
embraces a fairly extensive existing industrial area,
centred on the wartime ordnance factory at the
junction of Welshpool Road and Alfred Street.
The proposed marshalling yards form the central
core, and rail access could be provided to many
major industries. The main railway goods terminal
for Perth would be situated at the northern end of
the industrial zone, geographically very central in
the Region, yet away from the congestion 'of the
Central Area. Land adjacent to the railway goods
yard on the North-West would be occupied by
warehouse and storage buildings, the goods terminal,
and the port terminal, and the wholesale market.
The North Belmont industrial zone in which a
number of industries are already established lies,
broadly, between Knutsford Avenue and Abernethy
Road, South-East of Great Eastern Highway. There
are other scattered industries outside this but it
would be wise to draw the boundaries of this zone
fairly tight.
The land between Kalamunda Road, Great Eastern
Highway and the northern fringes of Perth Airport
is more suitable for industrial purposes than for
any other use. There is already some industry
established and its proximity to the airport would
not encourage residential development.
Finally, a small industrial zone is proposed at
Rivervale. Part of the residential area East of the
railway lies in the path of drifting smoke and dust
from the cement works. Attempts have been made
to abate the nuisance, but they have met with only
limited success, and it is doubtful whether the diffi-
culty will ever completely be overcome. Rivervale
because of its high position, river views and proximity
to the City, has been sought after for residential
purposes, but the presence of smoke and dust, the
infiltration of small industries, and the impracticability
of moving the cement works have suggested that
there should be a zone for industrial purposes with
Hawksburn Road as a limit, leaving the remaining
Great Eastern Highway frontage in residential use.
This industrial zone should be restricted to light
industry.
Two district centres are proposed. The first is
centred on Victoria Park, which is at present one of
the most important shopping centres in the Region.
There should be an intensification of shop grouping
at certain selected points. This would be preferable
to a continuation of a string of shops of considerable
length. The second centre proposed is close to the
Great Eastern Highway at Belmont. At present
there are no sizeable centres in this locality because
a great part of the possible catchment area is sparsely
developed.
The existing Kent Street High School is on a site
which may prove inadequate for a very large school.
It should be extended if at all possible. A further
high school is proposed in the vicinity of Abernethy
Avenue. The technological institute, teachers’ col-
lege and technical school will occupy part of the
Collier plantation. A further technical school will
be required in the South Belmont area, probably
near the industrial area.
Excluding riverside lands, there is at present about
190 acres of open space in the group of districts,
which is well below the standard suggested. Open
space on the Collier plantation will serve part of
Victoria Park and is linked to the area South-West
of Kent Street High School. Fairly extensive pro-
vision is recommended at May Street in South
Belmont. This would act as a ** buffer ” zone
between the residential area and the warehousing
area.
The Swan River frontage should be reserved and
improved for public use wherever possible. McCal-
lum Park is already pleasantly landscaped, and it
should be continued westwards. Reclamation is
being carried out on the old Goodwood Racecourse,
and further extensive reclamation is proposed on the
land to the South as far as the Great Eastern High-
way. When filling has been completed this ex-


tensive stretch of level riverside land should become
the major regional centre for organised sports. A
further low-lying area which should be reclaimed for
recreational purposes is situated South-West of
Grandstand Street. A start has already been made
on the project.
Further land is not likely to be required for Perth
Airport, although it may be necessary to extend
runways, and impose limitations on adjacent develop-
ment. These are unlikely to be unduly restrictive.
Even on the assumption that the present Perth Air-
port may become the secondary airport, it is always
likely to be of importance. The immediate sur-
roundings will not be good for residential use.
(n) Queens Park, Bentley Park, Cannington,
Riverton and Bulls Creek (Districts
24, 27 and 28)
This large area runs from the Welshpool Road in
the North-East to the Perth-Kwinana Highway in
the West, and is bounded on the North by the Can-
ning River. It includes the State Housing Commis-
sion estate at Bentley Park, and the southern limits
are formed by the Midland Junction-Kwinana railway
and the Fremantle-Midland Junction Highway.
Since the war large-scale residential building has
taken place on the northern side of the Canning
River, aided by important State Housing Commis-
sion estates at Bentley Park and Maniana. The
development in the Queens Park-Cannington area,
where there are large patches of low-lying land, is
scattered. Full-scale development will only be pos-
sible following a comprehensive drainage scheme.
Bentley Park comprises good building land with
some valuable sand deposits, but South of Fremantle
Road areas of low-lying ground are again present and
drainage will be needed.
On the southern side of the Canning River the
Riverton-Bulls Creek areas were virtually unde-
veloped until very recent years, although the land
has been subdivided for many years. Pockets of
low-lying land and sometimes swampy conditions,
lack of essential services, and poor access have held
back the development of Riverton although a con-
siderable amount of scattered housing is now to be
seen. South of Riverton and Bulls Creek there is
virtually no development and, again, there is low-
lying land in a number of places.
With the advent of better access, and the provision
in a few years of an adequate water supply, the
Riverton area could advance very rapidly. It is
close to the City and has a very pleasant frontage to
the Canning River. Before intensive development
takes place, however, attention must be given to
drainage problems, and it would be unwise to allow
intensive development South of Riverton and Bulls
Creek until a drainage scheme has been prepared.
There are at present some 12,800 persons in the
three districts, of which the bulk live North of the
Canning River and only some 1,500 persons live in
Districts 27 and 28. With the gradual provision of
drainage and essential services, the zoned residential
area could accommodate a total of about 133,000
persons.
The Perth-Kwinana Highway lies on the West of
the area, the Fremantle-Midland Junction Highway
on the South, and the Albany Highway on the North-
East. The last-named is already inadequate for its
function and, as an immediate measure, the carriage-
way is being widened in parts by the Main Roads
Department. Further intersections from minor roads
should be prevented where possible and the building
of shops in ribbons along both sides should be
arrested.
An improved route for the Albany Highway
approximately on the line Wimbledon Street-Rupert
Street, and by-passing the township of Kenwick, has
already been announced by the Minister for Works.
This will facilitate the bridging of the railway for
the Fremantle-Midland Junction Highway.
The Important Regional Roads run mainly East
and West. Fremantle Road runs from Canning
Bridge to the Albany Highway. An improved inter-
section using Hamilton Street is suggested, and the
route is extended along that street to Welshpool
Road, thus providing a direct link with the Belmont-
Welshpool industrial area. A connection from this
road in a north-easterly direction is proposed along
the general line of Marquis Street and Hill View
Terrace, passing the proposed regional hospital site
and linking with Albany Highway. Riverton Street
passing South-West over Riverton Bridge will become
a more important road. It connects to Barbican
Street and the State Electricity Commission reserve
to join Central Road and the Perth-Kwinana High-
way. From the point of intersection, Central Road
continues East along Burt Road to Nicholson Road


and Albany Highway. Nicholson Road proceeds
South-West over the proposed railway, and with a
small diversion, a good intersection with the Fre-
mantle-Midland Junction Highway is provided. South
Street is extended eastwards from North Lake Road
to the Fremantle-Midland Junction Highway, and a
North-South connection joins this with Central
Road.
The proposed Midland Junction-Kwinana railway
passes through the area from the Belmont-Welshpool
marshalling yards, joining the Bunbury line at Can-
nington Station, and proceeding South-West to
Kwinana on a line almost parallel to the Fremantle-
Midland Junction Highway. It passes under road
bridges at three points.
District centres are proposed at Queens Park,
near the junction of three Important Regional Roads,
and in the southern part of the area near the proposed
racecourse. Four new high school sites will be
needed, and they are shown at Cannington, Burt
Road, Central Road, and adjoining the new district
centre in the South.
The site for a future racecourse, which has been
acquired by the Western Australian Turf Club, lies
South of Bulls Creek adjoining the Perth-fCwinana
Highway. The site is well placed to provide for
future requirements, including the movement of
large numbers of persons for big race meetings.
The Canning River foreshores should be reserved
as Public Open Space from Nicholson Road to Bulls
Creek. A major open space belt, comparable in
scale to the Bibra Lake Park, runs in a south-easterly
direction from Bulls Creek. It contains the Perth-
Kwinana Highway, forms a break between two large
communities, and contains a large amount of land
not very suitable for building purposes.
(o) Maddington, Gosnells, Orange Grove and
Canning Vale (District 38)
Maddington and Gosnells have grown up as centres
on the Bunbury railway line and the Albany Highway.
Low-lying and sometimes swampy land to the North-
East and South-West limits the areas of close settle-
ment. In winter months there is a heavy run-off
from the Hills, affecting land which, in the summer,
may seem very suitable for building. In the clay
areas of Gosnells, where surface water collects in the
winter months, drainage can improve the position.
There are several extensive parts of the main urban
area which cannot properly be developed without
comprehensive drainage schemes. It is, therefore,
likely to be many years before comprehensive drainage
will extend to the Maddington-Gosnells area. There
are other reasons why close settlement should not
spread too far. Valuable fruit growing lands along
the Canning River should be preserved, and all
possible steps should be taken to prevent the growth
of miles of continuous development between Can-
nington and Armadale, which would give a long,
tedious and dangerous entry to the metropolis from
the Albany and South-Western Highways.
However, the Plan suggests room for some ex-
pansion of Maddington and Gosnells and the zoned
residential areas shown would enable them to grow
to nearly three times their present size. Some of
the zoned land would only be ready for development
on the completion of adequate local drainage schemes.
With room allowed for further building in the
Orange Grove area, the total residential zone could
accommodate some 16,000 persons, as compared
with about 5,900 in the district at the present time.
Albany Highway runs through the whole district.
A diversion to by-pass Kenwick has already been
mentioned, and a further diversion is shown to
by-pass Gosnells on the North-East, where it is
joined by the Beechboro-Gosnells Highway. These
two Major Regional Highways will provide quick
access to central Perth, the North and North-East,
and to the port via the Fremantle-Midland Junction
Highway.
No major industrial zone is proposed but small
zones for light industry may be required. The old
Canning Park Racecourse was originally acquired
for industry. It is of doubtful value other than for
some particular type of industry with very special
siting requirements. It seems clear that without
drainage work, only a small part of the site could be
used for residential development and it is suggested
that it should remain in the rural zone until further
investigations are made at a later stage.
Although quite large shopping centres will grow
in both Maddington and Gosnells it is not anticipated
they will become district centres.
Outside the defined residential areas the district
is in the rural zone, which includes some areas of
high or special agricultural value. It is suggested
that the relatively virgin and poor country of Canning


Vale, bounded by Nicholson Road, should be used
for afforestation. On the Darling Escarpment, where
some areas are already in public ownership, a regional
park system is shown, with a scenic drive overlooking
the coastal plain. Additional minor open spaces
are required in Maddington and Gosnells to attain
the standard for the increased population.
(p) Kalamunda, Maida Vale, Forrestfield and
Pickering Brook (District 37)
This large area lies between Perth Airport, the
Belmont-Welshpool industrial area, and the boundary
of the Water Supply Catchment area East of Carilla
and Mundaring Weir. The country rises from
Belmont, which is relatively flat and low, through the
foothills to the Darling Escarpment, where settle-
ments such as Kalamunda and Gooseberry Hill
overlook the coastal plain and the ocean beyond.
The whole district contains only some 6,900
persons, of whom the majority live within relatively
short radius of the centre of Kalamunda. For several
decades Kalamunda has been a popular Hills resort,
with many permanent homes as well as week-end
cottages. In the post-war years more and more
permanent residences have been erected, and the
speed of development would have been much more
striking if there had been a public water supply. As
water is now being provided it is anticipated that
there will be an acceleration in the rate of develop-
ment. The Plan defines a very ample residential
area, covering Kalamunda, South Kalamunda, Les-
murdie, and Gooseberry Hill. Virtually the whole
of the area is very suitable for building and from many
points there are distant views.
It is strongly recommended that the escarpment
edge should be held for the public. In a metropolis
spread generally on flat coastal plain, it is of great
importance to preserve a number of vantage points
where good views can be obtained. This is a guiding
rule in relation to the Swan River. The same
principle should apply in certain parts of the Hills.
At Kalamunda, the escarpment edge and an area on
the hill top should be acquired and held for public
recreation. The reserves of public open space
created should be traversed by a scenic drive.
Outside Kalamunda there are some very small
settlements at Maida Vale, Forrestfield, Wattle Grove,
Bickley and Carmel. Provision is made for ex-
pansion in each. Pickering Brook and Carilla are
villages in a completely rural area and it is not thought
necessary to provide for any measure of relatively
close settlement.
The total population which could be accommodated
in the residential zone is about 45,000 persons, of
which the bulk would be in Kalamunda. This figure
allows for an increase of some 38,000.
The proposed Midland Junction-Kwinana railway
and the Fremantle-Midland Junction Highway run
through the western part of the district, the latter
meeting the Beechboro-Gosnells Highway and the
existing Welshpool Road. The two main approaches
to Kalamunda are the Maida Vale Road, which leaves
the Great Eastern Highway via Epsom Avenue, and
the Welshpool Road from the Albany Highway.
Both are classified as Important Regional Roads and
they join in Kalamunda. Part of the old railway
reserve is used as a route to complete the circuit.
Both roads should be improved, particularly where
they climb the escarpment. The present line of the
Welshpool Road on the face of the escarpment is
difficult to improve. An alternative route is pro-
posed, following a line which has been examined by
the Main Roads Department.
Several routes are suggested for development as
scenic drives, the main requirements of which would
be the provision of a good road surface, the elimina-
tion of hazardous intersections and bends, preserva-
tion of points of scenic interest along the route, and
the design of vantage points with parking space for
cars to draw off the roads. The line of the scenic
drive along the escarpment has only been shown in
principle. It would take some considerable time to
determine it in detail, and the drive could be built
in sections as and when required.
It is assumed that many persons living in Kala-
munda will work in the Belmont-Welshpool industrial
area which is within relatively easy distance. In
detail planning, provision must be made for light
and service industries.
The district centre should develop around the
present main shopping area of Kalamunda. A new
high school will be required and a site is indicated
by a symbol.
Large areas are suggested for public open space
of a regional character, of which a proportion is
already in public ownership, for example, the Les-
murdie Falls reserve, which is a tourist attraction


of some importance. The total acreage may not be
required for many years, and rural uses within the
proposed Regional Open Space areas should remain
undisturbed. A policy of gradually bringing the
land under public control as occasion arises should
prevail. Additional Local and District Open Space
will be required in and around the areas proposed
for close settlement.
The eastern part of the district is mainly given over
to forest lands and fruit orchards, both important
in the regional economy. They should continue as
main uses, and become more accessible as new routes
are established in the forests.
(q) Darlington, Glen Forrest, Mahogany
Creek, Mundaring, Sawyers Valley, Parker-
ville, Stoneville and Mt. Helena (District 36)
This district consists of a number of small town-
ships, Mundaring being the largest, which have grown
at different points on the eastern railway lines and
on the Great Eastern Highway. The amount of
close settlement is still very limited and the popula-
tion, which numbers some 6,700, is mainly engaged
in primary production.
The country is very broken with a considerable
amount of gravel and rock in evidence. Many of
the valleys and hillsides are very fertile and, because
of the changing contours, there are some very
attractive building sites.
The district will always be predominantly rural in
character, but expansion of importance could take
place in some, if not all, of the townships. It should
not be overlooked that Chidlow and Wooroloo
are as likely to expand as the others, and they do
not fall within the boundary of the Regional Plan.
Even though the summer afternoon sea breeze
generally fails to reach the Hills, they have long
held an attraction as living areas. The Swan River,
the Indian Ocean and the Hills are the great physical
features which give the Region shape and which will
always attract homebuilders.
There are alternative means of transport to Perth.
The townships on the main railway line could enjoy
a frequent and fast suburban service. The other
townships are on a loop line which, because of steep
grades and poor patronage, does not now carry
passenger trains. There may be justification, at
some time in the future, for re-opening the service
with modern trains.
The Great Eastern Highway passes through the
district, and it is gradually being improved in quality
by the Main Roads Department. It is proposed to
extend the scenic drive which runs through National
Park, northwards to the Toodyay Road, and south-
wards to Kalamunda and along the edge of the
escarpment.
Shopping is scattered and there is no centre of any
magnitude in the district. At the present time
Midland Junction serves it as district centre. It may
continue to do so, even though some of the local
centres will increase in importance. Two new high
schools are shown, one North-West of Glen Forrest,
and the other, the existing school, East of Mount
Helena.
The State Forest Reserves are mainly South of
the Great Eastern Highway, and the Water Supply
Catchment Area is contiguous with the Highway in
the vicinity of Sawyers Valley. Elsewhere, con-
siderable areas are proposed for intensive agriculture,
mainly in places where there is a fairly high pro-
portion of land already in such use.
The Forrest National Park forms the western end
of the district and is continuously growing in im-
portance as a recreational area. Although its present
acreage may seem adequate the rate of growth of
population is such that it would be wise to extend
the area northwards to the Toodyay Road, thus
giving adequate space for the maintenance of native
flora and fauna and for future development. An
additional advantage to be obtained would be a
vehicle entrance from the Toodyay Road to com-
mence a tourist circuit through the Park. This
would form the northern part of the scenic drive
along the escarpment.
One of the proposals in the Plan is the suggested
relocation of the Zoological Gardens in Forrest
National Park. This would give a more ample
setting for the animals in natural surroundings and
yet be readily accessible to all parts of the Region.
Additional local recreational areas will be needed
in all the established townships.
(r) Wanneru, Yanchep, Middle Swan, Upper
Swan and Bullsbrook (District 35)
This district is the whole of the northern part of
the Metropolitan Region outside the North Perimeter
Highway and the main urban area.


Settlement is very sparse ; there are only about
5,700 persons in the whole district, the bulk of whom
are in the Swan Valley, and the figure may not
change to any great extent.
Large pine plantations are being systematically
established to the West of the Swan Valley. An
extension of the plantations is suggested South of
Gnangara Road and nearer to the City. The coastal
ridges and sandhills to the West are more or less
continuous scrub and bush, culminating in the
Yanchep National Park with its lake and interesting
limestone caves. North of the Swan Valley the
Darling Escarpment fades away to the East, leaving
the large R.A.A.F. establishment at Bullsbrook as
the dominant feature.
North of Wanneru, the road which terminates
at Yanchep, is virtually a tourist route. The Plan
envisages the Yanchep Highway growing in im-
portance, and being extended northwards along the
coast, towards the Moore River and beyond.
The Great Northern Highway to Geraldton and
the North-West is a well-established route which is
capable of further improvement. An adequate
width should be reserved in the closer settled areas
of the Swan Valley. The Middle Swan Road is
a relief road to the Highway. The Gnangara Road
is a reasonable East-West route, at some distance
North of the main urban area. No further cross-
country route will be necessary for many years.
Mention has already been made of the important
agricultural lands of the Swan Valley which are now
largely used for vinegrowing. They comprise some
of the oldest agricultural settlements in the State,
and many may be seen from the delightful Upper
Swan Church, a small early building perched on a
height overlooking the river.
From Herdsman Lake northwards, the market
gardening lands of Osborne Park stretch along a
band of rich swampy country to Wanneru and Lake
Joondalup. Generally, the land is unsuitable for
building and it should be retained for market gardens
to provide some of the fresh food for the growing
metropolitan population.
The proposed secondary airport, which may
eventually take primary place, lies South of Gnangara
Road. Caversham Airport is no longer used for
flying although it may be used for training purposes
in the future.
Yanchep Park is a fine reserve which, at times,
draws a substantial number of visitors to its con-
centration of attractions. It would be wise to think
of extending it for future needs, and the natural way
to extend is towards the coast. At present the
sandy track to the coast is very poor, but if this were
a good road in the Park many visitors would be able
to enjoy the beach.
A small beach settlement is envisaged at Yanchep
beach and similar settlements at Wanneru and Burns
Beaches. There can be no justification for extensive
subdivision, as it is apparent that the provision of
normal supply services to these areas would not be
economic. The areas proposed for closer settle-
ment are adjacent to a good bathing or fishing beach,
and the residential zones should include camping
areas and caravan parks. Wanneru is the one centre
which may quite appreciably expand, and provision
has been made for this, and also for an ultimate by-
passing of the town by the Yanchep Highway.
(s) Spearwood, Jandakot, Coogee, Hope
Valley, Kwinana, Rockingham, Wambro
Sound and Tamworth Hill (Districts
40, 41, 42, 43 and 44)
This district, the south-western part of the Region,
is predominantly rural in character, although it
surrounds the Kwinana-Rockingham close settlement
areas. The coastline is one of the most varied in
the Region. Cockburn Sound offers safe bathing
beaches ; Safety Bay and Warnbro Sound have
partially protected beaches which will attract many
additional thousands in the years to come.
Between Lake Coogee and Woodman Point the
large Explosives and Quarantine Reserve of the
Commonwealth Government will remain. Parts of
the original Reserve have now been returned to the
State. A site for a new State Prison is proposed
in this area. Apart from the coastal limestone strip,
the remainder of the former Commonwealth Reserve
is suitable for intensive market gardening. It would
form an extension of the important Spearwood
market gardening area, stretching through Hope
Valley to the northern edge of the new town of
Kwinana. In the longer term, more land for market
gardening may be needed ; the most suitable is to
the North and South of Tamworth Hill.


Very extensive limestone deposits of varying grades
exist all along the coastal ridges. Quite a number of
excavations have already been made, the most im-
portant of these in the area adjoining the new cement
works at Russell Road. Further extensive excava-
tions must be expected in the rural zone of this
district; and steps should be taken to ensure that
quarries are filled or levelled as they are worked.
Eventually, the land should be used for other pur-
poses, probably agricultural, even though it may
not be restored to the original level.
There have been advocates for continuous close
development of the coastal belt between Fremantle
and Kwinana, either for housing or industry. There
are many arguments against this.
The coastal limestone hills are far too broken for
the development of factory areas and, although some
residential development is possible, it would be
limited in depth because of the need to preserve the
market garden land at the rear. There is great
advantage in having a large area of open coastal
country between the suburbs and City of Fremantle
and the large scale development predicted at Kwinana-
Rockingham. It will not only encourage a more
compact and economical planning of these urban
centres, but also leave an important and attractive
stretch of coast, North and South of Woodman
Point, as a recreational area in a fairly natural state.
This will be of increasing importance as access to
the shores of Cockburn Sound becomes more limited
in the future.
Two minor residential areas are proposed at
Coogee and Jandakot. The former is a beach settle-
ment centred on the popular Coogee Beach. Janda-
kot is a small settlement on the railway which has
not changed much for a number of years. Industrial
development in the vicinity would cause some ex-
pansion.
The new town of Kwinana, for which the State
Government is responsible, is complementary to
the oil refinery situated on the coast about two
miles to the West of the town. The area of land
designated for the new town is sufficiently large for
a population of some 40,000. The first two
neighbourhoods, Medina and Calista, are now nearing
completion.
Between the new town and the refinery, a belt of
land nearly a mile wide has been reserved as Public
Open Space. This will form a valuable ** buffer ”
between the proposed large industrial area and the
new town.
The townships of Rockingham and Safety Bay,
now virtually one urban settlement, have grown as
holiday centres. Development to the South-East,
away from the coast, has been limited by high subsoil
water levels. The coming of the refinery has had a
marked effect. Residential development has re-
ceived a new impetus and it should spread, during
the next two decades, along the frontage of Warnbro
Sound as far as Beecher Point (Port Kennedy).
The future of Rockingham and the new town of
Kwinana depends to a large extent on the develop-
ment of industry. It is reasonable to assume that
new industries will follow those already established,
and with the provision of port facilities large-scale
development assured. The residential areas in the
towns will offer a wide selection of sites. The new
town already has attractive homes in a well planned
area with a fine natural background. The Warnbro
Sound coastal area is adjacent to attractive beaches,
although the ground is flat with few natural features.
Both Rockingham and Kwinana are ideally placed
in relation to the major industrial areas.
The population of the five districts is at present
just below 10,OCX). The proposals in the Plan allow
for an increase to over 150,000 persons, who would
reside mainly in Kwinana and Rockingham.
The Perth-Kwinana controlled access highway
runs across the area. South of Kwinana it joins the
Mandurah Road. The Kwinana-Mundijong High-
way runs East to the South-Western Highway,
leading to Bunbury.
Storey Road, an Important Regional Road, skirts
the northern edge of the new town to join the existing
Hope Valley Road and the South-Western Highway.
On the West, it leads to the refinery entrance and
then to Rockingham. The existing Rockingham
Road, from Hope Valley to Mandurah Road, will
eventually be closed.
The main entrance road to Rockingham from the
Perth-Kwinana Highway is South of the new town
approximately on the line of Dixon Road. The
existing Safety Bay Road is always likely to be a
road of importance, and it is continued round
Warnbro Sound to rejoin the Mandurah Road near
Tamworth Hill. Victoria Avenue is the starting
point in the North for a North-South route bisecting


the residential area, and joining the Safety Bay Road
near Waikiki Beach. After proceeding South it
returns to the Mandurah Road near Stake Hill.
The coast railway line from Coogee to Kwinana is
at present under construction. The new Midland
Junction-Kwinana line would join it near Hope
Valley, after crossing the existing Fremantle-Armadale
line near Jandakot. If demanded by industrial de-
velopment or promise, a new connection to Kwinana
from the main south-western line may be constructed
on the general line of the old timber railway. In
the longer term there may be justification for railway
passenger traffic between Rockingham, the new
town of Kwinana and Perth.
It is proposed that the largest industrial area in
the Region should lie between Cockburn Sound and
the Perth-Kwinana Highway, from Hope Valley
in the North to Dixon Road in the South. This
embraces the 1,500 acres of land of the oil refinery
and the steel works. Further heavy industries
destined for this zone may have large land require-
ments.
Future port extensions are proposed in the area
South of the wreck at Kwinana. An area of con-
siderable depth will be needed for port facilities
concerned with the storage and transport of goods.
The hinterland is flat and largely in State Govern-
ment ownership.
It is clear that the character of Rockingham is
likely to undergo great change. It would seem
inevitable that industrial and port development will
continue to grow. It is fortunate for the Region
that there will be a strong economic force at work
at a considerable distance from the main urban area,
and in a quarter which will offer very pleasant living
conditions.
Mention should be made of an area of land im-
mediately South-East of the junction of Naval Base
Road and Rockingham Road. It has been sub-
divided for many years into blocks of half an acre
in size, but no roads have been constructed and little
development took place until the past year. It is
cut by two proposed railway lines and a major road,
and there is no alternative but to include the western
portion within the industrial zone. It is clear that
it is not the place for further residential development.
The cement works at Russell Road are shown in a
small industrial zone which is not intended for other
industries.
Immediately to the North of Jandakot a special
industrial zone is proposed. This has been provided
as the land in the Robbs Jetty area may be too
limited in extent. The Jandakot site is at present
isolated, yet with fairly easy access for labour. Until
such time as sewerage and drainage is available,
however, special industries with extensive liquid
wastes for disposal should be located at Robbs
Jetty.
The only two shopping centres of any size are at
Medina and Rockingham. The major, or district,
centres will grow in the main town centre of Kwinana.
The existing centre at Rockingham will eventually
become a district centre. A further district centre
is proposed at Warnbro Sound.
Four high schools will be required, one at Kwinana,
one at Rockingham and two further South. In
addition, there should be technical schools in Kwinana
and Rockingham, with ultimately a technical college
to serve the whole area. A new regional hospital
will be at the southern end of the new town to serve
Kwinana, Rockingham and the surrounding districts.
In addition to the open space belt between Kwinana
and the industrial area, the Plan proposes a wide
belt of Regional Open Space to include Lakes Cool-
oongup and Walyungup. This should be a nature
reserve as well as a regional or national park.
Wherever possible the ocean frontage should be
retained in public ownership and adequate access
provided. Particular mention should be made of
the Point Peron Reserve, at present in Common-
wealth Government ownership. The rocky head-
land, and the level areas to the South-East, are
admirably placed for public open space and this
must be their permanent use. Beecher Point, at the
southern end of Warnbro Sound, should remain in
State Government ownership and, in the longer term
be developed as a recreational area.
(t) Armadale, Kelmscott, Roleystone, Byford,
Mundijong and Serpentine (District 39)
The south-eastern part of the Region, District 39,
has the Water Supply Catchment boundary for its
eastern edge. Development has grown in centres
related to the main roads and railways, of which
Armadale, the largest, is located at the junction of
the highways to Albany and Bunbury, and where the
Fremantle branch leaves the main Bunbury-Perth
railway line. Armadale promises to be a regional


centre of some importance. North-East of Armadale,
Roleystone and the surrounding area is becoming
popular as a Hills resort, with commercial orchards
in the valleys. Apart from the State Brickworks,
the main economic support for Armadale is agri-
cultural and pastoral.
Armadale, because of its strategic position, is a
town which could be expanded with advantage to
the Region. It is recommended that manufacturing
industry should be encouraged to settle at Armadale.
The Plan allows for considerable expansion of the
residential area, partly on the western flat lands and
partly in the interesting but more difficult hill country.
Appreciable residential expansion is also envisaged
at Kelmscott and Roleystone, with orchards in the
better agricultural land of the valleys.
Byford was extravagantly subdivided many years
ago, but development has been slow. Nevertheless
further room for development is proposed, and also
at Mundijong and Serpentine. The two last-named
townships are small rural centres within an agricultural
and pastoral countryside. Rapid expansion is not
envisaged although Kwinana may have some effect
upon their rate of growth.
At present there are some 7,400 persons living in
District 39. The Plan allows for a total population
of some 39,000.
No changes are proposed in the alignment of the
main highways to Albany and Bunbury. It is
assumed that they will gradually be improved, and
there will be an intersection of adequate design and
scale where the two highways meet at the Narrogin
Inn.
The proposed Kwinana-Mundijong Highway joins
the South-Western Highway, South of Mundijong,
and continues eastwards as an Important Regional
Road. Taking a route through Jarrahdale and the
Hills to the Albany Highway, it provides a direct
link between Albany and Kwinana.
The proposed diversion of Forrest Road carries
it along the railway to Westfield, and then North of
the new industrial area to the Albany Highway.
This avoids two railway crossings and provides a
by-pass to Armadale town centre.
Nicholson Road is continued South over the
railway to join the Rockingham-Armadale Road,
leading to Kwinana in one direction and Byford in
the other. This " take-off ” from Byford could
provide an alternative route to Perth from the South-
Western Highway without traversing the Albany
Highway. The route would be Nicholson Road and
Forrest Road, then via the Perth-Kwinana Highway
and over the Narrows Bridge.
The scenic drive along the Darling Escarpment,
coming South from Bickley Reservoir, leads into
Urch Road, Roleystone, and, finally, Carradine
Road, Armadale. The precise line of the scenic
drive should be the subject of further survey and study.
The main secondary industries in the district
are the State Brickworks at Byford and Armadale.
A small zone acknowledges the brickworks at Byford,
although it is not expected that other industries will
wish to go there. Provision is made for some
expansion at the new brickworks in Armadale. It
is proposed that the main Armadale industrial area
should be in the North-West, adjoining the Fre-
mantle-Armadale railway and the suggested re-align-
ment of Forrest Road.
Armadale will serve as centre for the whole of
District 39. The present shopping and business area
is now becoming cramped and confined and thought
should be given to its future development. Appendix
IV sets forward a schematic solution which could
form a basis for future plans.
A new high school is located to the South of
Armadale. A site for a small community hospital
has been earmarked between Kelmscott and Arma-
dale, but its future development in the regional
hospital pattern is still doubtful. The mental hospital,
near Mundijong, is in a fairly extensive agricultural
holding.
Large areas are proposed for public open space in
the hills around Armadale and Roleystone. Some
of the land is already in public ownership, and the
whole forms part of the open space chain running
along the Darling Escarpment. The areas suggested
are mainly hilltop lands which would not be required
for agriculture. It is proposed that the Bedfordale
and the Serpentine Falls reserves should be extended :
the latter despite the fact that the new Serpentine
Dam will severely restrict the flow over the falls.
When the main dam has been completed the lake
and surrounding area will be visited by many tourists.
Local and District Open Space provision is neces-
sary in the detail planning of the residential areas.
The Regional Plan envisages the use of the flat lands
immediately North of Armadale, and around Neeri-
gen Brook, as a recreational area.




CHAPTER 11
Implementation
For the first time since the Report of the Metro-
politan Town Planning Commission in December,
1930, there is offered in this Report and the
accompanying Maps and Diagrams an overall Plan
for the future development of the Metropolitan
Region. It has been apparent for many years that
the metropolitan local authorities, acting under the
Town Planning and Development Act, 1928—1954,
would have little hope of achieving worthwhile town
planning schemes for their areas without a clear
indication of the trends of regional development, a
picture of the overall communications system, a
rationalisation of major industrial areas, an overall
assessment of open space and other needs, and an
indication of a programme of future works on which
development depends.
During the preparation of this Report, the need
for guidance at a regional level has been made abund-
antly clear by all local authorities, business men,
industrialists and private persons, who have been
consulted on the matter. Indeed it can be said that
there is general agreement on the objectives and
principles of planning and the need for a co-ordinated
Plan for the Metropolitan Region, even though there
may not be complete agreement on some details.
However, it is one thing to prepare a Plan and
quite another to carry it out. It involves an immense
amount of co-operation and understanding between
Government and local government authorities on the
one hand and the public on the other. It involves
a genuine appreciation of, and agreement with, the
major objectives, and will necessarily mean the sub-
ordinating or alteration of some detailed arrangements
and schemes if these objectives are to be achieved.
Before long some major decisions will have to be
made. It is easy to defer these decisions, but the
opportunities existing at present will not occur again,
and decisions in the future will be much more difficult
to make. In order to make some of these decisions
effective it is important to obtain changes and im-
provements in the town planning legislation as early
as possible.
Finally, it is important that any Plan for the Metro-
politan Region should have very full public support
and understanding, even though there may be minority
disagreement about some of the details.
The purpose of this Chapter is to indicate broadly
the method of implementation recommended.
PART I: ADMINISTRATION
A. REGIONAL AUTHORITIES AND
FUNCTIONS
There are certain functional activities which must
be carried out at a regional level if they are to be
efficient and effective. They could not be undertaken
by local authorities even though the latter were
reduced in number and increased in size. These
activities include :
(i) The preparation and execution of a Master
Plan to act as a main framework for the
future development of the Region. The
execution of the Plan in the form of de-
velopmental works and development
control, and its constant review and
perhaps revision periodically.
(ii) The design of a major road system within
the framework of the Master Plan and
the execution of a road programme.
(HO The redesign and integration of a railway
system to deal with increased passenger
and goods traffic.


(iv) The preparation and execution of plans for
main sewerage schemes in relation to the
development programme.
(v) The design and provision of major storm-
water drainage schemes.
(vi) The design and provision of major water
supply schemes.
(vii) The provision of adequate electricity and
gas services.
(viii) The planning of public housing estates, the
building of new houses, and the co-
ordination of redevelopment schemes.
(ix) Development of a policy for the unified
control of traffic, public transport, and
parking throughout the Region, and the
execution of that policy.
(x) The provision, design and maintenance of
major open spaces and recreational areas,
including the principal beaches.
(xi) The provision of well laid out and fully
serviced major industrial areas, in such a
way that adequate land in the correct
locations is available for new and ex-
panding industries.
(xii) The preparation of a co-ordinated scheme
for disposal of refuse within the Region.
It is interesting to note that a large proportion of
these functions is already wholly or partly carried
out by State Government Departments or Instru-
mentalities.
This Chapter is concerned principally with planning
administration, but as planning is essentially a co-
ordinating function it is necessary to consider at the
same time the general aspects of regional administra-
tion.
The general pattern elsewhere in Australia and
overseas tends towards a three-tier administration.
The State, or National Government, forms the top
tier and formulates the State or National Policy. At
the other extreme is the local government authority
dealing with the day to day requirements and matters
of a detailed nature, while in between is the regional
authority which may be a County Council or a Special
Authority, generally composed of representatives of
each of the local authorities comprised within any
particular region or district, with possibly representa-
tion from National or State Government.
In the State of Western Australia, and indeed in
some of the other States in the Commonwealth, it
seems that a system such as this might be rather
top-heavy. For many reasons the Western Aus-
tralian State Government has had to assume the main
role in the development of the country and the towns.
In effect it has had to act as both the Sovereign State
and the County or second-tier government. It must
be assumed that this will continue and that the State
Government will fill this dual role for some con-
siderable time to come.
In the list of regional functions given earlier the
State Government, either through a Government
Department, or an authority such as the State Housing
Commission or the State Electricity Commission,
deals wholly with :
Main Roads
Railways
Water Supply
Sewerage
Main Drainage
Electricity
Public Housing
and partly with
Traffic Problems
Parks and Open Spaces.
There does not appear to be a clear case for
establishing a County or Special Authority to deal
with all or any of the regional functions, at present
wholly dealt with by the State Government. There
might be a case for a special authority or authorities
for some of the other regional functions which are
at present only partly a State concern, as mentioned
later in this Chapter.
Because of its financial interest in all of these
regional functions, either the State Government must
continue to act as regional, or second-tier government,
or it must retain a large representation on any regional
authority appointed and there is some doubt as to
whether this would be more effective than the State
Government acting alone.
Assuming the main regional developmental func-
tions are likely to continue with the State Govern-
ment, it is clear that the Government should act as
planning authority for the Metropolitan Region.


B. LOCAL AUTHORITIES AND
FUNCTIONS
The implementation of any town or regional
planning scheme is finally effected in terms of the use
of each particular lot of land and the size and type
of buildings erected on the land. Any control of
the use of land or the size and type of building must
generally be exercised by the authority immediately
on the spot, i.e., the local authority, which is con-
cerned with the details of development rather than
the overall principles. This detailed control, how-
ever, must be conditioned by decisions of a broader
or regional character which the local authorities
themselves are unable to make.
There are at present 29 local authorities within the
ambit of the Metropolitan Region, of which only
two are cities in the real sense of the word, namely,
Perth and Fremantle. The remainder have areas of
varying size, some being almost completely built-up
and others consisting of largely undeveloped land
with a few small centres.
For the broad scale physical planning necessary to
establish basic development principles for a rapidly
expanding metropolis, the present local authority
boundaries have little or no significance.
After the acceptance of an overall Regional Plan,
however, the local authority immediately assumes
greater importance as being responsible for filling in
the details of the broad scheme and for administering
and implementing them. It is the intention that this
should be done by means of a local planning scheme,
prepared by the local authority, and conceived within
the broad framework of the Plan.
At this stage the local authority boundaries will
have greater significance and it is clear that the more
efficient a local authority can become, in terms of
size, revenue, expenditure and staff, the greater con-
tribution it can make to local planning of a positive
nature. A move in this direction has recently been
made which will result in the reduction of the number
of local authorities within the Region from 29 to 23.
Whatever the pattern of local government ad-
ministration may eventually be, and assuming as well
that there will be greater local responsibilities in the
detailed planning field, the local authorities will not
be able to deal with the broader aspects of co-ordina-
tion and implementation of the Regional Plan under
the present town planning legislation. This does not
envisage a regional approach and will therefore re-
quire amendment.
While it would have been desirable to amend the
legislation and establish the proper implementing
authorities at or before the planning stage, this has
not been possible. It, therefore, remains necessary
to ensure that enabling legislation is brought down
before an attempt can be made to promulgate im-
portant parts of the Plan.
C. REGIONAL PLANNING AUTHORITY
The duties devolving upon a regional planning
authority entail, broadly :
(a) Preparation of a Regional Plan.
(b) Implementation and constant review of
the Plan.
The Government has already undertaken the first
of these duties resulting in this Report, although
further action will be necessary before the Plan can
have statutory effect.
The next and by far the most difficult duty is the
implementation. In this stage certain matters are of
immediate urgency.
(i) If the public are to be given a full opportunity
of studying and commenting on the Plan and the
necessary legislation is to be passed some time must
elapse before the Plan can come into effect. This
period could well mean the end of some of the
proposals in the Plan and it is urgent that some form
of interim development control should be established
as soon as possible. This control would be ad-
ministered by the planning authority.
(ii) The question of preparing co-ordinated pro-
grammes for future development, which is discussed
in Part 111, is of great importance. It will involve all
the departments of Government concerned with
development who, by their future actions, will be
laying down the main structure of the Region in its
finally approved form. While an attempt has been
made in this Report to indicate those proposals
which are of greater urgency than others, the final
programme must be a matter of detailed consideration
by the departments themselves. In order that the
Government may be fully advised on this a properly
constituted inter-departmental committee would be
necessary.


(iii) Provision must be made for proper considera-
tion of representations concerning the Plan, after it
is made available to the public, and for considering
major points of principle arising during the interim
development period. At this stage it is reasonable
that the local authorities should be represented and
have an opportunity of expressing their views. A
committee with Government and local government
representation is suggested to tender advice as re-
quested.
In this way the Government can obtain not only
the views of the Plan-makers, who must clearly be
given the first opportunity of considering representa-
tions, but also those of an informed Government and
local government committee. The basis of this
committee could well be the existing Town Planning
Board.
Finally, after a Plan is approved and in operation,
there is no opportunity for complacency. An en-
deavour has been tnade to make the Plan as flexible
as possible but a constant watch must be kept on
the growth and trends of development. It is possible,
and likely, that changes may have to be made in the
approved Plan to conform with changing conditions,
even though the main principles are not affected.
It would be wise, therefore, to make provisions for
the statutory and compulsory review of the Plan at
periodical intervals of, say, five years, and interim
reviews may be necessary at shorter intervals. In
any review the committee mentioned in (iii) above
could be asked to tender advice.
D. OTHER REGIONAL FUNCTIONS
Of the total list of regional functions mentioned
earlier some are at present only partly the concern of
the State, and some are not at present the particular
function of any one authority. However, they all
form an important part of the overall development
picture in the Region and, as such, their future ad-
ministration must be considered.
( i ) Traffic and Parking
All aspects of road traffic control and parking
should obviously be under the general direction of
one authority, although some administration may be
delegated to others. This authority should direct
the regional policy on such matters as unification of
road and intersection design, installation of traffic
lights, provision of pedestrian crossings, location of
waiting bays and stopping places for public service
vehicles and street lighting. If the control of traffic
is to be effective it must also determine the policy
on parking prohibition in streets, and the provision
of off-street parking.
Mention has already been made of this problem in
Chapter 7, and the suggestion made that all these
functions should come under the control of one
Minister. Their administration could be a depart-
mental function or that of a traffic authority specially
constituted to develop and co-ordinate a regional
policy and, where necessary, delegate the administra-
tion.
(») Parks, Open Spaces and Beaches
Extensive proposals are put forward in Chapter 6
for the provision of future parks of a regional charac-
ter, areas of special scenic value, large recreation
areas and ocean and river beach reserves, many of
which already exist.
As already mentioned in that Chapter, parts of the
suggested regional open space system will be of a
local or district nature, and the responsibility of
the local authority. The remainder would have to
be administered regionally.
The first step in providing for open space require-
ments of the future is either to secure the land, or to
ensure that the land is not so intensively developed
that it cannot be used when the time comes.
Suggestions are made in Part II of this Chapter for
the method of securing the necessary land as and
when occasion or need arises. However, when the
land is secured there is still the difficult problem of
administration and maintenance.
The State Gardens Board is responsible for the
development, upkeep and maintenance of certain
Crown Lands which range in character from the
Crawley Bay Reserve to the National Parks. Their
name implies that the administration of a National
Park, for example, was not originally intended to
be their function.
The local authorities under their respective Acts
have power to acquire land and provide parks and
open spaces, and many have done this very success-
fully, according to their capacity and finance.


The burden of developing and maintaining the
bulk of the river beaches and all the ocean beaches
falls on the local authority in whose area the beach
is situated, although they are quite clearly recreation
for areas the Region and, indeed, the State.
In view of the immense importance of these beaches,
and of major regional open spaces, it seems evident
that the financial and administrative responsibilities
should be shared regionally. For this purpose it
may be desirable either to enlarge the powers and
functions of the State Gardens Board to include all
regional open spaces and metropolitan beaches, or
else to confine the State Gardens Board to open
spaces which are in fact State Gardens, and con-
stitute a new authority to deal with the larger parks,
reserves and beaches. In either case there must be
power to raise finance on a regional basis.
E. PROVISION OF MAJOR
INDUSTRIAL AREAS
As has already been suggested in Chapter 4, if an
industrial area is to become economical and efficient
it is not enough simply to zone an area of land for
industrial purposes. Provision must be made for
adequate roads, services, drainage, waste disposal
and a number of other things which, with a functional
grouping of industries, may be provided more
efficiently, and the capital outlay recouped as the
land develops.
This can be done by private enterprise, Govern-
ment or local government equally effectively, but
experience elsewhere in the world has shown that, as
secondary industry increases, industrial areas must
be put on a more business-like footing by overall
action in one of the ways suggested. If it becomes
a Government function to establish some of the
major industrial areas, it could come within the
aegis of the Department of Industrial Development.
F. CO-ORDINATION OF REFUSE
DISPOSAL
It has already been suggested in Chapter 7 that
refuse disposal should be co-ordinated regionally
under the direction of the Public Health Department.


PART II: LEGISLATION
A. PLANNING LEGISLATION IN
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
The Town Planning and Development Act, 1928-
1954, governs town planning in this State. Con-
sidering that it was first brought forward in 1928,
it is a very comprehensive measure, providing wide
powers for local authorities to make planning schemes
and implement them, and establishing a central
authority, in the form of the Town Planning Board,
to advise the Minister on local authority town
planning schemes and other planning matters, and to
control subdivision of land throughout the State.
The centralised control of subdivision, although
inevitably attracting criticism, has undoubtedly been
a success. Large areas in the Region were sub-
divided into residential blocks before the Act came
into force and, apparently, long before there was any
real demand for them. Many of these areas still
remain undeveloped after nearly thirty years. Since
the Act, however, subdivision has proceeded regularly
in a gradual outward growth from the main centre
and to a large extent related to the provision of roads
and other supply services. In this respect the
Region compares very favourably with some other
cities in the Commonwealth.
The power to make planning schemes has not been
as widely used as might have been expected, and in
many of those cases where it has been used tended
to be negative rather than positive in character. This
has been caused partly by the absence of an overall
regional scheme, which would have given a local
authority guidance in respect of its main lines of
development, and partly by the rather uncertain
nature of the compensation provisions of the Act
which has acted as a deterrent to local authorities.
Two other Statutes in the form of the Municipal
Corporations Act, 1906—1947, and the Road Districts
Act, 1919-1946, contain powers for local authorities
to make by-laws to zone land for various types of
land use, and to lay down building lines in streets.
The City of Perth and City of Fremantle Acts also
give additional powers in this connection.
The zoning powers contained in the Municipal
Corporations Act and the Road Districts Act are,
relatively, much simpler and quicker to bring into
operation than those under the Town Planning and
Development Act, and consequently have been more
widely used. They suffer from the disadvantage
that the procedure does not give such full opportunity
for public consideration and objection, as under a
town planning scheme, and the less obvious but
more real disadvantage that the planning authority
has no power to take action itself to implement the
proposals when other means fail.
It is desirable that all town planning powers should
be incorporated in one Statute and also that the
procedure for making town planning schemes under
the Town Planning and Development Act should
be reviewed and simplified. It is fundamentally
important that the public should be made fully aware
of all schemes 'and have a reasonable opportunity
for criticism and objection.
B. ESSENTIAL PLANNING POWERS
Any planning legislation should satisfy the follow-
ing basic requirements :
(i) Power to prepare the necessary surveys and
a planning scheme for a given area both on
a regiona and local basis, together with
the necessary machinery for approving the
scheme and giving it statutory significance.
(ii) Power to control development 1 during what
is known as the " interim period,” i.e.,
the period during which the plan is being
made, up to the time of approval. If
this power is not obtained there is every
likelihood, because of the time factor, of
some of the major proposals being severely
prejudiced by the large-scale development
of land.
(iii) Power for the planning authority to ensure
that the development or improvement of
land, including the change of use of land
and buildings, is in accordance with the
approved scheme. This involves :
1 " Development ” in this section means the erection of any building or
structure and the carrying out of building, engineering, mining or
other operations in or over or under land, or the making of any material
change in the use of the land or buildings.


(a) The control of day to day develop-
ment by the planning authority
either by the giving of an actual
approval, or by permission in-
corporated in the scheme, or both.
(b) Power to enforce the control of de-
velopment by the imposition of
an adequate penalty in the event
of development contravening the
schemes, and the power to remove
unauthorised development.
(c) Power to ensure that development
envisaged in the plan is carried out
at the right time and in the right
manner. This means that the
planning authority must be able to
acquire land for the purposes of
the scheme, if necessary, com-
pulsorily.
(d) Power for the planning authority to
carry out development itself,
where it is satisfied that the de-
velopment is required and no
developer is able or willing to
carry it out.
(iv) Power to promote regulations under the
enabling powers of the Act to cover
various details of the scheme. Such
details might be the waiving of local
by-laws where they conflict with the
provisions of the scheme, the laying down
of building lines in streets for widening
and other purposes, the promoting or
variation of different density requirements.
(v) Power to procure the necessary finance to
purchase land required under the scheme,
and to meet any claims for compensation
which may be established.
C. COMPENSATION AND
BETTERMENT
(i) General Considerations
It is now well known that the potential payment of
compensation has been one of the major obstacles
to constructive planning.
Planning authorities have undoubtedly been in-
timidated in the past by the prospect of having to
pay large sums of money to implement proposals
which appear relatively simple in the scheme, and
the difficulty is magnified when the proposals con-
cern an already highly developed area such as a large
city. As a result plans have tended to be negative
in character.
It is not the purpose of this Chapter to discuss at
length the very important question of compensation
and betterment. It was thoroughly examined by an
expert committee in England in 1942 1 and, as a result
of its recommendations, the Town and Country
Planning Act, 1947, produced a most revolutionary
answer to the problem, involving the acquisition by
the State of development values in land.
This involved a very large capital outlay at the
beginning, but removed the difficulty of potentially
large compensation payments in the future, and freed
the planning authorities from their biggest deterrent
to constructive planning. In effect the scheme proved
inacceptable, the general acquisition of development
rights did not take place, and the Act has now been
modified to provide very generally for proven com-
pensation claims on the basis of the original claim
on the capital sum.
Compensation falls broadly into two categories :
(a) Payment for complete surrender of land
(including buildings if any) to a planning
authority.
(b) Payment where the land is not surrendered
but remains the property of the owner but
where limitation is imposed on the rights
of use of the land. This is often known
as compensation for injurious affection.
Compensation under category (a) is relatively
straightforward and while the basis on which com-
pensation is finally paid may provoke argument,
this is a matter for decision by the legislature.
Compensation under category (b) is much more
complex and involves consideration of how far a
public authority is entitled to restrict the rights of
the individual in the public interest, without com-
pensation.
1 Ministry of Works and Planning, " Expert Committee on Compensation
and Betterment, Final Report,” (The Uthwatt Report), London, 1942.


The Uthwatt Committee examined this point and
stated :
" For the last hundred years owners of property
have been compelled to an increasing extent,
without compensation, to comply with certain
requirements regarding their property such, for
example, as maintaining or improving its sanitary
equipment, observing certain standards of con-
struction, providing adequate air space around
buildings and streets of sufficient width. The
underlying reason for such provision is, obviously,
that compliance with certain requirements is
essential to the interests of the community and
that accordingly the private owner should be
compelled to comply with them even at cost to
himself. All the restrictions, whether carrying
a right to compensation or not, are imposed in
the public interest, and the essence of the com-
pensation problem as regards the imposition of
restrictions- appears to be this —at what point
does the public interest become such that a
private individual ought to be called on to
comply, at his own cost, with a restriction or
requirements designed to secure that public
interest ? The history of the imposition of
obligations without compensation has been to
push that point progressively further on and to
add to the list of requirements considered to be
essential to the well-being of the community.
It is unnecessary to trace this progress in detail ;
it may, however, be remarked that the view of
the Legislature on these essential requirements
for the well-being of the community has passed
beyond the field of safety to that of convenience
and amenity . . . . ”
Following this the Committee proposed five points :
" (1) Ownership of land does not carry with
it an unqualified right of user.
(2) Therefore restrictions based on the duties
of neighbourliness may be imposed without in-
volving the conception that the landowner is
being deprived of any property or interest.
(3) Therefore such restrictions can be imposed
without liability to pay compensation.
(4) But th,e point may be reached when the
restrictions imposed extend beyond the obliga-
tions of neighbourliness.
(5) At this stage the restrictions become
equivalent to an expropriation of a property
right or interest and therefore (it will be claimed)
should carry a right of compensation as such.”
Betterment is the enhancing of the value of land or
property occasioned by local improvements for which
the owner of the land or property was not responsible.
In theory, if the enhanced value due to improvements
from a planning scheme is paid to a planning author-
ity, this should balance the compensation paid by
the authority for the decrease in value of other lands
due to the limitations of use imposed by a planning
scheme.
In practice, betterment, although provided for in
most planning legislation is difficult to assess and
collect, and no really effective scheme has been
devised for doing so.
The Uthwatt Committee, while unhesitatingly
accepting the principle of betterment as being a fair
one, were convinced that it was impracticable to
segregate betterment particularly ascribable to plan-
ning from that which was not, and that an alternative
solution must be found. The Committee pointed to
the three ways by which betterment could be re-
covered.
(a) By a direct charge on the owner of the
property bettered. The amount of the
charge may not be the whole of the increase
in value but may be 75 per cent, of it (or
50 per cent., as in the Town Planning and
Development Act in Western Australia)
in order to leave some incentive to the de-
veloper.
(b) By set-off of betterment against compensation
payable to an owner in respect of other of
his lands acquired or injuriously affected.
(c) By recoupment, e.g., by the purchase of land
by the authority and its resale at the en-
hanced value.
In practice methods (b) and (c) can be adopted
with varying success but there seem very few cases
of method (a) having been successful. The difficulty
here appears to be in defining the extent to which
property has in fact been enhanced in value, and to
1 Ministry of Works and Planning, Expert Committee on Compensation
and Betterment, Final Report, (The Uthwatt Report), London, 1942.


what factor the enhancement can be attributed. In
any case, there are a number of other intangible
factors such as expenditure by owners of adjoining
lands, general growth of the city in terms of popula-
tion, roads and services, improved transport facilities,
which cannot be assessed under any set of rules, but
which nevertheless have their effect on values.
The Town and Country Planning Act, 1947, in
the United Kingdom provided a much more tangible
arrangement whereby an owner, who developed or
improved his property, paid to the State a develop-
ment charge, representing the increase in value due
to the development. This was claimed by many to
be a deterrent to property development and im-
provement and, as has already been mentioned, the
Act has been amended in this respect.
The Uthwatt Committee finally reached the con-
clusion that :
"no ad hoc search for * betterment ’ in its
present strict sense can ever succeed, and that
the only way of solving the problem is to cut
the Gordian knot by taking for the community
some fixed proportion of the whole of any in-
crease in site values without any attempt at
precise analysis of the causes to which it may
be due.”
( ii ) Compensation and Betterment in Western
Australia
The present Town Planning and Development
Act provides very generally for the payment of com-
pensation to the owners of land or property which
is injuriously affected by the making of a town plan-
ning scheme. This is very wide in scope and could
presumably cover any of the provisions of a town
planning scheme from zoning to street widening.
However, the Act also goes on to provide, again
in a very general sense, that compensation shall not
be payable in respect of a number of detailed pro-
visions of a scheme which relate to defining the space
about a building (i.e., the site coverage allowed),
limiting the number of buildings (i.e., density pro-
vision), prescribing the height, location, purpose,
dimensions, or general character of a building, or the
sanitary requirements of a building. The Act also
provides for the taking of a reasonable quantity of
land for open space or park purposes.
Control of subdivision of land has been exercised
for many years now without any compensation being
payable in respect of refusal of permission, or im-
position of conditions on approval.
Under other legislation in the State, by-laws are
made controlling the way in which buildings are to
be erected and the materials to be used. Other
by-laws are made prohibiting the parking of vehicles
in certain places. Restrictions and regulations relat-
ing to public health are quite numerous. It is an
accepted fact that these restrictions are necessary in
a civilised community and the making of them does
not attract compensation.
The zoning of land into industrial, residential and
other areas should not of itself attract compensation
provided that : (1) the zoning is properly made,
(2) the existing rights of the individual, as at the
time the zoning plan comes into effect, are retained,
and (3) the zone permits the land to be beneficially
used. This principle has been recognized in Vic-
torian legislation for some time and should be intro-
duced in Western Australia. It has long been
accepted in the United States of America and the
United Kingdom.
Where a zone prevents the beneficial use of land,
such as in an open space zone, it is clear that the land
is injuriously affected to a major degree and to such
an extent that it should be publicly acquired. In the
legislation it is suggested that such zones should be
called " reservations.”
If this principle is accepted it would seem that
claims for compensation for injurious affection should
be limited to the genuine cases where real hardship
has occurred. In fact it has not been possible to
trace any cases of compensation having been claimed
or paid under the present Act.
Betterment under the existing legislation can be
claimed by a planning authority where it can be
shown that an owner’s property has been increased
in value by the carrying out of public work. It is
limited to fifty per cent, of the increase and must
be made within twelve months of the completion
of the work. For the reasons stated earlier, this is
not considered to be a practicable provision and could
be well omitted. In its place an additional land tax
is proposed which would automatically reflect any
increases in value and take some care of the intangible
cases of betterment.


D. SUGGESTED NEW LEGISLATION
The present Town Planning and Development
Act, 1928—54, relates to the whole State of which
the Metropolitan Region is only a small part. The
Act, with minor amendments, would contain the
necessary basic powers to enable a local authority
to prepare a town planning scheme for its area.
It is, therefore, suggested that a new Act be brought
forward applying only to the Metropolitan Region,
using the Town Planning and Development Act as
a basis but amplifying and amending some of its
provisions. The existing Act would of course con-
tinue to apply in the remainder of the State, although
eventually its application outside the Region will call
for some amendments.
The provisions of the new Act should include :
(i) Powers for preparing and implementing a
Regional Plan.
(ii) Powers to control interim development,
i.e., development taking place before the
Plan is finally approved.
(iii) Provisions covering the administrative as-
pects of the Plan.
(iv) Financial provisions.
The Regional Planning Authority would be the
State Government, who would be responsible for
implementing the regional aspects of the Plan. It
would be responsible for control of development
affecting any of the regional proposals, both during
the " interim ” stage and after approval of the Plan,
and would also prepare and carry out a programme
of developmental works, as required.
The local planning authority would, in each case,
be the local authority who would be required, rather
than just empowered as at present, to prepare a
detailed local planning scheme for their district
within a specified period of time after approval of
the Regional Plan. Such local scheme would have
to conform to the regional proposals in the approved
Plan.
The centralized control of land subdivision should
still be preserved, although many of the difficulties
experienced in the past by the Town Planning Board
would be overcome if an approved Plan is available,
together with a programme of development.
Provision must be made for flexibility. In the
preparation of the Regional Plan it has not been
possible to set down some of the proposals in final
detail, and in any Plan minor amendments may have
to be made as development progresses. It should
be arranged that this can be done without altering
the principles or main structure of the Plan. For
example, some of the major regional highways and
railways have not yet been surveyed in detail and
may have to be modified. The routes shown are
as near to the final line as they can be and clearly
indicate the principles behind them.
It is not intended, nor can it be, that the Plan is
hard and fast in all details ; it must be kept under
constant review, particularly as far as the programme
of works is concerned.
The provisions of legislation suggested fall broadly
under the following heads :
(a) Plan-making and Implementing
Machinery
The present Act does not provide the necessary
machinery for making and implementing a Regional
Plan, but the procedure, generally, should be the
same as for a local scheme.
Obviously the Plan must first be agreed by the
Government as the regional planning authority. It
may be decided that certain aspects of it require
adjustment or alteration.
The agreed Plan should be made public at an early
stage together with the implementing Ordinance or
Regulations explaining the proposals and the ad-
ministration of them.
Sufficient time should be allowed for all persons to
study it and register any objections. The objections
must then be considered and it may be that as a
result of them certain changes or adjustments will
be necessary.
Any objections and recommendations made must
be properly considered against the background of
the original proposals and should be the subject of a
special report by the Town Planning Department
and by a special committee with local authority
representation, constituted in a manner proposed in
this section.
After considering these reports and making any
necessary adjustments, the final Plan should be
approved by Government and given Statutory sig-
nificance.


(b) Interim Development
There should have been some provision for overall
control of building development and land use before
the Regional Plan was commenced. Development
has proceeded rapidly during the period of prepara-
tion, and in some cases has forced the abandonment
of a proposal such as a major road or a major open
space and the adoption of a less satisfactory alterna-
tive.
Even after the publication of the Plan some con-
siderable time may elapse before it becomes statutory,
and within that time it must be possible to exercise
control over certain types and classes of development
which could prejudice proposals in the Plan.
Any control exercised could be on a very broad
basis and would be administered partly by the regional
planning authority and partly by the local authority.
Provided that the " interim development ” period
is kept reasonably short its administration should
not present any problems. If it is allowed to extend
over a long period delays to development will be
caused and questions of compensation will arise.
It is necessary to promulgate interim development
control before the Statutory Plan is published.
(c) The Ordinance or Regulations
This would comprise the written part of the
Statutory Plan and is described in greater detail in
Appendix II ; all the enabling powers to frame the
Ordinance must be obtained in the new Act.
The proposals in the Plan fall under two main
heads as far as their administration is concerned :
(i) Zoning or classification of land in accord-
ance with the types of building or land use
proposed, e.g., industrial, residential, com-
mercial, etc.
(ii) Definite development proposals such as
major roads, railways and harbour instal-
lations and open space, which are not in
fact zones and are accordingly classed as
reservations. These are the more positive
side of the Plan and will ultimately involve
the actual acquisition of the land for the
purpose for which it is reserved.
Generally (i) would be the responsibility of the
local planning authority, except in certain cases, and
(ii) that of the regional planning authority.
The Ordinance would amplify and describe the
Plan, how it is to be administered, and by whom.
Because of the fact that some of the major pro-
posals and zones, as already described, may have to
be amended in detail as time goes on, provision must
be made for such amendments with adequate safe-
guards.
Once the Plan is approved these amendments
should only constitute minor adjustments, for ex-
ample, of zone boundaries or routes of major regional
highways and railways.
(d) Financial Provisions
These may be necessary in connection with the
Plan under the same two heads referred to in sub-
section (c), namely zoning of land and reservations
of land.
Zoning is a restriction on use of land and, as such,
it might be claimed entails compensation for injurious
affection, which was considered in section C (ii) of
this Part.
However, provided the zoning in a town planning
scheme is reasonable and is only approved after all
considerations have been taken into account, then it
falls within the category of a restriction which should
properly be applied for the public good and as such
should not entail compensation. A similar provision
should apply to zoning in subsequent local planning
schemes.
This assumes that all properly authorised develop-
ment existing at the time the Plan comes into operation
is allowed to continue and that any necessary altera-
tions or additions within the curtilage of the develop-
ment at that time may be carried out.
Where all forms of private development are pro-
hibited on a particular parcel of land it cannot
appropriately be covered by a zone. It should be a
reservation and falls into the second category which
would include major regional highways and railways
and regional open space. These proposals will
eventually require the acquisition of the land in-
volved, and while it would obviously be more ad-
vantageous for the regional planning authority to
make all these acquisitions now, this would be diffi-
cult to achieve without a considerable sum of money
being available.


It is important, however, to ensure that as and
when these reservations are required the necessary
land can be bought without any value accruing to it
by reason of additional substantial development.
Such development could be prevented on payment
of compensation for injurious affection, but this is
only putting off eventual acquisition at increased
value and, in many cases, 'the compensation for
injurious affection may well amount to the whole
of the existing value of the land.
Consequently, it is considered that where develop-
ment threatens a reservation for regional purposes,
and provided no minor adjustment in detail is pos-
sible, the land should be acquired.
In the case of some of the longer term regional
proposals there is nothing to prevent the present use
of the land being carried on for a number of years,
and it is anticipated that in some of the outer areas
this may well be the case.
It is very necessary that the regional planning
authority should have power to acquire or resume
land required fo'r the purposes of the Plan, in the
same way that a local authority has the power under
the Town Planning and Development Act at the
present time. Financial provision should, therefore,
be made for this.
There are various ways in which additional moneys
can be raised. They must, however, clearly be
related directly to the land in the planning area, and
as such might be either a rate or a tax on the land
based on an assessment of its value.
The application of an additional local authority
rate would not be advisable in connection with
regional proposals particularly as the local authorities
will themselves have their own additional commit-
ments in the future.
Because finance under the Plan relates only to
regional requirements, the payment of a tax in the
form of additional land tax and assessed on the same
basis is considered most suitable.
It has the following advantages :
(a) It is a tax which would affect the average
property-holder only very slightly.
(b) It does not apply to improved agricultural
property which would mainly occur in
the proposed rural zones of the Plan, but
principally to urban property owners who,
in fact, will obtain the main benefit from
development proposals under the Plan.
(c) It is very simple to collect as machinery
already exists.
As mentioned in Section C (ii) of this Part, the
betterment of land resulting from development pro-
posals in the Plan, and indeed from the general growth
of the City, and which is automatically reflected in
any increased values, results in the payment of a
higher rate or tax.
It is unlikely that the annual revenue raised by
this method will provide an adequate capital sum to
meet early requirements. Accordingly, it would be
necessary to have the power to borrow money, using
the tax revenue for repayment of capital and interest.
Additional tax proposals are always received with
disfavour, but it should be remembered that any
moneys obtained by this method, and used for the
purchase and reservation of land for future require-
ments, will in fact save the State, and indirectly the
public, very much greater expenditure at a later
stage.
(e) Administration of the Plan
(i) The day to day work of development control
which would be necessary during the interim stages
of consideration, and the control necessary after the
Plan is approved would be dealt with by the local
authorities in the same manner, and desirably at
the same time, as control of building development
under building by-laws.
Certain types and classes of development which
affect the regional aspects of the Plan would be dealt
with at Government level by the Town Planning
Department.
(ii) As far as the actual Plan and its principles
are concerned, however, apart from the details, it is
considered wise that the Government should set
up an Advisory Committee to report on the Plan
both at the outset and at periodical stages thereafter.
The first occasion for report should be after the
publication of the Plan and after objections or repre-
sentations have been invited and received. Other
occasions would be in the case of amendments
becoming necessary or in the case of periodical review.


There is already a Town Planning Board to deal
with subdivisions and local authority planning
schemes, and to advise the Minister on town planning
matters. However, because of the importance of
the Metropolitan Region and the far-reaching effects
of the Plan, it is considered advisable to enlarge the
Committee by including adequate governmental and
local authority representation, without making it
unmanageable. It is suggested, therefore, that the
Town Planning Board should continue its present
functions and at the same time form the nucleus of
the Advisory Committee.
While the Board would continue to meet in accord-
ance with present practice, the Committee would
only hold meetings at fairly long intervals, except
perhaps at the inception.
There would need to be power to co-opt members
on to the Committee and to deal with matters by
sub-committee.


PART III: FINANCIAL AND PHYSICAL PROGRAMMES
INTRODUCTION
It is possible to view future expenditure in the
light of past experience. Annual public develop-
mental expenditure in the Region is in the vicinity
of £20,000,000 and, with the growth of population
and activity, at today’s monetary values will probably
exceed £50,000,000 per annum by 1985.
Irrespective of the actual amounts allotted to
development the maximum benefit will be obtained
if works are related in a programme so that each
undertaking reinforces and makes more effective the
others. It is possible to state the problems that any
co-ordinating body will have to face in preparing a
short-term programme. But two phases should be
considered. The longer term may influence con-
siderations of the immediate future.
A. THE COSTS OF UNPLANNED AND
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
Authorities and developers, whether public or
private, very often have not been able to obtain a
maximum return from their investments because
their efforts were unrelated. The 1928 Town Plan-
ning Legislation went part way in an attempt to meet
this problem by instituting central approval and co-
ordination of subdivisions. However, the sale of
large numbers of blocks subdivided before the intro-
duction of this legislation has been a major problem
to servicing authorities, particularly in the post-war
years. Endeavouring to use finance and materials
to the best advantage, they have been hampered by
demands from isolated areas in many parts of the
Region. In consequence, when services have been
provided they have only been sufficient for existing
conditions and not those required for the complete
development of the area concerned. In a number
of cases duplication or enlargement of services at
greatly increased costs has resulted.
These additional costs to the many service author-
ities are not the only unnecessary expenditure borne
by the community because of the lack of compre-
hensive planning. The annual losses experienced by
every section of the community due to congestion
on the roads and in the business and port areas were
also considerations underlying the decision to have
a Regional Plan prepared. An examination of several
examples of annual losses suffered due to scattering
of dwellings, congestion in the central areas and the
port, and the inefficient layout of the road and com-
munications systems, will indicate the magnitude
of these very real yet unnecessary costs.
(0 Vacant , Fully Serviced Lots
In the development of areas held by a number of
individual owners it is apparent that the lots cannot
be built on in an orderly sequence ; some will be
left vacant for varying periods. In the Region as a
whole there must be sufficient land available for the
prospective buyer to be able to choose a lot to his
particular liking. Nevertheless, there should be
reasonable limits to the quantity available.
A recent survey shows that, in what might generally
be termed the fully built up areas of the Region,
there were some 23,000 vacant lots with power,
water and roads available. The present cost of
supplying services to these lots is approximately
£2,750,000. At the current rate of building it is
reasonable to assume that some ten years will elapse
before they are all used. Some will be vacant for
longer periods than others but five years would
represent the average vacant period. Considered as
a whole it may be said that services at a capital cost
of £2,750,000 have been provided five years too soon.
At the prevailing rate of interest (4i per cent.) this
sum deferred five years is £2,206,000. If a plan had
been in operation it is probable that a saving of some
£544,000 could have been effected.
There are in the less densely developed areas many
thousands more vacant lots, some fully serviced,
some partially serviced, so that the several millions
spent to provide services for these lots lies idle, when
it could be providing better services and facilities for
the existing population.
The present building rate in the Region is between
5,000-6,000 houses per year, and sufficient land has
been subdivided to provide for many years’ building.
Unfortunately much of the land subdivided many
years ago is in areas which are either unsuitable for
building because of high ground water levels, or so
remote from services as to make the cost of servicing
prohibitive.


( ii ) Industrial Losses
In the case of industrial activities it may be found
that even higher losses are experienced year after
year, but they are very difficult to estimate accurately.
Every industrialist who has to move either his raw
materials or finished products about the Region by
heavy road vehicles is well aware of the considerable
daily losses involved in delays due to congestion in
the port and city areas, and competition with resi-
dential and pleasure traffic on the roads. Wage and
fuel rates are paid irrespective of whether the driver
and vehicle are working to capacity. City whole-
salers, retailers and business men are aware of the
daily delivery problems of trade vehicles trying to
operate in streets lined with parked cars. Office
workers are affected by the transport and parking
problems. Industrial workers also suffer through
delays and often unnecessarily long journeys to work,
with consequent fatigue. These losses and in-
efficiencies must be considerable in a year and add
to production and distribution costs.
(iii) Road Accident Costs
Road accidents cause death or injury to hundreds
of persons each year. Economic losses due to this
alone may already have reached £2,000,000 per
annum and are rapidly increasing. Treatment of
traffic accident cases at the Royal Perth Hospital
alone cost £43,000 in 1951. The figure for 1955
would probably be double. Many accidents would
have been prevented by the provision of safer high-
ways and better traffic arrangements.
(iv) Decreased Value of Real Estate
While it is hard to express losses through death,
injuries and wasted time in monetary terms, the
overall result of unplanned development is clearly
mirrored in land values, and the values of some
residential properties have been seriously reduced
because of other uses in the vicinity adversely affect-
ing them.
(v) Planning Expenses
The Plan, or more precisely the planning function,
should be established to determine the relationship
between development of all kinds and the best social
and economic uses of land. Its cost is only in the
field of administration, and it could easily be shown
that this small cost would be far outweighed by
savings. Development takes place with or without
a Plan. The choice is whether it should occur in
the right place at the right time, or haphazard.
Population changes are forecast in the Plan, which
endeavours to view both the present and the fore-
seeable future in the correct perspective. It does not
propose a system of economic, political or social
behaviour, but rather a system of land use that will
be appropriate to the size and character of the ex-
pected population.
The so-called " costs of planning ” are, in effect,
the costs of such developmental activities as house
and school building, and the construction of roads
and supply services, which would be incurred any
way in the normal course of events. Rather than
adding to the cost of these developments, a Plan and
programme should assist both individuals and author-
ities in spending wisely. By ensuring that a source
of possible employment is nearby when a housing
estate is built, that when a service is being laid it is
the right size for final development, and that com-
munications are sufficient for the future, planning
should virtually eliminate annual losses due to in-
appropriate development, maintain real estate values,
and reduce the need for costly outlay for redevelop-
ment.
(vi) Savings Effected by Planning
Only when a Plan makes recommendations in-
volving greater public expenditure than would be
the case without a Plan, can planning be said to incur
real cost. Even in this context, the actual expenditure
involved must be considered in relation to savings.
An overall, long term view of future requirements
for the practice of a full community life may appear
at the present to suggest " extras ” such as a more
ample provision of open space, yet the early reserva-
tion of considerable areas of open space may well
effect substantial economies when growth of popula-
tion and increased leisure make clear the demand.
The existence of a satisfactory regional plan,
leading to a rational programme of development,
should establish permanent real values to the land
holders of the community, and effect savings by
overcoming the difficulties caused by unplanned
development.


B. PRINCIPLES OF DEVELOPMENT
An appreciation of the problem of city or regional
growth can best be obtained from an analysis of the
main forms of development which must take place.
A development plan should provide the best way in
which the Region’s land and fixed capital assets may
be improved. The question of balance in growth is
discussed in Section D.
(i) Housing
Housing is usually considered to be the basic
human need related to land use, but it must be
emphasised that in a well integrated community the
provision of schools, shops, factories, open spaces,
and all other ancillary uses is just as important. They
should proceed together. The rate of population
growth is the basis for viewing all these requirements
in their true perspective.
The rate at which additional population can be
absorbed is to a considerable extent dependent on
house building capacity. To a large degree, financial
policy influences both private and public housing
construction. It is vital that public housing at least
should be equated with other works, particularly
the development of industrial areas.
(ii) Industry
Courageous steps, described in Chapter 4, have
already been taken to encourage industry to con-
tribute in the development of the Region and the
State. More courage, and more decisive action is
still required to carry industrialisation further and
in an orderly manner. The relationship between
industry and housing is basic. In many cases in-
dustries establish themselves near a ready supply of
labour, in other cases large industries will select
advantageous sites and attract housing development
to the vicinity. There are examples of both pro-
cedures in the Region. The industrialist must be
given a choice of a number of areas to allow him to
decide where he would find the most satisfactory
conditions for efficient production. If wise and
early decisions are not made on the development of
future industrial areas, many of the relationships
suggested in the Plan will be broken, and waste in
many forms will result.
(iii) Services and Communications
With any decisions relating to housing and in-
dustrial development must go those concerned with
types and standards of services. The economic
supply of services is of great importance. Water
supply and electric power can follow fairly flexible
programmes, but the same cannot be said about
sewerage, comprehensive drainage, gas supply, main
roads and transport routes. Urgent decisions are
being and have to be made. They will largely de-
termine the direction which future development
will take.
(iv) Schools, Hospitals and other Public
Buildings
A residence near a source of employment—though
both be fully serviced—is not sufficient. In any
developing area, the provision of schools and hospitals
is generally a matter of urgency, and there are other
complementary building activities of importance.
Individual but related decisions concerned with the
provision of public buildings will establish a pattern
for the future, and will permit private developers to
meet many community needs in an economical way.
It will be of great benefit to the community as a whole
when all developers, whether they be government,
local government or private, work towards the same
objectives, which together will make the Region
a richer, more efficient and more pleasing place.
C. PUBLIC EXPENDITURE
The economy of the State provides the background
against which priorities of development must be
considered. Detailed programmes of major public
works can only properly be established in relation
to the funds available each year for capital expendi-
ture. In order to make an estimate of the probable
rate of public development, expenditure over the
five years preceding 1953 may be used as a starting
point. During the five years, the bulk of the State
capital expenditure in the Region has been financed
from funds controlled by the State Treasury, the
State Electricity Commission, the State Housing
Commission, and the Main Roads Department, and
it is reasonable to assume that these authorities will
be responsible for future development in their re-
spective financial spheres.


( i ) Public Developmental Expenditure in the
State
The magnitude of public developmental expendi-
ture, as compared with the personal income of the
State, and the annual vote from the Consolidated
Revenue Fund which covers the administrative
expenses of Government, is shown in Table 50. It
also gives further useful comparisons based on the
per capita expenditure for development, and the
percentage of personal income that this activity has
absorbed. The comparisons in this Table indicate
that of recent years the community has been willing
to outlay increasing amounts per head, and as a per-
centage of income, on developmental works. It is
important to remember, however, that many of the
projects carried out in the period in question were
those that had been postponed, due either to de-
pression or war, and that there is still considerable
leeway to make up.
( ii ) Private and Public Building Construction
In addition to public developmental expenditure,
there has been considerable private and public ex-
penditure on building construction. Table 51 gives
the State-wide values of various types of buildings
completed in each year of the period.
The proportion of dwellings built in the Region,
compared with the remainder of the State, has varied
from 65 per cent, to 73 per cent., with the average
for the period about 70 per cent. Details are not
available for other types of construction, but approxi-
mately the same proportions are thought to exist.
(Hi) Expenditure on each type of Public De-
velopment in the State
The developmental expenditure of Table 50 is
further broken down in Table 52. The average
proportion for each purpose is shown.
(iv) Expenditure ivithin the Region on Certain
Types of Public Development
It has been found possible to differentiate as be-
tween the Region and the remainder of the State in
respect of some items. Table 53 contains this in-
formation, and indicates the average percentage of
each amount that has gone to the Region. In cases
such as Railway expenditure, where it has not been
possible to classify areas, there are unallocated items.
Of the total amount that could be allocated, balanced
proportions went to the Region and the remainder
of the State. Assuming that the remaining expendi-
ture was split in a similar, or 60/40 population basis,
it would appear that upwards of £17,000,000 was
about the amount expended in the Region in 1952-53.
Table 50
PERSONAL INCOME, PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT AND REVENUE FUNDS
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
1948-49 to 1952-53
Years.
Mean
Popula-
tion.
Total
Personal
Income.
Public Development Funds.
Con-
solidated
Revenue
Fund.
£
per Head.
Percentage of
Income.
Treasury.
*
Other
Author-
ities.
t
Total.
Income.
Public
Develop-
ment.
Con-
solidated
Revenue.
Public
Develop-
ment.
Con-
solidated
Revenue.
£000
£000
£000
£000
£000
£
£
£
%
%
1948-49 ..
522,184
121,000
2,754
5,024
7,778
21,378
232
14-9
41
6-4
17-7
1949-50 ..
545,786
148,000
6,005
7,649
13,654
25,787
271
25-0
47
9-2
17-4
1950-51 ..
571,349
193,000
8,108
10,644
18,752
27,997
338
32-8
49
9-7
14-5
1951-52 ..
591,158
217,000
15,416
12,962
28,378
34,547
367
48-0
58
13-1
15-9
1952-53 ..
611,150
239,000
18,922
14,352
33,274
39,392
391
54-4
64
13-9
16-5
SOURCE : Compiled from information supplied by the Acting Commonwealth Statistician, the Under Treasurer, the State
Electricity Commission, the State Housing Commission and the Main Roads Department.
NOTES : * Funds raised for State Electricity Commission included in Other Authorities.
t Includes deposits paid for War Service Homes and Administrative expenses of the Main Roads Department.


Table 51
VALUE OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION (PUBLIC AND PRIVATE)
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
(£000)
Year.
Houses.
Flats.
Other
Dwellings.
Total all
Dwellings.
Shops
without
Dwellings
attached.
Factories.
Others.
Grand
Total.
1948-49
3,796
26
3,822
31
219
634
4,706
1949—50
4,487
97
35
4,619
28
223
482
5,352
1950-51
7,516
303
13
7,832
86
205
825
8,948
1951-52
12,233
150
19
12,402
44
701
1,279
14,426
1952-53
18,994
167
254
19,415
151
834
2,518
22,918
SOURCE : Compiled from data contained in Part XII of the Statistical Register of Western Australia. 1952-53.
Table 52
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENTAL EXPENDITURE
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
1948-49 to 1952-53
(£000)
Year.
State Treasury Loan Funds.
Other Authorities Funds.
Grand
Total.
Schools.
Hos-
pitals.
Other
Govt.
Build-
ings.
Sewer-
age.
Water.
Rail-
ways.
Bal-
ance.
*
Total.
Elec-
tricity.
t
Hous-
ing.
t
Main
Roads.
§
Total.
1948- ..
1949- ..
1950- ..
1951- ..
1952- ..
Total
Average %
221
327
510
755
1,806
262
324
421
452
825
103
67
105
197
159
236
242
343
405
360
600
800
1,730
2,036
2,142
362
2,212
2,304
8,024
7,344
970
2,033
2,695
3,547
6,286
2,754
6,005
8,108
15,416
18,922
1,065
2,346
3,296
3,342
2,887
2,560
3,652
4,882
6,080
6,765
1,399
1,651
2,466
3,540
4,700
5,024
7,649
10,644
12,962
14,352
7,778
13,654
18,752
28,378
33,274
3,619
2,284
631
1,586
7,308
20,246
15,531
51,205
12,936
23,939
13,756
50,631
101,836
3-55
2-24
0-62
1 -56
7-18
19-88
15-25
50-28
12-70
23-51
13-51
49-72
100-00
SOURCE : Compiled from information supplied by the Under Treasurer, the State Electricity Commission, the State Housing
Commission and the Main Roads Department.
NOTES: * Includes Kwinana Housing and Workers’ Homes Capital: 1951-52, £58,000 ; 1952-53, £2,092,000.
t Includes Funds raised by State Treasury.
$ Includes War Service Homes and deposits paid on War Service Homes by applicants.
§ Includes Administrative expenses ranging from 4 per cent, to 4-6 per cent, per annum.


Table 53
STATE TREASURY LOAN FUND EXPENDITURE, 1948-49 TO 1952-53
ALLOCATED BETWEEN THE METROPOLITAN REGION AND THE REMAINDER OF THE STATE
(£000)
Year
Schools
Hospitals
Other
Government
Buildings
Sewerage
Water
Railways
Balance
Total
Region
Coun-
try
Region
Coun-
try
Region
Coun-
try
Region
Coun-
try
Region
Coun-
try
Region
Coun-
try
Unal-
located
Region
Coun-
try
Unal-
located
Region
■ Coun-
try
Unal-
located
1948- ..
1949- ..
1950- ..
1951- ..
1952- ..
Total ..
Average %
99
134
235
340
951
122
193
275
415
855
229
205
186
287
470
33
119
235
165
355
100
51
80
160
137
3
16
25
37
22
228
218
315
318
305
8
24
28
87
55
226
297
550
865
1,170
374
503
1,180
1,171
972
90
118
298
1,056
469
69
139
775
1,677
1,584
203
1,955
1,231
5,291
5,291
455
645
1,429
1,742
2,770
515
888
1,223
1,638
1,704
500
43
167
1,812
1,427
1,668
3,093
4,768
6,272
1,124
1,882
3,741
5,190
5,547
203
2,455
1,274
5,458
7,103
1,759
1,860
1,377
907
528
103
1,384
202
3,108
4,200
2,031
4,244
13,971
7,041
5,968
2,522
17,228
17,484
16,493
48-6
51-4
60-3
39-7
83-7
16-3
87-3
12-7
42-5
57-5
10-0
21-0
69 0
45-3
38-4
16-3
33-6
34-2
32-2
SOURCE : Compiled from information supplied by the Under Treasurer.
Table 54
ESTIMATED PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT FUNDS : WESTERN AUSTRALIA
1955-56 TO 1959-60
Year.
Mean
Population.
Total
Personal
Income.
Development
as a
percentage of
Personal
Income.
Available
for
Development.
(1st method)
Development
Expenditure
per head of
Population.
Available
for
Development.
(2nd method)
1955-56
♦ 1956-57
1957-
1958-
1959-
659,000
674,000
690,000
706,000
722,000
£000
281,000
297,000
313,000
330,000
348,000
0/
/o
12
12
12
12
12
£000
33,700
35.600
37.600
39.600
41,800
o/
/o
52
53
54
55
56
£000
34.300
35,700
37.300
38,800
40,400
(v) Estimated Future Public Developmental
Funds
From the information contained in the analytical
Tables it is possible to make an estimate of the funds
that may become available in the next five years period.
Table 54 sets out the population estimates based on
the past 50 years’ experience (not on the high rates
of recent years), together with two possible ways of
estimating future loan or developmental funds. The
first method assumes personal income will continue
to increase at from 5 per cent, to 6 per cent, per
annum, and the community would be prepared to
allocate about 12 per cent, annually towards develop-
ment. The second method, of per capita calculation,
assumes from past experience the community is
prepared to pay about £SO per annum per head to-
wards work of a developmental nature, and that with
mild inflationary conditions continuing expenditures
ranging from £52 to £56 per head per year will be
devoted to development in the next five years. In
each case the annual funds available would range from
£34,000,000 to £42,000,000 which, when viewed
against Commonwealth Loan Policy, the allocation
of petrol tax, etc., seems a reasonable basis. Assum-
ing again that upwards of 50 per cent, is allocated to


the Region in the future, public developmental funds
could range from upwards of £18,000,000 to
£23,000,000 per annum. Whatever the amount
devoted to the Region, there will always be the
problem of obtaining the greatest possible benefit
from the expenditure made, and this is discussed in
the next sub-section.
The Plan’s proposals suggest an early reservation
of land for major public purposes required in the
future, and this, as pointed out in the Sections on
Administration and Legislation, has certain implica-
tions in regard to public expenditure.
The service authorities, with knowledge of some of
the general proposals in the Plan, have already pur-
chased land, and it can be expected that these author-
ities will be able to make many of the reservations
from their own funds. Considerable savings will be
made through the integration of development in a
planned land use system. As an additional annual
source of revenue, to assist in the purchase and
reservation of land, a form of Land Tax is suggested
as the fairest method of raising sums of money for
reservations. It would be only a tiny fraction of
the real estate values permanently enhanced by the
efforts of the public developmental authorities.
D. THE PREPARATION OF
PROGRAMMES
When Governmental decisions have been made
regarding principles and priorities, it will be necessary
for the administrative and technical officers of the
developmental authorities to draw up a programme
for the first stage or period of implementation. This
Section mentions some of the problems which will
have to be solved by the developmental authorities
working together to ensure that a maximum return
is obtained from money allocated. It is suggested
that an Inter-departmental Committee, made up of
the major public developmental authorities and
Treasury representatives, should work within an
agreed planning framework. A firm developmental
programme of public works can only properly be
drawn up when each authority is fully aware of all
immediate aims and priorities. Similarly local author-
ities and private developers cannot play their full
part until government programmes are known and
understood.
Urgent priority works, determined from this
Report and Plan would be the starting point, to which
the methodical implementation of other works could
be related. It would perhaps be wise to limit the
first programme to a period of a few years. A
suggested procedure follows.
(i) Housing
A major premise of the Report is that the rate of
population growth in the Region will average about
13,000 persons annually over the next few years.
This should provide a basis for estimates made by the
State Housing Commission. There is a relationship
between population and housing needs even though
it is variable, and factors such as obsolescence, over-
crowding and the size of families affect it. It is an
advantage to deal with public housing requirements
first as they are generally met by the development
of large estates built in a relatively short time, and
these estates have a direct bearing on the program-
ming of supply services, the building of roads and the
location of industry. Private housing development
will occur in very numerous places at the same time.
In the past, the housing authority has endeavoured
to supply houses in all parts of the Region, and by
consultation and co-operation has taken into account
the supply services position in each area, and adjusted
its programmes accordingly. In the shaping of any
regional programme the housing authority will con-
tinue to play an important role in determining both
the direction and standard of development. Public
housing will focus attention on many matters of a
regional nature, and be of great importance in giving
impetus to development within the planning frame-
work.
( ii ) Industry
One of the main essentials of housing development
is proximity to the place of employment of the wage
earners in each household. The direction of develop-
ment can be decided by either industry or housing.
The Innaloo industrial area has taken advantage of a
labour pool in the northern suburbs. The Kwinana
housing areas have resulted from the location of large
industries requiring houses nearby. Waste of time
and energy through ever-increasing journeys to work
should be kept to a minimum. This alone calls for
co-ordination of developmental action. There would
seem to be a danger that great housing expansion in


the northern suburbs might lead to long journeys,
across the congested central area of Perth, to in-
dustries which favour the suburbs South of the
River.
Attention must be given, therefore, to the provision
of an industrial area or areas in the northern suburbs
if advantage is to be taken of the suitable building
terrain in those districts, and road access to central
Perth will have to be improved if substantial develop-
ment is to take place in the first stage.
With the probability that the main industrial axis
will be South of the River, attention will have to be
centred on comprehensive drainage schemes. Par-
ticularly in the well-placed Welshpool industrial area,
emphasis will have to be given to industrial and
residential development on land that is now unsuit-
able only because of the lack of a comprehensive
drainage scheme.
(iii) Supply Services
The importance to the service authorities of having
at once both an overall regional plan and a staged
developmental programme cannot be over-emphasised.
They should be able to install services that will cater
for the final population in each area. A series of
related programmes will ensure the maximum return
from any service laid, while not restricting individuals
any more than at present from choosing where they
wish to reside. Subdivisional and building control,
co-ordinated with the installation of services, must
lead to ordered regional growth.
( iv) Communications
The programme of road construction in the Region
should obviously be related to general development.
The Narrows bridge will add impetus to the southern
expansion which has, in fact, made it necessary. The
bridge cannot be regarded as an isolated road project;
it will entail extensive work at its northern and
southern approaches.
Although the standards of several important roads
will have to be raised it would prove economical to
provide new Regional Highways, which should be
incorporated in the development programme. The
Plan indicates where road reservations should be
established to cater for the needs of the growing
Region. By reserving land in the early stages the
road authority will not be forced to buy at values
enhanced by its own previous actions.
Decisions concerning railway improvements are
urgent. They vitally affect the Central Areas as well
as the direction of growth of the Region.
The relocation of the marshalling yards and the
passenger terminal is of immediate importance. Even
though the work may absorb a considerable portion
of available funds it should be commenced at an early
stage.
(v) Port Facilities
Of a magnitude comparable to that of the rail system
is the future development of the Port of Fremantle.
The immediate requirements are mainly related to
improved rail and road access to the existing river
berths and to the up-river extensions. A new rail-
way bridge, adjacent to the road bridge, will be
required. In the longer term extensions into Cock-
burn Sound will almost certainly be necessary.
Studies and survey work should be commenced at
the earliest opportunity.
( vi ) Schools, Hospitals and Other Public
Buildings
It is essential that schools and hospitals, clinics,
district shopping centres and civic and cultural
facilities be provided at rates to match that of housing.
Many of these very necessary community needs are
the direct responsibility of Government. In a public
works programme too great a stress cannot be laid
on the necessity of reserving adequate sites as well
as the timing of their construction.
( vii ) Private Development
(a) Commercial
The financial resources of the private developer
will be put to the most effective use if he is able to
get full information on a public development pro-
gramme. The Plan shows the ultimate extent of
residential districts, but the business executive is
vitally concerned with the staging of this develop-
ment. If a programme were established for regional
development, to which detailed local authority plans
could be related, he could make an important con-
tribution to the development effort. Adequate private
commercial development is essential to ensure the
simultaneous provision of those facilities necessary
for the establishment of balanced communities.


(b) Housing
In preparing programmes for housing, it is neces-
sary not only to assess the amount that will be pro-
vided privately, but to ensure an adequate choice of
sites. Every encouragement should be given to
private developers to build on blocks already serviced.
Comprehensive drainage will have to be provided
in some areas which are already serviced.
(viii) Open Space
Closely allied to the carrying out of public works
and private development is the provision and main-
tenance of open spaces. Priorities under this head
are perhaps the improvement of the river frontages,
the improvement and expansion of facilities at selected
beaches, the provision of new playing fields, and the
protection and improvement of some of the valuable
escarpment lands.
(ix) Central Areas
Many of the proposals for Central Perth hinge on
the eventual lowering of the railway and the moving
of the passenger and freight terminals, and the group-
ing of Government offices on State-owned land
adjacent to the Observatory. The first of these is
related to regional rail proposals, and steps have
already been taken to obtain some of the land re-
quired. The provision of new Government offices
could be financed by the sale of existing Government
sites which have high commercial values, and contain
obsolete buildings. The provision of further civic
buildings is a matter of some urgency and should be
considered in the first stage programme. Most of
the remaining projects, apart from roads which are
part of the regional pattern, will come within the
sphere of the City Council and private developers,
and should be carefully considered in the detailed
planning programme of the City Council. In Fre-
mantle where rail proposals require early considera-
tion, a start should be made, within the next decade,
on the construction of a new gaol on State-owned
land South of Fremantle.
(x) Co-ordination of Works
The proposed Inter-departmental Committee would
seem to be the appropriate body to prepare pro-
grammes of work for submission to Government.
To ensure the proper consideration of public de-
velopmental expenditures and programmes of works
the Committee should include representatives of the
State Treasury, the State Housing Commission, the
Department of Industrial Development, the Main
Roads Department, the Railways Commission, the
Metropolitan Water Supply, Sewerage and Drainage
Department, the State Electricity Commission, the
Public Works Department and the Town Planning
Department, with power to co-opt other members
when necessary. This Committee would be able
to examine the whole problem of regional growth,
and working within the framework of the Plan,
devise a public developmental programme. Such a
programme, when approved, could be set down in
the form of programme maps, which should be
prepared and administered by the Town Planning
Department, for the guidance of development. The
Plan and Report would act as a basis for meetings,
and discussions on priorities. Each authority would
be fully conversant with the whole programme and
be able to see more clearly its own contribution to
development as a whole. The effect on both local
planning schemes and private developers’ projects
should be most helpful. Local works could be
more economically dovetailed into the regional pro-
gramme, and private developers would be able to
formulate their own schemes, with better chances of
financial success for themselves and usefulness for
the community.
The Inter-departmental Committee would be able
to keep the principles and objectives of the Plan
constantly in view, and review it from time to time.
Development by agreed stages will have to take
cognizance of changing conditions and unforeseen
circumstances as the future unfolds. Each stage must
be directly related to the financial and other resources
available, and to this end programmes must be flexible.


APPENDIX I
Suggested Form of Control of Residential Densities
A. GENERAL
In housing and planning virtually every country
now has legislation designed to abate the overcrowd-
ing of land in residential areas. In the great cities
of the world very high densities are hard to justify
on economic as well as social grounds, even where
there is an acute shortage of building land. Slums
and blighted areas throughout the world are in large
part due to the crowding together of dwellings in
low or high buildings. There is no case for un-
reasonably high densities when ample building land
is available.
In Australia there is a tradition of low density
housing. As a consequence by-laws and other
building density controls have concentrated on this
and overlooked the long-term consequences of over-
building. There is considerable concern about the
size of lots for individual houses, but little thought
has been given to the density and form of flat building.
In the Metropolitan Region it is only just becoming
apparent that present methods for determining the
number and arrangement of flats on various sites are
inadequate, and may quickly lead to bad housing
conditions.
The essential requisites of any statutory instrument
determining the maximum density of residential
buildings are :
(i) Densities should be considered in relation
to the overall availability of land and the
estimated demand for land for residential
purposes.
(ii) The form of control should be easily under-
stood, easily applied and equitable in
its effect on owners and developers of
land.
(iii) The problem must be considered in the
light of local conditions of climate, living
habits and methods of land division and
disposal.
(iv) Maximum permissible densities should aim
at securing certain desirable conditions
of privacy, daylighting, sunlighting, space
about buildings and quietness.
(v) Maximum permissible densities should be
related to different conditions of site
area, frontage and depth.
(vi) Density control should be sufficiently
flexible to allow of variation in archi-
tectural form, and by providing incentives
for the comprehensive development or
redevelopment of large areas rather than
the piecemeal development of small lots,
should have as an important objective
the encouragement of effective architec-
tural grouping.
(vii) Density limitations should not unneces-
sarily restrict the economic potential of
high value land, and should, as far as
compatible with satisfactory living stand-
ards, permit the quantity of development
necessary to assure an economic return
in terms of rental.
(viii) In areas of mixed development, particularly
during the transitional stages, the rights
of adjoining owners should be adequately
protected against injurious affection by
new development.
(ix) Density control is a function of the planning
process, being closely related to planning
laws governing use zoning, and should
be an essential part of a Local Planning
Scheme rather than a Building By-law.
There should, however, be no dis-
crepancies regarding definition and in-
terpretation.


B. AVAILABILITY OF LAND
Given a free choice, most people would probably
prefer a home with ample garden space, so that as a
generalisation, densities should be no higher than is
necessary for the economic use of available land. In
Chapter 8 it has been suggested that it is reasonable
to expect that a proportion of about 10 per cent, of
the total ultimate population will require accom-
modation in the form of flats. It is unlikely that
this percentage will be exceeded to any extent whilst
the demand for detached dwellings remains high and
whilst there is sufficient land to meet this demand.
The distribution of Net Housing Densities throughout
the Region, excluding the Class " E ” Districts (Table
38 in Chapter 8) allows for a theoretical population
of 133,000, or 11 per cent, of the total population,
living in flats. This indicates that the maximum
permissible densities on which the calculations were
based make adequate allowance for the estimated
population XVithin the areas zoned for residential
purposes.
There is need for a more rational approach to
achieve results in keeping with real demand. At
present there is a gross disparity between the normal
development at 15 persons per acre and the higher
densities of flat development. What is required is a
reasonable range of densities reflecting probable
family needs, and taking into account site values
increasing, in general terms, from outer suburbs to
central city areas. Regulations which permit of
sudden increases from 15 persons per acre to upwards
of 200 persons per acre without intermediate figures
are unnecessary, unsatisfactory, and unjustified.
C. PRINCIPLES OF CONTROL
There are many possible ways in which residential
density can be regulated. Density control should
result in the restriction of the number of residents in
any given area and may be expressed in terms of
maximum numbers of persons per acre (Chapter
8 (F)). This method of expression, however, whilst
providing a valuable yardstick for comparison with
practice in other countries, and a basis for calculating
population capacities and the scale of provision of
non-residential uses, cannot be applied as the initial
control of building density. Current practice in the
United Kingdom is to measure and limit density in
terms of habitable rooms per acre, but this presents
difficulties as a system of control. Similarly, regulat-
ing the number of dwellings per acre is not satisfactory
in practice.
The simplest and most effective control is one
relating to building bulk (Chapter 9 (F)), in con-
junction with provisions relating to certain desirable
conditions of siting not directly achieved by control
of building bulk alone. These supplemental pro-
visions, which have in the past invariably been in-
corporated in a Building By-law, should form part
of a Planning Scheme.
To enable a relationship to be established between
cause (amount of building or floor space) and effect
(the number of persons per net residential acre),
certain assumptions must be made as to the likely
utilisation of residential floor space under normal
conditions of usage. This can be based either on an
estimated " occupancy rate ” of habitable rooms or
dwellings, or on a theoretically desirable floor area
per person in different types of accommodation.
The latter method is preferable when the initial
control relates to the permissible ratio between floor
area and site area.
In " The Greater London Plan,” 1 the following
are suggested as floor space standards for different
types of accommodation :
(a) 3-bedroom house : 200 sq. ft. per person
(b) 2-bedroom flat: 200 sq. ft. per person
(c) 1-bedroom flat22s sq. ft. per person
(d) bed-living room flat : 275 sq. ft. per person
In the Metropolitan Region, whilst no accurate
statistics are available, it would appear that higher
standards would be applicable. The majority of
family dwellings are in the order of 1,200 sq. ft., and
if a family average of four persons is assumed, the
resulting floor space standard is 300 sq. ft. per person.
Comparable figures for flats are not obtainable, but
would probably result in a slightly lower average than
for single dwellings. A figure of 250 sq. ft. per
person has been used in the calculations appearing
later in this Appendix. It must be made clear that
these figures are not put forward as minimum stand-
ards enforceable by law. Variations in the actual
use of floor space will not invalidate the general
recommendations made in subsequent Sections, but
will merely result in slight variations in Net Residential
1 Sir Patrick Abercrombie, “The Greater London Plan 1944,” London, 1945.


Densities expressed in terms of persons per acre.
The recommendations made regarding the limitation
of building bulk and regarding spaces between build-
ings are generally valid, irrespective of the number
of persons occupying those buildings.
D. PARTICULAR LOCAL
CONSIDERATIONS
Reference has already been made to this aspect of
the problem. With regard to climate, the quantity
and arrangement of buildings on sites should be
such as to : (a) permit the maximum benefit to be
derived from daylight and sunshine (internal plan-
ning, orientation and structural design playing their
part in this and in the reduction of sunlight in summer
conditions) ; (b) to prevent small pockets of stagnant
air during hot periods ; (c) make possible the pursuit
of those outdoor activities which are so essential a
part of the local way of life. Privacy, too, is par-
ticularly important to a people not wishing to re-
produce the congested living conditions of European
industrial towns, and who would not lightly make
the transition from the well-insulated single family
plot to the gregarious atmosphere of a multi-storey
tenement.
Whilst it is possible, during conditions of housing
shortage, that any form of accommodation at a
reasonable price may be sold or let, it is probable that
as homes become more plentiful not even the con-
venience of a central situation could make up for
deficiencies in privacy, space, light and air. In the
longer term, values of badly sited and congested
properties would decrease and a series of new slum
areas would result. This is a very real danger, the
implications of which may not be appreciated until
it is too late. Isolated blocks of flats on cramped
sites do not individually give cause for concern
except to immediate neighbours, but large areas
redeveloped in this manner could easily become a
major social problem.
Local practice in land subdivision and methods of
measurement are essential factors for consideration,
and in the suggested range of appropriate densities
regard has been had to particular situations likely
to arise in the development, or redevelopment, of
areas comprising typical lot sizes and frontages.
E. DESIRABLE LIVING
CONDITIONS
Based on the generalisations of the previous Section,
a series of desirable standards have been formulated
which, on the one hand, provide a key to the selection
of appropriate Plot Ratios and, on the other, should
form the basis of the control of siting referred to in
Section C.
(i) Privacy
In the United Kingdom, the generally accepted
minimum distance between parallel walls containing
windows to habitable rooms is 70 ft. 1 This distance
is not dependent on conditions of climate : it is
primarily to ensure a degree of privacy, and is there-
fore equally applicable here. But it is valid only for
one and two-storey buildings, being the result of
experiment and experience in the design of dwellings
of this type, and is only true for comparatively long
blocks. For higher buildings, and in the case of
fairly short lengths of opposite walls, suitable mini-
mum distances necessary for privacy are more difficult
to establish.
Conditions making for adequate privacy cannot
be determined by scientific calculation. Lack of
privacy arises from two main sources : the closeness
of opposite windows resulting in a real lack, and the
closeness of high walls resulting in overshadowing,
either in a literal or psychological sense. For long
blocks it can be assumed that minimum distances
valid for one aspect will be valid for the other, but
in the case of gable ends and comparatively narrow
projections the feeling of being overlooked is variable
according to the length and height of the wall opposite.
The essential point is that differentiation must be
made between walls which contain, and walls which
do not contain, windows to habitable rooms ; and
between situations where open views are possible
obliquely, even though adjacent walls may be fairly
close, and situations where the oblique view is not
possible.
Simple principles must, therefore, be established
to determine (a) the spacing of parallel multi-storey
blocks and (b) desirable minimum distances between
walls other than long walls containing windows to
habitable rooms.
1 Ministry of Housing and Local Government, “The Density of Residential
Areas,” London, 1952.


(ii) Daylight and Sunlight
One method of establishing the above principles is
with reference to standards of daylighting or sun-
lighting. In the United Kingdom it is currently
recommended that satisfactory daylighting for parallel
blocks can be obtained by ensuring that the buildings
in one row do not rise above an imaginary line drawn
at an angle of 25° from the foot of the building to the
adjoining row, 1 and that, as a generalisation, the
spacing required for daylighting should be sufficient
for privacy . It is true that conditions of daylighting
are quite different in Perth, and that an angle of
25 could not be justified here on this basis alone.
But a greater angle, with resulting closer spacing,
would not achieve the privacy provided by the 25°
angle. Moreover, in the United Kingdom it is
admitted that desirable conditions of sunlighting, as
distinct from daylighting, are not obtained by spacing
based on the 25° angle, and that adequate winter
sunlight could only be achieved in living rooms by
the adoption of much more liberal spacing and lower
densities. In Perth, however, the adoption of this
basic angle would allow four hours’ continuous
sunshine in midwinter, and would permit architects
and building owners, subject to correct orientation
and thoughtful design, to exploit to the full the
potentialities of a site without fear of their work
being negatived by future building on adjoining sites.
To summarise, the establishment of minimum
distances between parallel blocks of buildings, based
on an angle of 25°, would generally result in satis-
factory conditions of privacy and sunlighting and
more than adequate conditions of daylighting. Ap-
propriate Plot Ratios for various sizes of site have
been determined with a view to securing these con-
ditions of spacing, which for varying heights of
buildings are set out below :
Height of buildings. Minimum Distance be-
tween Parallel Blocks.
10 feet 70 feet
20 » 70 „
30 » 70 „
40 „ 85 „
50 „ 107 „
60 „ 129 „
70 „ 150 „
80 172 „
90 „ 193 „
100 „ 215 „
For more complex arrangements of buildings, the
only fully effective method of achieving satisfactory
results by site planning would be by the application
of principles based on accurate scientific data relating
to daylighting. Because of the technical difficulties
likely to be experienced in applying a complicated
control, a simplified method has been examined.
This system claims to do no more than cover the
majority of typical cases, and is based on three main
assumptions, viz :
(i) in the case of long walls containing windows
to habitable rooms, the distance between
buildings should be based on the 25°
angle previously referred to, with a mini-
mum spacing of 70 feet ;
(ii) there should be progressive reduction in
these distances as wall lengths decrease
and as daylight, sunlight, and open views
are obtainable obliquely ;
(hi) in the case of walls without windows a
closer spacing is generally permissible
except in long, high blocks where sun-
lighting restrictions (i.e., an angle of 25°),
should still apply.
To achieve these conditions by means of regula-
tions, minimum distances must be expressed in terms
of distances between building and site boundary, to
ensure equality of treatment and the protection of
existing and future rights of adjoining owners. For
this purpose, the graph in Diagram 40 is suggested as
a means for determining appropriate siting conditions
in all cases of residential development. A similar
graph has been devised (Diagram 41) to determine
appropriate distances from street alignments.
(iii) Open Space
Whilst it is impossible to prescribe exact standards
for open space in relation to flats, there is no doubt
that there is a desirable minimum which should be
provided in the form of gardens, irrespective of any
local or district amenities which may be established.
The areas of gardens usually associated with normal
subdivisions of j to 1 acre cannot be adopted
as criteria for high density development, but a
useful comparison may be made with what is con-
sidered to be the minimum desirable outdoor living
1 Ministry of Housing and Local Government, “The Density of Residential
Areas, London, 1952.


space in private houses in the United Kingdom.
There, the maximum practicable density for terraced
housing results in approximately 170 sq. ft. of garden
space per person. The handbook " The Density of
Residential Areas ” concludes that, as a generalisation,
effective open space of 170 sq. ft. per person is likely
to prove " sufficient to meet the minimum needs of
outdoor living, i.e., space for casual sitting out, pram
parking, and play areas for very young children.” 1
In Perth, to this list may be added " barbecues and
other outdoor social activities,” and the conclusion
drawn that under no [circumstances should pro-
vision of effective open space be less than 150 sq. ft.
per person.
( iv ) Garages and Car Parking
Maximum permitted densities should be such as to
allow adequate provision for garaging and off-street
car parking both for the convenience of residents
and as a contribution, however small, to the solution
of the overall problem of car parking in the metro-
politan area. Adopting a standard of 180 sq. ft. per
flat for garages, and 45 sq. ft. per flat for car parking
space, the total standard required for these purposes
would be about 60 sq. ft. per person.' For density
purposes, an allowance would be made of 50 sq. ft.
of garage space for every 250 sq. ft. of building area
allowed by the Plot Ratio, or 20 per cent, of floor
area in the main building.
In the examples in Diagrams 42 to 49, the amenity
open space provision tabulated is the area remaining
after the appropriate area for garages and parking
space has been deducted. It will be seen that in
certain cases the amount of open space possible falls
below the minimum recommended. Development
of this type should be discouraged in favour of
alternative forms.
F. APPLICATION TO VARIOUS
SITES
In general, permissible densities should increase in
proportion to the size of the site to be developed.
This principle will encourage the consolidation of
small sites in high value areas, and result in develop-
ment in scale with the surrounding area. Conversely,
reduced densities on those smaller sites likely to be
found as part of residential streets will result in
development not grossly out of scale with pre
dominating two or one-storey housing. Unless par-
ticular circumstances dictate otherwise, it is suggested
that residential development appropriate to the
various types of sites described in Section H should
be permitted anywhere in residential areas.
A more detailed account of the application of the
suggested regulations to different sites will be found
in the notes forming part of Diagrams 42 to 49.
G. FINANCIAL ASPECTS
It is essential that any system of density control
should permit a reasonable financial return in relation
to site values and building costs. Suggested density
limits have, therefore, been considered in the light
of their operation in areas of different site values, and
based on an examination of building costs and accepted
rates of profit, an assessment made of probable rents
necessary to secure an economic return. In all but
the highest value areas, the estimated economic rents
approximate closely to those now current throughout
the range of densities recommended. In the high
value areas where " luxury ” flats are likely to be in
demand, higher rents may reasonably be expected.
H. APPLICATION OF PRINCIPLES
In this Appendix, the meaning attached to many
words may be at variance with that commonly
accepted, and in order to indicate some of the defini-
tions which will require careful consideration by the
appropriate authorities, an explanation is given of
the more important terms as used here.
" Detached Dwelling ” means a dwelling which
is complete and self-contained and not joined
structurally to any other building whether
residential or otherwise.
" Attached Pair ” means a residential building
of one or two storeys comprising two
dwellings, each being complete and self-
contained and attached horizontally by a
party wall.
" Terrace ” means a row of three or more dwel-
lings separated horizontally by party walls.
1 Ministry of Housing and Local Government, "The Density of Residential
Areas, London, 1952.”


" Flat ” means that portion of a building used
as a separate tenement in a building con-
taining two or more such tenements other
than a building forming part of an attached
pair or a terrace.
The Local Planning Scheme should ensure that no
residential building is erected except in accordance
with the conditions suggested in Table 55. Provided
always,
(i) that no detached dwelling be erected on a
site otherwise than in accordance with
reference " f ” in Table 55.
(ii) that no 2-storey attached pair, or two units
of a 2-storey terrace, or building contain-
ing flats be erected on a site otherwise
than in accordance with reference " e ”
in Table 55.
(iii) that no single storey dwelling forming part
of a terrace or attached pair be erected
otherwise than in accordance with refer-
ence " g ” in Table 55.
Table 55
SCHEDULE OF MAXIMUM PLOT RATIOS
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Reference.
Minimum
Plot Size.
Sq. Ft.
Minimum
Frontage.
Ft.
Maximum
Plot
Ratio.
a ..
20,000
155
1-00
b
15,000
115
0-75
c ..
12,000
95
0-65
d
9,000
75
0-55
e ..
8,000
65
0-40
f
6,000
49
0-25
g
4,000
33
0-20
In addition, the regulations should control the
siting of residential buildings with reference to
graphs, a form of which is suggested in Diagrams 40
and 41. The minimum distance of a residential
building from site boundaries and street alignment
should be measured in accordance with these graphs.
Definitions of the terms used are contained in Diagram
39. Where a plot is to be developed with two or
more residential buildings, the minimum distances
between their walls should be measured as if a plot
boundary passed between, and parallel to, the two
walls whose spacing is to be determined.
Diagrams 42 to 49 illustrate the application of these
principles to various sites.
L SUMMARY
The form of building density control proposed
relates to the limitation of the amount of covered
floor area on any given site. The control is directed
towards :
(i) preventing unnecessarily high densities which
might lead to congested development and,
as one consequence, future slums,
(ii) permitting satisfactory conditions of privacy,
sunlighting and daylighting to be achieved,
(iii) providing adequate standards of open space
about buildings,
(iv) allowing the economic development of
potential building sites,
(v) encouraging the consolidation, and dis-
couraging the piecemeal development, of
small lots,
(vi) providing for a comprehensive intermediate
range of densities between the highest and
lowest, suitable for the wide variation in
housing types likely to be required.
The complementary form of control relating to the
siting of buildings is designed to secure :
(i) adequate conditions of privacy, space, light
and air,
(ii) the protection of adjoining owners and the
preservation of existing rights, which can-
not be guaranteed by the operation of a
building bulk control alone.


Diagram 39
SITING OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
(Method of measuring dimensions, and definitions of
terms used in Diagrams 40 and 41.)
Scale : [?]inch equals 2ft. approximately.
NOTES.
In the above example, if the dwelling is a single-storey
building facing a 66ft. street, appropriate minimum values
for Dl, D 3, etc., are obtained from Diagrams 40 and 41,
as follows :
Dl : 15ft. Presence or absence of windows im-
material. (Diagram 41.)
D 3 : measured from the junction with the front wall,
the first length of L 3 is 20ft. From Diagram 40
the minimum value for D 3 is 4ft. The second
length of L 3 is 10ft., total 30ft. The minimum
value for the second length is therefore 4ft. too.
Lengths of wall exceeding this distance would
have to be stepped back in accordance with
Diagram 40.
D 4 : the length of L 4 facing the l.h. side boundary
is 20ft., and the minimum value of D 4 is there-
fore 10ft. In the case of the r.h. side wall, the
length L 4 is conterminous with L 2. This
length is 46ft., and the values for D 4 are 10ft.
for the first 30ft., increasing to 25ft. at 45ft.
LI is the total length of the front wall of the building,
and is measured as if the wall were continuous in
one plane, irrespective of any projections or set-backs.
D 1 is the distance between the front wall and the street
alignment, measured from the nearest portion of the
wall.
L 2 is the total length of the side wall, measured from the
point of junction with the front wall as if it were
continuous in one plane irrespective of any projec-
tions or set-backs. When this length exceeds the
appropriate distance indicated in Diagram 40, the
additional length may be measured as if it were a
separate wall.
L 3 is the total length of side wall without windows to
habitable rooms, forming part of L 2.
D 3 is the distance between L 3 and the side boundary.
L 4 is the total length of side wall with windows to
habitable rooms, forming part of L 2.
D 4 is the distance between L 4 and the side boundary.
L 5 is the total length of rear wall, measured from its
junction with the side wall, as for L 2.
D 5 is the distance between the rear wall and rear bound-
ary.


Diagram 40 SITING OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
Minimum distances between walls and site boundaries
Diagram 41 SITING OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
Minimum distances between front walls and street alignment


Diagram 42
MINIMUM PLOT SIZE 20,000 sq. ft.
MINIMUM FRONTAGE 155 ft.
MAXIMUM PLOT RATIO 1.0
AVERAGE NET DENSITY 120 persons per acre
NOTES
Maximum plot ratio for residential buildings :
suitable for any number of storeys, but desirable
standard of open space provision only possible in
the case of high blocks. Wide choice of site plans
possible.
Typical development on a 1 acre site would be
a 6-storey block with 10 flats of 725 to 750 sq. ft. on
each floor, making a total of 60 flats.
EXAMPLE 1
Consolidation of 10 33ft. plots, 6-storey flats.
Net area of each plot .. .. .. .. 43,560 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 43,560 sq. ft.
Gross site area [half street-block, assuming 174,240 sq. ft.
block 990 ft. long] [4 acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. .. 130,680 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 523
Net residential density .. .. .. 130 persons per acre
Amenity open space 150 sq. ft. per person
EXAMPLE 2
Consolidation of 10 40ft. plots, 8-storey flats.
Net area of each plot .. .. .. .. 52,800 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 52,800 sq. ft.
Gross site area [half street-block, assuming 208,890 sq. ft.
block 1,200 ft. long] [4 8 acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. .. 158,400 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 634
Net residential density .. .. .. 130 persons per acre
Amenity open space .. .. .. 160 sq. ft. per person
EXAMPLE 3
Consolidation of 5 33ft. plots, 3-storey flats.
Net area of each plot .. .. • • • • 21,780 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 21,780 sq. ft.
Gross site area [half street-block, assuming .. 174,240 sq. ft.
block 990 ft. long] [4 acres]
Total floor space 130,680 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. • • 523
Net residential density 130 persons per acre
Amenity open space .. .. • • 100 sq. ft. per person


Diagram 43
MINIMUM PLOT SIZE 15,000 sq. ft.
MINIMUM FRONTAGE 115 ft.
MAXIMUM PLOT RATIO 0.75
AVERAGE NET DENSITY 100 persons per acre
NOTES
More limited choice of site layout, but variation
in orientation still possible. Suitable for any number
of storeys up to 6, depending on depth of site. A
typical arrangement on a site of 1 rood 24 perches
(Example 4) would be a 3-storey block with 4 flats
of 990 sq. ft. on each floor, making a total of 12 flats.
EXAMPLE 4
Consolidation of 3 40ft. plots, 3-storey flats.
Net area of each plot .. .. .. .. 15,840 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 11,880 sq. ft.
Gross site area [assuming street-block 169,290 sq. ft.
960 ft. long] [3 • 8 acres]
Total floor space .. .. 95,040 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 380
Net residential density .. .. .. 100 persons per acre
Amenity open space 180 sq. ft. per person
EXAMPLE 5
Consolidation of 4 33ft. plots, 3-storey flats.
Net area of each plot .. .. .. .. 17,424 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 13,068 sq. ft.
Gross site area [assuming street-block 185,130 sq. ft,
1,056 ft. long] [4 * 2 acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. .. 104,544 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 418
Net residential density .. .. .. 100 persons per acre
Amenity open space .. .. .. 190 sq. ft. per person
EXAMPLE 6
Consolidation of 3 40ft. plots, 6-storey flats.
Net area of each plot .. .. .. .. 15,840 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 11,880 sq. ft.
Gross site area [assuming street-block 160,290 sq. ft.
960 ft. long] [3 • 8 acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. .. 95,040 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 380
Net residential density .. .. .. 100 persons per acre
Amenity open space 230 sq. ft. per person


Diagram 44
MINIMUM PLOT SIZE 12,000 sq. ft.
MINIMUM FRONTAGE 95 ft.
MAXIMUM PLOT RATIO 0.65
AVERAGE NET DENSITY 85 persons per acre
NOTES
Allows choice of orientation on site for buildings
up to 3 storeys high. Generally unsuitable for
higher buildings, depending on depth of site. A
typical arrangement on a site of 13,200 sq. ft. would
be a 3-storey block with 3 flats of 950 sq. ft. on each
floor, making a total of 9 flats.
EXAMPLE 7
Consolidation of 3 33ft. plots, or 2 50ft. plots, 3-storey flats.
Net area of each plot .. .. .. .. 13,200 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 8,580 sq. ft.
Gross site area [assuming street-block 142,890 sq. ft.
800 ft. long] [3-2 acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. .. 68,640 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 274
Net residential density .. .. .. 85 persons per acre
Amenity open space .. .. .. 245 sq. ft. per person
EXAMPLE 8
Consolidation of 1 50ft. plot and 1 45ft. plot, 3-storey flats.
Net area of each plot .. .. .. .. 12,540 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 8,150 sq. ft.
Gross site area [assuming street-block 136,290 sq. ft.
760 ft. long] [3*l acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. .. 65,200 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 261
Net residential density .. .. .. 84 persons per acre
Amenity open space .. .. .. 245 sq. ft. per person
EXAMPLE 9
Consolidation of 2 50ft. plots, 2-storey flats.
Net area of each plot .. .. .. .. 13,200 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 8,580 sq. ft.
Gross site area [assuming street-block 142,890 sq. ft.
800 ft. long] [3 • 2 acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. .. 68,640 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 274
Net residential density .. .. .. 85 persons per acre
Amenity open space .. .. .. 200 sq. ft. per person


Diagram 45
MINIMUM PLOT SIZE 9,000 sq. ft.
MINIMUM FRONTAGE 75 ft.
MAXIMUM PLOT RATIO 0.55
AVERAGE NET DENSITY 75 persons per acre
NOTES
75 ft. frontage not generally sufficient for 3-storey
blocks in parallel, and in practice the eflective mini-
mum frontage for 3-storey development. A typical
arrangement on a site of 10,428 sq. ft. would be
a 3-storey block with 2 flats of 950 sq. ft. on each
floor, making a total of 6 flats.
EXAMPLE 10
Consolidation of 2 39ft. 6in. plots, 3-storey flats.
Net area of each plot .. .. .. .. 10,428 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 5,735 sq. ft.
Gross site area [assuming street-block 167,310 sq. ft.
948 ft. long] [3 • 8 acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. .. 68,820 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 275
Net residential density .. .. .. 72 persons per acre
Amenity open space .. .. .. 300 sq. ft. per person
EXAMPLE 11
Consolidation of 2 39ft. 6in. plots, 2-storey flats.
Net area of each plot .. .. .. .. 10,428 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 5,735 sq. ft.
Gross site area [assuming street-block 167,310 sq. ft.
948 ft. long] [3-8 acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. .. 68,820 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 275
Net residential density .. .. .. 72 persons per acre
Amenity open space .. .. .. 270 sq. ft. per person
EXAMPLE 12
Consolidation of 1 50ft. plot and 1 40ft. plot, 3-storey flats.
Net area of each plot .. .. .. .. 9,000 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 4,950 sq. ft.
Gross site area [assuming street-block 128,478 sq. ft.
900 ft. long] [2-8 acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. .. 49,500 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 198
Net residential density .. .. .. 69 persons per acre
Amenity open space .. .. .. 300 sq. ft. per person


Diagram 46
MINIMUM PLOT SIZE 8,000 sq. ft.
MINIMUM FRONTAGE 65 ft.
MAXIMUM PLOT RATIO 0.40
AVERAGE NET DENSITY 30-55 persons per acre
NOTES
Minimum plot size and minimum frontage for
flats and 2-storey attached pairs or terraces. 3-
storey development not generally practicable, and
2-storey buildings best sited facing street. Observ-
ance of minimum distances from plot boundaries
allows only limited variations in site planning.
On a typical plot of 32 perches, a 2-storey building
containing 4 flats of 870 sq. ft. each would be the
most common arrangement.
The average net density for detached pairs and
terraces would normally be lower than that shown
[about 30 persons per acre if 3-8 persons per dwel-
ling assumed].
EXAMPLE 13
Consolidation of 2 33ft. plots, 2-storey flats.
Net area of each plot .. .. .. .. 8,712 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 3,484 sq. ft.
Gross site area [assuming street-block 185,130 sq. ft.
1,056 ft. long] [4 • 2 acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. .. 55,744 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 223
Net residential density .. .. .. 53 persons per acre
Amenity open space .. .. .. 440 sq. ft. per person
EXAMPLE 14
Consolidation of 33ft. plots, 2-storey terraces.
Net area of each plot [in this example 8,712 sq. ft.
2 33ft. plots containing 2 dwellings]
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 3,484 sq. ft.
Gross site area [half street-block, assuming 163,350 sq. ft.
block 924 ft. long] [3-75 acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. . • 48,776 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 162
Net residential density [maximum] .. 43 persons per acre
Amenity open space .. .. • • 440 sq. ft. per person
EXAMPLE 15
Consolidation of 33ft. plots, 2-storey attached pairs.
Net area of each plot .. .. .. .. 8,712 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 3,484 sq. ft.
Gross site area [half street-block, assuming 163,350 sq. ft.
block 924 ft. long] [3-75 acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. •• 48,776 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 162
Net residential density [maximum] .. 43 persons per acre
Amenity open space ♦. .. .. 440 sq. ft. per person


Diagram 47
MINIMUM PLOT SIZE 6,000 sq. ft.
MINIMUM FRONTAGE 49 ft.
MAXIMUM PLOT RATIO 0.25
AVERAGE NET DENSITY 12-15 persons per acre
NOTES
Minimum plot size and frontage for single dwel-
lings. These examples illustrate application of
principles to larger plots.
Note greater freedom in site planning on wide
frontages.
Maximum plot ratio permits large houses in pro-
portion with size of plot.
Net residential densities are maxima : average
densities which could be expected, based on 3-8
persons per dwelling are :
Example 16 : 12 persons per acre.
Example 17 : 12 persons per acre.
Example 18 : 15 persons per acre.
EXAMPLE 16
I acre plots, 66ft. frontage, 1-storey detached dwellings.
Net area of each plot .. .. .. .. 10,890 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 2,722 sq. ft.
Gross site area [assuming street-block 222,156 sq. ft.
1,056 ft. long] [s*l acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. .. 43,550 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 145
Net residential density (maximum) .. 28 persons per acre
Amenity open space .. .. 2,000 sq. ft. per person
EXAMPLE 17
I acre plots, 82ft. 6in. frontage, 1-storey detached dwellings.
Net area of each plot .. .. .. .. 10,890 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 2,722 sq. ft.
Gross site area [assuming street-block 174,240 sq. ft.
990 ft. long] [4 acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. .. 32,664 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 108
Net residential density (maximum) .. 27 persons per acre
Amenity open space .. .. 2,000 sq. ft. per person
EXAMPLE 18
30-perch plots, 61ft. frontage, 1-storey detached dwelling.
Net area of each plot .. .. .. .. 8,167 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 2,041 sq. ft.
Gross site area [assuming street-block 172,590 sq. ft.
976 ft. long] [3 -9 acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. .. 32,656 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 108
Net residential density (maximum) .. 27 persons per acre
Amenity open space .. .. 1,550 sq. ft. per person


Diagram 48
MINIMUM PLOT SIZE 6,000 sq. ft.
MINIMUM FRONTAGE 49 ft.
MAXIMUM PLOT RATIO 0.25
AVERAGE NET DENSITY 20 persons per acre
NOTES
Minimum plot size and minimum frontage for
single dwellings. Plot ratio restricts building area
to about 1,500 sq. ft.—adequate for smaller type
houses. Larger houses should be sited on larger
plots. The effect of regulations protecting privacy
would limit the number of variations on narrow
frontage plots [Example 19] but would permit con-
siderable freedom in choice of plan shape and
orientation on wide plots [Example 20]. The
theoretical maximum residential densities would in
practice seldom be achieved. Based on an average
of 3’B persons per dwelling, the normal resulting
net density would be about 20 persons per acre.
EXAMPLE 19
Plots of 49ft. 6 in. frontage, 1-storey detached dwellings.
Net area of each plot .. .. .. .. 6,000 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 1,500 sq. ft.
Gross site area [assuming street-block 162,624 sq. ft.
990 ft. long] [3-7 acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. .. 30,000 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 100
Net residential density (maximum) .. 27 persons per acre
Amenity open space .. .. 1,100 sq. ft. per person
EXAMPLE 20
Plots of 66ft. frontage, 1-storey detached dwellings.
Net area of each plot .. .. .. .. 6,094 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 1,523 sq. ft.
Gross site area [assuming street-block 140,811 sq. ft.
1,056 ft. long] [3 • 2 acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. • • 24,368 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 81
Net residential density (maximum) .. 25 persons per acre
Amenity open space .. .. 1,100 sq. ft. per person


Diagram 49
MINIMUM PLOT SIZE 4,000 sq. ft.
MINIMUM FRONTAGE 33 ft.
MAXIMUM PLOT RATIO 0.20
AVERAGE NET DENSITY 25 persons per acre
NOTES
This minimum frontage is applicable only to
single-storey row housing and attached pairs. The
low plot ratio of o*2o would permit only small
dwellings in scale with the size of the site, which
would be suitable for old persons’ cottages and
small family dwellings of flat size as alternatives to
2or 3 storey flats. Larger pairs or terraces would
be subject to the same conditions as indicated in
previous Diagrams, according to the site.
EXAMPLE 21
Plots of 33ft. frontage, 1-storey terraces.
Net area of each plot .. *. .. .. j 4,356 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 871 sq. ft.
Gross site area [assuming street-block 163,350 sq. ft.
924 ft. long] [3‘75 acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. .. 24,388 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 81
Net residential density (maximum) .. 28 persons per acre
Amenity open space .. .. .. 850 sq. ft. per person
EXAMPLE 22
Plots of 33ft. frontage, 1-storey attached pairs.
Net area of each plot .. . . .. !.. 4,356 sq. ft.
Permissible floor space per plot .. .. 871 sq. ft.
Gross site area [assuming street-block 163,350 sq. ft.
924 ft. long] [3*75 acres]
Total floor space .. .. .. .. .. 24,388 sq. ft.
Total number of persons .. .. .. 81
Net residential density (maximum) .. 28 persons per acre
Amenity open space .. .. .. 850 sq. ft. per person


APPENDIX II
The Planning Ordinance
A. THE ORDINANCE OR
REGULATIONS
The written part of a statutory town planning
scheme takes the form of an Ordinance or set of
Regulations describing the scheme and its administra-
tion. It should be made under powers given in the
suggested legislation in Chapter 11.
The Regional Plan contains the overall approach
and the broad zoning suggestions which must be
filled out in greater detail by the local planning
schemes. In a similar way it is suggested that the
Ordinance which must form a part of a statutory
Regional Plan should be adaptable, in similar form
but in more detail, for use in local planning schemes.
Common principles must clearly apply to both
regional and local schemes and ordinances, and it
will be of advantage both to the public and the
scheme administrators if uniformity of presentation
is achieved.
This Appendix does not attempt to set out in full
a statutory form of Ordinance, which requires legal
phraseology and which must be related to other
Acts and Regulations. Many of the terms used
require quite specific legal definitions.
The Ordinance should contain the following pro-
visions :
(i) Preliminary : A section relating to the
general purpose of the scheme and to the
general definition and interpretation of
the terms used.
(ii) Zoning : A complete explanation of the
zoning proposals, including the Zoning
Table adopted in the Scheme and the
way in which it should be used. Pro-
vision must be made to safeguard the
rights of owners of existing buildings and
land uses which do not conform to the
zoning requirements (referred to as non-
conforming uses).
Special requirements applicable to any
particular zone should also be included in
this section.
(iii) Reservations of Land : Reservations differ
from zones in that the ultimate acquisition
of the reserved land for the purpose of
public development is implied. This
section should state the purpose of the
various reservations and the means by
which they are to be acquired by the
authority concerned.
The owners of land affected by a
reservation should be able to require the
planning authority to purchase their land
in certain cases. This section would also
set out the development (if any) which
could be permitted in the reservations.
(iv) Other requirements : This section should
contain any other provisions not dealt
with under the heading of Zoning and
Reservations.
It should include any special subdi-
vision requirements, provisions relating
to the size and location of buildings on
land, in relation to any particular zone,
and any building lines or other special
requirements.
(v) Administration : Should contain details as
to the method in which applications for
permission to develop land must be made,
to whom they must be made and by
whom they will be approved.
It is desirable to relate applications
made under this head to other applica-
tions which are at present made under
other regulations such as building and
health.
It should be possible for the developer
of land to submit one application to an
authority, and obtain a decision in respect
of all regulations affecting that develop-
ment.
Generally the building regulations
should cover the construction and internal
considerations of any building, whereas
the planning regulations should provide
for the siting and size. The two should
be operated together.


The aim should be to make the Ordinance easily
interpreted, simple to operate and yet flexible and
free from anomalies.
Accompanying the Ordinance would be a map or
maps indicating by drawing and distinctive colouring
the various zones for different types of land use, the
reservations of land for various purposes, and any
other proposals of a specific or advisory nature.
The Ordinance and map or maps together form
the statutory scheme.
B. ZONING
(i) The Nature of Zoning
One of the aims of every town planning scheme
is to ensure that all the land within its boundaries
is put to the best possible use. Because this land
is not in one but in a multitude of ownerships, and
the ideas of owners differ very considerably as to
how their land should be developed, reasonable
solutions are not always easy to reach.
For very many years, the principle has been estab-
lished that it is in the public interest to zone or
classify land into areas for different uses, having
regard to any development already existing and to
the most suitable purposes to which the land may be
put. This principle has been applied in the United
States and the United Kingdom for a long time and
has undoubtedly had a most beneficial effect. The
power to zone has also existed in Western Australia
for many years but only limited advantage has been
taken of it.
Zoning may be as broad or as detailed as the par-
ticular town planning scheme requires, and while its
immediate effect may seem restrictive, the results
should quickly be seen to be constructive.
For instance, it is clearly wrong that an area suitable
for a residential suburb and already partly developed
with houses should have scattered factories in it.
The very existence of these factories lowers values
and causes annoyance and often dangers to the
residents. Yet no one would deny that factories
are needed in a modern city, and within relatively
easy reach of the residential areas. It is not always
as apparent that, in the long term, it is equally harmful
to a factory to be in a residential area. Its future
development in such a place is limited. The sur-
rounding residential streets will be limited in size
and design and the industrialist is not in close touch
with other industries and businesses.
This is but one example of the disadvantages of
mixed development which can occur in a city where
the growth is unguided. Other examples have been
mentioned in the Report.
Zoning is relatively easy to apply in areas where
development is at present very slight. The difficult
problems occur in the older areas, which are already
almost entirely developed and where a mixture of
land uses exists. The solution can only follow a
close examination of the existing uses and the selection
of the most suitable and probably the predominant
type or types of use for the future, having regard
to the overall needs of the community.
This does not mean that development which does
not conform to the zoning must automatically move
out. It has probably been established for many
years and " existing use ” rights cannot be disturbed
without payment of compensation. However, if
the zoning is reasonable in its application and is
generally accepted, it follows that eventually those
uses which do not conform to the requirements of
the zone will probably move of their own accord to
more suitable localities as redevelopment takes place.
In some cases it may even be necessary for the plan-
ning authority to initiate the move and to pay any
compensation involved.
One lesson which has been learnt in all countries
in the last few decades is that any zoning system must
be flexible within its general design, and yet offer the
stability which is of great advantage to developers.
Early zoning schemes tended to be very specific and
definite rather than flexible. They made no allow-
ance for proposals of varied character which did not
exactly conform to the very limited scheme require-
ments. As a result, these schemes were either
amended piecemeal until they were unrecognisable
or else they lapsed completely.
The modem approach is to provide for a series of
use zones where the main or predominant purpose
of each zone is clearly defined, for example, as in-
dustrial, residential or shopping, but allowing a
certain amount of latitude within the predominant
purpose for other uses of a similar or allied class or
character.


(ii) Use Classes
In order to arrange and allocate various types of
building and land use, Table 56 has been prepared
to show a suggested classification of uses. Most
uses fall readily into one class or another with the
exception of Classes 10 and 24 which are referred to
later. The list shown in Table 56 is not intended
to be comprehensive, but it covers the types of
development normally encountered. A planning
authority can, in fact, define almost any type of zone
by reference to the list of use classes and a selection
of the classes required.
For example, the Zoning Table (Table 57) which
follows suggests only two types of Residential Zone
—Zone G which is particularly applicable to the
Central Areas and where the predominant use is
flat development, and Zone H where the predominant
use is the normal dwelling house. Other types of
residential zone could be devised.
In further explanation of Table 56 the following
points should be noted :
Class 4 —Home Occupations : It is always a matter
of controversy as to the extent to which the occupier
of the ordinary domestic dwelling should be allowed
to conduct business activities on his premises in a
residential area. Provided that these activities do
not adversely affect the character of the area as a
residential locality or cause a nuisance there can be
no objection, and the criterion therefore is probably
the size and nature of the occupation. For example,
the need for a special building or buildings other
than the dwelling and normal domestic outbuildings,
the employment of staff other than the owner or his
family, and special service main requirements would
probably take the occupation out of this class.
Doctors’ and dentists* surgeries and consulting rooms
[and, in some areas, professional offices] would
normally be permissible in all residential areas.
Class 7 — Showrooms : This class is intended to
cover uses which, because of the nature of the goods
to be shown, require large areas of floor space. They
are normally found in zones on the fringes of the main
commercial area, rather than in the higher value areas
in the centre.
Class 10—Special Places of Assembly : This type
of use has special siting requirements and cannot
easily be allocated to any particular ZQne, The main
factor to be considered is the need for accommodating
large numbers of people and vehicles and the con-
sequent effect on the surrounding area and roads.
Very special consideration is required in each case.
Classes 11 and 12—Petrol Filling and Service
Stations : Class 11 falls readily into the category of
retail business, provided any repair work carried out
is only on a minor scale. Subject to other con-
siderations, filling stations would normally be sited
adjacent to traffic routes or adjoining business centres.
Class 12, which would probably include petrol
service, falls into the industrial class, and is thus
more difficult to site because of effects on neighbour-
ing property.
It is suggested that further development within
the central areas of either of these classes should only
be permitted in connection with, and as a part of
parking areas or parking stations.
In all cases traffic considerations resulting from
the movement of vehicles into and out of the stations
are of prime importance.
Class 16 — Light Industry : There are varying
definitions of this type of industry ; some take into
account the level of noise produced by machines,
others limit the amount of floor space. None of
them are completely satisfactory. The main con-
siderations should be that:—
(a) the processes involved in the industry should
not harm the adjoining locality by reason
of noise, vibration, smoke, smell, fumes,
vapour or steam, dust or grit, oil, waste
water or waste products.
(b) in order to achieve some of these things any
machinery should be powered either by
electricity or a fuel which does not produce
smoke or steam.
It should be possible to site a zone containing
light industry immediately adjoining a residential
zone without any harm to the latter.
Class 17 — General Industry : This class comprises
all industry except Classes 16 and 18. While general
industry would not be permitted in a light industrial
zone, light industry would normally be allowed in a
general industrial zone.


Tablz 56
USE CLASSES
Use Class
1 Dwelling Houses, including attached pairs or terraced houses.
' 2 Residential Flats.
3 Boarding Houses, Hostels, Lodging Houses, Unlicensed Hotels, Residential Clubs.
4 Home occupations.
5 Licensed Hotels.
6 Shops, Department Stores, Restaurants, Cafes, Ticket Offices and Bureaux, Receiving Offices, Hairdressers,
Local Post Offices, Amusement Halls.
7 Showrooms in connection with Retail Warehousing or Offices, and intended for the display of goods of
a bulky character.
8 Offices, Banks, Stock or Produce Exchanges.
9 Public Buildings and Places of Assembly, including Churches, Cinemas and Theatres, Government and
Local Government Offices and buildings, non-residential Clubs, Colleges and Institutions.
10 * Special Places of Assembly, including Athletic or Sports Grounds with spectator provision, Drive-in
Cinemas, Racecourses or Trotting Tracks, Stadia, Showgrounds, Motels, Caravan or Camping Grounds.
11 Petrol Filling Stations.
12 Motor Service and Repair Stations.
13 Car Parks and Taxi Parks.
14 Wholesale Warehouses designed for the storage of goods and transaction of business other than retail
business.
15 Storage Warehouses and Yards, including Builders’ or Contractors’ Yards, Furniture Warehouses, Grain
Silos, Government or Local Government Depots and Stores, Transit Warehouses.
16 Light Industry.
17 General Industry.
18 Special Industry.
19 Schools, Residential Colleges or Universities.
20 Hospitals, Sanatoria, Convalescent and Nursing Homes.
21 Outdoor Recreation, including Public Parks or Gardens, Foreshore Reserves, Playing Fields, Children’s
Playgrounds, Private Open Spaces which do not fall within other Use Classes.
22 Professional Chambers or Professional Offices.
23 Liquid Fuel Depots.
24 Other buildings and uses.
Airports.
Bus Garages, Stations or Tram Depots.
Cemeteries.
Crematoria.
Major Public Utility Installations (Water, Electricity, Gas, Sewerage, Drainage).
Mental Homes.
Prisons.
Refuse Destructors and Refuse Disposal areas.
Wireless or Television Buildings or Installations. . ;
Zoological Gardens.
25 Buildings or uses of land for the purpose of agriculture or forestry or the keeping of livestock (including
poultry).
2*6 Buildings and uses for rural industry.
27 Buildings and excavations for the winning and working of minerals, including clay, gravel, limestone and sand.


Table 57
ZONING TABLE
Use Class
Central Shopping I 1 * -
Showrooms ?
Offices O
Warehouse t“l
(Wholesale)
Light Industry W
Civic, Cultural,
Educational
Residential (1) O
Residential (2) ffi
District or
Local Shopping
General Industry?^
Special Industry f 1
M
”3
M
3
Remarks
1
X
X
X
X
IP
IP
AA
P
IP
IP
X
AA
To provide corner shops where necessary in
Zone H.
Require very special siting.
In Central Areas only within car parks.
In Residential Zones only in selected positions.
Only in special cases in Rural Zone.
Require special siting.
2
IP
AA
AA
X
X
IP
P
AA
IP
X
X
AA
3
AA
AA
AA
X
X
AA
AA
AA
X
X
X
AA
4
X
X
X
X
X
X
AA
AA
X
X
X
AA
5
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
X
AA
6
P
IP
IP
IP
IP
IP
IP
AA
P
IP
X
AA
7
AA
P
IP
IP
IP
X
X
X
AA
IP
X
AA
8
IP
IP
P
IP
IP
IP
IP
X
IP
IP
IP
AA
9
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
P
AA
AA
AA
AA
X
AA
10
X
X
X
X
X
AA
AA
AA
X
X
X
AA
11
X
AA
AA
AA
AA
X
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
12
X
X
X
AA
AA
X
X
X
AA
AA
AA
AA
13
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
AA
A A
AA
AA
AA
AA
14
X
X
X
P
IP
X
X
X
X
IP
IP
IP
15
IP
IP
X
AA
IP
X
X
X
IP
IP
IP
IP
16
IP
X
X
IP
P
X
X
X
IP
AA
AA
X
17
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
P
X
X
18
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
P
IP
19
X
X
X
X
X
AA
AA
AA
X
X
X
AA
20
X
X
X
X
X
AA
AA
AA
X
X
X
AA
21
Perm
itted :
n all
zones
♦
22
IP
IP
IP
IP
IP
IP •
IP
IP
IP
IP
IP
AA
23
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
AA
AA
AA
24
R
equire
speci
il sitir
ig in
all ca
ses.
25
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
P
26
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
AA
X
AA
27
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
AA
NOTE : Central Area Uses—Shown by heavy black edging.
P Predominant use permitted as of right.
A A Permitted subject to approval of planning authority.
IP Permitted subject to approval as incidental to predominant use.
X Not permitted.
In all cases, building development is subject to control of density, siting, etc.


Class 18—Special Industry : This group comprises
those classes of industry which by reason of the fact
that they emit noxious or offensive fumes, or smells,
or waste products, require some degree of isolation
in their siting. They should be the subject of special
consideration in every case. At the same time such
industries cannot be too isolated as labour is required
to operate them and they can benefit by industrial
grouping as discussed in Chapter 4.
They fall fairly readily into two main groups :
(a) those which present difficulties in effluent
disposal.
(b) those which pollute the atmosphere.
Industries in group (a) should be located in a zone
where effluent in large quantities can be treated and
disposed of. Group (b), unless also partly coming
within (a) simply require isolation.
It should be noted at this stage that no provision
has been made in the Plan for industries normally
termed as " hazardous.” Such industries require
special isolation because of the hazard or danger to
life or property in the vicinity, and must clearly be
the subject of special consideration as the occasion
arises.
Class 21—Outdoor Recreation : This class includes
all types of recreation area ranging from small to large
and could be included in any zone. Where a playing
field area is of the type that requires special provision
for spectators and parking it would come within
Class 10. A private open space includes the large
grounds of a college or institution or a park or recrea-
tion area to which the general public are not normally
admitted except on payment of a fee.
Class 24 —Other Buildings or Uses : This class
contains miscellaneous buildings or uses which, by
reason of their nature, do not easily fall within any
other class. They have special siting requirements
and are consequently not appropriate to any par-
ticular zone. A planning scheme should make special
provision for this class.
Class 26—Buildings and Uses for Rural Industry :
This use class consists of industries which do not
come within Class 18 and which are necessary for
the handling, treating, processing or packing of
primary products. It would include a workshop
which services plant and equipment used in con-
nection with primary products in the rural zone,
Class 21 —Buildings and Uses for Mineral Work-
ings : The winning of minerals such as clay, sand,
limestone and gravel is most important to the economy
of the Metropolitan Region. Wherever possible
these minerals must be obtained before the land is
put to another use. Greater consideration will have
to be given to the future use of excavated land after
the winning of minerals has been completed. Where
mineral workings adjoin close settlement, the effect
of the excavations on the amenity of the area must
be considered.
Permitted Development : Certain classes of de-
velopment have not been included in Tables 56 and
57 as they are of the type which must be permitted
in all zones.
This development includes roads and footpaths ;
railways, and minor railway installations required
for the normal working of the railway such as sta-
tions ; public utility service mains of all types includ-
ing the minor installations necessary for their function
such as sub-stations, pumping stations, local telephone
exchanges and the like.
Major installations such as power stations and
large sewage disposal plants present special siting
problems and would come within Class 24.
(iii) The Zoning Table
Table 57 sets out a zoning table with the various
use classes in their respective zones. It is intended
as a guide in formulating planning and zoning schemes
and could easily be adapted to meet particular re-
quirements.
The principle suggested is that each zone should
have a predominant use for which the zone is de-
signed. The predominant use should receive auto-
matic zoning approval, although the development
would be subject to other regulations. Other types
of use must clearly be permitted within each zone
but these must receive close consideration by the
planning authority before approval, having regard
to the merits of each case and the predominant use
intended.
Certain uses will naturally follow as incidental to
the predominant use. For example, in an industrial
zone most industries will require offices and storage
space. These are ancillary to the main industrial
purpose.


Finally, certain uses should be expressly pro-
hibited in certain zones.
This method of zoning is a variation on the earlier
and very rigid methods which permitted little flexi-
bility. Those use classes shown in Table 57 which
do not require the specific approval of the planning
authority must conform to other regulations such as
those related to building bulk or density. The
classes which can be permitted with the approval
of the planning authority are those in which each
case must be considered on its particular merits. In
this way the authority is able to exercise its dis-
cretion within the broad limits of the predominant
purpose of the zone. In a slightly different category
are those uses which are permitted subject to ap-
proval as incidental to the predominant use. Once
determined as being incidental uses, their approval
would be automatic.
Table 57 is designed principally to show the types
of zones which might be expected in a detailed plan-
ning scheme, although the various zones are capable
of variation.
The Development Proposals Map (Plate 9 in the
Atlas), which is described in more dfetail later, is not
specifically related to Table 57. The zones shown
in this Map are on a broad scale and often cover a
number of the zones in the Table.
Plates 11 and 13 in the Atlas, on the other hand,
relating to the Central Areas of Perth and Fremantle,
are related to Table 57 and contain Zones A to G.
The problems in these areas are complex and the
zoning suggestions are included as a guide to the local
authorities concerned.
C. RESERVATIONS
Where land is required for a public purpose, and
is shown as such in a town planning scheme, zoning
does not always meet the case. Even though the
land may not be required for the public purpose
for many years, and the present use may continue to
be enjoyed during that time, the ultimate use will
exclude private development.
In a town planning scheme such land should be
classified as a reservation which carries with it the
inherent obligation on the part of the planning author-
ity to purchase it. As a planning scheme envisages
development for many years ahead it is likely that
a number of reservations will not actually be required
for their planned use until perhaps one or two decades
have passed, and it is possible that they need not be
acquired until just before that time. However,
because the reservation virtually prevents the use
of the land for other than its existing use and perhaps
a limited extension, it is necessary to make provision
for the reservation or any part of it to be acquired
if the owner desires to develop it and the reservation
prevents such development.
A detailed local planning scheme could include as
reservations all land ultimately needed for public
purposes, provided the size of the sites required,
and other details, are known.
In the Regional Plan, however, only three types of
reservation are proposed :
Major Regional Highways.
Railways and Harbour Installations.
Major Open Spaces.
The highways and railway lines by their nature will
be definite in size and character and clearly no further
development of land in reservations for these pur-
poses could be permitted.
In the case of the larger areas reserved for railway
and harbour works and for open space, a lot will
depend on the detailed requirements which are
eventually worked out in each particular case. It
will frequently be possible to permit a certain amount
of private development within these reservations
provided that the purpose of the reservation is not
prejudiced.
D. REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT
PROPOSALS
The Development Proposals Map (Plate 9 in the
Atlas) shows the very broad zones and reservations
which must be established as part of the regional
framework.
Apart from the Central Areas of Perth and Fre-
mantle, which are dealt with separately, the zones
suggested are :
(i) Industrial, which would include general and
light industry. (Zones E and Kin Table
57.)
(ii) Special industry. (Zone L.)


(iii) Residential, in its broadest sense, and in-
cluding local shopping, smaller light in-
dustrial areas, public buildings, schools
and other uses incidental to normal com-
munity living. (Zones E, F, G, H and J.)
(iv) Rural. (Zone M.) The rural zone com-
prises by far the largest part of the whole
region and within this zone areas have
been suggested as most suitable for In-
tensive Agriculture, Forestry and Holding
Paddocks. The basic difference between
these parts of the rural zone would be
the size of holdings in the various areas.
(See Chapter 10.)
It must be realised that this map is not intended to
be a statutory map accompanying a scheme, although
it could readily be converted to such a map. The
roads and railways, for example, have, for clarity,
been shown «s much wider than the reservations
that would actually be needed.
The other notations on Plate 9 refer to other
proposals which generally come within the category
of Classes 19, 20 or 24, or in respect of which no
specific but only a general siting is suggested.
E. ALLIED REQUIREMENTS
Living in a city or community implies the accept-
ance of a number of controls or regulations which
are essential to the public interest. It is commonly
accepted practice that new buildings should conform
to certain standards to afford protection to the de-
veloper and to his neighbours in the community.
No one, for example, would argue about the desir-
ability of adhering to definite standards in the
disposal of household wastes.
Closely allied to building and health regulations
are the very necessary provisions, normally incorpor-
ated in a town planning scheme, which relate to the
size of buildings and their disposition on the site.
The overall size or bulk of buildings is indirectly
a regulation of density if one assumes adequate
internal living or working space standards. A Plot
Ratio control is suggested as the method of determin-
ing bulk, and should be applied in all zones where
standards of living and working space are required.
Closely associated to bulk is the question of the
amount of site which any particular type of building
should cover. Industrial and commercial buildings,
for instance, would probably cover a much greater
proportion of a site than dwelling houses.
The location of a building on a site must be subject
to some rules if reasonable living and working stand-
ards of daylighting, ventilation and privacy are to be
obtained on adjoining land as well as on the site in
question.
These matters are dealt with in more detail in
Chapter 9 and Appendices I and 111.
Considerable publicity has been given in recent
years to the dangers caused by pollution of the
atmosphere by smoke and fumes and to the dangerous
alliance of smoke and fumes with fog to produce
what is known as " smog.”
A Committee set up in England in 1953 to study
the problem stated :
" Medical experience leaves no doubt that ....
the harmful and dangerous *‘smog” occurs only
when smoke and oxides of sulphur and perhaps
other deleterious substances are present in the fog
in quantity. Health suffers wherever smoke is
prevalent even in the absence of fog or mist but
it is their combination that does real harm.” 1
The London " smog ” of December, 1952, which
caused the Committee to be established, resulted in
some 4,000 deaths, according to the Report. An
earlier " smog ” occurred causing a number of deaths
and considerable illness is reported from Donora,
Pennsylvania, U.S.A., in November, 1948.
Among the possible solutions to this problem
are :
(a) The conversion of bituminous coal into
coke, gas and electricity.
(b) The use of smokeless fuels for domestic
purposes.
(c) The proper use of efficient fuel burning
appliances.
(d) The use of efficient grit arresting plant in
furnaces fired by pulverised fuel or operated
by forced draught.
(e) Further research into practicable methods of
removing sulphur dioxide from the flue
gases of power stations and other large
boiler plants.
1 Committee on Air Pollution, Interim Report, London, 1953,


Some large cities have already taken powers to
proclaim " smokeless zones ” which prohibit the
emission of smoke. Examples are Coventry and
Manchester in England and St. Louis and Pittsburg
in America. While this may be relatively simple
to achieve in areas of new development, in areas of
existing development conversion of plant and equip-
ment will be difficult and expensive. It is also clear
that a " smokeless zone ” to be effective must be
large in area.
While the climate in Western Australia is not
particularly conducive to fog or mists, they do occur
in some areas and there are already signs of increasing
smoke pollution.
It seems very doubtful whether domestic fuel,
which is mainly wood in Western Australia, plays
such a large part in this pollution as the domestic
coal in England and America. The difficulties are
therefore more likely to occur in respect of industrial
and railway smoke.
Other theories are currently being advanced which
claim a relationship between " smog ” and sunshine
and the increasing air pollution from motor vehicle
exhaust fumes.
It is clear that further investigation into this prob-
lem is needed and it would be wise in all zoning
schemes, particularly in light industrial areas, to
insist on the use of gas or electricity or a smokeless
fuel for the powering of plant in respect of all new
development.




APPENDIX 111
Suggested Form of Daylighting Control in Central Areas
(with particular reference to office buildings)
The most complex patterns of building develop-
ment are to be found within the central business
areas of all cities. Economic forces have demanded
considerable concentration, and until recently it was
considered inevitable that there would be a crowding
together of buildings offering inadequate working
conditions due to lack of daylight and ventilation.
As the result of research which has been carried out
by scientists, architects, engineers and town planners,
it has now been shown that striking improvements
in physical environment may be effected in the de-
velopment and redevelopment of high density areas.
This is a particularly important consideration for
office buildings, where adequate daylighting standards
are most needed.
A most important step forward may be taken if
use is made of formulae designed 'to ensure the
adequate daylighting of buildings. Studies have been
made of the amount of daylight that is required for
the performance of normal office tasks compared with
the amount of daylight available outside the building,
and the effect of size and disposition of neighbouring
buildings upon illumination values within office
rooms. The Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research in England, and the Commonwealth De-
partment of Labour and National Service in Mel-
bourne, have been conducting experiments in this
field, and their observations and comments have been
much appreciated during the preparation of the
Regional Plan. In England, notably in the City and
County of London, new office buildings have been
designed to satisfy codes prepared by the Planning
Authorities, on the basis of conclusions reached by
the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
In form and general disposition they are much in
advance of pre-war buildings whose shape was
generally determined by building codes based on
rule of thumb rather than scientific principles.
In common with Australian practice generally, the
building by-laws of the City of Perth attempt to
provide for the lighting and ventilating requirements
of buildings by maintaining a control over the di-
mensions, and ratio of height to width of what are
described as " light courts,” to suit the varying
fenestration conditions of classified uses within
buildings. Apart from the fact that light court
restrictions are such that they rarely provide adequate
daylighting or ventilation, a defect in the present
statutes is that though the minimum dimensions of
windows and other openings are prescribed in the
by-laws, the disposition and location of " light
courts ” within the floor area are somewhat arbi-
trarily determined by the City Building Surveyor
during the examination of plans submitted for Council
approval. Within the scale of present development,
the by-laws appear to have been administered by
the Surveyor without distinction between developers.
It is however, considered desirable with the in-
creasing complexity of building that is to be expected
in the future, for by-laws to be more explicit in day-
lighting and ventilating requirements.
This Appendix suggests an alternative approach to
the problem of daylighting control, the essential
function of which is to ensure that the erection of
any building will not prevent existing buildings on
adjoining sites, or those likely to be erected in the
future, from being able to secure by natural means,
without recourse to artificial light, internal lighting
conditions equal to, or more than, a recommended
standard. It is based on the principle of equity and
assumes that all buildings will be subject to the same
daylighting requirements, and can achieve high and
comparable standards of architectural design. If an
existing building is of an obsolete design, with bad
internal planning and inadequate fenestration, (or
even a building that provides no fenestration at all),
this fact should not impose unnecessary restrictions
on the owner of a proposed new building.
No attempt has been made to give a detailed
scientific exposition of the complicated subject of
daylighting which will be familiar to those architects
and lighting engineers who have studied the various
specialist publications of recent years. However,
some simple facts should be noted. Perth enjoys
strong and penetrating daylight for an extraordinary


number of days of continuous sunshine, and design
data for daylighting in Perth is based upon a sky
luminance of 1,000 foot lamberts per square foot, a
standard obtained for 90 per cent, of normal working
hours throughout the year (Diagram 50).
Diagram 50
NATURAL ILLUMINATION AVAILABLE IN
PERTH (WESTERN AUSTRALIA) COMPARED
WITH LONDON (ENGLAND)
The graph gives an indication of the greater natural
illumination available in Perth (Western Australia)
compared with London (England).
Bold line curves indicate light available in Perth
(Lat. 32° S.) in midwinter (21st June).
Curve (A) refers to an overcast day having a
maximum horizontal illumination outdoors of
1,580 lm./sq. ft.
Curve (B) refers to a cloudless sunny day having
a maximum horizontal illumination outdoors
of 4,900 lm./sq. ft. (direct sunlight excluded).
Dotted line curves indicate light available in
London (Lat. 52° N.) in midwinter (22nd
December).
Curve (C) refers to an overcast day having a
maximum horizontal illumination outdoors of
700 lm./sq. ft.
Curve (D) refers to a cloudless sunny day having
a maximum horizontal illumination outdoors
of 1,875 lm./sq. ft. (direct sunlight excluded).
Internally a minimum standard illumination value
of 7.5 lumens per square foot is considered sufficient
for all ordinary office tasks that should be obtainable
under all normal circumstances in all parts of any
office room up to a depth of 2 feet from the rear wall
of the room. This minimum standard of available
daylight at a point of reference indoors (7.5 lumens
per square foot), as a percentage of that available at
the same time outdoors (1,000 lumens per square
foot), establishes a relationship, specifically for Perth
conditions of .75 per cent., and is known as the
Daylight Factor.
Whilst it is unnecessary to stipulate the standard
of internal lighting for all office requirements, or
to predetermine the architectural design of a new
building, certain assumptions have had to be made
of average conditions that can reasonably be expected
to prevail in new office construction, in order to
establish a code which is uniform in its application :
(a) External sky luminance, 1,000 lumens per
square foot.
(b) Minimum internal illumination, 7.5 lumens
per square foot.
(c) Reference point, 2ft. from rear wall of room
under consideration (position of desk at
greatest distance from light source), and
2ft. 6in. from floor (working surface of
desk).
(d) Internal room reflection factors : ceiling
75 per cent. ; walls 50 per cent. ; floor
15 per cent.
(e) Brightness of external and street surfaces
equal to 10 per cent, of average sky bright-
ness.
(f) Minimum room ceiling heights : ground
floor 12ft. 6in. ; all upper floors 9ft.
(g) Distance of window head to ceiling level,
6in.
(h) Distance of window sill from floor level,
2ft. 6in.
(j) Glazed area as percentage of total window
wall area, 50 per cent, to 60 per cent.
From scientific analysis recently made by the
Commonwealth Department of Labour and National
Service in Melbourne, it has been shown that
where an obstruction angle between buildings is
not greater than 45°, and with the above assumed


Diagram 51
THEORETICAL ASSUMPTIONS
conditions, office rooms may be between 20ft. and
30ft. deep with adequate internal daylighting stand-
ards. With a central service area not requiring high
illumination, building depths of 70ft. to 80ft. are
possible (Diagram 51). Architects can take full
advantage of front and rear lighting conditions and
design buildings to the full width of the site without
providing light courts. Daylighting from side walls,
in normal cases would not be necessary, and any side
lighting provided on the site boundary would not
impose any limitations to adjoining development.
Obstruction expressed as an angular measurement
from the base of a building to the cornice level of the
opposite building, can be applied to all existing or
proposed building development. A basic daylight-
ing angle of 45° is well suited to Perth lighting con-
ditions and has considerable additional value in the
simplicity of operation. Where building heights
must be considered with reference to adjoining street
widths, the basic height to width relationship is
immediately apprehensible, each being equal to the
other. The height of the cornice level of any build-
ing (measured from the pavement level at the base
of the building), should be equal to the horizontal
distance from this point, to a point vertically above
the opposite street building line, corresponding to
the 45° angle.
From the rear boundaries of the site the 45° angle
should also apply. It is however unreasonable to
measure this from the rear of any building on an
adjoining site, as this would prohibit certain owners
from full development. The presence of an existing
building built up to the rear boundary of a plot would
preclude the owner of the contiguous plot from
achieving optimum development, and the absence of
a building to the rear of the site would make the
application of an angular control exceedingly difficult.
In order to ensure equitable treatment for de-
velopers, it is suggested that measurement should
always be made from the only finite position com-
mon to all concerned ; the rear site boundary. The
maximum permissible height is therefore twice the
distance from the dividing boundary fence ; a pro-
portional relationship of 1 to 2, or an angular
measurement of 63° 26', from the rear boundary.
It should be noted that an angle of 63° 26' from the
centre line of the street could replace the 45° angle
from the opposite building line and would establish
the same maximum cornice height, but the application
of the 45° angle is likely to be more easily under-
stood by developers and would encourage simpler
set backs above cornice level. Within the 45° angle,
proportion (1 to 1), and the rear boundary equivalent


Diagram 52 DAYLIGHTING CONTROL : ANGLES A (45°) AND B (63° 26')
63° 26', proportion (1 to 2), many possible variations
of building form are possible that will ensure sufficient
daylight for good office working conditions.
Diagram 52 indicates the cross-sectional envelope
for all normal combinations of street width and site
depth, within which any proposed building must be
contained. For this and certain other diagrams a
ground floor height of 12ft. 6in., upper floor heights
of 9ft., and floor thicknesses of Ift. 6in., have been
assumed, resulting in floor heights of 14ft., 24ft. 6in.,
35ft., 45ft. 6in., 56ft., 66ft. 6in., 77ft., 87ft. 6in.,
98ft., 108 ft. 6in., 119 ft., 129 ft. 6in., 140 ft., etc. In
the example shown, with a 100 ft. street width, the
maximum cornice height on the building line of the
street frontage to which the building refers, will be
100 ft., and the cross sectional building form must be
within the stippled area.
Three examples are given in Diagram 53 of possible
building development with different street width and
site depth combinations under normal street frontage
conditions. Corner sites, even though they have
additional side lighting possibilities, and buildings on
sites facing side streets are treated similarly. It must
be emphasised that there are many possible alternative
ways of developing any site, and floor to floor heights
shown in the examples are only meant to indicate
basic principles.
The cross-sectional envelope in association with
the Plot Ratio are the only limiting factors, and
within these limits, floor to floor heights, room
depths, and other matters of detail are at the dis-
cretion of the developer.
The Plot Ratio, obtained by dividing the total floor
space of the building by the area of the site (described
in some detail in Chapter 9, Part I, Section D (ii)),
limits the amount of building bulk, and the application
of daylighting principles will suggest a rational dis-
position of this bulk on any site.


Diagram 53
DAYLIGHTING CONTROL : APPLICATION
OF ANGLES A AND B, TYPICAL EXAMPLES
Example (A), Diagram 53, illustrates a simple
form of development, with a street width of 99ft. and
a site depth of 112 ft. With assumed floor to floor
heights (ground floor 12ft. 6in. ; upper floors 9ft.), a
9-storey building 62ft. deep is contained within the
cross-sectional envelope, developing a Plot Ratio of
about 5.0. The proposed building is therefore
satisfactory both from daylighting and Plot Ratio
standards. Where the Plot Ratio of any projected
building exceeds the maximum permitted, the de-
veloper must either reduce the number of storeys,
or revise the building depth for some or all floors.
Even on a small site which may be considered an
extreme case, Example (B), a building of considerable
volume would be permitted. On some small sites
full development to agreed daylighting standards is
difficult, and a Plot Ratio of 5.0 may not be achieved.
In such cases, the consolidation of two or more sites
to form a larger more comprehensive development
area would allow a higher Plot Ratio to be more
easily attained.
On larger sites greater design freedom exists,
Example (C) ; and in all these examples, daylighting
standards much higher than those in existing de-
velopment are possible.
Mention has been made in Chapter 9, Part I,
Section D (iii) of this Report of the more general
problems of existing office development. Design
according to the existing by-laws ensures little more
than vertical tubes open at the top, which at the
lower floors provide inadequate light and air to
offices. At the moment, the problems of the future
are barely discernible, as new buildings borrow air
and light from adjoining sites, but they will become
more and more serious as the density of central area
development increases. Some provisions of the
existing by-laws and amendments suggested by the
Technical Committee appointed to investigate this
problem, are :
(a) Where windows are on opposite sides of a
light court, the ratio of height to width for
the light court is 5 to 1.


(b) Where a light court abuts a site boundary
with windows on one side of the light
court only, the set back angle is to the
ratio 4 to 1, unless reciprocal rights of
light are granted where the ratio may be
increased to 5 to 1.
(c) Where a light court has windows on one wall
or opposite walls only, the width of the
light court must be not less than 6ft., or
a distance equal to one-eighth of the height
whichever is the greater, and above the
third storey each wall not containing
windows must be set back at least 12in.
for each additional storey.
(d) The minimum size of a light court is 6ft.
square.
(e) For street widths less than 33ft. a maximum
building height equal to 2\ times the street
width is permitted.
(f) For street widths between 33ft. and 40ft. a
maximum building height of 80ft. is per-
mitted.
(g) For all street widths in excess of 40ft. the
maximum building height is equal to twice
the street width to a maximum of 132 ft.
except in special circumstances.
Under these by-laws, buildings will become much
greater in bulk, and standards of daylighting and
general working conditions will suffer marked de-
terioration (Diagrams 54, 55 and 56).
Diagram 57 indicates possible development in
individual lots. The perspective shows a view of
the street frontage essentially similar to development
under existing control, but comparison with Diagram
56 and a study of the improvements especially in
plan, will indicate the principal effects of the pro-
posed control. Diagram 58 indicates development
as a single comprehensive unit to a maximum Plot
Ratio of 5.0. Consolidation of a number of small
sites into bigger units would offer architects con-
siderably more scope for imaginative design.
On larger sites some owners may consider it de-
sirable to develop an office building in depth rather
than to build across the full width of the street
frontage to the maximum possible height. Any
building that does not occupy the full frontage will
give less physical obstruction to buildings on the
opposite side of the street. Buildings facing tower
or open development, in addition to the tower de-
velopment itself, would enjoy more daylight and air,
and this building form might offer a number of
advantages to site owners and to the visual city
scene.
Diagram 54 TYPICAL EXISTING OFFICE DEVELOPMENT


Diagram 55
CROSS SECTION THROUGH TYPICAL EXISTING AND PERMITTED OFFICE DEVELOPMENT
UNDER EXISTING BY-LAWS
Diagram 56
TYPICAL OFFICE DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER EXISTING BY-LAWS


Diagram 57
POSSIBLE OFFICE DEVELOPMENT IN INDIVIDUAL UNITS
TO A MAXIMUM PLOT RATIO OF 5.0
Diagram 58
POSSIBLE OFFICE DEVELOPMENT AS A SINGLE COMPREHENSIVE UNIT
TO A MAXIMUM PLOT RATIO OF 5.0


Application of the normal 45° angle would pro-
hibit tower development, but where the width of a
building is considerably less than the site frontage,
allowing daylight and air at each side of the building,
the height could be correspondingly increased within
certain prescribed limits. " Tower development ”
may be defined as any development that has more
than 50 per cent, of the total floor space area of the
building in a tower form that does not extend in
width to the side boundaries of the site.
It is suggested that where the width of the proposed
tower development is not greater than the horizontal
distance from the face of the tower development to
the plane of the opposite building line (shown as a
maximum, in the application of Angle B in the plan,
Diagram 60), and conforms to the side distance
control that ensures adequate space between neigh-
bouring development (Diagrams 60 and 61), the
permissible height of the tower development may be
increased from the normal 45° angular measurement
(proportion 1 to 1) to 56° 19' (proportion 1 to lj).
Similarly the rear boundary control may be increased
from 63° 26' (proportion 1 to 2) to 71° 34' (pro-
portion 1 to 3).
Diagram 59 indicates the cross-sectional envelope
within which any proposed tower development must
be contained. In the example shown, with an 80ft.
street width and 120 ft. site depth, the cross-sectional
building form must lie within the stippled area.
Comparison with Diagram 52 will indicate the differ-
ences in possible building form between normal and
tower development.
Where sites are very deep, tower development on
neighbouring sites may form parallel facades similar
to street conditions, and to this extent any tower
development that has a side length greater than 80ft.
Diagram 59
DAYLIGHTING CONTROL : TOWER DEVELOPMENT ANGLES C (56° 19') AND D (71° 34')


Diagram 60
EXAMPLES OF POSSIBLE DEVELOPMENT
will have to conform to the normal Angle A and B
control (Diagram 52), to ensure adequate working
conditions for offices whose working depths must
be considered to lie across the width of the site.
Diagram 60 shows the application of the angular
side distance control, and indicates that there is a
wide range of alternative architectural arrangements
possible under die suggested control (summarised in
Diagram 61), to a Plot Ratio of 5.0. It would have
been possible to develop an angular control in plan
for side boundary conditions, but the acceptance of
an 80ft. maximum depth, (similar to 80ft. depth
measured from building frontage suggested reasonable
for normal development, Diagram 51), achieves a
generally similar result in a simpler manner.
The examples shown are not meant to indicate
ideal architectural solutions, but to give an idea of the
effect daylighting control would have upon develop-
ment generally. Application of daylighting prin-
ciples in no way restricts the choice of architectural
form a building may take. On the contrary, in com-
parison with existing provisions, considerably more
alternatives of building form would be offered to
developers.
For any site, a maximum Plot Ratio should be
established to determine the maximum amount of
building bulk, and within this maximum, developers
should have numerous alternatives —particularly on
larger sites. Choice for developers will vary between
a low building covering most of the site and a tall
building covering very little of the site. In tower
development, for any given site width, and an angular
control operating from both sides of the site, Diagram
62 indicates the building height in feet that will give
the maximum floor area : e.g., with a site width of
120 ft. and an angle D control, lines intersect at a


Diagram 61
SUMMARY OF ANGULAR CONTROLS
Diagram 62
OPTIMUM SITE DEVELOPMENT
height of 92ft. An 8-storey building with floor heights
as already assumed (provided that in this hypothetical
example all independent upper floor areas were
equal to the ground floor area), would give a maxi-
mum total floor area. With varying floor heights
this graph would need to be recalculated, but for
most office development can be accepted as a reliable
first approximation. This may prove useful in
marginal cases where a first suggestion for archi-
tectural grouping does not give a Plot Ratio equal
to the maximum permissible.
Plot Ratio and daylighting have certain points of
agreement, yet both independently condition the
form of central area development. Diagram 63
indicates this relationship graphically. Where site
depth and street width combinations intersect outside
the stippled area it will be difficult to achieve a high
Diagram 63
SITE DEVELOPMENT : RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN A PLOT RATIO OF 5.0
AND DAYLIGHTING CONTROL


Plot Ratio value with adequate daylighting standards.
For all combinations that intersect within the stippled
area, a Plot Ratio of 5 0 is possible, with consider-
able architectural freedom of design.
An attempt has been made, within the limited time
available for this study, to deal with most basic prob-
lems likely to arise, but this Appendix does not
purport to provide for every possible form of building
development. It would be inordinately difficult to
cover every detailed aspect of daylighting, and its
effect upon the complex pattern of central areas.
There are certain to be many problems that cannot
be covered by a general statement of principle, but if
the suggested approach to daylighting is accepted, it
would be subject to normal local government ad-
ministrative control. Waivers, for circumstances
that are not covered by this general statement, and
for extenuating circumstances peculiar to a particular
site, would be at the discretion of the responsible
authority.
Much of this Appendix is an original conception
and a new approach to the daylighting problem, and
though revisions in detail may become necessary,
it can be regarded as a considerable step towards a
more scientific and equitable set of by-laws. It
offers in place of the existing control, a more easily
understood and rational method of solving one of
the problems of central area development.


APPENDIX IV
Special Study : District Centres
A. GENERAL
Although the Plan for the Metropolitan Region is
primarily a study of regional problems, the first
impact of town planning is generally through its
effect on immediate and everyday surroundings.
Whilst it has not been possible to devote time to the
study of the numerous aspects of detailed planning
in which the Plan will ultimately find expression—
the design of housing estates, local and district centres,
sports centres, industrial estates, etc. —the regional
proposals will lose in effectiveness if expert and
sympathetic consideration is not given to these prob-
lems in the preparation of local planning schemes.
In one case, however —that of the district centre —
the design problems are so complex, and their effective
solution so critical to the success of the proposals
for community development, that it was thought
desirable to include a brief indication of possible
solutions. The orderly and planned growth of large
commercial and community centres is, in this State,
a comparatively new concept. Hitherto, the Central
Areas of Perth and Fremantle have provided most
of the major shopping, entertainment and cultural
facilities, but with the rapid growth of the metropolis
many of these activities will also develop at points
more easily accessible from contiguous residential
areas. This is in fact happening now. New centres
are growing, unfortunately in a haphazard manner
and without regard to ultimate requirements. The
problems of district centre design are in many ways
similar to those of the Central Areas, but on a minor
scale. As such, they require equally careful analysis,
with a view to estimating the area necessary to accom-
modate all the facilities required at appropriate
densities, the volume of traffic to be catered for, and
other matters, in relation to the size and character
of the district which the centre will serve.
A successful economic and architectural synthesis
will have a most beneficial effect on the social and
business life of the community. The absence of a
plan, resulting in the continuation of disorderly
growth, or the short-term benefit of a hurriedly
conceived plan, resulting in growth which although
orderly is misdirected, can only give rise to a legacy
of confusion impossible to resolve in the longer term.
The pre-planning of selected district centres and
the encouragement of their establishment and growth
is a function of local planning. The intention of
this short study is to give an indication of the nature
of typical problems and some of the principles which,
it is suggested, should form the basis of their solution.
B. DISTRIBUTION AND
REQUIREMENTS
The Regional Plan suggests various sites for district
centres. Whether in fact they develop in the loca-
tions indicated will depend on decisions made at
local level. In new areas the choice will be largely
decided by the direction and rate of housing develop-
ment. If the selected site can be planned to begin
its life as the first shopping centre in a new housing
area, it is more likely to expand into the major district
centre than if established later in competition with
already flourishing minor shopping groups. In older
established areas, precise locations can be determined
only after an extensive survey of existing conditions.
The district centre, as envisaged in the Regional
Plan, will contain the district’s main shopping
facilities, offering a wide range of goods and services,
the local government administrative buildings and the
major buildings catering for cultural and recreational
activities.
The provision of shopping facilities is likely to be
the first, and most important continuing function, of
the centre. It is essential that present and future
shopping needs be analysed and the necessary reserva-
tions made to cater for all probable requirements.


A study of this type will influence both the distribu-
tion and size of centres. In Chapter 8 it has been
suggested that of an overall provision of 9 shops per
1,000 persons (based on the present distribution),
about 3.5 shops, or the equivalent retail outlets, are
likely to be required in the district centre. It must
be emphasised again that the proportion is variable
according to the nature of the district, and that the
overall figure itself may well change in the future as
shopping habits alter. There will, therefore, be
many variations in actual numbers and distribution
as between ** corner ” shops, minor local groups, and
district centres. The advantages of shop grouping
rather than scattering must be apparent both to the
retailer and the shopper. A continuous shopping
frontage is far more effective from both aspects than
one where shops are interspersed with other uses.
As a basis for consideration, and adaptation where
necessary, it is suggested that a reasonable distribu-
tion could be the provision of 2 comer shops for
every group of about 200 houses, local centres of
about 16 shops for localities of 5,000 persons, and
the district centre with about 3 to 4 shops per 1,000
persons. In the latter would be found department
stores, chain stores, and supermarkets, and relatively
large parking areas would be required. In close
proximity to the shops would be space for banks,
agencies and professional offices.
The community buildings to be provided will
depend on the size and the social habits of the popula-
tion to be served, and the degree to which the com-
munity is prepared to devote a proportion of its
income to establishing halls, libraries, health centres,
and other public buildings. It may not be possible
in many cases, because of the advanced state of
development, to concentrate all the desirable uses in
one centre ; but assuming that this can be done (for
example, in new areas), it has been suggested in
Chapter 8 that about 1 acre per 1,000 persons would
cater for most of these needs. The allocation of
this total to the various possible uses has also been
suggested. It is recommended, as a general prin-
ciple, that this target should not be considered too
high merely because there is no apparent immediate
need, or because the present financial resources of
the community are limited. In a skilfully designed
plan, land reserved for community purposes can
revert to residential or commercial use if future
requirements fall below the scale forecast. A reason-
able balance should be struck between an under-
provision of adequate sites on the one hand and
over-provision, resulting in the sterilization of valuable
land for excessive periods, on the other.
C. DESIGN
There are three fairly distinct types of problem :
the redevelopment of existing centres in inner urban
areas, the design of entirely new centres in areas
which are at present undeveloped, and the orderly
expansion of embryo centres in detached townships.
The first of these is generally concerned with
already flourishing suburban shopping centres. With
two or three notable exceptions, they are usually
situated on major traffic routes, and consist of a
mixture of well-established uses, predominantly
shops, spread out along both sides of the highway.
The disadvantages of this arrangement have been
discussed elsewhere. The redevelopment and con-
solidation of highway ribbon centres is at the same
time a difficult and pressing local planning problem.
Ideal solutions are unlikely to be achieved, and im-
provements will take place only after an operation
covering several years. Many established but un-
satisfactory uses occupy key sites, and form serious
obstacles to the overall planning of the area. Existing
and prospective owners of business premises may
have to be persuaded by well considered argument
to adopt new forms of development. The present
pattern of land values, which developed under con-
ditions quite different from those now becoming
apparent, will change, but the changes should be
guided by sensible and effective zoning regulations.
The successful plan will effect a reasonable com-
promise between the theoretically ideal solution and
the short term solution in which existing faults are
accepted as inviolable. It will, by effective zoning,
encourage the establishment of those uses, other than
shopping, which for the public benefit should be in
central positions and which should not, because of
intensive competition for high value sites, be forced
to seek cheaper sites, however badly located, else-
where. It will offer a practical solution to the
growing problem of car parking, and where an
alternative route for through traffic cannot be found,
will minimise the conflict between fast-moving
vehicles and pedestrians by developing in depth away
from the highway. In some cases it will be possible


to continue the already successful principle of de-
velopment on one side only. Above all, it will be
based on a programme of development which has
regard to the financial resources of the local authority
and property owners.
A tentative and theoretical solution to a typical
problem is suggested at the end of this Appendix
(Diagram 64).
In the case of the entirely new centre it will be
easier to approach more nearly an ideal visual and
practical arrangement. Much of the skill required
will be in the selection of the site and in the ordering
of surrounding residential development to encourage
its natural expansion. Flexibility will be essential,
to allow for the changing needs of the growing com-
munity. The essence of a well-conceived plan should
be capable of realisation if future needs have been
assessed realistically and the necessary zones estab-
lished. Because of the infinite number of layouts
which are possible, depending on topography and
other variables, no attempt has been made to suggest
graphically a solution to this type of problem. One
example of the American trend in'district centres is
illustrated in Chapter 10.
Planning for the expansion of existing small centres
in detached townships is in many ways the most
tangible of the three problems. Not yet saturated
with development, their present structure neverthe-
less gives an indication of what is required and pro-
vides an acceptable basis for future development.
The catchment area of the centre, and therefore the
appropriate quantity of land required for various
uses, is more easily assessed than in the case of
districts forming part of a large and complex urban
structure. The pattern of main roads has generally
developed naturally from the simultaneous growth
of centre and hinterland, and with only minor
modifications can be adopted to encourage its further
development. Invariably the existing centre is a
loose arrangement of shops, houses, industries and
public buildings, together with a considerable amount
of vacant land and older buildings ripe for redevelop-
ment. As in the case of the established inner urban
centre, a successful programme will be the key to
the creation of a flourishing centre. A possible
form of development for one of these centres, that
of Armadale, is included at the end of this Appendix
(Diagram 65).
Although three different types of problems have
been referred to, it will have been apparent that
similar basic planning principles apply to each.
These may be summarised thus :
(i) Location : the location of the centre must
be such that, in addition to being geo-
graphically convenient to all parts of the
district, its development is encouraged
naturally and in tempo with that of the
residential development which it is to
serve.
(ii) Size ' an area must be defined and pro-
tected which is large enough to contain
all the facilities likely to be required, but
compact enough to ensure economical
use of the land and reasonable distances
between the various elements.
(iii) Use Zones : use zones of appropriate size,
having regard to carefully assessed re-
quirements, must be so disposed that
the efficient internal functioning of each
zone is assured and their relationship
such as to have a mutually beneficial
effect.
(iv) Traffic : where possible, through traffic
should be excluded to ensure the mini-
mum of conflict between vehicles and
pedestrians, and between long distance
and local traffic, but internal circulation
should provide simple and direct access
to key points.
(v) Car Parking : adequate provision should
be made for parking, both in terms of
quantity and distribution.
(vi) Pedestrians : the needs of pedestrians
should be recognised and their rights to
safety and convenience guarded.
(vii) Programming : a programme must be
established which relates to the priority
of community requirements and the
resources available to satisfy them.


(viii) Appearance : through the medium of
effective planning regulations or building
by-laws, a high standard of architectural
design should be sought, allowing for
individuality but preventing discordant
relationships.
(ix) Flexibility : the details of the plan must be
capable of adjustment to allow for
changing conditions, without prejudicing
the basic conception of the design.
The planning authority must be prepared, once a
plan and programme are agreed, to ensure the im-
plementation of the proposals by co-ordination of
the activities of both public and private developers
and, where necessary, by positive action in accord-
ance with the plan.
D. SPECIAL STUDIES
Diagrams 64 and 65 illustrate the application of the
principles outlined above. In neither case does the
plan purport to be the only solution to a particular
problem. In the suggested redevelopment of an
existing centre on a major highway many theoretical
assumptions have been made. More, or less, satis-
factory plans could be evolved depending on actual
site conditions. In the suggested plan for the centre
of Armadale, only the briefest of surveys has been
carried out, and the proposals do not pretend to do
more than illustrate the manner and scale of develop-
ment which could be achieved in this and similar
centres.


Diagram 64
REDEVELOPMENT OF AN
EXISTING CENTRE IN AN
INNER URBAN AREA
1. Existing development.
Mixed uses on each side of high-
way. Conflict between pedestrians,
service vehicles, parked cars and
through traffic.
2. Planned further develop-
ment. Zoning to prevent mixed
development along highway. More
compact centre with new shops,
car parking, etc., in the redeveloped
area behind existing frontage. Bus
bays and controlled pedestrian and
traffic crossings ensure easier pas-
sage for through traffic.
3. Alternative uncontrolled de-
velopment. More intense use of
frontage and spread along highway.
Continuous strip of everchanging
land uses and values, and ultimately
blight.
KEY
T. Town Hall.
L. Library.
H.C. Health Clinic.
P.O. Post Office.
P. Police Station.
F.S. Fire Station.
A. Ambulance Station.
CH. Church.
H. Hotel.
C. Cinema.
D. Dance Hall.
F. Residential Flats.
S.S. Service Station.
C.P. Car Park.


Diagram 65 EXPANSION OF A CENTRE IN A DETACHED TOWN—ARMADALE


INDEX
All references are to pages except where Chapters and Appendices are specifically mentioned
Abattoirs, 31, 222
holding paddocks for, 33, 204
Acts of Parliament,
City of Fremantle Act, 1948, 244
City of Perth Act, 1914, 244
Commonwealth Aid Roads Act, 1954
(Commonwealth), 107
Fremantle Harbour Trust Act, 1902, 136
Gas Undertakings Act, 1947, 140
Main Roads Act, 1930-53, 107
Main Roads Act, Amendment Act,
1952, 108, 109
Municipal Corporations Act, 1906-47,
107, 244
Public Works Act, 1902-45, 107
Road Districts Act, 1919-48, 107, 244
State Electricity Commission Act, 1945,
143
State Transport Co-ordination Act,
1933-48, 107, 127
Town and Country Planning Act, 1947
(U.K.), 245, 247
Town Planning and Development Act,
1928-54, 111, 239, 244, 246, 247,
248, 250
Traffic Act, 1919-53, 107
Tramways and Ferries Act, 1948, 128
Administration
of the Plan, 239-243, 250, 251
Perth as centre of, 20, 32
see also Acts of Parliament ; Imple-
mentation, State Government
Agriculture, 25, 26, 30, 32, 33, 203, 204
dairying, 24, 31
early development of, 20
employment in, 49
market gardening, 32, 49, 78, 79, 83,
203, 204, 211, 234
orchards, 31, 32, 49, 77, 83, 203, 204,
237
pattern of, in Region, 83
poultry farming, 32, 49, 203
vineyards, 31, 32, 77, 83, 203, 221
Airport
Caversham, 138, 234
Perth, 138, 139, 230
proposed new, 121, 138, 139, 220, 234
Albany, 20, 21, 33, 105, 228
Alfred Cove, 224
Allen Park, 217
Applecross, 78, 224
Armadale, 32, 56, 77, 154, 202, 204, 231,
236, 237
Ashfield, 221
Attadale, 78, 224
Authorities, see Commonwealth Govern-
ment ; Implementation ; State Govern-
ment
Aviation, civil, see Transport, air
B
Bakers Estate, 225
Banjup, 77
Barracks, the [Perth], 16, 175, 185
Bassendean, 54, 57, 61, 63, 68, 78, 133,
184, 221, 229
Bayswater, 57, 220
Beaches, Ocean, 91, 95, 97, 211, 214, 216,
217, 226, 231, 235, 242, 243
pollution of, 142
Bedfordale, 237
Beechboro, 78, 204, 218, 221, 228, 229
Beecher Point, 235, 236
Bellevue, 77, 221
Belmont, 55, 56, 57, 220, 228, 229
Belmont-Welshpool, 68, 69, 121, 122, 133,
134, 135, 137, 143, 228, 229, 230
Bentley Park, 204, 230
Betterment, 245, 246, 247, 249, 250
Bickley, 232, 237
Bicton, 223
Blackadder Creek, 222
Bold Park, 76, 83, 89, 98
Bridges
Central Area, Perth, 120, 121, 125, 174,
175, 186
Fremantle Harbour, 18, 193, 223, 259
Narrows Bridge, 99, 116, 117, 175, 178,
216, 226, 227, 259
proposed over the Swan River, 116,
117, 121, 122, 123, 129, 175, 216,
224, 226
road, 107, 110, 117, 129, 228, 229, 230,
231
Building and Construction, 9, 31, 72
Bullsbrook, 233, 234
Bulls Creek, 80, 230, 231
Bunbury, 143, 231
Burns Beach, 202, 234
Burswood Island
Regional Sports Centre at, 99, 101
Bus services, see Transport, public road


Butlers Swamp, 142, 217
Byford, 56, 237
By-laws, Building, 16, 148, 161, 164, 166,
167, 168, 247, 250, 261, 262, 287, 298
Calista, 235
Canning, 140, 226, 227, 231
Cannington, 78, 230, 231
Canning Vale, 204, 231, 232
Cardup, 56
Carine Swamp, 214
Carlisle, 227, 228
Carmel, 232
Carilla, 203
Causeway, 107, 110, 116, 122, 175, 228
Caversham, 138, 221, 234
Cemeteries, 100
Central Areas, see Chapter 9, also pp.
15-18, 82, 260, 299
daylighting control in, 166-168, 264,
Appendix 111
Fremantle Central Area, 17, 18, 188-200
civic and cultural buildings, 198, 199
Civic Centre, proposed, 198, 199
density of buildings, 194, 195, 197,
198, 199, 200
development trends, 191
gaol site, 198, 199, 260
history of, 188, 189
housing adjacent to, 199
industry, 198
land use, existing, 189
market, 195
offices, 195, 197
open space, 199
parking, 18, 190, 191, 192, 193
planning principles, 191
public transport, 193
railway proposals, 18, 193
road pattern, existing, 189
proposed, 17, 18, 192,
193
road transport, 193
shopping, 193, 194, 195
traffic, 17, 189, 190
warehousing, 197
zoning proposals, 191, 194, 195,
197, 198, 199
Perth Central Area, 15, 16, 17, 157-187
cinemas in, 185, 186
City Hall, proposed, 17, 186
civic and cultural buildings, 184,
185, 186, 260
Cultural Centre, proposed, 186
daylighting proposals, 166, 167, 168
definition of, 158
density of building, 162, 163, 166,
182, 183
development trends, 160, 161
employment in, 168-172
Government buildings, 16, 175, 184,
185, 186, 260
Government House, 17, 98, 185, 186
heliport, proposed, 16, 179
history of, 158
housing adjacent to, 17, 187
industry, 161, 171, 172, 184
land use, existing, 158
land values, 160
Markets, Metropolitan, 183, 184
offices, 16, 182, 183
open space, 186, 187
parking, 16, 172, 173, 176, 177, 178
planning principles, 161
public transport, 16, 178, 179
railway proposals, 16, 173, 174, 178,
179, 186, 260
road pattern, proposed, 174-176
shopping, 16, 179-182
access problems, 182
surveys, 15, 158, 168, 170, 171, 172,
173, 176, 180
traffic, 172
warehousing, 183
zoning proposals, 16, 17, 161, 162,
182, 183, 184
planning principles, 157, 161-168
Chidlow, 203, 233
Civic, Cultural and Public Buildings, 82,
254, 259
Central Areas, Fremantle, 189, 199
Perth, 184, 185, 186, 260
district centres, 155, 300, 301
local centres, 153
Claremont, 216, 217
Military Reserve, 97
Climate, 32, 75, 263, 264
Cockburn Sound, see Port
Committees,
proposed interdepartmental, 242, 260
Government advisory, 242
Commonwealth Government Departments
Australian Broadcasting Commission,
35
Civil Aviation, 138
Labour and National Service, 92, 167,
168
National Development, 25
Communications, see Chapter 7, also pp.
19-24 passim , 25, 26, 31, 33, 34, 53, 57,
145, 254, 259
see also Bridges ; Highways ; Ports ;
Railways ; Roads ; Traffic ; Trans-
port


Community, see Chapter 8
centres, 153, 155, Appendix IV
planning, 14, 145, 146
see also Density ; District ; Hous-
ing ; Locality ; Standards
Como, 226, 227
Compensation, 245, 246, 247, 249, 250
Concentration,
of activities in Central Areas, 15, 20,
32, 73, 82, 116, 130, 157, 158, 168,
171, 179
of activities in Region, 24, 25, 28, 30,
31, 33, 34, 47, 52, 54-58 passim, 189
of building in Central Areas, 162-166
of population in Region, 19, 20, 24,
30, 40, 41
of railway activities, 134
see also Decentralisation
Coogee, 76, 235, 236
Cottesloe, 216, 217
Crawley, 217
Cultural Buildings, see Civic, Cultural and
Public Buildings
D.
Daglish, 132, 214
Dairying, 24, 31
Darling Escarpment, 76, 77, 83, 98, 101,
221, 232, 237
Darlington, 76, 77, 221, 233
Daylighting, 166-168, 264, Appendix 111
Decentralisation,
in Central Areas, 163, 164
of industry, 10, 58, 69, 130, 131
of shopping, 47, 73, 155, 170, 179
within Region, 7,9, 30, 116, 140, 202
within State, 7,9, 30, 41, 202
see also Concentration
Density, see Chapter 8, Appendix I,
Appendix 111, also pp. 10, 11, 14, 15,
83-87
and land values, 11, 87
building, Central Area, Fremantle, 194,
195, 197, 198, 199, 200
building, Central Area, Perth, 15, 162,
163, 166, 182, 183
building, control of by Plot Ratio, 148,
164, 165, 166, 284
District Gross, 146, 156
housing, 148
in industry, 63-66
Local Gross, 146, 153
Net Residential, 146, 148, 149-151,
Appendix I
State population, 19
District, Residential, 149-156
and community, 146
centres, 154, 155, 179, 210, 211-237
passim, Appendix IV
definition, 41, 86, 153
densities, 83-87, 146, 156
proposed development in, 201, 211-237
proposed types, 149-151
standards, 153-156
see also Community ; Density ;
Open Space ; Shopping ; Stand-
ards
Drainage,
natural, of Region, 79, 80, 142
problems in clay areas, 76, 78, 80, 82
schemes for, 142, 143, 220, 221, 228,
230, 231, 240, 259
Dwellings, see Housing
E.
East Fremantle, 223
East Perth, 54, 55, 56, 63, 66, 217, 218
Education, 254, 259
high schools, 154, 214-237, passim
kindergartens, 152
nursery schools, 152
playing fields, proposed at Herdsman
Lake, 101
primary schools, 151, 152, 154, 223
private schools, 152
schools in Central Area, Perth, 186
teachers’ colleges, 154, 206, 208, 227,
229
technical colleges, 208, 236
technical schools, 154, 208, 222-237
passim
technological institute, 208, 227, 229
trade schools, 208
University of Western Australia, 25,
186, 206, 207, 208
Endowment lands, 214
Electricity Supply, see Services, public
Employment, see Chapter 4
Central Area, Perth, 168-172
comparison with Commonwealth, 45,
46, 61
concentration in Central Areas, 47
estimated changes, 46, 47
females, in Manufacturing Industry, 61
in Building and Construction, 72
in commerce, 73, 170, 171
in Manufacturing Industry, 50, 51, 52,
60-66, 171, 172
in Primary Industry, 46, 49
in professions, 73


Employment— continued.
in public authorities, 32, 73
in Service Industry, 45
pattern of, in Region, 28, 30, 31, 46, 47
pattern of, in State, 28, 45
shopping, 168, 170
F.
Factory production, see Manufacturing In-
dustry
Ferry services, see Transport, public
Financial aspects, see Implementation
Fishing, 49, 211
Flats, see Housing
Floreat Park, 214, 215
Forestry, 30, 49, 77, 78, 83, 204, 233, 234
Forrest National Park, 89, 98, 99, 101, 233
Forrestfield, 232
Fruit production, see Orchards
G.
Gaol, see Prison
Garden Island, 210
Gas Supply, see Services, public
General Industry, see Industry
Geology, of Region, 10, 76-79
Geraldton, 105
Glen Forest, 154, 233
Gold, discovery of, 7, 21, 34
Goldfields Water Supply Scheme, see Ser-
vices, public
Golf courses, 91, 100, 101, 215, 219, 220,
226
Gooseberry Hill, 77, 232
Gosnells, 202, 203, 231, 232
Government, see Commonwealth Govern-
ment ; State Government
Government House, 17, 98, 183, 185, 186
Greenmount, 77, 202, 203, 221, 222
Guildford, 20, 221, 222
H.
Hale School, 214
Hamilton Hill, 224, 225
Harbour, see Port
Health centres, 152, 153, 204, 206
Helena River, 221, 222
Helena Valley, 77
Highways, Major Regional, 108, 109, 116—
123, 125, 201-237 passim
Albany, 82, 137, 228, 231, 232, 237
Beechboro-Gosnells, 68, 121, 125, 138,
220, 221, 228, 231
Burswood, 122, 123, 125, 228
Canning, 224
Fremantle-Midland Junction, 121, 125,
222, 225, 230, 231, 232
Great Eastern, 123, 222, 228, 232, 233
Great Northern, 219, 228, 234
Kwinana-Midland Junction, 123, 125,
235, 237
North Perimeter, 122, 125, 219, 220,
221 222 233
Perth-Kwinana, 116, 117, 120, 125, 175,
224, 225, 230
South-West, 231, 235, 237
Stirling, 82, 126, 127, 216, 217, 223, 226
Yanchep, 120, 121, 125, 203, 213, 214,
217, 218, 219, 234
Hills
development in, 76, 202, 232, 233, 237
water supply difficulties, 141
Hilton Park, 54, 56, 57, 63, 69, 204, 224,
225, 226
Hollywood, 204, 206
Hope Valley, 203, 234, 235, 236
Hospitals, 204, 205, 220, 226, 227, 230,
236, 237, 254, 259
Chest, 206
Mental, 92, 206, 221, 237
Housing, see Appendix 1, also pp. 149-151,
258
areas, growth of, 41, 42, 44, 81, 82
density, 14, 83, 84, 110, 146, 148
dwelling types, 14, 146-148
existing pattern, 81, 82
flats, 17, 147-149, 187, 261-265
in Central Area, Fremantle, 199
in Central Area, Perth, 17, 87, 187
layout, 111, 148, 149
planning principles, 147, 148, 149
private, 260
programming, 254, 260
public, 240, 254
scattering of, 86, 87, 110, 111, 140, 201,
252
zones, residential, 161, 201-237 passim
Hyde Park, 218
I.
Implementation, see Chapter 11
authorities responsible, 18, 239-243
beach proposals, 97
financial aspects, 18, 252-258


Implementation—continued-
public expenditure, 254-258
industrial proposals, 10, 243
Inter-Departmental Committee sug-
gested, 18, 241, 258, 260
legislation required, 18, 241, 244-251
open space proposals, 242
programming
Central Area development, 260
communications, 259
district centres, 301
drainage schemes, 143
housing, 82, 258
industry, 53, 258, 259
Major Regional Highways, 125
open space, 260
port facilities, 259
public buildings, 259
subdivision, 202, 203
supply services, 259
railway proposals, 243
refuse disposal proposals, 144, 243
review of Plan necessary, 242
road proposals, 243
traffic control, 108, 242
Industry, see Chapter 4, also pp. 9, 10
Building and Construction, 9, 31, 72
General, definition of, 54, 279
Light, 54, 61, 66, 155, 213, 215, 279
Manufacturing, 9, 24, 27, 33, 34, 45-47,
50-71
car parking for, 64
Central Area, Fremantle, 198
Central Area, Perth, 161, 171, 172,
184
classification of, 54
density of, 63-66
future growth, assumptions, 54
implementation of proposals, 10, 71,
240, 243, 254, 258, 259
industrial estates, 56, 71
location of, Region, Bl
playing fields for, 91
production of, 27, 28, 33, 34
relationship with communications,
10, 106, 116-123 passim, 133
requirements of, general, 10, 52, 53,
57, 58
requirements of, land, 46, 47, 53, 60,
63-66, 81
road transport for, 53, 253
scale of, Region, 58, 60
scattering of, 56, 81
smoke nuisance, 58, 161, 284, 285
trade waste from, 53
water supply for, 53
zoning proposals for, 10, 66-69, 184,
198, 201-237 passim, 279, 282,
283, 284
Primary, 24, 27, 28, 30, 45-47 passim 49,
see also Agriculture ; Fishing ;
Forestry ; Mining and Quarrying
Service, 9, 28, 30, 45
Special, 54, 68, 69, 76, 225, 226, 236,
282, 283
Waterside, definition of, 54
Inglewood, 56, 220
Innaloo, 54, 55, 56, 63, 66, 219
Interim Development Control, 18, 242,
244, 248, 249
J.
Jandakot, 202, 234, 235, 236
Jarrahdale, 237
Jolimont, 208
Journey to work, see Transport
K.
Kalamunda, 202, 203, 232
Kalverstraat, Amsterdam, 182
Kelmscott, 77, 203, 236, 237
Ken wick, 56, 78, 230, 231
Kings Park, 17, 83, 89, 98, 185
Kindergartens, 152
Kwinana, 30, 34, 52, 60, 66, 68, 69, 82, 130,
133, 136, 140, 154, 217, 230, 231, 234,
235, 236, 237
Kwinana-Rockingham, 202, 208, 234, 235
L.
Lakes
Bibra, 69, 101, 224, 225, 226
Cooloongup, 236
Gnangara, 121
Gwelup, 214
Herdsman, 79, 80, 101, 142, 203, 215
Monger, 142, 144, 219
North, 224, 225
Walyungup, 236
White, 98, 101
Land
availability in Region, 83, 262
reclamation of, 14, 80, 97, 117, 142,
144, 177, 178, 199, 224, 225, 226,
227, 229
tax, 18, 250, 258
values, 11, 87, 300
Land Use, see Chapter 5, also pp. 10, 11
see also Central Areas ; Density ;
Surveys ; Zoning


Leederville, 214, 215, 219
Legislation, 244-251
Planning, in Western Australia, 244
powers required, 244, 245
suggested, 248-251
see also Betterment ; Compensa-
tion ; Implementation ; Interim
Development ; Ordinance (Plan-
ning)
Leighton, 216, 223
Lesmurdie, 232
Light Industry, 54, 61, 66, 155, 213, 215,
279
Locality, 151-153
definition, 146
standards, 151-153
see also Community ; Density ;
Open Space ; Shopping ; Stand-
ards
M.
Maddington, 202, 231, 232
Mahogany Creek, 233
Maida Vale, 202, 221, 232
Maniana, 230
Manning Park, 226, 227
Manufacturing Industry, see Industry
Market Gardening, 32, 49, 78, 83, 203, 204,
211, 234
Markets, 134, 183, 184, 195, 229
Marshalling Yards, 13, 69, 133, 174, 229‘
259
Maylands, 55, 56, 220, 221
Medical Centre, 206
Medina, 235
Melbourne, 46, 51, 58, 60, 62, 64, 72, 130,
133
Meltham, 57
Melville, 56, 57, 69, 223, 224
Middle Swan, 203, 221, 222
Midland Junction, 54, 56, 61, 68, 202, 221,
222, 233
Migration, 8, 19, 21, 24, 34, 35, 39, 40
Mill Point,
old mill at, 227
Minerals, see Mining and Quarrying
Mining and Quarrying, 30, 49, 76, 77, 203,
235, 282
clay, 30, 76, 78, 203, 220
Morley Park, 56, 57, 78, 80, 143, 220, 221
Mosman Park, 216, 217, 222
Mount Hawthorn, 217, 218
Mount Helena, 154, 233
Mount Henry, 227
Mount Lawley, 208, 217, 218, 220
Mount Pleasant, 223, 224
Mount Yokine, 219, 220
Mundaring, 233
Mundijong, 236, 237
N.
Narrows, proposed bridge, 99, 116, 117,
175, 178, 226, 227, 259
National Fitness Council, 89, 93, 99
National Parks, 89, 98, 99, 101, 233
Nedlands, 216, 217
Neerigen Brook, 237
North Beach, 76, 211, 213, 214
North Belmont, 77
North Dandalup River,
water resources of, 141
North Fremantle, 55, 68, 222, 223
North Perth 217, 218
O.
Observatory, 185
Offices, 154, 162-186, 287-298
Fremantle, 195, 197
Perth, 16, 162, 170, 171, 182, 183
Open Space, see Chapter 6, also pp. 11, 83,
201-237 passim, 240, 242, 243, 260, 282,
. 283
beaches, ocean, 91, 95, 97, 211, 214,
216, 217, 226, 231, 235, 242, 243
buffer areas, 91, 92, 94
categories of, 89, 90
Central Area, Fremantle, 199
Central Area, Perth, 186, 187
cricket grounds, 91
district, standards for, 94, 95, 153
existing pattern, 81, 83
golf courses, 91, 100, 101, 215, 219,
220, 226
green belt, theory of, 99
house and flat gardens, 90, 92, 264, 265
landscape, areas of value, 98
large private grounds, 92, 101
local, standards for, 92, 93, 94, 151, 152
National Parks, 89, 98, 99, 101, 233
nature reservations, 98
need for in urban areas, 89
on the Darling Escarpment, 76, 77, 83,
98, 101, 232, 237
playgrounds, children’s, 92
playing fields, 89, 91, 93, 94, 101


Open Space— continued.
private, 90, 91, 92
public, 92-101
race courses, 91, 229, 231
regional, 95-101
Regional Sports Centre, 99, 101
rivers and river foreshores, 91, 97, 187,
217, 223, 224, 227, 229, 231
system, necessity for, 90
trotting ground, 91
Orange Grove, 231
Orchards, 31, 32, 49, 77, 83, 203, 204, 237
Ordinance, Planning, see Appendix 11, also
pp. 248, 249
Osborne Park, 32, 56, 203, 219, 220, 234
P.
Palmyra, 223, 224
Parkerville, 233
Parking, Car, 125, 127, 242, 265, 300, 301
Central Areas, 16, 18, 172, 173, 176,
178, 190, 191, 192, 193
industrial area, 64
standards, 156, 157, 177
Parks, see Open Space >
Parliament House, 175
Passengers, see Transport
Physical characteristics,
of Region, 8, 10, 31, 32, 75-80
Pickering Brook, 203, 232
Pine plantations, 30, 78, 204, 205, 220, 225,
227, 229
Playing fields, see Open Space
Plot Ratio,
proposals for Fremantle Central Area,
194, 195, 197, 198, 199
proposals for Perth Central Area, 15,
166, 182, 183, 184
theory, 148, 162-186, 290, 296, 297, 298
Point Peron, 236
Point Resolution, 216
Point Roe, 97, 216
Point Walter, 99, 216, 224
Population, see Chapter 3, also pp. 7-9
capacity of planned urban areas, 156,
201, 202
distribution in Region, 41-44
distribution in State, 21, 22, 30, 40, 41
40 41
migration, 8, 19, 21, 24, 34, 35, 39, 40
natural increase, 39
of residential districts, 201-237 passim
past growth, 19, 20, 21, 30, 40, 41
see also Density
Port, of Fremantle, 7, 13, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22,
33, 134, 136, 137, 188-200, 223, 259
extension to Cockburn Sound, 13, 17,
66, 75, 136, 137, 195, 236, 259
freight terminal, 13, 122, 134, 183, 192,
229
Poultry farming, 32, 49, 203
Preston Point, 224
Primary Industry, 24, 27, 28, 30, 45-47
passim , 49
see also Agriculture ; Fishing ; For-
estry ; Mining and Quarrying
Prison,
site in Fremantle, 198, 199
site proposed at Coogee, 92, 210, 234,
260
Programming,
see Implementation
Public Buildings, see Civic, Cultural and
Public Buildings
Public Health, Institute of, 206
Pyrton, 206, 221
Q.
Queens Park, 230, 231
R.
Railways, 12, 13, 105, 121, 130-135, 239
country terminal, Perth, 16, 132, 133,
135, 178, 259
Fremantle-Armadale, 225, 236, 237
goods terminal, 68, 69, 133, 134
goods transport, 57, 105, 133
goods yard, future use, 177
growth of, 21, 22
in Central Area, Fremantle, 18, 193
in Central Area, Perth, 16, 173, 174, 193
marshalling yards, 13, 69, 133, 174, 259
Midland Junction-Kwinana, 222, 231,
236
port freight terminal, 13, 122, 134, 183,
192, 229
Rockingham-Jarrahdale, 134
suburban, 12, 130-135, 213, 216, 221
see also Transport
Recreation, see Open Space
Redcliffe, 227
Regions, of the State, 25, 26
Regulations, building, see By-laws
Relief, of Region, 75, 76


Reservations,
for open space, 11, 76, 83, 94, 97, 98,
100, 101, 211, 223, 224, 227, 242
for roads, 12, 259
in planning schemes, 247, 249, 250,
258, 277, 283
Reserves, Commonwealth, 97, 198, 208,
209, 210, 215, 221
Reserves, State, 81, 198, 202, 208, 209, 210,
234
Reservoirs, see Services, public
Residential,
see District ; Housing ; Zoning
Resources,
economic, of State, 8, 21, 22, 24, 25,
27, 28
of Region, 30, 31, 32, 33,
76, 77, 80
water, 10, 80, 141
see also Agriculture ; Fishing ;
Forestry ; Mining and Quarry-
ing ; Physical Characteristics
Richardson Park, 227
River Foreshores, 91, 97, 187, 217, 223,
224, 227, 229, 231
Riverton, 78, 80, 230
Rivervale, 68, 227, 228, 229
Roads, 7, 12, 106-129
administration, 12, 107, 108, 109, 239
classification, 12, 108, 109
controlled access, 108, 109, 116-123
passim
existing system, 109-111
Important Regional Roads, 12, 109,
123, 125, 201-237 passim
improvement of existing, 125, 126, 127,
201-237 passim
layout of developmental, 111, 149
limited access, 108, 116-123 passim,
201-237 passim
local access, 108
Major Regional Highways, 12, 108,
109, 116-123, 125, 201-237 passim
mileage, 110
motor parkways, 99
past development, 105
proposed system, 116-127, 201-237
passim, 259
standards, 108, 123, 153, 156
see also Central Areas ; Highways,
Major Regional ; Streets (for
road names)
Robbs Jetty, 225, 226
Robertson Park, 219
Rockingham, 75, 154, 234, 235, 236, 237
Rocky Bay, 216
Roleystone, 76, 203, 236, 237
Rosalie, Park, 94, 215
Rottnest, 210
Royal Show Ground, Claremont, 217
Rural Areas, 100, 201, 284
industries in, 203, 282
subdivisional policy in, 203, 204
see also Agriculture
S.
Safety Bay, 234
Sawyers Valley, 233
Scarborough, 211, 213, 214
Scheme, Local Planning, 25, 76, 94, 100,
141, 151, 213, 215, 224, 227, 228, 239,
241, 244, 248, 249, 250, 251, 260, 261,
262, 266, 277, 283
Schools, see Education
Serpentine, 83, 236, 237
Serpentine River,
water resources of, 141
Service Industry, 28, 30, 45
Services, public, 13, 140-144, 240, 254, 259
Eastern Goldfields Water Scheme, 22
effects of subdivision on, 203
electricity, 13, 143, 240
gas, 13, 143, 240
programming of, 259
refuse disposal, 14, 143, 144, 240
sewerage, 13, 53, 141, 142
water, 10, 25, 53, 140, 141, 240
see also Drainage ; Transport
Sewerage, see Services, public
Shenton Park, 215
Shopping,
access problems, 16, 182
decentralisation of, 47, 170, 179, 180
district centres, 154, 155, 179, 211,
212-237 passim, Appendix IV
in Central Area, Fremantle, 193, 194,
195
in Central Area, Perth, 16, 160, 161,
168, 170, 179-182
local centres, 152, 153
parking in relation to, 152, 155, 180,
300, 301
standards, 152, 154, 155, 299, 300
Slums,
danger of, 7, 261
Smoke, nuisance, 58, 161, 284, 285
Social Characteristics,
of Region and State, 8, 34, 35
Soils,
effect on development, 10, 77-79
types in Region, 31, 76-79
Sorrento, 211
South Beach, 226


South Belmont, 229
South Dandalup River,
water resources of, 141
South Fremantle, 224
South Guildford, 68
South Kalamunda, 232
South Perth, 78, 99, 226, 227
Spearwood, 32, 120, 203, 225, 234
Special Industry, 54, 68, 69, 76, 225, 226,
236, 252, 283
Sport, see Open Space
Standards of Development, see Chapter 8,
also Appendix I and pp. 14, 15
community buildings, 153, 155
district, 153-156
housing, 146, 147, 148
industry, in districts, 155
local, 151-153
open space, 89-103, 151, 153
parking, 153, 156, 177
public buildings, 153, 155
roads, 108, 123, 153, 156
schools, 151, 152, 154
shopping, 152, 154, 155
State Government,
Buildings,
relocation of, 16, 175, 184, 185, 186,
260
Departments and Instrumentalities,
Agriculture, 22, 77, 203, 204, 227
Education, 93, 151, 208
Electricity Commission, 140, 143,
230, 240, 254, 260
Forests, 204
Fremantle Harbour Trust, 134, 190,
193
Gardens Board, 242, 243
Housing Commission, 132, 202, 219,
220, 222, 225, 226, 230, 240, 254,
258, 260
Industrial Development, 243, 260
Labour (Shops and Factories In-
spection Branch), 168
L anc j s 224*
Main Roads, 106, 107, 108, 116,
123, 176, 224, 230, 232, 233, 254,
260
Police, 107, 112, 186
Public Health, 14, 112, 141, 144,
204, 206, 243
Public Works, 25, 260
Railways Commission, 56, 130, 132,
193, 216, 260
Rottnest Board of Control, 210
Statistician’s Office, 35
Town Planning, 168, 248, 250, 260
Town Planning Board, 242, 244,
248, 251
Tramways, 107
Transport Board, 127, 128
Water Supply, Goldfields, 141
Water Supply, Sewerage and Drain-
age, Metropolitan, 80, 140, 141,
260
see also Implementation
Stirling Square, 183
Stoneville 233
Aberdare Rd., 215, 216
Aberdeen St., 120
Alfred Rd., 216
Amherst St., 225
Balcatta Beach Rd., 213, 219
Balcatta Rd., 213
Barbican St., 230
Barrack St., 174
Beaufort St., 128, 174, 218, 220
Berwick St., 228
Boulevard, The, 213, 215
Bulls Creek Rd., 224
Bulwer St., 218
Burt Rd., 230
Cambridge St., 215
Carradine Rd., 237
Carrington St., 224
Central Rd., 230, 231
Charles St., 120, 218
Claisebrook Rd., 175, 218
Claisebrook St., 175
Claremont Cres., 216
Cottesloe Ave., 216
Davies Rd., 216
Dixon Rd., 235
Downsborough Ave., 228
Epsom Ave., 232
Fitzgerald St., 128, 218
Flinders St., 219
Forrest Rd., 225, 237
Fremantle Rd., 227
George St., 120, 175
Gnangara Rd., 234
Governors Tee., 176
Green St., 218,
Guildford Rd., 218, 220, 221
Hamilton St., 230
Hampton Rd., 225
Hardy Rd., 228
Hay St., 175, 180, 182
Helena St., 222
High Rd., 224
High St., 224,
Hill view Ter., 230
Hope Valley Rd., 235
Island St., 225
Kitchener Ave., 123, 228
Loftus St., 120, 218
Lord St., 218


Streets —continued
Maida Vale Rd., 232
Main St., 218, 219
Malcolm St., 175, 176
Mandurah Rd., 235
Marine Ter., 225
Marmion St., 216
Marquis St., 230
May St., 228
Melville Pde., 227
Middle Swan Rd., 222, 234
Moore St., 174
Mounts Bay Rd., 175
Mount St., 175, 176
Murray St., 180
Napoleon St., 217
Newcastle St., 218
Nicholson Rd., 230, 231, 237
Niland St., 222
North Lake Rd., 224, 231
Oceanic Drive, 214
Oxford St., 120
Railway Rd., 215, 216
Riverside Drive, 175, 176, 218, 220
Riverside Rd., 224
Riverton St., 230
Rockingham-Armadale Rd., 237
Rockingham Rd., 235
Roe St., 120, 123, 174
Rupert St., 230
Rutland Ave., 123, 228
Safety Bay Rd., 235
Scarborough Beach Rd., 213, 218, 219
Selby St., 215
Servetus St., 215
Shepperton Rd., 228
South St., 225, 231
St. Georges Ter., 175, 183
Stock Rd., 120, 224, 225
Storey Rd., 235
Stirling St., 174, 218
Sutherland St., 120, 175
Terrace Drive, 176
Thomas St., 218
Toodyay Rd., 222
Trafalgar St., 175
University Ave., 206, 208
Urch Rd., 237
Victoria Ave., 176
Vincent St., 218
Walcott St., 218
Walter Rd., 220, 221
Wanneru Rd., 218, 219,
Wellington St., 175
Wellington Ter., 225
Welshpool Rd., 232
William St., 174, 218
Wimbledon St., 230
Winthrop Ave., 206, 208
Wittenoom St., 123, 175
Subiaco, 42, 54, 55, 56, 66, 155, 206, 214,
215
Subdivision, 140, 148, 244, 248, 252, 263
programming of, 202, 203
rural areas, 203, 204
urban areas, 202, 203
Superphosphate works, 216, 217
Surf Live Saving Association of Australia,
95
Surveys, 15, 75
beach, 95, 97
industrial, 54, 61, 64
land use, Central Area, Fremantle, 82,
191
Central Area, Perth, 82, 158
regional, 80, 81, 82, 83
landscape areas, 98
office employment, 168
parking, in Central Areas, 176, 190
pedestrian count, Hay Street, 180
playing fields, 89, 93
traffic census, 113, 116, 172, 173, 190,
191
Swanbourne, 216
Military Reserve, 208
Swan River, 19, 20, 31, 80, 97, 123, 229,
232
see also Bridges ; River Foreshores
Swan Valley, 234
Swan View, 221, 222
T.
Tamworth Hill, 234, 235
Teachers’ Colleges, see Education
Technical Colleges, see Education
Technical Schools, see Education
Technological Institute, see Education
Trade,
Region as centre of, 33
see also Employment ; Offices ;
Shopping
Traffic,
accidents, 12, 111, 112, 113, 126, 253
Advisory Committee, 108
growth, 12, 113, 114, 116-127 passim
in Central Areas, 172, 173, 189, 190
road, control of, 107, 108, 242
single authority for, 113, 129, 240, 242
Transport, 52
air, 13, 138, 139
ferry, 128
heliport, proposed, 139, 179
journey to work, 13, 47, 61, 106, 128,
130, 131, 132, 179, 253, 258


Transport— continued .
public, road, 16, 127, 128, 129, 178,
179, 193
road, 57, 105, 106, 108
see also Railways
Trigg Island, 211
Tuart Hill, 56, 219, 220
U.
University of Western Australia, see Educa-
tion
Upper Swan, 203, 221, 233, 234
Urban Areas,
capacity of, proposed, 201
limitation of, 7, 201, 202, 203
subdivisional policy in, 202, 203
vacant land in, 148, 203, 252
Uthwatt Committee, 246, 247
V.
Victoria Park, 55, 78, 227, 228, 229
Vineyards, 31, 32, 77, 83, 203, 221
W.
Wanneru, 32, 202, 203, 233, 234
Warehousing, 134, 183, 184, 197, 198, 229
Warnbro Sound, 234, 235, 236
Water Supply, see Services, public
Watermans Bay, 211
Wattle Grove, 232
Welshpool, 54, 55, 56, 57, 63, 68, 228, 259
Wembley, 214
Westfield, 237
West Midland, 222
West Perth, 54, 55, 56, 63, 66, 214
Whitfords Beach, 211, 213, 214
Willagee, 224, 225
Woodman Point, 210
Wooroloo, 233
Work Force, see Employment
Wungong Broolc, 203
Y.
Yanchep, 98, 101, 202, 233, 234
Z.
Zoning, see Appendix 11, also pp. 15,
201-237 passim, 249, 283, 284, 300, 301
and compensation, 247, 249
Central Areas, Fremantle, 191, 194,
195, 197, 198, 199
Central Areas, Perth, 161, 162, 182,
183, 184
Development Committees, 25
industrial, 66-69, 184, 198, 279, 282,
283, 284
nature of, 278
smokeless zones, 284, 285
table, 277, 279-283
use classes in relation to, 279, 280, 282
Zoological Gardens, 98, 99, 227, 233






