

AUSTRALIAN
PARTY
Platform
As adopted by
FIRST ANNUAL CONVENTION
Sydney, April 22-26,
1930.
Secretary, N.S.W.:
W. F. JACKSON,
32 Castlereagh Street,
Sydney.


What the Party Stands for
OBJECTIVE.
The cultivation of an Australian national sentiment and
the maintenance of a White Australia based on racial purity.
The development of Australia as a self-reliant community
within the British Commonwealth of Nations; the full assump-
tion of national status and the complete expression of Aus-
tralian ideals and policies in the councils of the Empire and
the Nations.
PLATFORM.
Parliamentary.
1. Firm, just and capable government.
2. Members of Parliament to be responsible only to their
constituents.
3. No pre-selection of candidates.
Constitutional.
4. Amendment of the constitution to give the National Par-
liament power to legislate on all national matters, includ-
ing matters relating to trade and commerce, industry, and
all means of communication; and to effect such a distri-
bution of other powers between the Federal and State
Parliaments as may be necessary to promote the welfare
of the Commonwealth and to prevent conflicts of juris-
diction and wasteful expenditure,
3. Subject to the people’s approval of constitutional amend-
ments outlined in paragraph 4, the Party advocates:—
(a) An immediate reduction of the number of Members
of State Parliaments.
(b) The abolition of Legislative Councils.
(c) The abolition of State Governors, their place being
taken by Lieutenant-Governors.
(d) Abolition of the office of Agents-General and the
transference of their duties to the High Commis
sioner for Australia.
(e) The creation of new States.


Economics: Tirade: Commerce, and Finance.
6. Effective protection for maintaining and stimulating both
primary and secondary industries.
7. Amendment of the Constitution to enable the Federal
Parliament to protect the interests of the consumer.
8. The establishment of a bureau of standards of quality
of production for the protection of Industry and
consumers.
9. A uniform basic wage and standard hours of labour
throughout Australia (subject to climatic and other con-
ditions) determined by a federal tribunal on which em-
ployers and employees shall be equally represented, with
an impartial chairman.
10. Simplified system of Federal Arbitration and conciliation
by boards and local committees attached to each indus-
try, composed of an equal number of representatives of
employers and employees, with an impartial chairman.
11. All Federal and State Public Servants to have
equal rights to approach the Federal Arbitration Courts
for the settlement of disputes of salary and wage awards
and full rights to political and civic privileges enjoyed
by the general public.
12. Uniform Company Law.
13. Codification of all statutes dealing with Trade, Com-
merce and Industry at least once in every three years
when the amendments of the existing Statute laws on
these subjects require it.
14. A vigorous policy of land development, irrigation and
afforestation.
13. Decentralisation by means of railway, roads, and ports.
16. British migrants of the right type to be encouraged.
The number to be regulated by the economic conditions
prevailing in the Commonwealth. The number of
migrants of other nationalities to be limited by quota
system, which shall give preference to the migrants of
Northern European origin.
17. Preference for Empire products.
18. Improvement of facilities for co-operative and general
marketing and the fullest development of local and
inter-empire trade with the establishment of Trade
Agencies abroad.


19. The stabilisation of primary industries, and the estab-
lishment of a scheme for Fodder Conservation.
20. The non-political control and management of the Com-
monwealth Bank and the extension of its operations as
a trading bank; adequate provisions for rural credit and
housing.
21. The establishment of a Federal Reserve Bank under
separate non-political control.
22. Sane Finance. Cessation of public borrowing except
for renewal of loans and for reproductive works that will
provide interest and sinking fund on the capital cost.
23. Economy and business methods in government and re-
duction of taxation.
24. Communications: Uniform railway gauge. Encourage-
ment of fastest and most economical transit and trans-
port by land, sea and air. Vigorous policy of assistance
to civil aviation, and the establishment of necessary air-
ports.
DEFENCE.
25. Encouragement of all movements making for world peace
consistent with the security of Australia and the welfare
of the Empire.
26. Effective defence policy on land, sea and in the air.
SOCIAL.
27. Preference to soldiers. Just and sympathetic treat-
ment of ex-members of the A.1.F., their dependents, and
the dependents of deceased soldiers, with particular re-
ference to the urgent necessity for the fullest enquiry
into conditions relative to Soldier Settlers.
28. Uniform Marriage and Divorce Laws.
29. The maintenance of old age and invalid pensions.
30. j\ vigorous policy of public health with the extension
of the powers of the Federal Government in this domain.
31. Full Federal control (including censorship) of the motion
picture industry in Australia.
FEDERAL CAPITAL PRESS, CANBERRA.
