

PLATFORM
OF THE
Young Australia National Party,
ORGANISED TO
Unify, Purify and Simplify
Jhe Government of Australia.
jYCajor ?lanks.
1. Australian citizens to own, control, and rule the Commonwealth,
2. A WHITE AUSTRALIA for all time.
3. The AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT, consisting of a Senate and House of Representatives, to be the
supreme governing power in Australia. National Government. Election of Ministers to administer National De-
partments. Law construction by Committees of Members of the House of Representatives, under the supervision
of the Prime Minister. The House of Representatives to determine, the Senate alone to pass, legislation. Party
Government to be entirely abolished. (Explained in Campaign Manifesto.)
4. The National Government to acquire the following additional powers :
(A.) The right to make Treaties with any power or Nation.
(B). The right to appoint Consuls to any country.
5. THE DEAKIN SYSTEM OP NATIONAL DEFENCE: Compulsory Citizen Defence Force, an Aus-
tralian Navy built and manned by Australians, and under absolute Australian control.
6. To accomplish this; The UNIFICATION OF AUSTRALIA; Abolition of all State Governments,
Parliaments and Constitutions, and reconstruction by the Australian Parliament, providing for a comprehensive
system of Local Governments under the control of the National Parliament.
i. A NATIONAL LAND ACT, to provide ample areas for settlement; to prevent the aggregation of
large estates—by taxation or otherwise, —to break up existing large estates which hinder settlement, or upon
which too high a value has been set. To preserve forests and timbers, to provide for re-afforestation, and gener-
ally to conserve National agrarian interests as against those of any party, class, or company.
8. Nationalisation of all Harbors, Rivers, Lakes, Watercourses and their frontages and adjacent lands,
to an extent to be decided upon by the Australian Parliament.
9. A WHITE IMMIGRATION POLICY, when adequate lands have been made available for settlement,
and work provided for artisans by the encouragement and fostering of Australian industries and commerce.
10. PROTECTION OF TRADE, Commerce and Manufactures: Trading to be made honest; all goods to
be pure and unadulterated. Manufacturers to be protected against the competition of those employing slave,
sweated, or prison labor in any country; and against dumping, trusts and combines, secret rebates or commis-
sions.
11. PROTECTION OF LABOR; All employees to be paid adequate wages to be fixed by tribunals
appointed for the purpose, and protected against sweating, excessive hours of labor, unhealthy or dangerous sur-
roundings, and dishonest or inhumane employers. Severe penalties to be inflicted for breaches of the laws re-
lating to the protection of employees.
12. PROTECTION OF LIFE; All hospitals to be under national control. Adequate provision to be
made for the housing and rearing of foundlings. Medical examination of all children; the care, and if possible,
cure of all sick or maimed. The protection and care of all aged and infirm citizens generally. Abolition of capital
punishment.
13. Acquisition of the Northern Territory by the Australian Commonwealth, and where possible, of all
islands adjacent to the continent.
14. Abolition of the power and privilege to borrow money by Municipalities, Shires, or State Councils, or
Boards whatsoever, except on authority expressly granted by the Commonwealth Government.
15. The right of Initiative to be granted in connection with right of Referendum.
JYUnor blanks.
(A) Gradual repayment of existing loans.
(B) An Australian Commonwealth National Bank.
(C) Commonwealth legislation defining citizenship. Only Australian citizens to own lands and mines.
(D) Establishment of national granaries as a means of safety to the nation in time of war or famine.
National armament and ammunition factories to be established to render the nation self-dependent in time of war.
(E) Establishment of a Commonwealth Coinage.
(P). Establishment of the Metric system of coinage, weights and measures.
(G) Construction of strategic and trans-continental railways.
(H) Abolition of the Naval Subsidy to Britain.
(I) Abolition of titular distinctions.
(J) Preservation of the Native Birds and Animals of Australia.
(K) Adequate provision to be made for the care and education of the families of criminals undergoing
sentences of imprisonment.
(L) Creation of a Board of Scientists to recommend legislation dealing with the health of the people and
the prolongation of life; to report to, and advise Parliament on subjects that require special scientific training
and knowledge to deal with.
(M). Neglect of duty on the part of National Officials, Administrators and Public Representatives to
be punishable by dismissal and, or, fine.
Australia
Issued by THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE,
192 Castlereagh-street, Sydney.
John B. STEEL, President.
A. STIRLING, Vice-President.
J. BLUMENTHAL, Secretary.
ORGANISING SECRETARIES
New South Wales :
Victoria:
J. Blumenthal, 192 Castlereagh-street, Sydney.
C. Murnane, 269 Mount Alexander-road, Ascot Vale, Melbourne.
H. Goodson, Burleigh Heads, via Booningba, S.C. Line, Queensland.
M. J. Read, P. 0., Hobart, Tasmania.
Queensland :
Tasmania :
West Australia:
South Australia :
New Zealand:
Madge Cort, 24 Daphne-street, North Perth, W.A.
Secretary, 31415 G.P.0., Adelaide, S.A.
J. P. Watson, Blackwater, New Zealand.
Vincent P. Taylor, P. 0,, Box 616, San Francisco.
United States, America:
