

RIGHT to STRIKE AT
ACTIVE WORKERS
BLACKLISTED
fr'V-S’
PEOPLE’S BOOKSHOP
FI * /
“ANTI-FASCIST”


Foreword
Playford’s Industrial Disputes Inquiry Bill has been pro-
tested against by the United Trades and Labor Council and
many unions.
Suggestions made to prevent it becoming law range from
industrial stoppages to a walk-out from Parliament by the
Labor members. Some unions have already decided to
boycott any inquisition held under the Bill if it becomes law.
This pamphlet shows what a dastardly attack on trade
union and democratic rights the Bill really is, and how
essential it is that the Bill be defeated.
We recommend it to all who want to preserve liberty.
T. GARLAND.
A. A. DRUMMOND, State Secretary, Australian Rail-
ways Union.
W. M. SIMONS, Sec., Transport Workers’ Union.
C. J. McCAFFREY, Sec., Federated Ironworkers’
Union.
W. J. BURKE, Sec., Shop Assistants’ Union.
C. A. S. MELLOR, State Sec., Aus. Fed. Union of
Locomotive Enginemen.
N. CARRUTHERS, Sec., Gas Employees’ Union.
J. L. CAVANAGH, Sec., Plasterers’ Society.
J. A. JONES, Organiser, Builders Laborers’ Federation.
J. CON VERY, Sec., Boilermakers’ Society.
H. DADLEFF, State Sec., F.E.D.F.A,
J. WOODBURN, Organiser, Electrical Trades Union.
H. D. K.RANTZ, Sec., Federated Clerks’ Union.


Playford’s Slave Bill
On November 27, 1947 a Bill for an Act to provide
for inquiries into industrial disputes was laid on the table
of the South Australian House of Assembly by Premier
Playford, leader of the Liberal Country League, S.A.
unit of the discredited U.A.P. (now Liberal) Party.
The Bill, which the
L.C.L. Government has
the parliamentary num-
bers to make law unless
deterred by public pro-
test from so doing, is a
direct threat to the whole
of the trade union move-
ment, a blow at Austra-
lian democracy, an at-
tempt to destroy rights
won by the working
people in long*years of struggle,
What the Bill provides:
The Bill provides that, in the event of an industrial
dispute 1 which “has led or is likey to lead to an interruption
in the supply of services, utilities, or goods which he (the
Governor) deems essential for the maintenance of life or
health, or the prosperity of the State,” the Governor shall
appoint a Supreme Court Judge as a Commissioner to
inquire into the dispute.


Page 4
PLAYFORD’S SLAVE BILL
This wording is sufficiently wide to cover any indus-
trial dispute at all which leads to a cessation of work.
The Governor is to define the matters to be inquired
into; the Judge is to inquire into the dispute with all
speed and report his findings. Reports are to be laid
before Parliament. The Governor may employ barristers
and solicitors to assist the Commissioner and the Com-
missioner may allow any person who may be affected by
the inquiry to be represented by counsel. After these
preliminaries,, the Bill gets down to real business:
Section 6 provides that “a Commissioner may obtain
information in any way which he deems appropriate,”—
which means, of course, that ordinary rules of evidence
need not be applied, that second-hand tittle-tattle may
go into the record.
The Commissioner may also require" any person to appear
before him as a witness, to answer any questions and to
produce any documents. Such documents Would include,
of course, the records and books of any union involved
in a dispute, as well as personal correspondence.
The Commissioner may himself inflict a fine of up to £l 00
or imprisonment for three months on any person who
fails to attend after being served with a summons or who
fails to produce such books etc. as are required.
Section 7 strips away one of the most cherished o)f all
rights—the right of the citizen not to convict himself, the
right to refuse to answer any question which may tend to
incriminate him. This is the rule which prevails in any
Court of law, in inquiries before coroners and elsewhere—
but not before Mr. Playford’s proposed inquiry.
Section 8 makes it an offence (penalty up to six
months imprisonment) to hinder any person from giving
evidence or producing documents while under the next
section imprisonment for one year can be handed out to
any person who “uses, causes, inflicts or procures any
violence, punishment, damage, loss or disadvantage” to
any other person for having given evidence in an enquiry.


Put bluntly, this means that
workers who, after a strike,
refuse to work with a man
who has informed against them
during the struggle a paid
agent, perhaps, of the employ-
er may be convicted and
gaoled.
Star Chamber.
Section 1 0 provides that in
quiries shall be held in public
unless the Commissioner
is satisfied that “in the interests
of obtaining full information
or for other adequate reasons”
the inquiry should be held in
private. Further, the Coim-
missioner may at any time re-
quest any person to leave the
room in which the inquiry is
being held and without giving
any reason or explanation
whatsoever!
Finally, the Bill provides for
the Governor having" power to
make regulations and to prescribe fines not exceeding £5O
for breach of any regulation.
HOW THE BILL WOULD WORK
This Bill is, in essence, a Bill directed against one thing
on ly—the right of the working people organised in trade
unions to strike against intolerable conditions of employ-
ment. • 0-11 r
Mr. Playford will smoothly protest that this Bill applies
Both to strikes and to lockouts, that it equally affects both
employers and employees. This hypocritical cant. The
lockout is not the employers’ equivalent of the strike; the


Page 6
PLAYFORD’S SLAVE BILL
right to with-hold labor is ultimately the workers’ only
strength, his real weapon in support of decent wages and
conditions; the real weapon in the hands of the employers
is not the lockout but the right to “hire and fire” his
workers.
The employers very rarely use the weapon of the lock-
out, although they have done so on somq occasions at the
cost of untold human misery, because ownership and
control of the factories, the plant, the mines and other
means of production give them other and usually more
effective means of protecting their profits at the expense
of those who do their work.
Let there be no mistake about it, the Bill is aimed at
the trade unions and the fundamental democratic rights of
strike action.
How, in fact, would the provision of the Bill, if made
law, be used against the trade unions? Here we list
a few of the ways:
If Union Business becomes Public Property.
The Bill would put an end to the right of trade union
members to discuss their own problems inside the union
without the discussions being made known to employers.
Even while a dispute was still on, union members could
be summoned to give evidence of what was happening
at union meetings, the decisions reached, the tactics dis-
cussed.
Employers and their agents Would, of course, be able
to listen to the evidence.
A membjer who refused to give evidence would be
subject to a heavy penalty; while a member who did, in
fact, disclose his fellow members’ business could not be
penalise} in any way and to debar him from union meetings
even during the dispute itself would be an offence.
2 Union Records become Public Property.
Union trustees, treasurers and other officials could, even
during a dispute, be summoned to produce complete union


records including lists of members, shop stewards, etc.,
minute books, financial statements, bank pass books and
all other records.
The very organisation of the union could be disrupted
during a struggle and weakened to the advantage of the
employer by the simple expedient of calling up the union
records to the Commissioner.
3 Blade Listing.
Every honest Worker would be in danger because the
employers would have access to the business of union
meetings. Workers who expressed their views at union
meetings could be black listed out of the industry and,
indeed, out of employment all over the State.
The history of black listing in this and other countries
will convince every experienced trade unionist that the
employers would not miss this golden opportunity of
finding out and spreading through the Employers’ Federa-
tion the names of those workers who are prepared to' speak
their minds and give a lead on the problems of the
workers.
4 Protection for Bosses’,Agents.
One of the very vilest parts of the whole “Slave Bill”
is the protection it gives to those who offend every principle
of trade unionism, every principle of mateship which
developed so strongly from the early days and battles of
the Australian labor movement, the protection which it
gives to the informer, the pimp and the scab.
Employers who anticipate some industrial unrest, who
may indeed b'e fomenting it through some change of
wages or conditions, can put stooges into their industry
and so into the union concerned. When the dispute occurs,
the stooges can be used to give evidence of everything trans-
piring in the particular workplace or. at the union meetings,
the names of those who supported the action taken by
the union, the decisions of the union.
For genuine unionists to take action against these paid
agents, even to the extent of excluding them from union


PLAYFOKD’S SLAVE BILL
Page 8
meetings or refusing to work with them, would bean offence
punishable in the Supreme Court with imprisonment up to
12 months. A man who strikes another in a back-yard
argument or a hotel brawl is fined 1 £5 or perhaps 1 4 days
goal; but a unionist who refuses to work with, let alone
assaults, a traitor to his felloW workers, is liable for
imprisonment for a year. This is political discrimina-
tion of the worst kind.
5 Victimisation of union officials.
It is obvious that union officials will be victimised under
the proposed Bill. Officials are elected to their positions
as custodians of the interests olf members, to protect and
advance the rights of the members, to look after their
property and interests and to carry out decisions made by
their members. These same officials can be summoned
before a Commissioner to disclose all the business of the
union and its members, to name the leaders in any action
the members may be taking to disclose the financial position
of the union and any other information the Commissioner
may require. They can be gaoled for refusing to do so or
for carrying out decisions democratically made by the rank
and file. The official is put in the position where he
must sell out on his members or tffisk being gaoled.
These are some of the ways in whichi a union conducting
a struggle on behalf of its members can be disorganised
and partly crippled by the proposed legislation, its members
left open to the worst types; of black listing and victimisation
while, at the. same time, protection is provided for stooges,
pimps and scabs.
Overriding all these considerations is the fact that the
Bill aimsi to destroy the most fundamental of all democratic
rights of the working people ....
THE RIGHT TO STRIKE
In every country of the world, the struggle for the
right to strike has been a long and bitter one, a struggle
which is never completed while capitalism lasts because
capitalists seek, at all times, to limit and destroy that right.


No section of the labor movement advocates indiscrim-
inate strikes; allegations that strikes are caused by agita-
tors” and “disruptors” are false.
There are principles which must be fought for, if neces-
sary by strike action, and history has taught again and
again that it is only by such struggle, or the threat of it,
that the working class makes any decisive gain. If the
worker loses the right to strike, he is a slave, subject
completely to the employers arbitration system set up by
the capitalist state. The Australian people have long
fought against such tyranny and have established and will
fight to preserve this right.
PLAYFORD’S BILL PART OF
ANTI-LABOR OFFENSIVE
The Playford Bill is more than just a passing shot from
the local reactionaries. In the War against fascism and in
the months following victory the political power of the
working people advanced !all over the world. In the
colonial countries the peoples rose against imperialist
oppression and struggled for their national freedom; in
Europe strong movements of the people; born of the unity
of the resistance, played leading parts; in Britain the people
showed a clear desire for change by defeating the Conser-
vatives at the last general election. Today the capitalist
class is preparing to mount an offensive to recover its lost
positions. The capitalist class knows that, the chief obstacle
in its way is the organised working class. Hence the
measures to weaken and disrupt the organisation. For
this reason, anti-labor, anti-union laws are the order of
the day wherever the reactionaries are able to command
influence. . ,
In America, the Hartley-Taft Act deprives the unions of
rights established during the Roosevelt Administration and
before, and, indeed, attacks the whole basis of union activity
in dealing with wages questions on an industry-wide basis;
in France, there has been anti-union legislation over recent
months and there are similar laws in Canada and Sth. Africa.


Page 10
SLAVE BILL
In Australia, the trend
has been very strong. In
Victoria, one of the first
Acts to be passed by the
anti-Labor Government
under Hollway is the
Emergency Powers Act,
not yet proclaimed, which
provides fpr secret bal-
lots before strike action,
makes striking illegal, vic-
timises union officials and
generally contains the vic-
ious proposals of the usual
run of anti-labor spokes-
men. Even more recently,
the Queensland Industrial
Law Amendment Act has
shown that some Labor
Party Governments are
prepared to follow the
same path. This Act,
An incident in the St. Batrick’s
Day Demonstration during the Queens-
land Bail Strike. Basil Tippett, with
aimed mainly at picket- nose broken, being dragged to
ing of plants in case of Ilis f eet ‘
disputes, deprives unionists df rights long enjoyed in
Queensland and elsewhere. The penalties written into
the Hanlon Act are more severe than those contained in
the obsolete English Act of 1875 or the Queensland Act
of 1899. Police bashing of pickets and peaceful demon-
strations, raids on ■'workers’ homes, *sa vage sentences inflicted
on strikers by the courts ini the Queensland Railway Strike,
exposes the stark anti-democratic character of this legisla-
tion. In the Federal sphere, also, the Defence Projects
Act is basically an attack upon the democratic rights of
trade unions and trade unionists.
The pattern of the anti-labor legislation is dear and
with it come increasing attacks upon the Communist Party.
The Australian people will want to know why they
are being headed this way and where the way leads.


It is becoming clearer each day that the reason for
their policies is to be found in the approach of another
economic crisis which threatens to engulf all the capitalist
sector of the world, and to which the millionaires’ only
“answer” is a Third World War.
In the United States, there are plenty of signs that the
boom is busting, unemployment, decreasing savings,
increasing stocks of unsold goods, decreasing investment.
Me and My Shadow
Britain is admitted to be facing a grave crisis. In Aus-
tralia, Mr. Chifley has spoken on the signs of oncoming
“recession.” The Big Business Leaders are powerless to
stop it; they know that another depression will cause the
utmost resentment among the working people and there-
fore they seek, in advance, to shackle the trade unions,
disrupt their leadership and restrict their freedom of action.
They hope to weaken the labor movement to such an


PLAYFORD’S SLAVE BILL
Page 12
extent that, when the crisis does come, they will be able
to make the workers bear the main burden in the orm
of wage cuts and reductions in social services
etc. They 1 aim to destroy opposition to a Third World War.
THE ROAD TO FASCISM
These attacks on the Trade Unions, on the Communist
Party, on militant workers leads towards Fascism. is
was the policy and practice of Hitler and Mussolini. Today
the capitalists attack the unions on the score ot
“Communist control” but it is the whole trade union
movement they are out after, as Playford s Bill shows.
Hitler attacked the so-called “Red Unions and their
Communist leadership but once he had achieved office, a
labor unions were abolished, the whole leadership whether
Communist or otherwise, was arrested gaoled.
Dr. Evatt in particular, pointed out in Canberra recently
that those who seek to outlaw the Communist Party are,
in fact, not attacking only the Party, but all democracy.
Such an attack inevitably spreads to all those who back
progressive ideas. This is the lesson of history. There
could be no better example than the recent events m
Hollywood when the so-called Committee of Un-American
Activities used its powers allegedly to enquire into Com-
munist activity but, in fact, to slander and smear all who
stand for any serious treatment in films of social questions,
including many prominent Roosevelt supporters.
The anti- labor legislation, the attacks on the Communist
Party, on trade union leaders, are all part of the plan
to weaken and disrupt the labor movement and establish
fascism, in the interests of the monopolists and their crisis-
ridden economy.
Playford’s Bill is part of this pattern. It is not surprising.
Playford, his Government and his party represent only
the vested interests of South Australia, the factory owners,
the business men, the big pastoralists, the Chamber of
Commerce and the Chamber of Manufactures. These are
thd interests which run his party and control his policy. It


is no accident that Playlford brings down this Bill today,
he is merely playing 1 his part in the attacks of the monopo-
lists and their agents against the working people.
That these attacks are premeditated and planned is
clearly shown by the formation, announced by the Liberals
themselves, of the “Southern Bloc,” consisting of the South-
ern States with governments of Big Business to oppose
and barrass the Federal Labor Government and to take
the offensive against the working people.
Never Apart


Page 14
PLAYFORD’S SLAVE BILL
WHAT ABOUT OTHER CONTROLS?
Mt. Playiford is very glib about controlling the workers
“in the interests of society.” He does not show the same
enthusiasm for other controls which bear directly on profits.
Mr. Playford, his Government and the whole L.C.L.
set-up in South Australia show their true political colour,
when they oppose the Prices Referendum, designed to give
the Federal Government power to continue price control.
He is for controls which will hamstring the labor move-
ent, and against controls which will limit or reduce profits.
He wants to be free to continue his policy of low wages,
poor education, housing, hospital and health services for
the useful people.
UNITY AGAINST PLAYFORD
The Slave Bill can be forced into oblivion by the unity
and strength of the labor movement, supported by all
progressive people.
Queensland trade unions wlon a resounding victory
in their recent strike, and showed that repressive legislation
can be defeated. The fight to repeal the Queensland leg-
islation has still to be carried to a successful conclusion.
The Victorian legislation has been passed, but determined
opposition by the democratic forces has prevented it being
proclaimed.
In South Australia, Playford’s Slave Bill must be stopped
from becoming law. United opposition from the ranks of
labor and democracy can win this victory.
But this campaign must be more than one for the defeat
of the Bill.
Playford has come out clearly. He and his Govern-
ment are anti-labor, anti-democratic, and are prepared to
destroy basic liberties with Slave Bills to carry out their


plans. The campaign must be the beginning of a
mighty effort by the labor movement to expose the L.C.L.
as the agent of monopolists, to drive them from office,and
send to governing positions representatives who will fight
for democracy and the well-being of all useful people.
(Blocks by courtesy S.A. Tribune)
u 7 e °P le ’ s Bookshop, 29 Hindley Street, Adelaide, and
printed by Co-operative Press, 304 Waymouth Street, Adelaide


Latest
Publications
FOOTBALL, THE AUSTRALIAN GAME 2/9
By Seff Parry ex-West Adelaide and State player.
Illustrated.
SOCIAL SERVICES AND THE STRUGGLE
AGAINST THE ECONOMIC CRISIS 6d.
Useful information of the various social service
benefits available under Federal and State legisla-
tion.
SCIENCE AND THE NATION 1/8
By members of the British Association of Scientific
Workers. (A Pelican book)
TRIBUNE, S.A. Edition for the truthful local, inter-
state and international news. Published every
Friday.' ;
For progressive and general literature and stationery
shop at . . .
\ Phone C 3027 * CVITN
29 HINDLEY_ ST.
Adelaide
