

PLAY UR
JACK!
HERBERT
HAYENS


k 71S


/ 5
/




?PLAY UP, JACK !?


COLLINS? COPYRIGHT
BOOKS
Uniform with this Volume
6/- net
SCHOOL STORIES FOR BOYS BY
HERBERT HAYENS
Play Up, Lions !
Play Up, Jack 1
Play Up, Stags I
HYLTON CLEAVER
The Short Term at Greyminster
The Greyminster Mystery
AN ADVENTURE STORY FOR BOYS BY
THE AUTHOR OF SOUTH WITH SCOTT
CAPT. E. R. G. R. EVANS
& DRAYCOTT DELL
The Treasure Trail
SCHOOL STORIES FOR GIRLS BY
ELSIE J. OXENHAM
The Abbey Girls Win Through
Jen of the Abbey School


'


. gg 5tJ|
* filJR^
I ?' j '4/
f? f9fi lag IM a*
*'? 0i]M - - fe** M&ln *Swll^^lBfll
ki ; Mf.^S
In sight of the Island


?PLAY UP, JACK!?
HERBERT HAYENS
Author of ?Play Up, Buffs !? ?Play Up, Stags !? etc.
LONDON AND GLASGOW
COLLINS? CLEAR-TYPE PRESS


Printed in Great Britain.


CONTENTS
I. FAIR HAIR AND BLUE EYES 7
11. ALL WEST COUNTRY MEN 17
111. A STRANGE RECEPTION 2Q
IV. CAPTAIN BLUNT?S STORY 38
V. WHAT THE SPANISH PRISONER KNEW 48
VI. AFFAIRS BECOME DESPERATE 58
VII. THE SACRED HOUSE 67
VIII. GOOD-BYE TO THE STORM AW AY 79
IX. A NAMELESS SHIP 90
X. MAROONED ! 100
XI. JOE TAKES A RISK 111
XII. WAITING FOR AN ATTACK 121
XIII. POLLOK MAKES AN OFFER 131
XIV. THE MADNESS OF MR. EASTMAN 141
XV. A STRANGE PAIR 151
XVI. JOE HEARS A STRANGE YARN 162
XVII. A STARTLING TRANSFORMATION 172
XVIII. THE MYSTERY DEEPENS 18l
XIX. A PUZZLING TRAGEDY 190


XX. WHY PILLING DIED 201
xxi. brandon?s secret 211
XXII. GOOD-BYE TO BRANDON 2ig
XXIII. AN EARLY MORNING SWIM 231
XXIV. ANOTHER TURN OF THE WHEEL 242
XXV. THE PRIDE OF THE ISLAND 253
XXVI. A BIG DISASTER 265
XXVII. THE MASSACRE 276
XXVIII. A LUCKY CAPTURE 287
XXIX. IN THE TUGERI STRONGHOLD 298
XXX. THE WHITE SORCERER 309


CHAPTER I
FAIR HAIR AND BLUE EYES
lx was a night in the spring of the year ; nine o?clock
or past; dry, but with a keen wind blowing, too keen
for sleeping in the open air, which, unless I chanced
upon a friendly barn, seemed my likeliest prospect.
There was a moon, which struggled through banks of
driving clouds, so that I had light and darkness alter-
nately. The road, not of the first quality, looked
weird and ghostly, with a few trees and low bushes
dotting the sides at intervals, and a dreary moorland
stretching to right and left.
My pockets were empty, save for a knife and a
hunk of bread, the latter of which I had intended
saving for my breakfast, but, being desperately
hungry, I took it out and munched it as I trudged
along. I had come to that state of mind when to-
morrow may take care of itself. That same feeling
prevented me from being unhappy. I was tired, but
not unduly so ; the hunk of bread filled my stomach ;
I felt strong and capable ; and last, but not least,
I possessed a pair of stout boots, waterproof and
comfortable ; a rare luxury in my life.


Now that I did well not to worry overmuch about
the morrow, chance, or fate ?which of the two you
may please to call it?proved very clearly, for I had
scarcely finished my supper when an event happened
which, little as I guessed it at the time, was to alter
the course of my life. A motor-car overtook and
passed me. The driver, who was the only occupant,
was either very inexperienced or very negligent. He
steered erratically, and twice, a little ahead of me,
the car came almost to a standstill.
The second time was where the road twisted at
rather a sharp angle, and I watched, expecting the
machine to topple over into the ditch, when a man,
running swiftly from a clump of bushes, dexterously
hoisted himself aboard from the rear. What happened
after that I was unable to distinguish, except that the
car, with a sudden jerk, twisted itself round the corner
and disappeared.
The incident was none of my business, but the
strangeness of it appealed to me, and, almost without
thinking, I broke into a run. The car was a long
distance off now, going at a rapid pace, so, after a
while, feeling nothing was to be gained, I stopped
running. Still, the affair was so curious and out-of-the-
way, that, as I walked briskly along, I could think
of nothing else.
A mile, perhaps a little more, farther on, the moon,
breaking through the clouds, lit up a figure lying at
the side of the road. It was that of a young man,


hatless, barefooted, and dressed only in his under-
wear. His hands were fastened behind his back with
a strap and bits of rope, and a coarse stocking was
pressed closely around his mouth.
I removed the gag, cut the knots, and helped the
stranger to his feet. He stood without speaking, my
arm around him, when to my amazement four men
with levelled guns ran at us from the moors. A
dazzling light flashed into our faces, and a voice
sternly commanded us not to move.
The men, by their uniform, appeared to be prison
warders, and a fifth came dashing up swiftly on a
motor-cycle.
? What are you doing there ? ? he demanded angrily.
The warder who had flashed the lantern answered
roughly?they were evidently all in a thoroughly bad
temper ?? Trying to make something of this," and
he motioned towards us.
The last-comer now questioned me, but his manner
was so overbearing that I turned sulky and refused
to reply. I was well used to being kicked and cuffed
and bullied, but somehow I never liked it. The
stranger, however, had by this time partly recovered,
and in short, jerky sentences related what had occurred.
He was driving home to the Towers, thinking of other
things, when a man had suddenly struck him a blow
from behind, rendering him half unconscious.
From this statement, and from what I had seen,
the puzzle became easy to solve. For some reason


of his own, the runaway had removed his victim?s
clothes, dumped him by the side of the road, and
vanished with the car.
? That?s our quarry all right,? exclaimed the cyclist
briskly ; ? he?s slipped through our fingers again.?
? Convict?s stocking,? added a warder curtly,
holding up the gag in confirmation.
The cyclist stayed long enough to gather such
description of the car as the owner gave, issued some
instructions to his subordinates, mounted, and dashed
off in pursuit of the fugitive. He seemed a very
energetic person.
The man with the lantern now assumed the lead.
? Hawke,? he directed, ? run round to Pavey?s and
borrow his Ford; we must get this gentleman home,
and it?s nearly a five-mile stretch to the Towers.
And bring some wraps. Can you tell us your name,
sir ? ?
? Blunt?Edward Blunt of the Towers.?
? Very good, sir, we'll get your car back in a few
hours. That chap?s an escaped convict, missing two
days, but we?ll nab him now. Smart dodge, though,?
and he spoke half admiringly.
Mr. Blunt returned no answer; indeed, he barely
spoke either during the time of waiting or on the
journey to the Towers. He apparently took it for
granted that I should accompany him, so I got into
the Ford and sat by his side.
The Towers was a strong, old-fashioned building.


with no other house in the neighbourhood, and sur-
rounded by a high wall. The warder drove through
an open gateway, and, as we approached the house,
a young man came to meet us. His age was perhaps
twenty, he had fair hair and skin, blue eyes, and a
laughing mouth. He regarded us with some perplexity,
but Mr. Blunt offered no explanation, simply saying,
? Give the boy a bed ; I am going to my room.?
The warder, declining all offers of hospitality,
wished us good-night and drove away, whereupon my
new acquaintance led me into a large room, and in
a few minutes placed a substantial supper on the
table.
? Tuck in,? said he cordially, ? and when you?ve put
that away we?ll talk. No sense in doing business on
an empty stomach.?
I needed no second invitation. Venison pie, delicious
cold ham, new rolls, dairy butter ?eatables that for
many a long day I had seen only from outside a shop
window. Here was a supper as splendid as unexpected,
with breakfast in the morning a certainty. It was
surely the best of good luck !
? Now,? began my companion, when at length I
leaned back contentedly, ? let us get to know each
other. My name is Dick Charter; what do you call
yourself ? ?
? Jack Trevan.?
? West country man, eh ? good enough ! Where
did you meet the Boss ? where?s his car ? How came


you to be in a Ford with a prison warder as chauffeur ?
Very interesting but a trifle mysterious, eh,? and he
smiled.
I told him exactly what had happened, and added
that I hoped Mr. Blunt had not been hurt seriously.
? I think not,? Charter replied; ?he is tough and
fairly well used to hard knocks. But you are tired,
and will be the fresher for a sound sleep. We?ve
plenty of spare rooms in the house.?
The luxury of getting into that bed has never
entirely passed from my mind. The spring mattress,
the clean sheets, the soft pillows in place of the hard
ground, or at the best a bundle of straw ! I closed
my eyes, gave Mr. Blunt my blessing, and fairly lost
myself in the midst of entrancing dreams.
Charter wakened me next morning; I had a hot
bath?another crowning luxury?dressed, and went
down to breakfast. Mr. Blunt was not present, but
he had given instructions for me to go to his room
in an hour?s time. Charter explained that he wished
particularly to see me.
I found him dressed and studying the contents of
what appeared to be an old exercise book. He was a
young man, not much older than Charter, I imagined,
and, like him, had fair hair and blue eyes.
? I am in your debt for your help last night,? he
began, laying down the book; ? come nearer, let
me look at you more closely.?
Astonished, and more than half frightened, I stepped


to his side; his glance seemed to bore right into my
flesh. He scanned my face and my neck, and suddenly
it gave me an odd feeling to realise that my eyes and
hair were very similar to his and Charter?s; it was a
curious coincidence. Then he examined my hands
keenly, and asked a question so curious that I was
fairly startled.
" Have you any mark or scar on your body ? ? he
demanded.
" No, sir,? I replied as soon as my surprise permitted
me to speak .
Not the slightest mark anywhere ? ?
No, sir,? with a still greater feeling of wonderment.
"You are honest ? You have never stolen any-
thing ? ?
?You have no right to ask such a question,? I cried
hotly, in spite of my fear ; ? do I look like a thief ? ?
? No,? he replied, and then, " Would you like to
go to sea ? The pay will be four pounds a month, and
a hundred pounds when the voyage ends. But you
may never come back.?
Four pounds a month ; food, lodging, and perhaps
clothes! I hardly gave him time to finish. " I?ll
come, sir,? I cried eagerly.
He warned me that the service might be dangerous,
but for that I cared nothing. To be offered a real
job was like being invited to enter Paradise. So I
was placed in Charter?s charge forthwith, as a duly
enrolled member of the company.


? Blue eyes, fair hair, and without spot or blemish,?
Charter laughed.
What does it all mean ? ? I asked, puzzled,
I hardly know myself.?
He isn?t mad, is he ? ?
? A little queer on one point, I fancy, but it?s hard
to tell. Though a young man, the Boss is an old
sailor?followed the sea as a boy. There was some-
thing curious about his last voyage ; he was, I have
heard, the only survivor. Those who know best say
that afterwards he appeared more than a bit strange.
Then he came unexpectedly into a fair amount of
money, and immediately bought a yacht and began
making preparations for a long voyage.?
? To what place ? ?
?An island called Brua, somewhere in the South Seas.?
? But what is all this rubbish about blue eyes and
fair hair ? ?
? That?s one queer thing in a queer business ; he
is crazy on that. And, in addition, every member of
the crew must be young, and without spot or blemish
on his body. But, mind, if the Boss is mad on these
points, he is sane enough on every other. Can you
load and fire a revolver ? ?
" No.?
? Then I had better teach you, the knowledge may
come in handy.?
? Then there was something in what Mr. Blunt said
about the danger ? ?


? I guess so, but he has told none of us any par-
ticulars. Come along and I'll give you your first
lesson. All the crew have to practise shooting with a
revolver.?
During the next few days we saw little of our
employer, who kept to his room. Apparently he had
forgotten all about the car, which the police discovered
abandoned at Bristol, although they failed to recapture
the fugitive. Even in my case the incident had faded
into the remote background, but then I had so many
new things to engage my attention.
At the end of the week Mr. Blunt left the Towers
and, after being absent for a fortnight, returned and
ordered us to get ready to start for Plymouth, He
said little, but the near approach of the voyage
obviously excited him, and I confess freely that the
strange look in his eyes made me feel nervous.
My knowledge of ships and sailors was very slight,
but the yacht, which had been re-christened the
Sacred Bird, was certainly a pleasing sight. Every-
thing about her was spick and span and spotlessly
clean, while the crew looked smart and alert in their
new uniforms. And I should judge that among them
there was not a man as old as the captain. Chartei,
who had signed on as first officer, remarked humorously
that we looked very much like an infant class.
Directly we were on board, our employer called us
together and delivered a brief speech. ? Now, my
lads,? said he, ? here?s a last word before the yacht


sails. I have offered you generous terms because this
is no ordinary voyage. There may not be much risk
for you, but still there?s the chance, and I want to
make that perfectly plain.?
? We signed the ticket with our eyes open,? some
one remarked cheerfully.
? Very well, but there?s still time to back down ;
that?s what I want to say. If any of you don?t like
the job at close quarters, now?s the time to speak ;
it will be too late afterwards.?
The men declared heartily that they were all agreed,
and that no one wished to leave the ship.
? Very good,? he replied, ? and I hope you will
have the best of luck and a safe return. Mr. Charter,
we sail in an hour?s time.?
Rumour had already been busy with the Sacred
Bird, and a considerable crowd had assembled to give
us a send-off on our mysterious enterprise. The
bustle, the novelty, and the excitement maintained
my spirits at a high pitch, and prevented me from
feeling any misgiving as to the result of the voyage.


CHAPTER II
ALL WEST COUNTRY MEN
Fortunately, the weather was fine and the sea
calm, but even so I felt scant interest in things for
the first few days, but lay in my bunk utterly wretched,
and hardly caring whether the Sacred Bird went to
the South Seas or to the bottom of the ocean. The
fourth morning, however, I struggled on deck, and
from that tune began to pick up strength.
The vessel carried a very happy family; the men
w ere bright, cheerful, and good-tempered?the mystery
of the voyage and the captain?s peculiar method of
picking a crew drew them together; the food was
wholesome and plentiful, the quarters were clean,
airy, and spacious. *
My chief duties consisted in attending Captain
Blunt, but there was really not much to be done, and
I spent a good deal of time with the crew. With one
young fellow, Joe Shannon, I became particularly
friendly. He came from an old family of sailors, and
had taken to the sea as naturally as a duck takes
to water.
?I?ve been on several voyages before,? he remarked
p.u.j. l 7


one evening, when we were yarning on deck, " but
this is the mmmiest of all. Do you know anything
of the Old Man ? ?
? Not very much,? and I mentioned how we had
become acquainted, and a part of what Dick Charter
had told me.
?Mr. Charter has mixed things a bit,? he said;
? I haven?t breathed a word to the men, and shan?t;
but Jack, my eldest brother, was with him on his
last voyage. The ship was the Lucy Quinn, and she
put into some island ?Jack never heard the name ?
for water. According to his account, it?s an awfully
wild place ; the rocks come right down to the sea,
and there seemed no way of getting to the interior.?
? What about the natives ? ? I asked.
?No one ever saw a soul, though Jack felt certain
the island was inhabited. But the point is that Mr.
Blunt?he was acting as second officer then ?wandered
off with a youngster called Pellew; and the Lucy
Quinn never saw either of them again.?
? You don?t mean they cut the ship ? ? I gasped.
? Well, it doesn?t seem likely, does it ? But there
you are. The pair never turned up, and at last the
Lucy Quinn sailed without them. Reported missing.
There was a tremendous how T -d?-do about it, my
brother says.
? Sure this is the same man ? ?
? Sure ! ?
? Didn?t Pellew come back ? ?


" I believe not. Of course, you won?t talk ? ?
"Not likely, but it?s all very puzzling, I wonder
what?s taking the Old Man to the island again ? ?
Joe shook his head. ? Hard to tell,? said he, and
then, with evident hesitation, ? but don?t you think
he has a screw loose somewhere ? He looked awfully
queer this morning; his eyes were bright as paint,
and yet he didn?t seem to see anything or anybody.
Tell you what, Trevan, there?ll be some mighty funny
doings before we get to England again.?
Joe s talk set me thinking hard, and, I don?t mind
admitting, made me uncomfortable. This tale of the
missing Pellew was a curious one which added to the
mystery. Did Captain Blunt believe his friend was
still alive ? Was he going to search for him ? ?that
might be the solution of the puzzle. But if the
captain was really wrong in the head?and even Dick
Charter had admitted that much?there was no
telling what crazy notion he might have got hold of.
I watched him narrowly during the next few days,
but, except for the strange expression in his eyes,
perceived no sign of anything amiss. He did his full
share of the work, relieving Charter punctually, issuing
his orders promptly, and navigating the vessel with
the skill and confidence of a trained seaman.
But off duty, and down in his cabin, he brooded a
great deal, sitting perhaps for an hour on end, staring
straight before him, and never speaking a word nor
making a movement. The sight of him on these


occasions was uncanny, and I was always glad to
steal away and go on deck.
The delights and wonders of the voyage were a
continual source of enjoyment to me. I was never
tired of watching the great rolling weaves, and the
antics of the flying-fish, and the rare birds that occa-
sionally flew over the ship. I was woefully ignorant
of all these things, but my new chum gave me a good
deal of information, and I picked up more from the
sailors? yams.
Naturally, little opportunity occurred for a private
chat with Charter, who had such responsible duties
on his shoulders ; but now and again he managed to
spare a few minutes, and I found him the same bright,
cheery, good-natured fellow as ever. Whatever his
thoughts with reference to the skipper were, he kept
them to himself, and if he felt any misgivings no one
else heard of them.
As one of the crew remarked, it was a perfect
holiday trip, and we might have been cruising for
pleasure instead of working for wages ; but, somehow,
from the moment of sighting Brua, this feeling
vanished. I cannot account for the peculiar change :
there was no apparent reason for it, and yet every
one seemed oppressed by a sense of danger and
misfortune.
The island itself looked particularly uninviting.
The coast was steep and precipitous, and we sailed
half-way round before finding an opening wide enough


to admit a vessel even smaller than the Sacred Bird .
Captain Blunt was on the bridge, and from time to
time he gazed very earnestly at a sheet of paper, on
which he had made various sketches.
At length we sighted an inlet which apparently he
recognised. Though not of great extent, the opening
was amply sufficient for us: the water was deep?
we could probably have anchored right up against
the rocks?and the position was so sheltered that,
unless in very exceptional circumstances, no danger
need be apprehended from sudden storms.
It was nearly three o?clock in the afternoon when
we finished bringing the Sacred Bird to anchor in the
middle of the bay. The weather was fine, the air
marvellously still, the only sound to break the silence
being the moaning of the waves, as they rolled
monotonously against the iron-bound coast.
? The island doesn?t look to me as if it were
inhabited, I remarked to Joe Shannon, as we stood
in the bow of the ship gazing at the land; ? there
isn t a sign even of a canoe. If there were any natives
wouldn?t they come out to sell us things ? ?
? That?s the usual custom,? he admitted, ? but,?
with a laugh, ? I don?t see what they could bring
besides birds? eggs. Jack was right in calling it a
horrible place, and what the Old Man wants here
beats me altogether.?
? He may have come to search for Pellew,? I
suggested.


? Hardly! Pellew?s bound to be dead by this
time."
** Well, he hasn?t come to trade."
?No," and my companion?s voice sank to a whisper,
? but I?ll tell you what struck me. Suppose, when he
was left here, he discovered treasure-trove of some
sort. I know that old wheeze is about played out,
but if that isn't his motive, what is ? "
I shook my head, having no suggestion to offer.
? And if there aren?t any natives, why has he
brought rifles and revolvers and ammunition ? That
seems as if he expected trouble."
I looked again at the coast, still unconvinced: it
was silent, desolate, deserted. What, by courtesy,
might be called a beach, was simply a few yards of
loose boulders, with the cliffs, as far as one could
judge, rising sheer on three sides of it. It was impossible
to detect the semblance of a road, or even of a passable
track. The longer I gazed, the more I rejected the
idea of the island being inhabited, but in this I was
speedily undeceived. All the crew were summoned aft,
and the captain made a speech which set us wondering.
? We have arrived at our destination, lads," he
began, ? and so far, so good. This is where the
danger begins, but, unless you are very careless or
very stupid, there isn?t much to fear. The natives
on this island have no canoes, but they are as much
at home in the water as fishes. They may possibly
swim out and attack the ship at night. If they succeed


in getting on board, I won't answer for what will
happen, but that will be your own fault. Mr. Charter
will set a double watch, and every man will be armed
with a rifle or revolver. Do you get me ? "
? Ay, ay, sir,? chorused the crew.
? There is one other matter. In the morning I am
going ashore with a small party. Now, listen care-
fully. Those who stay on the ship, if they show the
least common sense, are in no danger; those who
come with me stand a chance of being killed. Turn
that over in your minds for a few minutes, will
you ? ?
His words had made the matter so plain that there
seemed little to turn over. Safety on the ship ; chance
of death on the land; a class of infants could have
understood that much. We discussed the subject for
a while, and then he began again.
? I am giving no orders," he explained, ? but if
there are four men willing to risk death, perhaps
torture, I will take them with me."
If you have ever formed one of a crowd trying to
press into some popular show, you will have a faint
idea of what happened. Every man pressed forward
as if afraid of missing some precious gift, and there
were shouts of ? Take me, sir, take me," ? I?ll make
one," ? Let me and Brady come, sir.?
Pushing to the front I made my claim as boldly as
the rest, though extremely doubtful of being chosen.
However, one gains very little in this world by standing


humbly aside. As Joe Shannon observed, it?s wonderful
what pure cheek sometimes will do.
Dick Charter gave a boyish laugh. ? Seems as if
you can have the pick of the bunch, sir,? he remarked.
? But,? exclaimed the captain, who looked a trifle
nonplussed by the hearty response to his invitation,
? I don?t want to pick and choose. They are all fine
fellows, and any four will do for me.?
? The only way is to draw lots,? grumbled Brady,
? but by rights I ought to be the first to go,? though
why this should be so the speaker left unexplained.
However, the idea was favourably received, and
acted upon immediately. Dick Charter tore a sheet
of paper into strips : four were marked with a cross,
the others remained blank. Then all were carefully
folded, placed in a cap, and shuffled up.
? Everybody satisfied ? ? he asked, and was pro-
ceeding to draw out one of the slips when the captain
stopped him.
? You can?t go,? he remarked, in a tone of apology ;
? you have to stand by the ship.?
Dick?s jaw dropped ; there was no need to express
his disgust and disappointment in words, but he
knew how to obey orders, and by a great effort
manged to reply calmly, ? Very good, sir.?
? That?s a bad scald for Mr. Charter,? whispered
Joe Shannon, and I nodded.
A spectator might have been excused for thinking
that the group pressing eagerly around the cap was


engaged in drawing lots for a thousand pound prize.
Every eye was fixed eagerly, almost aggressively, on
Brady, as his fingers fumbled slowly amongst the
bits of paper.
? He?s trying to feel the pencil marks,? cried
Shannon, and one or two men laughed.
Brady drew a blank. ? Just my blamed luck,?
he growled. ? I never did win anything in a raffle
but a twenty-year-old hen all skin and bone.?
Five blanks followed, and then Holten drew a cross.
He was the oldest and strongest of the crew, and even
those who envied his luck admitted the Old Man
himself could not have made a better choice.
The next man was equally successful. This was
Pym, a slight, wiry fellow, who, in his twenty-two
years, had been through more adventures than the
ordinary man dreams of in a lifetime. The third
winner was Drake, as daring a chap as the famous
admiral, and thus far no one could deny that the
captain had been well served by this irregular method
of selecting a shore party.
There were now about half a dozen papers left, and,
fearful lest any one should raise an objection, I plunged
my hand into the cap and drew a slip out.
? It?s a cross,? I cried excitedly ; ? it's a cross.?
I dare say the builders of Babel made a noise, but
they spoke in whispers compared with the losers on
board the Sacred Bird. ? Put it back, you young
imp,? screamed one. " He?s only a kid,? yelled


another. ? He?s only just out of the babies? class,?
protested Joe Shannon, who had been waiting his
turn to draw.
? I really think, sir,? said Charter, ? that Trevan
is too young for the job.?
Amidst all this hubbub and hullabaloo the captain
remained with a strange expression in his eyes, and
what looked like the ghost of a smile playing around
his lips. The noise and the shouting died down ;
no one even whispered, we all gazed at him as if
under a spell. And when, after a while, he exclaimed
quietly, ? The boy can go,? none dared to question
the verdict.
The decision surprised every one, myself perhaps
most of all, but a few words from Charter later in the
evening explained the seeming mystery.
? He has a crazy notion that it?s the hand of fate,?
remarked the first mate grimly. ? While the men
were shouting and raving he was repeating the names
over and over again?Holten, Pym, Drake, Trevan.?
? What have the names to do with it ? ? I asked
in astonishment.
? Don?t you see ? You are all west country men ;
he is one himself, and so was Pellew ! He regards the
result of the drawing as a favourable omen. And
Pellew couldn?t have been much older than you when
he was lost.?
I gazed at the speaker as if he too had become a
little cracked, the idea was so fanciful and full of


nonsense. What on earth could it matter whether
we came from the west or the north ? whether our
eyes were blue or black ? our skins fair or mottled ?
It was all a pack of rubbish, and the only possible
explanation was that Mr. Blunt?s wits had gone wool-
gathering. I felt now that he had been always more
or less unbalanced. However, it was too late to
worry; I had signed on for the job and had to see
the end of it.
? I hope you?ll come through safely," Charter
remarked after a while, ? but I wish you had drawn
a blank."
And that you could have gone in my place,
I said banteringly.
It isn t that; the plain truth is I?m worried to
death over the business. I?m afraid somehow that
the shore party will come to gnef. I can?t explain
w hy, but that?s the notion I?ve got in my head."
? There?s no need to worry," I said, ? we?ll come
back all right, but I wish you could tell me what
we re supposed to be doing. Are we searching for
Pellew ? "
It s as much a mystery to me as to you, Trevan,
though I fancy Pellew is in the picture somewhere.
Anyhow the best of luck to you." He gripped my
hand hard, and walked aft looking serious and troubled.
Turning back, I met Shannon, who wanted to know
what was wrong with the first mate. ? A dying duck
in a thunderstorm isn?t in it with him," he said;


? face as long as a fiddle, and as mournful as if all the
strings had been in a shower-bath."
? He?s a bit nervous about the shore party; has a
nasty feeling that we?re all going west.??
? Not you, Jack ; he needn?t lose any sleep over
you. Whatever happens to the others you?ll come
marching home. Any chap who?s been to sea would
spot you right off as one of the lucky ones. The only
thing bothering me is what you?re going to do.
Charter know what?s in the wind ? ?
I shook my head. ?He fancies w r e may be a search-
party to look for Pellew, but that?s only guesswork."
? Sort of looking for a needle in a bundle of hay !
Well, I?d advise you to turn in and get a nap. And,
I say, Trevan, if you feel a bit livery and would like
me to take your place ??
? Not much," I said, with a grin. ? You watch
out and see that the yacht doesn?t run away, that?s the
sort cf job you?re most suited for,? and dodging the
blow he aimed at me, I ran down the ladder.


CHAPTER 111
A STRANGE RECEPTION
At the first coming of dawn the shore party was
summoned to the captain's cabin. Now that the time
for starting was so near I felt anxious to be off; the
fever of adventure had got into my blood, and,
though sobered by the remembrance of Charter's
solemn face, I was keen to get to the root of the
mystery.
We met the first officer leaving the room, where
he had been receiving his final instructions, and from
his looks one could judge they did not appeal to him.
However, on board ship, orders are orders, and not
arguments.
The captain glanced at each one of us in turn, and
began, ?Just a few words, lads, before we start. I
mentioned yesterday that the members of this expedi-
tion stand a fair chance of being killed. This island
is not uninhabited. The interior is fertile and occupied
by a tribe of savages. It is my intention to interview
their chief. The nature of our reception is doubtful.
They haven?t any firearms, I believe, but they are
lusty fellows, and can handle their spears. If it comes


to fighting we can make some play with our revolvers,
but I hope there will be no bloodshed. And that
brings me to the hardest thing I have to say. Not a
shot must be fired unless we are attacked. It may
mean a dead man or so on our side to begin with, but
that must be risked.?
? Well stand by your orders, sir,? said Holten.
? Good ! There?s only one other thing : if I?m put
out, you will turn and make the best of your way
to the shore ?Mr. Charter will have the boats in
readiness.? He dismissed us with a wave of the
hand, instructing us to get a substantial breakfast.
? That's so much, anyhow,? said Holten, as w r e
marched off, ? and not so bad if you don t look at it
too near ; but the Old Man must have a queer kink
to want to go parley-vooing with a lot of niggers.
M I?ve heard that he?s been somewhere down here
before,? Pym volunteered.
? It?s his funeral, anyway,? remarked Drake, and
that closed the discussion, as I did not feel at liberty
to repeat the yam that Shannon had told me.
By the time our meal was finished the long-boat had
been hoisted over, the rowing party w r ere in their
places, and the remainder of the crew had lined up
to wish us good luck. We carried a couple of revolvers
apiece and plenty of ammunition, and each man had
a knapsack filled with food strapped on his back.
At the last moment Charter suggested that a stout
stick might be useful, and very quickly a dozen


or so, from which we made a selection, were routed
out.
I leave Mr. Charter in charge,? said Captain
Blunt; ? while lam absent you will obey his orders
precisely as if they were mine.?
Ay, ay, sir; we?ll do that,? came the hearty response.
Our messmates wished us good-bye, and Joe Shannon
gave me a special handshake. ? You?re a regular
fraud, young Trevan,? he growled, " but I hope you?ll
come through.?
Thanks,? I laughed, ? your turn next time,? and
he shook his fist as I went over the ship?s side.
The bit of shore on which we landed was even more
desolate than it appeared from a distance, being
literally covered with loose rocks and boulders thrown
down from the forbidding cliffs. We glanced at each
other in bewilderment, each man wondering how on
earth we were going to start on our expedition.
Hang on and off till Mr. Charter recalls you,?
the captain instructed the boat?s crew, and, bidding
us follow him, turned in the direction of what seemed
a totally impassable cliff.
?There?s the first path.? he exclaimed; ?some-
thing to test your climbing powers, eh ! Trevan, you
come next to me, then Pym and Drake, with Holten
last. And don?t forget my warning: we are peace-
able travellers, unless attacked.?
I had some experience of the Cornish cliffs, but to
climb them was child?s play compared with our present


undertaking. There was no vegetation, nothing but
loose stones and boulders and jagged rocks. Captain
Blunt endeavoured to find the least difficult route,
and we toiled after him, happy when we covered a
few yards without mishap. Several times our leader
called a brief halt, and it was midday when we arrived
under the brow of the cliff, where we stopped and
ate our first meal on the island.
Thus far we had met with no sign of life, beyond
a few birds, with none of which were my companions
acquainted. As far as one could judge, we had the
whole range of cliffs to ourselves, and indeed they
were so desolate and forbidding that the natives, unless
for some special object, were unlikely to frequent them.
For half an hour after the meal ended we remained
at our halting-place, chatting about the prospects of
our strange enterprise. Then Captain Blunt, who
sat on a ledge above us, got up, and we in single file
clambered after him.
We had expected, on reaching the summit, to obtain
a fair view of the island, but in this were disappointed.
Almost immediately in front of us was the fringe of
a great wood, the trees thin and straggling at the
edge, but becoming thicker and denser as we marched
along a narrow, tortuous path, beaten out by the
feet of the islanders.
? A proper place this for an ambush,? I heard Pym
whisper to Drake ; ??the niggers could snuff us all
out before we saw one of them.?


It was an ugly suggestion, made uglier still a moment
later, when on our right rose a piercing cry, so weird
and strange that one could scarcely believe it came
from a human throat. The next instant the sound
was repeated from a spot farther away, and again
from the very path we were traversing.
Our leader stopped, waiting for us to close up.
? That is a signal which shows we have been dis-
covered,? he remarked coolly, " Keep your nerve,
and remember not a shot is to be fired unless I give
the word.?
? Ay, ay, sir,? responded Holten.
I cannot speak for my companions, but for myself
I freely admit that the situation cooled my blood,
and I envied the lucky dogs who were snug on board
the Sacred Bird. Here we were marching along a
narrow path, surrounded by tall trees, any one of
which might conceal a lurking savage. At any moment
the unseen flight of a spear would bring death ! The
situation was far from cheerful!
Holten and his mates had survived too many perils
to be troubled very much, while the skipper evidently
had no fear at all; but for me?well, there?s no use
denying that I was horribly afraid. However, I did
my best to look at ease, and to keep my eyes on
Captain Blunt, although desperately anxious to turn
from side to side, in what would have proved a futile
search for the sign of a hidden foe.
The unearthly cries had ceased, and everything was
p.u.j. c


quiet again ; only the fall of our feet broke the nerve-
racking silence. Should we succeed in getting through
the forest unharmed ?If the natives desired to kill
us they had a splendid opportunity ! But we struggled
on until the wood became less dense, and finally
emerged on to open ground.
? Only talkee-talkee after all,? exclaimed Pym, in
a tone of relief, to which Holten replied, ? Don?t be
too sure, mate, these niggers are craftier than foxes ;
they may have a trick or two up their sleeves yet for
all we know. In a manner of speaking, that is,
because I guess sleeves are scarce articles here-
about.?
We continued without hindrance over the undula-
ting ground, and at length reached the head of a
valley, bounded on both sides by high cliffs covered
with verdure. From our position the valley presented
a beautiful spectacle. The foliage was magnificent;
bread-fruit and cocoanut trees abounded, while here
and there glistened the leafy thatches of commodious
bamboo-built houses.
But not a soul was in sight: everything was per-
fectly still. We questioned each other with our eyes,
and a feeling of uneasiness crept over us. Were the
islanders leading us into a cunningly contrived trap ?
But they might easily have massacred us in the wood !
The upper portion of the valley was very narrow, like
the neck of a bottle, but presently it opened out into
a wide expanse, and at the juncture we beheld a


surprising spectacle that brought back with a rush
all my fears.
? Keep steady, men,? cautioned our leader quietly,
? and leave everything to me.?
Perfectly cool, he stepped to the front, while we
lined up behind him, ready to use our revolvers should
the need arise.
Opposite us, drawn up in rows, stood as many as
a hundred of the islanders. They were tall men,
slimly but powerfully built, and each was armed with
a formidable spear. The colour of their skin was a
very light brown ; that of their hair, which they wore
long, was of a slightly darker shade. Save for a
matted kilt, they wore no clothes, and their bodies,
though not their faces, were heavily tattooed. They
stood as still and rigid as statues, betraying not even
the flicker of an eyelash, nor a gleam of life in their
brown eyes.
Some three paces in advance of them towered their
chief, a splendid fellow over six feet in height, beauti-
fully moulded and proportioned. A band, which
appeared to be of white cloth, encircled his head, and
from it sprang a huge feather taken from the wing of
a bird unknown to us. On his chest was the figure
of a warrior, poised, in the act of hurling a spear,
but his body bore no other tattoo marks. He, too,
remained motionless, as if hewn by a cunning sculptor
out of marble.
These passive images gave me an uncanny feeling,


but our leader, unimpressed, moved a step forward
and spoke. His speech was short, only a sentence or
two, and unintelligible to us : indeed the only words
we recognised were the two names, Blunt and Pellew.
The chief?s reply was a wave of the hand, at which
his men divided into two sections leaving a passage
between. Motioning us to follow, he led the way
through the gap.
To me the act seemed on a par with putting one?s
head into a lion?s mouth, but Captain Blunt accepted
the invitation cheerfully, and we marched in single
file along that living lane amidst a forest of uplifted
spears. If this were indeed a trap it was one from
which none could escape. A single sign, perhaps imper-
ceptible to us, would hurl us instantly into eternity.
Yet we walked on, outwardly calm, with heads erect
and eyes fixed straight ahead, as if no likelihood of
danger existed. The ordeal lasted only a little while,
but this little seemed a lifetime. Holten was the last
man through, and then the warriors silently reclosed
their ranks, and stalked impassively behind him.
The procession moved on in silence. We passed
many bamboo-built houses tucked away under the
cocoanut trees, but one and all seemed deserted, and
showed no sign of life. Nor did we meet a single
human being ?man, woman, or child. But for the
chief stalking majestically ahead, and his formidable
warriors in our rear, we might have been traversing
a country of the dead.


A quarter of a mile beyond the bottle-neck, on a
piece of raised ground, stood a house much larger
than any we had passed. It consisted of a spacious
central hall, with smaller rooms tacked on to each
end, and having a number of what may be called
outhouses in the rear.
? This is where he means to hold the pow-wow,?
said Drake in a whisper, ? though what it?s all about
goodness only knows.?
? If there?s going to be squally weather we?ll be
able to make a fight for it,? Pym remarked in a tone
of satisfaction.
In obedience to a sign from our guide, we filed in,
and squatted on the mats in a semicircle, the skipper
and the native chief next to each other. A dozen of
the warriors, evidently the leaders, formed a circle
around us; their men remained outside facing the
open doorway. In spite of Pym?s hopeful remark,
it seemed to me that our chance of escape was a
mighty poor one.
For five minutes we sat in solemn silence, waiting
for something?we could not guess what?to happen.
Then came a rustling movement from outside, and to
our utter astonishment a gigantic negro entered the
hall. He was a fine specimen of a man, with pleasant,
intelligent face, and quick, sharp eyes that took in
everything at a glance. He advanced to within a foot
of the chief and remained awaiting his instructions.


CHAPTER IV
CAPTAIN BLUNT?S STORY
We waited with lively curiosity while the chief spoke
to the negro, who presently turned to Captain Blunt.
? Sar,? he began, ? I your friend. I, American
sailor, kept a prisoner here. The chief asks why,
what for you come to his island ? It is not his wish.?
? Tell him,? replied our captain, ? that years ago
he captured two white men, myself and another called
Pellew. I escaped, but my friend was left behind.
Say that I have come to fetch him.?
The negro delivered his message, and translated
the reply. ? Sar, the chief remembers Pellew, a young
man with white skin, and eyes and hair the colour of
your own. The chief?s grief is very great; he loved
Pellew with all his heart, but many moons ago the
young man fell sick and died.?
For a minute Captain Blunt seemed to lose his self-
control. His face was white, his eyes filmed with
tears, one could see his limbs tremble ; but with an
effort he mastered his emotion and replied quietly,
? Tell the chief he is mistaken. Pellew is living, not
dead Add also that I have come to take him away.?


I glanced at Pym in amazement. What strange
words were these ? Obviously the skipper was ignorant
of the missing Pellew?s fate, yet he spoke with the
most astounding confidence. Surely this was proof
that on one point at least the man was crazy. We
watched the native?s face intently, as the interpreter,
himself wondering, conveyed the meaning of the speech.
For an instant the chief?s impassiveness gave way;
a look of doubt flashed into his eyes, then he regained
his attitude of indifference.
? He cannot understand,? said the negro, after a
while. ? The youth whom every one loved is truly
dead, and his bones lie among those of the great ones
of the tribe in the sacred burying-ground.?
?He lies ! ? returned the captain sternly; " Pellew
is not dead. If you want to regain your freedom help
me to find him.?
" There is a Spanish sailor who has been here many
years, I will ask him.? Then he turned and hurriedly
addressed his master, who listened patiently and
replied in a few words.
? 1 told him,? exclaimed the black, ? you had
learned from the Great Spirit that your friend fives,
and that you cannot depart without him, but Miri?
so the chief is called?maintains that Pellew is dead
and buried. What can you do ? ?
? Ho these fellows know anything about firearms ? ?
? No, they fight only with spears,?
? Bring me a small cocoanut.?


The negro, with wonderment in his eyes, obeyed,
and Captain Blunt handed the fruit to Holten.
? Your nerves are steady,? he said ; ? stand against
the wall and hold the nut above your head. I will
shoot from the hip.?
The sailor unhesitatingly did as he was directed,
and not a muscle of his body moved, as he stood
holding the outstretched fruit. Even the savages,
unable to conceal their curiosity, gazed with the
utmost intentness at the waiting Holten. Suddenly a
sharp report broke the profound silence, and the nut,
struck by a bullet, fell to the floor.
? Now explain to the chief,? said Captain Blunt,
? that we can kill every man in the room as easily as
I broke that cocoanut. Tell him, too, that we shall
remain on the island until he brings Pellew to us,
and that if a warrior raises his spear in anger we will
destroy the whole tribe.?
Miri was evidently nonplussed, but he showed no
fear, nor did any of the islanders, and I was wondering
what would happen next when Captain Blunt got up.
? We are going to seek a place in the open where we
can sleep,? he said ; ?let Miri remember my warning.?
Whether the chief was really afraid I could not
determine, but no one offered to molest us, and the
men outside remained motionless, perhaps awaiting
the signal for our slaughter. We should have sold our
lives dearly, but I realised, as did my companions, that
m the event of a fight we must all be killed.


Nevertheless, our leader went about his business
as coolly as if he were promenading the deck of his
own ship. He selected an isolated mound, difficult for
the natives to approach undetected, and affording a
certain amount of cover. Here we built a fire and ate
a portion of our food, with the addition of bananas
and cocoanuts.
Captain Blunt sat a trifle apart, while the rest of us
talked in whispers of our queer adventure. We
possessed some knowledge now of the captain's object,
and presently he shed a little further light on it. He
approached and sat down by the fire.
?You heard what passed in the hut,? he said,
? and the reason of our voyage. This is my second
visit to the island ; the first was when the Lucy Quinn,
damaged by a wild storm, ran into the bay. Pellew
was my junior, and we were the closest friends, closer
than brothers. The Lucy Quinn remained a week, and
on the last afternoon he and I set out to climb the
cliffs. We had no idea that the island was inhabited,
when suddenly we were struck down, captured, and
bound without even a chance of showing fight.?
Pym and Drake grunted sympathetically, Holten
withdrew his pipe and exclaimed tensely, ? That was
hard luck.?
The natives exhibited the greatest curiosity over
our appearance,? the speaker continued. ? They
pointed to our white skin, to the colour of our eyes, to
our hair, so different from their own \ they stripped


off our clothes to inspect our bodies more carefully,
and finally carried us to a hut. No one offered to do
us harm, and, in fact, we were treated royally. But
the actions of the natives filled us with misgiving.
Every day the chiefs and the medicine men visited us,
looked minutely at our skin, and compared Pellew
with me, as if trying to decide some difficult point.
At last, one evening, they carried Pellew off with
great pomp and ceremony, and I have never seen him
since. But," with a sudden outburst of energy, ? I
know, I am confident that he is alive.
? How did you manage to escape, sir ? ? Holten
asked respectfully.
The captain shivered. ?It was a horrible time,
he replied, " horrible. Pellew had vanished, I could
get no word of him anywhere. One night, in the season
of the rains, I left the valley, and crossed to the cliffs
farther along the island. There I lived in a cave,
making occasional journeys inland for fruit, and
employing my days in the construction of a raft. I
must have been crazy, for, when the raft was finished,
I lashed myself to it, and set out to sea at the mercy
of wind and current, with little food and no water.
A Portuguese boat picked me up raving in delirium.??
He rose abruptly, and we watched him walking
round the mound in a state of considerable agitation.
? Must have thought a lot of the young chap,?
exclaimed Holten.
"If he hasn?t dreamed it all,? Pym suggested;


? there?s a tile loose somewhere, for certain. How
can he know that this Pellew ain?t dead and buried ?
That?s the most likely thing anyhow. Hasn?t seen
him for donkey?s years.?
?I?ve been in a few queer holes in my life,? said
Holten, but this beats the lot. What does he reckon
on doing ? Staying here till the niggers murder us ? ?
? We ?ve got to see it through,? Drake observed
doggedly, ? we?ve signed on for the job.?
Right-o, mate, you needn?t teach your granny to
suck eggs,? said Holten sulkily; ? but it?s a rummy
go, all the same. What beats me is why he didn?t
bring the whole crew with him ! ?
? They would never have got here,? Drake replied.
The niggers let us through because they can wipe
us out at any time, but what chance would five times
our number have had in that forest if they had decided
to kill us there ? ?
The answer was so obvious that no one thought it
worth while to make it, and we stopped talking, to
stare moodily into the fire. The situation was indeed
an ugly one, and I fancy none of us had much hope
of ever seeing the Sacred Bird again.
Pym and I, revolver in hand, shared the first watch.
We tramped in opposite directions?along the edge
of the mound, stopping occasionally to peer into the
darkness, and to listen to any sound that might be-
token the stealthy approach of the natives. Nothing,
however, occurred during our spell, and when Holten


and Drake relieved us we lay down near the fire and
were speedily asleep.
Apparently the islanders were as much at a loss
how to act as ourselves. There was in the morning
still no sign of women or children, but a score of
warriors, who had been stationed there all night,
mounted guard a hundred yards or so from the foot
of the mound. Near the big hut half a dozen men
were at work. One was unmistakably the gigantic
negro, the swarthy fellow next to him we concluded
to be the Spaniard of whom he had spoken, the other
four were natives, but much darker in colour than
the warriors of the tribe.
? Well,? exclaimed Holten, casting a glance at the
trees, ? we shan?t exactly starve here, but we shan?t
grow too fat.?
The situation, in spite of the actual danger, was not
without its laughable side. What were we to do should
the natives merely stand and look on ? It was im-
possible to remain on the mound for ever, and an
attempt to explore the island would almost certainly
lead to bloodshed. And not one of us believed that
the skipper?s friend was alive !
Yet for some undiscoverable reason Captain Blunt
remained quietly confident. The natives, he declared,
were afraid, and had no desire to fight. Before long
Miri would endeavour to open another pow-wow and
come to terms.
? P?raps, and p?raps not,? muttered Drake. ? What?s


he want to make a move for when the game?s in his
hands. We can stay here and starve, or try to get
back to the ship, and a mighty poor try it will be.?
? We have our revolvers,? Pym remarked.
? A fat lot of use they?ll be,? disgustedly. ? Why,
at the first shot the niggers will scurry like rabbits
to their warren, and we shall never see them again.
But,? with a shrug, "we shall feel their spears. No,
unless the Old Man?s got some special dodge, we?re as
good as counted out.?
Drake seemed to be in the right of it. The morning
wore away, and the only movement was the relief
of the guard by a fresh batch of warriors. The village
maintained its deserted appearance, except that from
time to time some one went into or came out from the
big hut, where apparently the leading warriors were
sitting in conclave.
Now and again Captain Blunt threw us an en-
couraging remark. The natives will be too puzzled
to hold out long,? he said; ? our staying here will
break their nerves, they?ll be fancying all kinds of
strange things.?
We had our doubts about this, but an hour later
an incident occurred which in some measure justified
his belief. A man who issued from the hut was quickly
joined by the negro interpreter, and both walked
m our direction. The native was evidently a person
of distinction, the warriors, as he passed, bowing low
before him. He appeared old and feeble, and after


every few steps leaned heavily on the staff he carried.
The pair ascended the mound slowly, and Captain
Blunt stepped forward to meet them.
? Big medicine-man,? exclaimed the interpreter;
?he wanting to see you very special. I have found
out something for you from the Spaniard, but no time
to talk now.?
The medicine-man did not speak, nor did he call
for the services of his interpreter. In striking contrast
with the feebleness of his body, his eyes were bright,
alert, and piercing, and at each of us in turn he gazed
searchingly, as if to clear up some doubtful point.
For several minutes he paced to and fro, then, with
a word to the negro, turned abruptly and went over
the side of the mound.
? Well,? exclaimed Holten, ? that?s the funniest
game I?ve ever seen. What was the old heathen
up to ? ?
? Seemed as if he was looking for a long-lost
brother,? said Pym, with a laugh.
? He must have had some particular reason for
coming,? I put in.
? Perhaps it was to see if our hair had changed
colour in the night,? Pym suggested.
To this no one made any reply, but the chaffing
remark set me thinking. From the very beginning
the natives had regarded us, not only with surprise
and astonishment, but also with a perplexed wonder
in which there seemed to be a little fear. The withered


old medicine-man had done at close quarters only
what Miri and his warriors had done?examined us
minutely. Was there, after all, some method in the
captain?s madness ? Had he chosen his crew for the
express purpose of making a powerful impression on
these simple islanders ? Was it possible that they
attached some mysterious virtue to blue eyes, fair
hair, and an unmarked skin ? They themselves had
brown hair and eyes and skin, and I remembered
noting that the colour of the chiefs was several shades
lighter than that of the ordinary men. Perhaps this
was a mark of superior rank. The ideas running
through my head were ridiculous, but then the whole
affair was ridiculous.
I glanced at Mr. Blunt; the queer look was in his
eyes again, a rapt expression on his face ; he seemed
to be listening intently to sounds inaudible to us, and
I heard him presently mutter as if waking from a
dream, "The spell works.? From the medicine-
man s visit he had in some way learned something
that pleased him.


CHAPTER V
WHAT THE SPANISH PRISONER KNEW
The negro?s remark that he had found out something
roused our curiosity, and we wondered if it concerned
the missing Pellew. Evidently he had feared to excite
the medicine-man?s suspicions by talking too much,
and now we were compelled to wait in hope that a
better opportunity would arise.
Had he discovered that Pellew was alive ? or dead ?
? Seems to me that if Pellew is alive the nigger
would have said so,? Holten exclaimed, and Pym
agreed with him.
? Same if the youngster is dead,? said Drake;
? I don?t see there?s anything in it either way. What
bothers me is why that old heathen came to stare at
us ; I guess if we knew that we?d know a good lot.
We watched our late visitor enter the hut, and
presently the negro, who had been left outside, was
fetched in. Half an hour later he reappeared, and
approached the mound alone. Now he would have a
chance of giving us some useful information.
He was plainly in a state of high excitement: his
eyes rolled, and his face wore a puzzled expression.
48


He began talking almost immediately, and so fast
that it was difficult to understand him. But we
gathered that a big pow-wow had taken place after
the medicine-man?s return, that the natives were
genuinely troubled, and that much difference of
opinion had shown itself. For some mysterious reason
the islanders were averse from doing us an injury, and
this in some manner the negro declared had to do with
the colour of our eyes and hair.
? Sar,? he exclaimed impressively, ? they can kill
you all easily, and any man coming from the ship.?
Captain Blunt nodded. ? But they won?t,? he
replied confidently, ? Has the chief sent me any
message ? ?
? He is anxious to talk, sar, and asks that you will
come again to the hut.?
? Tell him,? replied the skipper, ? there is no need,
I have nothing further to say. And now, what have
you discovered ? ?
We listened intently, and with increasing surprise,
as the negro related his story. It appeared that the
Spaniard, who had been held prisoner many years,
remembered the capture of the two young English-
men, and the excitement their presence caused. Their
fair skin, blue eyes, and fair hair had caught the fancy
of the natives, and much discussion had arisen con-
cerning them. They had been examined, compared,
and judged, according to the Spaniard?s account,
like prize cattle.
p.u.j. d


? That part, at all events, is perfectly correct,?
Captain Blunt exclaimed, ? go on.?
One of the young men escaped, but it was uncertain
whether he had lived or died, the narrator had never
seen or heard of him again.
? We know all about him ! ? chuckled our leader;
? what of the one who was left behind ? ?
Thus far, the negro?s tale carried us no further
than Captain Blunt?s, but from this point everything
was new and of the most dramatic interest. All the
islanders, with the exception of the prisoners, had
turned out as for a gala. The younger Englishman,
borne aloft in a kind of litter, had been brought
from the hut and presented to the people. Miri
himself had helped to carry him, and the
medicine-men had garlanded him with wild flowers.
The natives danced and sang before him, and
had shown the wildest rejoicing. Then they formed
a procession, and, with the principal warriors acting
as a guard of honour, the young man was borne
away.
To Captain Blunt?s eager questioning, the negro
replied that securely hidden in a thick grove stood the
Sacred House, to which only the chiefs had admittance.
It was the scene of their religious mysteries, and instant
death was the lot of any unauthorised person dis-
covered there. Into this building the leading warriors
had carried their prisoner, but with what object the
Spaniard was unable to say.


? But,? concluded the negro, with an air of great
fright,? ? he think it for a sacrifice.?
? A sacrifice ! ? thundered Captain Blunt; " what
do you mean ? What are you keeping back ? ?
The negro looked at us in a beseeching sort of
way, before replying in an awed whisper, ? He think,
sar, they ate your friend. For three days and three
nights they stayed at the house in the grove.?
A terrible fear gripped our hearts, and we glanced
nervously at the skipper, whose face was white and
drawn with suffering.
? Can you lead me to this place ? ? he demanded.
? No, sar, and the Spanish man he is afraid, like a
child. But I will try again.?
Blunt?s face hardened. ?Tell the Spaniard from
me,? he said deliberately, ? that unless he agrees to
guide us there I will seek him out and shoot him like
a dog. Now, go and deliver my message to the chief.
To-morrow you must find some means of bringing the
Spaniard?s answer.?
The departure of the negro was succeeded by a
painful silence. Captain Blunt paced to and fro
restlessly, and from time to time we heard him mutter-
ing to himself. We did not speak to him nor to each
other, but in all our minds was the same conviction.
The unlucky Pellew, without doubt, was dead, sacri-
ficed in some religious rite. The natives were unlikely
to have lodged him in the Sacred House for any other
purpose.


Meanwhile, the time dragged by ; occasionally we
glanced toward the hut, half expecting to see the
negro again, but when darkness fell neither he nor any
of the warriors had appeared. Whether our leader s
refusal to join in another palaver had frightened or
angered the islanders, it was difficult to decide.
At length Captain Blunt called us together, and
in a low voice began to express his opinion of the
Spaniard?s story.
?It is a horrible tale,? he said, ? but I have not
abandoned hope. In spite of all we have heard, 1
still cling to the belief that Pellew is alive. You
cannot understand my reasons, but let that pass. Of
one thing I feel fairly certain ?these people are not
cannibals.?
? I?m glad to hear you say that, sir,? Holten
exclaimed, and we all shared in the relief which his
tone implied.
? No,? replied Captain Blunt, ?we can dismiss
that idea. That my friend has been sacrificed to the
native gods is more likely, but even that I shall
refuse to believe without definite proof. And that
I intend seeking for to-night.?
? Not without us, sir,? we exclaimed in unison.
? Yes,? he said, ? it is more prudent that only one
should go, there is far less chance of detection.?
? But why go to-night ? ? Holten asked gruffly.
? The nigger will be here again to-morrow, and may
bring useful information.?


? That is likely, but should the chief have any
suspicions he will prevent his coming. Besides, it is
uncertain that he can help us. The Spaniard has
been a prisoner for years, and captivity may have
broken his spirit. Even at the best, we cannot be
sure that he will be able to guide us.?
In our anxiety for his safety we pleaded and argued
with him. To talk of danger was useless, but we
pointed out that the chance of success was so slight
as to be negligible, and that his very first step would
probably lead him right away from the mysterious
shelter. He listened patiently, but his resolution was
inflexible.
? Now listen to me,? he said. ?It is unlikely that
you will be attacked during the night, but all the
same I want you to keep vigilant watch till the
morning. Should anything happen to me you must
take care of yourselves; and should you reach the
yacht safely, tell Mr. Charter to up anchor and sail
at once. On no account is he to send a party ashore.
That is my order.?
? Ay, ay, sir,? replied Holten cheerfully, ? we?ll
tell Mr. Charter what you say.? As if getting out of
the clutches of the savages presented no difficulties !
Captain Blunt now removed his clothes, retaining
only his vest and pants, fastened one revolver to his
waist, and, carrying the other, slipped off noiselessly
into the darkness.
? Downright foolhardiness,? was Pym?s comment,


as the figure disappeared ; ?he may wander about
aimlessly all night, miles from the proper spot.?
? A hundred chances to one that he?ll get a spear
between his ribs,? grumbled Drake.
Holten affected to treat the matter lightly, saying,
? He won?t do any good, but he?ll get back all right,
trust him for that. This isn?t the first tight comer
he?s been in.?
? But if he doesn?t return,? Pym insisted, ? what
then ? ?
? What d?you mean ?
? About ourselves.?
? Give the Old Man time to get killed first,?
was Holten?s scathing reply; ? he?s hardly started
yet.?
? There doesn?t seem to be much sense in it,? said
Drake. ?If the Spaniard?s yam isn't moonshine,
this young Pellew must be dead. It stands to reason.
The savages wouldn?t have taken him to their temple
unless they meant to kill him.?
We all felt the force of this argument, especially
as the unfortunate lad had not been seen since. Were
he alive, the negro surely must have met him ! How-
ever, discussion was useless; Captain Blunt had
started on his hazardous venture, and our duty was
to keep an alert watch, more for his sake, I could
not help thinking, than our own.
I lay face downward on the spot where Holten
placed me, both revolvers ready to hand. The mound


descended here to a patch of reeds, very tall and
upright, and growing closely together. Now that
darkness had fallen, it was hard to distinguish any-
thing clearly, and I was forced to trust almost entirely
to my sense of hearing.
There seemed no reason why the natives should
attack us, but one could not judge them by our
standards, and we could not foretell what whim or
fancy would come into the chief?s head, or into that
of the powerful medicine-man. After the skipper?s
refusal of any further parley, they might consider a
sudden massacre the simplest way out of their
difficulties.
But what kept my eyes aching, my ears strained,
and my nerves on the rack was the danger to Captain
Blunt. If he were detected, the natives would kill
him instantly. Though brave and capable, he would
stand no more chance than a baby against these
islanders, whose movements were as stealthy and
noiseless as those of a wild animal. The snapping of
a twig would put them on his trail, and the sudden
thrust of a spear would silence him for ever.
In spite of myself, I pictured the tragedy. The
white man walking warily over the uneven ground, or
creeping through the tangled undergrowth, peering
into the gloom, listening for any sound, and behind
him a brown-skinned savage, dodging his every step,
watching with poised spear for a favourable oppor-
tunity to strike. And then the lifeless body lying prone


on the ground, the glazing eyes that would never look
upon another sun !
My nerves went to pieces ; I wanted to call out to
him ; it needed a strong effort to keep from rushing
down the slope in an insane endeavour to overtake
him, to warn him of the awful thing that must inevi-
tably happen. By degrees I became calmer, but
only to realise my utter helplessness. Go or stay, I
was powerless to do any good. Even at that moment
he might have passed beyond aid.
Once during the night Holten came to my post,
and his visit did something to cheer me. All was
quiet everywhere, he announced, and argued that, so
far, nothing unusual had occurred. The skipper?s
capture or death, he contended, would have aroused
a big commotion in the village, and the chief would
have despatched a war party to surround the
mound.
? We?ll have Captain Blunt back before daybreak,?
he concluded cheerfully.
? Perhaps he is right,? I thought, as he disappeared,
and caught at the hope as eagerly as a drowning
man is said to catch at a straw. And, indeed, his
breezy confidence buoyed me up through the remaining
hours, although my fears returned with the coming
of dawn. Ten minutes more and the margin of safety
would be passed. And then came the tread of a foot,
and I saw Pym.
? Back,? he cried jubilantly. ? Half dead, but


that?s no matter, he?ll be right as a trivet after an
hour or two?s rest.?
? Has he discovered anything ? ? I asked eagerly.
?Not a scrap?never thought he would. Come
along and get something to eat.?
I got up, stretched my cramped limbs, and walked
slowly to the fire. Captain Blunt lay dead asleep,
while Holten and Drake were busily engaged in
portioning out our breakfast.
? Done up ! ? exclaimed the former tersely, pointing
to the sleeping figure; ? he?s had a night of it!
Twas a silly notion anyhow. How did he expect to
find their bally temple ? The nigger said it?s hidden
away. Just asking for trouble, that?s what he was
doing.?
? Oh, stop grousing,? cried Pym ; ? never heard
such a chap for grousing anywhere. Take a turn at
the grub, that may keep you quiet for a bit. Here
you are, Trevan. Set to, you?ll be hungry again before
the day?s over.?
? Maybe, and maybe not,? said Drake significantly,
which, in the circumstances, wasn?t exactly a pretty
speech.


CHAPTER VI
AFFAIRS BECOME DESPERATE
What actually had occurred during the hazardous
night trip, we could do no more than guess at; our
leader himself made light of the difficulties and dangers,
though terribly disappointed by his failure to locate
the building in the wood.
? What the next move will be,? he remarked later
in the forenoon, ?is doubtful. Meanwhile, we will
sit tight for to-day; if the natives don?t come to
terms by to-morrow we?ll make a start and carry
through our own plans.?
? Ay, ay, sir,? responded Pym loyally, although
what the proposed plans were, no one except the
Captain had the haziest notion.
To me the whole fantastic business appeared crazy.
Here we were, five of us, absolutely at the mercy of
our opponents. In a running fight one or two might
perhaps escape, but the natives were too crafty to
offer us that opportunity. At the first sign of hostilities
they would vanish, and practically every yard of the
ground as far as the beach would afford them cover.
No assistance could reach us from the ship, while we


ourselves were powerless. And there seemed so little
reason for sacrificing our lives ! The Spaniard?s grim
story made it pretty plain that Pellew was dead, but
even if that were incorrect, how was it possible to
rescue him ? And the natives were not likely to stand
by idly much longer.
? Mad as a hatter,? remarked Holten, interrupting
my gloomy thoughts; ? what will you take for your
hundred pounds ? ?
" Half a crown,? I responded promptly, at which
he grinned and offered me tuppence.
? I don?t like that,? remarked Drake, coming along ;
? the natives are preparing for mischief.?
? How d?you know ? ? we asked.
? Removed their fighting men,? he replied tersely,
? that?s part of some crafty dodge or other; where
are your eyes ? ?
Sure enough, the warriors had withdrawn, and this
change in tactics filled us with apprehension. It
might mean they had departed in order to take
up concealed positions, and, if so, the critical moment
was fast approaching.
? No,? repeated Drake, wagging his head, ? I don?t
like this new move at all.?
? There?s the negro,? suddenly exclaimed Pym,
now we shall get to know something.?
The negro, who was very agitated, approached us
rapidly, and saluting Captain Blunt, began, ? Sar, I
come from the chief; it is the last time. Miri says.


? Go away from my country ; go back to your ship.
My people are angry. If you do not go, I cannot stop
them from killing. But if you go I will hold them
back ; no man shall be hurt.? ?
? That?s very kind of him,? said the captain lightly.
? But, sar, it is true. The warriors are grumbling;
they wait only for the medicine-man to give the
wor d ?unless you go soon, they will surely kill.?
? But if we agree to go, how can we be certain that
the chief will keep his word ? ?
The negro shook his head. ? I will ask him,
y y
sar.
? Very well, it may be an advantage to make him
believe we are yielding. But if we go, you will be a
prisoner still.?
The negro?s face wore an expression of abject
misery, but he replied bravely, ?It is best for you,
sar, it save all your lives.?
? Have you talked with the Spaniard ? ?
? Yes, sar, he very timid, his heart jump and jump,
and jump, but if you say, ? Come ! ? he will come and
guide you to the Sacred House.?
? To-night,? said Captain Blunt, ? we will be ready.
Now take my question to the chief,? and, as the negro
departed, he turned toward us.
? I believe this Miri is quite honest,? he said. ?If
we accept his offer your lives are safe, and you will get
back to England without hurt. If you stand by me
there is a big chance of your being killed, I don?t try


to hide that fact. Consider well, now, before you
decide what you will do.?
For a moment we regarded one another irresolutely.
On the one hand life, on the other almost certain
death, for what we believed was a madman?s whim.
But we had made a bargain, and could not break it.
Holten spoke for all of us.
? We aren?t going back on our promise. Captain
Blunt,? he said; ? you?re the boss and we obey
orders. But we may as well face this thing with our
eyes open.?
? Quite right,? the captain agreed.
" Well, then, if I may say it, we are running a
frightful risk, though I honestly believe that for some
reason or other these niggers don?t really want to
hurt us. Still, we have perhaps one chance in a
million of getting through.?
Captain Blunt nodded calmly.
Well, sir, we?ll face the risks willingly, you won?t
find even the boy here hanging back. All that?s part
of the deal. But my point is : what are we likely to
gain by it ? Suppose we reach this place without
being discovered! We shall find it guarded.?
? Only by a few old men.?
? It will be easy for one of them to give us the slip
and raise an alarm ; they are certain to have danger
signals. We shall have to run for it.?
The captain agreed. ?But not by the way we
came, he said; ?we will steer in the opposite


direction, which will throw the natives for a time at
least off the trail.?
Holten hesitated, then, gathering his courage,
exclaimed boldly, ? The long and short of it is, sir,
that we all believe the venture is quite useless. It
seems to us altogether impossible that your friend,
Pellew, is alive.?
Captain Blunt offered no immediate reply; he was
deeply agitated, and when at length he spoke his
voice sounded strange and unnatural.
?It is difficult to explain,? he said. ? I know you
think I am half-mad ?perhaps I am. But in some
mysterious manner Pellew has made it plain to me
that the natives did not kill him. In spite of the
Spaniard?s story, I am as certain of that as that we
are standing here. Why they have hidden him and
kept him alive is a puzzle I cannot solve, but in my
mind there is no shadow of doubt that we shall find
him shut up in their sacred building.?
There was no mistaking the sincerity of his speech.
Whether mad or sane, he believed every word, and
every one of us realised that to leave the island with-
out first paying a visit to the native temple was
an impossibility.
Holten again acted as our mouthpiece. ?As you
feel like that, sir,? he remarked, ? there?s nothing
more to be said. My mates and I will stand by
you to the end. Is that so ? ? and he turned to
us


? Couldn?t be put plainer,? replied Drake promptly.
" Thank you,? said the captain simply. " Whether
these fellows come to guide us or not, we will make
our attempt to-night.?
He resumed his pacing to and fro, while we con-
versed in whispers. And I may confess that our talk
was the talk of men who expected never to see the sun
rise again.
?If we could put up a decent fight, it wouldn?t
be so bad,? grumbled Holten, ? but to be speared in
the bushes like hogs ! ?
? What?s the sense of croaking ? ? demanded Pym ;
? may as well look on the bright side of things?we
aren?t dead yet.?
? Trevan?s very near it, though,? said Drake, with
a good-humoured laugh; ? can hardly keep his eyes
open. You he down and go to sleep, sonny, there
won?t be much chance of sleeping to-night.?
I was indeed dog-tired, and very glad to take his
advice, falling soundly asleep almost as soon as my
head touched the ground. My nap must have lasted
a couple of hours, when the sounds of an unusual
commotion wakened me, and starting up I saw that
Min, accompanied by the medicine-man and half a
dozen of the principal warriors, had arrived at the
mound. The chief had come in person to deliver his
answer to Captain Blunt?s question.
It was evident that he badly wanted to be rid of
us. Realising, although his words were unintelligible,


that he was speaking very earnestly and impressively,
we waited anxiously for the negro to interpret.
The substance of his harangue was very similar
to what we had heard in the morning. His people
were growing uneasy and suspicious. They could not
understand why we wished to stay there. The young
man of whom we had come in search had died many
moons ago, his bones lay among the bones of the dead
warriors belonging to the tribe. Why, then, the
speaker?s people asked, did we not return to our
ship ? We must have a secret reason ; perhaps we
were preparing some cunning trap for their hurt!
They would pass beyond his power, and he could not
answer for what would happen. If we would depart
to-morrow he himself would go in our midst, so that
were a single spear raised he would be the first to die.
? Say to him,? Captain Blunt replied, ? that he
has spoken well and soundly, but say also that we have
no thought of injuring him or any of his people ; our
visit is a peaceful one. We will consider his offer,
and to-morrow at noon deliver our answer. He says
rightly that, if the young man be dead, he cannot be
restored to us.?
The warriors listened intently as the interpreter
proceeded with his reply. Apparently the purport of
it pleased them, and when the negro finished they
uttered murmurs of satisfaction. Even the medicine-
man, who was the most suspicious, appeared to be
favourably impressed-


Presently Mid spoke again. The White Man?s
words were good, he declared, and sounded pleasant
to their ears. To-morrow, when the sun was high,
the stranger would return his answer, and they
would part as friends. There would be no bloodshed:
it was well. He would spread the news amongst
his people, who would be content. Also he would
send us food.
With many salutations and professions of good-will
he departed with his guard, and presently several
men, bearing calabashes filled with roasted bread-fruit,
arrived. Three were very dark-skinned islanders,
almost mulattoes ; one was our friend the negro;
and the fifth, a swarthy, black-haired man, presumably
the Spaniard.
The negro advised us to eat heartily, and, while
attending to our wants, repeated his assurance that
he and his companion would set out directly after
nightfall. The Spaniard said nothing ; his spirit had
been crushed by the years of captivity, and I wondered
that he retained sufficient courage to join in an enter-
prise so desperate.
After supper, if one may so term the meal. Captain
Blunt insisted on our lying down, though, in my case
at least, excitement effectually kept sleep away.
In a few hours our fate would be decided: we should
be safely on board the Sacred Bird, or food for the
turkey-buzzards ! There was quite sufficient in that
to supply one with food for serious thought.
p.u.j. E


Since the final interview with the chief, our hope
of escape had become stronger. Buoyed up by the
expectation that we should depart peaceably the next
day, the natives were unlikely to maintain a strict
watch, if, indeed, they set one at all. More probably,
with the exception of the sentries on the cliffs, where
I believe a guard was always stationed, they would
go to bed relieved at the prospect of getting rid of
their unwanted visitors. With a bit of luck we might
have a sporting chance.
Drake held this opinion, and so, though less con-
fidently, did Pym; Holten, however, stuck to his
gloomy views. Our leader gave no hint of his actual
feelings, but waited in a fever of impatience for the
moment to start.


CHAPTER VII
THE SACRED HOUSE
With the approach of darkness I fell into a light
sleep, a sleep so light that a gentle pressure on the
shoulder wakened me.
? The guides have arrived,? whispered Captain
Blunt. ? Make no noise; remember that even one
slip may cost all of us our lives. Keep close to me.?
We crawled on hands and knees to the edge of the
mound overlooking the cane patch. There the captain
stayed, intending, for a time at least, to be the last
man in the strange procession. The negro waited at
the bottom, and a short distance in front of him was
the Spaniard. He was the real leader, and my newly-
found courage sank a little, when I reflected that the
success of the hazardous expedition lay almost entirely
in his hands. I should have felt more confidence had
the negro been our guide.
However, it was useless to worry now. Like some
amazing and preposterous serpent, the human chain,
every link in actual touch, moved slowly forward.
The darkness was too dense for us to distinguish
anything clearly, but I was conscious that for a


considerable distance we skirted the edge of the tall
canes. Then, with infinite caution, we wriggled into
a narrow path, bordered by thick canes on one side,
and high gloomy trees, standing like ghostly sentinels,
on the other.
It would be tedious to describe our wanderings in
detail; indeed it would be beyond my ability. Some-
times, as I have said, we wriggled along, close to the
ground, like some unheard-of serpent; at others we
advanced in a crouching attitude ; occasionally, but
only at rare intervals, we stood upright. Twice the
guide, having lost his bearings, stopped, and we waited
in an agony of suspense until he had recovered the
trail.
Once, when a tortuous path came to an abrupt end,
and we were winding in and out amongst the trees,
the man behind me stumbled. The noise was very
slight, almost insignificant, but to my straining ears
it sounded like a clap of thunder, and I held my breath,
expecting the sound to go rolling and reverberating
throughout the island. My nerves, I confess freely,
were by this time frayed almost to tatters.
To see nothing, to crawl, to crouch, to walk in
utter darkness, to know that at any moment a spear
driven by an unseen hand might pierce one?s brain,
was an ordeal so terrible that I wonder how T we retained
our sanity. For me, only the contact with the link in
front and the one behind prevented my going crazy.
Happily, the island appeared to contain no wild


animals, but the scurrying and scampering of the
smaller rodents, amazed at this sudden intrusion
into their domain, brought my heart to my mouth
a score of times.
Many other fears assailed me. The journey seemed
endless, I lost touch with time, it would not have
surprised me to see the sun rising and flooding the
land with golden light. And I remembered the deserted
mound ! Suppose an inquisitive native stole up there
and discovered our absence ! This fear, in particular,
gained control over me : it became in my mind a
certainty that our flight would be detected : I caught
myself listening, not for sounds close at hand, but
for angry yells from the rear. I wondered if the others
shared my gloomy fears.
Still we continued unmolested on our hazardous
journey. The canes seemed to whisper our secret as
we slowly passed, the trees to regard us stonily; but
no human sound reached us, no sharp spear stabbed,
no one stopped with a moan, as life suddenly quitted
his body.
The chain halted again, and, in a subdued whisper,
word was passed for Captain Blunt, who crawled
stealthily forward to join the guides. I guessed that
we had arrived close to our destination, and that the
critical moment was at hand. We were, in fact, on
the very fringe of the grove, which concealed from
profane eyes the mysterious building.
Our leader now assumed command : the guides had


accomplished their task ?they were as ignorant as
ourselves of what lay in front of us. By a lucky
accident, however, they had brought us to a wide
path, worn out by the feet of the warriors pro-
ceeding to the temple. The skipper went first,
followed by Drake and Holten abreast; Pym was
on my right, the negro and the Spaniard had fallen
behind.
We were able to distinguish a long, rectangular
building, the outer walls of which were constructed
seemingly of bamboo. With a sharp knife that the
negro had provided, Captain Blunt cut a hole, through
which we passed. He bade us wait while he recon-
noitred, and, returning presently, stationed us at
intervals, with strict orders to stop any one endeavour-
ing to escape. Then, accompanied by Drake and
Holten, he disappeared once more.
Thus far, all had gone well, and, according to the
Spaniard, only a few priests, all old men, occupied
the building. I wondered what was happening inside,
and what effect the w T ant of success w r ould have upon
Captain Blunt, for I would cheerfully have wagered
my hundred pounds against a cocoanut that the
missing man would not be found.
Several minutes passed, our companions were
evidently engaged in their search, but we saw and
heard nothing. Suddenly, from somewhere to the
rear of the building, rose a loud booming sound, as
if a mighty drum were being played upon by a


steam-hammer. Again and again it rose, loud and
clamorous, with extraordinary carrying power.
Almost as soon as I realised what must have occurred,
the warning signal was answered and taken up, first
in one direction, then in another, until the air echoed
and re-echoed with the clamour.
? That settles our hash,? exclaimed Pym ; ? the
niggers will be after us like greased lightning,?
On the instant Captain Blunt came swiftly toward
us. His features were hidden by the gloom, but his
voice was strong and jubilant, the voice of a man
intoxicated with joy.
? This way,? he exclaimed briskly ; ?we ought to
be able to make the far beach.?
Then ensued the maddest race that can be imagined.
Not that our speed was excessive, it was far from
that; but we tripped and fell and got up again, and
stumbled on, until battered and bruised, we emerged
from the wood and crossed a tract of fairly open
country. Meanwhile, the din behind us rose higher,
and above the beating of the drums ?if drums they
were?could be heard the savage yells of men : the
infuriated tribe was on our track.
Away from the shadow of the trees, surrounding
objects became more visible, and I now perceived
Drake and Holten supporting a young man, bare-
headed and bare-footed, but clothed in a robe of
native cloth. His skin was bleached, his feet were
bleeding, and he tottered as he walked. I realised that


this must be the missing Pellew. The three disap-
peared over the brow of the cliff, the negro and the
Spaniard followed; Pym and I stayed behind
with the captain.
? We three must fight a rearguard action,? said he,
? though I hate the idea of killing these islanders. If
you are forced to fire, aim to wound, not to kill.?
We descended some distance, and watched our
companions making their perilous descent. No path
existed, and every single step was fraught with
danger. How the two sailors succeeded in getting
Pellew even a few yards filled me with wonder and
admiration. Here and there they were digging their
toes into a crevice, and holding on by their fingers ;
now Holten, at the imminent risk of breaking his neck,
dropped from one boulder to another, and then turned
to support Pellew, held firmly from above by Drake.
They had covered perhaps half the distance when
the first of the islanders appeared. The light was
breaking now, and from our cover we recognised Miri,
the chief. He stood, a magnificent specimen of man-
hood, watching the fugitives, and apparently measuring
the distance. Obviously it was too great, and he
leaped with the surefootedness of a mountain goat
from rock to rock, stopping almost in a line with us
and somewhat to our left.
Again he calculated the distance, and raised his
spear. At that instant came a sharp report, and the
head of the weapon fell to the ground. And now


we heard the patter of many feet, as his angry followers
rushed to the scene. Three or four, displaying the
agility of cats, joined their chief, who pointed to his
headless spear and then to the spot where he had
seen the runaways.
Only the Spaniard remained in sight, the others
were sheltered by the massive boulders. By this time
the w'arriors had increased in number, and one hurled
his spear, but it fell hopelessly short. Then Miri,
selecting another spear, prepared to renew the pursuit.
? It?s a pity,? muttered Captain Blunt, ? but it
can?t be helped,? and he sent a bullet through the
warrior?s arm.
?Go lower down, Pym,? he commanded, ? but
keep well under cover, and directly they move, fire,
then change your position. And you, too, Trevan,
work round to your left: shots from three places at
once will confuse them.?
Whether we should break our necks over the cliffs
or be speared by the natives, was a matter of doubt,
but we were gaining time for our companions, which
was the main object.
How near death was to us a sudden, despairing
shriek from below made plain. It was the dying cry
?as we learned later?of the unlucky Spaniard, who,
missing his footing at an awkward angle, was hurled
to his death on the rocks beneath.
As if encouraged by this tragic incident, the natives
prepared to advance, but a bullet from the captain?s


revolver stopped the foremost. Instantly the others
rushed in the direction of the sound, but, as they
passed above me, I dropped a second, and they stopped
in confusion, enabling us to retreat a little lower with-
out being seen.
Our opponents were full of pluck, but, as long as
we remained hidden, the odds against them were
heavy. Each time we had fired with reluctance, our
main object being to save our own lives, wdth as
little bloodshed as possible.
Presently, realising their disadvantage, they changed
their tactics; the band broke up, spread themselves
over a wide area, and, sheltering behind the rocks,
began to descend singly. This was a dangerous move
for us, but, when the leading warrior came into sight
for a brief space. Captain Blunt shot him through
the shoulder.
That, I think, ended the fight: the warriors remained
in hiding, and we, after several hairbreadth escapes,
reached the beach, to find Drake propped up behind
a rock with a broken leg, Pellew sitting by his side,
and the negro mounting guard.
? Where is Holten ? ? asked the captain, after an
affectionate glance at Pellew.
? Gone round the bend to hail the ship,? Drake
replied.
? Good. Now let me see what I can do for you.
Not much, I am afraid, till we get aboard. Keep an
eye on the natives, Pym, though I reckon they?ll steer


clear of us, they seem to have learned their lesson.
Erevan, come here and help me.? Cutting away
Drake?s trouser-leg, he examined the injured limb.
" It?s a simple fracture,? he exclaimed presently, ? and
won?t give much trouble once I?ve got you on the
yacht. Cany a handkerchief, Trevan ? ? pulling out
his own ; ? good. Now we?ll render first-aid. Steady,
my lad.? As soon as he had made Drake comfortable
he left me with him and returned to his friend.
? Feeling better ? ? he inquired. ? We're out of
the wood now, and in less than an hour will be safe
aboard the Sacred Bird. Yes,? as the other?s face
flushed with pleasure, ? I thought the name would
remind you of the good old times. Remember ? By
Jove! old boy, I can scarcely believe my luck.
We?ll have you helping to navigate the yacht in a
few days.?
? I knew you would come, Ned,? replied the other
happily, ? I was sure of it, and never once gave up
hope. This is my idea of heaven ?the open air, the
salt water, and the blue sky above our heads. Pinch
me hard, Ned, and make me certain I?m not dreaming.?
? It?s no dream, old boy, thank God, everything?s
real enough. What are the natives up to, Pym ? ?
? Climbing the cliffs, sir ; three or four have been
hit, but they all seem able to walk.?
?I?m glad to hear that, I had no wish to hurt any
of the poor beggars. Hallo, there?s our boat; put
your backs into it, my hearties.?


The men gave way with renewed vigour, and pre-
sently the boat was drawn up some distance from the
spot where we had landed. Drake was lifted in very
carefully, the skipper fussed over his restored friend like
a hen guarding a solitary chick, and when the last man
had embarked, the boat?s crew pulled for the Sacred
Bird, which I, for one, had little dreamed of seeing again.
Joe Shannon was the first to shake me by the hand.
? You?re like a bad penny, Trevan,? he said, his eyes
twinkling merrily, ? sure to turn up again. What?s
the matter with Drake ? ?
? Slipped coming down the cliffs and broke his
leg; nothing serious, according to the Old Man.?
? Well, I reckon you?re all jolly lucky ; Charter's
been as fidgety as an old woman : he didn?t give a
brass tack for your chances. Frankly, I never expected
you?d find young Pellew. Who is your black friend ? ?
? I?ll tell you all about it presently, as far as I?m
able, though you?ll only scoff.?
? Well,? said he mischievously, ? I guess you aren?t
far behind when it comes to spinning a tall yarn.?
Charter good-naturedly gave up his berth to the
injured man, the negro received a friendly welcome in
the foc?sle, and Pellew went straight to the captain?s
cabin, where he remained during the next two or
three days. After that he came regularly on deck,
and the fresh air and simple living soon restored his
strength, so that long before reaching port his eyes
were bright and spariding, and his cheeks full of


healthy colour. Every minute that could be spared
from duty the skipper spent with him, and it did one
good to witness their David and Jonathan friendship.
Naturally a deal of gossip went on among the crew,
who had heard the story of our strange adventures,
but even the negro could no more than guess at the
mystery of Pellew?s life in the temple, and it was only
when nearing the end of the voyage that I picked
up a few stray bits of information from Charter.
? It?s the queerest yarn, Trevan,? he remarked,
" and there are a good many things I don?t under-
stand yet, but it seems that the colour of his hair and
eyes and having no marks on his body started the
trouble. The natives, as far as I can gather, didn?t
regard him exactly as a kind of god, but rather as a
first-class mascot. Except that he couldn?t go outside
the temple, he was treated decently enough. He
lived on the best of everything the island produced,
but the old boys who lived with him were an awful
nuisance, examining his body every morning, looking
for spots, perhaps, and jabbering away till his head
fairly hummed. Before you rescued him he had picked
up sufficient of their lingo to gather that they thought
he would bring the tribe some amazing good fortune.
I fancy that Mr. Blunt had a dim notion of the truth,
and that?s why he was so pernickety in picking his
crew. Blue eyes, fair hair, and no mark on the body.
Remember ? ?
?Yes,? I replied, laughing, ? but what beats me


is his spending all that money and risking his neck on
what was just an off-chance. Really there wasn?t one
in a thousand.?
Charter stretched himself out. ? That?s the queerest
touch of all,? he said, sinking his voice to a whisper ;
? for a long time before we sailed he hadn?t the
slightest doubt of Pellew?s being alive. The thing?s a
mystery to me, but they?ve been gassing about it no
end. * I felt sure you were alive and would come for
me/ Pellew told him. ? Every morning I said, ? Are
you coming to-day, Ned,? and every night, ? He s
sure to be here to-morrow.? But the time seemed
horribly long,? and I guess it was.?
? Pellew seems to have been just as cracked as
Blunt,? I interrupted.
? Perhaps so, but it?s a mystery to me. ? I knew
you were waiting,? said the skipper, ? but I couldn t
get the cash, that?s what stopped me from coming.
Many and many a night I?ve cried out, ? Stick it a
bit longer, old chap. I?ll be there soon.? There?s
the yam,? Charter finished, ? and you can make
what you like of it.?
? Anyhow, they?re both as happy as sand-boys,?
said I, ? and that?s the main thing.?
Not long ago I told the story to a very learned
gentleman, who saw nothing extraordinary in it. He
explained it quite easily, only he used such a lot of
hard words about telepathic action and the unconscious
transmission of forces that I couldn?t understand him.


CHAPTER VIII
GOOD-BYE TO THE ? STORMAWAY ?
Homeward-bound, with fair weather and favourable
winds ! For what more could one wish ? We were
the j oiliest ship?s company that ever sailed together,
and the skipper was the happiest man among us.
For some reason connected with his friend he had
decided on laying the yacht up at Southampton, and
as the Sacred Bird raced along the English Channel,
bobbing and curtseying like some dainty living creature,
they two stood on deck, watching the shore, laughing
and joking like schoolboys. The voyage had chased
away all trace of Pellew?s long confinement, and no
one, from his appearance, could have guessed at the
amazing adventures through which he had passed.
Drake was on deck, too, hobbling about with the
help of a stout stick. In spite of his accident he was
very cheerful, the fracture had knit up nicely, and
there was no fear of any permanent injury. Besides,
the captain had promised to provide for him on shore,
until he was strong enough to go to sea again.
As soon as the yacht had dropped anchor the crew
were called aft and Captain Blunt made a neat speech.


thanking us very handsomely for our help. Pellew
added a few simple words and we gave them both a
rousing cheer as they went over the ship?s side, taking
the negro with them.
My strange and unexpected adventure was at an
end, and next day, after we had been paid oh, I
wished Charter and my late messmates, except Joe
Shannon, good-bye. We two had struck up a strong
friendship, and it seemed natural that we should
stick together as long as possible. Finding that I
knew nothing of Southampton, he took me to decent
lodgings where he had stayed before. The house was
at the end of an alley near the quay, very tidy and
respectable, and when the landlady saw Joe her eyes
lit up with pleasure. She showed us into one of her
best rooms, and bustled off to get a meal ready while
we had a wash and general tidy-up.
? And now,? exclaimed Joe without any warning,
? what d?you reckon to do ? ?
This was a question I had put to myself several
times that day without getting a satisfactory answer.
I had been taught at school to read, write, and count,
but most of my education had been picked up in the
streets. I had slept on the ground more often than
in a bed, knew what it was to be hungry, and, speaking
generally, had received more kicks than ha?pence in
my life. And now, by a sudden turn of fortune?s
wheel, here I was, still a boy, though strong and
well-grown, decently dressed, and with a hundred and


twenty pounds in treasury notes, honestly earned,
tucked snugly away in an inner pocket.
Though I had never read Kipling, my first vague
notion was to buy a ham and see life ? * it seemed a
fascinating sort of thing to do, but difficult to put into
practice. Joe repeated his question, and then I
answered, Scots fashion, ?
? What are you doing with your wad ? ?
Putting it in the bank for a nest-egg,?? came the
prompt reply. ? I?ve thirty-five pounds there already.
ou d better put yours in and come on a voyage with
me ; I can get you a job.?
My one and only experience of the sea had been
far from unpleasant, but the life of a ship?s boy held
little fascination for me; a second venture perhaps
would be less favourable than the first, so my answer
to Joe?s proposal was a vigorous shake of the head
The landlady now came in with ham and eggs and
some steaming hot coffee, and the subject dropped
until nearly the end of the meal. Then he remarked
gruffly, ?Weh, you will have to do something; a
hundred and twenty pounds won?t last for ever.?
This was a cold, hard fact, without any glossing,
though I had made a hundred and twenty pennies go
a remarkably long way. But in previous days very
little was spent on clothes and lodgings, and not much
more on food And I had no particular desire to
return to my vagabond life. But something had to
be decided upon, and quickly.
p.u.t.
J F


? Might buy a stock of evening papers," exclaimed
Joe sarcastically, as he pushed his chair back from
the table; ? there?s a roaring trade to be done in
that line."
? Why not invest in a pony and cart and peddle
goods round the villages ??? I asked; ? I?m fond of
an open-air life."
My companion received the suggestion with a
boisterous laugh. ? You come along with me, kid,??
he urged, ? and give the sea a chance. You?re heaps
smarter than I am, and can get a mate s ticket as
soon as you?re old enough. Anyway, a voyage or
two won?t hurt you."
I pointed out that I had no overwhelming love for
the sea, and no violent wish to be a sailor, but he
met all my objections with the parrot cry, ? What
else can you do ? "
And when one came to consider hard facts, his
question was really difficult to answer. There were
hundreds of capable workmen in the town eating their
hearts out because they couldn?t earn a living, and
according to the papers it was much the same all
over the country. Naturally, a few gentlemen were
helping to hold up the comer houses, who never had
worked, and never intended to work, and who were
enjoying themselves immensely; but they were only
scum and of no account.
? Tell you what,? exclaimed Joe suddenly, ? you go
out in the morning and try to find a job, while I run


down to see my folks and have a look round the docks.
Maybe there?s none for either of us anywhere, but
well see.?
? Right,? I said, ? and now let?s go out for a stroll.?
I had that day in front of me, and many more of
the same sort. I tramped the streets till my feet
were blistered; I begged for a job like a starving dog
begging for a bone ; but for my wad of treasury notes
I should have starved. For a fortnight Joe fared no
better, and came back to Southampton. Then, by
a lucky chance, he fell in with Mr. Trefusis, the first
mate of the Stormaway ; he was short of an ordinary
seaman, and because of his friendship for Joe, he
agreed to sign me on at the same time as ship?s boy.
So, much against my inclination, I went to sea again,
though, mind you, I was glad of the chance, too, I
was fairly sick by that time of tramping hopelessly
around the town.
The Stormaway was a tramp steamer, and to my eyes
35 u ly as sin. I hated the very look of her, though
Joe declared she was a sound boat. But there never
was such a fellow for seeing the bright side of things
as Joe ! It was difficult even to grumble when he
was about; his cheery spirits always made me feel
ashamed of grousing.
Acting on his advice, I bought an ample kit, kept a
couple of pounds in my pocket for emergencies, and
lodged the bulk of my money in the savings bank,
until such time as the Stormaway returned to Plymouth.


Life abroad the tramp was mostly hard work,
leaving little room for what story-book writers call
the romance of the sea. We jogged along at eight to
ten knots, sometimes under favourable conditions,
more often than not making dirty weather of it,
discharging cargo at one port, and taking in more
for another, occasionally marking time until fresh
instructions from the owners arrived.
The S tor maw ay, I have said, was just an ordinary 7
tramp, but at Marseilles we took on board a passenger
named Braddock, a man of middle age, perhaps forty,
or a trifle more, of medium stature, compact, and
strongly knit. He was very active and alert, and
various little tricks and mannerisms suggested that he
had formerly followed the sea as a calling. He had
an engaging smile, extraordinarily bright eyes, and a
pleasant manner of speaking. He seemed to be more
a friend of the captain?s than a passenger in the usual
sense of the term. I put down these few details
because Mr. Braddock was to come into my life more
fully than either he or I at the time expected.
Though not enthusiastic about a life on the ocean
wave and a home on the robing deep, one thing did
cause me keen satisfaction. The skipper was a decent
chap, and when we called at a port he always, if it
were at all possible, issued shore leave pretty generously.
In consequence, I saw many strange places and became
acquainted with various queer people, for the Storm-
away seemed bound on a never-ending voyage, as,


after calling at several ports in Africa, she carried
us eastward to Calcutta, Singapore, and on to
Tokio.
? That?s the beauty of a tramp,? grinned the
optimistic Joe ; ? you know when you start, but are
never sure when you?ll finish.?
? I suppose we?ll be homeward-bound now,? I
suggested, not altogether hopefully.
? Wrong,? said he. ? Mr. Trefusis tells me we?re
going to have a look in at Sydney.?
? Anywhere else ? ?
?It depends on what we can pick up. We may
get a cargo for London?or for ?Frisco. But we?re
earning sound money and getting experience.?
? We?re getting experience right enough,? I agreed
dolefully, ? but sometimes one can have too much of
a good thing.?
? Anyway,? said he, ?I?d rather be sailing on the
Stormaway than tramping the streets begging some
blighter to give me a job ? ; and in that I was
prepared to go with him all the way.
We left a man named Simmons in hospital at Tokio,
and signed on a stranded seaman in his place. The
new-comer was down and out ?the skipper had to
provide him with a new kit all through?while for
the first three or four days the cook supplied him with
double rations, which he scoffed up hungrily like a cat
lapping cream.
? Crummy,? said he, ? this is the first bit of all


right I?ve met with for years. Guess I?ve fallen on
my feet this turn,? which showed, as I remember
thinking afterwards, that the speaker was a long way
off being a high-water-mark prophet.
Jesson ?that was his name ?proved to be a very
decent fellow. He chummed in comfortably with the
other men, did all and more than he was asked, and
in a hundred ways showed himself a hard-working,
competent seaman. The skipper was quite glad he
had picked him up, while Jesson declared that life on
the Stormaway , after what he had gone through, was
as like being in heaven as he wanted.
? He must have had a rotten time,? I remarked to
my chum, but the sarcasm was lost on Joe.
I was awfully sorry for Jesson ?afterwards ; at the
time I agreed with him that he was a lucky dog.
Perhaps he was !
Thus far life on the tramp had been of a humdrum
character. We worked and ate and slept, and occa-
sionally?-very occasionally ?loafed. The romance of
the sea had been out of the limelight thus far, but
when it did come it occupied the whole stage. And it
swooped down on us without warning.
We were jogging along steadily when I turned in,
just as we had done on scores of nights ; the sea was
calm, there was nothing unusual in the weather, and,
curling up in my bunk at peace with the world,
I fell sound asleep instantly.
Man is a mighty clever fellow, but in working up


real spectacular stunts I'll back Nature to give him
ninety in a hundred and beat him every game. And
the old lady doesn?t need to put in overtime to pro-
duce her effects. I turned into my bunk on a normal
night, and was jerked out of it by Jesson into a
strange, and unknown world.
? Slip on your togs,? he cried briskly, ? and be
quick ; we?re up against it.?
He seemed in such dead earnest that I was on deck
like a shot; very lightly clad ?though that really
mattered little, because all the oilskins in the world
would have failed to keep out the deluge that came
down in a solid wall. The wind blew, not in any
particular direction, but in staggering gusts that came
from every point of the compass.
The sea behaved like a mad thing; the waves
swirled and foamed, gathering into heaps ; dashed at
us in a sort of living fury, buffeting the steamer now
on this quarter, now on that, delivering smashing
blows until she strained and groaned and cried aloud
in agony.
We were able to do little against this monster
that had arisen so suddenly in its fury. It
needed all our energies to keep on our feet, and
before many minutes had passed there came that
terrible cry that strikes so chill to the heart, ? Man
overboard! ?
The cry meant death, and the man who had passed
from us so swiftly was Jesson. Poor chap ! His good


luck, as he called it, of getting a berth on the Storm-
away had not lasted long! And Jesson was speedily
followed by Mr. Trefusis !
One thing alone relieved the horror of that night
?or morning. The skipper, lashed to the bridge,
fought grimly and resolutely. Nature, backed by her
strongest forces, might break but could not bend this
undaunted man. All that a human being could do
he did, in as desperate a fight as human being ever
faced. There are brave men of all lands and in every
calling, but I know of none braver than the British
skipper battling for the lives of his men and the safety
of his ship. The sight of Mr. Bellman and the sound
of his voice gave one courage.
Perhaps an hour after I had turned out, the storm
reached its worst. The Stormaway creaked and
groaned as if a hundred thousand demons were tor-
turing every fibre of her poor old body ; she plunged
and tossed and kicked, but battled on bravely; so
that when the gale had somewhat abated there seemed
a distinct chance of our winning through.
? A bit rough ! ? shouted a voice in my ear, and, of
course, the speaker was that cheerful idiot, Joe
Shannon. A bit rough! If my foothold had been
more secure I would willingly have turned round and
kicked him.
But we had won after alb The storm subsided
almost as quickly as it had arisen ; the rain stopped,
the wind fell, the sea was rapidly becoming smoother,


and we caught our first glimpse of daylight. And it
was precisely then that our new-born hopes were
shattered! The water was pouring into the stoke-
hold, the engines stopped, the ship was perceptibly
settling down into the trough of the seas. We gazed
despairingly into each other?s faces. Death called
to us with an imperiousness that brooked no denial
There was, I am proud to say, no panic, no dis-
order. We could still fight, though without hope of
success. Mr. Bellman issued his orders calmly, and
they were obeyed to the letter. Death called, and we
neither whimpered nor whined. Our only chance of
salvation lay in the boats, and the first, crashing
against the vessel?s side, was smashed like an egg-shell
The end, when it came, came with remarkable
swiftness. My last sight was of the heroic officer still
on the bridge ; then the Stormaway tilted up, and
I slid abruptly from her deck into the sea.


CHAPTER IX
A NAMELESS SHIP
I am uncertain as to whether the Stormaway went
down at the same time ; it is probable she did, as I
saw nothing more of her, and the water was Uttered
with pieces of floating wreckage. My Ufebelt assisted
in keeping me afloat, and luckily I seized hold of a
large wooden grating. It was a precarious support,
but I clung to it Uke grim death.
The waves flung me and my raft hither and thither,
nor had I any inclination to contend with them.
The tragedy was so appalhng, the scene so shocking,
that nothing seemed to matter. Despairing cries rose
on this side and that as strong men were sucked down
to death. One poor feflow ?a stoker ?was swept
close to my grating ; he flung out a hand feebly and
grasped the sides. His face was livid; there was a
deep gash on his head; it was apparent that his
strength was fast ebbing away. He uttered no word,
but cast at me an appeahng look, as if seeking my
help. I tried to get round to him, but his Ump fingers
relaxed their grip, and he sank without a sound. The
despairing agony in his eyes as he disappeared was
not a pleasant sight.


Presently another man drew near and I shouted to
him loudly. Evidently a powerful swimmer, he turned
in my direction, and, with a rush of joy, I recognised
Joe Shannon. Catching hold of my grating, he fastened
on like a limpet. He gasped at sight of me, and then
his face lit up with pleasure.
? I thought you were gone,? he said. ? Can you
stick it ? ?
? Is it worth while ? ? I asked.
? You?re always alive till you?re dead,? he returned,
an d ?and there might be a ship,? at which I laughed
bitterly.
How long we clung to our support I cannot tell, but
I was nearly gone when Joe brought me back to life
with a shout. ? A sail! ?he cried, ? a ship bearing
this way. Hallo, she?s slowing down and dropping
a boat. They?re pulling for something in the
water.?
I perceived the exciting drama only very indistinctly.
Joe?s sight was far stronger than mine. ? They are
back at the ship,? he cried. ? It?s a man, Trevan,
they re hoisting him up. Now they?re getting in the
boat. She?s turning back ; no, she?s coming straight
on; if she keeps that course we?ll be picked
up.?
The suspense was sickening ; I would not care to
live again through a half-hour such as that. Now we
caught a glimpse of the steamer; now the great
waves obscured our view. Would she see us, or.


what was more likely, pass on ? What she did meant
the difference between life and death to us.
Before Joe announced his discovery I had been
indifferent, almost, indeed, content to die; now I
was feverishly anxious to live, and prayed that the
chance vessel would come so near that we could attract
her notice.
Suddenly Joe set up a terrific yell, in which I joined,
though my voice was too feeble to add greatly to the
volume of sound. But we shouted again and again,
stopping only to recover our breath, and presently my
companion exclaimed, ? She s seen or heard us,
they?re lowering the boat again,? and once more we
yelled with all our might.
At last I perceived the approaching boat, and heard
the cheery cries of the rowers as they shouted words
of encouragement.
The actual work of rescue occupied very little time ;
the boat?s crew hauled us in, and before long we were
safely on board the ship. The sailors gave us food and
hot drinks, and we turned in straightway between
their blankets.
Neither of us felt much the worse for our adventure
next morning, when we were called aft to be inter-
viewed by the captain. We discovered that the man
first rescued was Mr. Braddock, and he came forward
to congratulate us.
? I?m afraid we?re the only ones of the Stormaway?s
complement left,? he said, ? and it is a marvel that


any of us escaped. We have to thank Mr. Davis for
our lives.?
Mr. Davis was evidently the skipper of the craft we
were aboard. He was a slight, spare man of medium
height, and, as one could tell at a glance, hard as
nails. He was clean-shaven, with a rat-trap mouth,
a long nose, and steely gray eyes?the kind of man
better to have on your side in a fight than against
you. He glanced at us sharply, and ordered us to go
forward, adding that no doubt Mr. Payton, the mate,
would find us a job.
? A tough customer, that,? Joe whispered. ? I
don?t like the look of him. Seems to fancy we got
wrecked on purpose to give him the trouble of picking
us up,? and, certainly, he did not appear too well
pleased with our company.
The mate was even worse than his captain. He was
a tall, gaunt man, with hands and face like teak, long,
bony arms and legs, and not an ounce of fat anywhere.
He wore a patch over the left eye, but the right bored
into you like a gimlet. He had a harsh, rasping voice,
and his temper went off at half-cock. He remarked
sarcastically that he had no intention of wrapping us
up in cotton wool, that the ship was short-handed,
and that we could turn to and work for our grub.
? Nice, scaly brute that,? I commented; ?if he
were the skipper, I guess he?d have left us to
drown.?
? Likely enough,? Joe agreed, " but if the ship?s


short-handed he ought to be pleased at getting us.
We?ll more than earn our prog anyway.?
Both of us wondered where the steamer, which
apparently had no name, was bound for, but our new
mates volunteered no information. They were sulky
dogs, who made us feel in a hundred ways that we
had no business in the ship. At the captain?s orders
they rigged us up in some cast-off clothes ; we were
given a fair share of victuals, and no one offered to
molest us. Still, it was obvious that every one regarded
us as interlopers, and would at any moment have
gladly dispensed with our society.
I began to feel uneasy, and my vague alarm
increased as the days passed. A nameless ship with
no port of lading and no port of discharge was a
mystery that even Joe Shannon failed to fathom.
? An uncommon sort of boat,? said he ; ? I?ve never
seen the likes of her. She?s cleaner than a man-of-war,
and faster than most craft double her size.?
? She carries two guns forward, and there?s a place
for one aft,? I added.
My companion shook his head, evidently mystified.
? I reckon we?ll feel healthier when they put us
ashore,? he whispered.
Another matter made a deep impression on our
minds, and that was the wonderful state of discipline
on board. There was no hazing or bullying, but orders
were promptly obeyed, while Joe declared that the
crew were as highly trained as navymen.


We had hardly any conversation with Mr. Braddock.
What he thought of the strange conditions it was
impossible to judge, but he made himself quite at
home, and was, to all appearance, on the friendliest
terms with the captain. I noticed, however, that the
mate regarded him with little favour.
Neither Joe nor I could put a finger on anything
wrong; yet both felt that some strange mystery
brooded over the ship. We discussed the subject
many times in whispers, but were always at a loss.
Certain remarks casually dropped made it appear that
Mr. Davis was the owner as well as the captain, but
this information, even if correct, hardly threw light
on the situation.
Having really very little knowledge of seafaring
matters, I suggested that Davis might be a pirate,
and that when the proper time arrived we should see
the ship hoisting the Jolly Roger, but Joe scouted this
notion as wild and improbable.
? That game was played out long ago,? he asserted.
? There?s no chance for pirates nowadays. I?ve never
been in these seas, but I dare say there?s plenty of
trading here of a sort. All the same, we?ll take French
leave at the first port we come to, though I don?t
suppose we?re in any danger.?
No,? I agreed, ? the man wouldn?t save our
lives for the pleasure of putting us to death after-
wards.?
As to that,? said Joe, ? he was bound to pick us


up?rule of the sea, and whatever else this Davis
may be it?s certain he?s a sailor.?
Later that same evening I was stowing away a
rope on the deck when Mr. Braddock strolled along.
He gave me a cheery nod, walked past, and returned.
He stopped now, chatted a minute or two about the
weather and the voyage, and then, dropping his voice,
exclaimed cautiously, ? Don?t ask any questions,
because I know no more than you do, but advise your
mate to keep his eyes open in case of squally weather.?
Then he added, in a louder tone, ? Glad you?re fitting
in all right,? and so resumed his walk.
I thought a good deal over this remark, and so did
Joe Shannon, but neither could make anything of it,
except that Braddock, like ourselves, had a suspicion
that something was wrong. Evidently, however, he
had no ground to work upon, and his warning was
vague and indefinite.
? A pity he didn?t say more or less,? Joe remarked.
? But what kind of mischief are we to look out
for ? Why should these people want to harm us ?
And in any case, how can they ? ?
? Knock us on the head and throw us overboard.?
? But why ? What good would that do them ? ?
? None that I can see ; I guess we?re just a set of
moonies.?
The speaker was no doubt right; still. Brad-
dock?s remark was so curious that I could not rid
myself of it. He must have seen or heard something


that had aroused his suspicions, or he would hardly
have given me such a warning. However, since I had
no key to the mystery, it was useless puzzling about
it ; the only sane thing was to wait and watch.
Next day we came in sight of land, though for the
time it lay a great distance off, and Joe concluded
it was most likely one of the coral islands lying
between South-east Asia and Australia. Those of the
crew to whom I spoke declared they were ignorant of
our whereabouts, though wiiy they should lie over
such a simple matter was difficult to understand.
At first we appeared to be steering straight for the
nearest land, but afterwards the course was altered,
and not until late afternoon did we approach nearer
than to make out the fringe of various small
rounded islands.
? They?re no use to us anyway,? said Joe, ? unless
the ship needs water. Wonder what Mr. Davis and
the mate are pow-wowing about ? They seem to be
having a regular barney.?
Both officers were on the bridge, engaged in an
animated discussion. The mate was excited and in
deadly earnest over something. He spoke in subdued
tones, but one could tell by his dramatic gestures
that the subject was serious. The expression on his
face was one of hardened cruelty.
The captain appeared to be slightly amused by his
subordinate?s arguments. Occasionally he even laughed,
and, whatever the subject of dispute, we were certain
p.u.j. G


that he would have his own way. Payton was most
likely aware of this, for at length he turned round and
walked off, still in a vicious temper. Our interest in
this curious by-play would have been far more intense
had we guessed how nearly the subject in dispute
affected us ! However, we were as ignorant as the
little lambs that go on skipping, while the butcher is
opening the gate into the field.
As soon as the mate had left the bridge, our course
was again changed, and the vessel headed due east,
which rapidly brought us in sight of an island with a
rounded hill fairly well wooded in the centre.
? Looks as if we were going to make a call here,?
I said, ? though it seems a queer stopping-place.?
? Water,? replied Joe ; "it can be nothing else.
She?s slowing down, going to anchor, I guess.?
? The island?s only a small one, and there?s no sign
of natives.?
? That doesn?t matter as long as there?s water, and
no doubt Davis has called here before. Ah, I thought
as much,? as the engines slowed down.
? There?s Braddock just come on deck; he looks
a bit surprised.?
? He ought not to,? said Joe ; ? he must have run
into dozens of outlandish places for water at one time
and another.?
This was perfectly reasonable, and should have
satisfied me, but somehow I felt far from satisfied.
I had a feeling that all was not right, and that in some


manner this proceeding boded us no good. I watched
Braddock keenly; he was talking to the captain,
apparently asking questions, and the expression of
surprise on his face gradually deepened. The captain
bore himself in the same manner that he had done
with Payton, smiling from time to time, and once
playfully patting his companion on the shoulders.
Certainly my fears appeared to have only a very
slight foundation.


CHAPTER X
MAROONED!
Events now began to move rapidly. The mate
ordered a boat to be lowered, into which two of the
crew got ?one a colossal negro, the other a truculent-
looking Spaniard, for several nationalities were repre-
sented on the nameless ship. Then Payton, with a
curse and a kick?it was the only time he had touched
us?growled to Joe and me to get in. My fears now
returned in full force, but I had to obey, and my
companion followed wonderingly.
Those on board may have guessed what was about
to happen, but they displayed no interest, either pro-
ceeding stolidly with their work or regarding us with
complete indifference. Then several packages were
passed down, and, last of all, Davis and Mr. Braddock
took their places. The former was talking good-
humouredly, and Braddock, whose face had almost
lost its look of astonishment, seemed to enjoy his
conversation.
At a sign from their chief, the two rowers gave way
vigorously, and in a short time had brought the boat
alongside the island. Davis gave Mr. Braddock a


hand to help him ashore, and intimated to us that we
were to follow. One fellow carried the parcels some
distance up the beach, while the second remained in
the boat. I looked at Joe for some explanation, but
he was as much puzzled as I. Mr. Davis, however,
speedily put an end to at least a part of our puzzling
and wonderment.
?I am very happy,? he began smilingly, ? to have
been the means of saving your lives, but I regret to
add that your presence on the ship causes us a certain
inconvenience. Special reasons,? and his smile grew
broader, ? prevent me from landing you at any recog-
nised port, while I cannot continue to keep you on
board, much as I enjoy your fascinating society,?
and he made a low bow to Mr. Braddock. ? I realised
the difficult situation when picking you up, but one
must obey the unwritten law of the sea.?
None of us offered any reply, and he continued:
? Mr. Payton?s solution of the problem was simple
and direct ?it was merely to knock you on the head
and drop you overboard, but, though an excellent
man in many respects, his imagination is not widely
developed. I propose to act far more agreeably.
Here is a beautiful island, small but compact. The
scenery, as you will admit, is ravishing : there are
no wild animals, no venomous snakes ; the natives
from the neighbouring islands never come here ; it
has the reputation of being haunted. That, of course,
is absurd.?


? Do you mean,? asked Mr. Braddock, speaking for
the first time, " that we are to be marooned ? ?
? A harsh term, my dear sir, and, in the circum-
stances, grossly misleading. I should describe the
situation rather as giving you a delightful holiday.
I leave a few things that may be found useful, and
later, at a more convenient season, I will call for you.
Meanwhile, I trust you will spend a very enjoyable
time in this sylvan retreat.?
?We are much indebted to your hospitality,?
returned Braddock, ? and you certainly are a very
agreeable rascal.?
? Thank you,? he replied gravely. " Even the
most modest of men are grateful for words of praise
fitly spoken.?
The whole scene was exceedingly funny, although
I fancy only Davis was fully able to appreciate
the humour.
Any opposition on our part would have been sheer
midsummer madness. Even had we killed him and
his boat?s crew, the position would have remained
hopeless. There was nothing to be done but to accept
the inevitable. In silence we watched the boat return,
and the ship steam out into the open sea.
? Well,? exclaimed Joe, staring hard at the receding
craft, ? that beats the band.?
? Romance of the sea,? I observed half laugh-
ingly.
? Cheer up,? our companion advised briskly; ?we


have an advantage over the poor fellows on the
Stormaway ; we are alive ! ?
? Oh, I?m not grousing, sir,? Joe replied; ? things
might be a lot worse. But what does it mean ? How
could we possibly have done him any harm by
staying on board ? ?
? That?s a puzzle at present, but no doubt he has
excellent reasons. In the first place, I scarcely imagine
that he is an ordinary sailor. As a rule, a peaceful
trader doesn?t carry guns, nor is her crew heavily
armed. Some years ago, I should have put him down
as a Blackbirder, but that trade, I believe, is pretty
well done.?
"Do you think he really means to return for
us ? ? 1 asked.
"If he can do so without running into personal
danger, not otherwise. However, there will be ample
opportunity for speculating on that. At present our
best course is to discover what he has left us, and to
find a sleeping-place for the night.?
This was sensible advice, and we began imme-
diately to examine the parcels which the negro had
deposited on the beach. As a result, we decided
that Davis was not altogether a bad-hearted chap.
There were packets of tea, tins of meat, matches,
flour, biscuits, fishing-lines and hooks, and various
other articles exceedingly useful to marooned men.
? A very gentlemanly pirate, if he is a pirate,?
Braddock remarked, his eyes twinkling.


? At least, we shan?t starve for a while,? said Joe.
We made no attempt that night to explore the
island. The beach on which we had landed was fairly
level, with only a gently rising slope, but to the north
it rose abruptly and we soon discovered a convenient
cave suitable both as a store-house for our provisions
and as a temporary lodging. Here, having eaten our
first meal as marooned men, we lay down, and speedily
fell asleep.
I wakened early and stepped outside. The sun had
already risen ; the soft clouds were suffused with gold
and orange, the sky was intensely blue ; I had rarely
seen a spectacle so magnificent. And at my feet lay
the lagoon, its waters delicately tinted and clear as
crystal. Gazing at the exquisite beauty everywhere
around me, I agreed that Davis could scarcely
have provided us with a more picturesque prison.
Later in the day we explored our new domain. It
was wonderfully fertile, and in the centre, as I have
mentioned, rose a wooded hill, at the summit of which
we made a gruesome discovery. Right at the top
grew an isolated tree in the middle of what appeared
to be a cleared circular space. At first I concluded the
surrounding timber had been cut down purposely,
but this, a closer examination revealed, was not the
case. We were still discussing the odd spectacle,
when Joe suddenly exclaimed, ? What?s that ? Look,
nearly at the top, against the trunk.?
Following the direction of his arm, I glanced up.


and there to my horror beheld the body of a gibbeted
man, long since dead, and now no more than a skeleton.
By what means it had been placed in its extraordinary
position was a mystery, but there it hung, a ghastly
and sinister object.
? I wonder what tragedy his story covers,?
exclaimed Mr. Braddock. ? Murdered by white men,
without doubt; the poor fellow was never put there
by natives.?
? Must have been a sailor,? said Joe.
? A pirate,? I exclaimed, ? executed for attempting
mutiny or something of that sort.?
? Perhaps Captain Davis might be able to enlighten
us,? suggested our companion quietly ; ?he is well
acquainted with the island. It is easy to account for
the native belief that the place is haunted, and that
may suit his schemes.?
? Can?t we get the poor beggar down and give him
decent burial ? ? asked Joe. ? It?s horrible to think
of his hanging there; I won?t be able to forget that
picture for ages.?
Braddock shook his head. ?I?m afraid that?s
impossible. It is a puzzle how any one managed to
put him there ! ?
? Well,? muttered Joe, ? I shall give this part a
wide berth in future.?
The ghastly discovery cast a gloom over our spirits,
and for the remainder of the day we thought of little
else. The most likely explanation of the tragedy was


the one I had previously advanced. The victim was
almost certainly a sailor, belonging to some piratical
craft, who had aroused the anger of his superior
officers. Perhaps they had suspected him of treachery,
or he had been guilty of insubordination, and this was
his terrible punishment, which served also as a warning
to others.
My fancy reconstructed the tragic scene. The
vessel lying in the channel, the procession of boats,
the doomed man, pinioned, in the foremost, the landing
on the beach, the slow march up the hill, the circle of
awed and silent sailors around the fateful tree, the
complicated business of fixing the chains, the last
dread moment before the unhappy wretch was swung
into eternity ! And then the re-forming and departure,
the march to the boats, the setting off again to the
vessel ?the island left in the sole keeping of the
dead man ! It was not a pleasing picture to go to
sleep with.
Still, being physically tired, I slept well; so did
the others, and we rose refreshed, and in cheerful
spirits. Mr. Braddock, by common consent, took
charge of the commissariat, and indeed both Joe
and I acted willingly under his directions. He had
far more experience than either of us, and was,
besides, exceedingly pleasant and entertaining.
? This is quite an adventure for you youngsters,?
he remarked, ? something to talk about w T hen you
return to England. Davis wasn?t far wrong in saying


we can enjoy a pleasant holiday here. What with
the native fruits and fish, and the provisions from the
ship, we shan?t be in sight of starving for quite a
long time.?
Joe Shannon laughed. ? Rather a neat way of
putting it,? he said; ? sounds almost like an adver-
tisement for one of Cook?s tours.?
? The only drawback is,? I objected, ? that you
state no definite time for returning. If you could
fix a reasonable date for leaving I should enjoy
my holiday better.?
" That?s the weak spot, but we need not feel de-
pressed. For one thing, I shouldn?t be altogether
surprised if Davis came to fetch us.?
I considered this unlikely, and said so ; it seemed
to me fairly certain that Davis was engaged in some
unlawful transactions, and that he would be very
chary of providing witnesses against himself. That
would be too quixotic ! Certainly he had no expecta-
tion of our escaping for at least a very long period,
if at all.
What?s the chance of a boat calling in for water,
sir ? ? Joe asked.
There is just the bare possibility,? was the reply,
? but I scarcely advise you to count on it.?
? And we can?t make any kind of craft, even a
canoe, for ourselves. There?s plenty of material, but
we haven?t any tools.?
No,? Mr. Braddock agreed with a laugh, ? we


are worse off than Robinson Crusoe in that respect.
We must depend on a passing ship or the islanders.?
? Davis says the natives are scared of the place
now, and the sight of us would frighten them still
more,? Joe objected.
?Yes, but they would talk, and there are white
men scattered all over these seas ?merchants? agents
trading in copra and pearls. They live amongst the
natives and learn all that goes on. If we could attract
the attention of a passing canoe the news would be
carried to one of them.?
? Our best chance for that is on the other side,?
Joe suggested.
? I believe you are right; suppose we go and
prospect ? ?
We set off at a leisurely pace, having ample time
on our hands, and since there was no danger of a
sudden attack, either by snakes or by wild beasts,
we had no need to take precautions. Certainly Captain
Davis could have chosen a much worse place on
which to maroon us, and we mentally put this down
to his credit.
From the rocks on the eastern side of the island
a low-lying piece of land was faintly discernible on
the horizon. We hoped it was inhabited by peaceful
natives, but that, naturally, it was impossible to
tell. Our new position, however, formed an eminently
serviceable post, and, as there was a choice of half a
dozen caves suitable as a store-house, we proceeded


without undue exertion to transport our provisions.
Then, under Mr. Braddock?s directions, we erected a
hut, shaped like a beehive, and, although the building
would have failed to secure full marks in a Boy Scouts?
competition, it answered our purpose. Next day we
gathered and stacked a goodly pile of dry grass and
wood, which, when the proper time arrived ?if ever
it did arrive?would furnish an arresting bonfire.
Real Crusoes doubtless would have discovered
many other things to do, but perhaps we lacked the
proper Crusoe spirit. In any case, we could not hunt,
as there were no animals; nor construct a boat with
no other implement than a blunt clasp-knife. Joe,
however, who was never easily beaten, made a brave
attempt at putting together what he called a raft,
but the result was not a decided success. The ram-
shackle contraption had every possible defect and
not a single merit, and I am certain that the original
Robinson would not have trusted his cat on it
even in a calm sea. Of course we chaffed him
unmercifully, but he appeared rather proud of his
handicraft.
? She won?t ride the water exactly like a duck,?
he admitted, ? but she ought to be able to carry one
of us to the nearest island.?
? There?s one thing you can congratulate yourself
on, Shannon,? Mr. Braddock exclaimed, laughing,
you haven?t broken the Second Commandment, for
your raft is like nothing in the heavens above, or the


earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth, and
that in itself is a mark of original genius.?
** The British Museum might be glad to have it,?
I suggested, ? it would prove a great draw ; Specimen
of Early Shipbuilding supposed to have been con-
structed at the time of the Flood.?
Joe eyed his strange craft thoughtfully and declared
that with a few additions and alterations she might
be made quite serviceable, at least for smooth water.


CHAPTER XI
JOE TAKES A RISK
We had been marooned close upon a fortnight and
nothing in particular had occurred. By degrees we
had added to the comfort of our wigwam, and this
was so far to the good ; on the other hand, our stock
of provisions was steadily lessening, which gave us
something to think about. Joe caught fish in abun-
dance, and we decided, though rather dubiously, to
cook a few for dinner.
Mr. Braddock hit the situation off neatly, ?We
are like the man with the fungi,? he said, ? who was
ignorant whether they were mushrooms or toadstools.
His only method of discovering was to eat them. If
he lived, they were mushrooms ; if he died, they were
toadstools.?
Luckily none of us died, so we decided that Joe?s
catch provided us with a wholesome, if not altogether
palatable, change of diet, besides helping to eke out
our remaining stores.
One morning Mr. Braddock and I were examining
the provisions with a view to stricter rationing, when
we were startled by a wild hullabaloo from Joe,


who came running towards us in the highest excite-
ment.
? A canoe ! ? he cried, ? a canoe ! Quick, set a
light to the bonfire,? and off he danced again waving
his arms and yelling as if he were a megaphone.
Until then I had no idea he possessed such a sound
pair of lungs.
Running out, we kindled the dry grass and wood,
which before long was blazing merrily. Then we
joined Joe, who continued to shout and to perform
tricks like an animated windmill.
? There she is,? he cried, ? steering east. She?ll
be abreast of us very soon. Throw some more wood
on the fire, Trevan ; keep it going.?
? Right-o,? I replied with a laugh, ? though there?s
little need of the fire. Unless the natives are all stone
deaf they will have heard your gentle music.?
I threw on more fuel, and the three of us shouted
together and waved our hands and made pantomimic
gestures in order to attract the islanders? attention.
Would they see us ? was our first question ; and if
so, would they venture to come ashore ?
? They?ll be too scared,? I exclaimed. ?If they
believe the place is haunted, they?ll put us down for
evil spirits.?
? Don?t stop to jabber; shout,? cried Joe, and
then, ? we?ve got ?em, they?re heading in shore, come
on,? and we ran after him down to the beach, watching
with eager eyes the manoeuvres of the boat.


? I can?t understand it,? Mr. Braddock remarked
in a tone of surprise, ? there must be a white man in
the canoe, and a very powerful one at that. So much
the better for us.?
" They?re sheering off again,? I exclaimed dis-
appointedly, ? they won?t venture.?
? ? First she would and then she wouldn?t,? ? he
hummed whimsically; ? our only hope is that
they will spread the information in the proper
quarters.?
? Rather a long chance,? said Joe, and proceeded
rapidly to divest himself of his few clothes.
? What are you going to do ? ? we asked him.
? Persuade ?em to fetch you off. Sure to be some
one who can talk pidgin English. And if they won?t,
I can swim back easily.?
? You?re running into danger for nothing,? we
protested. ? They?ll either sail off or stay to knock
you on the head,? but Joe laughed and declared the
venture was worth making.
In spite of everything we could say?and we said
a good deal of an uncomplimentary nature ?he entered
the water and struck out. He was a powerful swimmer,
and we had little fear of his drowning, but there was
a great deal of force in our dread that the natives, in
a spirit of panic, might club him to death. I watched
anxiously, hoping they would resume their voyage
before my stout-hearted chum reached the canoe.
However, they chose to remain, although the


swimmer rapidly approached them. I glanced at my
companion; his face was as troubled and uneasy
as my own. A few moments now would decide
Joe?s fate. We had only an indistinct view?the
distance was too great ?but we watched him draw
up alongside the canoe, and it seemed as if he placed
his hands for support upon the gunwale. Neither of
us spoke ; we scarcely dared to breathe, the suspense
was so sickening.
That they had not killed him immediately I regarded
as a hopeful sign ; it showed that to some extent they
had conquered their fear, and it was fear, not blood
lust, that I dreaded.
? I believe he has succeeded! ? Mr. Braddock
exclaimed suddenly ; ? look, they?re helping him into
the boat. They would never do that if they meant
to kill him.?
" Good old Joe ! ? I cried enthusiastically, dancing
around and waving my arms like a Dervish. ? Thank
goodness we can say good-bye to this place; it was
getting monotonous.?
My companion replied with a startled exclamation.
? They aren?t coming here, Trevan; they?re leaving
us behind.?
I stared out to sea stupidly, watching the canoe as
she drew farther and farther from the shore, heading
due east. What was the meaning of this startling
change ? What was happening to my chum ? Our
own plight now held little interest for me. I could


think only of Joe Shannon, helpless and alone amidst
that crowd of islanders.
Mr. Braddock was the first to recover his wits.
? It may turn out all right,? he suggested, with a
show of cheerfulness. ? The natives can be cruel and
vindictive if you injure them, but, speaking generally,
they aren?t blood-thirsty. Perhaps they?re carrying
him to the white agent or trader on one of the islands,
and, if so, we shall be rescued in a day or two.?
The canoe had now become a mere speck on the
waters ; presently it disappeared altogether, and we
turned away.
Mr. Braddock?s suggestion had partly reassured
me, and indeed it appeared entirely reasonable. Joe
had failed to overcome their superstitious fears, I
argued, but the fact of their keeping him in the boat
proved they had accepted at least part of his story.
? Cheer up,? my companion advised brightly, ? we
shall have him back to-morrow or the next day at
latest.?
?As long as no harm happens to him, I don?t
mind,? I replied,? but it gave me a shock to see the
boat scuttling off.?
? It was rather startling, but I feel sure that my
explanation is the right one. Now, let us go to
dinner. There?s no reason for keeping watch to-
day.?
He insisted on preparing a special feast, declaring
that our stores were ample for the short period we


should remain, but this confidence was probably
assumed for the purpose of cheering me. In this he
succeeded, and when we turned in at night I had
thrown off my dreary fears, and looked forward quite
hopefully to seeing Joe again in a short time.
Next morning we were awake early, and anxiously
scanning the ocean for sign of a sail, but nothing
appeared in sight, and we returned disappointedly to
breakfast. Still, as my companion pointed out, there
was really no occasion for despondency ; the time was
young yet, we had no idea of the distance to be
traversed, and a hundred and one things might arise
to delay Joe?s return.
All this was true and reasonable, but directly after
breakfast I hurried forth again to renew my weary
vigil. The morning passed, and the afternoon, but
it was not until darkness fell that I abandoned hope
for that day and went back to the shelter. Luckily,
Mr. Braddock retained his composure. We were in
too much of a hurry, he declared; he would not be
surprised even if a week passed before the arrival
of a canoe, but that one would arrive eventually he
felt certain.
Whether he believed his own words or not may be
doubtful, but he acted up to them, and all through
the next day and those that succeeded it his cheery
optimism kept up my spirits. Early on the fourth
afternoon we perceived in the far distance a small
object, which, on approaching nearer, proved to be


a fair-sized sailing boat, built somewhat after the
style of a canoe, yet differing in several respects from
the usual native craft. Presently we were able to
distinguish the crew, and two white men seated in
the stem.
? Just as I expected,? Mr. Braddock commented.
? Shannon has got hold of a white trader, and we can
say good-bye to our prison. Captain Davis will not
be pleased if he learns we tired of his hospitality so
quickly. Ah, they are furling the sail and taking to
the oars.?
We hastened along the shore in the direction for
which the boat was heading, and Joe, standing up
and waving his arm, gave us a cheery hail. He was
wearing an old jacket, a pair of trousers reaching to
the calf of his leg, and a straw hat several sizes too
large for his head.
? Here we are again,? he cried, jumping on to the
beach, and then, as the second white man followed
more sedately, ? This is Mr. Eastman; we owe him
a big debt.?
Mr. Eastman was a tall, spare man with a long
face tanned brick-red by the sun, shrewd gray eyes,
and a quick, alert manner. ? Unless there is any-
thing particularly pressing to stay for,? he said, ? I?ll
be glad if you will get aboard ; we can talk afterwards.
My boys are a bit panicky, and itching to be off. They
always give this place a wide berth.?
? There is nothing to prevent us from making an


immediate start,? Mr. Braddock declared with a
laugh, and within a few minutes, much to the relief
of the natives, the boat was headed seawards.
" It isn?t a long distance to go,? said Joe, as he and
I settled down, ? but Mr. Eastman was up-country
wLen we landed, and he had all his w r ork cut out to
muster a crew. The poor beggars are frightened to
death. I can?t understand their lingo, but they?ve
evidently got it into their heads that Old Nick bosses
the island. They?ve been shivering with sheer fright
all the way here.?
? It?s a w r onder they didn?t knock you on the head
first go off,? I said.
? Two or three wanted to, but that long-legged
chap over there insisted on taking me to Eastman,
and the others gave way. But it was a toss-up and
no more. And they never took their eyes off me. I
reckon they half expected I should turn into a full-
blowTi devil with horns and a long tail,? and he
laughed merrily.
?It was a foolhardy thing to do anyway ; you
might have been killed.?
? Quite easily,? he agreed, ? but then I wasn?t.
And a lucky thing for you,? he added.
? Does Mr. Eastman live on an island ? ? I asked
presently.
? One of a group, and he?s the only wTdte man
there. He has a wooden shanty and seems to be a
sort of little king, but I shouldn?t like his post. He


never sees any one but the natives, except when his
company?s ship comes, or a stray craft puts in for
water. I reckon we?re still a long way from Plymouth. ? ?
? And out of a job too.?
? That isn?t as bad here as in the old country.
Besides, we?re having quite an adventure.?
? Quite,? I replied dryly; ? romance of the sea
and that sort of thing. When we get back I?m going
to invest in that pony and cart and travel inland,?
at which my light-hearted chum laughingly advised
me to try a canal boat.
It was still light when we reached the cluster of
islands, on the largest of w T hich Mr. Eastman had
established his headquarters. Apparently the entire
population?men, women, and children ?had turned
out to receive us. They were in a state of keen excite-
ment, shouting, dancing, beating drums, and making
hideous noises, which perhaps testified to their pleasure
at seeing their friends alive. Evidently they regarded
the boat?s crew as mighty heroes, who had bearded
the evil one in his den and had come off conquerors.
After speaking a few words to them, Eastman
invited us to accompany him to his house, where a
couple of native servants speedily produced an appe-
tising meal to which we sat down joyfully. The
uproar outside continued for a time, but gradually
the noise lessened, and finally died away.
? The people have gone to their huts, but not to
sleep,? our host explained. ? They?ll chatter most of


the night like excited children. They are splendid
fellows, but chock-full of superstition. I?m perfectly
certain they never expected to see my crew again.
But I am keeping you from your supper, which isn?t
hospitable. The sail must have given you an appetite.
Afterwards I shall be glad to hear your story, which
ought to be an interesting one.?
? We may safely promise that it will interest you,?
Braddock replied, ? more especially the part which
accounts for our presence on the island.?


CHAPTER XII
WAITING FOR AN ATTACK
When the servants had cleared away the supper
things, our host lit his pipe, and Mr. Braddock pro-
ceeded to relate the story of our adventures. He
described briefly the foundering of the Stormaway,
and the loss of every one on board the vessel except
our three selves.
? We were picked up,? he continued, after the
trader had expressed his sympathy, ? by a boat from
a steamer. I can teM you neither her name nor her
nationality. She carried no marks of identification,
and appeared to have come from nowhere, and to be
going nowhere. She carried two guns forward and
one aft, a strange sight on a peaceful trader.?
Our host slowly withdrew the pipe from his mouth,
made as if to speak, thought better of it, and resumed
smoking.
? The crew formed a mixed crowd, including a
a Spaniard, and one or two Swedes, but the
majority were English.?
? There were two Yanks?Prentice and Gibbons,?
my chum remarked.


? They looked a hard-bitten set, and the discipline
on board was exceptionally strict. Man-of-war style,?
and our host nodded thoughtfully.
? The name of the first mate was Payton. He?s a
tough customer, with the strength of a bull, and with
a temper ?well, I should be sorry for the men who
crossed him.?
? He?ll finish up with a knife between his ribs some
dark night,? Joe declared.
? What about the captain ? ? It was the first
remark our host had made.
" The mate called him Davis. A slight, spare man,
not as tall as you, but hard as nails. Rather a
good-looking chap but for his mouth. He treated me
pleasantly enough, but there was something about
him that I couldn?t fathom. In fact, we hadn?t been
on board more than a couple of days before I began
to suspect mischief. Still,? with a quiet chuckle, ? I
certainly didn?t expect to be marooned.?
? Marooned ! ? exclaimed the trader sharply.
? That?s what it amounted to,? and he described
our landing on the island, and the captain?s curious
conversation. ? It?s the biggest mystery I?ve ever
been mixed up in,? he concluded.
? But the chap wasn?t half bad,? remarked Joe ;
? he didn?t intend that we should starve.?
? And he made a half promise to return for you ? ?
? We didn?t place much dependence on that,? I
promptly said


Our host puffed away at his pipe for several minutes
before saying, ? It?s a mighty queer yam, and queerer
still if, as I believe, you?ve been in the clutches of
Brisbane Paul. As a rule, he isn?t credited with
possessing much of the milk of human kindness.?
? Who is Brisbane Paul ? ? we asked.
? Very few people can answer that question, but I
can tell you what he is. In these days of wireless it
sounds absurd to talk of pirates, but Paul is a pirate
?of a sort. He?s like one of the old bushrangers,
only his headquarters are on the sea.?
? I wouldn?t have given him a month at that game,?
observed Braddock.
" And yet he has been playing it successfully for
more than two years. He is full of craft and daring ;
he owns a tremendously fast boat, and is as thoroughly
acquainted with these seas as I am with my garden
patch. He appears and vanishes and re-appears like
a conjurer?s trick in a music-hall show. But, as I
remarked, he?s only a sort of pirate. As far as is
known, he doesn?t meddle with ships on the high
seas.?
Then how does he make the game pay ? **
Partly, at least, out of the traders. You know
there are trading stations scattered all over the
islands. We collect a lot of valuable stuff?copra
and pearls, for example?which our ships call for.
Only it sometimes happens that Brisbane Paul swoops
down beforehand, overpowers the agent and the


natives, packs everything of value on board his ship,
and disappears like a flash. I?ve been his victim
once, but/? with a chuckle, ? he arrived a day after
the fair?our own vessel had just sailed. He wasn?t
at all pleased ; he seemed to imagine I ought to have
kept her back.?
? But how does he dispose of the stuff ? ?
? That is his secret. Personally, I believe he makes
use of the Chinese. Now, you had better turn in here.
My quarters are rather cramped for such a large
family, but in the morning I?ll set the men to run up
a hut for you.?
The knowledge that Brisbane Paul had been in the
neighbourhood evidently caused him a certain amount
of uneasiness; he continued to be very thoughtful,
and a night?s reflection did little to allay his
fears.
?Yes,? he confessed, in answer to a question next
morning, ? your yarn is a trifle disconcerting. The
truth is, we have had a particularly successful season,
and got together a collection of really choice pearls
waiting for our steamer. And if Paul should happen
to arrive first ! ?
? I see,? exclaimed Braddock, ? but you would
put up a fight ? ?
The agent made a grimace. ? The natives are
brave enough in a way, but they stand no chance
against firearms.?
? Have you any weapons ? ?


? And heaps of ammunition, but only three of the
men can shoot.?
?You and I make five. What about you young-
sters ? ?
? I can handle a revolver
? Good. And you, Shannon ? ?
?Well,? replied Joe, with a grin, ? I?m not what
you?d call a crack shot, but I could hit a man if he
came near enough.?
? That?s seven, while the natives ought to be able
to do some damage with their spears.?
Our host appeared not to relish the prospect of a
tussle, although he seemed a brave man.
It s a desperate game,? he exclaimed at length,
and I?m thinking about my people. Paul won?t
hurt them if there?s no resistance, but if there is, he?ll
wipe the poor devils out.?
? It?s for you to decide,? said Braddock, ? but,
whatever your decision, we?ll stand by it.?
Thanks,? he replied, ?I?ll have a talk presently
with the chief.?
In the evening the trader announced that should
the buccaneers visit the island the natives had agreed
to resist them.
? In tllat case we?ll start with our plans,? said
Braddock briskly. ? There will be no harm done even
if the gentleman gives you a miss. Where is he likely
to land ? ?
? There?s only one place possible, at the little pier.?


? That simplifies matters. And after landing they
will come straight for your house ? ?
? That?s the usual order of things. A surprise
attack on the white man during the night! The
natives, you see, don?t count.?
? They?ll count this time,? replied Braddock
grimly.
The energy which our companion threw into the
affair surprised us. Acting through Eastman, he took
charge of all the arrangements, directed that watchers
should be stationed at suitable places, and instituted
a set of signals by means of which the arrival of the
pirates might be made known almost instantly. Noth-
ing was left to chance. Directly the signal was given,
the older men were to withdraw the women and
children ; the younger were to secrete themselves at
appointed places. Every man was given a fixed station
and had precise instructions how to act.
? All this may be unnecessary,? he observed, ? but
we can?t call Brisbane Paul?s hand without holding
some high cards ourselves.?
? We?ve simply got to win,? exclaimed our host,
M or the result will be appalling.?
? That?s right, it?s a fight to a finish; no quarter
given or asked. Boys,? turning to Joe and me,
? don?t make any mistake ; it?s their heads or yours.
Mr. Eastman says truly that you?ve got to win.?
? We?ll do our best,? I replied, ? but I?m hoping
there?ll be no need to fight.?


** Quite likely there won?t be, but we?ll be prepared,
all the same.?
Some distance from the shore, and in a direct line
with the agent?s house, he had a long trench dug,
fairly wide and deep, and several yards from the edge
nearest the building he planted a row of sharp stakes.
? They?re almost bound to blunder into that trap,?
he remarked with an air of satisfaction, ? and, if so,
the game?s ours. Your boys will have some use for
their spears, Mr. Eastman.?
At the close of the third day our preparations
were complete. The natives were thoroughly drilled
in their part, while we made ourselves acquainted
with every foot of the ground across which the free-
booters were expected to pass. Until the signal was
given, not a shot was to be fired, while the islanders
were warned to maintain perfect silence.
The excitement of those three days had prevented
us from fully realising the nature of our task, but now
we had ample leisure for thought, and our reflections
were far from cheerful. Frankly, I hoped our pre-
parations were unnecessary ; I had no desire to kill
or be killed, and the others agreed with me.
? It?s a beastly nuisance,? said Joe, " but if this
Brisbane Paul does turn up, we?ll have to tackle him.
And we?ve fixed up a hot reception for him ; he and
his crew will get the surprise of their lives.?
It s like murder,? I protested uneasily, but this
my chum declined to admit.


? Not at all,? he asserted. ? Eastman has a right
to defend his own property, and these chaps wouldn?t
be squeamish about killing him. They take their
chance, good or ill. And, after all, it?s as likely as
not that we?ll see nothing further of them. There?s
no certainty of their coming.?
At first we had almost taken it for granted that the
freebooters would pay us a visit, but when a week
passed uneventfully our fears lessened, and we felt
highly amused at our extraordinary precautions.
Even Braddock inclined to the opinion that the danger
was over, though he insisted on a vigilant watch being
maintained every night.
? It?s when you haven?t taken in your canvas that
the squall often bursts,? he remarked.
Joe and I slept in a hut close to the agent?s house,
and we always lay down with revolvers and ammuni-
tion ready for any emergency. The fear of a surprise
attack kept us awake half the night, listening for the
signal, and occasionally we took a turn outside to
satisfy ourselves that all was right. But, as I have
remarked, the passing of time considerably relieved
our anxiety, and we fell asleep as speedily as in the
Stormaway?s bunks.
At the end of a fortnight our fancied security
received a rude shock. I had slept perhaps an hour
or slightly over when a hand laid lightly on my
forehead wakened me.
? Don?t make a noise,? some one whispered, ? and


get to your post quickly. Shannon, are you awake ?
Two boats are pulling for the shore. I?m sorry, but
there?s no sense in blinking facts : it?s a life-and-death
struggle. You know just what is to be done ? ?
?Yes,? we replied quietly.
? Well, good-bye for the present, and good luck.
Remember, after the first shot?s fired there?s no hope
for any of us but in complete victory. Davis isn?t
likely to spare you, and if he would, Payton won?t.?
We wished him good-bye as he went out, and
dressed quickly. The dreaded moment had arrived,
the beginning of a fight to the death. Now that the
danger was upon us we realised vividly the force of
Braddock?s words. It was possible, nay probable,
that before the sun rose we should all be lying dead.
Joe gripped my hand hard. ? Keep your pecker
up,? he exclaimed cheerfully. ? I guess we?ll come
out on the right side. If we don?t, well, here?s good-
bye, old son.?
? Good-bye, Joe,? I whispered, returning the
pressure of his hand, and the next instant we had
departed, each to his appointed position.
I reached the mound which was to serve me as
cover, placed one revolver on the ground close to my
hand, and grasped the other firmly. On a previous
occasion, although even now I was only a boy, I had
looked death squarely in the face, and escaped as if
by a miracle ; perhaps my luck would continue to
hold good !
p.u.j. x


I crouched low, straining my eyes, and listening
intently. The night was dark and still; I saw and
heard nothing. An intense silence brooded over us,
it was wellnigh impossible to believe that the island
contained life of any description. Yet close to me
six men waited with weapons of death in their hands,
while in their hiding-places a score of natives lay
alert, but motionless as graven images.
Stealthily and cautiously, though unconscious of
danger, the freebooters were advancing towards their
plunder?or their doom ?while eyes as sharp and keen
as those of a lynx followed their shadowy figures. The
picture conjured up in my imagination was a ghastly
one ; the silence and the waiting weighed on my
nerves ; I felt oppressed as if by a hideous night-
mare, and longed for anything that would end this
agonising suspense.
At length, after an eternity of waiting, the terrible
silence was broken by the sound of footsteps, faint at
first, then more pronounced. My heart beat fast,
perspiration bathed my face ; but I clutched my
revolver more firmly ?the supreme moment was at
hand. In a few minutes now we should be either
victors or dead.


CHAPTER XIII
POLLOK MAKES AN OFFER
Presently the dim, vague outlines evolved into
shadowy figures. They marched three abreast, with
the leader by himself in advance. Not a sound beyond
that of their footsteps was heard. To me, conscious
of the graven figures in their shelters, the silence was
dreadful. I watched the oncoming of the freebooters
with fascinated eyes. There was no novelty to them
in the business. The night landing, the rapid march,
the capture?sometimes the murder?of the agent,
the collection of the booty, the swift return and
instant disappearance?it was all familiar and even
commonplace.
This particular venture, however, was far from
commonplace. I had no wish to kill these miscreants,
but neither had I any pity at their approaching fate.
They were brutal robbers, and their hands were dyed
in blood. They chose to five by the sword, let them
die by it. There was no sense in feeling tender-hearted
over Brisbane Paul and his associates !
The marauders pressed on, and the tension grew
high. The foremost figure reached the edge of the


trench and disappeared; the first line followed ; the
sound of their falling bodies reached us distinctly.
The remainder of the crew halted irresolutely ; cries
of rage mingled with fear arose ; firearms were dis-
charged, perhaps by accident, and we heard the
sharp scream of a man who had been shot.
Then a huge figure scrambled out on our side of
the ditch. It was the gigantic negro, who ran on,
firing at random and bellowing like a bull. Then a
revolver shot rang out and he partly fell, but, picking
himself up again, ran forward with amazing vigour.
A second shot, as we discovered later, went right
through his heart, and he tumbled headlong with a
strangled screech.
Behind him ran the redoubtable Paul, and by his
side the chief mate. Ruffians both, at least they showed
no fear, but rushed into the unknown as bravely as if
they had been gallant knights. By this time others
had emerged from the trap, but the initial disaster
had demoralised them, and they blundered on any-
how, making the night hideous with their discordant
noises. Some clambered down into the trench, others
ran hither and thither confusedly ; a few turned round
as if anxious to reach the boats again.
And this death, which had leaped upon them in
the darkness, was made more appalling by the absence
of any sound save that of their own voices. They
knew not what to do or believe or think. They had
expected nothing more than to hold a loaded revolver


to a helpless man?s breast, and to demand where his
treasure lay hidden. And now first one dropped dead
or wounded, and then another, and presently a cry
arose that they were being attacked from the rear,
and, indeed, from all sides by invisible enemies.
This was the crowning disaster. Terror seized them,
panic terror, and only those who have seen men in a
panic can realise what that means. A few kept their
heads sufficiently to drag or carry their wounded
mates with them, but the majority broke and fled
pell-mell. And one listened in vain for the raucous
tones of the ferocious Payton, or the sharp, keen
decisive commands of his leader! The helpless
wretches, left to their own resources, rushed in a
blind fury to the sea.
Suddenly a shrill whistle, rising high and clear above
the din, filled them with a new frenzy of despair,
though it was simply the pre-arranged signal for the
islanders to stop their pursuit. The repulse was
complete, and none of us had any stomach or desire
for useless slaughter.
Emerging from our cover, we gathered around our
leader. ? Brisbane Paul and his chief lieutenant are
down, he said, ? the remainder are but broken men.
They will desert the ship at the first opportunity and
scatter. What?s your opinion, Eastman ? ?
? I agree. They will never forget this lesson;
besides, they?re powerless without their captain.?
At his instructions, the natives brought torches and


began to search for the bodies of the fallen. Braddock
had more than a nodding acquaintance with gunshot
wounds, while the agent?s stores provided many useful
drugs and medicines.
The negro lay nearest to our line of defence ; he
was stone dead, and we left him to the attention of
the islanders. Behind him, at some distance to the
right, was the truculent mate, who had bawled his
orders for the last time. Him also we left to the care
of the natives.
Close by we found Brisbane Paul. His body was
warm and he still breathed, but the light from the
torches showed that he had been hit in several places.
With the assistance of the agent and a member of the
firing party, we carried him to the house, and laid
him on the floor for Braddock to examine his wounds.
? Alive,? said he, ? but no more. Still, it?s as well
to die here as to be hanged in Sydney.?
The wounded man opened his eyes and glanced
dully round the room. It was evident that as yet he
failed to realise what had happened. He gazed into
our faces without comprehension, but presently the
ghost of a smile flitted across his eyes.
? Ah ! ? he exclaimed, and the monosyllable ex-
pressed a world of meaning.
I placed a cordial to his lips, but he brushed the
glass aside lightly and asked for water, which Joe
immediately fetched. The man was dying ; we all
realised that, and he himself equally with us. But the


faint smile reappeared, and in it one perceived both
irony and humour.
? Tit for tat,? he whispered softly ; ? that's fair
enough, boys. But Payton was right, after all?wary
old bird, Payton. Should have knocked you on the
head and dropped you overboard. No room in this
world for kindness.?
? I?m afraid your ticket?s up,? Braddock said very
gently. ?Do you wish to tell us anything before ?
? I weigh anchor. Thank you, no. Where?s
Payton ? Oh,? as no one replied, ? gone on, eh ? It
was a pretty trap, a pretty trap,? and his eyes closed.
By this time three other men had been carried to
the adjoining hut, and Braddock went to attend to
their injuries.
? Can?t do any good here,? he remarked, glancing
at the captain ; ? he's dying fast, and no one can
help him. Keep his lips moist, Shannon ; it will be
finished shortly.?
He took the agent with him, while Joe and I stayed
by the dying buccaneer. We stood there in silence,
watching, ready and eager to render any service
possible. He lay so motionless that we thought him
dead, but presently he began to talk, though so
faintly as to be almost inaudible. But what he said
concerned only himself; he was speaking of bygone
events and to people unknown to us.
Now he smiled like an innocent boy ; then his mood
changed, his features became hard and stern, and his


mouth showed more like a rat-trap than ever. Once
his voice rose sharply in anger, and I shall not easily
forget its note of bitterness. We listened not too
carefully ; his secrets, pleasant or miserable, were his
own, and we had no desire to share them.
At the end he was perfectly sensible. He glanced
from one to the other of us without enmity, and
whispered humorously, ? Payton?s plan was safest.?
Those were his last words, but I am certain they were
spoken only by way of jest.
Day had dawned now, and we left the house, where
nothing more could be done, and walked to the beach.
A trail of blood showed where the freebooters had
embarked, but the boats had disappeared, and the
natives, who had a look-out station on the top of a
hill, informed us that there was no sign of the ship.
? Seems almost as if it had been a dream,? ex-
claimed Joe, as we turned back, ? and a mighty
unpleasant one.?
? Well,? said I, ? we?ve helped to break up a
rascally gang, and that will make things a bit cleaner
in this part of the world.?
? What shall we do with our prisoners ? ?
? Hand them over to the Australian Government,
most likely?that is, if they recover.?
Two of the three men were severely wounded ; the
third had escaped with trifling injuries. He called
himself Andrew Pollok, which may or may not have
been his name. He appeared specially interested in


the answer to my chum?s question, and talked a good
deal to me on the subject, asking if I thought he would
be hanged. I told him that was almost certain, which
did not make him any the livelier.
One day we led him to the far corner of the island,
where Brisbane Paul and his associates were buried,
and he displayed remarkable interest in the identity
of the dead men.
? I?m glad you potted the nigger and Payton,? he
said, ? they were both brutes. But I?m downright
sorry for the skipper; he was straight as you make
?em, was Brisbane Paul, and gave everybody a fair
deal.?
? The chap, for example, that he hanged in chains
on the top of the tree,? I suggested.
? Yes, sir, that was Billy Walton, and hanging was
merciful for Billy.?
I hoped he would relate the story, but his mind
was occupied with something of far greater importance.
Presently, with a wave of his hand towards the graves,
he said, ? Have you got Ericson there ? You couldn?t
mistake him ?tall, hairy fellow, with a long ginger
beard.?
? No,? replied my chum promptly, ? I remember
Ericson, I was in his watch. He must have escaped.?
Pollok?s face went a shade pale ; his eyes looked
worried and anxious, and he mumbled to himself
something that we failed to catch.
That same evening, just as we had finished supper,


he came to the house saying he wanted to ask a
question.
? Fire away,? said Braddock.
? I want to know what you intend to do with me.?
? Hand you over to the proper authorities on a
charge of piracy.?
? That means hanging.?
? It probably does.?
? Well,? continued the fellow, " you mayn?t believe
it, but I?ve no liking to be hanged. I saw Billy Walton
hanged.?
? It can?t be altogether pleasant,? we agreed.
?So I?m going to put up a proposition. Give me
my life and I?ll show you where Brisbane Paul kept
his loot.?
? Can?t be done,? replied Braddock promptly, ? but
the authorities may strike a bargain with you.?
Pollok shook his head. ? They?ll be months too
late,? he remarked gloomily. ? There was the captain,
Payton, the nigger, Billy Walton, Ericson, and me.
And now there?s only me and him. He?s cute, is
Ericson. He?ll slip the mob very first chance and
have that pile in ?Frisco before you can look at him.?
? Perhaps he?s done that already.?
? It isn?t likely, but he?s bound to get it unless
you close with my offer. The longer you wait, the
bigger Ericson?s chances, and the move is with you.?
? What do you think we shall do with the booty.?
Andrew shrugged his shoulders. ? You can share


around,? said he, ? or hand the stuff to the authorities ;
I?m not in it, anyway. But you?ve got to decide pretty
soon. Reckon you can make up your minds by
morning. Oh, you might give me some drink or
something for the chaps in the hut; they?re moaning
pretty bad. Though why you want to keep ?em alive
if they?re going to be hanged is a puzzle.?
? I?ll come and have a look at ?em,? Braddock said.
The freebooter?s sensational statement furnished
ample material for brisk discussion. From the outset
Joe and I favoured accepting his offer, not out of
sympathy for him, but because somehow it seemed
fairer. Why, we argued, should he be hanged, or at
least suffer a long term of imprisonment, while another
fellow, equally if not more guilty, secured a fortune
out of the business. The reasoning may have been
unsound, but neither of us had ever won prizes for
logic.
The agent regarded the matter from a different
point of view. He talked of the law, and hinted that
by conniving at Pollok?s escape we should very likely
see the inside of a prison for ourselves as his accom-
plices. We were bound, he argued, to hand all three
prisoners over to the proper officials, and leave them
to act as they thought fit.
? I should agree with you,? Braddock exclaimed,
? were it not for Ericson. But he makes the position
difficult. There?s no doubt the men will disperse.
They?ve had a bad shock, and are without leaders.


'? ? PLAY UP, JACK ! ?
Ericson will be the first to slip off, secure the treasure,
and vanish. By accepting Pollok?s offer we may be
able to restore the stolen goods to their rightful
owners.?
This was a strong point which finally led the agent,
although with very great reluctance, to agree to the
bargain. ? The man deserves severe punishment,?
he insisted doggedly.
? Well,? remarked Mr. Braddock, ? it won?t be any
real pleasure to hand over the stuff to us, without
getting a penny piece for himself.?


CHAPTER XIV
THE MADNESS OF MR. EASTMAN
Pollok betrayed little surprise at the outcome of
our discussion. ? I don?t see how you could have
done anything else, since I?m offering you a fortune
for nothing,? he declared bluntly.
? You?re offering us nothing,? Braddock pointed out
sharply; ? anything we recover will be handed to the
Government.?
? That?s your look-out,? was the reply, in a tone
which implied that the speaker had a very poor
opinion of our sanity.
Now that the affair was practically settled, he
became, within limits, a trifle more communicative.
Though declining to enlighten us as to the actual
disposal of the ordinary booty, saying, perhaps truly,
that this might bring disaster on other people, he
informed us that the most valuable pearls had been
deposited in a secret place, from which a few were
removed from time to time when a favourable market
offered for their purchase.
? The Old Man,? he continued, ? was the finest
judge of pearls in the world ; what he didn?t know


wasn?t worth knowing, and the boys trusted him to
the hilt. Whatever else Brisbane Paul was,? he con-
cluded, ? he was straight,? a term which, applied to a
notorious sea-robber, sounded strangely incongruous.
? Where is this hiding-place ? ? we asked.
At this question he laughed. ? You?ve been there
already,? said he, ? and not so long ago. That?s what
made Payton so wild. He said the skipper was mad !
But I?m not so sure ! Davis generally had his wits
about him ! Anyhow, you didn?t find anything.?
? D?you mean the stuff?s on the island where he
marooned us ? ?
? Just there, and we?ll fetch it over to-day if you
like. Thinking of Ericson, I?d say the sooner the
better.?
At first the yam sounded scarcely credible, but on
reflection we agreed that the freebooter had run very
small risk. We were not likely to have gone searching
for concealed treasure of whose existence we were
in ignorance, and the pearls doubtless were securely
hidden.
After some discussion it was decided to make an
immediate start. The agent preferred to remain behind
in charge of the prisoners, while we considered it
prudent to dispense with the services of the natives.
A crew of four was ample to manage the boat, especially
as the sea was calm and there appeared no likelihood
of a storm. Pollok was unarmed, but Joe and I slipped
a revolver apiece into our pockets.


" He can?t do any mischief, we?ve got him too
tight,? said Joe, ? but, mark you, he?s a shifty
customer, and not to be trusted beyond the reach of
one?s arm.?
I placed no confidence in the fellow myself, but
he was so completely in our power as to be harmless ;
he could neither fight nor run away.
Nothing exciting occurred during our cruise ; it
was, indeed, very much like calling at a left-luggage
office for a parcel, although without Pollok?s assistance
we could have searched for a month or a year, and
come away empty-handed at the end. He steered the
boat to the north of the island, where we lowered the
sail and row r ed in close to the shore. The rocks were
full of caves and fissures, but our guide displayed no
hesitation, and very quickly indicated a spot where
the craft could be beached.
Joe saw that she was properly fastened, and then, a
few yards off, Pollok pointed to one of the numerous
openings. ? Unless Ericson has been before us, we
shall find the loot inside,? he explained. ? The pearls
are in an iron box on a ledge and fastened by a strong
chain to a staple. The sea sweeps in occasionally, but
only when there?s a big storm.?
? Right-o,? exclaimed my chum. ? I?ll help you.
We?ll need that torch you brought, Mr. Braddock.?
The opening was so low that the explorers were
forced to crawl through on their hands and knees.
We waited outside, and presently heard the noise of


some apparently heavy object being pushed violently
across the floor.
? Cheerio,? cried Joe, ? here she comes.?
By dint of pushing and tugging and a little skilful
manoeuvring, we got the box on to the beach?an
iron coffer covered with weeds, and with a strong
rusty chain attached.
As we started on the homeward voyage, Braddock
said, ? You?ve done your share, Pollok, and now it?s
up to us to do ours.?
The freebooter offered no reply ; his eyes were fixed
on the box, and it was evident that he considered it
rough luck having to abandon his share of the con-
tents. Perhaps, from his point of view, it was.
We deposited our treasure in the agent?s house, and
after supper discussed the advisability of inspecting
it. Pollok was insistent that we should satisfy our-
selves as to the truth of his story, while the trader
frankly confessed his strong desire to examine the
pearls. The box was locked, but as he had plenty of
tools, this mattered little, and finally we decided to
open it.
Joe and I being entirely ignorant about pearls,
took little interest in the proceedings, but the other
three betrayed considerable excitement.
? It?s the finest collection in the South Seas,?
declared Pollok. ? Look at that beauty ! Did any
one ever see anything like it ? ?
I glanced casually at the agent. He was actually


gasping, his eyes burned, his face expressed greed and
lust and covetousness. For a moment or two his
appearance was simply horrible.
? It?s a double-button pearl, and must be nearly
a hundred grain,? he cried.
? Five thousand pounds the captain was offered
for that,? growled Pollok, ? and he wouldn?t let it
go?
?I?d have given eight myself,? Eastman said,
? and then been sure of a big profit. There?s another
and another, both double-button. And the size!
Good heavens! I?ve been handling pearls for a
quarter of a century, and never dreamed of such
wonders. Brisbane Paul showed wisdom in keeping
them off the market. There are half a dozen fortunes
in that box, Braddock.?
? That?s no concern of ours,? he replied quietly,
? except that we have to see it handed over to the
Government agents. Luckily there?s no chance of its
being stolen, or we might have to use our revolvers.
And these pearls have caused enough bloodshed
already.?
? Did you notice Eastman ? ? asked Joe, when we
reached our hut, ? that chap?d do murder for the sake
of those things. He?s just crazy about them.?
? He can?t do any harm,? I said.
?I?m not so sure, sonny ; he has plenty of guns and
can arm Pollok, and the other two chaps are coming
round. We?re only three, and the natives would
P.U.J. K


naturally stand by him. An accident to me, say,
would leave only two, and another accident would
leave one. And it wouldn?t be a desperate matter to
strike up a bargain with the pirates.?
I confess that, after seeing Eastman?s face, my
chum's words made a deep impression. The mere
sight of these marvellous pearls had inflamed him with
a passionate desire to possess them. As Joe declared,
there had been, for the space of a moment or so,
murder in the man s eyes. And he could easily gain
over Pollok and his two mates !
After the repulse of the attack, Joe and I had
occupied another hut, leaving our own for the accom-
modation of the wounded. If Eastman really har-
boured any criminal design on the pearls, having
his three possible accomplices all together would
be very useful, and I determined to deprive him
of this advantage.
Next morning, at breakfast, I pointed out the
wisdom of removing Pollok from his associates. ?If
he stays with them any longer,? I explained, ? there
wall be trouble when the boat arrives. They?ll want
to know why he isn?t a prisoner too ! ?
That s true,? Mr. Braddock admitted, ? but what
can we do ? ?
? Keep him out of their sight in the day-time, and
put him with Joe and me at night. Then, later on,
they won t be surprised to learn that he has met with
a fatal accident of some sort.?


? A capital idea. I?m glad you thought of it. 111
explain the matter to him presently.?
There was no discussion over the suggestion, which
seemed so natural that even the agent appeared
unconscious that any deeper motive lay behind it,
but Braddock somewhat startled me when we were
alone by saying, ? So you saw Eastman?s eyes ? ?
? Yes,? I replied simply, ? so did Shannon.?
? A decent chap, too, but the temptation is a
strong one. You see, he?s an expert in pearls, and,
as far as my judgment goes, there never was such a
marvellous collection as this of Brisbane Paul?s.
Eastman told me last night that the three double-
button ones he picked out will fetch ten thousand
apiece in the proper market. Our suspicions may be
groundless, but I shall be pleased when either his
vessel or a Government gunboat puts in. They?re
sadly behind the times here ; all these stations should
have been installed with wireless long ago.?
? Eastman says the ship is bringing the necessary
apparatus this voyage,? I remarked.
To my surprise, Pollok heartily approved of the new
arrangements, and settled down quite comfortably.
He took his meals with us, and never, as far as our
knowledge went, made any effort to visit his mates.
Nor did he appear to hold any but the most ordinary
communication with the agent, although in that
matter w r e must have been deceived.
For a fortnight life went by placidly; nothing


unusual happened, and the trading vessel was expected
within eight or ten days. Perhaps we grew careless
and our suspicions were lulled to sleep ; at any rate
the tension of watching was relaxed, very nearly to
our undoing. Joe saved us, and he admits himself
that it was only by a lucky fluke.
It is necessary, perhaps, to explain that my chum
slept nearest the door, Pollok on the far side, while I
occupied the middle of the floor. On that particular
night I was sleeping soundly, my loaded revolver close
to my right hand. It wanted perhaps fifteen minutes
or so to two o?clock when the report of a shot, and
the fall of some object across my face startled me, and
I jumped up excitedly.
? Steady on, old son,? cried Joe calmly. ? I?ve
dropped him. Get a light.?
In less than a minute we were staring at the dead
face of Andrew Pollok, by whose side, dropped from
the nerveless fingers, lay a long, slender knife which
neither of us had ever seen.
? Come on, he?ll keep,? exclaimed Joe brutally,
and we ran outside.
The agent stood with his back to us by the door
of his hut, and it seemed to me that three dusky figures
suddenly vanished. That may or may not have been
disordered imagination.
To my intense relief the door suddenly opened from
the inside, and Braddock, partly dressed but fully
armed, appeared.


? What is it ? ? he exclaimed quickly. ? What
has happened ? ?
? Pollok has met with his accident,? Joe replied;
? you had better step across ?and Mr. Eastman.
The dead man, shot squarely between the eyes, was
a grim sight, and we looked at him without speaking.
The agent?s face was ashen, and his forehead wet with
perspiration. All his body trembled, and I thought
he would have fallen.
? Something woke me,? Joe explained, ? something
or somebody bumping against the door, I fancy. And
then I saw Pollok crawling across the floor to Trevan.
He raised himself and seemed to be looking for
something. When I caught the shine of his knife I
understood he was searching for the proper spot to
strike. He found it at last and the blade suddenly
went up. Then I fired ; that?s all.?
? But,? said the agent, whose voice was very husky,
? what did he expect to get by it ? ?
? Intended to wipe us all out, perhaps,? said Joe
carelessly, ? and recover the pearls. You've had a
narrow squeak, Mr. Eastman.?
? I was just returning from the shore,? he stam-
mered ?and we all knew instinctively that he lied.
? One of the natives thought he heard a gun fired at
sea, but it proved to be a mistake.?
No one felt inclined to sleep again. We left the
dead man in peaceful possession of our hut, and sat
together in the agent?s house awaiting the dawn.


The inner history of that night was never explained,
but I pieced it together somewhat in this manner.
Pollok was to kill me with a blow of the knife, grab
my revolver, and shoot Joe before he was fully awake ;
at the same time his accomplice was to account for
Braddock. The wounded men would no doubt have
followed us speedily, leaving the two conspirators to
divide the spoils.
We had, however, no proof, and as with the passing
of Pollok the danger was at an end, we concluded
that to probe the tragedy more deeply was useless.
But, by the time the ship arrived, Eastman was a
broken man, and begged piteously to be relieved of
his duties. His appeals were fruitless ; the captain
was inexorable. He would report to the owners,
he said, and they would doubtless send a fresh man
on the next trip, but that was all he could do, and
as the vessel sailed away we left the unhappy trader
gibbering feverishly on the little pier.


CHAPTER XV
A STRANGE PAIR
The voyage to Sydney passed uneventfully, and
directly the vessel anchored we ?phoned to the head-
quarters of the police, who sent several officers to take
charge of the iron box and our two prisoners. They
had already suffered severely, and I could not help
thinking that it was hard lines on them having to be
punished all over again. Some people, however, are
always unlucky.
At the station the inspector informed us that we
should have to remain within call until after the trial,
but since the authorities paid all our expenses in no
niggardly fashion, that was no great hardship. The
proceedings dragged on for several weeks, when the
prisoners, chiefly on our evidence, were sentenced to
a long term of imprisonment. Afterwards, whether
from the owners of the pearls, or from the Government,
or from both, we received a handsome present for our
services, so that, as Joe remarked, it was well worth
while being marooned.
Mr. Braddock was going on to New Zealand, and
vve parted from him with much regret. He had


proved a good friend to us, and without his assistance
we could never have come through our adventures
as successfully as we had. It appeared that he had
some idea of settling in New Zealand, so it was
extremely unlikely that we should ever meet again.
? And now,? remarked Joe, as we turned back
from the harbour, ? it?s high time to settle our own
plans.?
We had no intention of staying in Sydney ; we were
merely birds of passage, making it a resting-place and
a starting point for our journey back to England.
Each of us had a nice little nest-egg in the Savings
Bank of Plymouth, and more than enough money to
return home in first-class style, and, if it pleased
us, to live at our ease for a time. But Joe was too
wise to be extravagant, and he pulled me up with
a jerk when I suggested taking rooms in one of
the hotels.
? Don?t be a fool,? he exclaimed roughly. ? Because
we?ve had a slice of luck and got a bit of money
together?s no reason why we should chuck it into the
gutter. We?ll live here cheap and go back steerage
if we can?t work our passage, which is really what I?m
hoping to do.?
??No working a passage for me,? I replied quickly.
? I?ve done two voyages and just missed seeing my
number up on each. I wasn't meant for a sailor. I
feel more like waiting till some one?s built a bridge
across to the old country.?


Joe laughed good-humouredly, it wasn?t easy to
get him riled. ? You re a mug, said he, the money
won?t last any too long, and meanwhile,? this very
determinedly, ? we?ll go slow.
For all his good-humour, one might as well have
argued with a mule as with my chum, so I raised no
more objections, and we found cheap diggings at a
sort of boarding-house in Little East Street. We
rented a bedroom, and had breakfast with the lodgers
downstairs, but our other meals were bought and
eaten outside.
We had as little as possible to do with the inmates
of the house. They were a motley collection, most of
them having a hard struggle to find the money for
their bed and breakfast. Two or three, I guessed,
could have told us a good deal about the inside of a
jail. However, they didn?t interfere with us; we
were two stranded sailor boys looking for a ship, and
as such not worth powder and shot.
But on the very first morning we noticed a young
fellow about my own age who looked completely out of
place in that strange medley. He was as poor as the
rest and dressed as shabbily, but something in his face
showed he did not belong to the gang of wasters
gathered in that dingy kitchen. For one thing he
was unmistakably English, both in appearance and
in speech, and his manner of speech was very
different from ours.
? Wonder how he got into this hole ? ? said Joe


quietly ; ? he?s no business here anyhow. It?s like
seeing a racing-yacht among a lot of coal-barges.?
? People dead,? I suggested, ? and he?s been left
stranded.?
Whatever the trouble, it had little outward effect
on the boy?s spirits. He had a soft, pleasant voice,
bright eyes, and a laughing mouth. He was evidently
a tremendous favourite, and even the surliest of the
growsy lodgers greeted him in a friendly way, calling
him Jimmy.
? Good-moming,? said Joe, as the boy was passing
us on his way out.
He stopped at once. ? Good-moming,? he replied,
?You are new-comers to Little East.?
? Yes, we?re staying here a few days until we get
a ship.?
? Ah, going back to England! What luck ! ? and
I fancied there was a certain wistfulness in his speech.
? It?s easy to tell you?re English.?
? Born and bred,? said Joe.
? And proud of it! ?
? And proud of it. And I wouldn?t mind wagering
that you?re English too ! ?
? You?d win,? he answered, with a laugh. ? I?ve
only been down under a few months. But I?ll be
English always, even if I stay here another fifty
years. It?s jolly good to have a chat with any one
from the old country. Perhaps I?ll see you again
this evening ! ?


? We?ve got a room on the second floor, first on
the landing.?
? Oh, you?re swanks ! absolutely !he exclaimed,
with a laugh, ? I?ve only a rabbit-hutch under the
roof; but that?s heaps better than dossing in the
common-room.
He shook hands with us both, promised to look us
up, and went away, still smiling.
? Grit,? said Joe, watching the disappearing figure,
? grit and pluck. But I?ll lay he s pretty
home-sick. Did you hear how he said What
luck ! ? ? ?
I nodded
? He?d give a lot to be going back with us. And
we?ve got enough of the ready to pay his passage,
Trevan.?
That was like Joe ! He?d cheerfully work his own
passage home, in order to save money, and then give
it away to a stranger. And of course I had to agree
with him.
? But go slow,? I advised ; ?he doesn?t seem to me
the sort of chap who?ll take favours easily?especially
in the shape of cash.?
However, he came to our room that evening, and
we talked England for hours. It was plain that he
couldn?t have enough of the subject: his eyes gleamed,
his breathing was fast and irregular, he poured out a
thousand eager questions, which we answered as well
as we could.


About ten o?clock he got up, still flushed and
excited. ? I?ll have to go now,? he said, ? though I
could sit here all night. And thanks for having me.
You can?t guess what it means to meet with folks from
the old country.?
? Come again,? exclaimed Joe heartily, " we'll be
glad to see you any time.?
The boy had said very little about himself, but we
gathered that his home was in the south, Joe guessed
Hampshire, and not very far from the coast. He was
well acquainted with that part of the country, and
his talk was mostly of the sea, the woods, and country
lanes and pleasant fields. Once he mentioned Win-
chester, but pulled himself up short as if the name
brought back unpleasant memories. Why he was
eking out a miserable existence in a Sydney slum
became a bigger puzzle than before.
? He may have been a fool,? was Joe?s comment,
? but there?s nothing crooked about him. Honest as
the day, he is.?
" And he?s been well brought up, been to a good
school and all that, yet here he is. Now, if you?d
found me in such a shanty it wouldn?t have been
surprising, but him ! ?
" There?s no accounting for these things,? observed
Joe, with a wise shake of the head. ?By the way,
he hasn?t gone upstairs, he?s gone into the next room.
But that?s none of our business.?
The following evening we had another visit from


Jimmy, who rather surprised us by asking if he might
bring his friend Brandon along.
? He?s got the room across the landing,? he said,
? and is English too. He never mixes with the
others, and is altogether a lonely sort of chap. A
little cheerful company may do him good.?
Brandon?s appearance did not impress us favourably.
He was a young man grown old long before his time,
very slightly built, with a dead pale crinkled skin,
deep-set sunken eyes that glowed like points of fire,
and prominent cheek bones. He was restless and
fidgety, and his eyes roamed round the room with a
questioning, half-frightened look. We had never seen
him in the kitchen, and it turned out that he never
went there. What he did inside or outside the lodging-
house no one knew: he kept his business strictly to
himself. Sometimes he was away before the other
inmates were up, but again he might not stir from his
room, which was always kept locked. He seemed
warmly attached to Jimmy, and one day, when we
had got to know him better, he told us a little
about our new acquaintance.
? The people here call him Jimmy,? he said, ? but
his real name ?no, I?ll leave him to tell you that, if
and when he chooses ; we came from England in the
same ship. He had stowed away, and when the captain
discovered him he had a rough time.?
? I know something of stowaways,? Joe interrupted,
? and this chap doesn?t look like one.?


?Yet he was. His story is rather painful. He
belongs to prosperous, well-to-do people, and ran
away from home.?
? That?s bad,? said Joe promptly. ? What had he
done ? ?
? Nothing ! but his father was one of those un-
pleasant people whose will must never be crossed. He
seems to have bullied and thrashed, and thrashed and
bullied until Jimmy, being a high-spirited boy, could
stand it no longer ; so he abandoned all his prospects
and disappeared. Just now he should be preparing
for one of the universities ; instead he?s earning barely
enough to starve on, and living in a Sydney doss-house.
Of course you won?t mention anything of this to him.?
" Couldn?t we persuade him to go home ? ? I asked ;
? we can pay for his passage.?
Brandon shook his head. ? I'm afraid he?ll never
go back. In spite of his cheerful manner he is very
bitter. He must have had a wretched time.?
? Poor old chap,? said Joe. ? I?ve heard of such
fathers, but have never met one. Why, when we were
at home my brother and I just worshipped our father.?
? But,? continued Brandon, ? by a pure accident
I think I?ve secured him a berth on a big ranch up
north. He?s fond of animals and will be far happier
in the country. We shall hear in two or three weeks ;
yes, we shall certainly know before long now.?
? Bully for you,? I cried, ? he?s far too good a chap
to be left stranded here.?


My simple words had a curious effect. Brandon
got up and went out, leaving us wondering at his
abrupt departure. Perhaps he objected to hearing
himself praised!
? That chap?s more of a mystery than Jimmy,? my
chum declared. ? There?s something queer about
him, but I can?t put a name to it. He?s as nervous
as a cat, and looks scared to death half the time.
And no one seems to know anything about him.?
? Skirving ? ?that was the landlord ?? calls him a
loony,? I said, ? but he pays his rent and gives no
trouble. Anyway we shall be done with him soon,
because I?m off. I?m altogether fed up hanging around
here.?
? Another week,? my chum urged, ? and if nothing
turns up by then we?ll book a berth in the first ship
sailing. Though I?d rather save the passage money
all the same.?
So that matter was settled, and we were about to
turn in when some one knocked at the door, and Jimmy,
looking excited and uneasy, put his head inside.
? Has Mr. Brandon been here ?? he asked; ?he
isn?t in his room, and I expected to meet him.?
?He left us an hour ago. What?s the trouble ?
? I don?t know.? The boy sat down on the edge
of the bed. ? I?m always anxious when he disappears.
He?s a queer chap, but he?s done heaps of things for
me. I should have gone under for keeps if it hadn?t
been for him.?


? Don?t worry, he?ll turn up all right. Gone for a
stroll perhaps. You?ll see him again in the morning.?
My attempt to cheer the boy was wasted. ?If I
knew where to look for him ! but I haven?t the faintest
notion. I never know where he goes. And sometimes
I?m afraid ?you understand.?
Joe nodded. ?You stay with us for a bit: we
shall hear him come in presently. There?s no sense in
cruising around the streets without a chart. You?d
be almost bound to miss him.?
This was such a common-sense view that Jimmy sat
down, but during the next hour he went twenty times
to Brandon?s room, only to find that he had not
returned. I thought the youngster was making a
lot of fuss about nothing : after all, the affair was
very simple. The man had gone out on his own
business or pleasure and would return when it suited
him. It seemed silly to make a mystery out of such
a commonplace incident. But the boy?s obvious
excitement and the dreary waiting depressed me,
and I began presently to imagine all sorts of weird
and disagreeable things.
About two o?clock in the morning we heard some
one stumbling up the stairs with the unsteady move-
ments of a drunken man. Jimmy flung the door
wide open and rushed out, while I followed close on
his heels. By the light from the room I saw Brandon
as he reached the landing, and never want to see a
similar sight again.


The man was bareheaded; his hair as wet as if
it had been soused in water. His forehead was wet,
too, and beads of perspiration stood in the crinkles
of his skin, which had turned a dirty yellow colour.
His bps, though making no sound, moved incessantly ;
his limbs tottered as if unable to support his slight
frame, and he seemed on the verge of collapse. But
his eyes ! They burned like the eyes of a wild beast
and yet without expression. I shuddered at the sight
of them.
Catching sight of Jimmy, he broke into a low
moaning. The boy would have held him but Brandon
pushed him away. ?He is here,? he wailed like a
child, ? in the street, watching, watching and waiting.?
With that, all strength left him and he would have
fallen but that we caught him. Jimmy took a key from
his pocket and opened the door, so that Joe and I
could cany the unconscious body into the room and
lay it on the bed.
? Better call in a doctor,? Joe advised, but the boy
shook his head.
? I can manage,? he said; ?he wouldn?t like to
have any one else here. And, and,? haltingly, ?he
may talk, you see,?
? All right,? replied Joe, ? call us up if you need
help.?
P.U.J.


CHAPTER XVI
JOE HEARS A STRANGE YARN
Did you notice his face ? ? I asked, when we had
returned to our room and closed the door. It was
a stupid question, but I felt bound to say some-
thing.
? Made me think of a mess-mate we lost off
Pernambuco. Fell overboard, and a shark made a
straight line for him before we could lower a boat.
I saw fear and terror then, but it was a wholesome
sort of fear: the chap knew what was coming and
understood the horror of it, but Brandon?s fear was
of another kind. I can?t explain very well, but it
didn t seem as if some one had threatened to murder
him or anything like that. More as if he?d seen a
ghost that he didn?t expect to see.?
Almost as if he?d been threatened by a dead
man,? I suggested.
That s it, Trevan, that?s what I was trying to
get at. Some awful thing that the poor beggar
couldn t understand. ' Watching,? he said, * watching
and waiting.? He mayn?t be very plucky?l don?t
know?but he wouldn?t have wailed in that fashion


just because some fellow was waiting a chance to cut
his throat or bash his head in.?
?He recognised the ghost too ! And there?s another
thing, Joe ! It looks as if Jimmy has a pretty cute
idea of what the trouble is. Wouldn?t have a doctor
because Brandon might talk ! Why shouldn?t he talk,
if there?s nothing shady to come out ? ?
? That?s so,? Joe admitted reluctantly, ? but what-
ever the upshot is, I?ll wager there?s nothing crooked
about Jimmy. He may know or fancy he knows the
fellow?s secret, but if there?s any dirty work, he isn?t
mixed up in it. Brandon?s been good to him, and
he?s grateful, that?s all. Of course the boy?ll stand
by him, he's bound to do that.?
We got into bed and tried to sleep, but there was
little sleep for me. The incident haunted me. That
there was some mystery seemed certain, but what ?
The man had been no more restless than usual; he
had talked sensibly and reasonably, and had told us
Jimmy?s story in a sympathising way. It was only
when I praised him for being good to the boy that he
jumped up abruptly and went off without a word,
A more alert and experienced person would no doubt
have picked up the trail at once, but I was only a
boy myself, with little education and no ability to
see through a stone wall.
Jimmy knocked at the door just as we finished
dressing. It was evident he had not taken off his
clothes, nor slept, and he looked very worried and


perplexed. There was no need to ask what kind of
night he had spent.
" Mr. Brandon?s sleeping now,? he explained, ? but
it?s been pretty awful. Some one?s frightened him
nearly to death, and all the first part of the night
he kept harping on my father being in the street
watching him.?
? Did he know your father ? ?
? Never saw him in his life, that?s the odd part of
it. But I think,? with a deep sigh of relief, ? that
the worst is over now. And by the way, you?ll oblige
me by not mentioning the subject to him. He doesn?t
remember you saw him.?
? Right-o,? replied Joe, and then, ? but look here,
sonny, this is awkward for you. I understand you?ve
your living to earn, and how can you do that and wait
on this chap at the same time ? I should advise
calling in the proper authorities, if there are any.?
Oh, he 11 be all right after a sound sleep, but in
any case I?m bound to see him through. It?s only
fair, for he?s been jolly good to me.?
? I?ll bring your breakfast,? said Joe ; ? that will
freshen you up. And if you want any help you?ve
only to ask for it.?
? Thanks,? replied Jimmy heartily, ? but I guess
I can manage.?
As it chanced, the sick man made a rapid recovery.
He still trembled a good deal when we met him, but
the hunted look had gone from his eyes, and he spoke


rationally on ordinary topics, as if nothing unusual
had occurred. Nevertheless, the strange incident had
so strongly impressed both Joe and me, that we
couldn?t get it out of our minds.
? Queer,? said Joe, ? what people will do and say
when they?re a bit wrong in the head. Now what
on earth made this chap think of Jimmy?s father when
he had never met him ? And w r hy should he be so
terribly scared ? ?
? He?s pretty considerably run down,? I replied,
? and his brain isn?t altogether steady. Then he?d
been speaking pretty freely of the old bounder, and
that excited him.?
?Yes, but
? Don?t talk to the man at the wheel. I take it
that he went wandering all over the town. Then he?d
be worn out, and famished for want of food, and no
doubt a little light-headed into the bargain. Probably
he caught a glimpse of some night-prowler on the
look-out for easy money and that finished him.?
? It didn?t put that awful look into his eyes,
though,? Joe insisted stubbornly, ? Besides, how
could he recognise a man he hadn?t seen ? Tell me
that, sharp-shins.?
I didn?t attempt to answer the question, it was
unanswerable ?so far as I was concerned?and Joe
chuckled. Obviously some one, intentionally or not.
had frightened the fellow clean out of his wits, but
who was it ?


The next two days we were busy dancing at the
heels of those who go down to the sea in ships, or
perhaps more strictly those who send other people
there, and we saw little of either Brandon or Jimmy;
but on the Friday something happened that whetted
our curiosity immensely. Joe had an appointment
with a man in town, and did not return till nearly
four o?clock.
? Any luck ? ? I asked, for he was still bent on
working his passage home.
? None,? he replied gloomily, " but I?ve a curious
yam to spin you.?
? Fire away,? I said, sitting down on the edge of
the bed ?for we were in our own room ?and preparing
to listen.
? It?s about that chap yonder,? speaking very
quietly ; ?is he in ? ?
? He may be, but I haven?t heard him.?
? When I?d finished with old Swanson, or he with
me, I went into that eating-house in Silver Street for
a bite : you know the place.?
I nodded. ? Throwing away your money recklessly,
Joe,? I said banteringly.
? It is a bit above us,? he admitted, ? but I was
peckish and didn?t want to go farther. Anyhow, I
turned in there.?
? That means a glass of milk and a biscuit for
dinner to-morrow.?
Taking no notice of my chaff he continued seriously,


JOE HEARS A STRANGE YARN 167
? It was after the rush time and the room was nearly
empty, but two men were sitting at the next table to
mine. They had finished their meal and were chatting
over their coffee and cigs. I didn t pay any attention
till something one of them said made me prick up my
ears. ? You can?t mistake him,? the fellow was saying ;
* looks as if he?d been buried for a century and dug
up again. A thin wisp of a chap ; he?d crumple up if
you put your hand on him heavily.? ?
? Brandon ! ? I exclaimed impetuously.
" That?s what I thought. ' What?s his name ? ?
asked the second man.
? The one who spoke first laughed and shrugged
his shoulders. ? Used to call himself Goodchild, I
believe, but what?s a name ? there?s nothing in that;
he?s got thousands to choose from. But you can?t
mistake him, and ?twill pay you to keep your eyes
open. Only I don?t want any of the Sydney force
butting in ; this is my special job.? There was a good
deal more talk, but that?s about all I heard. What
d?you make of it ? ?
? What were the men like ? ?
? The first was a tall, fair-haired chap, well dressed,
but not exactly what you?d call a gentleman perhaps.
Pretty flush of money, I?d say. Enough to be going
on with anyhow. Keen as a hawk, and clever, too, by
the look of him.?
? English ? ?
?No doubt of that. Not long landed, I?d fancy.?


? And the other ? ?
? Native bom. Might be a doctor or lawyer down
on his luck, or almost anything.?
? Hum,? said I, ? this is giving a queer turn to
things. It?s clear they were talking about Brandon,?
? Certain ; there?s no getting away from that.?
? And in England his name was Goodchild. And
here?s a man come out specially from England to
look for him.?
? He may be one of those detectives,? Joe suggested
doubtfully.
?He certainly is,? I exclaimed confidently. ? The
very fact of his wanting the Sydney police kept out
of the business proves so much. As he said, it?s his
special job and he means to have all the credit. Be-
sides, we know Brandon?s living under some kind of
a cloud.?
? I wonder what he?s wanted for ? ?
? Embezzlement or forgery, or something of the
sort, no doubt.?
After that we sat in silence gazing at one another,
each occupied with the same thought. What ought
we to do ? Give the man up to the law was our first
impulse. Really he was little more than a stranger
to us, and it certainly wasn?t our duty to shield a
criminal. If he had done wrong he must suffer the
consequences. Then, remembering Jimmy, we hesi-
tated. Brandon had acted generously in befriending
the boy, and that was to his credit. His arrest would


be a terrible blow to Jimmy. It was a decidedly
complicated affair.
" It isn?t our business,? said Joe at length. ? it?s
between Brandon and the detective; we?re only
lookers-on. I?m sorry for Jimmy, of course ?
? So am I.?
? But what can we do ? Brandon must lie on the
bed he?s made.?
? If we gave him a hint,? I suggested, ? he might
slip away.?
? Or have another fit.?
From what we had already seen this was very
probable ; the man who had collapsed at a shadow
would show little bravery against a real flesh and
blood detective. But this, as my chum remarked,
didn?t help us very much.
We discussed the matter a long time, finally
deciding to talk it over with Jimmy and to be guided
by his advice. By this means, too, we should soften
the shock which was bound to come when his friend
was marched off to jail. Fortunately, or unfortunately,
the boy arrived shortly afterwards, and Joe, without
any beating about the bush, repeated the story he
had told me. To our surprise Jimmy was so little
impressed that he laughed outright.
? I?m sorry,? he exclaimed the next instant, ? but
the idea of a detective being after poor old Brandon
is too rich. You?re quite certain it was a detective
you heard talking.?


? Well,? replied Joe sturdily, ? he?s come all the
way from England, and he doesn?t want the Sydney
police informed, because it?s his job. And Brandon?s
going under a false name looks fishy by itself.?
? There might be a dozen good reasons for that.
But what makes you so sure of his being the wanted
man ? ?
? There?s no doubt about that, not the least bit.
This English stranger drew a speaking likeness of him.
The only question is whether he?s to be told what I?ve
heard.?
Jimmy did not hesitate a minute in his answer,
but spoke with the utmost confidence, ?Tell him
everything,? he exclaimed, ?it won?t make the
slightest difference. If any one wants him, he?ll be
here, he won?t try to run away. Either you?ve made
a mistake or the detective?s on a false scent. I?m as
sure of Mr. Brandon as I am of myself.?
?I?ll tell him then,? said Joe, ? and I hope you?ll
be proved right. And the sooner he hears the yarn
the better for everybody.?
? He?s in his room, I?ll ask him to come.?
Except for a moment or two on that eventful
night, we had not been inside the room; it was
always kept locked, and neither Joe nor I had the
faintest idea of what Brandon did there. This, from
the first, had seemed a trifle mysterious, and now our
suspicions were redoubled. A man who had nothing
to hide would hardly take such precautions to


JOE HEARS A STRANGE YARN 171
keep his fellow-lodgers on the wrong side of the
door.
At the end of two or three minutes Jimmy returned
alone. ? He?s busy at present,? he explained, ? but
will come in about an hour. Of course I didn?t tell
him anything. Now let?s talk of something more
agreeable. Have you got a ship yet ? ?
?No luck,? replied Joe. ? I?m afraid we?ll have
to return as passengers, and that will suit Trevan
down to the ground.?


CHAPTER XVII
A STARTLING TRANSFORMATION
We sat chatting for nearly two hours ?on every
subject under the sun except the one that interested us
so keenly?before we heard Brandon lock his door
and cross the landing. He had recovered from his
mysterious fright, except that his eyes, always rest-
less, had now taken on a sly and furtive look, and
occasionally one caught him glancing hurriedly over
his shoulder. He and Joe sat in our only two chairs,
Jimmy and I on the edge of the bed.
? I heard a queer conversation this afternoon,?
Joe began, ? which all of us think you ought to know.
Maybe it?s of no importance, but you?re the best judge
of that.?
I watched him narrowly as Joe proceeded with his
story. He sat perfectly still and made no remarks,
but his skin became of an even more ghastly tint,
and deep fear looked from his eyes. He started
slightly at the name of Goodchild, but gave no other
sign. Still, it was easy to see that the yam made a
deep impression on him, and I felt sure that Joe was
right. There was some grim secret in the man?s past,
a secret that was in danger of being brought to light.


For some minutes after the finish of the story he
sat breathing heavily?he was the very picture of a
hunted man brought to bay.
Then he said jerkily, ? It?s very good of you,
Shannon, to tell me what you?ve heard, but there
must be some stupid mistake. This detective from
England now, what was he like ? ?
As Joe described minutely the fair-haired stranger
a remarkable change came over our visitor. His fear
remained, but it was of a different kind. He pulled
himself together, and put what seemed to me an
extraordinary question.
? Why do you tell me all this ? ? he asked. ?If
I am Goodchild I am a criminal, or at least a suspected
criminal, with the police on my track, and your
warning may assist me to escape.?
My chum replied bluntly, almost coarsely, ? Look
here, Brandon, I care nothing about you one way or
another, but Jimmy trusts you thoroughly, says you?re
a white man all through.?
I shall never forget the intense look that Brandon
gave the boy, though I cannot describe it ?I don?t
believe the most famous writer living could do so
properly.
" That?s one thing,? Joe continued, ? and the
other's almost on the same lines. If you?re in danger
of being arrested?mind, I don?t say you are ?then
for the boy?s sake I?ve given you a chance to cut and
run. I don?t want to see you dragged to prison.


Whether you?re innocent or guilty, you?ve done the
square thing by him, and he?s fond of you.?
Jimmy jumped up. ? This is all rubbish,? he
cried ; ?of course Mr. Brandon?s innocent, I?d stake
my life on that. There's a stupid blunder somewhere
or other, and w r e?ll get it cleared up.?
For a moment the man flushed ?it was the first
time I had seen blood show through his skin ?then to
our consternation he covered his face with his hands
and sobbed like a child. We could only look on in
wonder and amazement. When at length he got up
Jimmy would have accompanied him to his room,
but he preferred to be alone.
?I?m not going to run away,? he said shakily, and
yet with a certain strain of firmness. ? I have no
cause for hiding from your detective.?
? I told you so,? exclaimed the boy triumphantly.
? He?s as innocent of any crime as we are.?
? He certainly didn?t seem afraid of the detective
discovering him,? I admitted, ? and I?m very glad
on your account.?
Jimmy gripped our hands hard. ? You?re two
bricks,? he exclaimed, ? and I?m grateful.?
My chum offered no opinion till the boy had gone,
then he exclaimed with a light laugh, ? You?ll have
to get up pretty early in the morning, Trevan, if you
want to see Brandon again.?
? Do you think he?ll bolt ? ?
? Sure of it,? confidently.


Now, I wasn?t so sure ; indeed, turning the matter
over in my mind I hardly felt sure of anything, except
that once upon a time he had gone by the name of
Goodchild. Beyond that I was altogether puzzled
He had listened to Joe?s yam in an agony of dread,
but had recovered himself most marvellously. Although
greatly agitated he was no longer despairing, and
something or other had given him a certain amount
of confidence. Perhaps he had thought out a plan ?
in some respects he seemed remarkably clever ?for
tricking the man who was on his track. What im-
pressed me, particularly, however, was the maimer in
which he declared there was no cause for his running
away, and in spite of Joe I felt inclined to believe that
he would not leave Little East Street. But I admit
frankly that I could not make head or tail erf the
affair. It is certain that I should never gain any
great reputation as a skilful detective.
Next morning we went down to the kitchen filled
with curiosity. Had the bird flown ? Of course we
had not dared to knock at his door. Jimmy was
already in his place, and the cheerful smile with which
he greeted us answered our unspoken question : Bran-
don had not lied ; he was staying to face the music.
I felt just a little surprised myself, but Joe was
absolutely incredulous. This knocked his theory all
to pieces : either the man must be innocent or a super-
rogue ! During the morning he added to our bewilder-
ment by going openly into the town, without the


least attempt at concealment. And he had a pur-
poseful air with him, as if he had resolved what to
do and how to do it.
? Doesn?t look much like a guilty man,? I suggested.
Joe whistled. ? That knocks me out,? he confessed.
? A fellow wanted by the police doesn?t stroll around
the streets in broad daylight. Well, I?m glad I was
wrong, though I don?t understand it. I suppose,?
with a chuckle, ? I couldn?t have been dreaming.?
" I'd like to see him and the detective meet,? I
said, ? it ought to provide a sensation.?
? Whatever the upshot is, he will be arrested,?
Joe declared, ? and he must know that.?
We talked a good deal more to very little purpose,
and then an incident occurred which for the time
swept the other affair clean out of our heads. It came
about in a very simple way. During our walk I
happened to buy a London weekly newspaper and
carried it home. It was lying on the table when
Jimmy entered, and he picked it up eagerly.
? It isn?t often I see a paper from the old country,?
said he, ? it?s like a whiff straight from home,? and he
began scanning the news, while Joe and I sat chatting.
Presently the boy uttered a low cry and let the paper
drop. His face had gone very white, and he was
trembling violently.
" What?s the matter ? ? I asked, crossing over to
him, ? are you ill ? ?
In answer he pointed to the paper. ?My father,??


he jerked out, ? dead! And I had never heard
of it?
Picking up the paper I glanced at the part he had
been reading. This was the startling paragraph I
read. ? A young man has been detained on suspicion
in connection with the death of the late Sir Henry
Cummings. The baronet, it will be remembered, was
shot in an encounter with burglars, who succeeded in
getting away with a rich haul, including a very valuable
necklace, a family heirloom. The police are believed
to attach considerable importance to the present
arrest.?
This was an astonishing revelation, but I had no
leisure to think over the matter just then. ? Have
you never written home ? ? I asked.
?No,? he replied, rather shamefacedly.
? And your mother is alive and doesn?t know what
has become of you ? ?
? That?s the terrible part of it,? he said, and the
tears came into his eyes.
? You?ll have to cable at once,? exclaimed Joe ;
? we?ve enough money for that and for your passage
home. You can pay us back afterwards. Now, off
with you and cable whatever you think best, and
don?t bother about the cost.?
Jimmy tried to express his thanks, but Joe pushed
him toward the door, saying, ? Never mind that;
go and send your message. And to-morrow you can
send a letter.?
p.u.j. M


? If his father was a baronet,? said I, ? he?ll be Sir
Somebody now, won?t he ? ?
? Don?t know and don?t care,? Joe responded
roughly. "Pm thinking of the woman crying her eyes
out over there in England. The young skunk ought
to have written to her, even if he wouldn?t write to
his father.
?I?m glad he didn?t explain wdiy he ran away, he
must have been pretty full of it when he told Brandon.
And between you and me, I?m not sorry that he?ll have
to make a clean cut from the man.?
Nothing of particular importance happened during
the next two or three days, and then Jimmy came to
us with a long cable. The message naturally contained
few details, but we gathered from it that Sir Henry
had been shot on the very night that his son had left
home, and further that a sum of money was being
despatched to the National Bank.
? I?ll have to go back,? he said, ? though I?m sorry
to leave Brandon. I?ve tried to get him to return
with me, but he prefers staying in Sydney. He?s
very much cut up.?
? Has he met the detective yet ? ?
?No, that affair seems to have fizzled out, and I
fancy he isn?t taking any more notice of it. By the
way, you?ll come with me, of course, and let me get
your berths.?
Joe shook his head. ? Things are altered now,?
said he. ?We always knew you were in a different


class from us, though it was all right as long as you
were just a lodger in Little East Street. But common
sailor boys don?t chum in with baronets. WeTe going
home steerage.?
? But I want you,? the boy exclaimed; ? you?ve
been true friends to me, and I?m not the sort of cad
to drop you because I?ve got a handle to my name.
I?m proud to be your friend, Shannon, and Trevan?s.
I?ll be miserable if you turn me down now.?
He spoke in evident sincerity, but Joe remained
stubborn. ? We?ll be glad to hear how you go on,?
said he, ? and to see you now and again, perhaps, but
anything more than that would be sheer foolishness.
You must see for yourself that we can?t go into
your world. We?d be a regular laughing-stock to
your friends.?
Jimmy, though keenly disappointed, did not press
the point, and presently returned to the tragedy of
his father?s death.
? My father was an utterly fearless man,? he said,
? who wouldn?t have given way to a dozen burglars.
They must have made their haul before he interrupted
them.?
? It?s queer you should have missed reading about
it in the papers.?
?In one way but not in another. I wandered about
for days, mostly in the country districts, and never
saw a paper. When I got to London I went straight
to the docks, and arranged with a friendly sailor to


stow me away on the Princess Anne. I had only a
few shillings, you see, not nearly enough to pay for
a berth.?
? Well,? observed Joe, ? you?ve had a fairly rough
experience, but ?twill be something to look back on
later. You won?t be any the worse for it.?
This was true enough, but, thinking of some of
the characters he had been forced to mix with in
Little East Street, I shuddered at what might have
happened. Most boys would have been ruined for life,
but Jimmy was straight and clean all through, and
I don?t believe it was in him to go wrong.
On one point he was very determined?he declined
stoutly to move into a hotel. ? No,? said he, ? I?ll be
leaving in a week or tw r o, and till then I?ll stay in my
attic. For one thing,? and he lowered his voice,
? I?m uneasy about Brandon. He?s been very strange
the last day or tw r o. Naturally he?s glad of the change
for me, but he?s going to feel the parting badly,?
He washed us good-night, and we heard him knock
at Brandon?s door and say a few words, before passing
on to climb the rickety stair wdiich led to his attic.


CHAPTER XVIII
THE MYSTERY DEEPENS
My chum by now had abandoned the idea of working
his passage home. Scores of qualified men, not a
few with a mate?s papers in their pockets, haunted the
docks in the vain hope of getting a ship, ready to do
anything or go anywhere for the sake of a bare living,
and there was nothing for them. Gaunt and half-
starved many looked, as if they had forgotten what
a square meal was like.
? Twould be a shabby trick to rob one of those
poor chaps of a job when we?ve got money in the
bank and in our pockets,? Joe said, ? but we shan?t
rob anybody by travelling steerage.?
? Have it your own way,? I replied, ? let?s book
berths in the first ship sailing. I?m not keen on the
voyage, but I?m keen on getting home,? which perhaps
was strange, since I had no home in England any more
than in another country. But England was England
to me, though I owed her little.
Next morning accordingly we went to one of the
shipping offices, secured berths in the S.S. Crocodile ,
paid our deposits, and made the necessary arrange-
ments. Then we strolled along in search of a decent


eating-house, when Joe, clutching my arm suddenly,
whispered, ? Don?t look up too quickly, but here?s
the Sydney joker I told you of coming.?
As Joe had already remarked, the inquiry agent
might have been in almost any line of business. He
was a young man, thin-lipped, with keen, roving eyes,
and a crafty face ; his clothes were shabby but well
brushed, and, altogether, he had the appearance of
a capable person down on his luck.
It gave me rather a shock to meet him, since I had
almost come round to Jimmy?s opinion that the affair
had fizzled out; but somehow, though perhaps the
feeling was stupid, at the sight of the man in the
flesh, I had a sense of uneasiness.
?That?s the chap,? said Joe again, when he had passed.
? Well, what of it ? I asked irritably. ?If he?s
after Brandon he must be a stupid bungler not to have
found him yet. And anyhow it?s nothing to do with
us. Brandon?s there if any one wants him. I reckon
you hit on a mare?s nest, Joe.?
He smiled good-humouredly. ? Maybe and maybe
not; those who live longest will see most.?
Our second sensation that day lay in discovering
the shabbily dressed stranger in Little East Street.
He was talking very earnestly to Morgan, a Yankee
quay lumper, and before they had noticed us Joe
jerked me back.
?No need for the joker to know we live in the
same house,?? he said, ? we?ll wait till he?s gone.?


Though scarcely understanding my companion?s
motive, I drew back and waited. For perhaps ten
minutes longer the two remained in conversation, and
then the agent, slipping some silver into Morgan?s
hand, walked away. From the expression of his face
I gathered that he was perfectly satisfied with the
result of his investigations.
? He?s been pumping Morgan and learned what he
wanted to know,? I remarked.
Joe nodded. " Things will go with a hum now,?
said he briskly.
Neither of us knew what we expected to happen,
but both were convinced that it would be something
startling, probably Brandon?s arrest and removal to
prison. The detective, learning that his man had
been run to earth, would lose no time in making his
plans. In the ordinary course of things he would have
obtained the assistance of the Sydney police, but
playing a lone hand he was bound to act with a
certain amount of caution. Still, it was worth while
taking a risk, since success would bring him all the
glory, and perhaps a substantial reward.
We sat up late that evening listening eagerly for
any unusual sounds. However, as nothing happened
to disturb the house, about two o?clock we turned in,
and, being tired, slept soundly. We went down to
breakfast late ; Jimmy had gone out, but from the
talk and everyday appearance of the lodgers we
gathered that the night had passed quietly.


? I can?t understand the business at all,? said Joe.
? I figured that the detective would have been after
him like a shark grabbing at a man?s leg.?
It certainly seemed mysterious, and even more so
when, early in the evening, the shabby-looking
stranger reappeared, bringing the detective with him.
They stood in a doorway opposite the house, and the
agent pointed out Brandon?s room, having no doubt
previously wormed the information out of Morgan.
We watched them perhaps five minutes, when to our
intense astonishment they quietly left the street.
? What's the game now ? ? asked Joe, as we stood
looking at one another blankly.
? There?s some dodge behind it,? I replied in an
off-hand manner ; ? these detectives have their own
little tricks ; they don?t need you and me to teach
?em their trade.?
On being informed of what we had seen, Jimmy
was greatly astonished. The tremendous change in
his own life and his implicit confidence in his friend
had driven Joe?s startling story from his mind, and
he never expected to hear anything further of it.
? It may be advisable to tell Brandon,? I suggested,
but to this at first he showed some unwillingness,
saying that he was anxious not to add to his worries.
However, he finally consented, and on his return
plunged us into still deeper surprise.
? Have you told him ? ? I asked.
?Yes,? he replied brightly.


? How did he take it ? ?
?He wasn?t worried the least bit. He?s tremen-
dously busy, hardly giving himself time to eat and
sleep ; but he asked me to keep watch and report
to him if the men return. He still thinks there?s some
stupid mistake, and intends to have the matter out
with them.?
The situation had become more complicated than
ever; frankly, we could make nothing of it. Here
was a wanted man actually proposing to meet the
officer sent to arrest him ! Our suspicions of his
guilt were entirely unfounded, or he was playing a
tremendous piece of bluff, which scarcely seemed
likely.
We hung about the house all next day in a state of
tense excitement, but dusk had settled down before
the strangers appeared again. I had been watching
at the street comer, and hurried back. Jimmy, who
seemed quite pleased, immediately went off with the
information, and in a few minutes our man of mystery
emerged from his room. He walked firmly, with a
grim and distinctly unusual expression in his fiery
eyes. He descended the stairs, and we followed at a
distance, curious to witness what happened.
? He isn?t frightened now at all events,? Joe whis-
pered, and I readily agreed. In truth he looked much
more like going to arrest a man than to be arrested.
He paused for a moment at the door as if to make
certain of the stranger?s whereabouts, and then crossed


the street with a seeming confidence that puzzled us
completely. Naturally we were unable to hear any-
thing of the conversation, and it was only by straining
our eyes that we saw what occurred.
The first act in the drama, so to say, was in itself
an extraordinary one. The strangers were obviously
astounded by the unexpected appearance of the person
they wanted, but the detective stepped from the
doorway with the intention, we supposed, of seizing
him. Without taking the least notice, Brandon
advanced to the inquiry agent, said something to
him?very sharply, it appeared to us ?and pointed
with a dramatic gesture down the street. The man,
with scarcely any hesitation, obeyed his order and
slunk away. This opening was entirely out of keeping
with our expectations, and we watched fascinated for
the next act.
The two now left facing each other presented a
startling contrast?the detective, big, strong, full of
life and vigour; Brandon, frail, shrunken, and
emaciated. Yet again we noticed that his movements
were not those of a frightened man.
The detective began the conversation, the other
replied, and they talked together for nearly ten
minutes. No sign of heat or anger was shown on
either side ; the discussion might have been between
two business men engaged in a deal, and when it
ended the big fellow walked away. We rubbed our
eyes, doubting if we had seen properly.


Directly the detective disappeared Brandon returned.
His walk was a little less steady, and his face was
wet with perspiration. I thought he intended to pass
us without a word, but suddenly turning toward
Joe, he said, with a shaky laugh, ? Your detective
won?t take me to England with him, Shannon,
after all. As I said from the first it was a stupid
blunder, and now I can go on with my work in
peace.?
He beckoned to Jimmy to accompany him, and the
pair passed into the house together, leaving us, as
Joe described it, ? flabbergasted.?
On the face of things he had certainly discovered a
mare?s nest, but both of us had an uneasy feeling that
the real mystery remained unexplained. The detec-
tive had not travelled all those thousands of miles
for the sake of his health ; he had come in search of
some one whose description fitted in exactly with that
of Brandon. He had found his man and had not
made the slightest attempt to arrest him. That fact
alone was more than sufficient to puzzle us.
The affair did not actually concern us ; but it was
so strange and perplexing, so absolutely baffling, that
we continued discussing it eagerly long after reaching
our room.
? We aren?t clever enough to get to the bottom of
it,? said my chum ; ? if we were we?d find something
to startle us. Brandon?s done a big bluff of some kind,
though I can?t guess what it is.?


? Don?t be silly,? I returned; ?if he?s really
Goodchild he couldn?t fool a detective, ?specially one
sent to arrest him. Anyhow, we?re off to England in
a week or two, so what does it matter to us ? ?
Then Joe surprised me. ? We?ll have to forfeit our
deposit,? he said stubbornly, ? because I?m a fixture
here until I?ve seen this thing through. You can call
me an obstinate mule or whatever else comes into your
head, but I?m going to stay.?
? What on earth can you do ? ?
? I don?t know ; wait for something to turn up, I
suppose.?
I tried hard to argue him out of his decision. I
coaxed and blustered, dwelt particularly on the loss
of his deposit, and did no more than waste my breath.
His sudden whim was the more astonishing, because
he made it a rule to keep out of other people?s business,
but this puzzle gripped him firmly. Naturally it made
a stronger appeal to him than to me, because he had
heard the conversation in the eating-house and felt
so sure of his ground.
Presently entering the house we went upstairs to
our room. We continued talking over the problem
for an hour or so, and then my chum, removing his
boots, opened the door and stole cautiously out on
to the landing. He returned at the end of a quarter
of an hour, and in reply to my question announced
that he had been listening outside the locked room.
? The chap?s pacing to and fro as restlessly as a


caged tiger and talking to himself,? he said. ? Once
or twice he laughed aloud, not a pleasant laugh?more
like that of a madman. He?s been shaken up badly.
There?s mischief of some sort on foot.?
? Oh, well,? said I, not in the best of tempers, ? it?s
his funeral. Why should we worry ? ?
Nevertheless, I shared a little of Joe?s uneasiness,
and before going to breakfast next morning crossed
the landing to Brandon?s room. Everything was
profoundly quiet and I concluded that he was either
sleeping or dead.
Jimmy, who joined us at table, was in good spirits.
The incident of the previous evening had eased his
mind, and removed his chief objection to returning
to England immediately. He felt now that he could
leave his friend safely. He made no allusion to our
all returning together, but mentioned that he was
sailing in the Crocodile, and supposed that we should
be making an early start too.
? We?ve a little business to finish first,? Joe replied,
? but it isn?t likely to take long.?
? Come and see me directly you get back,? Jimmy
said pleasantly, and naturally we gave him our
promise.
He left us shortly after breakfast to interview the
manager of the bank, and we saw no more of him that
day. Neither was Brandon visible, and after staying
in the neighbourhood until evening, we decided to
spend an hour or two in town.


CHAPTER XIX
A PUZZLING TRAGEDY
It wanted about a quarter of an hour to midnight on
our return to Little East Street, which was quiet and
deserted. We had nearly reached the lodging-house
when some one closely muffled up suddenly came out.
He stood a moment glancing nervously along the
street, then with a swift movement crossed the road
and sheltered in a doorway. At the first sight of him
Joe and I had instinctively backed into the shadow
of the w r all.
? Brandon ! ? said my companion in a whisper.
? What?s his new game ? ?
? Has an appointment with the detective, perhaps."
I spoke in joking fashion, but Joe received the
suggestion seriously. ? Shouldn?t be surprised,?? he
muttered; ? shouldn?t be surprised at anything, for
that matter. We?ll stay here and watch, I?m bent on
finding out what all this means.?
Ten minutes passed and nothing happened, but at
the end of another five our patience was in part
rewarded. A man came into sight on the opposite
side of the street. He walked slowly and cautiously,


glancing occasionally over his shoulder, and behaving
as if not altogether sure of himself. To my utter
astonishment it was the big detective, and we watched
his movements anxiously. Neither of us spoke, but
each asked himself the same question. Did he expect
to meet Brandon ? or were we about to witness a
terrible tragedy ? He approached the doorway, when
to our unspeakable relief the hidden watcher stepped
out and spoke to him. Joe wiped his forehead and
breathed heavily.
? What did you think ? ? I asked ; ? that Brandon
was going to kill him ? ? and he answered quite
simply, ? I did.?
They remained barely a second or so before moving
away in the opposite direction from us, and I was
scarcely surprised to find Joe eager to follow them.
Obviously this meeting had been planned on the
preceding evening, but for what reason it was difficult
to imagine. The situation was so strange and un-
accountable that I began to catch a little of my chum?s
fever. We stepped singly across to the other side,
and, hugging the wall, followed, though not too closely,
in pursuit.
The two were talking earnestly and apparently in
a friendly manner ; certainly to us at a distance they
appeared most unlike a detective and his prisoner.
It was noticeable, too, that both showed the utmost
caution, and once, when a belated traveller approached,
they sought the shelter of a friendly doorway until


he had passed. Clearly neither of them wished to be
seen, even casually. Several times, too, they stopped
and looked back, so that we were compelled to keep
at a respectful distance.
This precaution proved our undoing. Doubtless we
played the part of Sherlock Holmes very clumsily?at
all events on the outskirts of the town we lost our
quarry. They had seemed to be making for the coast,
but that was no more than conjecture on our part,
and in reality we were at a loose end. There was a
spice of danger in our situation, too, though that did
not count much with us. After a hurried discussion
we continued cautiously, but every step forward con-
vinced us more fully that we might as well give up
the search. The night had grown dark, and we had
absolutely no notion in what direction to go.
For some time Joe was too stubborn to listen to
reason, but finally, admitting that nothing could be
done, he consented to return home. He was bitterly
disappointed at our failure, but that did not help us.
It was useless also to keep on saying that the whole
affair was very mysterious, though truly we said little
else. Why had Brandon made a secret appointment
with the detective, and taken him into the desolate
district where they had disappeared ? That was a
question to which neither of us could give even the
vaguest answer.
We walked back in the greatest dejection and
reached our room without being observed. Then we


sat down in the dark near the door without speaking
a word, and listening intently. We were anxious to
discover if and when Brandon returned. It is un-
pleasant to admit failure, but I frankly confess to
being outwitted, and, but for my chum, whose hear-
ing was marvellously acute, I might have remained
listening all night.
About two o?clock Joe, giving me a hint to remain
quiet, softly opened the door and crept out.
? I thought so,? he whispered on his return within
barely a minute, ? he?s just come in. There?s a light
in his room.?
? I didn?t hear a sound.?
? No, because you were listening for his boots and
he came up the stairs and crossed the landing in his
stockinged feet. That?s an old dodge. Then his door
gave the tiniest creak and that made me certain.?
? After all, this doesn?t tell us much,? I grumbled,
undressing slowly.
? Little things to-day may be big things to-morrow,?
replied Joe ; ? one never knows.?
? We?ve lost our chance and shall never get another,?
was my final ungracious remark as I got into bed.
Late next morning, however, Joe?s words were
brought home to me with startling abruptness. Shortly
after eleven o?clock a tremendous commotion occurred
outside. Newspaper boys were selling special editions,
and the inhabitants of Little East Street were buying
the sheets damp from the press. People were scanning
p.u.j. N


the columns with excited faces, and calling out to
one another, and the one sinister word that reached
us was Murder! Joe ran down quickly and procured
a paper.
Even before looking at the contents we knew
instinctively what had happened; the newspaper
account only gave us fuller information. The big
detective with the fair hair was dead! His body had
been found in a desolate spot near the coast. A
revolver lay close to his side, and one chamber was
empty. But the papers laid great stress on the fact
that the bullet which killed him had been fired from
a weapon of much smaller calibre. The whole case,
they concluded, contained the elements of an unusual
mystery. That was a day of special editions, and we
eagerly bought copies of them all.
All sorts of fantastic stories figured in them; but
during the afternoon it was stated that the dead man
had been identified as Robert Pilling, a famous detec-
tive despatched from Scotland Yard on an important
mission. This announcement created the liveliest
interest, and the excitement was increased by a
report that Theo Markden, a private inquiry agent
in the town, had given the police valuable informa-
tion likely to lead to the immediate capture of
the criminal.
? Well ? ? exclaimed Joe questioningly.
? We?re in a nasty mess : a pity we happened to
see what we did see. The police will be here presently,


and if they ask us point-blank what we know we?re
bound to answer.?
? Or if they don?t ? ?
? I?m afraid so,? gloomily. ? 'Twill be a fearful
blow to Jimmy.?
? That?s what I?m thinking. I wonder if he suspects
anything.?
The boy himself supplied the answer. He paid us a
flying visit about eight o?clock. He had spent most of
the day in Brandon?s room and was returning there, a
rather unusual occurrence. He was bright and cheer-
ful, and evidently had not the least idea that the big
man?s death had anything to do with his queer friend.
? Poor chap,? he exclaimed, glancing at our Utter
of papers.
? It?s a pity he made that mistake about Brandon,?
observed Joe tentatively, ? the pohce may be indined
to make a fuss.?
The boy laughed whole-heartedly. ? Oh, there?s
nothing in that; we aU know Brandon went of his
own free will to meet him. Besides, he wasn?t out
of the house last night. You?re prejudiced against
him, Shannon.?
? Perhaps so ! ? Joe admitted.
? I?ve been helping him all yesterday and to-day.
You?d never guess what he?s doing. Perhaps he?ll let
me tefl you later, but it?s a secret just now.?
Towards midnight we heard steps on the landing,
very soft and cat-like, a discreet tap on the opposite


door, a voice speaking quietly. In a minute or so the
door was opened and closed again, and we heard
nothing further. I was eager to go out, being filled
with curiosity, but Joe pulled me back warningly.
? The police,? he whispered. ? Our best plan is to
he doggo till we leam what?s happening. We?ll have
to give evidence, but there?s no need for hurry.
Brandon may break down and confess, he?s weak as
water.?
Remembering the look in his eyes when he first
went to meet the English detective, I felt rather
doubtful as to this ; still, the advice was sound, and
the longer we could keep clear of the affair the better.
What we both really hoped was that no need for our
evidence would arise.
Presently the door opened again and several persons
coming out descended the stairs. There was no noise
or fuss, and no one seemed to be talking. What, we
asked ourselves, had happened in that closed room ?
At the end of half an hour I stole out quietly : the
door was fastened; neither light nor sound came
from the other side, Brandon had evidently been taken
to the station.
? Couldn?t expect anything else after that chap
Markden had told his yarn,? said Joe ; ?the police
would reckon it mighty suspicious. However, there?s
nothing to be done to-night.?
In the morning we quickly discovered that the visit
from the police was known all through the house.


Every lodger was discussing it, and the very fact that
Brandon had been arrested, or at least closely ques-
tioned, told against him. If I heard the old saying,
M No smoke without fire,? once, I heard it a dozen
times. From the talk that went on around us, how-
ever, one fact became perfectly plain. Brandon had
been so skilful or so lucky that no one had seen him
leave the house on the night of the tragedy, or return
to it. Besides our two selves, not one single witness
could be brought against him. It came out, too, that,
after a close and searching investigation, the officers
had failed to find anything that would connect him
with the crime.
We received an account of the proceedings at the
police office from Jimmy, who appeared to have offered
valuable testimony in Brandon?s favour.
?You may as well learn his secret now,? he began.
? He has been working hard for months at some
engineering invention. His room is filled with draw-
ings and tiny models, and he has a workshop in the
town where he does the heavier parts. When the
police arrived he was naturally much astonished, but
one had only to see his face to be certain of his inno-
cence. He answered all their questions without
hesitation, and offered to go with them to the station.?
? Did he say anything about having met the
detective ? ? Joe asked.
?Yes, and that the man admitted there had been
a mistake. That was a strong point, especially as


Markden owned that the detective had told him the
same thing. Naturally Brandon had no proof of
being at home all night, but I was able to testify
that we were working together till close on twelve
o?clock. We were obliged to stop then, because we
needed some small springs, which he went out and
bought the first thing this morning.?
? Have the police set him free ?
?Of course,? in surprise; ? they had nothing
against him.?
This was perfectly true ; there was not a scrap of
evidence in existence ?except ours ! And even what
we had to disclose proved nothing. It was very
suspicious, but suspicion doesn?t amount to certainty.
? Besides,? observed Joe thoughtfully, ? getting rid
of Pilling wouldn?t do him any good?only put him
in a bigger mess. Scotland Yard is sure to send over
another man now.?
? And the Sydney police will watch Brandon like
a cat watching a mouse.?
? Shadow him everywhere,? Joe agreed.
But it seemed that as yet we had touched only the
fringe of the mystery. The evening papers contained
a startling report. A most surprising and sensational
cablegram had come through from England. Scotland
Yard declared their complete ignorance of the dead
man, denied that any one named Pilling was on their
staff, and asserted flatly that no one had been recently
despatched to Sydney for any purpose whatever.


The police sent again for Markden and Brandon,
but neither could throw any fresh light on the subject.
The stranger had called himself Pilling, had stated
he was a detective from Scotland Yard, and was
searching for a wanted criminal. It was a bewildering
puzzle to which there seemed no solution.
If the dead man wasn?t Detective Pilling, who was
he ? and with what object had he come to Sydney ?
How was he able to give such an accurate description
of Brandon, whom he called Goodchild ? And then
discover he had made a stupid blunder ? More serious
still, why had he secretly met Brandon by appoint-
ment ? What motive prompted him to start on that
fatal journey ?
We asked the questions without being able to
answer them, but out of the mist and confusion one
fact emerged clearly?there must have existed some
close connection between the two men.
? That accounts for what we thought Brandon's
bluff,? I said. ?He recognised the fellow from your
description, and knew all along that he was a
fraud.?
He knew more than that,? remarked my chum
significantly, ? he knew who the chap actually was.
And for some reason or other he made up his mind
to get rid of him.?
The shooting might have been done in self-
defence, I suggested, remembering the revolver and
its empty chamber. ? It?s reasonable to suppose the


pair quarrelled over something, and Pilling might
have fired first.?
Joe nodded. ? Like as not; but what?s underneath
it all ? that?s what worries me.?
The papers still contained screeds of matter about
the mysterious tragedy?gossip, infallible clues, vague
rumours, questions to the police, advice to the police,
but no fresh information. The only new thing was the
coming forward of several people who had met Pilling
in the town, and the proprietor of the hotel at which
he had put up, but what they had to say, though
interesting to themselves, had no bearing on his
untimely death.


CHAPTER XX
WHY PILLING DIED
If you have a fence to get over, the best thing is to
get over, and find afterwards what a nasty one it is.
Joe and I boggled at ours, looked at it sideways,
searched for a gap through which we might wriggle,
even considered if it were necessary to get through
or over at all. We were up against a disagreeable
job, and the longer we looked at it the more disagree-
able it appeared.
We felt pretty confident that Brandon had killed
the sham detective by accident, or in self-defence, or
as the result of a deeply-laid plan. On that point no
one but himself would ever know the truth. In our
opinion the police at present could not even detain
him on suspicion. With our evidence the case would
be different, and the question was whether we should
offer it.
We had no quarrel with the man, and the way in
which he had befriended Jimmy had always impressed
us favourably, yet it seemed our plain duty to tell
what we knew, whatever the consequences.
? We aren?t accusing him,? Joe argued, ? and he


may be able to explain things,? though neither of us
altogether believed that. ?We ought to see the
police at once.?
?I wish we hadn?t recognised him,? I remarked feebly.
? Where?s the sense in talking like that ? We did
recognise him, and it?s up to us to say so.?
The first question we shall be asked is why we
didn?t come forward sooner ? ?
? Because we didn?t want to be drawn into the
mess. That?s simple, and if the police don?t like it
they can lump it.?
Joe kept drumming on the table, looking very hot
and irritable. His usually placid temper was strangely
ruffled. He hated doing what we had to do, and yet
saw no way out of it. We got up, put on our hats,
and went to the door ; then we turned and sat down
again. It was certainly a difficult job to tackle.
At last I offered a fresh suggestion. ? Suppose,?
I said, ? that we tell him what we are going
to do.?
? Can?t see any use in that.?
? It won?t seem so shabby afterwards,? I replied
limply, ? and anyway there?ll be no harm done. He
can't bolt, the police are sure to be shadowing him.?
? That?s true.?
? And as you said, he may be able to clear himself.?
Joe remained silent for several minutes, but finally
replied, ? All right, we?ll see him now, before going
to the station.?


? Wait till the youngster?s gone to bed; we shan?t
want him there.?
Jimmy went upstairs shortly before midnight, and
directly afterwards we crossed the landing and tapped
at the door. There was no answer, but through the
crack we saw a light inside.
I tapped again and said softly, ? It?s Trevan and
Shannon. We want to speak to you, we must speak
to you. It?s a matter of life and death.?
?I?m busy,? came the querulous reply; ? tell me
in the morning.?
?It won?t wait; it?s about Pilling.?
We heard him stifle an exclamation, and after a
short interval the door was opened. The apartment,
of which at our previous hurried visit we had scarcely
caught a glimpse, fully answered Jimmy?s description.
The walls were covered with pen-and-ink drawings, the
table was crowded with tiny springs and wheels and
delicate bits of machinery. Queer instruments, most of
them altogether strange to me, lay on the floor; in one
comer was a kind of blow-pipe, and near it were tiny
scales and weights. The only article that made the place
look anything like a living-room was the camp bedstead.
The instant we stepped inside Brandon locked the
door. He seemed greatly surprised and slightly
suspicious, but not alarmed. Since there was nowhere
to sit down we remained standing, and Joe suggested
that he might prefer coming to our room.
? This will do,? he replied rather abruptly, ? because


I hope you won?t keep me long ; I have a lot of work
to finish.?
? It will depend largely on yourself,? replied my
chum coolly ; ?we want to talk to you about the
detective ?according to the papers he wasn?t a genuine
one ?who was found shot near the coast.?
Brandon threw out one hand with a gesture of
weariness. ? Surely I?ve heard enough of Pilling or
whatever his name may be,? he said. ? And,? with
a quick change of tone, ? in any case, I fail to see
what you have to do with it.?
?We?ve been reading the papers and are a bit
puzzled. We remember your meeting this man, who
turns out to be no detective, and we gathered that
he had made a mistake.?
? That?s exactly what he acknowledged and what
he told his spy,? replied Brandon promptly; ? the
police are acquainted with all that.?
I m coming to the police. They thought you
might have had something to do with his death.?
? Well, that?s all knocked completely on the head,?
and a note of satisfied triumph sounded in the
speaker?s voice.
? Excuse me,? said Joe gravely, ? but unknown to
you there are two officers in plain clothes watching
the house at this moment.?
Brandon gave a slight start, but regained his com-
posure instantly. He was holding himself wonderfully
well in hand.


? They?re more stupid than I imagined,? he said;
? still, I don?t understand how that brings you here,
unless it?s to give me another warning. That is very
good of you, but altogether unnecessary.?
? As far as we gather,? Joe continued, ? the police
have no evidence. They know you met the man once
and that he admitted his mistake. They believe that
you never saw him again. If you had met him again,
on the very night of his death, say, the case would
look uglier.?
The wretched man must have begun to suspect
something, his bps twitched and his eyes narrowed ;
the unwholesome yellow tinge crept over his parch-
ment skin. He started to speak, checked himself,
and waited for Joe to finish.
? Suppose now, two witnesses swore that you did
meet him secretly that night, and walked with him
very cautiously, avoiding all passers-by, toward the
spot where his body was afterwards found ! ?
I was too young and inexperienced to understand
the nature of this strange person, who seemed to be a
bundle of contradictions. At one moment he appeared
on the verge of collapse, at another he displayed the
utmost firmness and resolution.
?Go on,? he exclaimed, ? you?ve said either too
much or too little.?
Then here goes to make an end of it. We saw
you?Trevan and I ?meet Pilling, evidently by ar-
rangement ; we followed you down toward the coast ;


we heard you, at two o?clock in the morning, come
cautiously up the stairs in your stockinged feet and
let yourself into your room. And it?s up to us to
inform the police.?
I expected him to tremble or even to fall down ;
he did neither, but behaved with the most amazing
coolness. But for one passing spasm he betrayed
scarcely any agitation.
? This is interesting,? he remarked, ? and proves
how easily mistakes are made. Can you fix the time
when you saw the person you mistook for me ? ?
? A quarter to twelve,? replied Joe promptly.
? Then your whole story falls to the ground, my
lad, because Jimmy has already sworn that it was
midnight when he left this room.?
? We made no mistake,? I declared, and he actually
laughed.
? It?s the boy?s testimony against yours,? he
observed quietly, ? and surely he had a better chance
of identifying me in a lighted room than you in a
dark street.?
He spoke with such absolute confidence that I
almost began to wonder if we could have been mis-
taken, but the statement had no effect on Joe.
? You can?t shove us off with that stuff,? he said.
? Putting the clock on and back again is too old a
trick nowadays. Still, all that is for the police. Perhaps
it will make a difference when they discover who
Pilling was.?


That chance shot got home. For the first time
Brandon faltered and became agitated.
? Because,? continued Joe, ? as soon as it?s known
that you and Pilling were old acquaintances they'll
begin suspecting things.?
Brandon glanced sharply from one to the other of
us ; then he said, ? I hate asking favours, but I?m
bound to ask this one. Will you keep back your
information till the morning ? ?
? No hanky-panky,? said Joe.
? I will be at your room at ten o?clock, after Jimmy
has gone out, but I need time to think. Afterwards
I will accompany you to the station if you still wish
it. You can trust me.?
? We?ll trust you,? I said, " and expect you at ten
o?clock.?
He thanked us and we went out, wondering a little
if we hadn?t made fools of ourselves.
? Though,? said my chum, ? I?m inclined to think
he?ll keep his promise. He?s a hard nut to crack, is
Brandon. I can?t fathom him even now. You noticed
that he doesn?t want the youngster to be there.?
?Yes, though he?s bound to hear about it all the
same.?
We went to bed filled with wondering curiosity.
Would Brandon turn up ? and if so, what light was
he likely to throw on the mysterious affair ?
It was fairly certain that he and Pilling were old
acquaintances. Did he want to get rid of the other


man ? and had he enticed him out to the desolate
spot on purpose to kill him ? Somehow I scarcely
believed that. There was really no proof of what
had occurred, and as far as I could judge he had
little reason to be afraid of the police.
With this in my mind I was all the more surprised
to see the great change in his appearance when he
entered our room promptly at ten o'clock. He had
evidently passed a wretched and sleepless night;
his eyes were heavy and puffy ; he looked harassed
and careworn, and his confident bearing had deserted
him. He wished us good-moming, and sat down
rather limply on the chair that Joe placed for him.
But his first words showed that in some form or other
he intended meeting our challenges
? It is understood,? he began, ? that what I say
here will not be repeated without my permission ! ? to
which Joe agreed for both of us.
He nodded, leaned back on his chair, half closed his
eyes, and told us this strange yarn. ?My story is a
painful one, but for some time past I have made up
my mind it has to be told, though I have never found
sufficient courage to tell it. In one sense perhaps
you have done me a good turn. But, unless you
object, I will skip the beginning for a moment, and
start with what has happened recently. When
Shannon came with his story and described his detec-
tive I immediately recognised Pilling and foresaw
trouble. To a certain extent I was in his power, but


he was in mine also. Neither could injure the other
without hurting himself. I determined to see Pilling
and come to a temporary arrangement with him. It
was on my invitation that he met me secretly. Pilling,
I must explain, was absolutely reckless when his temper
was roused. It is necessary for you to know this in
order to understand what followed.?
He stopped here as if in thought, and then con-
tinued, ? Whether you believe me or not, I had no
intention of doing him any harm. For one thing, I
was fully aware that suspicion would most likely fall
on me, and for my own reasons had no wish to attract
the attention of the police. But there was one thing
he wished me to do, and I refused. Both of us were
obstinate, and I may add that he was surprised also.
His temper rose, and he threatened me with death
unless I yielded. He was much the stronger and could
have killed me with his hands. Instead, he produced
a heavy revolver and gave me two minutes to decide.
I am not a brave man ; I had no wish to die just
then, but to do what he demanded was impossible.
I remained silent. He had worked himself into a
towering rage, and to that I attribute my escape.
He fired, and by a miracle the bullet missed me.
Before he could press the trigger again I shot him
with a small automatic that I always carried with me
?for another purpose.?
? And killed him ! ? I exclaimed.
? Yes, though I had no intention of killing him.
p.u.j. o


That is a true account of what happened. On that
score my mind is perfectly easy. I have told you this
because I want you to believe me innocent of
planning his death."
? Well,? said Joe, ? the yam rings true, and I
don?t see why you can?t tell it squarely to the police.
In that case our evidence would help you,"
? Because?because,? he gasped, and seemed about
to faint. I fetched some water which he drank greedily,
and we waited anxiously until he had so far recovered
as to be able to speak.


CHAPTER XXI
brandon?s secret
? I had hoped not to tell my wretched story,? he
began presently, ? until I could do so voluntarily,
but you have forced my hand. Although the police
cannot connect me with Filling?s death, there is a
possibility of my being detained on suspicion while
they make inquiries. Now I can?t face this, because
it will prevent me from doing what I wish to do of
my own free will.?
? Mind you,? interrupted Joe, ? we aren?t forcing
you to confess anything.?
? It?s my only chance, Shannon ; I am hoping that
at the finish you will agree to my proposals.?
? We don?t wish you any harm,? I said.
? I believe that, and am grateful. Now for the
story ; I will make it as brief as possible. You will
not be surprised to hear that my proper name is
Goodchild. My parents were very poor, and at their
death I was left to make my way in the world alone.?
? Same with me,? said I, ? only I never knew my
people.?
? I was not very strong nor very clever, but I
grew up with a perfect passion for machinery.


Anything in the nature of a nut or a bolt or a wheel
fascinated me. I took advantage of every opportunity
that cropped up to study machines, but meanwhile
I had to earn a living of some sort, and that in itself
took some doing.?
I nodded appreciatively, being thoroughly well
acquainted with that condition of life.
? While drifting about from one place to another,
I touched at Salford and got an odd job in a mill.
The work was tedious and the pay poor, but I was
to a certain extent in touch with machinery, and that
was sufficient. A foreman named Howells, noting
how keen I was, gave me a lot of information?how
the machines were built, how they were worked, what
good points they had, and what bad. One in par-
ticular I examined very often. Howells called it a
capital machine but too slow.?
Any chap who could double the number of its
revolutions would make a fortune in no time,? he
remarked one day.
? This set me thinking harder than ever. I studied
that machine so thoroughly that I could draw every
part of it with my eyes shut. Then a slack time came,
orders fell off, the mill closed down, and I was adrift
again. But I never forgot that machine ! I often
pored over my drawings when my stomach was empty,
and my head swimming for want of food.?
? I?ve known that feeling too,? I cried impulsively,
? but all I thought about was getting some grub.?


Thank goodness none of my readers knows what it
is to be half?ay, more than half starved ! I know,
and perhaps that is why I pitied the man !
? The worst thing,? he continued, ? was my belief
that I had discovered the fault and could remedy it.
But nothing could be done without money, and of
that I had none, and no prospect of getting any.
Then I happened to meet Pilling. I lay no blame on
him, mind. What I did I did with my eyes open.
He unfolded a plan for robbing a country house where
we could make a rich haul, and I was to have a quarter
share of the booty.
? No doubt he reckoned on my joining his gang
altogether, but I had my own plans. I secured a
passage ?Pilling lent me the money, though with no
idea of what use I was putting it to?on board an
Australian-bound steamer. My great hope was that
the money would enable me to perfect my invention,
for that was what I cared for most.?
He paused, as if dreading the effect of his next
words, and then added faintly, ? I booked my passage
in the name of Brandon.?
Joe and I looked at each other and gasped : we
began to see what was coming.
? That is not the worst,? he continued gravely,
? let me get this part over quickly. We robbed the
house, and because I was unknown to the police
Pilling handed me the stuff, which included a valuable
necklace, and arranged where I was to meet him.?


Once more we recognised with amazement what
his words meant, but neither of us interrupted.
? I was already on the landing when a man came
out from one of the bedrooms. He was big and
strong and very determined-looking. He carried a
revolver and angrily bade us put up our hands. I
did so, trembling with fright, but Pilling fired ?it
seemed he always went armed?and the stranger fell
at my feet. The next minute I was in the grounds,
running blindly, anywhere to escape from the scene
of the tragedy. My mind is a blank as to what hap-
pened next. The only thing that kept me from going
mad was the knowledge that I had booked my passage
to Australia. Finally I pulled myself together and at
the proper time went aboard the steamer. My papers
were all in order, and no one challenged me.?
? And then you met Jimmy ! ?
??Yes. At first he was just a friendless boy for
whom I felt sorry ; afterwards ?but there, it is wiser
to leave that. Thank goodness I was the means of
doing him a good turn or two.?
? What about the necklace ? ? I asked.
? That is what brought Pilling to his death,? gravely.
? By some means he learned I was in Sydney, and
came over to pluck me. He insisted on my giving
up the necklace, and wiien I refused lost control of
himself, just as he had done before.?
No one spoke for a while, and then he remarked,
' Perhaps you will not believe what I am going to


say now, yet I hope you will. I used the money
sparingly, just sufficient to buy instruments and keep
us alive ; the necklace I left untouched; I lived for
one thing only?the success of my invention. Then
I intended to restore Jimmy?s property and to make
over to him the patent of my new machine. But I
never reached success, and to-day am as far off as
ever. And in addition lam a broken man. Ido not
ask for pity, but I do plead for your help.?
? How can we help ? ?
?By withholding your information. You realise
for yourselves that the police cannot touch me for
Billing?s death.?
? I'm not so sure of that,? protested Joe.
He made a gesture of impatience. ?lam a broken
man,? he repeated wearily. ?My life is a failure and
I suffer agony every day. Three times I have seen
the boy?s father ?it is only the outcome of an excited
brain, but terrible none the less. What I ask is that
you will let me return with you to England. I care
nothing for Pilling, he brought his death on himself,
but I cannot die in peace until I have confessed to my
share in the robbery.?
There was no mistaking the speaker?s sincerity. He
was a thief ; he was in a sense responsible for the death
of his accomplice, but we both felt sorry for him. He
neither whined nor cringed, and the only favour he
asked was permission to give himself up to justice.
That he had meant to do this I thoroughly believe,


even had Pilling not crossed his path. And there was
truth in his contention that the Sydney authorities
could not convict him of murder. They could, on our
evidence, throw him into prison and bring him to trial,
but no jury would return a verdict against him.
But the point which weighed most with us was that
he would never survive the trial. He would die
miserably in prison without an opportunity of doing
the one thing in the world he wished to do ! I glanced
at Joe and gathered that his thoughts ran on the same
lines as my own.
? It?s a strange story,? I said, ? but we believe it,
and, rightly or wrongly, will say nothing about it
for the present.?
? Thank you,? he replied simply, with a genuine
ring of thankfulness in his voice. ? One other thing,?
he continued anxiously, ? you will not tell Jimmy
until ?until later ? I could not bear that ! ?
? There is no need ; he sails on Tuesday.?
It seems curious now that we never felt the slightest
hesitation in trusting him ; we were absolutely certain
that he would accompany us to England and give
himself up. And when Jimmy heard of the alteration
of our plans he had no suspicion of the truth. He
was vexed and annoyed, and made us promise to
write to him directly we landed, which we promised
to do. But I pitied his unhappy friend, who suffered
terribly until the boy?s departure, and we were all
relieved when his ship steamed from the harbour.


?Now we can make fresh plans," said Joe, ? and
I think it will be advisable for you to keep the police
in touch with your movements. As you say, they
have no hold over you, but at the same time ?twill be
easy to trump up some flimsy charge, if they become
suspicious.?
I have no doubt that the authorities took ample
precautions, but on the surface they showed little
concern. Apparently Brandon was at liberty to go
where he pleased, so we made arrangements to travel
home by the next steamer. It was a wretched time,
because in a sense Joe and I were the unhappy man?s
jailers, although actually we never kept watch over
him. As to the reason for his return home not a
word was said.
At last the evening arrived for us to go on board.
We finished our arrangements and went into his room
for the last time. He had tom up his drawings and
broken his models, and stood staring at the wreckage
like a man in a dream.
? A graveyard ! ? he exclaimed presently ; ? the
graveyard of all my foolish hopes and ambitions. Let
us get away, boys."
If we hadn?t pitied him before we should have
done so then. This invention was his very life?s blood !
For the sake of it he had lapsed into crime, had worked
long hours day and night, had abandoned practically
everything else in the world, and it had failed him ! And
now he was returning home to die ?a convicted thief 1


? Poor beggar,? said Joe afterwards ; ?if he?d had
half a chance he'd have run as straight as the rest
of us.?
? He?s bound to go to prison, I suppose ! ?
"No help for it, but he won?t be there long. He?ll
keep up till the trial's over and then go out like the
snuff of a candle.?
? How about the necklace ? He won?t want the
customs people to spot it.?
? That?ll be stowed away all right, he's clever
enough for that.?
The homeward voyage was as curious an experience
as I had ever known. We did everything possible to
make it pleasant for our companion, and he was very
grateful. Toward the end of the voyage he became
brighter and more cheerful, and it seemed, too, as if
the sea-air had made him stronger.
At Southampton he asked us to accompany him to
the police station, where he handed a signed statement
to the inspector on duty, and then wished us good-bye
before being taken to the cells. There was no weak-
ness or nervousness in his manner, and indeed I had
never seen such a look of peace on his face.
? Try to think a little good of me sometimes,? he
said, as an officer led him from the room.
We went out into the street feeling miserable and
unhappy; even the usually cheerful Joe finding it
impossible to keep up his high spirits.


CHAPTER XXII
GOOD-BYE TO BRANDON
We put up for the night at a decent inn called the
Half Moon, and not being in the mood for amusement
of any kind went to bed early.
? We?ll have to let Jimmy know all about it,? my
chum remarked, as I was taking off my coat, ? and we'll
have to start first thing in the morning before the
yam gets into the papers. The Pollards, Okeford,
that?s the address he wrote down.?
This was a disagreeable business, but one we could
not get out of, so at breakfast I questioned the waiter
about Okeford, and learned that it was a village five
or six miles outside Southampton. By starting at
once, he added, we could catch a bus that would set
us down within less than half a mile of The Pollards.
The house was easy to find, the first villager we met
directed us to it, but neither of us felt much like
going in. It was a big place, with a fine lawn, a broad
drive, and splendid trees. We looked at each other
with a comical grin ; calling casually on baronets was
rather out of our line.
? It?s got to be done,? said Joe resolutely, ? and the


longer we look at it the less we?ll like it.? He opened
the gate and we went inside. A slim young fellow in
a chauffeur?s livery met us on the drive and roughly
asked our business. It?s curious, by the way, how
frequently a gentleman?s servant is so much ruder to
people of his own class than his master is.
? We?ve come to see Sir James Cummings,? I
replied ; ?is he at home ? ?
The fellow looked from one to the other of us,
staring hard. ? Come about a job ?? he demanded.
? Yes,? said Joe breezily, ? we hear he?s advertising
for a fresh shover, and we?ve come to apply. Think
there?s any chance ? ? and we walked on leaving him
with his mouth open.
We had nearly reached the building when Jimmy
appeared in the doorway, where he stood lighting a
cigarette. It gave us both rather a start to see him,
and we stopped dead. He looked far more at home
here than in Little East Street, but in spite of his
title and fine clothes, his beautiful grounds, and every
sign of wealth and luxury, he was our Jimmy just the
same. He cleared the steps at a bound and ran to
where we stood. His eyes shone brightly, his face lit
up with real pleasure, there was no mistaking the
heartiness of his welcome. He gripped our hands
hard, almost pulling us along. ? Now, this is good,?
he exclaimed. ? Come in and see my mother ; she?s
been hoping and hoping you would come soon.?
? Oh,? replied Joe, looking flustered, ? we aren?t


coming in, thanks ; we?ve just come to tell you about
Brandon and then we?re off again.?
? Not much,? laughed Jimmy ?I can?t go on calling
him Sir James ?? you?re coming with me,? and he
half dragged us up the steps and into a room, which,
as far as we were concerned, might have been a room
in a palace. Near the fireplace a lady was seated in
a large chair, and he called out breezily, ? Here they
are, mother, Joe Shannon and Jack Trevan ; I told
you they were sure to turn up.?
Lady Cummings, though we were both too ignorant
to know she had a title, got up to meet us. She
looked too young to be Jimmy's mother, and was
very pretty, but what I thought most of was the way
she welcomed us. Her cheeks were flushed and her
eyes shining, and she took each of us by the hand.
Her own were white and smooth, and Joe confessed
afterwards that he felt almost ashamed they should
touch his clumsy paws.
? I have been waiting,? she said, and her voice
was like music coming from a silver instrument, ? to
thank you, though I cannot do it properly, for being
so good to my boy.?
I stole a sidelong glance at Joe ; his face was peony-
coloured, and he stammered and stuttered in the
attempt to explain that we had done nothing unusual.
But Lady Cummings would not listen, and she thanked
us so warmly that we wished we deserved a hundredth
part of her praises.


Presently we found ourselves sitting down and
Jimmy began to question us about the voyage, and
ask how we had left Brandon, at which, I suppose,
the expression on our faces changed, for he guessed
immediately that something was wrong. ? What is
it ?? he cried impulsively; ? don?t tell me the poor
chap?s dead.?
" No, he isn?t dead,? I assured him, ? but very ill,
and not likely ever to get well.?
? I wish he had returned with you, so that we could
have looked after him,? said Jimmy?s mother.
Joe threw me an imploring glance, but I happened
to be gazing intently at a picture on the wall opposite,
so he had to get on the best way he could. ? The
truth is,? he said awkwardly, ? that Brandon came
back with us.?
?To Southampton ? ? cried Jimmy. ? Where is
he ? Why didn?t you bring him along ? Is he too
ill ? Have you taken him to hospital ? What is it.
Shannon ? There?s something behind this, I'm sure.
Tell me all about it, there?s a good fellow.?
Here I shall always consider Joe Shannon deliber-
ately played me a shabby trick. ? There is a story,?
he said, ? but Trevan?s the only one who knows it
properly. He?ll tell you. I shall just bungle it.?
He winked impudently ; had the matter been less
serious he would have laughed outright. Afterwards
he had the cheek to say it was only tit for
tat.


Jimmy and his mother turned together, eager for
information, so since Joe had wickedly left me in the
lurch, I was forced to repeat the story Brandon had
told us in Sydney. Neither of them interrupted ;
their faces showed complete amazement but not a
trace of anger, and when I finished Lady Cummings
furtively wiped her eyes.
Jimmy was the first to break the silence that
followed. ? The necklace came by registered post this
morning,? he said ; ?it must have been handed in at
Southampton yesterday, but there was nothing in the
way of explanation with it.?
Now that the worst part was over Joe found his
tongue again. ?We didn?t go straight to the station,?
he volunteered. ? Brandon did several little jobs on
the way, and the first place he went to was a post-
office. Remember, Trevan, how he asked us to wait
outside ? ?
? Poor fellow,? exclaimed Lady Cummings softly,
? we must do all that is possible for him, Jimmy.?
? I?m going straight into town, mums. Who is
the best man to get ? ?
? I think in the first place I would see Mr. Robinson,
your uncle and he are old friends. Of course you will
spare no expense.?
?Not likely, mums, and I'll wangle an order to
visit Brandon. Poor old chap, he kept me afloat
when I might easily have gone under. And he never
got a ha?porth of happiness out of life. I guess it


broke his heart when he found his invention was a
failure."
We thought this a favourable opportunity to bring
our visit to a close, but Lady Cummings pressed us to
stay until Jimmy returned, and without being rude
we could not refuse. It was rather comical to watch
the look of amazement on the chauffeur?s face when
he saw us on the steps with her wishing his master
good-bye ; no doubt the worthy fellow thought the
world was nearing its end.
I haven?t the ability to describe Jimmy?s mother,
but there?s one fact that will tell you far more about
her than any words of mine can. It was seven o?clock
before Jimmy came back, and during all that time
we never once remembered the strangeness of our
surroundings. She put us so much at our ease that we
felt no awkwardness even at lunch, and we talked to
her as easily and freely as to people of our own class.
Of course the talk turned on Jimmy's life in Sydney ;
she couldn?t hear too much of that: how he looked,
what he said and did, the hardships he had gone
through, and in fact everything that had happened.
Her eyes filled with pride when we dwelt on his grit
and pluck, but another and a softer light came into
them when Joe in his blunt, dowmright manner said
that Jimmy was straight as a die without a particle
of vice in his make-up.
? Most youngsters would have gone to the dogs,"
he finished up, ? but not Jimmy; there?s no yellow


streak in him anywhere.? He had entirely forgotten
that he was speaking of a baronet, and a wealthy
one at that.
We were quite a family party when Jimmy
joined us, with a very dejected look on his face.
? I?m afraid w r e can?t do much, mums,? he said
sorrowfully. ? He?s in the prison hospital, and the
doctor says will never live to stand his trial. The
truth is he hasn?t the slightest desire to live. He
broke down completely on seeing me; don?t ask
any more about it.?
He w r as greatly upset, and I have no doubt the
interview had been particularly trying, but he rallied
presently, asking how long w r e intended staying in
Southampton, and pressing us to come again and stay
a week or two with him. ?We ought to keep in touch
with one another for the sake of old times,? he said.
? As for the stuff you talked in Sydney, wiiy it was
just stuff and nothing else.?
Much to the chauffeur?s amazement, he insisted on
driving us to the Half Moon, though, as we pointed
out, it would have been quite easy to return by the
bus. However, he had his way, and his last words
were a pressing invitation to come again to The
Pollards as soon as possible. Sir James Cummings
is an important man in the country now, but in my
thoughts of him he is always Jimmy.
Joe kept me awake a long time that night discussing
our plans, or rather mine, as his own were cut and
p.u.j. P


dried. He intended having a short spell with his
mother and then going to sea again. ? There's about
four hundred pounds to my account in the bank,"
he said, ? but I can?t live on that. Mr. Moggridge, he?s
a lawyer my mother knows, will invest it for me, and
it 11 grow while I?m at sea. In a few years I?ll have a
nice little nest-egg. The point is, what are you going
to do ? ?
I made no answer, it was hard to decide. My modest
fortune was a hundred pounds short of his, and I
hadn t any idea what to do with it. For any useful
purpose I was as badly off as when we signed on for
the voyage in the Stormaway . As Joe remarked, one
couldn t live long on a few hundred pounds, and it
was necessary to find a berth of some sort. But I
had no real liking for a sailor?s life though I felt sorry
enough at the idea of parting from Joe.
Think it over,? said he at length. ?I?ll leave you
my address and you can write to me. But don?t
play the fool and let your money slip away. I dare
say there are sharks in Southampton as well as in
other places.?
We left it at that, and next morning I saw
him off from the West Station and then turned
back, feeling pretty glum and lonely. My first
step was to secure a room in the house where I had
stayed with him, and the rest of the day I spent
poring over the advertisements in the Southern Echo,
but without discovering anything that would be of


the slightest use to me. I turned over all sorts of
plans in my mind, but hit on nothing definite, and
finally went to bed in sheer disgust. The real truth
was, though I hardly recognised it, I wanted to be
with Joe. He was my only friend, we had been
chums for a long time, and had gone through some
exciting adventures together, so perhaps it was
scarcely surprising that I felt his absence so deeply.
Without him I was absolutely alone in the world.
Jimmy could be counted on, as far as that went, but
I wasn?t fool enough to think I could live on equal
terms with a rich man who had a handle to his name.
He would have done anything for me, there was no
question about that, but we lived in different streets,
so to speak, and our paths lay in different directions.
It may have been a silly sort of pride, or sound horse
sense, but there it was.
After breakfast I wrote a line to Joe and then
wandered round to the police-station to inquire for
Brandon. The sergeant, who remembered me, was
very civil and obliging, going out of his way to explain
how I could obtain a visiting order if I wished to see
him. ? The chap?s dying,? he added, ? and the police
won?t put any obstacles in your way.?
I must say that all the officials were very sympathetic,
and next afternoon I was permitted to visit the un-
happy man. A marked change had come over him,
and it didn?t need a doctor?s verdict to tell that the
end wasn?t far off. He seemed grateful for my coming,


and squeezed my hand feebly, for his strength was
just on the ebb. It would have been stupid to talk
of his recovery, or any nonsense of that sort, and
indeed his first words were, ? I?m going on, Trevan,
and I?m glad.? Then by fits and starts he talked in
low whispers of how Jimmy had come to see him,
until at length my time was up, and I was compelled
to wish him good-bye.
? Good-bye,? he said. " I made a mess of things,
311(1 ?after all, the engine wouldn?t work. That
finished me, Trevan. I thought, I thought
gave me such a strange look, a look I could never
tell the meaning of, and lay back.
That was our last meeting \ he died a few days
later, and by that time I had left Southampton.
An answer to my letter came by return of post
inviting me to come down to Towling. Joe meant to
loaf for another week before looking for a ship, and
thought it would be pleasant to spend the time to-
gether. My mother will be glad to see you, and
will make you comfortable,? he wrote. ? Book to
Plymouth and let me know right off what timp the
train is due,?
His cheery note was like a cup of water to a man
dying of thirst, and I counted the hours until it was
possible with any show of decency to make a start.
Except for the visit to The Pollards ?and that was not
the same thing?it was the first time in my life that
I had been invited to a person?s house, though I had


been shooed away from the doors of a good many.
You, who have never known the heartache of a boy
brought up without friends or relatives, would have
laughed in amusement, had you seen me get out of
the train and run excitedly along the platform, and
heard my cry of extravagant pleasure as I recognised
Joe waiting for me against the barrier.
? Here you are,? he said, ? well on time. Come
along ; we?ll go down to the Barbican and cross by
the ferry, that?s the way I always go. Our place is
on the other side of the Sound. Comfortable journey
down ? That?s right. I hate trains, I?d much rather
come round by water.?
? That?s because you?re romantic,? I cried, laughing.
? What you miss in a train is the chance of being
drowned. I say, Joe, there?s a lot of water gone past
the mill since I was here before. I wonder what?s
become of the Sacred Bird ? ?
? Captain Blunt sold her, I?ve heard, to a millionaire
who goes in for long cruises.?
? She was a dainty ship, Joe, different from that old
tub of a Stormaway ?
? Don?t you run down the Stormaway ,? said he,
? she put money in our pockets.?
? She put us into the sea first of all, though. I
shall never forget that morning.?
? Well, the old ferry-boat isn?t likely to let you
down,? he exclaimed, laughing. ? Seems to me,
Trevan, you?re mortally afraid of being drowned.


What you ought to do is to take it all in the day?s
work. If you are to be drowned you will be, and
that s all there is in it. You can?t dodge your luck,
good or ill. Evening, Phil,? to a blue-guemseyed
fisherman passing.
Phil made answer in something between a cough
and a grunt. He was a fine-looking fellow, nearly
six feet in height and broad in proportion, with deep
chest and massive limbs, but Joe remarked that there
was no need to stare at him, I should see plenty of
the same sort at Towling.


CHAPTER XXIII
AN EARLY MORNING SWIM
Practically all the men-folk of Towling, either as
fishermen or sailors, followed the sea for a livelihood.
Joe?s father just then was beating round the Horn in
one of the few wind-jammers still left on the waters ;
his brother was on a tramp steamer like the Stormaway,
working from port to port as the owners picked up
cargo. His mother was a fine-looking woman, nearer
six feet than five, and it was plainly to her that he
owed his sunny smile and cheerful disposition. She
was standing in the doorway of a house three parts
up the narrow hill that led from the landing-place.
She shook my hand warmly, saying, ?I?m not
going to call you Mr. Erevan, or any of that foolish-
ness ; I?ve heard so much about you that to me
you?re just Jack.?
Now, could any boy have had a better welcome
than that ? My face went hot and I nearly cried, for
it was the first time within my knowledge that any
woman or girl had called me Jack. Perhaps my mother
did when I was a baby, but that I couldn't remember.
Joe took me into the back kitchen to wash, and


then we sat down to a hot supper, the chief part of
which consisted of an enormous fish-pie. Mrs. Shannon
helped me liberally, and followed it up with a jam
tart of her own baking, smothered in cream. After-
wards Joe and I took a short stroll along the top of
the cliffs, and before turning in we all three gathered
round the fire for a cosy chat.
Nothing was said then about the future, but on the
third evening Joe mentioned he had heard of a possible
berth on a vessel then fitting out for South America,
and that he thought of taking a run over to Plymouth
in order to interview the second mate.
? PU be sorry in a way if you get fixed up,? I said,
? not for you, of course, but for myself. I wish we
could find a shore job that would keep us together.?
? And I wish you?d come with me,? he replied,
laughing. ?It wouldn?t take long for you to get
your master s ticket, and then we could put our money
into a ship and you could sail her. Not a big boat
at first, but that might come later.?
His mother suggested we should go shares in a
fishing outfit, but Joe had no mind to be a fisherman,
while that kind of life didn?t appeal to me. There
seemed something more to the purpose in her next
idea. ?If you won?t go to sea, Jack, why not try
Canada ? Folks tell me it?s a grand country and you
could put your bit of money into a farm.?
? Or a ranch,? said Joe, ? there ought to be good
fun in cattle raising.?


This set me thinking, and the longer I considered
the matter the more it seemed worth while. It would
cost little to go as an emigrant, and I could no doubt
earn my living and learn the business at the same
time. Before we broke up for the night I had almost
decided to go, or at least to seek advice from Mrs.
Shannon?s lawyer friend.
Next morning we went down to the Sound as usual
before breakfast for a swim. Leaving our clothes in
a cave in the rocks we entered the water and struck
out. It was a trifle cold and we swam vigorously.
Presently to our surprise, for at that hour we generally
had the bay to ourselves, a man came down from
the big hotel which had its own private stretch of
foreshore, threw off a long overcoat, and plunged in.
He swam very powerfully, using the breast-stroke,
and forged ahead at a great pace.
? Some swimmer,? exclaimed Joe admiringly, as
we watched him.
? I hope he knows about the underswell, it?s rather
treacherous,? I replied.
We had reached our limit and were on the point
of turning back, when Joe, giving a last look at the
stranger, cried out, ? Hurry, Trevan, he?s in diffi-
culties ; looks like cramp.?
Being much faster in the water than I, he soon drew
ahead, calling out, ? Keep it up, we?re coming.?
The man was making desperate efforts to keep
afloat, but we had a long distance to travel, and I


feared he would disappear before we reached him.
As it was he must have been drowned but for Shannon,
for my pace was too slow. Joe, however, tearing
through the water like a young torpedo, reached the
spot in the nick of time. Fortunately the stranger had
sufficient sense not to struggle, and a minute or so
later I was at the other side of him.
? Straight for the beach,? said Joe cheerfully, ? we
ought to be able to do it,?
I had my own opinion on that point, but kept it
to myself. We were both tired, and not a soul was
anywhere in sight, the only object visible being the
dim outline of a battleship or big cruiser lying a long
way off. Still, as my chum said, it was up to us, so
we struggled on with our helpless burden. My breath
became shorter and shorter, I moved my legs mechani-
cally, the arm that supported the stranger ached
fearfully as if the muscles were being tied in knots.
I kept my eye on the shore, which seemed to come no
nearer, and my heart sank. The fishermen had come
it with their boats long ago, so we could not expect
help from them.
? Steady on,? cried Joe encouragingly, " we?ve got
to do it. WeTe getting nearer. I can see the hotel
quite plainly.?
Our only chance seemed to be that some one might
see us, but the grounds were empty, there were no
other bathers, and as far as any sign of life went the
building might have been unoccupied. We swam


more slowly now, and at every fresh stroke I felt it
would be impossible to make another, but little by
little the distance lessened, until for the first time I
began to have some hope of winning through. We
shouted at the top of our voices and presently several
figures appeared running swiftly down from the
hotel.
? Thank God for that,? I exclaimed, ? I?m nearly
done.?
Three or four men dashed into the water and
dragged us all three ashore, ? Get hot blankets,?
cried Joe, ? and put some more in his bed. Run for
a doctor, some one. No, he isn?t dead, stupid, got
cramp or something.?
The people round us were mostly servants, but now
a tall, thin man, who had hastily thrown a long
dressing-gown over his pyjama suit, came running
down. He was a doctor who happened to be staying
at the hotel, and in a few minutes he had given
various instructions to the flustered domestics.
There were plenty of helpers now, and directly the
stranger showed signs of consciousness Joe exclaimed,
? Come on, Trevan, we?ll have to run for it, I don?t
want any more water just now,? and the next instant
we were running off barefooted and in our wet shorts,
Joe taking the easiest way round the cliffs till we
reached our own little cove.
? Qualifying for Boy Scouts, and doing our good
deed early in the day,? said he with a grin ; ? anyway,


we?ve earned our breakfast. Gum, we?ll need some
sticking-plaster for our feet. Feeling shaky ? ?
? Achy more than shaky, my muscles are all in
lumps.?
? Soon wear off,? cheerfully. ? Here, I?ll give you
a hard towelling. Touch and go, old son, wasn?t it ?
though I don?t believe you were bom to be drowned.
Now we?d better wash our feet before starting.
Nothing like salt for a cut. Race you back to the
house. No ? Right-o.?
Mrs. Shannon was waiting for us anxiously, but
her face cleared as we came in sight. ? I began to
wonder if there had been an accident,? she said.
? Been pulling a chap out of the water,? Joe replied
breezily; ? cramp. Lucky we were about. He?s
staying at that swank hotel. Now we?re ready for
breakfast, and you might pour out the tea first. Hot
and strong, mother, we can both stand it.?
?Is the gentleman recovering ? ? she asked, as we
sat down to the table.
? Oh, he?s all right; we left him in the hands of a
doctor. Another cup of tea. Pass your cup, Trevan.?
In looking back on life I?m sometimes inclined to
agree with Joe that we do what we have to do, and
that it is rarely we actually choose for ourselves.
Here was Joe Shannon eager to obtain a berth on board
ship, and I with my mind made up to emigrate to
Canada, when a trifling matter like an early morning
swim cuts across everything and makes one look at


life from quite a different angle. There is no doubt
whatever that, but for what occurred that morning,
I should have settled down quietly as a Canadian
farmer. I?m not grumbling, only it shows how little
ahead of us one is able to see.
Neither of us mentioned the incident again, but the
story quickly spread, till by the end of the day it had
grown enormously and we had become local heroes.
There had been very nearly a tragedy, the yam went,
and we had nearly lost our own lives in rescuing the
drowning man. Joe laughed, while his mother sug-
gested we ought to be presented with gold medals,
but the villagers insisted on treating the matter
seriously and giving us a good deal of praise.
? Regular heroes for twenty-four hours,? said Joe ;
? we?ll be back numbers again to-morrow.? Joe had
a large amount of horse-sense in his make up.
Little was known in the neighbourhood concerning
the stranger, except that his name was Fortescue, and
that he had stayed at the hotel nearly a week. Both
these facts we heard during the evening from Glyon,
a boy who did odd jobs at the hotel.
About eleven o?clock next morning Mrs. Shannon
and I were at the door chatting with Joe, who was
going across to Plymouth to look for a ship, when a
motor-car stopped at the top of the hill. A well-
dressed man stepped out, spoke to the chauffeur, and
walked quickly in our direction. It was difficult to
tell his age. He was tall and slim, but powerfully


built; he had black hair turning gray and a clean-
shaven face. His eyes were black, very bright and
piercing; there were furrows in his cheeks, and deep
lines around the corners of his mouth. His shoulders
were broad and set well back, he carried his head
erect, and I guessed he was, or had been, a soldier.
He raised his cap politely, gave us a searching look,
and exclaimed in a pleasant voice, ? My name is
Fortescue, and I think you are the young men who
saved me yesterday from an unpleasant death.?
Joe apparently had suddenly become dumb, so I
said lamely, ? I?m glad we managed to drag you out
of the water,? at which he laughed good-humouredly.
? That is quite English,? he said, still laughing,
? and as a description of what happened rather
humorous. Dragging me out of the water, madam,?
turning to Mrs, Shannon, ? actually means swimming
nearly a mile with an almost insensible man at the
risk of their own lives.?
? Oh,? she replied, ? they didn?t tell me that.?
? No, they probably wouldn?t; I quite realise the
kind of story they would tell. English people ?I am
only half English myself?seem to be built on those
lines; they do a very brave deed as a matter of
course and coolly walk off.?
? Well,? said Joe, with a quiet chuckle, ? there
was nothing more to be done.?
? Exactly ; but you must permit me to regard your
action in a more serious light. But for you two I


should be a dead man, and the good folk in the neigh-
bourhood would be fishing for my body. To me that
is really of some consequence. I am, naturally, a
strong swimmer, but am troubled occasionally by an
old wound. That, I presume, is what caused me to
collapse. At one moment I was perfectly strong, the
next ? and he finished with a dramatic wave of
the hand.
? It would have been easy enough,? Joe volun-
teered, ? only we had been for a long swim and were
tired. You should have heard Jack blowing, mother,
exactly as if a school of porpoises had been working up
the Sound.?
" Oh ! ? exclaimed our visitor quickly, ? now I
know where we stand. You are Joe Shannon, and
this is Jack Trevan. One of the hotel servants told
me your names and where to find you,? He stopped,
gave us another glance, and continued hesitatingly,
? I have written out a cheque ?
? And left it at the hotel,? put in Joe very sharply,
one might in truth say rudely.
Fortescue looked at him, shrugged his shoulders,
and replied, ?Yes, I left it behind,? which was, of
course, untrue, but the uncompromising look in Joe?s
eyes formed sufficient excuse for him.
? I don?t want to offer you a reward,? he added,
? but I feel strongly that you ought to let me do
something ;at least you owe me that. Surely there is
some way of showing my thanks.?


Mrs. Shannon added her mite to the conversation.
? The boys are pleased to have been of help,? she
remarked, ? and that is enough for both of them.?
? A stiff-necked and stubborn people,? he exclaimed
laughingly. ?At all events you will let me come
again. I am staying here over the week-end, and I
do feel that I should like to know you better.?
? I?m sure you?re welcome any time,? declared Mrs.
Shannon. ?If you care to drop in for a cup of tea
to-morrow ?Joe?s off to the town just now ?we?ll be
very glad to see you.?
There was no false modesty about Mrs. Shannon.
She set herself neither above people nor below them,
but treated millionaire and beggar with equal polite-
ness and expected to receive the same treatment
herself from both. She was one of that very small
class to whom a person?s wealth or poverty makes
absolutely no difference. Fortescue accepted the
invitation, and wishing us all good-day, returned to
his car. Joe ran down to the pier to catch his boat,
and she and I were left together.
? He seems a pleasant gentleman, Jack, though he is
partly a foreigner,? she remarked. Her ideas of
foreigners w T ere peculiar. ?Of course you couldn?t
have taken his money, but there was no call for Joe
to be so nasty. You can be independent without
being rude.?
? Oh, he didn?t mean to be rude,? I exclaimed ;
he only spoke a bit quickly.?


? He was rude,? she declared, with all Joe?s ob-
stinacy, ? and I don?t hold with rudeness. However,
that?s neither here nor there, now. If you don?t mind
we?ll have a cold snack for dinner and I?ll cook some-
thing hot by the time he comes back.?
It was selfish on my part, but when about seven
o?clock he returned looking glum and dissatisfied, I
could not help feeling secretly glad. ?Full up,? he
informed his mother ; ?the mate said he could pick
where he chose, fellows tumbling over one another
to get a job. Nearly as bad as it was at Sydney. But
I met Charlie Pearce, who?s promised to keep an eye
open for me. He?ll do what he can, though at the
best it means I shan?t get a ship for weeks.?
? Better come with me to Canada,? I advised him,
half hoping he would agree.
? Sit down and eat your food while it?s hot,? his
mother exclaimed, ? there?s no sense in grizzling,
and you?ve earned a spell ashore if any one ever did.
The chops are done to a turn,? and she placed the dish
on the table.
p.u.j.


CHAPTER XXIV
ANOTHER TURN OF THE WHEEL
Mr. Fortescue came to tea the next afternoon, and
we spent a pleasant time listening to the story of his
adventures in foreign lands, particularly the forests
of South America. We gathered, though he did not
say so, that he was a wealthy man and that he had
spent many years in collecting and classifying strange
and rare plants. Really, as we learned afterwards,
he ranked high among the world?s most famous
botanists, and his name was known and honoured
among men of science everywhere. He had lately
come from Patagonia, and was now planning an
expedition to New Guinea.
? My nephew, who is older than you, though not
much, is out there,? he said. ? Oh, no,? smiling,
? Phil isn?t a botanist, the subject is too dry for him ;
he is prospecting at present for gold. He loves a life
of excitement, and few things please him more than
what he calls a spicy adventure. His father, Sir
Roger Manton, has himself been a noted explorer,
though for the last year or so he has lived quietly
at home. My nephew is to meet me at Samarai and


take me up the country to where he is mining. That
will make a capital spot for starting off.?
? Isn?t New Guinea a rather savage sort of
country ? ? asked Joe.
? It certainly doesn?t bear the best of reputations,
though it is far safer now than it used to be, at
least the English part; it is less peaceful, I believe,
across the Dutch frontier.?
I felt deeply interested in his talk, and asked
if he intended travelling alone after leaving his
nephew.
? Oh, no,? he said, ? I shall engage a couple of
decent fellows at Sydney, and a black boy or two in
the island as guides. You see everything will be
strange to me, and I am looking forward to the trip
with a great deal of pleasure.?
No more was said about New Guinea, and he
guided the conversation cleverly to ourselves and our
own doings. He did not put direct questions, but
since neither of us had anything to conceal he speedily
discovered that we were both at a loose end.
I felt restless and uneasy after he had gone, and
lay awake a long while thinking over his story. I
suppose there must be a spice of adventure in my
own blood, for his description of travel in unexplored
parts of the earth and of strange, little-known people
made me wish there was a chance of going with him.
I was certainly young for such a difficult job, but then
I was strong and healthy, and used to roughing it.


So was Joe for that matter, and our visitor had men-
tioned his intention of picking up two men at Sydney.
Why shouldn?t he take us instead ? In the course of
our wanderings we might strike gold, and perhaps
when the trip ended join hands with his nephew. I
lay awake dreaming dreams and seeing visions, and
went down to breakfast in a state of great excitement.
? Hallo,? exclaimed Joe, ? what?s up ? Hit on a
scheme for making a fortune ? ?
" Maybe ; maybe not,? I replied; ? we?ll talk
about it later.?
? Right-o, I never knew such a chap for getting
maggots into his head.?
After breakfast we helped Mrs. Shannon to clear
up and then strolled along the cliff overlooking the
Sound, when I unfolded my scheme. At first Joe
was too astonished to make a reply, and we walked
on in silence.
? I?ve heard there are cannibals in New Guinea,?
he remarked presently.
? They won?t eat us, we?re too tough and stringy.?
? They might fatten us up, I?m putting on flesh
already.?
? Listen to me and don?t be silly. We could stay
with Fortescue a year or two ?he said the trip would
last a couple of years at the outside?and then join
some miners. If we struck lucky you wouldn?t need
to bother about a ship any more.?
? I?d be able to give mother a good time,? said he


thoughtfully; ? and I?d like to do that. But this is
all moonshine, Erevan, he wouldn?t take us.?
? Would you go if he made us an offer ? ?
? Would you ? There?s no bridge to Sydney built
yet,? at which I laughed, but pointed out that we
shouldn?t have to work our passage.
? I like this chap well enough,? Joe observed after
a while, ? he seems to be the genuine article, but I?m
all against being trussed up and cooked. I don?t care
for playing that part in a feast.?
? We aren?t likely to meet with cannibals,? I urged,
?we shan?t venture outside British territory. Anyway,
it isn?t such a mad scheme as Captain Blunt?s, and
you were willing enough to go with him.?
? Oh,? he said airily, ? that was just an ordinary
voyage with a landing-party at the end of it, and I
wasn?t one of the party either.?
? And you didn?t forget to grouse about being left
out,? I reminded him.
We were still laughing at the recollection when a
pleasant voice exclaimed, ? Looking for your ship.
Shannon ? The Sound seems fairly empty. I wish
you?d let me pay off a small part of my debt by
doing something for you.?
Tou aren?t in our debt at all,? my chum replied
stoutly. ? Besides, Jack and I have earned a spell
ashore, and something?s sure to turn up.?
We walked on a short distance when our companion
remarked, ? I have had word from my nephew and


am booking a passage in the Moldavia. I?ve been
wondering,? hesitatingly, ? whether you would care
to accompany me. I won?t hide the fact that there is
a certain amount of danger and hardship to be faced,
but I can pay you well, and perhaps put you in the
way of doing better for yourselves than by going to
sea. It would save me engaging strangers, too, who
might not prove suitable, and, well, the truth is. I?d
like to have you both. What you did the other day
may seem a little thing to you, but it was a big one
to me, and I can't easily forget it. Still, don?t let me
try to persuade you against your own inclinations.
I shall be glad if you will come, but I won?t press you.
Don?t give me an answer now, turn the matter over
for a couple of days, and then let me know what you
decide. Will you come and have lunch with me ? ?
? Mother?s expecting us, and we mustn?t keep her
waiting,? said Joe. ? But we?ll think over your offer,
and give you an answer to-morrow or the next day.
It needed a vast amount of thinking on Joe?s part,
though not on mine. For myself, I would have accepted
instantly. I liked Fortescue ?he was, as Joe said,
genuine?the idea of exploring a strange, wild country
attracted me, and I believed there was a prospect of
something good coming from it. I was prepared to
risk the danger and face the hardships, while I did not
give much thought to the chance of falling in with
cannibals.?
Naturally Joe?s first act was to inform his mother


of the offer and to ask her opinion. ?If you?d rather
I didn?t go there?s an end of it,? he said.
? What do you wish to do yourself ? ? she asked
him.
? I hardly know. Jack seems to fancy it may be a
good thing. Mr. Fortescue will pay our expenses,
and we shall bring back good money, perhaps, if we're
lucky, come home with a fortune.?
She shook her head slowly. ? I never thought
much of money, Joe. As long as one has food and
clothes and a decent roof over one?s head, the rest
doesn?t count.?
The fact that he might be running into grave
danger made little impression on her. She was the
wife of a sailor and daughter of generations of sailors.
Hundreds of years had gone to the making of Mrs.
Shannon. Her forbears had sailed the seas with Drake,
and very few of them had found a last sanctuary in
the quiet Towling churchyard; their bones lay at
the bottom of the ocean or on the rocky shores of
distant countries. Any post might bring news of
her husband?s or son?s death, and, like so many
women of her brave and undaunted type, she accepted
everything that happened as the working out of a
mysterious fate. She could sorrow, but she left whim-
pering to the spineless creatures who scarcely bore a
right to the name of man or woman. A great all-
powerful God ruled the world, and if she did not
always understand His ways she never questioned


them. Joe was as safe with Him in New Guinea as
in Towling. That was the simple creed which would
carry her, uncomplaining, to the end of life.
She was shrewd, too, in her own way, and saw more
deeply into Joe?s mind than he did, ? Jack?s dying
to go,? she said, ? this Mr. Fortescue wants you, and
I?ve nothing against it. Only don?t stay away too
long ; come back as soon as you can, I?d rather have
my boy than all the money in the world.?
A grand woman was Mrs. Shannon?the sort of
woman who makes good men.
Mr. Fortescue was evidently pleased by our decision.
"We?ll go into Plymouth and buy your outfits, and
I?ll book your berths at once,? he said.
? We can?t go in the same class as you,? remarked
Joe promptly ; ? some of the passengers would be
for throwing us over the side.?
Our employer, for that is what he really was, tried
hard to overcome Joe?s objection, but in the end he
gave way.
? He?s a good chap and the proper sort,? my chum
observed, ? but we?ll feel much more comfortable
travelling second. Out in the wilds each man makes
good as far as he's fit, but all that counts here is how
much there?s in your purse.?
I didn?t argue with him, arguing would have been
useless anyhow, and besides there w r as a certain amount
of truth in what he said. But money wasn?t the only
thing; our speech was different, and we weren?t


accustomed to sitting down to meals with high-class
swells, though later in life I discovered to my astonish-
ment that there was little difference between them
and us.
Mr. Fortescue proved as generous as we had thought
him. He bought the best of everything, and when
finally we went aboard the Moldavia my chum fairly
grinned at sight of his kit. ? Not so dusty for a man
before the mast,? said he.
Mrs. Shannon had come to see us start. It was a
fresh experience for her, as she was more familiar with
the sailors? quarters than the passengers? cabins. ?My
word, Joe, you?ll lie soft,? she said, ? this is different
from your bunk in a tramp fo?csle,? adding, ? though
I don?t know that your sleep?ll be any the sounder.?
?He won?t be wakened up to stand watch,? I
remarked.
? That?ll seem funny, come to think of it. Turn in
when I like and get up only in time for breakfast. I
shouldn?t wonder if I?m wishing myself back on the
Stormaway .?
A few minutes before the warning bell we were
joined by our employer who came to wish Mrs.
Shannon good-bye, and he stayed chatting with her
until it was time for visitors to leave the ship. We
stood on deck watching the crowd of curious sightseers,
and the men casting off the hawsers, and feeling
strangely out of things as the orders passed to and
fro and we hadn?t even to listen to them.


? Let?s go below,? Joe suggested, as soon as his
mother was out of sight; ? I?ll be more used to things
to-morrow ; at present I feel kind of topsy-turvy.?
There is little to record about the actual voyage.
Compared with the unfortunate Stormaway , our ship
was like a floating castle, and she rode the waters so
peacefully that one might have been crossing a mill-
pond. We made friends with several passengers who
were going out to settle in Australia, and the days
passed pleasantly, though with no real work to do
the time appeared long.
We chummed in particularly with a young fellow
about Joe?s age, who was going up country to a sheep-
walk, the property of an uncle. He was a jolly sort
of chap who poked fun at most things and always
had a cheery smile. "My people didn?t want me to
go,? he confided to us, ? they say it?s worse than being
buried alive. No company except the stockmen and
a few blacks, no town anywhere near, the same old
faces all day and every day; they reckon I won?t
stand it longer than three months. But there are
the horses, and I?m fond of riding. Besides,? with a
chuckle, ? a bushranger or two may turn up, though
I hear they?re fast going out of date. My uncle?s
met a few in his time and can spin some rattling yams
about them. And he?s promised to let me go to
Sydney once a year. Annual bean-feast, so to speak.?
He openly envied us though. ? New Guinea ! ?
he exclaimed; ? now that's ripping, simply ripping.


Don?t know the country at all, but I?ve read of it.
Cannibals, pearls, gold-mines, precious stones; my
stars, you are in luck Going up country too, not
hanging round the coast. Good shooting too, and
alligators in the rivers, and everything. You?ll have
the time of your lives."
We rather expect to,? said Joe slyly.
" Oh, well," continued Becking?he had told us
his name?" we have a chance of bush-fires and
floods ; the rivers go down with a rush, I?ve heard,
and you have to ride forty miles a day trying to save
the sheep and things, so it won?t be all sitting about.
And there are wild blacks too, pretty handy. They
come to steal the sheep, and shoot poisoned arrows
at you; but still ?
? Taking things all round you ought to be kept
lively,? I said, laughing.
? Splendid," he agreed, " and my father was all
for having me sit in a stuffy office adding up piles of
figures. No, thank you. He makes pots of money at
the game, but it?s hardly good enough."
We never met him again after he left the vessel at
Sydney, but I?ve often wondered how he got on with
his fires and floods and bushrangers, and the wild
blacks with their poisoned arrows. I rather fancy he
is still racing after his drowning sheep and enjoying
fife immensely. He was that sort.
? Well,? exclaimed Joe, as we stood on the quay
waiting for Mr. Fortescue, ? that?s the end of the first


lap and you aren?t drowned yet. I suppose boats
run from here to New Guinea.?
? Sure to, though I don?t expect we?ll start for a
few days. Remember the last time we were in
Sydney ? ?
Rather. And Little East Street, and Jimmy, and
poor old Brandon. Here?s the boss coming. I guess
we won?t be staying in a doss-house this journey.
We?ll be taking a taxi to a swagger hotel.?
The prospect was rather surprising for a street
arab, who during the early years of his life had only
the key of the street to cany around with him


CHAPTER XXV
THE PRIDE OF THE ISLAND
It did not take us long to start the second lap. An
hour after we reached the hotel our passages were
booked for Samarai in a trading-vessel called the
Sunbeam, which was sailing in the early morning.
Sunbeam is a pretty name, but that was the only
pretty thing about her. She was smaller than the
Stormaway, uglier, squatter, and far dirtier. There
was no proper accommodation for passengers ; the
hold was chock-a-bloc with goods which overflowed
on to the deck, making the slowest locomotion diffi-
cult, not to say dangerous.
After taking a look round, Joe returned to me
chuckling. ? I think, Trevan,? said he, ? that you
stand a mighty good chance of swimming before you
reach port. This funny old tub ought to make foul
weather in the calmest sea.?
? Let?s hope we shan?t wish ourselves back in her,?
I replied.
The Sunbeam certainly proved a remarkable boat;
she left undone all those things she ought to have
done, while doing everything she ought not to have


done, but fortunately we met with no rough weather,
and in her own feckless way she carried on quite
successfully, to my chum's undisguised astonishment.
Poor Mr. Fortescue spent an unhappy time. The
rolling and pitching of the vessel, the groans and
lamentations of her engines, the large and wonderful
cockroaches, which would have made a fair cargo by
themselves, the impossibility of exercise except at the
risk of breaking one?s limbs combined to upset him
altogether, and not even the squealing pigs were more
delighted when the Sunbeam finally arrived off the
island of Samarai.
Our first sight of this beautiful island filled us with
wonder and delight. According to our employer it
was formerly little more than a swamp filled with
malaria which killed the white settlers off like flies,
but now the swamp had been drained, and malaria
no longer existed. The scenery was magnificent.
Tall palms, bread-fruit trees, mangoes, luxurious
cocoa-nut trees, strange and splendid flowers made up
such a wonderful picture that I could have gazed at
it for hours.
The town itself was a small place with a few stores,
three or four hotels and boarding-houses, a large jail
for native prisoners, a church and school, the Govern-
ment buildings, and a number of private houses, but
it was very busy and to us full of interest, Mr. For-
tescue w T ent away to interview the Resident Magistrate,
as there was so sign of his nephew, and we spent the


time of waiting watching the people?fuzzy-headed
natives, local police, traders who had come for stores,
hard-bitten miners from up-country, and pearlers
recruiting for ? boys ? to help in their work.
We were watching with amusement the pranks of
a number of them just returned from one of the islands,
when our employer?looking perplexed and worried,
came back. None of the officials had seen young
Manton, and there was no message from him.
? A dozen things may have delayed him,? said Joe
with his usual cheery optimism, ? he isn?t travelling
by a mail steamer or an express train ; he?s certain to
turn up in a day or two.?
As there was no sense in searching for the missing
man without at least some clue to guide us, our
employer arranged that we should stay at one of the
boarding-houses while he made further inquiries. In
the general sitting-room we found three other guests,
all diggers, one of whom, a short, stocky, pleasant-
faced man, introduced himself as Dan Sweet, ? Howdy,
boys,? he exclaimed, ? what?s brought you into this
blamed hole, if it?s a fair question. Sort of Bank
Holiday trip ? I reckon you?re Britishers.?
? You win,? replied Joe, ? but we aren't out on a
beano exactly, we?re botanising.?
The digger's jaw dropped and he looked at us
blankly.
? Botanising,? said he, ? what in thunder?s
that ? ?


? Collecting plants and flowers and things of that
sort,? I explained.
He regarded us with still more bewilderment.
? Collectin? plants ! Listen to that, you chaps. These
loonies have come to New Guinea to pick up plants.
Ever hear such a balmy tale ? ?
One of his mates, his name was Jackson, took his
pipe from his mouth. " I once met a queer cove on
that rig twenty miles up country, but he was a German
and wore spectacles. He had a small army of carriers
and sacks stuffed with rubbish. First trip ? ?
? The very first,? responded Joe promptly, and
since the telling could do no harm, he gave them a
brief sketch of our story.
? And the newy hasn?t turned up,? observed
Jackson ; ? well, there?s nothing surprising in that.
Gone under as likely as not; New Guinea isn?t as
healthy as some places. What with alligators and
savages and fever and malaria and hard drinks fellows
do go under pretty quickly. Where was this youngster
supposed to be ? ?
We shook our heads.
? Did he have a name ? ? adding thoughtfully,
? though that ain?t much use either.?
? His name?s Manton,? I replied.
? There?s no such chap in Woodlark, unless he?s
given himself another. Names do have a way of
altering out here.?
The stocky man looked up. " Manton,? he said ;


" young fellow, but a bit older than you, well set up,
and dark hair. What?s his first name ? ?
? Philip,? I replied eagerly.
? Then that?ll be him, sure as death. Phil Manton.
Well, sonny, he won?t be in Samarai yet awhile.?
Joe and I put the same question : ? Is he dead ? ?
? Not when I left camp, though he wasn?t far off,
so to say. Ever heard of Muddy Sam ? ? to the
others, and without waiting for a reply, added, ? This
young Manton cockerel stood up to him game as
anything, cleared him out of Pleasant Camp. Ah,
you can open your eyes, but it?s gospel truth. ? We?ve
no more use for you here,' says he, quiet as one of the
holy fathers, ?so you can quit right now. And if you
ever show your ugly mug here again, I'll drill holes
through it.? ?
Talked that to Muddy Sam ? ? in tones of astonish-
ment.
? Soft and cooing, like as if he was singing a hymn.
Made me think of Sunday School when I was a kid.?
? And he?s still alive ? ? incredulously.
?Of course there was an almighty scrap. The
youngster warned us off; said he?d settle his own
quarrels, thank you. Always very polite, he was.
He got knifed in the end, but by that time you
couldn?t have told Sam from a scrap-heap and we run
him out as if he d been a sick donkey. Hawkins says
the boy?ll recover though, and he?s the finest doctor
down under.?
p.u.j. R


? Who is this Muddy Sam ? ? I asked.
? The dirtiest skunk in New Guinea or out of it.
Ought to have been jailed and shot long ago. Cruel!
There?s no sort of cruelty he isn?t equal to. Jump a
man?s claim and knife him if he opens his mouth.
That?s what he?d been doing at Pleasant, and that?s
what the youngster wouldn?t stand for.?
? That,? observed Jackson, filling the room with
a cloud of peculiarly acrid smoke, ? is about the first
time Sam?s had his hand called. If I were in your
shoes, Dan, I?d keep well out of his way, or plug him
on sight.?
? We ought to have done that when we had the
chance,? gloomily, ? he?ll make things hot for the
whole crowd. Still I don?t say that I?m going to look
for him,? and the others laughed.
? I?m off to fetch the boss,? Joe exclaimed. ?It
isn?t a pretty story, but he?ll have to be told.
Mr. Fortescue had no doubt, from the miner s
description, that the young fellow lying ill at Pleasant
Camp was his nephew, and he show r ed the greatest
anxiety to learn all about his condition.
? I don?t say it wasn?t a close call because it was,?
Sweet told him, ? but your newy?s in good hands, pro-
fessor. Haw r kins is a slap-up doctor, though he can
use pick and shovel with the best. I d back his
say-so against most people?s. Don?t you be too
anxious.?
? But,? eagerly, ? I must go to the boy at once.


Where is this Pleasant Camp ? How am I to get
there ? ?
? The Firebug?s starting for Statham Island within
a fortnight,? volunteered one of the others, ? she?ll
put you ashore and the natives will guide you over-
land. The boys in that district don?t often kill whites,?
a remark which sounded interesting.
?You might get a passage in the Government boat
up the Fly River,? said Jackson, ? but she stays to
make inquiries at most of the villages, so the trip?s
pretty long-drawn-out.?
? Isn?t there any other way ? ? our employer in-
quired anxiously. ? I want to get there in the shortest
time possible.?
Sweet suggested after much thought that Casey
might hire out his tin can for the trip. ? She?s good
for a few miles without sinking,? he added.
Joe asked him if he meant a motor-boat.
? Casey calls her that,? he said, ? though no one
knows why. Would you like to see her ? ?
?I?ll be greatly obliged to you,? said Mr.
Fortescue.
? You won?t feel like that long,? significantly, ? but
in case you decide to hire her I?d advise you to leave
the bargaining to me ; Casey might cheat himself,?
at which there was a loud guffaw.
We went in a body to inspect the wonderful craft,
which bore the high-sounding name of Pride of the
Island printed in enormous and badly-formed letters


all round the sides. As Joe observed judicially, she
may at some former period have been a motor-boat;
now she was like nothing that ever floated on the waters
unless it was the raft my chum had tried to construct
when we were marooned. At one time she had been
shortened, at another added to ; she was of no par-
ticular shape and every square foot had been patched
and tinkered. The accommodation was vile, no self-
respecting engineer would have touched her engines
with a ten-foot pole ; but Casey expatiated on her
marvellous qualities as if she were the last word in
the Atlantic fliers.
Joe inquired sarcastically how much he would give
us to take her away, but Casey, preserving a grave
face, sang her praises all over again. No money could
buy her, he declared ?according to the miners he had
tried for the last five years to sell the abomination ?
but we could have her services for a reasonable sum,
and after much haggling and forcible language a
bargain was struck. The professor, as Sweet insisted
on calling Mr. Fortescue, was to provide everything
necessary, pay down a sum of thirty pounds, and make
good any damage that this incomparable boat might
suffer. The terms were a gigantic swindle, but he
was in a desperate hurry to start, and it was a case of
Hobson?s choice.
Nothing could be done that night, but at dawn we
began overhauling the Pride of the Island, laying in
a stock of petrol, which Casey supplied at his own


price?and stores, obtained from the same conscience-
less profiteer. Sweet generously offered to join the
party ?he had intended taking a trip to Brisbane?
and engaged a trusty boy belonging to the Bindarene
tribe to accompany us. His name was Bill, he had
been brought up at a Mission, could talk with the
natives of various tribes, and had proved his worth
on more than one dangerous expedition. He was slim
but wiry, with a pleasant face and lively manners,
and before all was over we were extremely glad that
Sweet had hired him.
It took all day to get things in some sort of order,
so we determined to sleep on board and start at day-
light. We had a stirring send-off. Casey strutted up
and down with the importance of a fleet commodore,
gazing with conscious pride at his property ; a crowd
of miners came to wish Sweet a safe journey, at the
same time hinting pretty broadly that they didn?t
expect him to have one ; Bill?s friends had gathered
in force, most of them envying his good fortune, and
there was much laughing and shouting when the Pride,
imitating the actions of a kicking horse, started on
her eventful voyage.
Joe and our friendly miner had been installed as
engineers, and I rashly volunteered to attend to the
steering till we entered the river, when Bill, who had
a passing acquaintance with its waters, was to take
over. For a while, however, the Pride steered herself.
Sometimes she went forward, at other times back ;


now she turned to have a last look at the receding
shore, then slung round with her nose questing for
Queensland, all at her own sw T eet will and fancy. If
she kept up these pranks in the river we shouldn?t
get very far.
? She?s feeling skittish after being laid up so long,
but that?ll w T ear off,? said Joe. ? Hope she doesn?t
hit something. We?ll get more used to her tricks
presently.?
Mr. Fortescue was too anxious on his nephew?s
account to bother about the dangers of the voyage,
? This may alter my plans, Trevan,? he remarked.
? I may have to abandon the expedition and take Phil
back to England. That will make no difference to
Shannon and you, as far as money is concerned, but
I shall be greatly disappointed.?
? So shall we,? I replied honestly, ? but things may
not be as bad as you fear. A month or so at Sydney
or in New Zealand may be all your nephew needs.
No doubt Shannon and I could stay at the camp till
you returned, work his claim for him, perhaps.?
? Sweet will be able to explain those things. lam
at a loss to understand how Phil came to be at this
place ; in his last letter he spoke of prospecting in
Woodlark Island.?
? Perhaps the new? place offered the better chance,?
I suggested.
? Mr. Rogers, the commissioner, considers it rather
dangerous. Our ow r n natives are fairly friendly, but


the camp isn?t far from the Dutch border, where there
are tribes of man-eaters. He gave me a sketch-map
of the country which later may prove useful.?
I didn?t say so, but the atrocious behaviour of the
Pride just then made me feel doubtful if we should ever
reach the camp, much less come away from it. How-
ever, after a series of miracles we got safely across the
sand-bars at the mouth of the river, and partly by
careful attention, but chiefly through luck, we sur-
vived the dangers of the first day, and shortly before
dusk fell tied our dilapidated kettle to the bank.
Among Bill?s accomplishments was the art of
cooking, and before long we were sitting down to a
savoury dish of curried fowl, followed by fresh pork,
with luscious bananas as dessert. Then Sweet told us
yams about the islanders, friendly and unfriendly,
and I could hardly avoid thinking there was little
actual difference between them. He also related stories
of white individuals akin to Muddy Sam, and on the
whole these gentlemen appeared to be as brutal and
bloodthirsty as the worst of the natives.
? But there are others, professor,? he continued.
"Take your newy?s partner, for example. We call
him English Harry, and never ask for his real name.
Why he quit over yonder no one knows or cares, but
he?s as white and straight as any man living. Saved
me once from an alligator at the risk of his own life,
and knocked me down afterwards because I wanted
to thank him. At home he belongs to what you'd call


the gentry; I guess his folk are pretty high up, but
he never puts on side. In camp he?s just a miner
same as me. Yes, we?re a mixed crowd. Remember
the fellow at Samarai, the one with the reddish
moustache ? Just along from Woodlark for a spell.
His father?s one of the richest men in Australia. Name
of Templeman. Been knocking about the world for
years. I could spin a yam about him that ?ud make
your eyes open wide, but it?s time to turn in if we?re
to make an early start. I?ll take the first watch and
hand over to Bill. There isn?t likely to be any danger
yet, but it?s always wiser to make sure. Hope you?ll
have a good rest, you?ll need it.?


CHAPTER XXVI
A BIG DISASTER
We started again at daylight, and there were so many
interesting things to attract one's attention that I
almost forgot the reason for our trip. The banks were
tremendously steep and in places bordered by enor-
mous trees that completely shut in one?s view. Here
and there near the villages were wide belts of sugar-
cane, and cultivated banana trees in profusion. At
one spot where a tributary flowed into the main stream
the natives had erected a suspension bridge, tall trees
on each bank being joined by cane floors, some vege-
table fibre pulled very tightly forming the sides. It
made me dizzy to look at, but the natives crossed
as easily and carelessly as if walking on firm
ground. Higher up were more trees and the forests
seemed to extend a considerable distance on both
sides.
I doubt if the others took much notice of what we
passed. Mr, Fortescue, very naturally, was thinking
about his nephew, while Joe and Sweet found their
job of nursing the machinery too strenuous to afford
time for sight-seeing. However, they were beginning


to learn something of the Pride s funny tricks, and we
went along all day without mishap.
It was on the fourth night that disaster came, and
even then one couldn?t blame the Pride. We had
tied up as usual and lay snug in a bend of the river
below a big rock that gave us a certain amount of
shelter. Mr. Fortescue, tired of being cramped up in
the boat, decided to stretch his legs on shore, so Sweet
and Bill speedily rigged up a tent where we could
have supper. The evening was fine, and after the meal
we made up a bed for our employer and left Bill to
keep watch. There seemed to be little danger; the
professor had his revolver and Bill his rifle, while both
possessed plenty of ammunition. Besides, we were in
friendly territory.
? No harm here,? Bill declared, ? only Bugi round
here, Bugi no fight white fellows."
? Fire your rifle if you need us,? said Sweet, ? we?ll
be with you in two jiffs ;" and to us, ? I wouldn?t
agree farther up, but the hostile savages never venture
down as far as this.?
Bidding the two good-night, we went aboard again,
saw that the boat was fastened securely, and examined
our revolvers and ammunition, which Joe had stowed
in a stout case and placed handy so that we could get
at them easily in an emergency. ?If this jolly old
boat should happen to knock any of us over the irons
are safer there than in our hip-pockets. You fellows
turn in, I?ll take the first watch and Sweet the third,


that?s the most dangerous,? and the miner agreed,
saying that an attack was always likeliest to be made
at dawn.
I slept peacefully till my chum turned me out.
? Nasty night, Trevan,? he remarked, ? heavy clouds
and a rising wind, we?ll have a rough journey to-
morrow. There?s one bit of luck, though, no savages
will trust their canoes afloat in the storm that?s coming.?
He lay down in my place, turned round, and was fast
asleep. Joe didn?t believe in wasting valuable time.
Going on deck I found that he hadn?t spoken without
reason. The clouds hung heavy and low, up river the
wind howled dismally, and I thanked our lucky stars
that the boat was moored in the shelter of the out-
jutting rock. No rain had fallen as yet, but the wind
increased in strength, from a howl the sound became a
roar ; I could hear the lash of the storm on the churn-
ing waters as they raced past; even in our sheltered
position the Pride rolled and pitched tremendously,
bringing the sleepers to their feet with a jerk. It was
too dark now to distinguish anything, and our voices
scarcely carried the length of the deck. The boat
trembled and quivered, a huge swirl of water heaved
her into the air, everything loose slipped overboard,
and she dropped back with a nasty jar. Then she
strained and tugged and pulled at her moorings, till
it became apparent that something must give way.
? She can?t stand much more,? I yelled, as Joe
carefully worked his way toward me. It was just one


of the stupid things one does say in such a case, and
Joe like a wise youth took no notice ; he had more
important matters on hand.
Ten minutes later the rain fell, and we heard a
tremendous commotion, as if a huge rock had flopped
into the water. That the Pride held as long as she
did was a tribute to our workmanship, but the end
was bound to come. What exactly happened was
difficult to tell, all we knew was that the boat was
adrift and we were helpless. ? Hold on tight and
trust to luck,? the miner shouted.
The advice was sound, but to profit by it quite
another matter. I saw a dim figure a few feet from
me, but could not tell which of the two it was. Sud-
denly something higher than the boat?s sides caught
the figure and carried it away. I shouted at the top
of my voice, and the miner?s answering cry reached
me from the fore part of the boat. ? Shannon?s gone,?
I yelled, and I caught something that sounded like
? A big tree.?
I felt a spasm of agony at the awful tragedy. In
the fraction of a second my chum had disappeared,
swept to his death. I had sufficient sense to realise
that we could do nothing, though I would gladly have
jumped into the raging waters after him. It was a
hard task staying there trying to save my own life ;
indeed for the moment I felt utterly indifferent
whether fife or death came to me.
? Look out there ! ? the miner shouted suddenly,


and a second tremendous tree with wildly waving
branches swept past, scarcely a yard away. Then we
spun round and round like a horse in a circus-ring till
my head went spinning too, and half unconsciously I
loosened my hold. A warning cry recalled me to my
senses, and the next instant a fearful crash flung me
face downward on the deck. I scrambled up ; there
came a splitting and rending, a hissing of water, a
thousand weird sounds caused by the demoniac wind,
and in the midst of it all Sweet grabbed me by the
shoulder.
? That?s the end of the Pride, Trevan, but I guess
we?re all right. She?s struck some rocks, but whether
they?re part of the bank I can?t say. She isn?t sinking,
she must be wedged in, grounded on a ledge. Keep
steady till the light comes.?
Keep steady ! What did it matter anyhow ? My
thoughts were fixed on my chum ?and his mother !
It seemed cruel and silly. Why had he been taken and
I left ? His death would bring sorrow and misery to
his mother; there was no one to mourn for me.
Luck was an evil thing, stupid and wicked. I cried
in the darkness and was not ashamed, for my heart
was filled with bitterness. How could I face Mrs.
Shannon if ever I got back to England ? But for me
Joe would not have come to New Guinea, and I felt
responsible for his death.
An hour passed, perhaps two; the rain gradually
stopped, the roar of the wind subsided to a faint


moan, the clouds stole off, a pale light appeared in the
sky, and then colours, crimson and gold and orange,
making a gorgeous picture. To me all this glorious
splendour of the morning was a hideous mockery.
Nature, dealing out death and destruction, had spent
herself in a furious outburst, and now appeared
smiling and genial, like some bland hypocrite.
Sweet was too practical to have any use for senti-
ment. ? That's the finish to Casey's lobster-tin," he
said, ? and no blame to her. She looks worse than a
scrap-heap. What a stroke of luck to be cast ashore
just at this spot."
We were on the opposite side of the river and
evidently some distance lower down. The boat had
been flung on to a ledge of rocks a trifle above the
water, and was broken into three pieces, the fore-part
so twisted and battered as to be unrecognisable.
? First thing is to salvage anything that may be
useful," my companion remarked. ? It?s to be hoped
the guns are safe."
To his intense satisfaction he discovered the case
intact, and removed two of the revolvers and a number
of cartridges. ?So far, so good," he exclaimed, ? but
there seems to be nothing eatable. We?ll have to
tighten our belts for breakfast and tighten 'em again
for dinner. The next thing is to cache the case in a
suitable spot; the natives are sure to find the wreck.
Then we?ll work downstream a bit to see if there?s
any sign of Shannon, though I reckon there isn?t much


left of him by now. Alligators ! Take hold of this
end ; it?ll be a ticklish job getting across. Ready ?
Watch your feet.?
I carried out his instructions listlessly, caring little
whether we succeeded or not, but he was full of grit
and determination, and never rested till we had lodged
the case in a hole near the bank and covered it over.
? Now,? said he, after fixing his bearings, ? we?ll
make a start, though it?s only a matter of form.
Pleasant sort of place to die in, isn?t it ? ?
The left bank hereabout was very different from the
right, near which we had chiefly kept while coming
up. For some distance it was bare and desolate,
with grim, forbidding mountains and narrow boulder-
strewn gorges with scarcely a trace of vegetation.
Here and there the rocks came right down, pushing
into the river, and several times we were forced to go
a long way round. My companion did not conceal his
opinion that we were on a hopeless quest, and he made
it specially plain that every step he took was simply
to please me.
? Mind you, Trevan,? he said earnestly, ? I?m
downright sorry for Shannon, but a dead man's dead
after all, and we have to think of the living. There?s
the guy in the tent who?s paying you ; he won?t know
what to do.?
? Bill?s with him,? I answered sullenly, ? and he
won?t want me to come back without Shannon.?
? What do you expect to find ? ? he persisted,


? Shannon?s either drowned and eaten, or eaten without
being drowned. You?ve seen for yourself that the
river?s thick with those ugly brutes.?
? He might have got ashore,? I argued, ? and any-
how I'm going on. Besides, we need to find a way
of crossing to the other bank,? and he grudgingly
admitted there was something in that.
We trudged on, mostly in silence, for Sweet was
getting tired of my obstinacy, looking eagerly along
the bank as well as in the river, but meeting with no
success. At the end of perhaps a three hours? tramp
my companion stopped. ? Look here, Trevan,? he
said, not unkindly, ? it's no use. If there was a dog s
chance I?d go on all day, but there isn?t; you must
see that yourself.?
I begged hard for another hour, and finally he
consented, though still grumbling. I can laugh now
as I recall the scene; we two, hungry, footsore,
stumbling along, and I, holding my hands to my
mouth, shouting from time to time, ? Joe ! Joe
Shannon ! ? as if some hope existed of receiving a
reply. Occasionally Sweet joined in, looking ashamed
of making a fool of himself, and one could scarcely
blame him. And then how we suddenly came to a
dead stop, and stared foolishly at each other.
? That you, Trevan ? And Sweet ? Thought you
had both gone under.?
There he was, sitting under a rock, hatless, of
course, his coat tom in many places, his trousers


ripped up, a deep scratch all down one cheek, a lump
as big as a hen?s egg on his head, but perfectly cool.
It made me laugh to hear his first question. ? Brought
any tucker ? ?
? Tucker, you heathen,? cried Sweet, ? we reckoned
on your being tucker for the ?gators. How came you
here, anyway ? ?
? There?s nothing in it. A drunken tree swept me
off the boat, jazzed on down stream while I hung on
to the branches, fetched up at the side, and flung
me on to the bank. That?s all, and now for the grub.?
? Do the same as we?ve done, tighten your belt,?
Sweet advised.
Joe jumped to his feet. ? What! ? he shouted,
? you a rescue party and no tucker ! Where?s the old
tin can ? ?
? She?s all right,? grinned the miner, ? waiting on
the rocks for you to admire her. Can you walk ?
because we have to go right back?there?s no way of
crossing here.?
Joe groaned and looked round dismally. "Not one
blamed banana-tree,? he said, " not even a dead
parokeet, and I?m starving.?
He tightened his belt and we set out. I was hungry
and dog-tired, but in my new joy the discomfort was
nothing, and it seemed no distance to the boat. Sweet
got out another revolver and cartridges, and we went
on, shouting and yelling, in the hope of attracting
attention on the other side. Presently we caught
p.u.j. s


sight of a figure dancing about and waving a rifle.
? Bill!? we shouted. There was an answering cry
and then Bill disappeared. Clambering out to the
edge of the rocks we waited patiently. More than an
hour passed and then he appeared higher up with Mr.
Fortescue dragging what was evidently meant for a
raft. Between them they pushed it into the water,
the native got on, and with the aid of a long pole
very cleverly managed to guide his primitive craft
almost to our feet.
? That won?t bear us, it?ll go to pieces,? I said.
? Bear one,? proudly, ? one and Bill. Go down
stream a little. Then Bill come back.?
We sent Joe first, and as the raft grounded on the
other side Mr. Fortescue met it. Then the three of
them painfully dragged it up stream and the manoeuvre
was repeated until all were safely over.
? The boat?s gone to kingdom come, professor,?
said Sweet, who came last, ? but the only thing the
matter with us is we?re starving. All the grub?s at
the bottom of the river. What?s to be done, Bill ?
The native showed his teeth. ? Bugi village. Bugi
trade white fellow, no fight. Fowls, pigs, yams.
Bugi trade. Big feast.?
" Can we get there to-night ?
Bill shook his head. "Not to-night, too far. Part
way, then sleep, breakfast in morning.?
? I can hardly drag one foot after the other, pro-
fessor, and these two are just as bad, but we d better


make a start," Sweet advised. " The longer we stay
here the worse off we?ll be.?
This advice was so sensible that no one could object.
Striking the tent and placing it with the raft, we set
out, Bill leading with Sweet to pick out the best way.
That would have been a terrible night-march at any
time, but in our state of collapse, there are no words
strong enough to describe it. I could not keep my
eyes open, my legs were like bars of lead, and I stumbled
at every other step. More than once Joe had to put
an arm round my body to hold me up. ? It?s bad to
march on an empty stomach, but you?ll have a fine
appetite for breakfast," said that cheerful idiot.
Bill stopped at length, explaining that we had reached
the best place for resting, and I thoroughly agreed
with him. Any place was the best place for me just
then, and almost before stopping I dropped on the
ground too dead beat to trouble about anything. As
to taking my share of the watch, if one was set, I
candidly admit that I shouldn?t have been of any
earthly use.


CHAPTER XXVII
THE MASSACRE
I fell asleep as I have said, and Joe wakened me.
He declared I had slept for four hours, it appeared
like four seconds. The light was still faint and gray,
so that one saw nothing clearly. The country was
flat and stony, but at the end of an hour?s hobbling
over loose boulders we found ourselves in a morass of
some white sticky substance that clogged our feet and
made progress both slow and fatiguing. Bill went
ahead, picking out what he called a path, the rest
following in single file with the miner acting as a
kind of rearguard.
It was a relief to reach the opposite side of the
swamp and to tread again on firm, solid ground. The
land stretched out now in a series of gently swelling
hillocks and hollows covered with long grass and
stumpy bushes. There were many trees too, but not
of a fruit-bearing kind, and we looked in vain for
something eatable. Bill's sense of distance was not
acute ; when questioned he asserted the village was
a mile away. I multiplied that by three and then fell
short. At length to every one?s gratification we came
in sight of cultivated land and presently Bill, who


had gone on in advance, returned in company of a
native with massive limbs and a great deal too much
stomach. This was Baro, the chief of the Bugi in
that district. With many friendly gestures he led us
to the village where, inside the stockade, a noisy and
gesticulating crowd of men, women, and children
had gathered. I remarked to Joe that the place seemed
sadly lacking in tailors.
Bill, who did all the bargaining, announced with
great solemnity that we were ? government,? very
strong and powerful, which I must say we looked, and
able to destroy the village. But we were ? good
government,? and if Baro treated us well all sorts of
pleasant things, such as the passing of money between
us and the Bugi, would follow. Therefore Baro should
provide a house ?the houses were thatched huts built
on piles ?and kill fowls and pigs, and cook plenty of
yams for which we would pay with both hands.
He proved a popular orator, and the Bugi loudly
applauded his telling speech. Baro led us to his own
dwelling, a large and commodious hut, and promptly
turned out the inmates, except two women who stayed
to wait on us. I spent the waiting interval on a mat,
sleeping soundly, and it needed a strong dig in the
ribs to rouse me. I have always kept a warm comer
in my heart for those excellent Bugi, who provided
such a sumptuous banquet. True, we had neither
table nor table-cloth ; knives and forks were absent,
but we squatted down to plump chicken, the sweetest


of young pork, yams in abundance, and bananas that
had a delicious flavour. It is an old saying that
starving men should not eat too heartily, but we
defied that excellent maxim, and fortunately no one
seemed any the worse.
The miner had decided to return in a canoe for
the hidden ammunition, but shortly before the feast
ended, Bill, looking very scared, came in and whis-
pered something to Sweet, who instantly went out,
leaving us puzzled and slightly alarmed. He returned
quickly and with him two white men, one of whom had
been pretty badly wounded by a spear. I guessed
they were miners and wondered how they came to
be there.
? Professor, there?s bad news for you and all of us,?
he began gravely. ? These chaps are mates of mine
at Pleasant Camp. The long one?s Pinkerton, the one
with the hole bored in his side is the Fish. If he
ever had another name he?s forgotten it. They came
here the day before yesterday and the Bugi gave
?em shelter. Their medicine-man doctored the Fish
in fine style, he gets plenty of practice in that sort of
wound. They left the camp in a hurry ; Pinkerton
says the name will have to be changed.?
? Well,? put in the Fish, ? you can hardly call it
pleasant, anyway.?
We were all sitting up now and staring at the
speaker. ? What is it ? ? exclaimed Mr. Fortescue
anxiously, ? what has happened ? ?


? Well, professor, you must give yourself a brace
up. The Tugeri from over the border have been on
the war-path. According to their account,? and he
pointed to his mates, " all the villages round about
must have joined in the raid. It was the night before
last when they broke in, yelling and stabbing like
devils. The boys had no chance. These two got
away, but not before the Fish was mauled a
bit.?
? Have you any news of my nephew ? ? falteringly.
? They?ve told me all they know, professor. There
wasn?t a whisper of the Tugeri being out, and Pinker-
ton says it all seems like a nasty dream. He happened
to be on the east side of the camp when the fuss
began, and, like a wise man, skipped without any
questions asked. All the Fish knows is that he emptied
his revolver and crawled away on his stomach.
Pinkerton came across him, did a little amateur
surgery on the spot, and helped him along here. They
seem to have been in a violent hurry to get away.
As to your newy, professor, he may be alive or dead,
who?s to say ? ?
? Who?s his newy ? ? Pinkerton asked.
? Phil Manton.?
? The youngster that called Muddy Sam's hand !
The last time I saw him he was spouting poetry, same
as if he'd been on the stage, and no more able to
fight or run than a new-born kitten. The niggers may
have missed him ! ?


Fortescue jumped up excitedly. ?We must start
at once,? he cried, " we may be in time.?
Sweet touched him lightly on the shoulder. ? Gently,
professor,? he exclaimed; ? you?re a bit excited and
no wonder, but you won?t do any good by rushing at
the thing head down like a bull in a china-shop.
Bill?s gone to fetch the ammunition, but I can make
old man Baro understand. Our quickest way is by
river, and the Bugi will take us if they?re well paid.
They can put us ashore not far from the camp. We?ll
leave word for Bill to follow, so there won?t be any
time wasted. As for the Fish, he?ll be all right here,?
at which that worthy flatly announced his intention
of coming with us.
? I can sit in a canoe, and shoot if you give me
some cartridges,? he declared. ? There?s nothing much
the matter with me. Hawkins isn?t a patch on this
Bugi medicine-man when it?s a case of a jab with a
spear.?
Sweet?s reply was forcible and direct, but he stub-
bornly refused to be left behind, though finally con-
senting to wait till Bill returned with the ammunition.
Then Sweet quickly struck a bargain with the chief,
several canoes were manned and filled with provisions,
and with the least possible delay we started.
Pinkerton sat in front of me, and on the way I asked
him what chance there was of finding Manton alive.
?Well,? said he slowly, ? I didn?t want to skittle
the old boy over, but what chance can there be ?


The Bugi could make themselves unpleasant, but
these Tugeri are about the last word in savages.
Bloodthirsty cannibals they are. The best I hope for
Manton is that he was killed right then. Savvy ? ?
I nodded, and neither of us referred to the subject
again.
It was wonderful how skilfully the natives managed
their heavily-laden canoes. Their fuzzy heads made
them look wild and outlandish, but they were fine
men ; they wore no clothes except a loin-cloth, and
as they used the paddles one could see with admira-
tion their rippling muscles. At first they went merrily
enough, singing, or rather chanting, in unison, but as
we ascended the river their song died down to a
murmur, and their faces showed signs of fear.
? Their hearts would be in their boots only they
haven?t any,? said Pinkerton. ? They?ve heard of the
raid, and they aren?t anxious to meet the Tugeri.?
?Yet they look capable fighting-men.?
?So they are, but not against the Tugeri; the
Tugeri are top dogs in this part of the island, though
they live chiefly across the border. These chaps?ll
dump our stuff on shore and scoot, and small blame
to ?em. They don?t want to go into a Tugeri cooking-
oven,?
I had read of cannibals, had joked with Joe about
them, had even spoken with men who professed to
have lived among them, but somehow until that
moment I had never fully realised their existence,


and Pinkerton?s matter-of-fact allusion to a cooking-
oven filled me with horror and disgust, and, I confess,
more than a little fear.
We covered the last part of the journey in darkness,
and it was with difficulty Sweet directed the rowers to
the spot where he wished to land. Here things turned
out as Pinkerton had predicted. The friendly natives
in fear and trembling carried the provisions ashore,
and after dumping them down anyhow hurried back to
their canoes, and shot off as if the Evil One were
after them.
? Nothing can be done before daylight,? observed
Sweet, ? and I guess all of us had better keep watch.
The beggars most likely have gone back to their
villages, but one can?t be sure. If they do turn up
we'll fight it out, and I?d advise every one to keep a
last bullet for himself.?
? Cheerful sort of chap,? remarked Joe, " almost
as lively as Jeremiah.?
He took no notice of the jibe, but placed us in our
stations with strict orders not to fire until we were
absolutely certain that an enemy was approaching.
? And then,? he added crisply. ? don't waste a
bullet.?
Mr. Fortescue, who was all for pushing on, naturally
chafed at the delay, and it was only with consider-
able reluctance that he agreed to stop.
? I?m sorry for the professor,? Sweet said to us,
? but it would be a mad trick to go on in the dark,


especially as there's no earthly chance of finding
Manton. If there were, of course we?d risk it.?
I lay on the bank facing the water, with revolver
cocked, eyes staring into the gloom, ears straining to
catch the faintest sound. I thought of the night when
we waited for Captain Blunt, but this experience was
far more evil and terrifying. The others were some-
where near me, but out of sight, and to all intents
and purposes I was alone. The hours crept on slowly
and painfully, but daylight came at last and we were
free to move.
Little time was wasted before the start. We ate
our breakfast hastily, cached the remainder of the
provisions, and after a final look round, set out. We
travelled quickly, our employer urging us on, and
presently, though the marauding savages had disap-
peared, we came across marks of the deadly struggle
?here a broken spear, there a cap and fragments of
clothing, in more than one place a trail of blood where
a wounded man had endeavoured to drag himself
away. At the deserted camp we found more evidence
of the furious fight; arrows, bent spears smeared with
blood, shreds of clothes, and spent cartridges, but
not a single human being dead or alive. We searched
long and patiently, Mr. Fortescue the most energetic
among us, until finally it became plain that he must
abandon all hope of finding his nephew at the camp.
?I?m sorry, professor,? exclaimed Sweet kindly,
? but it?s what I expected, your newy?s shared the


fate of his mates, and the mischief is we can't do
anything for him or them.?
? No,? he agreed, ? I can?t expect you to risk your
lives, but I must go in search of him.?
Sweet was getting angry. " That's downright non-
sense, professor,? he answered roughly, ? you will only
get yourself and these youngsters killed. If ?
? If Mr. Fortescue goes, Trevan and I go with him,?
exclaimed Joe.
? Of course you will, and that gets my back up.
If there was a dog?s chance Pinkerton and I would
join you, but there isn?t. It?s simply throwing all
your lives away for nothing.?
He turned aside and talked earnestly to Pinkerton.
Both were angry at our employer?s folly, for no man
had ever taken up such a senseless idea. To wander
from the camp by himself or with Joe and me meant
certain death within a few hours. We should be
knocked on the head with a club, or speared, or shot
with an arrow without the least chance of defending
ourselves. The idea was sheer folly and yet we were
bound to go with him.
Presently the miners finished their talk and Sweet
came across to us. ? Look here, professor,? he ex-
claimed, ? I don?t want to be rough, but I've got to
talk horse-sense. We can?t keep you here against
your will without a rumpus, but we mean to stop this
mad scheme, and you?ll have to stay till we?ve had a
chance of talking to Bill. All we know at present is


that the murderers are Tugeri, but they have several
villages, and we haven?t the foggiest notion to which
your newy?s been taken, if he?s been taken anywhere.
Now be sensible and wait quietly. Bill will be back
in a few hours, and when you?ve heard what he has
to say you can decide for yourself.?
? But every minute may be precious.?
? If you start off on a wild-goose chase without
knowing where you?re going or what you?re doing
every minute may be wasted.?
? That?s sound reasoning, Mr. Fortescue,? said Joe.
? Trevan and I are ready to start when you give the
word, but I reckon we?ll save time in the end by
waiting. It?s worth while having Bill?s opinion.?
He yielded at length and sat down by the edge of
a shaft, looking worn and miserable. He was desper-
ately anxious to do something, but after the first hot
fit had passed he saw that the miners were right.
We had brought part of the provisions with us, and
near midday took a sparing meal, washing the food
down with water from the spring that ran through
the camp. Then Sweet advised our trying to sleep,
adding rather brutally that the next one might be
our last. Though not a bad sort on the whole he
was rather careless in his choice of words.
However, we took his advice, and I was dropping
off quite peacefully when a sudden cry of surprise
from Pinkerton roused me, and I jumped up, grabbing
the revolver which I had placed by ray side. Pinkerton


was running along the bank like a mad dog and
Sweet after him, both shouting and calling out what
sounded like men?s names. Joe was staring at them
as if he thought they had lost their wits.
? What is it ? ? I asked in amazement.
? Don?t know ; they?ve spotted something or some-
body. Now they?ve stopped. Jerusalem ! It?s two
white men. They?ll be miners who escaped the
massacre. They?re all coming back and one?s limping.?
Our employer had joined us, his cheeks flushed and
his eyes shining. His lips were twitching tremulously,
and he gazed eagerly at the approaching men. Sud-
denly the expression of his face changed, and he turned
aside with a deep groan.


CHAPTER XXVIII
A LUCKY CAPTURE
The limping man forcibly held my attention. He was
rather above the average height, and slightly though
firmly built. Though tanned and roughened by
exposure to the weather there was something about
him different from us and even from his companion.
His face was hard and set, and he had a natural aii
of command that immediately impressed an onlooker.
How he came to be an ordinary miner I never heard,
but it caused me no surprise later to leam that he
had been a soldier of high rank and that he belonged
to a well-known English family. A portion of one
trouser-leg had been cut away and his thigh bandaged
with part of a shirt; his left shoulder had been
similarly treated. I put him down in my mind, and
rightly, as the man whom Sweet had spoken of as
English Harry.
His companion was a big, burly, full-cheeked man
who looked good-humoured and easy-natured. This
was Hawkins, who before coming to New Guinea had
earned his living as a properly qualified surgeon. It
was he who had attended to the other?s injuries. They
287


came straight toward us and the one who had been
wounded at once addressed Mr. Fortescue.
?lam sorry to hear of your trouble, sir,? he began
in a cultivated voice, ? and still more grieved at not
being able to give you much hope of your nephew?s
safety. He was my partner for a short time, and I
became warmly attached to him. If he is dead the
person responsible for his death is a scoundrel called
Muddy Sam, I understand Sweet has related that
part of the story.?
Mr. Fortescue inclined his head, not trusting himself
to speak.
?It was Muddy Sam who organised the attack. To
be revenged on the boys who ran him out of the camp
he has done what I honestly believed the foulest ruffian
incapable of doing ; he has gone back on the white
man and thrown in his lot with a cannibal tribe. He
is now almost certainly with the Tugeri chief, Tiki, and
lam going to kill him. It is possible that your nephew
may be in the same village, but I would not build too
much on that.?
He spoke without raising his voice, and betrayed
no hint of passion, but when he said very simply and
quietly, lam going to kill him,? he made me shudder,
the words sounded so pitiless. I felt that they were
not a threat, but merely a simple statement, and I
already regarded Muddy Sam as a dead man.
From the new T -comers we received a more vivid
account of the raid. Taken completely by surprise,


the miners, though deserted by their native helpers,
who had rushed off at the first shot, had put up a
desperate resistance. Few, apparently, had escaped,
though it was possible that two or three might be
hiding in the neighbourhood.
Returning to the river we brought out the remainder
of the provisions, which proved very welcome to English
Harry and the doctor. When they had finished eating
we formed a council of war to discuss our plans.
Muddy Sam had directed the attack, but Tiki, the
dreaded Tugeri warrior, had led it, and it was in his
village that the renegade white man had probably
taken up his quarters. Here, too, if anywhere, we
felt fairly certain Manton would be found.
? It?s a pretty hard nut to crack,? said Sweet, ? and
I don?t exactly see how we?re to do it. There?s a
tremendously strong stockade round the place, and
Tiki has a hundred fighting men. We count nine all
told, and none of the friendly natives will join us,
they?re too much afraid of Tiki.?
??We don?t need them ; we?ve revolvers and plenty
of ammunition. The Bugi will lend us canoes, and
we can creep up at night. Tiki?s village is the first
one, which makes things easier. Remember, he thinks
we are all killed, which will make him careless. There?s
another thing, too, though I needn?t dwell on it. Ever
since the raid the brutes have been eating and drink-
ing, and w T on?t be in much condition for a fight. If we
can take them by surprise the rest should be easy.?
p.u.j. ? x


It was strange how completely every one fell under
the spell of this quiet man with the soft voice and the
hard face ! No one offered any opposition to his plan,
though it appeared terribly risky and hazardous.
The arrival of Bill, accompanied by the Fish, and
a friendly native, who, directly the case was landed,
showed the greatest eagerness to be gone, created a
diversion. If there were any peace-makers among
us they found no ally in the Fish, who on hearing
the story of Muddy Sam?s treachery, spluttered and
exploded with rage. ? The dirty skunk,? he cried
passionately, ? we?ll have him out and hang him if
he?s surrounded by a thousand niggers. A white man
to go back on his own colour !
This seemed in the opinion of all of them to be the
blackest crime he could have committed.
I felt sorry for Bill. He was brave and plucky, and
had risked his life many times with the miners, but
at the mention of the Tugeri his courage momentarily
gave way, and at the name of the dreaded Tiki his
limbs shook. But fright could not weaken his loyalty,
and he willingly agreed to guide us to the village.
Directly these points were settled, English Harry
started off with Bill and the friendly native to buy
a fresh stock of provisions and hire canoes in which to
ascend the river, enjoining us meanwhile to maintain
a strict watch.
? I guess we?re biting off more than we can chew,?
remarked Sweet, as he and I were getting out the


cartridges, ? but as long as we hang that beast of a
Muddy Sam I don?t care if we?re all wiped out.?
? But won?t you have to hand him over to the
police ? ? I asked, and he laughed unpleasantly.
? No, sonny,? he replied with a snap, ? we?ll be
our own police and judge and jury and hangman all
rolled into one. There?s no sense in letting the govern-
ment fool about with the slimy brute. He?s outside
the pale. I don?t quite figure out how we?ll manage,
but Harry?s going for him, and what Harry goes for
he gets. He?s a lucky beggar besides being a dare-
devil in his quiet way. There?s another thing too,
but don?t harp on it to the professor. There?s more
than half a chance of finding his newy. Sam would
take care he wasn?t killed with the others ; that would
have been too merciful a death. He?d carry him off
and have him nursed back to health.?
? That seems curious,? I exclaimed in astonish-
ment.
? Not at all, he?ll provide better sport if he?s strong
and fit. Trust me, I know Muddy Sam.?
The suggestion sounded horrible, and altogether
beyond belief, yet the miner evidently believed in
what he said, and later, Pinkerton and the Fish both
told me much the same thing. Presently I took my
spell of sentry-go, and afterwards forgot all my
troubles in a sound sleep, not waking till the return
of our leader, who had heavily bribed several natives
to navigate the canoes as far as our camping-ground.


Farther they would not have ventured for all the
pigs and fowls in New Guinea.
By the time the canoes arrived it was too late to
make a start, as daylight would have found us on the
river in full view of the natives, and since secrecy was
essential for our success we remained until the late
afternoon of the next day. The plan decided on was
to approach the stockade under cover of darkness, and
wait in a suitable hiding-place close to the bank while
English Harry went on to reconnoitre the position and
decide on the method of attack. ? Everything,? he
said, ? depends on a complete surprise; unless we can
be sure of that we may as well stay here.?
As the time for our departure approached my fears
increased and I grew very uneasy. How were we to
attack successfully a strong village surrounded by a
stockade and defended by a hundred warriors armed
with formidable spears and bows and arrows ? Unless
our firearms threw them into a panic they would over-
whelm us by sheer force of numbers. Joe, and per-
haps some of the others, shared my opinions, but out-
wardly at least there was no weakening. The game
had begun and we should have to see the end of it.
I do not think Mr. Fortescue realised the desperate
nature of the venture ; he was so excited at the chance
of rescuing his nephew that nothing else counted,
and he would have gone alone rather than not
at all.
Fortunately for our purpose dusk fell early, there


was no moon, and ten minutes after embarking we
were lost in the gloom. At that stage we depended
almost entirely on Bill, who, though he would rather
have faced a hundred hungry alligators than the
Tugeri chief, loyally kept down his fears and piloted
us with the greatest skill.
Although still dark, daybreak was not far off when
we approached the bank a short distance below the
village, and pushed our craft into a favourable position,
where they were partly screened by bushes and long
grass and tall reeds growing right down to the water?s
edge. Thus far all had gone well, but the most critical
time still lay in front of us. Taking Bill and Sweet
with him, our leader stepped quietly ashore and
started on his dangerous errand.
The rest of us sat in complete silence, not daring
to speak or to make a movement of any kind. The
minutes seemed like hours, and we were racked by
almost intolerable suspense. Unless our companions
returned quickly with some definite plan the enter-
prise must end in failure, since the light was spreading
and all chance of a surprise would be out of the
question. Even if they succeeded in discovering a
weak spot the prospect was still pretty hopeless.
Suddenly from out of the stillness came a wild,
fierce yell, a yell of astonishment, consternation, and
anger. Then a shot rang out, a second and third in
rapid succession, and instinctively we realised what
had happened. By some mischance the three intrepid


men had been discovered and were battling desperately
for life.
In an instant the doctor leaped to the bank. ? Come
on, boys,? he cried, ? it?s a fight to a finish. Keep
under cover and send every bullet home.?
We tumbled out anyhow, plunging into the reeds,
scrambling along, knocking our heads and barking
our shins against the trunks of trees, and shouting,
? Stick it out, we?re coming.?
There was a fair amount of light now, so that we
could see each other. The doctor was still ahead with
Mr. Fortescue at his heels, and the others, except the
Fish, close behind. That worthy, weakened by his
wound, was, much to his disgust, unable to keep up.
? Here they are,? cried Hawkins joyfully. ? Come
on, Harry, we?re all here.?
Breathless, panting, but uninjured, the three men
raced on, the yells of the savages sounding nearer and
nearer. ? Under cover, quick,? shouted English
Harry; ? don?t fire till they get close up, and then
give ?em a volley.? We dropped to our knees and
waited, but only for a few seconds.
As near as I could judge there were twenty to
thirty of them, tall, strong, lusty fellows, headed by
one towering above all the others. He carried a huge
spear and bounded over the broken ground with the
speed and agility of a wild animal. We lay still,
hardly daring to breathe and not moving a muscle.
Bill, who had dropped close to me, shook and trembled


like a leaf. ?Tiki,? he exclaimed nervously, while
his teeth chattered.
? If we can bag the chief, boys, the game?s ours,?
cried English Harry, ? but don?t kill him. Ready ?
Wait for the word.?
On they dashed in wild pursuit of the mysterious
strangers, and totally unconscious of the death-trap
to which they rushed.
? Now! ?
Our revolvers blazed out; three of the savages fell,
their companions stopped, frightened and irresolute ;
Tiki alone, brandishing his spear and shouting his
war-cry, came on. Fearing to kill, we had missed
him altogether. Our leader, sighting again, took
careful aim, and fired deliberately. Tiki fell, shot
through the thigh, but even so he made frantic efforts
to get up. Active and swift as tiger-cats, Sweet and
Pinkerton leaped from their cover, seized his feet, and
dragged him back. A shower of arrows followed,
happily without doing any mischief. Again the
natives, shrieking and yelling, halted in doubt and
confusion.
? Talk to them, Bill,? exclaimed our leader. ? Say
that unless they go back we will kill the chief. If they
go away he shall live. Cover them, you fellows, and
if any one attempts to shoot, drop him.?
As Bill stood up one of the savages raised his
bow, but before he could stretch the string a bullet
from Mr. Fortescue?s revolver broke his arm, and the


weapon dropped harmlessly to the ground. It was a
capital shot, and the warriors howled in affright.
I have said Bill was brave, and the job needed some
pluck, but he spoke boldly, only his voice quavered
a little as he pronounced the name of the formidable
chief. The doctor understood a word here and there,
but to us his speech, emphasised by many gestures,
was unintelligible. The Tugeri howled and danced
and shook their spears violently, and we saw with
dismay that many more were coming by twos and
threes to join them.
Bill turned to us. ? They won?t go,? he exclaimed,
? they will kill us all, their women will heat the
cooking-ovens. They say let Tiki come back, and
they will go away.?
All this while the doctor and Sweet were busy with
the chief. They dressed and bandaged his wound,
and now, each holding a revolver to his head, they
propped him up so that his men could see him.
?Tell him what to say, Bill. The men must go back
to the village, put all their weapons in a heap, and
stand outside the Pouri-Pouri house. Then we will
come and hold a palaver. We have great magic.
If any one touches his weapons he shall die, and Tiki
shall die as well. Hurry along.?
Poor Bill! To stand face to face with the ferocious
savage and tell him what to do was a severe test of
courage ! Tild listened without moving a muscle and
at the end began to talk, or rather bellow. The men


gave a shout, lowered their spears, and sullenly shifted
their ground.
? Did he speak good words, just what you told him ? ?
English Harry asked suspiciously.
?Yes, he said do what white fellows want, no fight
white fellow now, wait a while. By-and-by they will
have feast.?
? Oh, that's the game, is it ? Well, we shall see.
Now, Mr. Tiki, we are moving on. Tell him. Bill,
what will happen if any of his tribe shoots, or if he
tries to run away. By jove, boys, what a slice of
luck ! When they spotted us I reckoned the game
was up, but now we hold all the trumps and Tiki
is the joker. They won't want him killed, but keep
your eyes open and shoot straight at the first sign of
trickery. Trot the gentleman along, doctor ; we?ve
got to be quick or Muddy Sam will give us the slip.?
? This must be a bit more exciting than searching
for the Mascot, Trevan,? said Joe chaffingly, as we
took our places.
I glanced at Mr. Fortescue, whose face was tense
with mingled hope and fear. Was it possible that he
would find his nephew ? and alive ? Even then it
seemed too good to be true.


CHAPTER XXIX
IN THE TUGERI STRONGHOLD
Such a strange spectacle as the early sun looked down
upon had never been seen in any part of New Guinea.
Tiki, who walked with difficulty and in evident pain,
was helped along by Sweet, while the doctor followed,
keeping his revolver pressed as a gentle reminder
against the chief?s head. His face showed no fear,
only a kind of contempt, though he fully understood
what would happen if he tried to escape, or if any
of the tribesmen were stupid enough to attempt a
rescue.
The natives had vanished, but for all that we kept
our weapons ready for action, advancing cautiously,
and looking forward with a certain amount of appre-
hension to every bit of cover. It was not hard to
realise that we were completely in the power of our
savage opponents. One flight of spears and arrows
at short range would destroy us, but it would mean
also the death of Tiki, a fact that gave us all extra
courage. It seemed unlikely that the Tugeri would
risk the life of their powerful chief, though even that
was not impossible.


? I don?t think we?ve much to fear as long as we
keep tight hold of him,? Pinkerton remarked cheerfully,
? and Sweet?s doing that. Of course we can?t alto-
gether reckon on the fellows inside who didn?t hear
his orders.?
? I expected to see a hundred, and there weren?t
more than thirty,? said Joe.
? Oh, that?s one of the things Harry was reckoning
on. They?ve been having a carouse all night, and
most of ?em would be sleeping off the effects; we?ll
find ?em inside. And Muddy Sam too, I hope.?
? That?s what I?m doubtful about,? growled the
Fish; ? he?ll have heard the news by this time and
be gone like a shot.?
I had wondered why he hadn?t come to help Tiki
when the alarm was first given, but the miner?s
explanation satisfied me. ? Even a skunk like Sam
wouldn?t join in their beastly feast,? he said; ? he?d
steal away to his own hut and lie doggo till it was all
over. Afterwards, likely enough the natives wouldn?t
let him go. In that case he?ll try to make mischief,
but that?s the only danger I can see. Cheerio, professor,
we may find your newy yet. He was pretty light-
headed, you know, and most savages are terribly
afraid of a chap who?s off his balance. They?ve got a
notion that it?s owing to some sort of sorcery, and
they don?t like offending evil spirits. I had a mate
once who owed his life to that.?
? If he?s still alive I?m afraid the man you call


Muddy Sam will kill him directly he hears of our
coming.?
? As likely as not he won?t get the chance, professor.
These fuzzy-heads are very suspicious, and get hold
of all kinds of queer notions. They may fancy, for
example, that this is all Sam?s doing, and not stop
to argue. I wouldn?t chance sixpence against a gold-
mine that they haven?t knocked his brains out.?
? Or tied him up to wait for what happens,? said
Pinkerton, ? that,? vindictively, ? is what I?m hoping.?
A close sight of the formidable stockade filled me
with amazement that any one should ever have
dreamed of a successful attack ; there seemed to be
not a weak spot anywhere, and we must all have
been shot or speared in trying to force a way
through. The situation was still desperate ; but for
the stroke of luck in capturing Tiki it would have
been hopeless. However, we were at the entrance,
which the natives had left open, and the procession
came to a halt.
? This is where we bum our boats,? exclaimed
English Harry. ? I reckon we?ve made things safe,
but if they aren?t, blaze away till the last cartridge,
and keep that for yourselves. Ready, Bill ? Tell
Tiki to warn his people that if they shoot an arrow
or throw a spear he?s a dead man ; shove him inside,
doctor, and tickle his skull with your gun. Hold on
tight, Sweet. If he gets away we?re done.?
The three went through while we held our breath


in suspense, as Tiki in a loud voice delivered his
message ; then, forming up, we advanced at a slow
pace, as if there were no need for hurry, through the
village. It was a large place, with numerous huts and
sheds, and one big building, the Pouri-Pouri house,
in front of which nearly a hundred warriors had
gathered in a body. They were unarmed, their weapons
lying heaped on the ground a short distance off. At
this sight I breathed more freely, beginning to hope
that after all we might escape the cooking-ovens.
We passed on, and with our back to the building,
faced the crowd.
? Look as if we?ve nothing to fear,? our leader
advised us, ? the slightest sign of weakness on our
part and the game?s up. Now, Bill, pipe up and tell
?em what I say.?
I had no doubt then, and have none now, that the
natives were awed by his splendid fearlessness ; he
spoke as easily and naturally as if addressing a peaceful
meeting in an English town-hall.
?We have powerful fire-magic,? he began, Bill
repeating his words in their own language, ? and can
kill you all and Tiki as well. But we aren?t going to
kill you, if you do as we tell you.? The natives stood
like so many statues, without the stirring of a single
eyelash.
? A white man came among you not long ago,?
he continued, ? a bad white man with lying tongue
and evil heart. He told you to come to the miners?


camp to kill, and showed you how to do it. He cast
his spell over you and Tiki. You had a great night
stabbing and shooting arrows. The miners were asleep
and tired, so you were able to kill some of them. But
you did not kill them all, and now we have come here
with our fire-magic. What have we come for ? We
have come for the evil white man who taught you to
make war on us. That is the first thing. Where is
he ? He must be given to us if you want Tiki to
live.?
These words produced a sudden and violent com-
motion. The natives called out, waved their arms,
and made the wildest gestures. They seemed, as
Sweet remarked, half children, half devils.
" They are talking of the wiiite man,? Bill told us.
? They say it was his fault; he put sorcery over them
to make them come. Last night he went to his hut
to sleep. They left him alone till this morning. Then
they heard that Tiki was a prisoner, so they fell on
the white man in his hut and tied him up before he
could use his fire-magic. He is there now, and they
want to bring him to you.?
? Good! Let Tiki send four men, the next in
importance to himself, to fetch him; we will wait
till they come back.?
In response to a signal from the chief four of the
leading savages left their places and disappeared into
one of the huts, from which they brought out Muddy
Sam, who appeared to be swathed by withes. Stopping


in front of Tiki, they propped up the wretched prisoner
and remained motionless.
He was short, scarcely reaching middle height, but
wiry and muscular ; his age, I reckoned at forty. He
had a large head, bulging enormously at the back,
coarse matted hair and bushy eyebrows, beady eyes,
deep-set and far apart, thick, flabby lips, and a lower
jaw that stuck out farther than any man?s I have seen.
I concluded that his dirty, mottled skin had given
him his nickname. He glanced sullenly at his late
companions, and judging by his twitching mouth was
desperately anxious if not afraid. The miners? faces
were hard and ruthless, even the cheery doctor had
a stern air. One did not need to be a prophet to tell
that the renegade would receive little mercy.
? Well,? exclaimed English Harry coldly, ? I expect
you?ve guessed what we?re after. Have you anything
to say ? ?
? I?ll keep that for a proper judge,? with a touch of
bravado.
There was a queer expression in the other?s eyes as
he replied coolly, ? I'm the only judge you?ll come
before. If you?ve anything to say, say it, and we?ll
listen. But be quick about it,?
An intense fear crept over Muddy Sam?s face.
? D?you mean you?re going to murder me ? ? he
asked.
?Not at all,? lightly, "I?m going to hang you for
murder?quite a different thing. Now if you want to


speak, speak, though it won?t do you any good. No !
Very well; in five minutes I?m going to string you
up. I?ve brought a rope on purpose, though hanging?s
far too merciful a death for you. I?m not asking
your opinion, you fellows, I?ll carry this on my own
shoulders.?
? Not much, you won?t,? cried Pinkerton ; ? we?re
all in it, and if you don?t hang the rotten beast I
wiH.?
? That goes for all of us,? said Sweet sharply.
I turned away from Muddy Sam?s unwholesome
face. This killing of a man in cold blood was a
sickening business, though no one would deny that
he richly deserved his fate. In betraying men of his
own colour to a set of bloodthirsty savages he had
committed the unpardonable sin and had put himself
outside the pale. I did not pity him. Yet a big lump
rose in my throat nevertheless.
Meanwhile the Tugeri had been watching intently
and following every movement. Though ignorant of
what was said they seemed to sense the meaning of
the drama, and to understand something of the coming
tragedy.
? Don?t take your eyes or your weapons off them,?
our leader exclaimed, and I was glad of the command,
since it prevented me from witnessing the actual deed.
I saw him, however, produce a thin cord which had
been wound round his waist, and step back. Then
Pinkerton cut the bands fastening the prisoner?s legs.


and with the Fish to help, dragged him away. His
mottled face had become gray, beads of perspiration
stood on his forehead, and his eyes filled with an
awful agony.
For the moment an intense hush fell around us ;
not a sound came from bird or beast, not the rustle
of a leaf, not a sough of the wind through the trees ;
nature seemed to have stopped her work till the tragedy
was finished. The natives stood with staring eyes,
gazing as if fascinated at what was happening.
I thought I heard a half-suppressed groan and
then came the sound of English Harry?s voice : ?You
showed no mercy to the unfortunate men you helped
to kill; there is none for you here ; you will be
fortunate to find it where you?re going. Now ! ?
A long-drawn sigh escaped from the crowd; the
men shifted their feet uneasily and talked to one
another in whispers. Death in many shapes and forms
was no novelty to them, but this thing they had never
seen and it demoralised them. At that instant I
believe we could have walked quietly through the
village, got into our canoes, and pushed off without
an attempt being made to molest us.
Mr. Fortescue was terribly upset by the grim
incident. ? This is very horrible,? he exclaimed.
? Horrible, but necessary, my dear sir. When one
comes across a poisonous reptile one crushes it without
delay. This man was more deadly than a cobra, and
showed less kindness. However, that part of our
p.u.j. u


business is finished, and now we will try to obtain
news of your nephew. I hope for your sake and my
own that the second part will prove as successful as
the first. Bill, there was a man in camp, sick almost
to death. He was too weak to walk and he talked
foolishly. Ask Tiki what has become of him. He
must be given up or we will use our fire-magic/?
I pitied poor Mr. Fortescue, unable to understand
a word, listening in fear and suspense while Bill and
the chief talked together. What were they saying ?
Did the strange words mean life or death ? Would he
discover his nephew alive ? or learn that he had been
killed with the others ? He had lowered his revolver
and turned his head eagerly toward the speakers.
Presently Tiki stopped talking and the boy began
to interpret his words. ?He says white fellow very
sick, tossing his arms and making strange noises.
Tugeri afraid of him. Sorcery devil. Sam put him
on branches, tell Tugeri to carry him here. Put him
in hut with women, but women run away. Frightened.
Very strong devil. Then sorcerer go and make magic.
Not dead, but devil not come out. Throw up his arms
and yell. People all afraid, only Sam go near him.
For the first time since we had met him English
Harry?s face showed some trace of excitement, ? D you
hear that, sir ? ? he cried. ? Phil?s here, and alive.
We may save him yet. Hawkins, my dear chap, this
is your job ; go along with Mr. Fortescue, Sweet will
take your place. Bill, tell Tiki we want some one to


point out the sick man?s hut. Go on, you two,
quick ! ?
?I?d willingly give a year?s earnings to save old
Phil,?? cried the doctor. ? Gad, Harry, you?ve hit the
target twice with one arrow. What you have to do
now is to keep these fellows quiet till we?re ready to
make a start.?
? Tiki will attend to that,? laughing, ? as long as
he feels Sweet?s revolver against his skull. Hurry
along, there?s your guide,? as one of the natives stepped
out from among his companions.
Directly they had gone he turned again to Bill,
wanting to know how many more white men were
in the village, but in reply to the question Tiki
answered, none. Where were the women and children ?
Outside, hiding.
? It?s a bit risky, Pinkerton,? he said, ? but I wish
you?d make a search in case the old boy?s lying,
though I?m afraid he isn?t.?
" No,? replied Pinkerton, ? to find Manton is more
than we had a right to expect, properly speaking.
Tickle the old ruffian with your gun, Sweet, just to
let him know you?re still there.?
The natives watched him suspiciously, and a threaten-
ing cry was raised, but a word from Tiki quieted
them. ? That?s right,? said Harry, ? tell ?em not to
make a fuss unless they want to become dead fellows.?
It was an anxious time facing a mob of cannibals,
and I wondered how long it would be before they


became restive and made a rush for us, but after a
glance at the helpless Tiki I felt reassured; as long
as he remained in our power w r e were fairly safe.
Still it was a relief to us all when the doctor
returned and we heard his report.
? Phil, all right, ? he said, ? but he?s mighty
bad. Didn?t recognise his uncle or me ; off his head
completely. Oughtn?t to be moved, only we can?t
keep him here. And it?s difficult to fix him up com-
fortably for the journey back. What?s to be done ?
Better decide quickly, old man, we?re sitting on the
safety-valve and may go sky-high any minute.
The other nodded. ? I?ve watched it coming, but
we can hold on a trifle longer. I?ve got a really good
idea. Phil?s going to save our skins without knowing
it. Put him in my canoe and you and his uncle go
with him. I?ll borrow Tiki?s. I intend to take him
along, and it will save him the trouble of walking
back. Be as quick as you can, and meanwhile I?ll
read the riot act. I?ve got these chaps between my
finger and thumb and can do what I like with ?em.??


CHAPTER XXX
THE WHITE SORCERER
This is the manner of his reading the Riot Act, more
or less faithfully interpreted by Bill, and I thought
it very cleverly done :
?Now listen to the words of the great white chief,
listen, and get them into your thick skulls. You
Tugeri are fools and know no more than a parcel of
little children. Tell ?em that several times, Bill. You
are great fighters, but I am a greater fighter. You
came over your fine and killed white men. For that
I ought to bum down your village, root up your yams
and your cocoanuts, and carry off all your pigs and
fowls. But I know it was not your fault. You were
led away by a white fellow who told great lies and
boasted what he could do. You believed him ; now
you see what I can do,? and he waved his arm drama-
tically toward the dismal figure hanging limply from
the corner of the Pouri-Pouri house.
? Because you were only fools and children I shall
not punish you this time. I shall take my fire-magic
away, but I shall know what you are doing. Listen
now with all your ears. Stay on your own side of the
line. If you come to our side, and kill one single man


of any colour, or even so much as steal one little pig
from the people in the villages I shall come back with
many men and much fire-magic, and the Tugeri ?
He blew along the palm of his hand.
? Tiki knows that to be true. I can blow his head
off before you can pick up a spear. But there is worse
than this, which shows what fools you are. The
white man you brought here is a bigger sorcerer than
all your sorcerers. I am taking him away to make
him well. The spirit with him is very angry, you have
seen that for yourselves. If he should die the spirit
will come back, and then the Tugeri will know what
evil is. Their women and children will fall down like
empty sacks, there will be no flesh on their bones ;
no fish will come to their nets ; all the yams and the
cocoanuts will wither away; there will be no more
pigs and fowls. Let your sorcerers see to it that
the white man does not die, or it will be worse for
you. I have told you these things for your good, now
I will talk a while to your chief.?
Bill must have made them understand, for a fearful
howl went up from the mob, and many of the terrified
savages cried aloud, waving their arms frantically
toward the huts.
? What are they saying, Bill ? ?
? They are afraid; they say it was not their fault,
and their sorcerers shall work day and night, so that
the white man's spirit shall not torment them.?
? By jove,? cried English Harry, ? I thought that


would fetch ?em. Tell ?em all over again. The women
and children, the yams and pigs, and all the rest of
it. But if the white sorcerer lives he won?t let his
devil hurt them, unless they come killing or stealing.
Pitch it strong. I wish I could talk their lingo; ? but
from the scared faces of the savages Bill appeared to
be a capable substitute. Even Tiki trembled as he
listened to all that would happen to his tribe.
? That?ll make ?em sit up and take notice,? cried
the Fish delightedly, ? keep the ruffians quiet for
months. Here?s Pinkerton, he hasn?t found any one
else by the look of him. Any luck ? ?
Pinkerton shook his head. ? I?ve been through all
their beastly huts, but there?s no sign of any of our
mates, not even an odd boot. Hawkins says we can
begin to clear as soon as we please ; he's tucked Manton
up comfortably and the professor?s with him. And
the sooner we?re off the better for your humble
servant?s peace of mind.?
The most critical part of the adventure now lay
before us. The ingenious sorcery yam had thoroughly
frightened the Tugeri, but they were like wayward
children, and a sudden whim might seize them at the
very last moment. I agreed with Pinkerton that
every minute spent inside the stockade was a minute
wasted, but how we were to retire in good order, at
the same time keeping the natives under control, I
didn?t quite see.
Our leader, however, had his plan mapped out,


and through Bill communicated it to Tiki. It was
advisable, he said, that the chief should travel with
us, so that at the end of the journey he might receive
a report of the sick man and cany the news back to
his people. It would be well for the Tugeri sorcerers
to know if the very strong devil was likely to return
to the village. Since there was no other way out.
Tiki agreed to go and gave instruction for his canoe
to be taken to the spot where our own craft lay. We
had still to learn how the warriors would regard the
arrangement, and we waited anxiously while he
spoke to them. To the first part of his speech they
listened in stony silence, but the end was greeted by
a hum of approval.
I have no desire ever again to form part of a pro-
cession like the one that marched through the Tugeri
village. Joe and I walked side by side behind Pinker-
ton and the Fish, English Harry and Bill guarded
Tiki, while Sweet cheerfully brought up the rear, the
most dangerous position.
? Don?t show any hurry,? our leader warned us,
? or those fellows wall lose their heads and forget all
about the sorcery, it?s their nature. Tiki, my friend,
I reckon you?ve never been nearer to death than you
are now.?
Though the chief had no understanding of the
words, he evidently gathered an idea of their meaning,
and called out something to his men, which Bill
explained was to the effect that any one who disobeyed


his orders should be cooked and eaten directly he
returned. This was good hearing, and it lifted a great
weight from my mind. Outside the stockade we heard
loud wailing and lamentation from the women and
children hidden in the plantations beyond. In some
mysterious manner, very difficult for a white man to
comprehend, news of the threatened calamity to the
tribe had reached them, and they were giving whole-
hearted expression to their grief.
From time to time Sweet cheered us with the
information that there was no sign of the natives, and
at length after an anxious journey we reached the
river, where Manton and his uncle were already afloat.
At the last moment it was decided not to use Tiki?s
canoe, but to let his men bring it down next day,
and the chief embarked with our leader, Sweet, and
Bill, the remainder of the party following in the third
boat.
? Whew,? exclaimed the Fish, wiping his forehead,
? I?m beginning to believe we shall get away, but it
was a shave.?
? And there?s nothing to stop the beggars from
following us,? said Joe. ? I should have stove in all
their boats.?
? And brought the whole howling pack on top of
us ! Just what a greeny would have done,? the Fish
replied good-naturedly. ? I prefer to trust myself
to English Harry, if you ask me.?
Still the danger existed, and many anxious glances


were cast behind, but the hanging of Muddy Sam,
the fear of sorcery, and the strict orders of the ferocious
Tiki all had their effect, and we reached our destination
without having seen a sign of an enemy.
?No ill effects from the journey,? Hawkins
announced after examining the invalid, " we?ll carry
him straight on. Four bearers in relays, but be careful
to keep in step. I shouldn?t be surprised if the regular
motion sends him into a natural sleep, and that, my
dear professor, will mean recovery. It will be long,
however, before he uses a pick again.?
? I hope he never will,? exclaimed Mr. Fortescue
earnestly. ?As soon as he is strong enough, I shall
take him back to England.?
? A good plan, though we shall miss him, especially
Harry. They were model chums, like the classical
johnnies I used to read about long, long ago. Damon
and Pythias, if I remember rightly. Ready ? Smoothly
now ; don?t jolt him whatever you do.?
A hundred yards or so from the camp we met with
a great surprise. A white man followed by a number
of natives came running toward us. His eyes almost
bulged from his head, and he looked as if he were
seeing ghosts. ? Well, I?m jiggered,? he exclaimed
in amazement, ? I reckoned you?d all gone on. Been
having a little holiday all to yourselves ? Who?s
that ? Manton, did you say ? Think of that now;
he was as good as dead before the fuss started.?
Then, his gaze resting on Tiki, he clenched his fists


savagely. ? Great Scott! How on earth ? But
I won?t waste time asking questions. There's a
beautiful piece of cord doing nothing, I?ll fetch it.
What! Not hang him ? Sure, you?re joking. With
the boys wiped out too ! There?s Purdy Jones, now !
You haven?t seen anything of Purdy ? No, I s'pose
not. Knocked on the head before he could pull out
his shooter. I drilled a hole through that joker though.
And you aren?t going to hang this bloodthirsty nigger ?
Well, now, I call that surprising, most surprising.?
? We?ll spin you the yam later, Babe,? said English
Harry good-naturedly, " but we?ve rescued Manton,
hanged Muddy Sam, and put the fear of death into the
Tugeri, so we haven?t done so badly. We had to
promise Tiki his life or we couldn?t have carried
through.?
? Sure, a bargain?s a bargain,? the Babe agreed,
adding disconsolately, ? and nothing any good ever
comes from one. Anyhow, I?m glad you've hanged
Muddy Sam ; he needed hanging. That?s just what
he was fit for. Manton going to pull through ? ?
? Hawkins says so.?
? Then that?s all right. If the doctor said to me,
* Babe, you?ll be a dead man to-morrow,' I?d be dead
sure as a gun. Never makes mistakes like the regular
pill and plaster men.?
It was pleasant to hear the Babe's emphatic opinion,
for certainly the sick man didn?t look very much
alive that night, nor even next morning, but he was


much less restless, and had fallen into a natural sleep,
so we sent Tiki away ?after Hawkins had re-dressed
his wound ?with the assurance that his people need
not fear the vengeance of the sick man?s ? devil,?
unless indeed they were foolish enough to make war
on the miners or any of the friendly tribes.
As Mr. Fortescue spent most of the time with his
nephew, English Harry proposed that I should enter
into regular partnership with himself and Joe with
the doctor, to which, after obtaining our employer?s
permission, we gladly consented. There was much to
be done repairing the damage done by the savages
and getting everything ship-shape and Bristol-fashion,
and the next three weeks saw us hard at work from
sun-up to sun-down. Gold-mining was a new experi-
ence, but we had health and strength and youth to
back us, while our partners showed us how to do what
was needed.
During this time Manton made slow but steady
progress until at length Hawkins let him get up and
potter about the camp with his friend Harry. It was
evident, however, that he would have to go away, and
I wondered what difference that would make to us.
One evening his uncle sent for us. He was very
affable and pleasant, as indeed he always was, and
put the case frankly. He was returning to England
with his nephew at the first opportunity, and wished
to know if we preferred to go with them or stay at
Pleasant Camp.


? In either case,? he said, ? I shall pay you the
three years? wages according to our contract, and your
homeward passage, and if you care to remain and
take your chance with the miners I shall have nothing
to say against it. Your money will be lodged in the
Royal Bank at Sydney, so if luck deserts you there
will be something to draw on. But it is for you to
decide, I shall not press you either way.?
? That?s a very generous offer, Mr. Fortescue,?
said Joe, ? but first of all I think we ought to consult
our partners.?
? Certainly you should do that, and you can give
me your answer afterwards.?
? Well,? exclaimed my chum, when we got outside
the shanty, ? what about it ? ?
? I?m for staying on,? I replied promptly ; ?at
least we shall make our grub, and we may earn a
tidy little sum here. If the luck peters out, we can
go home.?
? Then we?ll go straight off and find out whether
the other johnnies want us.?
Neither English Harry nor the doctor would advise
us one way or the other, but both made it plain that
our staying would be agreeable to them, and next
morning we told Mr. Fortescue our decision.
? I believe you?ve chosen wisely,? he remarked.
? The life is hard, and, up here, dangerous, but the
miners seem honest and straightforward, and the
Tugeri are unlikely to attack the camp again.?


By this time he himself was anxious to return to
civilisation, but his nephew was unequal to the over-
land journey even by the easiest stages. Bill suggested
a canoe, but the voyage would have been tedious,
and the river was not without its dangers. Fortune,
however, in the shape of a Government official, came
to their assistance. His name was Howard and he
had been sent to investigate the truth of certain
alarming rumours that had found their way to Samarai.
How much he learned I never heard, not much, perhaps,
for the miners objected to outside interference even by
the Government, and preferred fighting their own
battles. At the end of the visit, thanks to the good
offices of English Harry, Mr. Howard willingly agreed
to find room for the invalid and his uncle on the
flat-bottomed boat in which he had ascended the river.
On their last night at the camp we gave them a
farewell supper, and next morning every white man
tramped to the river to see them embark. Mr.
Fortescue shook us by the hand warmly and wished
us the best of luck. ?You have my address,?? he
said, ? and I shall be pleased to hear from you at
any time. Some day, when you return, I hope w
shall meet again.?
Of what happened during our stay at Pleasant Camp
I can give only a brief account, and indeed if told at
length the story would become tedious. We worked
hard and lived hard, but on the whole the days passed


pleasantly, while our luck stood fairly steady. Natur-
ally there were changes?several of the original
company drifting away to tempt fortune elsewhere,
and fresh adventurers coming to fill their places. I
struck up a strong friendship with my partner, but
he never spoke of his former life, and to this day
I haven?t solved the mystery that changed him from
an English gentleman?though really he was always
that ?to a New Guinea digger.
One incident caused much amusement among the
old hands. A Tugeri warrior, sent by Tiki, came into
camp to inquire after the health of the white ? sorcerer.?
My partner, keeping a solemn face, replied that the
? sorcerer ? was strong and well again, adding that
no harm would come to the Tugeri through him, as
long as they kept their own place, on which the
warrior, greatly relieved, took his departure. Doubt-
less the tribe frequently went on the war-path, but
such was their fear of Manton?s ? very strong devil ?
that the camp was never again molested.
At the end of two years the mine showed signs of
petering out, and our partners decided to abandon
their claims, the doctor returning to Sydney, and
English Harry going down to the coast for a spell of
pearling. He offered to take us with him, but as we
had acquired a tidy little fortune, nearly 3OOO apiece,
we determined to say good-bye to New Guinea and
return to England.
In London we called on our generous employer,


who received us very kindly, and was good enough to
invest my little fortune in a way highly beneficial to
me. Since then I have never been on the sea, even in
a pleasure boat, but Joe Shannon soon tired of a shore
life. The salt water was in his blood, and the last
time I heard from him he had his master?s certificate
and was running a tramp, which he partly owned, to
any part of the world for which he could secure a
paying cargo.
LONDON AND GLASGOW. COLLINS? CLEAR-TYPE PRESS.




822 ? 9/1
AA AS7 cuj
A A Co/?y^




ftp
