

APOLOGY
Codford, can I forget the times
In mental weakness, when these rhymes
Dropt from my pen, in bitter ink,
When I had lost the power to think ?
Reader, I here make bold to state,
Were you in Quota “ Forty Eight,”
You would have grown as mad as we;
I ask your Christian Charity
For this I write—l’m not to blame
Nor can I give the Author’s Name.
w. c. H.
Codford, June 1919


48 QUOTA
We came from Jeumont at the Too
To catch the early boat—a ;
by train and steamer and by boot,
They hurried up our Quota.
Our number and our name and ranK
Upon a card they wrote—a ;
While every one his stars did thank,
That forty eight’s his Quota.
The first of June we sail away.
The transport all afloat—a ;
“ Don’t overstay your leave” they sa>
“ Or you will miss the Quota,”
The first of June has gone—July
Finds us without a boat—a ;
But still we swallow every lie
They put up re our Quota.


The 9th, the 10th, the 16th now,
To think we don’t endeavour,
Let Quotas come and Quotas go
But we stop here for ever.
We’re glad before we came from France
They took the Workshops phot—a ;
Our next of Kin now have a chance
To memorise our Quota.
Long years have passed, that’s long ago,
We don’t care one i-oat —a;
The Codford grass on graves does grow,
That covers up our Quota.


CODFORD.
I’m on a Codforci Quota, there’s hundreds here like me
That dope in ones or batches in abject misery,
I’ve tried to find the mad house where lunatics are nursed,
The Quotas all are coming, I want to get in first.
Why we are going ratty —I feel I really must
Explain it at the outset —I think it only just.
At times I’m almost normal, ’tis better now perhaps,
To put it down in writing before my long relapse.
I’ve stood about the ringside and watched the pennies spin,
My last pay lost in no time, and sometimes scored a win.
Now two up’s stale and rotten, the crown and anchor’s gain,
Has faded from my memory —till pay day comes again.
I've done with spinning pennies with anchor and the crown,
They’re like the blanky Quota, I feel they did me down.
I don’t walk out with Tabbies the same I did in France,
Perhaps I’m growing moral —perhaps I get no chance.
I’ve argued with my cobbers from Bibles to the war,
Heard funny yarns, some new ones, and some I heard before
From Darwin’s evolution we’re argued everywhere,
And why were Aussies moral and why the diggers swear.
How officers would like it when back in civvy clothes,
Can they knock out a living and what else goodness knows.
The notice board I’ve read it, I know it all by heart,
Which Quota has its boat roll and when the next will start
I’ve filled a book with figures on ships that come and go,
To find out when we re going, but I shall never know.
I gather all the fireflies that fly about the camp,
I know the Cook-house gossip and others of that stamp.
I tried to form a theory how long in camp we stay,
The mental strain is awful, my brain has given way.
Now seated on my mattress, I talk in gibbering tones,
While from the hut around me come sympathetic moans.
My mate is putting Kl-wi upon his pants behind,
Another’s tearing paper to occupy his mind.
I think the rest are dilly, I neither know nor care,
I hear them say I’m going—I have forgotten where.


Last night past midnight’s hour, I thought I heard the quack,
Proposing vivisection on poor Hellfire Jack.
And it was in a stoke hole it seemed I knew the place,
The concert party singing and many a well known face.
The Remnants fervid singing, the doctor’s bloody knife,
Revived me as I muttered “ Now this is more like life.”
I watched the voltage rising, 1 heard the 4-foot saw,
When cookie from the doorway was wanting voltage more-
Old Bertha steamed and rattled, the air was stifling hot,
I looked around and noted the Jeumont Workshop lot.
I watched the voltage rising up, up and ever higher,
Mick and his imps in dozens were stoking up the fire.
Yet, on those impish faces I recognised too well,
The Army Corps from Jeumont were meeting me in Hell.
I said ‘ Tis nice in Sheol ” I felt it did me good,
To be away from Codford —the diggers understood.
And all the air was sparking, 1 felt my fingers itch,
When Winter s wooden pincers put on the Froggie’s switch.
Ten thousand Volts of Lightning were tearing through our
wires,
The white hot flames of Hades shrieked thro’ old Bertha’s
Fires.
She moves! We’re off and going—“O Lord with me abide,”
I pulled Old Bertha’s drain-cocks wide open either side,
For Hell had started moving with sparks and hissing steam,
The world shone round about us in phosphorescent gleam.
Down thro the Codford river in places not too wide,
Our white hot bulwarks fusing the barks on either side.
Across the English Channel we left behind the sea,
In angry clouds of vapour waves hissed as we went free.
We fused our way through pastures, and past familiar scenes,
We shimmered past the Tabbies we saw at Croquelines,
Past many a raging Froggie, demobilised to find,
The Workshops Corps had left them some souvenirs behind.
Thro many a thick set forest, thro’ plain and mountain top,
Our track we melted onward, we travelled without stop.
And right above our bowsprit, in heat and glare and roar
Two Bolgers white hot, melting, were gulleting a saw.
Amidships Welsh is steering with goggles on his eyes,
He’s thinking of the pictures the landscape here supplies
Deep down below in Class-rooms instructors by the score
Were photographed by flash-light—perhaps did something
more.


Oh ! Life was well worth living and every day was gay,
The Codford camp behind us, where young men’s hair turn
grey.
We felt so young and happy to Aussie drawing nigh,
Our minds were keen as mustard, we’d soon be home and
dry.
Home ! No more dopy Codford, far worsethan any war—
I listened—bugles sounding “ Come to the cookhouse door”
I thought 1 smelt the salmon that left his hungry sea,
To camouflage potatoes for breakfast with the tea.
Some called it tea, some, coffee What sin a name they said.
And ate their Codford breakfast—survived, and some are dead
Their over loaded stomachs with salmon and with stew,
Dried beans and rhubarb pudding had far to much to do.
Again the bugle sounding, and waking did I curse,
I dream’t —I’m still in Codford and writing raving verse.
1.2/6/19


fifiCtkpi
