

POEMS AND HYMNS
ERNEST BROUGHAM DOCKER.


POEMS AND HYMNS.
THE CONQUEST OF GRANADA: ABDALLAH’S
DEPARTURE.
Poem recited at the Annual Commemoration of the Sydney
University, on Saturday, the 23rd of March, 1861.]
Bright rose the morn, as on the mountain track.
Resting his weary steps, the Moor looked back;
Back on the vale beneath, the fairest plain.
Mid all those lovely garden-fields of Spain.
The Vega,—fair it was, though marred by war,
Fair, though it smiled not as it smiled before.
And in the midst, Granada, like a queen,
Enthroned upon the mountain, graced the scene;
A beauteous scene! The wild Sierra rose
Behind in awful grandeur, wrapped in snows.
Beneath Alhambra reared her ruddy towers;
Adorned by art and nature’s lavished powers;
Fair palaces and marble colonnades
Gleamed in the light amid the green arcades;
And crystal fountains cooled the perfumed breeze
As past it swept ’mongst flowers and citron-trees,
And kissed the trembling pictures of the glade.
Mirrored in streams which through the gardens strayed.
Granada! monarch of a thousand years.
Unchanged amid the changing hopes and fears
Which swayed the moslem reign—as at the day
When first she rose to her majestic sway—
The same still at her empire’s waning hour,
A glorious monument of ancient power!
Each gorgeous palace, all the towers tell
Where genius, might, and science used to dwell.


These all departed now! the city camp*—
The wasted plains are there instead—the stamp
Of war and misery arc upon the scene.
Alas! sad field for memory to glean!
Sad sights were those to meet the wanderer’s eye,
Full many a spot was marked with crimson dye—
Where, struggling for the home they loved so well.
Around her walls Granada’s noblest fell.
In vain they fell! for years of sin and crime,
Unchecked, had hastened on the fated time;
When, harassed, wasted by intestine war,
The Moslem race should rule in Spain no more.
These scenes now filled the exile’s mind; each spot
Fixed its sad impress, ne’er to he forgot;
Not fuller were the swollen clouds of rain.
Than was his heart, of tears, and grief, and pain,
Long by the rugged mountain path he stood.
Long did he gaze in meditative mood;
Then, with a sigh to fair Granada sent,
The exiled King poured forth his sad lament.
As when the wintry torrent’s course is stayed,
Where trees and drifting boughs a bar had made
The eddies circle in the widening tide;
And then in seeming calm the waves subside;
Till, triple strength acquired, their powers display,
The barrier bursts, and headlong yields the way;
The awakened flood exerts its pent-up force—
Leaps o’er the rocks and clears its narrowed course
Then, spreading on the plain, its fury yields,
And fast subsides in silence o’er the fields:
So did the Moor pour forth his stormy grief,
Until at length his spirit found relief.
• Santa Fe.


“How art thou fallen, city of the plain,
Gone are thy glories, ne’er to rise again.
Wild Desolation is around thy walls.
And melancholy brooding o’er thy halls,
While silence, lonely monarch, reigns within.
How hardly hast thou suffered for my sin,
Granada! for the sin was mine alone;
When first I dared to seize my father’s throne, —
When first I drew the parricidal sword,
Misfortune’s tide upon my country poured;
I rushed to meet the destined woes of fate,
And learned her stem decrees, alas! too late I
O would that I alone had home this load
Of misery, and from my veins had flowed
The streams of blood Granada’s warriors spilt
In expiation of my fatal guilt!”
“O, baneful Discord, Satan’s darling child.
Parent of min and confusion wild,
Potent to work a monarch’s overthrow.
And to a nation deal the fatal blow.
Behold thy work! these fields dyed with thy sign-
This desolated city—all is thine.
Thy blows these ills upon my country bring,
And drive me forth to roam, a throneless king.
Granada! how thy fading star is set;
No more the Crescent crowns the minaret:
Thy towers, Alhambra, own the Christian sign;
Adieu, ye ancient towers, no longer mine I
Home of my Fathers! all thy pride is past;
Thy monarch goes—thy weakest—and thy last!
Farewell I no longer shines the future bright.
And all my hopes are shrouded deep in night—


Dark shades of night, hy many a sorrow cast,
Which rise up from the memories of the past.
As waves on waves in quick succession roll.
The distant visions crowd upon my soul;
Visions of misery—the dregs of woe—
And homeless exiles, driven hy their foe,”
“O, Christian, use thy victory well! nor press
Too hard thy captives in their deep distress;
Enough have they to bear—too much for me—
I sink beneath this weight of misery.
Wretch that I am! plunged in dark waves of fate
Full well I bear the name “Unfortunate!”
And now, I turn from all I loved before,
Farewell, Granada! I return no more!
Here from this rock I breathe my latest sigh;
Farewell! I leave thee, but I leave to die!”
IN MEMORIAM.
F. M.
Obiit August 4th, 1864.
I do not weep for him,
For him his fate I scarce regret;
And yet I mourn, with tears mine eyes are dim,
My cheeks are wet.
I mourn for those bereft—
His friends, and one more loved thaft those;
Those in whose aching hearts a void is left
That will not close.
For that which needs so much
The fertile brain, the faithful hand.
Whose rankling ills require a skilful touch, —
His native land.


Perchance in future years
His light had been not low nor dim;
But we have lost him —and for this my tears,
But not for him.
He hath no need for tears,
For he shall know of tears no more;
His life is measured not by span-like years,—
His work not o’er.
For are such gifts as his
But given that we may be bereft?
When blossoms droop and fall, the law is this, —
That fruit is left.
And he was bom for fruit;
We hoped great things ere he should fall;
Scarce twenty years have passed, and he is mute,
And is this all?
No! rather would we deem
That he is called to work above;
The work for which his Master needeth him,
We know not of.
Yes! may it not be thus,
That in his wide-extended sphere.
Unfelt, unseen, he works with us, for us,
His brethren here.
And though we see not yet
The fruit for which the blossom fell.
We know God’s purposes in love are set, —
That all is well.


CHRIST’S FAITHFUL SOLDIER.
Soldierl wake—the night is past—Rom. xiiL 11, 12.
And gird thy radiant armour on;
In the evil day stand iast—Eph. vi. 13 —16.
Stand! till the fiery strife is done.
What though dangers oft assail,
Though Satan’s arrows press thee sore,
Faith’s firm shield can never fail,
Thy Lord hath won the fight before.
When the Tempter tries his power
To win thee from the path of right;
In dejection’s darkest hour,
When hope can scarce dispel the night,
Be not troubled, —Jesus saith
To his true soldier in the strife,
“ Be thou faithful unto death
And I will give a crown of life.” Rev. ii. 10.
That bright crown of righteousness—Tim. iv. 7, 8.
Laid up by Christ the Judge, for him
Who, in danger and distress,
Still fights—whose faith becomes not dim.
Strive in hope, nor doubt nor fear
Though rough thy path, thy struggle hard.
Soon shall Christ, thy Prince appear,
To give to thee thy great reward. Rev. xxii. 12.
THY KINGDOM COME.
O God ! who once Thy bright array
Didst leave, and Thy resplendent home,
To Thee with hopeful hearts we pray,
As Thou didst teach, Thy Kingdom Come!


Thou didst come down to win the vile,
With might of Love that suffers long,
Thy rebel sons to reconcile,
And heal the universal wrong.
Thou wilt Thy purposes fulfil,
For Thou art Might, all might above;
Thou wilt not change Thy gracious will.
For Thou, O God! art perfect Love.
And what are we who would Thy power
Oppose with our ephemeral might?
We change with every changing hour,
And Thou wilt change us to the Right.
Thy Kingdom Come! 0 Lord! we cry,
For we are weary of the strife;
Fast bound in bonds of death we lie,
O make us Thine, and give us life!
Almighty Power! Thou canst not fail, —
Infinite Love! Thou wilt not cease,
Till all Thy sons Thy glory hail,
And all Thy Kingdom be at peace.
LEAN ON JESUS.
Lean on Jesus, lean on Jesus,
Pilgrim on life’s painful road,
Art thou weary—heavy laden?
He will ease thee of thy load.
Hast thou wandered from the pathway?
Hark! the Shepherd calls thee “Come,
Lo! with yearning eyes he seeks thee,
Seeks to lead thee gently home.


Trembling doubter, lean on Jesus,
Sinking faithless in the sea,
Dost thou feel thy utter weakness?
Jesus’ hand will strengthen thee.
Lean on Him, as once did Peter;
Then though angry billows chafe,
Be not fearful, He is with thee,
Lose not courage, thou art safe.
Oh! how sweet to lean on Jesus,
Pillowed on his tender breast,
Finding like the loved Disciple,
Perfect comfort, perfect rest.
01 how sweet to lean on Jesus!
Oh! the wonder of his love!
Everlasting Arms beneath us!
Ever sleepless Eye above!
Teach us, 0 Thou blessed Jesus,
Evermore to lean on Thee,
Guide us through life’s wildernesses.
Bear us o’er death’s bitter sea.
Lead us, 0 Thou blessed Jesus,
To Thy kingdom’s peaceful shore.
And receive us to Thy bosom.
There to rest for evermore.
IN MY FATHER’S HOUSE ARE MANY MANSIONS.
John xiv. 2.
O House of many Mansions!
0 everlasting Home!
Where God the Father waiteth
For all his sons to come;—


Where poor and blind and feeble
Brought in from outer gloom.
In countless hosts are gathered,
And where there yet is room.
O House of many Mansions!
O everlasting Home!
Where JESUS is preparing
A place for all who come;
Where He who knew no shelter.
Who found on earth no rest.
Beside the door is standing,
To welcome every guest.
O House of many Mansions!
O everlasting Home 1
On earth we have no city.
In shifting tents we roam;
And many, wand’ring homeless.
Upon the wayside fall;
But there —eternal Mansions!
And there —a Home for all!
O House of many Mansions I
Where Jesus is the light,—
A Sun that knows no setting,
A Day that knows no night!
O Saviour lead us homeward,
Receive us at the door,
And robe us, meet to dwell there
With Thee for evermore!


“ In all time OF OUR TRIBULATION; in all time of our
WEALTH; IN THE HOUR OF DEATH, AND IN THE DAY
OF JUDGMENT, GOOD LORD DELIVER US.”
In all time of tribulation,
Saviour, hear our supplication;
In our woe, be Thou beside us,
In our darkness, do Thou guide us;
O Lord! hear us and deliver,
For Thy mercy faileth never.
In the time when wealth is growing,
Teach us whence that wealth is flowing;
When our heart’s desire is sent us,
Lest we waste the talent lent us,
0 Lord 1 hear us and deliver.
For Thy mercy faileth never.
When we come to death’s dark river,
And with dread we shrink and shiver,
Part the floods, lest they go o’er us,
Show Thy heavenly light before us;
0 Lord! hear us and deliver.
For Thy mercy faileth never.
In the last great Day of terrors,
Lord! remember not our errors;
With Thine own blood Thou didst buy us,
With Thine own blood justify us;
0 Lord! hear us and deliver,
For Thy love endures for ever!


LORD, TO WHOM SHALL WE GO? John vi.
To whom, Lord, shall we go?
Where find relief from this world’s weary strife,
Its turmoil, death and woe?
Thou hast the words of everlasting life.
To whom, Lord, shall we go?
What other help, what comfort can there be?
Around, above, below,
There is not one I can compare with Thee.
To, whom, Lord, shall we go?
Who else can heal the sick, the lame, the blind,
Or dry the tears of woe ?
Who else the fallen raise, the lost ones find?
To Thee Lord, would we go,
For we are hungry, poor and blind and weak;
We thirst for streams that flow
From living wells; for bread of life we seek.
To Thee, Lord, would we go,
To Thee, who art the Life, the Light, the Way.
With trembling steps and slow
We come; O call us, seek us, lest we stray!
To Thee, Lord, would we go,
O take us to Thyself, within us reign!
For Thee to love and know
Is life eternal, never-ending gain.
LOOKING UNTO JESUS. Heh. xii. 2.
0 God in Jesd manifest!
O Thou in whom the world is blest!


O Light of blind humanity!
We lift our longing eyes to Thee!
O Thou who art our truest Friend,
Our All-in-all, our First, our End,
In happiness, in misery,
In life, in death, we look to Thee.
But yet we cannot see aright,
False lights deceive our feeble sight;
Fast bound by sin, we are not free
To turn our eyes alone to Thee.
O bright and morning Star! arise,
Dispel the mists that veil our eyes,
Remove our blindness, set us free,
And teach us how to look to Thee.
O make us ever more like Thee,
Until we see Thee perfectly;
No longer darkly or in part,
But face to face, and as Thou art.
EVENING HYMN.
God preserve us in His keeping
Throughout this night!
May His Eye behold us sleeping,
Who is the Light!
God, the sleepless Watcher, guard us
In all dark hours;
May His Arms enfolding, ward us
From evil powers I


GOD, protecting Angels send us,
Who everywhere
Shall attend us, and befriend us
With loving care.
May pure sleep to us be given,
And visions bright,
Sent, like blissful gleams from Heaven,
Lighten our night.
So may He who careth for us
From care release,
And once more to day restore us
In health and peace.
BE WITH ME IN THE DOUBTFUL DAWN.
Be with me in the doubtful dawn.
Thou Helper of the frail and weak,
When scarce the darkness is withdrawn.
And scarce I see the One I seek.
So blind am I, so dense the night,
0 Light of light, be Thou my light!
Be with me in the mom of life,
Thou Shield and Shepherd of Thine own,
When foes are gathering to the strife,
And I stand trembling and alone,
Outwearied with the combat’s length.
O! Strength of strength, be Thou my strength!
Be with me in the noonday heat,
Thou Shadow in a weary land,
When straggling on with toilwom feet,
I faint amidst the desert’s sand.


O Rock of Ages—be my shade,
O Stream of life—be Thou my aid!
Be with me when the night comes on,
Thou Sun of everlasting day,
When strife is o’er and work is done.
And all the world doth fade away,
To Thine eternal arms I come,
O Father 1 Father! take me home.
THE MORNING DEW.
God’s glory shines in common things
To humble minds that look aright;
To them the lowliest object brings
Full oft a flash of heaven’s own light.
And such a sight one mom I found,
Before the dews had taken flight;
Beneath the sun, upon the ground.
A diamond-gleam of living light!
And as I moved along, behold,
A liquid emerald it became; —
The chrysolite’s clear molten gold,
And then the ruby’s crimson flame;
And soon the amethyst it showed.
And last appeared the sapphire’s blue;
When suddenly the meadow glowed
With myriad stars of varied hue;
But brighter far than light which falls
From the most lustrous earthly gem,—
They seemed like fragments from the walls
Built round the new Jerusalem I


0 God! Infinite! Wonderful!
Who dwell’st above the starry zone!
While highest heavens obey Thy rule,
A lowly dew-drop is Thy throne!
HYMN FOR THE SEASON.
Paraphrase from Joel, I.; Hab. 111., 17, &c.
The earth doth mourn and languish beneath the summer heat,
The vines and fig-trees wither, the fields do yield no meat;
The flocks and herds are desolate, the flame devours the grass,
The streams of water fail to flow, the heavens are as brass.
No more the song of gladness—the voice of joy has ceased,
And sounds of woe and mourning rise up from man and beast;
0 Lord! to Thee our cries ascend: look down upon our land;
O let Thine anger cease from us; remove Thy heavy hand.
In sorrow and repentance for all our sins we mourn,
With fasting and with weeping to Thee 0 God we turn.
Lord! spare Thy heritage we pray; in gracious mercy bend;
Have pity on the fainting land, and let thy showers descend.
We lean upon Thy promise: the land shall laugh and sing,
The beasts shall fear no longer, the grass once more shall spring;
The vats o’erflow with wine, the bams be full of wheat again,
For God in wondrous mercy shall send down abundant rain.
Yet, though the fig-tree wither, the fields their fruit withhold,
The vine forget to blossom, the flocks forsake the fold,
In Thee O Lord will we rejoice, and trust Thy gracious will,
That Thou wilt give us strength to hear, Thy mercy save us stilL
B. BIOWB, f 11H1II, 818 1 ITH.
