

POEMS,
BY
BASSETT DICKSON.


///'d
f/i / }y’*"
£d~ ftf* #- ~
§0»;




[?]


Poems;
BY
Bassett Dickson.
TASMANIA:
MINTED AT THE “MERCURY” STEAM PRESS OFFICE, HOBART TOWN.
1865.


JOHN DAVIES, HUNTER, HOBART TOWN, TASMANIA.


THE FOLLOWING POEMS ABE MOST EESPECTFULLY
DEDICATED TO MY FELLOW-COLONISTS OP AtTSTEALIA,
BY THEIE FEIEND,
THE AUTHOE.




PREFACE.
To my Fellow-Colonists of Australia, —
In dedicating the following poems to you, my
fellow-colonists, I am led to believe that I may be
instrumental in improving the habits of thought of
some of the residents in these colonies, and that my
example may influence other future and better writers to
publish their conceptions, and thus induce emulation
and ultimate excellence. My object in writing the
following poems was to benefit my fellow-men by freely
expressing my sentiments on various subjects, in, I hope,
a pleasing manner, and it is with the same object in view
that I now publish them, and although some passages
in my earlier poems would be more sober and grave if
written now, yet I have never written anything calcu-
lated to raise a blush on the brow of innocence—so
much for the morality of my poems —now as to their
literary merit. It is said that “an author is not a fair
judge of his own productions/’ I differ in opinion with
many on this subject, and believe that an author (if a


sensible man, not too self-opinionated, nor puffed np
with vanity, as many of the poetic fraternity are,) is the
most competent person to form a correct judgment as
to the relative merits of his works, and their value, as
compared with those of others, and although Milton’s
preference of Paradise Regained over Paradise Lost
may seem to militate against my belief, yet I coincide
so far with Milton’s estimate of the relative merits of
his two great poems, as to admit that Paradise Regained
is a much more carefully written poem, more harmonious
in its language, and, perhaps, more free from faults than
its unrivalled competitor, and that its defects lie rather
in its subject, than in its execution : for my own part I
may observe that no poem in the English language gives
me such intense pleasure as Paradise Lost, the beauty
of imagery, the fertility of invention, the grandeur of
ideas, and the magnificence of diction to be found
therein render it unique in unapproachable excellence.
The only poems which can be compared with it are the
Eneid of Virgil, and the Iliad of Homer, but noble as
those two poems undoubtedly are, yet compared with
Paradise Lost, they are like the light of a candle as
compared with the dazzling brilliancy of the orb of
day. 'While thus expressing myself let it not be


imagined for a moment that I institute any comparison
whatever, between the feeble outpourings of my mind,
and the magnificent creations of Milton : when I peruse
his great work I bow down with reverence before his
mighty genius, and feel that the best of my writings
are unworthy even to be named with his.
I have extended my remarks on this subject further
than I intended, hut if they will influence the rising
generation to read Milton's works more frequently,
and thus improve the taste, and the style of future
authors, my remarks will be productive of good, and
my object will be gained.
In publishing my own poems I have no hope of
gaining fame, nor any of pecuniary reward. lam
led to this belief by the well-known fact that the
best American authors such as Longfellow, Washington
Irving, and others, find it absolutely indispensable to
achieve an European, hut more particularly an English
reputation, before either fame or profit will be awarded
them in America : Australia is not likely to differ from
America in this, any more than in the adoption of some
of her most objectionable political institutions : my only
expectation, therefore, is that a few congenial minds may,
perhaps, give my writings a calm perusal, and that such


perusal may be productive of good results in inducing
emulation and excellence in future Australian Poets.
With reference to the metres used by me, I look on
all metre, or rhyme, as mere ornament, deserving to be
duly prized as such, but adding little to the real value
of the poem. That true Bard of Nature, Burns, says
“ the rank is but the guinea’s stamp,” and while fully
agreeing with him in the sentiment so beautifully
expressed, I would, on the present occasion, alter
it thus, and say that “ rhyme is but the poem’s
stamp —its worth, good sense, and all that.” I have,
therefore, chosen various metres, and found no diffi-
culty in any, and though well aware that blank
verse is not a favourite with the great bulk of readers,
and is really more difficult than rhyme, inasmuch
as it requires more thrilling incidents in the sub-
jects treated of, and higher mental powers in the author
to render it generally acceptable to readers, yet I have
deliberately chosen blank verse as the vehicle for convey-
ing to my readers the sentiments and ideas contained
in my principal poem, my reason being that I believe
my readers will be few, but probably intellectual, and,
consequently, capable of discovering the genuine worth (if
any) of my ideas, though clothed in the homely garb of


blank verse. One of my chief objects in writing my prin-
cipal poem was to reconcile the revelations of modern
science with those of the Bible, and whether I have suc-
ceeded or failed, I leave my readers to judge : suffice it
to say that in one portion lam conscious of failure; but
probably this arises rather from want of power on my
part, than from the impossibility of its achievement by
others; some future greater Bard will doubtless succeed
where I have failed, and may thank me for having paved
the way to his success. This poem having been written
some years before the civil war in America, and as I
could not possibly have foreseen such a calamity, I feel
fairly entitled to credit for having foreseen and predicted
some great national calamity as overhanging America , a
punishment for its great national crime of slavery; a
prediction which, unfortunately, has been literally ful-
filled.—Would that I could have averted the dire
calamity ! My reason for uttering this prediction was,
that being fully persuaded that in God’s moral govern-
ment of the world great crimes meet with appropriate
and just punishment even in this life, I could come to
no other conclusion than that some great punishment
was in store Jor America, which she would have to bear
“in God’s good time.” I little expected to witness it


in my life ! but it more than ever convinces me of the
soundness of the conclusion at which I had arrived, and
which many instances in my experience of life only tend
to confirm.
Hoping that with so fearful a warning before us, both
we and our posterity may be preserved from national
and individual sin, and that when we shall quit this
petty sphere for, I trust, a brighter and a better one,
our example may still act on our posterity to follow in
the right path, so may the future empire of Australia be
renowned not only as being one of the most powerful, but
one of the most virtuous nations on earth; with this hope
in my heart,
I remain.
My fellow-colonists,
Your obedient servant.
BASSETT DICKSON.


Contents.
Page.
To the Reader X
The Angel’s Visit 1
Horn Heki.
Introduction 53
Canto the First 57
Canto the Second 73
Warbeck ; or, The Tasmanian Settler.
Dedication 91
Canto the First 93
Canto the Second ......... 143
Miscellaneous Pieces.
Lines on the Death of the Duke of Wellington, 1856 . . 189
Song . ... . . 191
Lines on the Fall of Sebastapol 192
The Indian Mutiny—Written on Receipt of the Intelligence
of the Mutiny of the Sepoys in India, the Massacre at
Cawnpore, &c., &c 194
Lines on the Revolution in France which hurled Louis Philippe
from his throne 196
On Happiness 199
Fatherland 200
An Aspiration 202
The Pilot—An Allegorical Poem 204
Song—Woman’s Work is Never Done 210
Lines—“ Come to Me all ye that are weary, and I will give you
rest.” 212


Paf/e.
Old Erin’s Harp 213
A Briton’s Reply to the French Threat of Invasion . . . 225
Lines—“ Written on Recovering from an Attack of Influenza . 220
Impromptu on the Marriage of a Victorian Bachelor to a
Tasmanian Lady 231
On the Death of Prince Albert 233
The Idler’s Lament—A Satire on the Management of the
Queen’s Orphan School 235
Extempore—On Spending an Evening with Miss , at her
Father’s House 244
Lines—Written after reading Revelations 21st Chap. Verse 4th 245
Extempore 247
Extempore—On a Lady presenting me with a Rose . . . 250
Stanzas 251
Riley Jeffs’ (the Bushranger) Last Thoughts . • . 253
An Extemporaneous Address to Tasmania ...» 255
The Old Maid’s Song—Written for the Benefit of Young Ladies 256
Song . • 258
Heki’s War Song • 259
Song • 261
Ode to Affliction 263
Song 266
Ode to Spring . . • ...... » 267
A Hymn on the Glorious Works of God . • • . 271


To the Reader.
The Angel's Visit.




To the Reader.
(iXh
O f?s£> cEAD'ER, ere praise or censure you bestow
C 3 jljC'Sf Upon my Poem, read thou through the whole,
\_ And then I’ll listen to thy cavillings,
V-/ V-' But if you read at random, here, and there,
And then condemn it all, I heed thee not.
Glen Ayr, January, 1860.
The Angel's Visit.
1 Sr/pb IIEED of this world where so much evil reigns,
> Ilf \ I absorb’d in thought, reflecting on
Li. w,/;j That strange, that unsubstantial dream call’d life,
(//AVvi on visionary dreamer, Man.
Yr\ VVV ’Tis true he has progress’d in knowledge since
' Hurl’d forth from blissful Eden, but what know-
ledge ?
B


Knowledge of good with evil so combin’d
’Tis scarce wise to attain it, who knows most
But sighs to find himself most miserable,
’Tis sad to too much and yet remain a mortal.
Behold the wisest sages of mankind,
From Solomon even down to our own days,
The wisest are the saddest of the sad.
So high their lofty aspirations rise,
So low the stern realities they find,
For “ all is vanity and vexation all,”
So says that philosophic kingly sage,
That wise, yet hoary-headed libertine,
Whose tastes voluptuous nought could satisfy,
*Unsated ’mongst unnumber’d concubines,
And num’rous wives, who turn’d his heart from God.
But two exceptions on this earth appear,
The one a man, the other more than man,
And they were hated by their fellow-men,
And persecuted even unto death.
The one that Grecian sage whose spirit mild
Breath’d peace, and love, and sought to bless mankind,
Teaching them wisdom with his latest breath,
And resignation ’midst his sufferings great;
Him they compell’d to drink the bitter cup
Of deadly poison: perish’d thus that man;
* His experience had taught him a bitter lesson, and in his old age ho
mourned over his youthful sins on this very head.


But not so perish’d his immortal spirit.
The other was a Being more sublime,
Surpassing all who on this mortal stage
E’er jet appear’d; with doctrines strange and n.
Yet bearing impress of divinity,
For mortal man before had never waged
Such open warfare with all mankind’s creed,
Yet taught He all with such authority,
Exemplifying still the doctrines taught
By his own practice. Mankind stood amaz’d,
Doubting awhile if he were man, or God,
Yet he appear’d in such humility
As stagger’d all belief; teaching all men
“To love each other ev’n as they love themselves,”
A doctrine most sublime! if acted on,
The world, and man, and nature, all were changed,
And earth like Eden soon would bloom once more,
And man like angels sinless here below.
What need were then of fleets or armies strong ?
Of kings, or princes, parliament, or laws ?
Or priests from pulpits, truths as now to teach ?
None would transgress, and none need punish then,
All thought of ill banish’d from this peaceful earth,
All men alike on others’ good intent,
All good in common, none preferring self,
But ardent each to serve the common cause
Of mankind’s welfare ; oh ! such truths as these


Men were not yet prepared to hear, so they
Sought the great innovator to destroy,
And compass’d by vile means that Being’s death,
A fearful death, ev’n death upon the cross!
Oh! cruel man!'Oh long-forbearing God !
Canst Thou see such and pardon man the while?
Tes, Thou canst pardon or we were destroy’d,
Bor daily we perform as cruel deeds,
We’re still the same our fathers were of yore,
The same in spirit, tho’ not such our deeds.
Which of us “ loves our neighbour as ourself” ?
When “ stricken on one cheek, turn we the other ” ?
Or, if our “ coat he ask’d give we our cloak” ?
Oh! men are still all evil, changed in name,
But not in truth, still evil passions hold
The mastery, the devil still reigns on earth,
If not supreme, still wide-spread pow’r he holds,
And more or less sways every human heart.
God is indeed most merciful to hear
The wickedness of man and not destroy.
What were those sins which mankind once committed
In antediluvial times to anger God
So much that He could bear their crimes no more,
But doom’d them all to ruin, man and beast
In chaos hurl’d with all the feather’d tribe ?
(One man alone and all his household sav’d)
Oh! were they greater than men now commit ?


Or has our God become more merciful ?
Ev’n since our Saviour’s advent here on earth,
What crimes have been committed in His name!
Men chain their brothers to the fiery stake,
And smile with joy on their deep agonies,
Then to the altar of their God repair,
And ask a blessing on the deed they’ve done,
Men bind their brothers to the torturing wheel
And tear them limb from limb, defacing thus
God’s faithful image with pretended zeal
To serve His cause, —hypocrisy most vile
IJnpractis’d ev’n by demons who pursue
Unvarnish’d evil undisguis’d as saints,
Thus Calvin burn’d Sertorius, thus
The persecuted persecutors turn,
What we condemn in others we pursue,
Oh! were we Christians could we do such deeds ?
Forgetting quite that lesson so divine,
“ Who’s free from sin let him first cast the stone.”
Thus Galileo was in prison thrown,
Because he dar’d to testify the truth.
Thus wicked, men have been in every age;
Some, chain the body, others, chain the mind,
Condemning all to torment without end,
Who dare presume to differ from their creed,
Thus, Athanasius sends all those to hell,
Who do not own him their unerring guide,


Trampling beneath his foot with spiritual pride,
That noble precept of our Lord and Master,
“ Judge not, 0 man, lest you be also judg’d”—
But man doth judge, Oh ! I am sick to death,
Of mankind’s pride, presumption, and his folly,
Sure Christianity was not intended
To be wrapt up in mystery so strange.
And stranger still that mankind should be taught
’Tis indispensable to their salvation
The incomprehensible to comprehend.
What says that noble-minded man Saint Paul
The eloquent apostle of the Gentiles ?
“Believe on Christ the Lord and thou’lt be sav’d.’
0 blessed words! 0 doctrine most divine !
Tet man would warp it to his private ends,
And like the Jews in their Talmudic writings,
Encumber God’s own Iruth with fables vain,
As with traditions did their sires of yore.
But such has been the tendency of man
In every age, to add unto his creed
New articles, encumb’ring more and more
The simple truth with man’s inventions vain.
The Bible is the Christian’s rule of faith,
To teach the learn’d, and the unlearn’d alike,
And studied right needs no interpreter
But man’s own conscience; it was writ for all,
But chiefly for the ignorant and poor,


Expounding truths sublime in parables,
Wbicb all who run may read, and understand,
O wherefore then make plainest truths obscure ?
Why shroud' the light in darkest mystery ?
Till men at length disgusted with the heap
Of rubbish, in the shape of cumbrous forms,
Which they must wade thro’ in their search for truth,
Turn back repell’d, and give up in despair.
These were the thoughts which cross’d my teeming brain
While sitting thus in deep reflection wrapt,
When o’er me stole a slumber deep and strange,
And this the vision which engross’d my mind.
Methought that I had died most suddenly,
My disembodied spirit call’d by God
Before his judgment seat, while yet not aged,
While yet unfinished all I had to do,
On earth, —my first thought was regret, my next,
Full acquiescence in the will of God.
And now before me was held up, as ’twere,
The truest mirror of my whole past life,
Ev’n from my earliest infancy, I saw
My every act; each long-forgotten thought
Flash’d thro’ my conscience with electric speed.
My good and evil there before me stood,
Each action, and its secret motive too.
Oh! who can tell—alas ! no words can paint—
The vividness of that bright flash of truth.


It me awhile appall’d: it doubtless was
An inspiration of the Holy Spirit,
Which brings all things to our remembrance fresh.
And makes things past clear as the present seem.
Such was that sacred flash; my feelings then
No pen can paint, no mortal tongue can tell.
I would have given the world if it were mine
To give, my life, or aught that men hold dear,
Could I erase part of that picture there,
Or lose remembrance of my earthly sins,
Sins of commission, of omission too,
And yet I felt I was not on the whole
Like others sinful, glorying in their sin,
But still I could not bear the thought of sin ;
Sin seemed so hideoug whether great or small,
And all around me seem’d so free from sin,
I hated sin where all things else were pure,
I felt asham’d I was not pure as they,
It was not fear of punishment I felt,
But horror of all sin for its own sake,
No doom than this could then seem more severe,
To loathe, abhor one’s self since stained by sin,
To feel unworthy that the God of love,
Of purity, should look on aught so vile.
While thus I felt, —an angel came beside,
To summon me before the throne of God,
And I obey’d with mingled fear and hope.


But this which takes me time and words to tell,
Was instantaneous as the lightning’s flash,
All I have told you in a moment pass’d,
And all I saw and felt I knew was true.
Now with that Angel I pursued my way,
To hear my sentence from God’s lips pronounc’d,
But just as I approach’d the last bright court
Which usher’d to the presence of my God,
The angel cried “ enough, thou art repriev’d,
And I thy guide to lead thee back to earth.”
I almost felt regret these words to hear,
And having gone so far would further go.
But back to earth I must my steps retrace,
Pow’rless I felt, and followed him who led,
While thus he spoke, “ ’Tis the divine decree —
And man should follow where the Spirit leads.
Men little know the wondrous ways of God,
Nor by what means He works out His decree,
Suffice it now I am His instrument,
To lead thro’ paths thou hast not trod before,
And oft have I been sent from God to man
To warn him from the paths which he should shun,
To point out paths which lead alone to truth.
And while to earth our journey we pursue,
Strange truths thou’lt hear beyond thy previous ken,
And I’ll explain, for so doth God permit.
Permitted too what thou canst bear of truth


To teach.: so babes at first are fed on milk,
They, stronger grown, of stronger food partake,
And from that stronger food grow stronger still.
“ Ask’st thou my name and lineage long ? suffice
I am that angel whom God sends to man
As being in intelligence the next
Superior, immaterial man.
(The same who to Saint John was erewhile sent.)
Such thou thyself some future day may’st be,
If well applied those talents God has given,
If rightly used thy opportunities,
For when mankind on earth was first created,
God planted in his soul the germ of truth,
Which cultur’d well doth yield ten thousand fold
Increase of precious fruit, still blooming more
And yielding fruit thro’ all eternity.
“ And yet how few among the sons of men
Unto that germ of truth attention pay ?
Pew make it bud, still fewer make it bloom,
And few, if any, make it bear ripe fruit.
For it will neither bud, nor bloom, nor bear,
If nurtur’d not with unremitting toil.
“ But one alone on earth gave it due care,
Even Enoch, father of Methusaleh,
And God translated him from earth to heav’n,
No intervention of what men call death,
A "d dread so much, tho’ rightly understood


Death’s but the threshold of eternal life.
“ Long time has pass’d : at least what man calls time,
(Time is by us unfelt) since I was sent
To Hagar wand’ring in the wilderness,
Then first commun’d I with material man,
By suff’rings bow’d, the fruit of his own sin.
Mine was the task to turn her heart to God,
To comfort her in her affliction deep,
And from the future to withdraw the veil.
“ She saw, she felt an Omnipresent God,
And own’d the truth to me, to me His servant.
“ My errand next brought me to Abraham,
Upon my way unto that wicked city,
Whose deeds of evil so displeas’d the Lord,
That he rain’d down from Heav’n both fire and brimstone,
Turning it into a bituminous lake,
Whose waters to this day have bitter taste.
’Twas then that Abraham, that pious man,
‘ The father of the faithful’ styl’d by men,
Did mediate between his God and man,
And God permitted me at once to grant
His prayers for mercy: granted yet in vain.
“ Thence to that pre-doomed city on we went,
And thence removed Lot and his family,
Ere swift destruction on the place descended.
I saw, and wept its fearful guilt, and ruin.
“ To Hagar once again in deep distress


My errand was, for God permits not long
The prayers of faith to be pour’d forth in vain.
I dried her tears, restor’d her failing sight,
She look’d, she saw from that parch’d desert spring
A well of purest water, she and child
Both drank .thereof and life and health return’d.—
And still for man the well of life doth spring,
And all who drink shall be to life restor’d.
“ Next was I sent to Abraham again,
When he would offer up his only son
In strict obedience to the will of God,
(Not that the Lord this faithful man would tempt,
But that material proof might thence remain
Bor future times of one man’s steadfast faith).
From heav’n I call’d, and stay’d his uprais’d hand,
Then told him of the blessings God would pour
On him, and his thro’ all eternity,
And for his sake on all the human race.
“I next was sent to Jacob in a vision,
Lest he should turn him from his father’s God,
For man is ever prone to turn from truth.
He slept and dream’d, and in his dream he saw
A ladder from the earth to heav’n ascending,
And angels bright ascending and descending,
And in the heav’ns above was God, who said,
‘ I am the Lord, the God of Abraham
And of thy father Isaac, and of thee;


On thee, and on thy seed, will I bestow
The land whereon thou liest, and thy seed
Like as the dust shall be for multitude.
And they shall spread unto the east, and west,
And north and south, and in thy seed shall all
The countless families of mankind be bless’d,
And I will still be with thee, with thee now,
And whereso’er thou goest, and will bring thee
Again into this land, nor will I leave thee
Tho’ thou shalt leave me oft, yet will I not
Leave thee, until accomplish’d all the things
I now have spoken.’ Jacob then awak’d
In fear, much agitated by his dream,
And dedicated all his heart to God,
And of his temp’ral goods ho vowed a tenth.
“ Again, with others of my brethren, I
Was sent to Jacob on his way to Esau,
And softening down the anger of the brothers,
Induc’d a peaceful meeting, else had been
The deed of Cain reacted o’er again.
“ Once more to Jacob, ere his name was chang’d
To Israel, I appeared by night; in form
A man, —we wrestled long in argument,
For much he knew, in all things most profound,
Tho’ weak when touch’d in his material frame,
Tet firm of soul he would not let me go
Until I bless’d him, though unknown my name.


“ In visions of the night I next appear’d
To Joseph, and to Pharaoh, sent by God
To mould them both to His divine decree,
And also unto Israel thus was sent,
To chide his fear of going into Egypt,
Tho’ much he long’d his long-lost son to see.
“ Next was I sent ambassador from God
To Moses, urging him to lead his people
From Egypt to the land of Canaan home.
But Moses fearful of the dangers great,
And also of his own ability,
Objected so, that I could not prevail.
Then God spoke out in me, commanding him
To go at once, and signs and wonders show’d,
O’erwhelming there with miracles so vast
The sad perverseness of his stubborn soul,
That he at length reluctance felt no more,
But there became the instrument of God,
To lead his people from the land of Egypt,
Performing before Pharaoh and his court
Wonders ne’er seen upon the earth before.
He led them forth, and thro’ the Bed Sea led
In safety, yet o’erwhelming there, their foes,
For fire, and water, and all elements
Are pow’rless in the mighty hand of God
To save, or to destroy, but, as He wills
Their great Creator’s bidding they obey,


So doth a gentle child which loves its father,
♦Hear, and obey, unquestioning the while.
Oh ! would that mankind as obedient were,
As anxious to perform their father’s will!
The mind of man God seldom doth coerce,
But leaves it free, for good or evil free.
“ But all my missions unto stubborn man
’Twere long to tell, —suffice it now to say
Mine was the task (as doubtless thou hast read
In Exodus, the thfee-and-twentieth chapter)
To show the Israelitish host the way
In all their wand’rings thro’ Arabia’s deserts,
Leading them back unto the promis’d land,
Driving before them those idolatrous nations
Who anger’d God and perish’d in their sin.
“ But still I found they were a faithless race,
Those stubborn Jews, like all the sons of men.
They anger’d me so oft, I felt dispos’d
To hurl them all in ruin, and from Moses,
To reproduce a gentler, better race,
Who would at least be grateful to their God ;
For all in vain I found to them were given
Such blessings ne’er vouchsafed to man before ;
Their temp’ral and their spiritual wants supplied
By agency divine before their eyes,
•Perhaps the highest point of Christian obedience is not merely to do
God’s will, without “ murmuring,” but without “questioning.”


And yet they murmur’d and rebell’d the more.
Oh ! I myself was fill’d with wonder then
At God’s forbearance to this stubborn race,
Unable his designs to comprehend,
Or what lay hidden in the womb of time,
Surpris’d I found myself restrain’d from doing
Strict justice on them, urg’d by zeal towards God.
“ Yet as they were a nation hard of heart,
Slow to believe those miracles sublime,
Perform’d before their eyes, and lest they should
In after times abandon all belief
In God, I instituted then, and there,
A code of laws, a formal ritual,
Full of observances and outward show,
To fix their eyes, if not their hearts on God.
Not that He merit finds in forms and show —
He loves the pure, the faithful heart alone,
And one pure prayer from an humble heart,
Outweighs all forms, all penance yet performed.
Vain are all forms, vain are all temples rear’d
To Him whose temple is creation vast,
Whose myriad worlds unnumber’d roll around
His throne, that peerless throne of dazzling light,
Whence He surveys what none but He surveys,
The boundless realm of the illimitable
Eealm which rul’d by love obeys His sov’reign will.
From that vast realm what sounds of praise ascend


What harmony beyond conception sweet,
What various notes from various orbs arise,
And mingling sing eternal hymns of praise !
Shall man alone be mute ? ah no ! let man
Adore God humbly with an awe-struck heart,
For He is far beyond conception great,
And good, as great, He is the mighty God
Not of earth only, but of myriad worlds
Which fill all space, and of those various beings
Which in intelligence and wisdom seem
Inferior some, and some to equal man,
Others superior, in proportion just
As their vast orbs surpass yon world of your’s.
Behold yon brilliant planet Jupiter,
Compar’d with which your globe is but a speck ;
Or further look and see Orion vast,
That problem dark, that mystTy still to man;
Or turn thy gaze to yonder fix’d Pole star,
That centre of unnumber’d suns around,
Each sun the centre of a system vast,
Whose various orbs around their primal orb
Ceaseless revolve in harmony divine.
And when thou hast their mighty bulk survey’d,
Say would it seem in just accordance with
The great Creator’s wisdom were they made
The homes of beings weak and frail as man ?
No, some are now the bright and happy homes
C


Of godlike beings who have still retain’d
Their purity, who have resisted sin,
And triumph’d o’er temptation, they are pure,
And consequently happy ; pure as when
They sprang to being at their Maker’s call
And bless’d their great Creator ; they’re endow’d
With powers superior far to fallen man,
Who by his sins lost intellectual strength,
And whom they view with pity, and with love,
As fellow-worshippers of one great God,
AH subject to one ruler, and they know
That man some future day will be restor’d
To his primeval innocence and bliss,
And then resemble them, as he may grow
In purity and freedom from all sin.
Then wars shall cease, then courts of law shall close,
And priests and pulpits be requir’d no more,
All evil deeds, all evil thoughts unknown,
All men become as prophets and as priests,
All earth one temple of the living God,
All voices raised in one glad hymn of praise,
The loud outpouring of their grateful hearts
To Him, the universal Lord of all,
With whom there’s nothing great, there’s nothing mean,
Nor mighty Orb, nor animalcula,
Tho’ one remote, the other so minute
That man’s best instruments scarce bring to sight,


Yet both receive alike their Maker’s care
And manifest His wisdom, and His might.
“ Oh ! if you mortals would perceive the bliss,
The pow’r, the knowledge which you might attain
Even in your mortal state if free from sin,
Surely you would resolve to sin no more,
Nor ever wander from that high resolve,
As did the Jews who wander’d oft from God,
Although he loved them more than fathers love
Their best lov’d children, or as mothers love
An only child for which they’d give their life.
0 ! I would often have abandon’d them,
But that I lov’d the Lord, and was His servant.
For often they provoked me to great anger,
With their vile deeds and their idolatries,
Forsaking Him who for them did such deeds,
Even as men now forsake the Lord their God.
“ Thus kept I with them ev’n till Moses’ death,
Nor then forsook, but for bravo Joshua fought
When he succeeded to the chief command,
Against accursed Jericho I wav’d
My sword victorious, soon the walls fell down,
Without the aid of any human force,
For I was anxious that they all should see
Great deeds perform’d thro’ faith and trust in God.
As for the accursed city thus destroy’d,
It well deserv’d its fate, so hideous were


Tli’ abominations daily practis’d there
In open day, by that incestuous race,
Descendants vile of Lot’s abandoned daughters.
“ With Joshua, too, against the Amorites
I fought, and made the sun and moon stand still,
Or seem to do so, and prolong’d the day,
While Israel there destroy’d God’s enemies.
And tho’ this deed has puzzled much mankind,
Astronomers the most, who fondly deem
Such deed impossible, forgetful still
That nothing is impossible with God.
Men little know the agents God can use
To work his will, how with small instruments
He can with ease the mightiest deeds achieve.
So did he at creation of your earth
Great deeds perform, ev’n by his sole command;
‘ Let there be light,’ said God, and there was light.
And tho’ these mighty deeds were told to man
In after times by prophets wise and good,
In language suited to the comprehension
Of that same age in which the deeds were told,
Ev’n as I now impart some truths to thee,
In language such as thou thyself wouldst use,
Yet this has sometimes caus’d mankind to doubt,
And lose their way in error’s winding maze,
Following the literal meaning of a word,
They ‘ strain at gnats, and meanwhile camels swallow.*


For as in knowledge and in science man
Progresses, other language must be used,
The same idea, or same fact to tell.
’Tis thus the fact of Joshua’s lengthen’d day,
And the recording shadow on the dial
Of Ahaz seem to clash with modem science,
Tho’ rightly understood they quite agree,
And each the truth of other doth confirm.
So also is the fact of the creation
In strict accordance with geology,
Although some men most idly dream they differ.
True science doth attest the Bible’s truth,
The six days mention’d six long periods are
Of time indefinite, as man counts time,
And what to thee, perhaps, may seem more strange,
Is, that creation is proceeding still,
And ever will be thro’ eternity.
“ But I could tell thee truths erin much more strange,
If thou could’st bear them, but thy sins prevent.
Those bear most truth who are themselves most truthful,
The pure alone can bear the perfect truth,
But where’s the pure, the truthful, perfect man ?
“ Oh! if mankind would purge themselves from sin,
What truths now hidden might they then perceive ?
No need would be-of telescopic aid
To pierce the starry sky, but far more clear,
Than thro’ the best of man’s best instruments,


Might all God’s wondrous works be seen by man,
And perfect all, in harmony divine,
All working out their great Creator’s will,
And all created for some useful end,
Tho’ man perhaps may not that end discern.
“ It makes me smile to hear the pride of man
Reasoning as if all things were made for him,
Tho’ he himself is hut one single link
In the creation, the connecting link
’Twixt heav’n and earth, he is on earth the greatest,
As lin heav’n tho least: yet far surpassing
Thee, as thou see’st, in knowledge, and pow’r from high.
“ Yet still mankind knows much, and might know more,
If they would humbly seek the truth from God,
For God grants more to faith than man dare ask.
’Twas thus of old to faithful men was given
Such knowledge as from science ne’er was drawn;
’Twas thus the patriarchs and prophets old
Received a knowledge of futurity,
Thus David and Isaiah saw tho future,
As plainly as men now the present see,
Using the heavenly telescope of faith,
And by the glorious vision wrapt, inspired,
They drew the scene in poetry divine,
Striking with master-hand the heav’nly lyre,
Producing lofty strains unknown before,
Their verse harmonious, and their theme sublime.


Compar’d with them what are those Grecian Bards
Whom men admire ? Homer, and Hesiod too,
Euripides, and all the num’rous throng,
Who sung of earthly themes in earthly strains,
Telling of evil men, and evil deeds, ,
And praising those who censure most deserve ?
The first was blind, and still the blind he leads,
Wlio deem that deeds of evil merit praise,
Yet he like David and Isaiah drew
His earliest inspirations from above,
But being evil, evil scenes he drew
In preference, miscalling evil good.
He sang of human wars, and blood, and slaughter,
Of deeds libidinous, and lust abhorr’d,
And all that ever hath been known of crime,
These he attributes to his heroes, and,
Par worse, ascribes the same to his false gods,
Polluting thus the minds of mortal men,
Confusing all their thoughts of good and evil,
Shedding his baleful influence o’er his race,
From which ev’n yet man is not wholly free—
Misled by him that lofty Roman bard,
Who had some glimpses of the truth divine,
Was tempted too, and sung of war, and crime,
Of Dido, and .Eneas, and in strain
Harmonious pour’d his stately verse along.
Thus they abus’d the talents they received,


Instead of teaching mankind truths sublime,
They errors taught, and fictions wild and vile.
Not so that mightier genius Milton, who
In glorious strains taught truths sublime to man,
Transcending far all Bards.who went before
In purity, and majesty divine,
Whose fame immortal ever must increase,
While Britain’s language shall on earth be known.
“How strange that mankind should be.so perverse,
And turn good gifts unto the basest use!
The proper use of Poesy is to sing
High praise to God, and truths to teach mankind.
Witness its application by St. John,
Witness the glorious visions which he saw,
How God for him withdrew the veil which hides
Futurity, and showed to mortal sight,
Or rather to the inward eye of faith,
The heaven above the heavens, the throne of God
Beyond conception bright, surrounded by
Myriads of bright intelligences, which
To other eyes might each appear a god.
Such are the visions which men might perceive
Were they like him, as pure, as free from sin.
But ‘ men love darkness for their deeds are evil,'
And therefore sing they of men’s darkest deeds,
And laud those actions angels most condemn.
’Tis thus that mankind’s butchers have been prais’d


From Nimrod to Napoleon ; in each age
The worst destroyers gain the highest fame.
What are those heroes who thus plague mankind,
But instruments to work the wrath of God
On disobedient nations ? they but rods
To punish those who chastisement deserve.
And shall such instruments be fill’d with pride ?
God’s will can raise them, and his will destroy.
And what’s the fruit of all those victories,
Where men have triumph’d o’er their fellow men ?
Troy lies in ruins, Greece is ruin’d too,
Persia, and Parthia, and those Tartars fierce,
Ghengis Khan, Jehangire, and Tamerlane,
Who sacrific’d such hecatombs of men
To glory ! Where’s the glory which they gained ?
’Tis of that sort which made a madman bum
The temple of Diana, and which rear’d
Vast pyramids in Egypt’s burning sands,
Cemented all by human blood and tears.
Where now is Egypt’s glory ? where is Eome’s ?
Like Nineveh’s and Babylon’s, and Tyre’s !
Man’s empires are like flowers which deck the field,
Like them they bloom, like them they fade away.
Where now the Moslem avalanche which threaten’d
Erewhile destruction to all Christendom;
No human force its fury could withstand,
Till God repell’d it from Vienna’s walls;


That empire now on sufferance exists,
And will ere long be number’d with the past.
“ And yet a diffrent end bad been its fate,
Had its great founder follow’d in the path
I pointed out that be might it pursue,
For to Mahomet I was also sent,
To lead him from idolatry to truth,
If he would learn. I taught him the great truth,
Th’ eternal truth of one eternal God,
And tho’ alas ! his pride and vanity
Induced him to usurp the name of prophet,
Casting the Saviour Jesus Christ aside,
And cumb’ring truth with fictions strange and wild,
The crazy fancies of a fertile mind.
He knew the truth but would not it pursue,
I therefore left him to his own inventions,
Finding his heart as Balaam’s was before.
Like his perverse, ungenial soul for truth.
Then soon a heap of fables he produc’d,
In which the germ of truth doth still remain
Conspicuous, shining bright above the rest,
Like one pure gem among a heap of rubbish.
Then tempted by the arch-enemy of man,
Who offer’d him the bait of pride, ambition,
Lust, and all that unregenerate man
Deems good and great: thus tried, alas! he fell.
Then sought he earthly good by earthly means,


And from the scabbard drawing forth the sword,
Proclaimed himself a prophet sent from high,
God’s great vice-gerent on the earth below,
The king of men, God’s priest and prophet too,
And with his sword his doctrines he enforc’d.
“ But far more pow’rful is the sword of truth.
Bethlehem’s star ascends, and his declines,
And on the earth will soon be known no more.
Nor would it ever have ascended thus,
But that the Christians so obscur’d the truth
With fables vain, with pious frauds, and lies,
And sank so low in gross depravity,
That few the truth from falsehood could discern.
Alas ! that Christians should descend so low,
And foist such pious fables on mankind,
As have been done in every age and clime !
So Constantine when warring on Liberius
Pretended he discern’d in heav’n a cross
With Hoc Signo Vinces, as the motto,
As if the Prince of Peace commanded war,
Whose empire rests on love and truth alone.
“ Thus worldly-minded men in every age
Palm pious frauds on man’s credulity.
Witness the heaps of fragments of the cross,
Enough to build ev’n Noah’s mighty ark..
Witness “ the nail” which forms the Lombard’s crown,
And witness too “ the holy coat of Treves.”


These are the relics of the pagan’s creed,
Which intermingle with the Christian faith,
And practis’d by mistaken men who deem
Th’ end being good doth sanctify the means,
Forgetful that God has abundant means,
At His command to propagate His truth,
And that His blessing ne’er can rest upon
Those who use falsehood ev’n to serve the truth;
The truth can spread but by the truth alone.
“ When I look on the nations of the earth,
How much pretence, how little truth I see !
How dark the pages of the human heart!
How much assum’d where little is possess’d !
How fair some seem unto their fellow men
Whose inwards hearts, alas ! are foul indeed !
See Britain’s Henry, of that name the Eighth,
So proudly styl’d “ Defender of the Faith,”
By one who like himself, devoid of faith,
Tet still assum’d the pow’r to give such title.
“ Oh, man! thou’rt still the same in every age;
Where is thy boasted “march of intellectP”
You learn to-day what next day you forget.
Some arts you know which were not known before,
Others are lost which once your fathers knew.
Thus knowledge of “ the Grecian fire” was lost,
Which long preserv’d an empire from the Turks,
Thus lost the engines of Archimedes,


Which, foil’d the Romans before Syracuse.
What hast thou learnt since first the world was young,
Since men were scatter’d on the plain of Shinar ?
Men then could cities build, and lofty towers,
More lofty than Saint Peter’s dome at Rome.
Men could build ships as large, or larger then,
Than any since built by the sons of men,
Save that which Britain’s sons are building now.
What if I tell thee men have not progress’d,
But far receded from their father’s lore!
"What if I tell thee that those nations now,
Whose tombs alone of all their works remain
(O’ergrown by mighty forests), hast’ning fast
To be resolv’d to their first elements
In that part of the world men call the new!
What if I tell thee, these, the sole remains
Of what was once a mighty nation, mightier
Than Greece, or Rome, or Persia, ever was,
And far excelling them in useful arts,
And for long ages holding fast the truth,
That truth which their forefathers with them bore,
Of which some relics may be still discern’d
’Mongst the descendants of their fierce destroyers,
Those savage Indians, who this day preserve
A firm belief in One Eternal God;
Sole relic of the ancient faith they brought


From Asia to America, all else
Perish’d, and all traditions of them lost,
Their arts destroy’d, oblivion o’er them clos’d,
And o’er their mould’ring tombs vast forests rose.
The growth of ages, these began to spring
While Europe was envelop’d still in darkness.
“ Look also on the sultry plains of Ind,
Where literature and science flourish’d long
Ere written language was to Europe known.
The ancient Yedas there in Sanscrit writ,
Those uninspir’d imaginings of men,
Blend germs of truth with fables dark and wild,
Exalting still the priesthood, o’er the rest,
A dom’nant caste, to which all else must bow,
Those sole custodians of their sacred books
Bid them interpret as it suited best
To fix their fetters on the vulgar throng.
“ What wonder then tho»people sank so low,
Oppress’d at once by fraud and force combined ?
Born in low castes none could from them emerge
How great soe’er their pow’rs of mind might be.
For such the pow’rs of mind were but a curse,
They felt their mis’ry more, yet could not rise
Above the caste in which they had been bom.
“ What wonder then if life to such became
A constant scene of misery and woe,


A load so great that death might seem a boon!
From hence arose the human sacrifice,
The car of Juggernaut gave rest to some,
Who found no rest in life, and being told
Such acts were pleasing to their idol gods,
What wonder if they worshipp’d them in blood ?
Thus widows did ascend the funeral pile
Of their late husbands, there were burn’d to death
’Midst fearful tortures, taught by priestcraft vile.
“ But these are deeds of their degen’rate days ;
It was not always so in India, there
Men once were gentle, merciful, and kind,
Nor slew they aught that had the breath of life,
But like the early parents of mankind,
Ere death was known, on fruits alone they lived,
And vegetables, fruits of mother earth ;
And then they led a peaceful happy life,
Their sages often reach’d a green old age
In contemplation wrapt, and calm delight.
“ Look also on the empire of Cathay,
That ancient empire, whose Mongolian race
Has long possess’d a knowledge of the arts
And sciences so useful unto man ;
Whose language monosyllabic is found
More comprehensive than the modern tongues,
Which Europe’s gifted sons so highly prize.
“ And yet they are not a progressive race,


Those vain Chinese, who still remain the same
Their fathers were some thousand years ago,
Yet deem themselves so far remov'd above
All other nations, tho’ we see them sunk
So low in vice and gross idolatries.
“ But nations ne’er can prosper which refuse
A just obedience to the living God.
Not all the maxims, and the teachings of
Confucius, their moralist and sage,
Supply their one great want, religious truth.
But now at length the destin’d hour is come,
When their exclusiveness shall be remov’d,
Those barriers burst which shut from them the light,
And war shall lead them to “ the Prince of Peace.”
“ Thus good shall spring from evil, from the west
They shall their bane and antidote receive.
From Britain’s sons, the allies now of France,
They shall at length the Christian faith receive,
And rise, and prosper in the social scale.
“ And yet they may in some things be admir’d,
Their patient perserverance, and the care
With which they cultivate ungenial soil
Demand our praise ; their written language too
Hundreds of millions read and understand.
Not like the num’rous dialects of the west,
Where neighbour cannot neighbour understand


In speech, or writing ; thus, confusion reigns
And is to social intercourse a bar.
“ But now behold the nations of the west,
Where Eussia occupies the lion’s share,
When day by day her outstretch’d arms she spreads,
And neighb’ring nations grasps in her embrace.
But like the deadly boa’s fatal clasp,
So strangles she all whom she doth embrace ;
So Poland fell, so Turkey would have fallen,
Had Prance and Britain only held aloof.
So has Circassia also lately fallen,
And crouching Persia almost owns her sway,
Her fatal influence Prussia often feels,
And tott’ring Austria as a suppliant bends.
Sweden and Denmark also grieve to feel
Her influence in their councils paramount.
“ Thus daily doth this northern pow’r encroach
Like Home of old on all the nations round.
Tho’ sometimes forc’d to leave her mangled prey,
She eagle-like retires to wilds and crags ;
Foil’d but not vanquish’d there she keeps on watch,
Eeady to pounce when the right moment comes
On any prey which she may thence descry.
Her ruler too by wisest councils led,
No longer rules a nation of mere slaves;
He gave the serfs their freedom, and thus laid
D


The firm foundations of an empire vast.
Let Britain, and let Prance be warn’d in time,
Or else this mighty avalanche may roll
With lightning speed, and crush them on its way.
“ Next view imperial France, where rules supreme
The third Napoleon, him whose daring deeds
Have rais’d him from an outcast to a throne.
He plays a desp’rate game, and freely states
AH Europe’s welfare on a single move.
Man of dark thoughts, his deep designs unknown,
He talks of peace while meditating war.
“ The Empire Peace,” one year his motto was,
The next saw Solferino’s bloody field,
Till gorg’d with carnage, and with gath’ring foes,
He soon perceiv’d the fearful risks he ran,
And then patch’d up a peace, retarding thus
The hopes of freedom for Italia’s sons,
Whom he deluded thus with promise vain.
His promise was that “ ItTy should he free
Ev’n from the Alps unto the Adriatic.”
And yet the self-same man now advocates
The restoration of those petty tyrants,
Whom all true freemen hate for their misdeeds.
Let Britain hence a useful lesson learn,
Nor blindly trust in any promise made
By one who makes self-interest his creed.


“ How strange that nations in alliance now,
Should yet be arming each against the other,
What mean those naval armaments of France ?
’Gainst whom but Britain can they be intended ?
What mean those num’rous gun-boats cas’d in steel ?
Impervious even to pow’rful rifled guns,
Yes, they are meant some future day to pierce
The heart of Britain if a chance occur.
But Britain doubtless will keep watch and ward,
And while aggressive wars she ever shuns,
Be ever ready to defend her rights.
“ Yet let her seek the flowery paths of peace,
And spread the bliss of freedom ’mongst mankind ;
This is her mission, this the path mark’d out
By Him who should be man’s perpetual guide.
“ But evil ever follows unjust wars,
And nations suffer for their former sins,
Thus France will suffer, when her time has come,
For late enriching fair Italia’s plains
With blood of men so freely shed in vain.
“ ’Tis but the same old story, conquests still,
Which lead to nothing but the conqu’ror’s fame,
Tho’ higher fame might still be gain’d in peace.
Witness that mighty ship which Britain builds
To spread the arts of peace o’er all the earth,
To show mankind what peaceful men might do.


Such enterprise as this now merits fame,
Tho’ this is nothing to what man might do,
If peace were all his study, and good works.
“ Yet mark the diffrence between peace and war,
Napoleon’s wars brought ruin on mankind,
The arts of peace fresh blessings bring to all,
Yet all man knows, and all he now enjoys
Is but a trifle, if compar’d unto
That higher state of knowledge, and of bliss,
He might attain even on yon earth below,
But for his sins, and fearful wickedness.
“ Yet God oft uses men as instruments
To work His will, He raises some on high,
Exalting many from a lowly sphere
For His own purposes inscrutable.
Kings has He chosen from the shepherd's fold,
And Eoman Consuls from the Eoman plough,
Or, if more modern instances be sought,
Behold the first Napoleon, miscall’d “ great,’’
Yet “ great” he doubtless was in one fell sense,
Great in destruction of his fellow men.
Him God rais’d up from out the common mass,
And gave him power,—to use, or to abuse, —
He chose the last, and hence his speedy fall,
No offspring left to fill his vacant throne.
Yet he was gifted more than other men,


As great in arts of peace as he in war.
Ctesar alone among the sons of men
His equal was: great deeds he should have done
For mankind’s welfare, hut allur’d by fame,
And selfishness, he wander’d from the path
Mark’d out before him ; then like Saul of old
Without a guide he stumbled, and he fell,
And from his tow’ring height great was his fall.
Thus ended all his bright ambitious dreams,
His aspirations after earthly fame ;
Thus clouded were his closing years of life,
A sullen captive to a stubborn foe,
Far from the country which he lov’d so well,
He died an exile on a barren rock.
And why ? Because he would not give his heart to God,
To Him who for him such great things had done,
Because he warr’d not for his God, but fame,
His people, too, were similar to himself,
And hence the punishment they underwent.
And still they are an irreligious race,
Ascribing all the glory to themselves,
Tho’ but the instruments of God’s just wrath
On disobedient nations, who transgress,
And whom He chastens with a parent’s rod.
“ Now turn thy eyes upon the British isles,
That small, but still most pow’rful empire, which


Victoria rules with sceptre just and mild.
No warrior she, she hates aggressive wars,
But cultivates the gentler arts of peace.
Her people’s welfare is her constant aim,
Convinc’d she is responsible to Him,
Who gave such mighty interests to her care.
She shows her realm a pattern in her life,
And founds her throne upon her people’s love.
Such should bo the foundation of all thrones,
And none but those so founded are secure,
And none but those so founded God will bless.
Kings are but stewards of a mightier King,
And therefore should that mightier King obey.
Let kings and subjects therefore bear in mind,
That all are subject to one King supreme,
And if they deviate from the path of truth,
They both must bear appropriate punishment,
Tho’ often long deferr’d, yet ever sure.
“ Next view Columbia vast, where nature teems
With objects wondrous, on colossal scale ;
Volcanoes fierce, her mountains tow’ring high,
Her ocean rivers, and her cataracts grand,
Her hills of gold, which throw into the shade
The fabled treasures of Pactolus’ sands.
Her mighty forests, and her prairies vast,
Her fields of ice, her equatorial plains —


Columbia revels thus in the sublime.
Even man himself is seen there in extremes,
The Patagonian huge, the Aztec small,
The same extremes display’d in mental pow’r,
The Anglo-Saxon and the Esquimaux,
Present the greatest contrasts of the race.
“ Here in this mighty continent behold
The future homes of millions yet unborn.
Those silent solitudes unpeopled now.
Are destin’d yet to teem with busy man
There where the mighty Amazon doth roll
Andeian waters to the distant sea,
There, commerce yet shall hold her well-throng’d court,
And merchants meet from furthest ends of earth,
“ How strange that nations should attack each other,
And war for petty portions of your globe,
While areas vast of richest soil are left
TJntill’d, unsought, neglected, and unknown!
The world is wide, and room enough for all,
Were they in arts of peace alone employ’d,
But while they are by evil passions sway’d,
There will be wars, and poverty, and woe.
“ Now let us glance at the United States,
That empire young whose herculean strength
Already claims for it a foremost place.
There where democracy runs riot, and


Where scenes occur which good men must deplore.
There, I behold an embryo empire, which
Is destin’d to be great in God’s good time.
Not till she has a heavy penance paid
For her great national sin of slavery;
Not till she has that foulest stain remov’d,
That fearful blot upon her code of laws.
For why should men be slaves to fellow men ?
Who made the white man free ? the black a slave ?
Did God ? Oh! blasphemy most foul,
To sin, and lay that sin upon thy God,
It is the work of Satan, and of men,
Of wicked men who Satan make their God,
WTio worship Mammon, who would sink their souls
For lucre base unto the lowest hell,
And yet with vile hypocrisy declare
They act in strict obedience to God’s will,
That God made Ham his brethren’s servant, slave;
Torturing thus the Scripture’s meaning plain,
Full proof the devil can also Scripture quote,
Whene’er it serves his purposes of evil.
“ But let Columbia’s infant empire learn
In time its duty, and retrace its steps
As Britain did, and freedom give its slaves.
Then shall her rapid progress be increas’d,
And discord’s jarrings will be heard no more,


United all in bonds of concord close,
She will appear a pattern to the world,
Worthy of those who to her freedom gave,
Worthy of noble men like Washington,
Worthy of Franklin, and of men like him,
Who make the good of mankind their chief aim.
Now let us give a passing hasty glance,
On far Australia’s thinly-peopled shores,
That home of thy adoption, where thou hast
Spent the best years of all thy manhood’s prime.
Behold the eager search for Mammon there,
The restless toiling for material wealth,
As if the transient joy which wealth can give
Can be retain’d by them beyond the grave ;
Sere thou may’st see of what avail is wealth,
Or those vain prizes which men seek on earth.
The fleeting joys which wealth, pow’r, fame bestow,
Are lost for ever in the silent tomb,
While those true joys a well-spent life doth give
Increase still more when earth has pass’d away.
Eepine not thou altho’ thy lot be cast
In an obscure and isolated isle,
Whose sons at present small devotion pay
To poesy, or to the cultur’d mind,
Base Mammon’s vot’ries they, their god is gold;
For it they rip the entrails of the earth,


And crush with toil the hard auriferous rock ;
Then aided by a metal volatile,
They thus extract the particles of gold.
“ Be thine the task to win a richer prize,
A prize compar’d with which all wordly wealth
Is valueless, gold but a bauble vain.
That prize is wisdom; gained alas ! by few,
Nor often sought because unknown its worth,
Tet those who gain it doubtless gain the key
Of worldly wealth, if haply they should deem
Such worth their care: but they who wisdom gain
Seek higher objects far than worldly wealth,
For wealth they deem a plaything fit for fools,
But with their minds enlarged, they higher soar,
And seek that highest prize —eternal bliss.
This is the only prize which doth repay
Man’s toilsome search: all else are found when gain’d
Empty and hollow—dazzling unpossess’d,
But when possess’d their worthlessness is found.
“ Not so doth wisdom deal: who grows more wise
More capable of happiness becomes.
The wise man can extract the joys of life,
And them enjoy, rejecting still the ills.
(So doth the bee the floral sweets extract.)
With mind content, and placid, and serene,
He daily wisdom draws from Nature’s fount,


And practises the lessons which he leams.
Observant of the great Creator’s skill
Throughout creation, and the mighty power,
And ceaseless, limitless beneficence
Which are thus ever to his gaze display’d,
Raising his thoughts above the sphere of earth,
His mind refining from unholy thoughts,
His conscience purifying from all sin,
Thus lives he in communion with his God,
Redeem’d from endless death by one man’s death.
Thus Adam liv’d with Eve in Eden blest,
All earth a glorious paradise around,
And bright the future to their vision seem’d,
And they were happy as now angels are.
“But all is chang’d— yet not so wholly chang’d,
But that the earth might once again become
A second Eden, if men would grow wise,
And only follow where their interest leads.
Man’s highest interest leads to love of God,
To serve Him, and to worship Him in truth,
(Not with lip-worship as most mortals do)
To act in strict obedience to his will,
To feel that every secret act is known,
Each holy thought read with approving smile,
And mark’d by the omniscient eye of God.
“ Yet, think not while I urge a holy life,


That I approve retirement from the world,
In gloomy cloisters, or in deserts lone ;
Not so : for I admire an active life.
All mortals have their duties to perform,
Each has his sep’rate mission to fulfil;
Men were not made in indolence to live,
But each according to the talents given
Should them employ, and turn them to best use
The world is wide, and open is the field
For each his special talents to employ,
And rightly used all work for mankind’s good.
God has bestow’d his gifts with lavish hand,
Profuse in heav’nly, and in earthly good ;
Material wealth in rich abundance lies
On every side, unknown, unsought by man, —
Unsought because unknown, thro’ ignorance.
“ Yet often men complain of poverty —
Why are they poor ? Because they do not use,
And turn to good account the gifts of God;
No self-denial, no perseverance use,
But sit and murmur at their mournful lot.
Toil well applied of body and of mind
Is the sure road to competence and wealth ;
And mod’rate toils a blessing, not a curse,
(Man’s great Eedeemer led a life of toil,
The lowly trade of carpenter he learn’d,
And by his work paid for his daily bread.


Not like Thibetian Llama thron’d in state,
Torpid with indolence, the Saviour liv’d
As man should live, a pattern for the race.
The great apostle of the Gentiles, too,
Disdain’d not work, but earn’d his daily bread.)
With such a field before him each may choose
His sep’rate sphere of action, if he but
Render himself quite equal to perform
The various duties which may lie therein.
Thus one may safely guide the helm of state,
Another may in soldier’s uniform
Like Havelock fight where’er the cause is just ;
Others again from pulpits, or with pen,
May teach their fellow mortals useful truths.
Some may in arts mechanical excel,
Promoting thus their own, and mankind’s good;
Some may like Livingstone or Franklin plunge
In wilds unknown, for science’ sake, or God’s ;
Some may—and they should never bo contemn’d, —
Some may do battle with the wilderness,
And it subdue, and change to fields of com.
Some may still further in the desert plunge,
And feed their flocks where fed the kangaroo,
Reclaiming thus from deserts wild, and waste,
What yet may prove the fit abodes of man.
Some may become the daring pioneers
Of civiliz’d life in regions still scarce known;


Some may no special sphere of action choose,
And yet be fit for any, ever found
Equal to aught they’re call’d on to perform,
Whether those duties may he great, or small,
Performing all alike with equal zeal,
And thus their efforts meet with much success.
“ Man’s service is as pleasing to his God,
Or at the plough, or at the helm of state;
Those proud distinctions, prized so much by man,
Are vain, and hollow in the sight of heav’n.
The meanest insect which doth crawl the earth
Has its just value in the sight of God,
Each has a fitting place, for each was made
By an all-wise, beneficent Creator.
‘ Ho sparrow falls unseen, unknown,’
TJnpitied by its space-pervading Maker,
Who leaves his creatures free, yet doth permit
Deeds to be done which He does not approve.
Hence many a doubt springs in the mind of man,
As to the wisdom, justice of God’s rule ;
But all such doubts shall yet be clear’d away,
God’s wisdom and His justice own’d by all.
Tho’ men see dimly now, the day will come
When clearly all shall be to light reveal’d,
And ev’ry doubt and prejudice dispell’d.
“ For thee, when thy last hour on earth shall come
That change of being, which men dread as death,


Tho’ but transition to a higher state,
(So butterflies from caterpillars rise,)
Be thou for such prepar’d: nor look with fear
On the approaching change, but firm in hope,
Eely with confidence upon thy God,
And say * His will be done,’ for life, or death,
He gives, or He withholds as He deems good,
And always orders all things for the best.
Thus oft in mercy He afflictions sends
To some to save them from a heavier ill.
So fondest parent to a much-lov’d child
Doth medicine give, to save its cherish’d life.
Tet child and man too oft rebellious prove,
Resisting all they can their parents’ will,
Unable their designs to comprehend
Both murmur loudly at His loving care.
“ But do not do so thou, receive with thanks
Whate’er thy God may send thee, joy, or pain,
For rest assur’d that God will only send
What’s for thy good, tho’ thou may’st deem it ill.
Yet if there’s aught that thou would’st fain possess,
Which may be granted without harm to thee,
‘ Ask and receive,’ God is more prone to grant,
Than man to ask, that which is really good,
He ever grants much more than sinners ask,
“ Meanwhile, or if thy days be long, or short,
Still spend them well, thou ever wilt enjoy


Sweet retrospection from a well-spent life.
As in that mirror where was late display’d
Thy ev’ry act and thought ev’n from thy birth
Till then—what mingled feelings reign’d
Within thy breast as thou thy life survey’d:
I saw and mark’d the workings of thy soul,
As thou thy good or evil deeds perceiv’dst,
Now, bow’d beneath the bitter shame of sin,
Now, gratified at sight of some good deed,
Or gen’rous thought there duly register’d.
“ Then think what an eternity of joy
To view that mirror of a spotless life, —
To feel yourself quite pure among the pure,
And meet to come before the throne of God,
And mingle with his angels, pure as they.
Such thou may’st be if thou wilt henceforth live
In strict obedience to the will of God.
Thy past misdeeds thy Saviour has forgiv’n,
Then profit thou by all thy errors past,
And henceforth practise all I now have taught—
This is my mission from thy God to thee.
“ As for thy state in life, or high, or low,
Be thine to follow where thy duty calls, —
Be thine thy earthly mission to fulfil.
Deem life’s distinctions neither great nor mean,
But do thy duty in the sight of God,
Heedless of praise or censure from mere man.






Honi Heki;
A POEM IN TWO CANTOS.




INTRODUCTION.
This Poem is founded on the following account of “ the
late affair at New Zealand,” copied from the Australian, a
Sydney paper:—
“ The grand attack on Tuesday, the 11th March, 1845,
was made by three parties of natives: one by Held, a
Christian and a man of nolle nature, with about two
hundred followers; another under Kowiti, a heathen, with
about the same number, his followers professing to be
Eoman Catholics; and a third under Pumuku, with about
the same number. The three parties did not exceed six
hundred men. They had muskets and double-barrelled
guns, with few exceptions; and also tomahawks, of which
it was reported they intended to make use under certain
circumstances. Early in February, Kowiti, formerly a
friend of the Europeans, though a man of no principle, had
begun to plunder the settlers a mile or two from the settle-
ment, particularly Mr, Wright’s, formerly a master mariner.
This was not resisted by Mr. Beckham, for this good reason
—he had then no force sufficient to encounter Kowiti’s
party of two hundred armed men. But H.M.S. Hazard
arrived at the settlement in the end of February from
Auckland, bringing with her the materials to erect a block


house near the flag-staff. In a few days the block-house
was finished, and a guard of twenty soldiers was placed in
it under the command of Ensign Campbell. Soon after the
arrival of the Hazard, Kowiti attempted to steal some horses
from one of the suburban settlers. The commander of the
Hazard, hearing of it, sent an armed boat to the place,
which pursued the natives. The latter fired at the boat,
and wounded one of the boat’s crew. This was the first
act of war, or open rebellion, on the part of the natives.
“ The new flag-staff was erected when the block-house
was finished. Our readers in New South Wales are aware
that the British flag has for a long time excited the jealousy
and active opposition of the chief Heki, on what he considers
patriotic grounds. Having been taught to read the
Scriptures and other books, he has always argued against
the flag-staff, as being a token of the subjection of his
country to the British, which he compares to the subjection
of the natives of New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
Land; and he has repeatedly declared his resolution to
prevent this flag from flying,’ or die in the attempt. He,
indeed, promised Governor Fitzroy, when Major Bunbury
arrived at the Bay of Islands with two hundred troops, to
desist from his hostility on this point; but when the troops
had returned to Sydney, his former feelings revived; and
his resolution to prevent the flag from being hoisted has
evidently grown stronger and stronger from that time. Not


long before the attack on the 11th, he had delivered his
gold-laced cap to Archdeacon Williams *to cry over* after
his death, having made up his mind to sacrifice his life to
his inclinations as to the flag. Held also alludes to the
treatment of the Israelites in Egypt by Pharaoh, and makes
comparisons between those two nations, and the English and
his own people. Held is a religious man, a Protestant, and
has prayers among his people every day. Wrong or right,
he is allowed by all to be acting on what he conceives to be
his duty to his country. He never joined the other chiefs in
plundering the settlers. He contends for one object, and
one only, the non-erection of the flag-staff, &c., &c., &c.”




Honi Heki.
CANTO THE FIRST.
f«9| Jh ✓'''•AVXN O, just now, some idle time on band,
fcSiltejj /O And idleness being sire of many a vice
*.°j\ln Britain, also in Van Diemen’s Land,
uJSU I therefore seek employment, and my choice
Now falls on rhymes, though I no theme have
planned.
No matter, I don’t mean to be too nice,
But take the first that flits across my mind;
So in New Zealand I my hero find.
His name is Honi Held, he a chief
Descended from a line of warriors, who
Had made the days of all .their foes be brief,
And, not content therewith, did eat them too:
Strange diet! prized by them above roast beef,
Or pork, or yams. Of enemies’ skulls some few
Were kept as trophies of each direful scene,
To tell their sons how brave their sires had been.


But Honi Heki was no cannibal;
For in his youth he had converted been,
And taught this saving truth—Christ died for all;
And that He makes no diiference between
The white man and the black, but those who call
In faith on Him He saves, though e’er so mean.
This was the faith which Heki had received,
Unlike his brother chiefs by idols still deceived.
Yet Heki saw, with pain and great distrust,
The encroachments daily made upon his land
By British subjects, which he deemed unjust;
So he resolved in future to withstand
Further aggression, and, if fight he must,
Why, then he had his brave devoted band
Of faithful warriors; also great Pomare,
And brave Kowiti powerful allies were.
Yet Heki wished not war; for he loved peace,—
If with his country’s safety ’twere consistent;
He was a patriot such as ancient Greece
Had viewed well pleased, had he been then existent;
His oxdy wish his country to release
From hated bondage to a nation distant:
His warrior sires from such had been exempt,
So he would be, or die in the attempt.


About this time the British flag was planted
Upon some land which still was in dispute ;
Some British settlers claimed it, and they wanted
By force of arms alone to urge their suit;
This Held saw, but saw it still undaunted,
Resolved that there it should not long take root;
But, lest of rashness his first act should savour,
He called the neighb’ring chiefs in full “palaver;”
There to discuss what might be done to save
Their native land from bondage; or, if they
Would calmly let the British ensign wave
O’er them as vassals, he for one would say,
His sires lived free, he would not die a slave!
This to the chiefs his message was that day.
Pomare, Kowiti, Waka None, all
Chieftains of note, responded to his call.
And now they are in full palaver met;
Chiefs, warriors, sages, from all parts are seen;
The largest meeting ever known as yet,
Though many a meeting on that spot had been.
All now are silent, while in phrases set,
Heki explains to them what he does mean ;
And I propose, if that my time affords,
To give his speech entire in his own words.


“ Chiefs of New Zealand, countrymen, attend !
Your willing ear to Honi Held lend;
For he it is, whose humble voice you hear,
Whose tongue shall tell of fearful danger near.
Behold the British on our native soil,
How they of lands our countrymen despoil!
Encroaching still as every year doth show,
Too powerful soon, if let in peace to grow.
When first they came they merely sought to trade ;
They came and went, and came again and stayed ;
Then mingled with our tribes on the pretence
Of teaching us their arts, religion, sense.
Their arts we loved, religion some admired,
And for awhile such intercourse desired.
Even I myself, at my great sire’s request,
And my own wish (deceived as were the rest),
Their friendship sought, their language learned, and arts,
And their religion, which, I own, imparts
A loftier hope, a nobler mind to man,
Than our weak priests, or weaker idols, can;
But, as I said, their arts I quickly learned,
But soon their monstrous vices I discerned j
Though, doubtful first, I scarcely could believe
They were so base, or could so much deceive.
Their books I read, and as my knowledge grew,
I found their deeds but wore a darker hue.
As many a distant land enslaved may show,


Eeceived as friends they proved a deadly foe,
Destroyed the natives, or from country tore,
And hurled them outcasts from their native shore.
Such was their fate; the same may be our own,
If our united valour be not shown.
Then mark, my friends, the flag which late they reared
On yonder hill no longer must be spared;
For know ye not it means that while it stands
We are but slaves, they masters of our lands ?
To-morrow’s sun must see that flag laid low:
By me it shall be done, bring weal, bring woe.
What! shall our sires from other worlds upbraid,
And say how we in valour have decayed,
Or shall our sons in future times deplore
Our cowardice, a valiant race no more ?
Ah! no, my friends! our future deeds shall tell,
At British cost, that wo our sires excel :
In future times our sons our deeds will trace,
And point to us as heroes of their race.
In arts of war we shall improve by use;
Britons must own New Zealand can produce
In war their equals, their superiors in
Aught else: though dark the colour of our skin,
Our deeds will fairer prove, as time may show,
When they shall weep to have provoked such foe.
But still, my friends, think not I wish for war,
I hate, abhor it—few men love peace more;


Yet, when my country calls I must obey.
I will not see my native land the prey
Of foreign foes, so long as I can wave
A sword in its defence, or die to save!
This my resolve no power on earth can move,
As future days and future deeds will prove.
My further thoughts at present I forbear,
"While other chiefs their various minds declare.”
Thus Honi Heki spake. Then great Pomaro
Arose, and thus addressed th’ assemblage there;—
“ Chiefs, heroes, warriors, whom I view around,
Whose names have been by glorious deeds renowned,
Have ye not heard what Honi Held spake ?
His words are true, and we must vengeance take.
Too long we’ve slumbered, while our artful foe
Usurped our lands, and did more powerful grow.
Emboldened thus, they now begin to brag,
And fling the gauntlet down in yonder flag !
Shall we refuse their challenge ? Shall wo pause
To risk our lives in such a glorious cause ?
E’en I myself, though now advanced in age,
Will lead my warriors in the hottest rage
Of deadly strife, and make our British foe
Pay in their blood the forfeit which they owe.
Lives there a wretch whose dastard soul would shrink,
While stands his country on destruction’s brink ?


None such exist! Our country’s danger will
Make cowards brave, and brave men braver still.
Then rise, my friends ; let Heki lead our van ;
There lives no wiser, nor a braver man;
Well fitted he his native land to save,
As wise in council as in battle brave.
One fault alone his noble mind corrodes,
Ho for the Christians’ left his country’s gods ;
But time, I doubt not, will again restore
His former faith, to be forgot no more.
Meantime, my friends, we should not linger long
In these debates, but haste t’ avenge our wrong.
My further words shall, therefore, be but brief,
I vote for war, and Heki as our chief.”
Thus great Pomare. Kowiti then arose ;
Dark was his look, and knitted were his brows ;
A thirst of vengeance sat upon his face,
The fiercest savage he of all his race ;
And thus began : —“ My friends, why linger here ?
Behold our foes in yonder town appear,
Unguarded yet, they deem themselves secure ;
Then arm at once, and make our vengeance sure.
An easy prey this dreaded foe appears ;
Let Korararika bum about their ears.
’Twcre easy done as said’, then why debate ?
We’ll leave no soul alive to mourn their fate;


Wives, children, all, in one wide min hurled ;
A terror to our foes, a lesson to the world!”
Here ceased Kowiti. Held then arose,
Kowiti’s desperate purpose to oppose,
And thus :—“ My friends, my speech shall not be lon
But, when I hear the brave Howiti’s tongue
Such barbarous counsel give, I have no choice,
But firmly thus to raise my humble voice
Against all treach’ry, even to our worst foes,
Whom we should fairly fight, and hand to hand oppose.
Oh ! think, my friends, what dire disgrace would fall,
By such an act of baseness, on us all.
Ho ! let us fight them in the field like men,
And show in battle’s hour our bravery then;
And, conq’rors proved, let them our mercy viewj
We war with men, but not with women too.
H me you honor with the chief command,
Then know, that Heki ne’er will stain his hand
With innocent blood. In battle gore must flow,
But babes and women ne’er shall be my foe.”
Thus Held spoke, convincing old and young;
For soft persuasion sat upon his tongue.
He ceased—a murmur of applause went round,
And ’mongst the chiefs but one dissentient found,
And that was Waka Hen£. He alone


Approves not, and his reasons thus makes known:—
“ Te chiefs and heroes, sages, warriors, all,
Assembled hero at Honi Held’s call,
Tour patient ear a moment I would crave,
In hope my words may from destruction save;
For much I fear the path you now pursue
Will cause your ruin and your country’s too.
Though HeM with his flowery speeches may
Tour judgments warp, and lead your minds astray,
His words are lost on me; for I can view
His purpose deep, and his deception too.
He boasts his country’s love, that he may gain
Tour confidence, and thus his wish attain.
Beware, my friends! be cautious what you do!
Make him your chief, he’ll prove your tyrant too !
This his ambition, here his purpose tends;
His hollow words but cloak his private ends.
But why make Heki chief? Can none but he
Lead our brave warriors on to victory ?
Have we not other chiefs as brave and wise
As Honi Heki ? Cast on such your eyes.
Tes, there’s Pomare, the worthiest chief of all;
A thousand warriors wait upon his call.
What, though advanced in years, he is more sage :
We know that wisdom is the friend of age.
F


Then let him lead our warriors; him I prize,
And heart and hand Fll join your enterprize.”
Thus Waka Nend spoke with envious tongue,
His slanderous speech did Honi Heki wrong;
But, jealous of that chieftain’s growing fame.
He basely sought to blight his rising name.
He ceased, and then Pomare once more arose,
And thus —“ Thy speech, 0 Waka Nend! shows
A discontented mind j for what you urge
’Gainst Held is as powerless as the surge
Repulsed from yonder cliff. Who can believe
That Honi Heki could such thoughts conceive ?
Thou art no friend of Held’s well I know;
But do not to thy country prove a foe.
Our future liberties are now at stake;
Then cease all quarrels for our country’s sake,
And on the common foe thy vengeance pour,
Till we shall drive him from our native shore.
This, to effect, both friends and foes should join,
And with their lives alone the cause resign.”
He ceased, and shouts of joy now rend the skies;
Each chief is seen with vengeance in his eyes ;
They rise tumultuous, and on Heki call,
To give his order for the flag-staff’s fall.
He leads them on, five hundred warriors brave,
Rude though they be, resolved their land to save


Prom foreign foes: in ardour they abound ;
But Waka Nene is not ’mongst them found;
A traitor he unto his country proves,
And British gold his sordid bosom moves.
But Heki now the British flag surveys,
And thus his order to his troops conveys:—
“ Tear down yon flag, and tread it in the dust;
The few who guard it may retire, or must
The consequences of their folly take;
A nation’s liberty is now at stake !”
This order scarce was given ere ’twas obeyed,
And prostrate was the British ensign laid.
The few who guarded it, at such a sight,
To Eorararika sped with hasty flight,
And there related what they had seen done
By Honi Heki, and the war begun.
Commotion now doth in the town appear,
The troops are called, the townsmen volunteer;
All are enraged at Held having dared
T’ insult the flag which British hands had reared.
T’ avenge this insult they, in furious mood,
Resolve on taking Honi Held’s blood,
And his confed’rates—this their stem decree, —
Not doubting of an easy victory.
With this intent they forward march with speed,
Quite confident, of order take no heed.


Of soldiers, sailors, volunteers, there were
Four hundred men in all collected there.
The Hazard, sloop-of-war, rode in the hay,
Whose guns might aid in the approaching fray.
Thus on they march, and soon behold the foe,
Who stand prepared to meet the coming blow,
With Held at their head, he sword in hand,
No danger fears, fit leader for such band.
The British captain gives the word to fire,
And now begins a scene of carnage dire.
Loud peals the musketry on every side,
And the green sward with human gore is dyed,
And dismal screams and dying groans are given,
And num’rous souls depart for hell, or heav’n.
And this is war ! Ah! when will mankind learn
To live in peace, and their own good discern ?
False proved the fruit which Eve our mother ate I
What “ knowledge” have we in our present state ?
Short-sighted beings, blind to our own bliss,
We choose the “evil,” and the “good” we miss.
This life, which all men might in peace enjoy,
By our own sins and follies we destroy;
As if the few short years which heaven bestows
To man on earth a heavy burthen grows.
But to our theme: the battle rages still


With dosp’rate fury ; neither party will
The victory yield; the British are surprised
To find such valour in a foe despised;
Forgetting that when men for freedom fight,
Each patriot warrior strikes with double might,
Cowards grow brave; no danger then restrains ;
Death is less hateful than oppression’s chains.
But Heki now, to take his foes in flank,
Had placed some troops concealed behind a bank,
With orders to rush forth with savage yell
Upon the British, and to flight compel;
While he in front should charge; which having done,
Once more in front he leads his warriors on,
And makes a furious onset on his foe,
Who waver, and recoil at every blow.
Death tracks his footsteps, foes before him fall,
His deeds strike terror to the hearts of all;
While from their cover rush the ambuscade;
Then was the British flight not long delayed.
They broke and fled; each man his safety sought
As best he could; some by the foe were caught,
But not destroyed; for Heki’s orders were,
To slay who fight, but those who yield to spare.
The battle lost, the British in despair
Have reached the town, but find no shelter there.
Wives, children, all, perceive no hope below,


Save in the mercy of an injured foe,
And he of savage race; small hope I ween;
When, lo! a flag of truce advancing seen
Their drooping hopes revive. Approaching near,
This message doth the welcome herald hear:—
“ Our leader, Honi Held, sends to say,
He has no wish your vanquished troops to slay.
To free this land, which you unjustly claim,
And to regain his rights, is his sole aim.
This end attained, no dire revenge he bears;
He fights for freedom, but the vanquished spares.
On board your ships you, therefore, may retire,
And unmolested by our further fire ;
As for your slain, they shall with ours receive
A Christian burial and a soldier’s grave.
Such was the message which the herald brought
To the despairing British troops, who thought
Ho hope remained on earth; but Held proved
A generous foe, who was by mercy moved;
Hnlike Kowiti, who, had he all the sway,
They had all perished on that fatal day.
On board their ships they now embark with speed,
Wives, children, all, that they may be conveyed


To Auckland, seat of government, where they
Might state their hapless fate, and for assistance pray.
Meanwhile their town was plundered by the foe,
Then laid in ashes. With this deed of woe
This Canto we conclude. The next may tell
What further fortune to our hero fell




Honi Heki.
CANTO THE SECOND.
sounds of woe in Auckland streets were
® OOll as was w kat bad so late occurred
Y/j Mvvf At Korararika! Friends, relations slain,
i\\ fifli While houseless those who had been spared
remain!
Roused by the news, the Government prepare
To try the issue of another war:
They arm the troops, nor volunteers refuse,
And Colonel Despard for their leader choose.
A worthy choice, a gallant soldier he,
In danger dauntless, cool in victory.
TTia troops he musters, drills them day by way,
Makes them the rules of discipline obey;
Being conscious that a small disciplin’d band
Can easily a motley host withstand :
One veteran heart which death can fearless view,
Is worth a hundred of the rabble crew.


This Sweden’s madman-hero* taught his foes;
This, history from the world’s commencement shows ;
This Despard knew, and therefore drilled away,
Till he had taught his soldiers to obey
Each order soon as given; so, thus prepared,
The war’s commencement he not long deferred ;
But now embarks his troops, and cannon too,
A well-served train, although in numbers few.
Two men of war (which weathered many a gale)
Eeceived his troops on board, and then set sail;
Swift through the deep the gallant war-ships glide,
Despising mountain billows, wind, and tide.
The tempest’s force with them might strive in vain,
They rode resistless monarchs of the main;
Full many a clime had heard their thunders roll,
From sultry India towards each frozen Pole.
Triumphant still their ensigns were unfurled,
When Britain’s navy strove against the world,
f Part of the squadron which brave Nelson led
At Trafalgar, where Britain’s hero bled,
In victory’s arms ; to save whose life alone,
Each British seaman would have given his own.
(Yet Britain still need have slight cause to fear,
For, when required, fresh Nelsons will appear).
* Charles XII.
t This was written 20 years ago, in the Author’s young days, hence the
want of historical accuracy in this passage.


These gallant vessels thence o’er many a sea,
Victorious swept where’er a foe might be ;
Conveyed at length, yet pitying him the while,
Europe’s dictator* to his prison isle.
The generous tars felt for their captive’s woe, —
The brave exult not o’er a fallen foe ;
And he their kindness with like kindness met;
They parted from him with a deep regret,
In search of other foes, till none were seen,
And earth hailed Britain as the ocean Queen !
Yet still employed these gallant vessels were,
Conveying now Britannia’s troops to war,
In earth’s remotest isles. The sun ne’er sets
On Britain’s empire, yet each conquest whets
Her appetite for more ; she well might spare
New Zealand to the chiefs who govern there !
But now their destined port the vessels gain,
The troops are landed, and the artillery train.
Two thousand soldiers on that beach now stand,
Eager to fight, a well-disciplin’d band.
Encamped on mountain tops is HeM seen,
With force inferior—braver ne’er had been ;
Yet anxious he, to save the future flow
Of human gore and further deeds of woe.
To Colonel Despard, therefore, he sends o’er
* Buonaparte.


A herald, this the message which he bore :
“ To Colonel Despard Honi Heki sends,
To show the evil which on war attends ;
Our bravest troops by hundreds may be slain,
Tour towns, or mine perhaps, may burn again :
Women, and children, by the rage of war,
Must suffer likewise, and its miseries share.
To avert these evils, therefore, I propose
A single combat; let my British foes
Choose from among them one whom I may meet,
And let that combat’s issue be complete.
If I am vanquished in the fatal fight,
We all submit to your superior might,
But if I conquer, then, you shall resign
These lands disputed, which I claim as mine.
Yourself, the chieftain of a warlike band,
Perhaps will combat with me hand to hand ;
Or, if your Queen’s vicegerent would prefer
To be your Champion, we the fight defer
Till his arrival. Or, if you decline
In single lists to match your strength with mine,
Say, will you choose five hundred from your side,
While I an equal number shall divide,
And let their nervous arms our fate decide.”
Thus Held’s herald did his message bear,
’Twas heard with scorn: for battle both prepare.


Meantime the traitor Waka None joined
Tlie British troops, and now the force combined
Is ordered to advance towards Held’s camp,
Who marched to meet them: flanked by a deep swamp
His left wing halts, a river on his right,
Plain ground in centre, thus begins the fight.
Thick from the British lines the bullets fly,
While answering vollies to their peals reply ;
In vain they charge, they cannot force their way;
Hew Zealand warriors still dispute the day.
Although outnumbered, yet their valour stood
In lieu of numbers, and discipline good.
Wherever Heki fought, he seemed to be,
Himself a host, such feats of valour he
Performed that day. Kowiti and Pomaro
Were also noted for their conduct there,
Foremost in fight, by such examples fired,
Their troops fought bravely, even their foes admired
Their desperate valour; though the cannon’s roar
Had thinned their ranks, their courage rose the more.
But now, alas ! a ball has struck their chief;
Brave Heki falls ! his troops behold with grief
This fatal blow: they take him to the rear,
And find he has received a wound severe;
His right breast entered by a musket ball,
And faint from loss of blood, death seems for him to call.


But now, behold the force of woman’s love!
Kuwani, Held’s much-loved wife, does prove
The saviour of his life, for she had learned
Of herbs the virtues, and their power discerned.
Quick from her stores she brings the balsam rude,
Tet efficacious; soon it stops his blood,
And life, which seemed as though it ebbed away,
Returns again, to animate his clay.
Kuwani had been left by him that day
Safe in the “ Pah,’’ where all their women stay;
Yet could not rest, by hopes and fears so torn,
The dire suspense no longer could be borne.
Such gathering doubts her gentle bosom pain,
Lest her loved Held should be ’mongst the slain,
Forth from the “ Pah” she takes her way alone,
Resolved to know the worst which could be known.
While she advances still increase her fears,
As every volley thunders in her ears;
At length a gentle eminence she gains,
Whence she can view beneath the outstretched plains
Where hostile bands contend; one glance she throws
In search of where her Heki’s standard rose:
She gazed a moment, but she gazed no more,
She saw him fall, and bathed in his gore.
Swift as the dove, which cleaves the liquid sky,
On wings of love Kuwani seems to fly;


Nor thinks of danger, nor of foes how near;
Her Heki’s safety now her only fear.
Such true affection in her bosom rife,
She thus arrives in time to save his life.
Meantime the battle fiercely was renewed,
The British charged, but still their foes withstood ;
Though Heki’s sword no longer waved o’er all,
They fought with fury to revenge his fall.
Their stubborn valour obstinately rose.
Whenever fortune smiled upon their foes:
Thus, when the British thought that Heki’s fall
Would be the signal of retreat to all,
It only gave fresh impetus to those ;
More deadly still the furious contest rose.
Tet, what avails the force of warriors rude,
While British cannon from a distance hewed
Their bravest ranks ? Had they like arms to wield,
They would have triumph’d on that well-fought field.
Though thinned their ranks, yet scorning to retire,
They kept their ground, returning fire for fire ;
And bravely still pursued the unequal fight,
Till parted only by the approach of night.
Meanwhile Kuwani tends her wounded lord,
And his recovery is her best reward.
She watches o’er him, even as mothers watch


Their first-born infants, anxious she to catch
Each symptom of improvement; and would fain,
If it were possible, have borne his pain.
Oh ! what can equal gentle woman’s love!
A guardian angel she doth ever prove,
To those she fondly loves; in want, in woo,
’Tis then that we her value truly know.
She soothes each sorrow, heals each deeper grief,
And finds for all some species of relief.
Oh! who like her on sickness’ bed can tend ?
Or, who, like woman, for a faithful friend ?
Her gentle heart with love of peace imbued,
She calms our passions in their fiercest mood ;
Her soothing voice our gathering wrath allays,
And even the sternest with a smile she sways.
Or, should some breast more obdurate appear,
Cold wore that heart which could resist her tear.
Oh, what were earth unblest by woman’s smile ?
A dreary wilderness, a desert vile !
Parted by night, the hostile bands retired,
To seek that rest which each so much required.
Their limbs, so wearied from the desp’rate fight,)
Felt grateful for the intervening night; v
Conscious of battle with the morning’s light. )
Now silence deep the hostile camps has bound,
Except the sentinels who pace around


To guard against surprise. How calmly sleep
Some, whose next slumber will be far more deep!
Yet there are some, who cannot sleep, nor rest,
By doubts and sad presentiments opprest;
Some inward monitor foreshows their fate,
Yet warns in vain, such warnings come too late.
’Mongst those who thus felt death’s presentiment,
In Colonel Despard’s lines, is Captain Grant,
As brave a man as ever held command,
His sabre’s edge few foes could e’er withstand,
As Held’s troops might testify too well,
Of whom some twelve before him prostrate fell.
But something now within his dauntless breast,
O’erclouds his mind, nor suffers him to rest.
In vain he tries such feelings to dispel,
The thoughts which bode him ill he cannot quell.
Death haunts his vision, seems for him to wait,
And points exulting to the doom of fate.
So Brutus’ evil genius, we are told,
On plains of Philippi appeared of old,
To warn that patriot of his coming doom,
Leaving a summons to an early tomb.
Yet Brutus saw that spectre undismayed,
And calmly was the patriot’s answer made;
So just to him his every act appeared,
No death he shunned, no powers of darkness feared.
Like him brave Grant, though conscious of his fate,
G


Disdained to shrink from what might him await.
A true-horn Briton, to his country true,
His virtues many, and his foibles few.
Yet still he grieved at what he could not shun,
To leave his wife beloved, and infant son :
And they to him so dear! her grief alone
Almost unmans him, more than death foreshown.
On his own fate he scarce bestows a thought,
But deeply mourns his lonely widow’s lot;
His fancy paints her stricken with the blow,
Speechless in the intensity of woe:
So well to him her faithful heart is known,
Too well he feels she lives for him alone,
That, when she hears his fate, no skill can save,
His death must be her summons to the grave.
But now the lamp of night from hcav’n’s withdrawn,
And glimm’ring in the east appears the dawn;
At whose approach the warlike bands awake,
And, once more, hostile preparations make.
’Mongst Heki’s troops such havoc had been made,
That they in battle are not now arrayed,
But keep within their pah, of which Pomaro
Takes the command, while Held’s wounded there.
Now, Colonel Despard seeing that his foe
Declines the battle on the plains below,


Resolves to storm the pah: with this intent
His cannon and best troops are forward sent,
To occupy those posts which may annoy
His foes, and whence his cannon may destroy.
But oh ! what toil and labor there were found,
To drag artill’ry o’er the tangled ground ;
For on the sloping hills so thickly grew
Dense forest timber, guns could scarce get through;
Thick scrubby creepers spread from tree to tree,
And made their march a work of labor be.
But perseverance wonders will elfect,
So they at length their batteries erect
On sites, from which they could the pah command,
And pour a fire their foes could not withstand.
But now the order for th’ assault is given,
And cannons thunder like the peals of heaven.
Th’ assaulting columns march to the attack
Of the stockade, but there were beaten back,
Devoid of axes, and of ladders, they
Tore down the palisades which blocked their way, >
And did most heroic bravery display, )
Yet could not force an entrance; for their foes,
In every breach most gallantly oppose,
And make a rampart of assailants slain,
In fierce attempts an entrance there to gain.
Among the foremost British, Grant appeared,
Their bravest leader, and he now had cleared


The entrance of the breach, when brave Poxnare
Bushed to the spot; they met in conflict there ;
Fierce was the struggle, deadly, but not long,
Pomare, tho aged, was a veteran strong:
While Grant his sad presentiment recalls,
A headless bleeding corpse he prostrate falls.
Struck with the sight, the British troops recoiled,
And all their hopes were in an instant foiled.
Their leader’s death so filled them with dismay,
That with reluctance they at length gave way,
Eetiring in good order, while their foes
Dared not pursue, nor their retreat oppose.
Tet still the British loss had been severe,
So much exposed—their foes more sheltered there.
Still on the pah the British batteries play,
And make sad havoc on this dreadful day,
Till night approached. That fearful night was spent
In consultation deep in Held's tent:
He, by his fond Kuwani’s skill and care
So much restored, now well his part could bear
In their debates; at length they thus decide,
Within that pah no longer to abide,
But to retreat, ere daylight, several miles
O’er mountain passes, and through deep defiles,
Where scarce their foes could march, nor halt to fight
Till they should gain some rugged mountain's height,


Where they might once again defy their foes,
And form a pah impregnable to those.
Decided thus, they march in silence thence,
Nor from the British meet the least offence,
Who never dreamt of such resolve being taken,
Or that their pah they would have thus forsaken.
Ee-form’d in line, by danger grown more wise,
Yet sternly brave the British troops arise,
Prepared once more to combat with their foes,
Whose desp’rate valour doth so well oppose
Their stronger force; but daylight doth unfold
A sight most strange; no foes can they behold
In yonder pah,—yet fearful of surprise,
They deem some stratagem beneath it lies,
And with much caution enter; still they find
Not e’en the wounded have been left behind.
With wonder filled, they search around in vain,
But still no tidings of their foes can gain.
Then, numerous scouts are sent on every side;
Their orders are to scour the country wide,
Till they discover where their foes have fled,
That British troops against them may be led.
Thus passed that day, to them no foes appeared,
(Yet still some ambuscade the British feared)
The night approached, and then returned a scout


With this report, “ Our foes I have tracked out;
Encamped upon a rugged mountain’s brow,
They rest secure, whence they defy us now.
Attack were vain, so rough and steep th’ ascent,
While every passing hour by them is spent
In raising strong stockades, as if decreed
To make their camp impregnable indeed.”
This scout’s report, when Colonel Despard heard
Confirmed by others, he perplexed appeared,
Scarce knowing what to do. If he pursued,
A foe so active might again elude;
Or could he reach them, it were hard to say,
So strong their camp, if he could win the day.
Besides, his losses had been so severe, —
For what he’d gained, his troops had paid too dear.
Provisions short, no reinforcement nigh,
And on his allies he could scarce rely;
For Waka Nenc was a doubtful friend,
False to his country! How could he depend
Upon a traitor'. If the foe he joined,
His troops must yield unto their force combined.
In these reflections Despard passed the night;
Then sent a herald with the morning’s light
To Held’s camp; a flag of truce he bore,
With proffered peace, and offers to restore


The long disputed land to Held, who
Should, on his part, the ancient peace renew,
Allowing all the settlers who once held
Lands at the Bay, from which they were expelled,
To occupy those lands again, and be
From hostile depredations henceforth free.
Such were the terms to HeM offered, and he
Accepted them, so just they seemed to be ;
And thus was peace restored. The chiefs now meet,
And all with ardour Honi Heki greet,
Who from his wound had now recovered quite.
The British leader views him with delight:
And brave men still, or whether friend or foe,
Must prize the man who did such brav’ry show;
Who for his country, not for conquest fought,
Whose noble heart knew no unworthy thought.
To deeds like these we should accord our praise,
And not on ruthless conquerors fix our gaze:
Those whose ambition plunges realms in woe,
Mankind should look on as their common foe.
Fame ne’er should crown the brows of such as would
To aggrandise themselves shed human blood;
Napoleon—Caesar—Alexander—all
Such misnamed “ heroes,” whether great or small,
Instead of fame should meet with mankind’s scorn, —
Fame should be given to none but who their race adorn,


Were this the case, had “ heroes” but their due,
Then wars and “ heroes” would henceforth be few;
O’er all the earth peace would extend her sway,
Anri smiling plenty shine with cheerful ray;
Then arts would flourish, commerce spread more wide—
Electricity perhaps to it applied,
Distance annihilated, mankind grown more sage,
Thus should we realise “ The golden age.”
For me, my humble pen (though weak ’tis true)
Will point to merit where I deem it due;
E’en though in humble, or in savage life,
My muse will praise but where true worth is rife.
For this she chose from out the numerous throng
Of “ heroes,” Heki, hero of her song;
Hoping his heroic deeds may yet inspire
Tasmanian patriots with an equal fire.
Whene’er their injured country stands in need
Of patriot swords, then patriot hearts shall bleed
In its defence, till stem oppression me
The foiled attempt to fetter hearts so true.
Here ends our tale—wc part from it with grief;
Yet Heki lives, an independent Chief.


Warbeck;
OR
THE TASMANIAN SETTLER:
A POEM, IN TWO CANTOS.




Dedication.
®0
To thee, Zelima, I now dedicate
These artless strains, th’ o’erflowings of my heart;
For in this life, whate’er may be my fate, —
Though clouds may low’r, thy love will still impart
A sunshine to my soul, which will abate
And lessen, if it cannot heal each smart.
Whate’er the world may prove, at least I’m sure
Thy love will last, long as life may endure.
The world may smile, or the world may frown on me,
I think that I could calmly bear with either ;
Not swelled by pride, if in prosperity,
Nor yet cast down by woe. Light as a feather
I hope my now warm heart may ever be, —
And thine the same, —or absent or together;
Our last best hopes placed in the realms on high,
A sweet “ Maria” thou! but, ah! no “ Warbeck” I!




Warbeck.
CANTO THE FIRST.
I.
in Tasmania Warbeck first arrived,
{ C Wffjflf ) Crown lands were not so scarce as they are
[/J //V vv)®° therefore he the benefit derived
n( Mi Which ev’ry candid person must allow
KJ va Lv Accrued to early settlers: he contrived,
Without much trouble, though I know not how.
To place his “ grant,” two thousand acres, down
Upon a stream, and near a rising town.
n.
He was a steady man; his years, I think,
When truly told, might number twenty-five;
Strong was his resolution not to sink
While he could swim, but fearlessly to strive
’Gainst ev’ry obstacle, and not to shrink
From toil or trouble till he should arrive


At independence, which his heart held dear, —
Tet which so oft recedes as we draw near.
in.
Tet Warbeck’s views were xnod’rate at the present:
’Tis with our wealth that our desires increase.
Few are the wishes of the humble peasant;
Tet grant him these, and others in their place
Will quickly spring; our longings are incessant,
And with our wishes gratified keep pace.
But Warheck was contented with his lot ;
An easy competence was all he sought.
IT.
With his own hands he helped to build his hut;
’Twas built with logs; I will not say ’twas proof
’Gainst eVry blast of wind, although he put
The logs as closely as he could: the roof
Was thatched with grass, which close at hand he got,
And helped to carry: as yet he’d not a hoof
Of horned cattle; but with two servants’ aid
He built his hut, and first improvements made.
v.
Which having done, he took ono day a walk
To his next neighbor; for he wished to buy


Some breeding ewes, that he his land might stock;
And if John Andrews would not be too high
In price, from him he’d purchase a small flock,
Which would increase. The house now meets his eye:
It held four rooms, a kitchen, and a hall;
Quite large enough, —the family was small.
VI.
Before the house a lovely garden lay,
Well stocked with shrubs and trees of ev’ry kind;
But to the front door it blocked up the way,
So that all visitors approached behind.
’Tis a colonial fashion I must say,
And also not in the best taste designed;
Besides it has this disadvantage too,
That from the front it oft shuts out the view.
VII.
John Andrews was a married man, and had
Two lovely daughters and an only son,
About fifteen, a clever active lad.
His daughter—that’s to say the eldest one—
Maria, was at times a little sad ;
Her five-and-twentieth year she had begun;
But whether this her spirits might depress,
Or some more serious cause, I cannot guess.


Till.
Perhaps it was her natural bent to be
Not melancholy, but a little serious.
She seldom joined in youth’s frivolity,
But loved to read of Pompcy, Ccosar, Marius,
And ancient Greek and Roman history;
Indeed her mind held stores of knowledge various,
And in the most of which she was self-taught:
For knowledge she most diligently sought.
xx.
Her sister Emelina was nineteen;
At least she’d not acknowledge she was more,
Though I have heard 'twas but four years between
Maria’s birth and her’s; I must implore
Her pardon, if six years did intervene.
Her manners quite a different aspect wore ;
She was not sad, her heart was light and gay,
Cheerful as children’s when engaged in play.
x.
In point of beauty she might doubtless claim
The precedence. Just five feet four her height;
Shot from her eyes, love’s dart ne’er missed its aim,~
For they were black as jet, and sparkled bright


As o’er did eyes in a fond lover’s dream,
Or, as tlie stars upon a cloudless night ;
Her eyebrows nobly arched, her forehead fair,
O’erhung by the profusion of her hair. •
XI.
Her face was rather long, so therefore she
Looked best in ringlets ; yet the “ Grecian style”
She sometimes wore, perhaps for novelty,
Although it doubtless did her beauty spoil;
Her teeth were whiter than the ivory;
Her cheeks were sometimes dimpled by a smile;
Some thought her nose was rather too acute —
But on these points we will not be minute.
xir.
She was a lovely maid, although her figure
Art rather had deformed than improv’d;
Her waist was laced so tight ’twas not much bigger
Than her fair neck, though oft she’d been reproved
By her mamma, and sometimes used with rigour.
Tet threats and arguments she stood unmoved ;
Nor would she change: no martyr at the stake
E’er showed more constancy for conscience’ sake.
H


XIII.
Such were John Andrews’ daughters. He appeared
A plain, straight-forward, plodding sort of man;
One who with cautious prudence safely steered
His prosp’rous barb, for on no shoals he ran.
At present he had fifty acres cleared,
All fenced with post and rail, and sown with grain.
His farm contained six thousand acres, and,
What is still better, rich alluvial land ;
XIV.
The greater part of which he bought from neighbours
Who did not thrive, (though equal were their means)
But lost their land, —besides some years of labour,
Because to folly they gave up the reins.
They were more fit to march with glitt’ring sabres,
Than to bestow on sheep the proper pains.
To Hobart Town they did too often stray,
And got involved, —then sold their farms to pay.
xv.
From such he bought their lands at a low price,
Because they were in want of ready cash,
For which they made the greatest sacrifice.
Such are the fruits of “ cutting a great dash!”


I can’t exactly say the sum precise
Ho paid per acre to those settlers rash;
But in no case did it a pound exceed,
Which for such land was a low price indeed.
XVI.
But Andrews was a diff’rent sort of man;
Just fit to bear an early settler’s life:
In fortune’s race his neighbours ho outran,
Being aided also by a prudent wife,
Who loved him still as when her love began,—
For constancy was in her bosom rife, —
Which he repaid with love sincere and true,
Not by his words alone but actions too.
xvix.
But on our hero we must keep an eye,
For Warbcck is the hero of the talc.
We left him to the house approaching nigh;
And by this time he surely cannot fail
To be engaged in conversation high
With Mr. Andrews, on th’ intended sale, —
And also with his wife and daughters fair,
Who charmed him with their wit and graceful air.


XVIII.
But chiefly Emelina he admired,
So fair her form, her piercing eyes so bright!
(And brilliant eyes have oft with love inspired
The thoughtless heart of many a youthful wight)
Maria seemed to him too much retired, —
She was not formed to captivate at sight;
Her charms were veiled from superficial eye:
So brightest pearls beneath the ocean lie.
XIX.
Yet with each hour more unreserv’d she grew,
Improving on acquaintance; Warbeck found
That he had been deceiv’d at the first view, —
For every virtue did in her abound.
Though not a beauty of the brightest hue,
Yet was her heart with real goodness crown’d ;
Nature had been too lavish, had she joined
A lovely form to such a noble mind.
xx.
Yet thus true worth oft lives unsought, unknown,
While glitt’ring folly does attract the eye.
Alas! how oft is real merit thrown
Into the shade, because reserved and coy!


Too oft we prize the outward form alone,
As children for some painted bauble sigh;
Regardless of the mind contained within,
We seldom look much deeper than the skin.
XXI.
Unlike those who but in one art excel,
Unto Maria nothing came amiss.
She danced with grace, could sing, played music well,
Had read the histories of Rome and Greece,
And of that modern patriot, William Tell,
Who first gave liberty unto the Swiss;
Neither was Sobieski, Washington,
Or any hero unto her unknown.
XXII.
But of romances she was no admirer;
She thought them toys for children, neatly gilt;
Love seemed to be their author’s sole inspirer,—
A thing much talked of, yet but little felt;
Their long descriptions merely serv’d to tire her;
She scorned them all, but to true genius knelt;
A Shakspere, Dryden, Milton, Gibbon, Scott,
Such, and such only, deem’d she worth a thought.


XXIII.
Nor yet did she neglect the useful arts ;
She was a skilful housewife, and could make
Pies, puddings, butter, pickles, cheese-cakes, tarts, —
And also a good loaf of bread could bake;
She knew the flavour which each spice imparts
To jollies, jams, preserves, and to pound cake,
She also did to eminence attain
In ornamental needlework and plain.
XXIV.
Tet for applauses she did never ferret;
Whato’er she did, did she with the sweet grace
Of modesty, which thus enhances merit.
No haughtiness in her you e’er could trace;
And, though she bore within a lofty spirit,
Tet she was mild as Nature’s smiling face
In autumn, when abundant harvests wave
On cv’ry side, and woo mankind to save.
xxv.
But now we will proceed with Warbeck to
Inspect the sheep which Andrews has for sale.
His lowest price ten shillings for each owe, —
The lambs were given in—l’ll not detail


All their good qualities, as owners do—
The bargain was concluded on the nail :
Let it suffice to say the sheep were good,
And price was fair, as then the market stood.
XXVI.
Indeed John Andrews did not even try
To “ take in ” Warbeck, although a “ new chum
And most new chums (let not the old deny)
Were mostly cheated of a pretty sum,
In buying stock at prices far too high:
Indeed it seemed to be their common doom,
To find experience must be dearly bought,
That it may not be easily forgot.
xxvn.
Alas! how many thus have been the prey
Of prowling sharpers with unfeeling hearts,
Who strove to lead new immigrants astray,
By deep deception and detested arts;
Being ruled alone by avarice’s sway,—
Which to the mind the basest thoughts imparts;
Nor scruples by what means it may attain
■»« selfish ends, if it the object gain.


XXVIII.
Oh ! who can tell the troubles and the trials
Which early settlers had to undergo !
The cares, vexations, sorrows, self-denials,
Which none but those who’ve borne them fully kno'
’Twas hope alone (which cheers with its descrials
Of future joy through clouds of present woe)
That nerved their drooping hearts to persevere,
And all their woes with fortitude to bear.
XXIX.
But Warbeck was more fortunate than others,
In dealing with a man so just and fair,
Whose word alone was better than another’s
Oath, bill, or bond; deception lurked not there.
He hated avarice, that vice which smothers
All the best feelings which the heart can bear ;
He was a gen’rous, lib’ral-minded man,
Whose honest heart could no deception plan ;
XXX.
And he with Warbeck was so pleased, he gave
To him a cordial, gen’ral invitation
To call whene’er ho could spare time, and waive
All ceremony; idle affectation ;


And that he always should much pleasure have
To pass the time with him in conversation;
The ladies also said ’twould give them pleasure
To see him there, whenever he had leisure.
XXXI.
Warheck returned his thanks in terms polite,
Tet open, artless, free from all disguise,
And then departed ; for approaching night
Was spreading fast her mantle o’er the skies.
But Warheck heeds not this; his heart was light,—
Though sometimes Emelina’s piercing eyes
Would cross his thoughts, as he pursued his way, —
Until at last they led him quite astray.
XXXII.
0 ye who in the bush have gone astray,
And spent the night in wandering to and fro ;
Breaking your shins o’er logs which cross your way,
And more perplexed the more you forward go,—
Oft wishing for the lingering dawn of day,—
The misery of such a night ye know;
And doubtless do not envy Warbeck’s lot,
Nor all the falls and bruises which he got.


xxxxn.
Ho being well-tempered bore them all with patience—
And patience is a virtue much required
In life to curb the more unruly passions;—
And when with wandering he at length grew tired,
Ho sat absorbed in his own meditations,
Like a philosopher, or poet, when inspired,
Until the dawning day dispelled the gloom ;
And then he quickly found his way to home.
xxxxv.
“ 0 home, sweet home!” well does the song express
That “ no place is like home, though it may be
Ever so homelystill we love no less
The home where we have spent our infancy.
In age our memory clings with tenderness,
To our first home, when our young hearts were free
From all the cares which lengthened life bestows;
For who can pass through life and feel no woes ?
xxxv.
And Warbeck’s present home, though mean enough,
Was dear to him as the most splendid mansion
Can be unto its owner; ’neath such roof
My happiest days were spent; I need not mention


This to those settlers, who have also proof
That happiness rests not in the expansion
Of lands or dwellings. Could we be content
With competence, life might in peace be spent.
xxxvi.
But still ambition will not let us rest;
Whate’cr we be, we would be greater still:
This restless passion in the human breast, —
The latent cause of all our good and ill, —
Directed right, a blessing ’tis confess’d ;
But wrong, with woe it does our whole lives fill.
What different acts from the same cause proceed,
As different sounds produced by the same reed.
XXXVII.
Without ambition what would mankind be ?
Debased below the rudest savages,
Whom on New Holland’s arid wastes we see
In nudity, at whom we wondering gaze.
Can they have the same intellect as we ?
Or is it education which does raise
The white man o’er the black ? The world beheld
Dark men rule Egypt, where the arts excelled.


XXXVIII.
But now they seem of meaner intellect;
Although some bright exceptions may be seen, —
Like Toussaint, who merits our respect;
(Though unsuccessful he has doubtless been)
And others, whom I also might select,
As instances of negroes who have been
Endowed with a capacity as great
As white men, though so circumscribed their state.
XXXIX.
Yet by ambition many are undone ;
Whilst some shine as true heroes; look to where
Almost in our own times rose Washington;
A name which unborn nations must revere :
His is true fame, he for his country won
Her liberty, which to his heart was dear,
Yet scorned a crown, though in his grasp it lay,
For which through blood so many plough their way.
XL.
Home has her Brutus, Switzerland her Tell,
Greece has her patriots, but we look in vain
For one like Washington : though Caesar fell,
Worst tyrants rose to bind with heavier chain ;


But Washington, whose genius did repel
His country’s foes, triumphant scorned to reign ;
Yet leaves to all posterity a name,
Which sounds the sweetest from the trump of fame.
XLI.
Compared with him, how mean all other heroes !
Napoleon, Alexander, Tamerlane, —
All masters of the world in different eras ;
Caesar and Mahomet, Cromwell, Charlemagne,
Fame on he^,annals ranks; all cruel Neros,
Who strove to fetter all men with their chain ;
Eejoicing o’er the universal gloom,
As did the tyrant o’er his burning Eome.
XLII.
But these are history’s heroes —Warbeck’s mine,—
An humble hero, but unstained by crime.
I might have chosen a loftier, but confine
Myself to this: I seek not the sublime.
I ask no laurel on my brows t’ entwine,
Nor fame to hand my name to future time ;
Content to pass my hours of leisure thus,
Verse my amusement, and so has its use.


XLIII.
But in Tasmania there is not much taste
For poetry,—at least that I discover;
And oft have I been told ’tis but a waste
Of time, to let such useless fancies hover
One moment in the mind, which should be placed
On higher matters; verso hut suits the lover,
To pour his passion in some plaintive strain,
To melt the maid whom else he’d woo in vain.
XLIV.
But though they say so, yet I will maintain
Yerse has its use; it gives the mind employment;
’Tis sweet amusement if we do not strain
Our faculties too much in its enjoyment.
The mind requires some exercise ’tis plain,
To keep it healthy, this is all that I meant, —
And not that any should neglect their duties,
To get enraptured with poetic beauties.
XLV.
T’ employ the mind when we have nought to do,
To keep it from a general stagnation,
How various are the means which men pursue!
Many of which deserve much reprobation.


Some drink, some play, some smoke, some snuff, some
chew,
Tile practices! which need extermination.
Poets may praise the “ jolly god,” but I
Deem Bacchus a foul demon we should fly;
XLVI.
Por see what evil he hath done the world
By war and wine, —more by the last, than first,
Although his conquering banners he unfurled
O’er prostrate India, soon the bubble burst,
Not long o’er earth he war and slaughter hurled,
But by one base invention he has cursed
With deadliest curse, the human race, but most
Those nations which of civ’lisation boast.
XLVII.
How strange that drunkenness should thus entice! —
The drunkard’s life is but a conscious death ;
Devils themselves disdain so low a vice,
Which sinks man to a brute—or far beneath,
For brutes do not get drunk of their own choice.
Taste not of wine the Turkish Prophet saith,
Yet wine, like all the gifts of God, of course
Is good,—men make God’s blessing their own curse.


XLVIII.
0 Temperance! chaste goddess of delight,
To thee through life let all my vows he paid;
Pure are the joys thou giv’st; thy form so bright
And lovely, long my heart has swayed;
0 guide me still, protect by day, by night,
0 leave mo not till I in dust am laid ;
But when temptation most assails, be near
To breathe thy warnings in my willing ear.
XLIX.
But we digress —I love a short digression
In poetry, it gives at least variety,
Besides the sentiments’ more full expression;
A changeless song, like methodistic piety,
Palls the tired ear, and does not wake a passion :
But now at least I’ve rated inebriety,—
A vice our hero Warbeck ne’er had known,
Though he to five and twenty years had grown.
L.
At home we left him at the earliest dawn;
Where having breakfasted, he went to view
The sheep which he from Andrews’ flock had drawn
His shepherd was a careful man he knew,


And fed his flock upon the verdant lawn,
Which sloped down from his hut; on it here grew
Mimosas sweet, Tasmania’s loveliest tree,
Which crown’d with bloom greets spring’s approach
we see.
LI.
The sheep looked well, and seemed contented there,
The playful lambs were frisking to and fro.
“ Ah, happy innocents so free from care!”
Thus Warbeck thought, “ no sorrows do ye know.
Would I were like ye, all your joys to share,
No thought of present, past, or future woe
To mar your mirth, while man, creation’s lord,
Feels woes unfelt by brutes which clip the sward.”
111.
He turned for home while thus soliloquising,
And oft with his own thoughts he did commune, —
For he was always fond of moralizing
On what he saw ; perhaps to keep in tune
His finer feelings, for there’s no disguising
The heart that’s sensitive feels woe too soon ;
Full many a hint he did from nature draw,
And profited by every thing he saw.
I


LIU.
He lived alone, yet felt not solitude,
For his own thoughts his sweet companions were;
He sought none else, he was of serious mood,
Yet where mirth reigned, he there his part could bear,
As gay as those whom vanities delude ;
For cold that heart must be which will not share
The general joy when gladness reigns around,
Nor beat with transport to sweet music’s sound.
LIV.
But Warbeck had an ear for music, he
Had “music in his soul,” the murmuring stream,
And sighing breezes breathing harmony,
To him were music, fancy’s brightest beam
Shone on his mind, and made each flower and tree
Appear to him more beautiful than seem
Such things to others —fancy does bestow
A higher zest to joy, but deepens every woe.
LV.
Yet Warbeck’s woes were few indeed, if any,
For Heaven from childhood had been kind to him:
And his warm heart was grateful for the many
Blessings bestowed, of which he did not deem


Himself deserving, for he was not vain, he
In early youth had drank from the pure stream
Of piety, whence flows that sweet rill Charity,—
The sight of which on earth is such a rarity:
LVI.
By Charity I do not mean the act
Of giving to the poor, but what Saint Paul
Describes in first Corinthians with such tact.
Ho says unto the poor though we give all
Our goods, yet if true charity be lacked,
It profiteth naught; yet many whom we call
Good Christians, doubtless must mistake its features.
So coolly thoy condemn their fellow creatures.
LVII.
All who may differ from them, they, at once,
Without reluctance, give unto the devil;
Nor will allow of Heaven the slightest chance,
To those who err, though they err not from evil
Propensities, but by deluded glance;
Doubt in the mind is like in wheat the weevil,
In New South Wales, —it preys upon the mind,
And nothing leaves but chaff and bran behind.


lvixi.
Tet many doubt, —if all who doubt were damned,
Saint Peter’s post would be a sinecure ;
Hell’s spacious courts would be too thickly crammed,
So fast from earth would doubting mortals pour.
’Twere a hard case if Heaven’s wide gates were
slammed
On all who doubt, doubt sometimes works its c
But Warbeck doubted not, condemned no creed,
Since different roads to the same heaven may lead.
LIX.
But not far distant from his farm there dwelt
A man who held religious doctrines strange :
’Twas said “ in church or chapel he ne’er knelt,
And that he strove the minds of youth to change.”
He also took a great delight to pelt
All clergymen who came within his range ;
Protestants, Catholics, Methodists, all
He deemed impostors, who men’s minds enthral.
LX.
He held it as the soundest doctrine that
No clergyman an honest man can be;
In ev’ry land they live upon the fat,
And leave the lean unto their followers ; he


Thought it a shame that those who did not sweat
Should lire on others’ sweat; the industrious bee
Expels the idle drone; their hives contain
But those which by their toil their living gain.
LXI.
Lawyers he held in equal detestation, —
Those hungry sharks which prey on all mankind:
Our laws, he thought, requir’d much reformation;
“Law eats tho oyster, leaves the shell behind.”
Lawyers, like spiders, seem in every nation;
They deem all those their lawful prey they find,
Or can inveigle into law, with lies; —
Their cobwebs snare mankind as spiders’ flies.
XiXlI.
His name was Selab. Was he happy ? No.
Did happiness depend on wealth alone,
Then Selab’s bosom could no sorrows know.
Twelve thousand acres he could call his own,
A house convenient, garden, where did grow
Earth’s loveliest fruit. Beneath, a bright stream
shone,
And made this spot a paradise appear;
No toil to tire, no Eve to tempt him here.


LXIII.
Yet Selab held sound maxims of morality;
He was, I think, a moral-minded man;
He really was much better in reality
Than those might deem who did not closely scan:
His house was famous for its hospitality,—
A hearty welcome there for every one;
A true John Bull in all things, e’en in grumbling,
Without effect, like distant thunder rumbling.
LXIV.
He held strange doctrines; and they were not pent
Within his breast; he spread them far and near.
To see this neighbour Warbeck sometimes went;
He kept an open house and had good cheer;
So with him now and then a day he spent;
Hot that his arguments he loved to hear,
For sometimes he could scarce contain a smile,
When “ Brahma,” “ Yishnu,” did his host beguile.
IXV.
For “ Brahma,” “ Yishnu,” “ Siva,” and the rest
Of Hindoo idols, were the source, he said,
Of our religion, which from India’s breast
Drew its first nourishment, and quickly spread,


As all plagues do, from east into tlie west.
He said that Moses, and Menou, who led
Some Indian Budhists westward, were the same:
That Jews from India, not from Egypt came.
LXYI.
Abram must have been, he thought, a cannibal,
Preferring human flesh to bread and cheese;
Or, at the least, like Carthaginian Hannibal,
Who offered human victims, to appease
His country’s gods, but found it unattainable.
These were his thoughts, and rev'ties wild as these;
For, though he had a most capacious mind,
Strange phantasies would thus his vision blind.
liXVII.
He thought the world eternal, still upheld
By One Great Cause, which guides and governs all—
A space-pervading Spirit—which impelled
Myriads of worlds around, the great and small,
Each in its destined path: our world excelled
By other worlds; and what the sun we call
Is but a brighter world : for in the sky
Worlds our world, and suns our sun outvie.


LXVIII.
Nor can I think that all these worlds were made
To serve one petty world, and man alone!
Those orbs unnumbered, in the heav’ns displayed—
Suns, planets, comets, all that yet are known —■
By wise, unerring, changeless laws are swayed,
To man incomprehensible! 1 own
My inability to comprehend
Their origin, duration, use, and end.
LXIX.
Yet still I deem that all those orbs on high
Are peopled with inhabitants, to suit
Their various spheres, with intellect more high
Than man on earth; some stand in high repute,
Others inferior; so beneath our eye
Link joins to link—from insect to the brute,
From brute to man, from man to angels—till
We stop at infinite perfection still.
nxx.
Oh! who can look upon the glist’ning skies,
And not be humbled to the dust, to see
Man’s nothingness! Omnipotent, all-wise,
All-merciful must their Creator be!


And what are we, base worms! that he should prize!
And yet he offers an eternity
To all who will accept. What would we more ?
Bend to the dust, proud man, and nature’s God adore !
LXXI.
But Warbeck was submissive to his God:
For he was pious; not in outward show,
But in his heart: he followed the same road
His parents trod before him ; they did sow
The seeds of piety in him ; to them he owed
A debt of gratitude ; —most children owe
More to their parents than they ever pay ;
Like debtors, they put off the reck’ning day.
LXXII.
And there are few who love to pay their debts, —
And fewer still who have no debts to pay.
Cash is so scarce at present that it sets
All men to think how they may pay their way;
Except the greedy usurer, who gets
Fifteen per cent., or twenty, as some say:
But those who lend at such a rate must be
Contented with the worst security.


LXXIII.
Of usury laws* much has been talked of late:
To establish them in vain the debtors try.
Some say Tasmania owes her present state
Of poverty to interest being high.
Few can afford to pay the present rate :
Yet, on the other hand, I cannot see why
Money should differ from all other things, —
It shows its value by the rate it brings.
lxxiv.
’Tis strange that int’rest here should stand at ten
Per cent., at home 'tis only three, or four.
I wonder that some enterprising men
Of capital do not come to this shore,
And money lend at six or seven, they’d gain
At least some three or four per cent., or more;
And they might get “ securities undeniable”—
And this would make the usurers much more pliable.
LXXV.
But no political economist am I,
No “ Adam Smith,” no “ Harriet Martineau”—
I wish I were, I then perhaps would try
The causes of our present state to show.
* Written in 1843.


Our merchants every day (it makes me sigh)
To the insolvent court are forced to go :
On every side insolvency abounds
debts, one hundred thousand pounds.
LXXVI.
But Warbeck was no creditor, nor debtor,
He neither borrowed, nor lent money, he
Was quite contented with his farm: a better
Upon Tasmania you could scarcely see;
He only wished the climate to be wetter,
And that from summer frosts it might be free ;
Then would this isle “ with milk and honey” flow, —
’Twould doubtless be a Paradise below.
IiXXVII,
By this time he had purchased all required
Upon a farm, —bullocks, ploughs, and harrows;
And also a good ploughman he had hired;
Yet often ploughed himself some crooked furrows ;
But daily he improved as he desired ;
No longer to the beam the plough he burrows,
But draws each furrow straight, and even too;
As ploughman he could be surpassed by few.


nxxvni.
He also learned to sow, to reap, to shear,
And in each art he such good progress made,
That when he wished he foremost could appear,
And throw the quickest workman into shade.
He did in nothing competition fear,
Whate’er he tried, in it he took the lead:
He was the same from childhood, when at school,
First in his class, none could dispute his rule.
LXXIX.
He bought a horse, it was an Arab grey,—
I love a grey, it is a pretty colour.
Though some perhaps prefer a black, or bay,—
Both were content, the buyer, and the seller;
His name was Badger, full of life and play
Was he, no animal was fuller :
But, since there’s nothing faultless here below,
His only fault was shying that I know.
LXXX.
To see his neighbours oft on him he rode, —
But to his neighbour Andrews most of all;
He certainly a predilection showed
For the society at Werton Hall,


The name which Andrews gave to his abode,
A sounding name for a brick cottage small;
But in Tasmania such is oft the case,
Parks, halls, and castles, on all sides we trace.
LXXXX.
I wonder that no palaces are seen;
I think my cottage I shall call a palace,
If but for singularity. I mean
Offence to none, I really bear no malice
’Gainst halls, parks, castles; though the last, I weer
Are mostly built in air: where men oft fail is
In building their high hopes on bad foundations :
We are too sanguine in our expectations.
LXXXII.
I said that Warbeck showed a predilection
For Werton Hall; and beauteous Emelina
Was the attraction j pure was his affection,
And she was lovely; he had never seen a
Maiden who could like her bear close inspection ;
Her eyes so brightly shone! and well I ween a
Bright sparkling eye oft fixes lovers’ fate,
A single glance the soul can fascinate.


LXXXIII.
Oli how I love a brilliant eye! it seems
To say there’s soul within: no matter what
The colour be, if life be in its beams!
This makes me call to mind what I have not
Forgotten yet, one of my boyhood’s dreams,
Ere I of love had formed a single thought;
Yet at thirteen I felt some passion move
My heart; —at such an age could it be love ?
LXXXIV.
Yet then I felt what I ne’er felt before,
And never since, at least with equal force;
If ever lover did I did adore,
And drew my draughts of love from the pure source
Of my young heart; but now such dreams are o’er :
With every year I wiser grow of course,
And now can scorn the tyrant love, whose dart
May slightly touch, not deeply wound my heart.
LXXXV.
0 love! thou great enslaver of the world!
Thou tyrant of the tyrant and the slave !
For thee how oft has desolation hurled
Its blighting breath o’er many an empire brave ?


What caused Troy’s fall but Helen’s ringlets, curled
With taste, and those bright charms which nature
gave:
Alas ! that aught so frail should cause such woe !
Men fight for baubles, as their histories show.
nxxxvi.
Antony lost a world for Egypt’s queen,
Who in the midst of battle basely fled;
Yet still her slave his Roman soul was seen,
E’en in the hour when by his sword he bled:
"While she, the dastard heartless wretch so mean,
Looked coldly on; no sorrows bowed her head;
She shed no tears upon her victim’s grave,
But tried all arts his conqueror to enslave.
nxxxvn.
Love works a world of woe upon this earth,
As Petrarch, Werther, and a thousand more
Bright instances of men of sterling worth
Might testify ; and deeply I deplore
That such a passion ever had its birth
In Warbeck’s bosom: but I can’t do more
Than state plain facts, not adding nor abating,
Since these are truths, not fictions, I am stating.


LXXXVIII.
And Warbeck gazed on Emelina’s eyes;
Ah ! wherefore did he see those eyes at all!
The more he gazed, the more did lore arise
Within his breast, and placed his heart in thrall
We’re told that “ no man at all hours is wise
We own this truth, —for look at him we call
The wisest man, King Solomon the sage ;
The slave of love—a fool in his old age.
LXXXIX.
He loved strange wives, and stranger concubines:
But ’twas not love, but lust for them he felt—
True-love’s bright lamp for one fond bosom shines;
Changeless, howe’er the storms of life may pelt.
How blest are those whom pure alfcction joins,
Who in each other’s fond embraces melt;
Whose inmost thoughts in one pure current roll;
Each true to each, as needle to the Pole !
xc.
And Warbeck loved with a first love, as pure
As ever love upon this earth was seen:
But such a love is almost always sure
To fail—who woos with truth will seldom win;


Plain truth, alas! few maidens can endure;
So you who would succeed, with lies begin,—
“ Sigh, fawn, and flatter,” as some poet sings;
This rule observe, success it ever brings.
xci.
Yet Warbeck sighed, but could not fawn and flatter;
’Twas here he erred, —his spirit was too high.
And I may say without the slightest satire,
Those should not fall in love who will not lie;
But they some truth should with much falsehood scatter
In their soft talk; and cautious be, and sly,
And practise all sorts of deceptive arts :
These are the surest means to win their hearts.
xcn.
But to proceed: when Warbeck “ popp’d the question,”
The maiden blushed, and smiled, and half said yes,
Yet murmur’d; so Warbeck thought he’d best shun
To urge the point at present; but no less
Uncertainty will try a patient Christian; —
Are Christians patient ? she, I must confess,
Cared not if she her lover’s feelings hurt;
She was, that worst of characters, a flirt.
J


xcm.
Yet still he loved her, and she made him feel
Himself her slave ; by turns she frown’d and smil’d;
Sometimes she listened to his fond appeal
Apparently with pleasure; and beguiled
Warbeck who thought his woes she soon would heal;
He was as artless even as a child, —
And so she played upon him without doubt,
As anglers play a salmon, or a trout.
xciv.
And doubtless 'tis great sport to see a lover
Once fairly hooked, thus dangling at the tail
Of some fair maiden’s line, who makes him hover
About her person with his woeful wail.
Lovers are game, like pheasants, or like plover;
And sportive maids, in season, may assail
Their hearts; but when the season’s o’er, ’twere shame,
Laws, lovers should protect, as well as game.
xcv.
But Emelina, in and out of season,
Made constant war on Warbeck’s peace of mind.
Sometimes she’d thaw, and then again she’d freeze on;
As changeable as woman, or as wind, —


For both are fickle. I can’t tell the reason
Why she to Warbeck ever proved unkind:
In fact I think herself could scarce tell why
She acted thus, —and therefore how can I ?
xcvi.
I might declaim until I should be hoarse,
And yet the causes of her acts not find..
Less difficult to find the Niger’s source,
Than trace the wand’rings of a woman’s mind.
In hate, she’s furious as the whirlwind’s force ;
But when she loves, she really is too hind, —
Extreme in all things, whether good or evil;
If good, an angel; but if bad, a devil.
xcvn.
But oh! what language can describe the state
Of Warbeck’s mind ? unutterable woe,
And black despair upon his bosom sate ;
Yet still his inward grief he did not show
To aught but her who doomed him such sad fate.
Could heaven permit such wickedness below ?
The murderer shall not live, the scripture saith,
But what is murder to this daily death ?


XCVIII.
Could I describe what Warbeck felt, all eyes
Would sbed a tear of pity o’er his woes;
But such description all my art defies.
My pitying muse, alas ! but partly shows
His tale of woe, and since in vain she tries,
Perhaps his own words may the best disclose
What he then felt; so now his thoughts I’ll show ’em.
As he described them in a pastoral poem.
xcxx.
For he with artless touch could strike the lyre,
And pour in plaintive strains his heartfelt woe;
Hot sweeter strains could Handel’s self desire,
So sadly soft the mournful numbers flow.
For all the muses did his song inspire,
His own in Colin’s griefs at once you’ll know;
As in the language of a simple swain,
He poured his song, and this his mournful strain:—
COLIN’S COMPLAINT—A PASTORAL POEM.
’Twas spring, and fields and flowers in bright array
Were newly clad by Sol’s reviving ray,
Fair was iho landscape, form’d of verdant downs;
None such exists in man’s o’ercrowded towns,
Bright bloom’d the gay mimosa’s scatter’d round,
The winding streamlet ran with murmuring sound;


When pensive Colin while his flock did graze,
Thus poured his soul forth, in these mournful lays :
“ Oh ! thou, who still must claim my artless song,
The wilful cause of all my grief and wrong ;
On thee I call! oh ! listen to my strain,
Perhaps my words may wake thy love again.
Ah ! foolish hope, which but my weakness proves,
No more my song my Emelina moves
For now, alas ! as changeable as wind,
She scorns my love, inconstant as her kind;
Yet time has been when she would deign to hear,
And listen to my strains with willing ear.
How oft with her I’ve form’d yon rustic bowers,
For her have plucked and culled spring’s sweetest flowers !
Plucked by my hand, all flow’rs alike she praised,!
And sweetly blushed whene’er on her I gazed.
Ah ! blissful days ! when, heedless of disguise,
Love spoke in volumes from her brilliant eyes!
When hearts to hearts, and souls to souls confess \
The love that burns within, words can’t express >
The glowing thoughts which such fond bosoms bless. /
But now no more I’ve pow’r to fix her mind;
She scorns my love, without a cause assigned.
Perhaps some fairer form her heart may move ;
But who can love her with so pure a love ?
What can she see in other swains, that I
May not their poor pretensions far outvie ?
What rival swain from me can boar a prize ?
Whose song so sweet in praise of her bright eyes ?
When such the theme, oh! how my bosom swells !
As she all maids, my song all song excels.
Nor yet in song alone : who can compete
With me in skill ?—■whose pasture is so sweet ?


Whose flock so fair ?—who tends his charge so well ?
Speak, fickle maid!—my favored rival telh
“ Here bright mimosas in full bloom abound
On ev’ry branch birds chirp their loves around,
On yonder bank my playful lambs disport
But I to melancholy shades resort.
Oft on such scenes I’ve gazed with fond delight,
Though now I find no pleasure in the sight.
When sad the heart, all nature smiles in vain;
No charm in landscape, grove, or verdant plain.
Dear Emelina, wilt thou ne’er be kind,
As once thou wert ?—say, what has changed thy mind !
Oh! with thy former smiles thy lover bless,
WTio loves with love no words can e’er express.
One tender look will banish all my woe ;
Thy love the greatest bliss I seek below; >
No richer gift on me can heaven bestow. /
Oh ! where are now those former blissful days,
When thou didst list with rapture to my lays,
Smiled as I sang, and didst my strains approve,—
Thyself the theme, my song inspired by love?
Blest with thy love, no sorrows then I knew;
Approving nature smiled in brighter hue;
W r ith hasty flight the happy moments rolled,
And night approached ere half our tales were told :
But, since thy smiles my sight no longer cheer,
Hours seem like days, each ling’ring day a year.
In vain at night I seek my former rest,
My wakeful couch by restless limbs is pressed :
Sleep grows a stranger to my weary eyes,
And unrefreshed at early dawn I rise;
Pensive I rove, nor join in mirth or jest,
And melancholy is my constant guest.


Thus some lone mariner, cast on desert shore,
Without a hope to cheer him, smiles no more;
So I, alas! as desolate in mind,
Feel equal solitude among mankind.
I, who was once the gayest of the throng,—
’Mongst tuneful swains I sang the merriest song;
In rural sports the foremost part I played,
And all my laurels at thy feet were laid:
But now no more I join the cheerful swains,
Grief should not mingle where such pleasure reigns ;
In lonely groves my mournful numbers flow,
And yet they fail to utter half my woe.
Belentless maid! canst thou inflict such pain.
Nor pity feel, nor yet the cause explain ?
Not free from faults am I, too well I know;
But who is perfect in this life below ?
’Tis vain to search for such the world around;
Immortal angels are imperfect found :
Then think, my Emelina I think, once more!
Beleut at last, thy Colin does implore.
As slumb’ring embers o’er a smoking plain,
Waked by a breath, in flames burst forth again;
So joy, which slumbers in my bosom’s core,
Waked by thy smiles, would light my heart once more.
“But ah ! in vain I pour my mournful lays,—
Nor in her bosom can compassion raise.
Then cease my song: my sheep demand my care,
And to their fold ’tis time that they repair.
You western sky, which purple clouds adorn,
Now gives the promise of a lovely mom; —
But morning calm, or ev’ning’s milder hour,
To soothe my mind no longer has the power.
My flock secure, I to my cottage go,
And there in solitude indulge my woe.”


c.
Thus War-heck poured his artless tale of woe:
The pitying groves wept o’er the mournful song;
The murm’ring stream did meantime silent flow,
And sighing zephyrs bore the notes along;
All nature joined, their sympathy to show,
And universally proclaimed his wrong;
While she, for whom he poured so sad a strain,
Smiled as he sang, and gloried in his pain.
ci.
She, who could list to such a tale unmoved,
Was deaf alike to father and to mother,
Who pleaded Warheck’s cause in vain. She proved
Heedless alike of sister and of brother.
At length Maria ascertain’d she loved,
Or, had at least, a fancy for another;
For such a heart true love could never feel;
’Twas callous as the flinty rock or steel,
cu.
Yet she imagined that she was in love;
Imagination’s equal to reality:
I do not know what did her fancy move;
The man she loved had not a single quality


Which ought to be beloved; yet she did prove
Attached to him, as if by some fatality:
She heard her friends’ remonstrances unmoved;
The more opposed more obstinate she proved.
cm.
Thus loves grows stronger fed on opposition;
We prize not what is easily attained ;
This makes some maids show such an exhibition
Of feigned reluctance, —and their point is gained;
’Tis thus they bring their lovers to submission;
They’re prized the most by those whom most they’ve
pained:
So love in Emelina’s thoughtless breast
Grows stronger for the man her friends detest.
civ.
At length they left her to herself j and she
Was quickly wedded to her quondam lover.
At first she felt as happy as could be; —
But ere the honeymoon’s short month was over,
Woe, want, and discord you might daily see ;
She, in her husband, did a sot discover,
And debts and duns did daily him environ ;
He also ruled her with a rod of iron.


cv.
Thus Emelina suffered for her folly:
She, who with Warbeck happy might have been,
t
Now doomed to pine in hopeless melancholy,
E’en in her youth while yet her heart was green;
For former failings now she paid most fully ;
And yet most just her punishment, I ween.
Ye flirting maids! in Emelina’s fate
Behold your own.—Avert it, ere too late.
cvi.
But now we’ll take our leave of her, and turn
To Warbeck, who his grief could not suppress
At once; —for he at times his loss would mourn.
To Werton Hall his visits did not cease:
His friends, with grief, beheld his visage worn;
Yet there, at least, he seemed to suffer less
Than when elsewhere; all did such kindness show ••
And sweet Maria oft dispelled his woe.
cvn.
But woe, like all things else, must have an end:
The fierce tornado will not always last;
The earthquake does not long earth’s bosom rend;
The ocean’s wrath subsides, as does the blast;


What fiercest foams, its force will soonest spend;
The thunderbolt is in an instant past;
The broils of nations, too, must also cease; —
So Warbeck by degrees regained his peace.
cvm.
Unto Maria much he owed; for she
Pelt for his woe, and oft in pity strove
To heal his heart; and not in vain we’ll see.
And was it nought but pity which did move
Maria thus his comforter to be ?
We’re told that “ pity melts the mind to love
I’ll pause not to inquire, nor seek to find,
The causes which may move a maiden’s mind.
cix.
Slight causes oft will great effects produce.—
As from a spark may burst a sheet of flame:
Yet, without diving into thoughts abstruse,
’Tis plain enough, in this harmonious frame,
That nought exists without its proper use, —
Though man, perhaps, may not find out the same,
Yet madly dares his Maker to asperse:
Man but an atom in the universe.


cx.
Oh! man, how strange, how wonderful art thou!
Compared with all on earth, how vastly great!
Compared with heaven, how mean! Thy pride must how
Before an angel of the lowest state.
We’re horn —we die—we know not when, or how—
Alike unknown our past and future fate ;
Half-reasoning hrutes, hy passions urged along,
We know the right, yet oft prefer the wrong.
CXI.
But now ’tis time this canto should be ended,
Though not for want of matter or of rhyme,
Bor neither is, as yet, one-half expended,
But that I deem prolixity a crime.
This canto is the length which I intended,
At the commencement of this tale sublime;
So here I pause, to hear what may he said
By those who have thus far my poem read.
cxxi.
And now, ye gentle critics of Tasmania !
You’re like your British brethren, I suppose;
So that, when authors strive to entertain you,
Your brows contract, and long your visage grows.


Think not by flattery I will strive to gain you.
Truth guides my pen ; so ye, in verse or prose,
May pour your wrath: and shall it pain me ? No!
The eagle soaring high disdains the rooks below.




Warbeck.
CANTO THE SECOND.
l lASMANIA, loveliest isle of Southern Ocean!
>|a ' Thou Erin of the south! I grieve to see
LThat thy decay awakens no emotion
r//A\V) their cold hearts who rule thy destiny,
j vri Oh! could they feel a patriot’s warm devotion
'-s To thy true int’rests, then prosperity
. Would soon return unto thy lovely isle,
And make thy children with contentment smile.
ii.
But now in vain thy settlers till thy soil,
And weary industry may strive in rain;
The farmer’s unrewarded for his toil;
“ He gains a loss,” so low the price of grain.*
* In 1843, when this was written, wheat was not worth more than from
3s. to 4s. per bushel, while the interest of money stood at 10 per cent.
Agricultural farming has never been very profitable in Tasmania.


His land becomes the prey of usurers vile,
Those hungry vultures, of this land the bane,
Who fatten on the wretchedness of others :
Avarice every better feeling smothers.
m.
Alas! Tasmania—my adopted land,
Thou’rt but the wreck of what thou late hast been !
So, when a pilot with unskilful hand
Directs the helm, the vessel’s fate is seen;
She strikes the rocks, nor can the shock withstand :
Vain are the efforts of her crew, I ween,
Who, spent with toil, her hapless fate deplore;—
She slowly sinks, alas! to rise no more.
IV.
But wherefore grieve ? Grief makes not woe the less:
So to our tale. I think we left our hero
Endeavoring his passion to suppress :
His spirits had been sunk as low as zero,
But peace does now once more his bosom bless ;
And from henceforth he dates a brighter era ;
And when ho looks upon the past and gone,
He sighs to think such weakness he had shown.


V.
Ob! who that looks back on bis former life
Would once again his ev’ry deed react ?
E’en saints themselves might use the pruning-knifo
On actions which their characters have blacked:
Tet Warbeck’s youth with prudence had been rife,
Or, what may seem the same, not being attacked
By strong temptations, ho appeared to he
As virtuous as a mortal well can be.
VI.
And thus we see we never should despair,
E’en when our hopes are at their lowest ebb,
Since fortune is as fickle as the fair:
So unaccountably she weaves her web,
That when she smiles the most we should beware:
Her frowns soon follow, —like a new-born babe,
Whose half-formed smiles are dashed -with sudden tears :
Thus changeable dame fortune oft appears.
VII.
And Warbeck felt how foolish he had been
To grieve so much, —for such a trifle too ;
A heartless girl he lost, —yet I have seen
Such loss a gain: though strange ’tis no less true.
K


0! could the future like the past be seen,
Then some events we’d bless which now we rue;
Oft, what we deem a curse, a blessing proves,
When time the film from our dimmed eyes removes.
VIII.
And now he bends his mind to cultivate
His farm, and many great improvements made.
Some of his paddocks he did irrigate,
Th’ expense of which but badly they repaid:
His farm, unlike what it had been of late,
Where forests grew, now under com was laid,
And bore good crops; for fertile was the soil,
And Warbeck farmed it in the English style;
IX.
That is, he kept his fields in good condition,
And not like many of our farmers, who
Sow the same crops in endless repetition,
And when one field is worn out, plough a new.
Such mode of farming is the land’s perdition.
And those who practise it in time must rue;
But Warbeck farmed on quite a different plan:
System through all his cultivation ran.


X.
He also built a handsome cottage, which
Was neat, not large, but built with greatest taste.
Our hero now was growing daily rich, —
Yet still was prudent; he disliked all waste:
He held it a good maxim that “ a stitch
In time saves ninenot “ famine or a feast.”
With Irish brogue pronounce my latest rhyme,
And then with taste and waste a feast may chime.
XI.
[l’ve heard some persons reading rhymes, who would
Ho difference make or if ’twero verse or prose.
To me, however, it seemed exceeding rude;
My ear it grated, and my blood it froze.
I may be wrong; but still, I think, they should
On the accented syllables repose,
And to the author’s gen’ral style attend,
And not with discords harsh the ear offend.]
XII.
By this time Warbeck had a garden planted;
And he displayed much taste in the selection
Of trees, and shrubs, and flowers; he nothing wanted
Which could delight a botanist’s inspection;—


His garden was on rising ground, which slanted
Down tow’rds the stream; he had a rare collection
Of plants indigenous, whose names defy
My skill, because no botanist am I.
XIII.
But he could tell you the botanic name
Of every little plant and shrub you saw;
He thought this science should attention claim
From those who strive to study nature’s law.
For me, alas! I tell it to my shame,
For botany I do not care a straw;
And yet I love to see a lovely flower,
It soothes my mind in meditative hour.
XIV.
I’ve seen the rose in summer sweetly blooming,
And to the sun its lovely hues unfold;
When next I sought it time was fast consuming
Its transient bloom; its fate need not be told!
Thus grief, alas! is daily fast entombing
The sweetest human flowers that we behold;
Plucked from the stem while yet in bloom arrayed,
Withered by death, —the loveliest soonest fade.


XV.
And then we weep for whom we should rejoice,
At haring flown to brighter worlds than this;
Where rirtue is rewarded, and where vice
Is never known in their abodes of bliss.
Ah ! happy those who wisely make their choice
In youth, of paths which never lead amiss:
For them death has no terrors, —he appears
A friend to lead them from this world of tears.
XVI.
0 meditation! silent, thoughtful maid,
With downcast eye, but with expanded mind j
Whose lofty brow appears to have a shade
Of melancholy with thy thoughts entwined:
By thee, full oft, has my young heart been swayed;
From infancy thou hast been ever kind :
In mirth let others seek for happiness;
But let thy calmer joys my bosom bless.
XVII.
For me, full oft, thou hast withdrawn the screen
From mankind’s vain pretensions, till I saw
Vice lurking where I deemed true worth had been;
Some, whom I once believed without a flaw,


With num’rous vices closely masked, were seen,
Sinners in secret, I beheld with awe ;
And while instructed by truth’s transient gleam,
I sighed to think, men are not what they seem.
xvni.
At distance viewed how great the hero seems!
The sage how wise ! and piety how meek !
The conquering hero while on earth he gleams,
Does nought but fame and deathless glory seek :
The sage, whose wisdom like bright Phoebus’ beams,
Illumines the whole earth, seems never weak:
And piety, with humble downcast eyes,—
Who could suspect therein rank pride’s disguise ?
xrx.
And if we scan the hero and the sage,
And trace their actions to their hidden source,
They’d make but a poor figure on life’s stage:
The sage’s precepts would lose half their force ;
Few heroes then would grace the poets’ page;
Poets themselves are like the rest, of course,
Not by their lives, but by their verse they teach ;
So parsons seldom practise what they preach.


XX.
Man is a curious animal; a strange mixture
Of evil and of good: there’s none so base
But has some virtue in his breast a fixture ;
And none so good but vice ■will claim a place;
And though divines may pass a harsher stricture,
Yet more of good, than evil, I can trace
Within the human heart, —whate’er its state,
Yet does the good o’er ill predominate.
XII.
But we must take this life as men take wives,
“ Bor better or for worsel do not know
If those are happier who lead single lives,
Or those who to the feme of Bymen go:
At least there’s one thing certain, man derives
True happiness from neither; I could show
That those who’re single seldom are contented,
And those who wed, alas! too oft repent it.
XXII.
Yet he, who fondly loves a lovely wife,
And who his love as fondly does return,
Must doubtless be the happiest in this life;
Blest with each other, without cause to mourn,


No angry jars, no sharp domestic strife,
But pure affection on each face is worn :
But are there really such ? Ah ! wherefore cherish
Such hopes, which like some flow’rs but bloom to perish!
xxm.
True happiness, a native of the skies,
Dwells not on earth; or, if a moment seen,
Like “ Will’ the wisp,” it but deludes the eyes,
And leads astray all those who seek, I ween;
In vain ’tis sought for by earth’s fools, the wise
Know that on earth its dwelling ne’er had been ;
For e’en when seen ’tis like a falling star;
It gleams a moment, then dissolves in air.
XXIV.
The most that mortals can expect below,
Is but contentment, which is rarely found;
For e’en when fortune does her gifts bestow,
We find new wants on every side abound:
’Tis our desires uncurbed that form our woe.
Those are least happy who by fortune crowned,
Allow fierce passions to corrode the mind;
Pall’d by the present, to the future blind.


XXV.
But, gentle reader, I must beg your pardon
Bor these digressions of my wand’ring muse;
Although in sooth they serve to help a bard on,
And give his tale some variegated hues.
Variety is pleasing in a garden ;
And in a tale who would a sameness choose ?
So does my muse her varied strains impart,
Yet merely breathes the thoughts of her own heart.
XXVI.
But now we’ll seek our hero, and shall find him
At Werton Hall; a place where he had found
His bane and antidote ; though love did blind him
While ho by Emelina’s chain was bound ;
How, Cupid’s slave no more, the god resigned him
To Pallas’ guidance, she with wisdom crowned,
And for his “ mentor” sweet Maria chose:
So with a second flame our hero glows.
XXVII.
I do not know what name to give his passion,
It differed so from what he felt before.
His former flame you doubtless deem a rash one,
And yet it penetrated his heart’s core ;


But love is sometimes changeable as fashion;
Think not those who once loved can love no more,
First love shines with a bright but transient gleam,
All after loves less bright, more constant beam.
XXVIII.
And Warbeck now for sweet Maria felt
A warm unalterable pure devotion;
And pity did to love her bosom melt,
And made her heart glow with a strange emotion;
’Twas the first time to love she ever knelt,
And, being a novice, had at first no notion
That she this truth should by experience prove,—
That even the wisest must submit to love.
XXIX.
And Warbeck now appeared to her to be
(As certainly he was) superior to
The common herd of mankind; she did see
Virtues in him which seldom meet our view;
From human failings he was nearly free.
He had, what’s rare, an honest heart, and true;
But oh! he was thrice blest in now possessing
Maria’s love, heaven’s best and choicest blessing.


XXX.
She fondly loved him with a love as pure
As angels love in heaven; ah! could I find
Such love on earth, I would not long endure
A single life ; yet celibacy’s kind,
And I, at least, need not complain I’m sure, —
Maria gave to Warbeck her whole mind,
And heart, and soul; he, in or out of sight,
Engrossed her thoughts by day, and dreams by night.
XXXI.
To love and be beloved by virtuous woman,
Fair in her person, lovely in her mind,
Is certainly a bliss so great that few men
Have been as yet so fortunate to find.
Oh! why is mutual love a love uncommon ?
The bands of Hymen discords oft have joined,
And what should be a blessing thus may turn
A deadly curse which must through life be borne.
XXXII.
What pity ’tis that those who disagree
In matrimony, cannot be unmarried;
A great improvement it would doubtless be,
And save full many a noble heart being furrowed


By broils domestic, as we often see
Where love once dwelt, but where he has not tarried.
Yet after all what equals matrimony ?
That homely dish made up of gall and honey.
XXXIII.
There’s not a blessing in this life below.
But doubtless has some mixture of alloy ;
Sufficient still to make all mortals know
That perfect bliss is found alone on high.
Thrice-happy those whose well-spent lives can show
A certain promise of eternal joy!
Whate’er their griefs, their conscience being pure,
Makes them all ills with fortitude endure.
xxxiv.
But once more to our tale. Maria loved
And was beloved by Warbeck in her turn:
Indeed it seemed as if one spirit moved,
And made a mutual flame in their hearts burn.
A love so guiltless was by heaven approved.
So artless they, each did deception spurn.
Prom each to each the electric spirit flies:
They need no language but their glowing eyes.


XXXV.
Tor there the inmost thoughts of each were read
Without disguise, as from their hearts they sprung.
So artless they, (as I’ve already said,)
They never harboured e’en the thought of wrong.
But Warheck now, by inspiration led,
Attuned his lyre, and thus poured forth his song:
While as he sung, Maria, with emotion,
Blushed like Aurora rising from the ocean.
SONG.
1.
"Wilt thou return a pure affection
For lore sincere and true,
When Hymen’s hands in close connection
Shall bind my soul to you ?
2.
Oh yes ! I know that thou wilt love me,
And X will love but thee;
And changeless as the heav’ns above me,
Our mutual love shall be.
3.
And e’en when time shall plant a wrinkle
Upon thy lovely brow ;
And age its silvery locks shall sprinkle,
Then, will I love as now.


4.
And when some transient grief may harrow
Thy mind, some future day,
Then will I strive to soothe thy sorrow,
And kiss thy tears away.
5.
And oh ! I hope thou wilt forgive me.
Should I e’er prove unkind,
When cares and worldly crosses grieve me,
And sour my troubled mind :
6.
One word of kindness will reprove me,
And all my errors show :
To find so true a soul to love me,
Will banish all my woe.
7.
Thus will we love till death shall sever;
And then well meet above ;
Yes, we shall meet, to live for ever
In pure eternal love.
IXXVX.
As Warbeck sang this simple artless strain,
Maria’s bosom swelled with tenderness.
She bade him sing those touching strains again,—
They thrilled her very soul, she did confess;


And in her speaking eyes these words were plain,—
0 that such love our future lives might bless!
Ah! doubt it not, said Warbeck, as he kissed,
And fondly clasped her to his glowing breast,
XXXVII.
Who that embraces thus the maid he loves,
But feels emotions words can ne’er express !
Love pure as their’s consenting heaven approves,
And owns on earth it can no further bless.
’Tis happiness supreme, when passion moves
Two virtuous hearts, who thus their love confess;
Who live but for each other; in whose eyes
Each reads the love which utterance defies.
XXXVIII.
But oh! it lies beyond my power to tell
What bliss, what transports, now awaited them;
Each day, each hour, their happiness did swell:
All you may fancy, or by night may dream
Of happiness, was their’s. I may as well
Leave them to transports, and here change my theme :
My muse now starts for Hobart Town, along
With Mr. Andrews, so I’ll change my song.


XXXIX.
On business of importance Andrews went.
It seems some crown lands close to his did lay,
Which were put up for sale by Government,
At public auction, in the usual way.
To purchase these now Andrews was intent :
So he appeared on the appointed day,
Among a crowd of others, whom the same
Business brought, —or speculation’s game.
XL.
’Tis a bad system selling lands by auction;
The ruin of this island it has been;
Its fall dates from that Downing-street concoction,
In which such gross absurdities are seen;
Of late they’ve given the system some correction,
By which the sting is ta’en away, I ween;
For now they ask for land a price so high,
That few can be so foolish as to buy.
XLX.
A pound an acre for a barren rock!
The same, if it should be alluvial soil!
But of the last there is but a small stock
As yet unsold ; at least within this isle:


'Tis thus the Government would fleece their flock;
For them alone the weary settlers toil;
For what with quit-rents, taxes, and police,
For them, not for ourselves, we shear the fleece.
XLIX.
Eager as claimants, but as debtors slow,
Of all bad pays the Government is worst;
As to my cost, alas! too well I know:
But ’tis no matter now; Fm not the first
Whom they did cheat; in equity they owe
(But equity! a dream too fondly nursed)
Three hundred sterling pounds and thirty-five,
For which I did no benefit derive.
XLIII.
That sum just now would be acceptable ;
I want to make improvements on my farm;
T’ enlarge my house, to build a barn as well,
Where I might keep my corn secure from harm, —■
And several other things I need not tell;
Perhaps a wife, to keep my bosom warm :
But I must put off these for some time longer,
Until my purse shall grow a little stronger.


XLIV.
And thus, my gentle reader, you may see
The injury that they may do the nation.
A race of poets might spring up from me,
Who would deserve the whole world’s approbation ;
But if I die without, posterity
Will doubtless fly into a dreadful passion,
And rail ’gainst those who cheated them and me, —
Me of some hundreds, them of poetry.
XLV.
Thus great events from petty causes spring:
You see from cause so slight the world may lose
A host of bards, each greater than a king;
For what is greater than a gifted muse ?
Now this is truth, not fiction, that I sing,
And credence you should not to me refuse;
For I protest Fm serious, though I trace
Th’ incredulous smile upon my reader’s face,
XLVI.
But you may say bnrds’ sons may not be bards,
And may, perhaps, adduce some instances;
But you forget, while thus you play your cards,
That we are now at the antipodes,


And nature here a diiTrent fate awards
To animals and men: you need but gaze
On the opossums, or the kangaroos ;
Marsupial both, so either you may choose.
XLVII.
So now I’ve proved my strange position true :
I hope, my reader, you are satisfied ;
And, though my doctrine may, perhaps, be new,
On this account it should not be denied;
Yet some will doubt it, for “ the elect are few
And some oppose it, out of stubborn pride.
I therefore leave my doctrine to its lot;
I care not who believes, or who does not.
XL VIII.
I leave all men to form their own opinions,
And would not pin another’s faith to mine ;
Nor do I doom to Satan’s dark dominions
Those who are not inclined with mo to join.
I leave such threats to bigotry’s base minions ;
And so this doubtful doctrine I resign,
And turn to Andrews, who began to bid
For sov’ral lots, which I regret he did.


XLIX.
The auctioneer, who was a witty fellow, —
I know not if a true-horn Briton he;
His hair was black, his skin was very yellow,
As if he came from Spain or Italy ;
He had good lungs, and now did loudly bellow,
■ As if he feared his bidders deaf might be; —
Fit agent of a government, which would
Wring from the unwary settler all it could.
n.
None could accuse him here of incapacity ;
He seemed designed by nature for his trade;
He lied so often, and with such audacity,
You scarcely could believe a word he said;
Persisting, with amazing pertinacity,
(’Twas pity he was not a lawyer bred)
In falsehoods gross, yet clear to others’ sight:
To serve his ends, he’d tell you black was white.
LI.
As Andrews bids, another does oppose,
And merely for the sake of opposition;
He did not want the land, although he rose
The price on Andrews, who wished this addition;


And now so spirited the bidding grows,
That it was quickly brought to a decision,
Knocked down to Andrews as the bidding ceased,
The price four times its value at the least.
LII.
Another lot was then put up for sale,
Which a new immigrant now wished to buy;
He was a man of forty, and looked pale,
And melancholy gleamed upon his eye.
Has he a chance ? Ah! no; he’s sure to fail.
I pity him; and would you ask mo why ?
He has a num’rous family, and has come
To make this island be their future home.
LIU.
For he had read at home, in some newspaper,
That crown lands here were to be purchased cheap;
Each acre half a guinea, or much cheaper j
So therefore he resolved to cross the deep.
He is opposed; and hope’s expiring taper
Leaves him in dreary darkness. Must he keep
His family in town till the next auction ?
To his small capital this would be destruction.


xiv.
So now to rent a farm, lie must endeavour;
No chance to buy one he might call his own ;
This cherished hope, alas! is gone for over ;
Tot ’twas this hope, this pleasing hope alone,
Which made him leave his home: but for it never
Would he have left a home where he had known
So many happy days, to trust the wave.
What will not man for independence brave!
xv.
The coarsest food which independence gives
Is sweeter than the sweetmeats of another.
I loathe the fawning servile wretch, who lives
Upon another’s bounty. It must smother
The heart’s best feelings. Ho who nobly leaves
His early home, to seek elsewhere some other,
Where he from such dependence may be freed,
And by his own exertions live, is great indeed !
XVI.
But by this time ’tis fit that I should tell you,
That Andrews purchased all the lots he wanted.
'Tis strange how competition will impel you
To offer more than prudence would have granted.


Take my advice; let no sucli fancies swell you;
Whate’er the bargain, let it bo transplanted
Into another soil; if price too high,
Better its loss than afterwards to sigh.
LVII.
So, having purchased all that he required,
Andrews prepared for his return to home.
My muse, like him, of town grows quickly tired;
For all things there wear artificial bloom;
By nature’s beauties she can be inspired,
But town her flights of fancy would entomb ;
So she in Andrews’ gig has ta’en a seat,
And now they’re driving down Macquarie Street.
Lvnx.
He drove a splendid mare, a famous trotter,
I think she stood some sixteen hands in height;
A rich dark bay she was ; good judges thought her
The handsomest that ever met their sight:
Now Andrews had not bred her, but had bought her ;
Ho gave for her one hundred guineas quite;
I would not give so much for the best horse
That runs, —excepting Pegasus of course.


LIX.
She passed all other horses on the road;
You’d almost think she thought it was a sin
To he behind, she such high spirit showed;
But now at “ Mawle’s Hotel,” the pair are seen,
And there they find accommodation good;
They thence proceed unto the “ London Inn,”
Where, having had their tea, the mare a feed,
And paid the fare, to Oatlauds they proceed.
LX.
And there they stopped at “ Samuel Page’s” door ;
The ostler ran as fast as he was able ;
A smile upon his countenance he wore,
While he the mare was leading to the stable;
He calculated on a shilling more:
How here, at least, I do not deal in fable:
Meantime my muse and Andrews had been shown
Into the parlour, and there left alone.
LXI.
He pays to her some compliments; she smiles ;
I’m sorry that I am so far away;
We’re told that “ when a husband’s fifty miles
From his own spouse, she may be rather gay


But, ah! my muse was chaste; seductive wiles
Could never lead her guileless heart astray;
Like Csesar’s wife, my muse must ever be
Not only chaste, but from suspicion free.
LXII.
At early morn from Oatlands they departed :
A place where storms are almost always blowing,
And many a trav’ler under them has smarted, —
’Tis also famous for so often snowing ;
But it was mild, for once, when Andrews started;
And now along “ St. Peter’s Pass” he’s going:
My muse, of course, is seated by his side,
Surveying nature with a conscious pride.
LXIII.
Now “ Tunbridge Wells” is gained, and quickly passed,
And in the distance “ Mona Tower” is seen:
My eyes upon that tower have oft been cast,
As o’er the “ Salt Pan Plains” I rode ; I ween
That monument its builder will outlast.
But, reader, at the “ Salt Pans”* have you been,
To see bright Phcebus, on a summer’s day,
There making salt in such a curious way ?
* The early settlers used to collect salt from these natural salt pans.


LX IV.
It seems that Phoebus understands all arts, —
A sort of universal genius ho ;
He here makes salt, while in West Indian marts
Him as a sugar boiler you might see.
Nought comes amiss to him, so vast his parts;
He also fabricates all poetry;
E’en at this very moment, as I write,
He is directing my poetic flight.
LXV.
But while in these digressions wo lose time,
My muse and Andrews fly along the road.
My muse’s thoughts are doubtless most sublime,
Though from her tongue her thoughts but seldom
flowed.
But Andrews knew not of her turn for rhyme.
Macquarie River now beneath them flowed.
They cross the bridge at Ross, and now they stop I
At Ross Hotel—’tis kept by Mr. Hope; V
But where’s the man of Ross ? ah, where is Pope l)
LXVI.
Oh! that his mantle ho had left behind,
As did Elijah, when he flew to heaven!
In vain he sung bold truths to all mankind;
They heeded not, preferring flattery’s leaven.


In vain his inspirations were designed
To bless all men; but they in vain wore given.
Men list to flattery; truth they will not hoar :
Truth sounds like discords unto vice’s ear.
LXVII.
0 Pope! thou best of bards ! not Milton’s self
Can give such pleasure to my mind as thou:
Whene’er I take thy works from off my shelf,
To thy departed genius low I bow:
Thou, who couldst spurn the sordid lust of pelf,
And from thy hand Cragg’s proffered pension throw;
Whose virtuous life was faultless as thy strain ;
Worth, prudence, genius, all in thee did reign.
LXVIII.
Nor yet forget that master of the Lyre,
That mighty genius whose capacious mind
Grasp’d heav’n and earth ; who with poetic fire,
Breath’d his soul on all that he design’d :
Unhappy Byron! thou who dost inspire
With thy own feelings millions of mankind,
Hast thou been wretched, too ? how sad to find
Such fate oft waits the noblest of mankind !


LXIX.
But cease ye harsh, unfeeling, heartless few,
Whose venom’d tongues would taint his deathless
fame.
That he had errors—errors of dark hue —
None will deny; but who is free from blame ?
E’en those who rail may be more vicious too,
Although no stain may rest upon their name,
And why ? their petty spheres have kept conceal’d
Crimes which in loftier place had been reveal’d.
LXX.
Ah! hapless Byron! hapless in thy wife,
Whose heart could never harmonise with thine,
Nor yet excuse an error in thy life,
Oh! had she prov’d what heav’n did her design
Thy helpmate, years of agonizing strife
Had then been saved, and thou with grace divine,
Improving with thy years, hadst left behind
Thy closing life a model for mankind.
LXXI.
By this, the mare has had her feed of corn, —
My muse and Andrews some refreshment too;
So now once more along the road they’re borne,
And quickly “Campbell Town” appears in view.


Three splendid inns do this small town adorn—
Which shows that temp’rance here has much to do;
But they to stop no inclination showed ;
They turn off now on the Avoca road.
LXXII.
But soon they find what difference lies between
A good road, and a bad; now through the sand
The gen’rous beast all o’er with sweat is seen.
Andrews gets out, and leads the mare in hand.
It is a shame this road so long has been
Left in a state of nature; a small band
Of convicts should be placed here, and not all
Sent up unto the station at “Eingal.”
LXXIII.
But they got through at last, and on they drove
With speed: for Andrews always found delight
In driving at a rate I disapprove.
But now the South Esk river meets their sight,—
Then disappears again as on they move ;
Now opposite my cot they stop their flight;
And I just now am welcoming my muse,
Eejoiced to see her after her long cruise.


Lxxrv.
Her lovely form to my fond heart is prest,
And tears of joy are sparkling in her eyes ;
With such a spouse was over mortal blest ?
Hot Adam with his Eve in paradise.
She tempted him to sin,—you know the rest; —
But she who in my fond embraces lies
Is pure and stainless, as in heaven above
Bright angels may be seen; like their’s her love.
LXXV.
But where is Andrews ? He would not accept
My invitation, but pursued his way.
His further journeying must be o’erleapt ;
Perhaps you deem his home at “ Break o’ Day ?”
Indeed I do not know which road ho kept;
Perhaps “ Ben Lomond” in his journey lay:
But, if it did, ho must at “ Glover’s” call,
That is, if he has any taste at all:
LXXVI.
Eor there an artist dwells, a painter he;
A man of genius, as his landscapes show ;
In them you view Tasmanian scenery,
And huge “ Ben Lomond” in his cap of snow,


The monarch of surrounding hills ; you see
How ho does frown on all the rest below;
Towering on high, in majesty alone,
Ho fears no rival to usurp his throne.
LXXVII.
But tell me, reader, have you boon at Glover’s,
These offsprings of his genius to behold ?
Ah no! of genius here there are few lovers ;
We seem to bo in such things rather cold.
’Tis wealth alone that in our fancy hovers, —
Why tell a tale which has been often told!
Yet such the fate of genius may bo said,
Neglected living, idolized when dead !
LXXVIII.
But Andrews now has reached his home once more,
And Warbeck and Maria there ho found
As happy as I said they were before :
Thus mutual, virtuous love, with bliss is crowned.
Here lies the moral, here the virgin ore ;
The rest is mixed with dross, which does abound
In every mine, of gold, and silver too :
So rare pure truth, discovered by so few.


LXXIX.
And now all things were ready for the marriage;
Andrews consented, as a thing of course.
I will not pause a moment to disparage
Those who see nought in lovers but their purse.
Yet still ’tis very certain that a carriage,
And a fine house and farm, act with some force,
Not only on the parents, but the maid ;
Who may pretend by love alone she’s swayed.
LXXX.
The wedding day at length arrived, and they,
With several other friends, sincere and hearty,
Drove to the church ; the parson soon did say
The awful words unto the wedding party.
Now list ye maids, “ love, honour, and obey
These are the very words, so without art, ye
Should never substitute the words “ be gay”—
As I once heard a certain lady say.
LXXXI.
But now it is my province to describe
The wedding party, and the wedding dinner ;
But I must leave the last unto the tribe
Of epicures, of whom each is a sinner.


I’ve not tlie least propensity to jibe,
And in all satire scarcely a beginner:
So you must be contented if you view
A rough, but true description of a few.
LXXXII.
The dinner now is on the table laid ;
The guests are seated round in their due places;
The bride and bridegroom too may bo surveyed,
Love in their hearts, and joy upon their faces :
Each one, and all in their best dress arrayed,
The ladies in their satins, silks, and laces;
So lovely, and so charming they are seen,
With their descriptions I of course begin.
I. XXXIII.
But “ age is honourable,” and should claim
The precedence; yet I this truth must own,
I seldom closely scan an aged dame,
Whose spring and summer seasons long have flown.
Perhaps all such may say it is a shame;
It may be so, yet I'll leave them alone,
And turn unto those lovely charmers, whom
I now can view in all their vernal bloom.
M


LXXXIV.
Behold Miss Delia Simper at the table, —
To have an appetite she ne’er was known;
To taste a bit just now she was not able, —
She doubtless must have lived on love alone ;
A pleasing diet truly, and most stable—
Miss Deha weighed, I think, about twelve stone:
So love as diet, is you see potential,
And yet I must have something more substantial.
LXXXV.
I can’t exist on love alone, howe’er
It may succeed with others; yet with me,
Lean as I am, ’twould make me much more spare—
And, apropos, all poets lean should be.
But now I’ll turn unto another fair,
Whom opposite Miss Deha you may see:
Miss Lydia Chcket is the lady’s name, —
, You say “ she lives at Blank Hah,” yes, the same.
LXXXVI.
She is a little chatt’ring monkey, who
Is blessed, or cursed, with wondrous volubility;
Some think it is a blessing, though some few
Perhaps may deem it of the opposite quality:


However this may be, ’tis no less true,
The best way is to listen with humility
To these eternal talkers, whom I prize:
As shallow brooks which flow with greatest noise.
LXXXVII.
But while they talk, you may be thinking still,
Yet give them now and then, a nod, or smile;
They, with their chatter so engaged, they will
Think that you are attentive all the while.
The subject mostly, is some neighbours ill,
Some maiden’s frailty, or some scandal vile, —
The usual topics of their conversation,
As also of their silent meditation.
LXXXVIIX,
But lower down behold Miss Serious now,
With face so grave, one of the “ few elect
Yet pride, rank pride, sits on her haughty brow,
Although she deems herself without defect.
Differ from her, and she will not allow
But that on error’s rock your heart is wrecked;
And all your hopes of heaven at once expel ;
She’ll calmly tell you that your doom is hell.


XXXXIX.
She can’t be wrong, infallible like the Pope;
Faith drives all mists of error from her eyes ;
For her, and her alone, bright truth does ope
Its hidden mines, —she how she bears the prize
Of heaven’s inheritance. • She has more than hope;
She would not change with Eve in paradise,
Before the fatal apple had been given:
Unfit for earth, she must be fit for heaven.
xc.
I wonder if the science of phrenology
Was ever tried, to find her turn of mind;
And that she was, as doctress of theology,
By nature from her infancy designed.—
But I must make to her my best apology
For thus presuming her small specks to find :
We know the sun is not from blemish free, —
As those who use good telescopes may see.
xci.
And now another lady meets my eye,
A youthful matron she, it makes me grieve
To see her here, in such strange company;
A daughter worthy of her mother—Eve;


She thinks all others like herself must bo
Full of duplicity; trying to deceive
With petty arts, her neighbours and relations:
Guile still the subject of her meditations.
xcn.
But here, as worthy females seem so rare,
They should not be forgot when them we view;
On this account I cannot now forbear
From noticing yon virtuous matron too,
A pattern she to the surrounding fair,
All praise were weak to give her but her due;
Prom all her sex’s failings nearly free,
And what she is, such should all matrons be.
xcm.
Not distant far I also can behold
Another, who my praise must also claim,
A matron fair and lovely, not yet old,
Whom envy’s self can scarcely dare to blame;
Had I now passed her by my heart were cold.
And sev’ral others I might also name
With great respect; yet this must be confess’d,
These two bright jewels sparkle o’er the rest.


xcxv.
But now unto the gentlemen I turn,
And of the present party sketch a few.
Truth guides my pen, all fiction now I spurn ;
I wish to give to every one his due ;
But vice and folly can’t by me be borne,
So they may here behold a mirror true.
I throw the fool’s-cap up, so those who choose
To fit it on, may wear, or may refuse.
xcv.
Now Mr. Spitfire claims the foremost place;
You see him yonder, with malicious grin,
Which always sits upon his fieiy face,
And demon heart; for he takes pleasure in
Another’s woe: it gives him joy to trace
The downfall of a worthier man, so mean
A wretch has my contempt, my hate, my scorn;
But now to Mr. Bombast I will turn.
xcvi.
He thinks himself a mighty man, no doubt,
Because “ J.P.” is tacked unto his name ;
With proud, but graceless stride, he struts about,
And from all persons would submission claim;


He speaks to all with dictatorial shout;
A pompous manner seems to be his aim;
From human weakness, doubtless, quite exempt,
And yet I look upon him with contempt.
XCVII,
And why ? Because a hollow thing of pride,
A mindless man, (if I may use the expression)
Who fain would be by others deified;
So, therefore, he need not fly into a passion,
Because I choose his follies to deride,
And thus, with gentle hand, to lay the lash on:
I might be more severe, if so I chose;
But I am mild, I wish you to suppose.
XCVIII.
But Mr. Barebones next attracts my eye,
With solemn brow and visage sanctified,
As if his thoughts all centred in the sky.
So meek and humble! He can have no pride !
Tet in his dealings cunning, artful, sly;
’Tis then religion’s cloak is cast aside:
’Tis then that he a hypocrite stands confess’d;
A prowling wolf, but in sheep’s clothing dress’d.


XCIX.
Not distant far, Apicius you may view,
So nice in diet! a great epicure,
Who’s always finding out some dish that’s new,
Some sweeter dainty, which may him allure,
And his insatiate appetite renew.
For me, I must confess, I can’t endure
Those who a temp’rate diet don’t enjoy,
Who think in eating all our pleasures lie.
c.
Yet, after all, he is a pleasant fellow,
A good companion, and a hearty friend,
Whose mirth and wit, especially when mellow,
Mow in a stream which seems to have no end:
And many a tale and anecdote he’ll tell you,
If you with him some winter ev’ning spend.
Whate’er his faults, his heart is ever kind;
A hearty welcome at his house you’ll find.
ci.
These are a few of those at Warbeck’s wedding;
At present I will not describe the rest;
Though I might write till you were tired of reading;
But all long tiresome stories I detest;


So I will pause, if but to show good breeding;
My flights of fancy now must be repress’d
Meantime I hope that some may see their pictures
In this my verse, and profit by my strictures.
cn.
I laugh at others, and I leave them free
To laugh at me; —for who is free from folly?
So they may laugh, when they my follies see;
’Tis laughter cures the spleen and melancholy.
I care for none who do not care for me,
Or if men take my satire warm or coolly;
But did I really say my satire ? oh!
I never deal in satire, as you know.
cm.
The dinner o’er, the ladies now retire;
The bride and bridegroom’s health was drunk, of
course;
I hope I don’t my reader’s patience tire.
But, reader! you must “patience have per force,”
Until I choose to lay aside my lyre.
But at the door now stands a gig and horse,
In which, with blushing face, close by the side
Of Warbeck, sits Maria, his sweet bride.


CIV.
But, as they started, I could then discern
A tear just springing in Maria’s eye.
She o’er her early home did fondly yearn.
Ah! who can part from home without a sigh ?
The generous filial heart will fondly turn
To parents, friends, and scenes of former joy;
But these, and more than these, Maria gained
In him who with her hand her heart obtained.
cv.
They’re wedded now; and happy they must be,
If happiness was e’er in wedlock found;
They’re blest; but, ah! such bliss waits not for me;
No sweet Maria can I view around.
My tale is done. —Thus, reader, you may see
How virtue will at last with bliss be crowned.
Here ends my song.—l now lay by my lyre,
Till, haply, loftier themes once more my muse inspire.


Miscellaneous Pieces.




Lines on the Death of the Duke of Wellington,
1856.
VI 1 ECLIPS’D alas! is Britain’s sun,
} / 'fr*. {> Bead lier illustrious Wellington,
J/ \ I
/( (oXci) \\ He, ■whom nations lov’d and fear’d,
U VO Qy J By foes esteem’d, by friends rever’d,
Whose sword was drawn in Justice’s cause,
y To vindicate his country’s laws,
Who only fought that war might cease,
He drew his sword, and gave all Europe peace.
Match’d against the mightiest one
Of modern times, he fought and won,
Tho’ long the struggle, fierce the strife,
And dire the waste of human life,
Yet check’d he in Ids mad career
Him who fain would grasp the sphere,
And ere the deadly strife was done,
Victory smil’d once more on Wellington.


Great in every walk of life,
In paths of peace, in fields of strife,
“ The greatest captain of the age,”
In Britain’s senate shone her sage,
In danger’s hour he rul’d the state,
And fix’d his country’s future fate,
Fresh laurels thus he daily won,
As great in peace, as war, was Wellington.
Eeplete at length with years, and fame,
Hist’ry now his deeds must claim,
And paint on its impartial page
Th’ illustrious hero and the sage,
Who from his grave shall yet inspire
Britain’s youth with heroic fire,
By whom shall such great deeds be done,
That Britain shall not miss her Wellington.


Song.
« ta* U t e th e co n p. !s is c„ tot te e,
\~y !s/|| Where’er I may wander still it turns unto you,
/ UHhI \ In crowds, or alone, or where’er I may be,
( C l/o) pfy heart still is wand’ring ever to thee.
Oh ! wilt thou permit it unpitied to roam,
Wilt thou not receive the poor wanderer home ?
' ' For wherever thou art its home is with thee,
Thy bosom its resting place ever must be.
But shouldst thou prove cold, and expel it from thence,
To wander unpitied in sorrow intense,
Alas! thy displeasure it never could meet,
If torn from thy breast it would break at thy feet.


Lines on the Fall of Sebastapol.
I 11% IEBASTAPOL lias fallen at last,
r Eclips’d is Eussia’s sun,
rll V/f(^ Hcr ™ ie *^ * s
yJ) JiwA' The prize at length is won,
\ij) (dj No longer shall her ruthless Czars
Engulph the nations round,
Eegardless of their patriots’ tears,
Or freedom’s deadly wound.
Unhappy Poland now arise,
For freedom strike once more,
See Kosciusko in thy skies,
His spirit hov’ring o’er.
“ Awake my country, now awake,
Awake, awake, he cries;
Spring from the dust for freedom’s sake,
And Phoenix-like arise.


“ Wait not for foreign Lands to save
Our long-neglected state,
Tho’ we to Europe freedom gave,*
She left us to our fate.
“ Unmov’d she saw the bandits round
Seize and divide the spoil,
An act more base is nowhere found,
’Mongst deeds of despots vile.
“ But justice, tho’ so long defcrr’d,
Will be ere long reveal’d;
A warning note is plainly heard,
’Tis Russia’s doom is seal’d.”
* Europe owes Poland a debt of gratitude for having saved the
Cross from being trampled beneath the Crescent. Sobeiski and his heroic
Poles, under the walls of Vienna, saved Europe from being overwhelmed
by the Mahommedans—and how have they been rewarded ?


The Indian Mutiny.
WRITTEN ON RECEIPT OF THE INTELLIGENCE OF THE
MUTINY OF THE SEPOYS IN INDIA, THE MASSACRE
AT CAWNPORE, &c., &c.
rO/ X
O (||% C.VPEED to India, speed with me,
C q Speed to death, or victory.
Cj? T?\ <; V'Eritain in her hour of need
?c3 Calls Australia, bids her speed,
y Who can hear her call in vain ?
Patriots speed with might and main,
There, your keenest swords unsheath,
There, awaits you glory’s wreath,
There, where heroes gladly throng,
Breathing hate for woman’s wrong,
There, where fiends incarnate stood,
Butchering infants in cold blood,
There, let every patriot speed,
And patriot be, in act and deed,
Gallant Wellesley’s spirit there,
Clive, whose noble soul could dare
Aught that man might dare to do,


They shall guide us dangers through.
Hastings firm, with soul of fire,
Napier stern, shall us inspire,
Havelock brave, and Lawrence wise,
Pointing from ethereal skies,
To fiends who outrage Heav’ns just laws,
(Spirits aid in such a cause)
Fired by them with lofty aim, 'j
Let us emulate their fame, C
And write on history’s page our name, \


Lines
ON THE REVOLUTION IN FRANCE WHICH
HURLED LOUIS PHILIPPE FROM HIS
THRONE.
done. He’s hurl’d from his throne,
Qr |» Seeks refuge in disguise ;
(?(/■]))¥ (l($D France has a glorious lesson shown
To wond’ring Europe’s eyes;
fu) (Q (j) Whose awe-struck princes plainly see
Enlighten’d nations must be free.
What monarch could be more secure,
Than Louis Philippe seem’d;
He deem’d his throne would long endure,
But ah! he idly dream’d;
Nor truth, nor justice fix’d his throne,
Corruption was its base alone.


But soon the tott’ring fabric fell,
By moral truth assail’d;
Freedom by force he strove to quell,
And signally he fail’d;
Corruption may succeed awhile,
At length ’twill on itself recoil.
Where now his diplomatic arts,
To win the throne of Spain ?
His selfishness lost him all hearts,
He’s look’d on with disdain,
Who’d grasp by fraud a neighb’ring throne,
Even while he tottered on his own.
The day is past when dark intrigues
The nations could beguile,
Despots no more dare form in leagues
To serve a purpose vile;
Awaken’d Freedom feels her pow’r,
And tyrants vanish in an hour.
Thro’ sympathizing Europe, too,
Freedom begins to wake,
While panic struck the Despot crew,
Whose thrones beneath them shake,
They see the hour approaching fast,
When thrones must number with the past.


When Greece was in her palmy days,
And freedom flourish’d fair,
What noble actions meet our gaze,
Achiev’d by freemen there ;
All Persia’s countless host she braves, —
One freeman’s worth a thousand slaves.
Then Freemen rise, and break the chain,
Which Despots forg’d of yore,
O’er all the earth let Freedom reign,
Be Tyrants seen no more, —
Those deadly vampires of the state,
Deserving every Patriot’s hate.


On Happiness.
hopes for happiness on earth
ffw 2 )) as aspirations vain,
\/f {l ySo spirit of celestial birth
' \\\J Dwells in this world of pain,
|(j Alone can happiness be found,
In her own native sky,
Where peace, and joy, and bliss abound
Thro’ all eternity.
But while to earth’s cold surface chain’d
We’re doom’d with every breath,
By cares and sorrows to be pain’d,
By illness and by death;
None can escape the common doom,
None can exemption find,
The happiest have their hours of gloom,
When sorrow fills the mind;
When death itself would be a boon,
Which we would hail with joy,
Nor deem it come one hour too soon,
To waft us to the sky.


Fatherland.
y /ATHERLAND! Fatherland! that glorious theme,
C vt J Let me hear it sung once more,
(/y)l V(f(vAnd I will list in ecstatic dream,
His vV Like Druid-hard of yore.
0 ! sing me the song of the olden time,
When heroes dwelt in our land,
Our histories tell of their deeds sublime,
Wrought in our Fatherland.
When brave Prince Arthur that mythical king,
And his knights with a daring hand,
Left the deeds of their days for bards to sing
To the lyre of their Fatherland.
When Harry the Fifth and the brave Black Prince,
With his valiant chivalrous band,
In a few sharp bouts laid prostrate Prance,
Hurrah for our Fatherland!
When Puritan Cromwell, that mystery strange,
And his savage king-hating band,
Struck terror to all within cannon range,
Exalting our Fatherland.


When Eodney swept over tlie subject sea,
And Marlborough o’er the land,
When Louis of France bent low the knee,
To our brave old Fatherland.
But pass we still on to more modern days,
We yet meet with deeds as grand,
When Europe’s proud conqueror yielded his bays
To our brave old Fatherland.
Nor is she thus famous in war alone,
But worthy of high command,
As leader in science, and arts, all own
Our brave old Fatherland.
There liberty dwells, ’tis the home of the free,
No slave sets foot on her strand,
Tho’ glorious the past, bright the future will be
Of our brave old Fatherland.
And shall we—shall Britain’s last offspring here,
Shall we degenerate stand ?
Ah no ! Australia’s proud sons shall appear
Worthy their Fatherland!
Fatherland! Fatherland! that glorious theme,
Let me hear it sung once more,
And I will list in ecstatic dream,
Like druid-bard of yore.
Meadow Bank, April 9th, 1859.


An Aspiration
.
Vl zs HEEE is a world where justice reigns,
la -A- n( i truth (on earth so rare),
/ \ Where mercy breaks the sinners’ chains,
V / A \ / -^ n( l Gr°d is worshipp’d there.
Unlike this world where man to man
Has ever been unjust,
Where might is right, the stronger one
Treads down his kindred dust.
Hero, hate, and strife, and envy lour
On natures meek and kind,
The despots’ and the bigots’ pow’r
Unite to chain the mind.
Here, “ charity” is seldom seen
(Some say to heav’n it’s flown),
“ Hope” springs not here in tendrils green,
But “ faith” is left alone.


And pointing to that world above,
A world that’s free from pain,
Says, “ There, seek justice, truth, and love,
On earth the search were vain.”
Then let me seek that world on high,
Where cares and sorrows cease,
Tir’d of this world from it I fly
To realms of endless peace.
Glen Ayr, Sept. 28, 1859.


The Pilot.
AN ALLEGORICAL POEM.
1.
UJ {yj FRAGILE bark, with flowing sails,
/ Jas'X \ Sail’d on tbe sea of life,
I OiO I dang’rous sea with sudden gales,
Vi ivV And shoals and tempests rife.
The pilot was a careful man,
And onward held his course,
Oft close on sunken rocks he ran,
Urg’d by the tempest’s force.
3.
With wind ahead, with dangers great,
Increasing more and more,
Night fell: most hopeless seem’d his state,
False lights on either shore,


4.
But still the Lighthouse lit by Faith,
Shone bright above the rest,
To warn from sunken rocks beneath,
To point which course was best.
6.
So onward still he did proceed,
No anchorage was there,
With little for his hope to feed,
Or ward off black Despair.
6.
Yet kept he on thro’ that dark night,
While dangers did surround,
At times unseen even Faith’s bright light,
While fogs and shoals confound.
7.
In that dark night the seamen too
Doubted the Pilot’s skill,
A diff’rent course to them seem’d true,
Each strove to work his will.


8.
The false lights gleam’d, the men rebell’d.
And fain would steer for shore,
Yet still his onward course he held,
Columbus-like of yore.
9.
But who can paint his suff rings then,
In that dread hour of woe ?
Forsaken he seem’d of God and men,
Bereft of help below.
10.
Think not he quail’d beneath the fear,
The vulgar fear of death,
To him the grave were welcome cheer,
’Twere nothing loss of breath.
11.
But ’twas the death beyond the grave,
That second death he fear’d,
Should he not ship and cargo save,
Or if he badly steer’d.


12.
And Ms firm faith in that bright light,
Tho’ now and then obscur’d,
Sustain’d him thro’ that dreary night,
No other hope endur’d.
13.
Even hope and trust in his own skill
Had failed him long before,
Tet glimpses of that bright light still
Nerv’d his weak heart once more,
14.
And thus unto his men he spoke :
“ I will be still obey’d,”
With that a deadly weapon took,
And pointing to their head,
15.
“ Obey or die.” The men were mute,
He rose in their esteem;
Just then the lamp of faith shot out
Its light with brilliant gleam.


16.
The narrow and the dangerous strait
They safely had pass’d o’er,
Now love succeeds that burst of hate.
Smooth seas appear before.
17.
And rising from the silver’d east,
Day dawn’d with hopeful light,
AH doubts and fears away they cast,
Their destin’d port in sight.
18.
Pair blew the breeze, all sails were fill’d,
The barque flew on with speed,
The seamen owned their pilot skill’d,
Their friend in hour of need.
19.
And soon they gain’d the destin’d port,
All friends crowd forth to meet,
The cannons thunder from the port
A welcome loud and sweet.


20.
But who can paint tho joys which beam
In that brave pilot’s breast?
The past seems as a hideous dream,
Now, so supremely blest.
21.
He moor’d his bark, he leap’d ashore,
To God’s courts led the way,
His God, his Saviour to adore,
For his being there that day,
22.
My tale is done—the moral see,
And may it you befriend,
Let each who reads that pilot be,
Like his your voyage may end.


Song.
WOMAN’S WORK IS NEVER DONE.
✓OoO~)
G LY tlie needle, ply,
Sew, sew, sew,
This the sight that meets the eye
\Vn Wheresoe’er we go,
(Tj Woman’s work is still begun,
Woman’s work is never done.
Children tear their clothes,
Stitch, stitch, stitch,
Away to its mamma it goes,
Whether poor or rich.
Woman’s work is still begun,
Woman’s work is never done.
Stocking heels have holes,
Mend, mend, mend,
Little time to mend your souls,
Thus mending without end.
Woman’s work is still begun,
Woman’s work is never done.


Mothers of our race,
Of every clime and hue,
0! mend the mind in every place,
Tour own and offspring’s too,
All depends on you!
This your work is hut begun,
This your work is never done.
Glen Ayr, September, 1859.


Lines.
“COME TO ME ALL YE THAT ARE WEARY,
AND I WILL GIVE YOU REST.”
(0?(C)
of the load of life,
f WfM \ Saviour Jesus give me rest,
VD O / a^’e me f rom this scene of strife,
\j])(V r To the mansions of the blest,
y There to live with them and Thee,
Sounding the Almighty’s praise,
Strife unknown, from sorrows free,
Loud the glorious hymns we’ll raise.
All that life can give below,
Health, and wealth, and length of days,
Ends in sorrow, ends in woe—
Let me my Creator praise.
Let me join the heavenly throng,
Let me swell the glorious lays,
Myriad voices join the song,
Men and angels sing God’s praise.


Old Erin's Harp.
Erin’s harp unused so long,
OT Unstrung, forgotten, neglected lay,
P With rubbish vile in a corner flung,
Was left to rust and to rot away.
2.
Until a youth with eager eyes
Was led by chance to search the heap,
He spied the harp: he grasp’d the prize,
Resolv’d his treasure to guard and keep.
3.
The harp re-strung was soon complete,
The dust and rust he clear’d away,
He touch’d its chords—the notes were sweet,
And whisper’d hopes of a brighter day.


4.
And thus it spoke in murmuring tones,
And sadly plaintive was the song,
Mingling therewith a few deep groans,
It told its mournful tale of wrong;—
5.
“ 0 bear me away from my native land,
To earth’s remotest bound,
Relinquish me not till thy dying hand
Lose strength my notes to sound.
6.
“ For badly used have I been of late,
Tho’ once old Erin’s pride,
Now, left to a most inglorious fate,
And carelessly flung aside.
7.
“ But thou wilt soon sail to a distant isle,
An island like Erin fair,
Whose southern skies more brightly smile,
And I will cheer thee there.


8.
“ And oft as you roam o’er its mountains wild,
Or tread its deep forests alone,
I’ll soothe thee at times with my accents mild,
And, anon, in a louder tone.
9.
“ When thou may’st be in a mournful mood,
I’ll breathe my most tender strain,
When inclin’d to mirth, or to laughter rude,
Then, joy in my notes shall reign.
10.
“ Yet neither for fame, nor for lucre base
Shalt thou draw forth a note from me,
In solitudes wild, in the loneliest place,
I’ll pour out my soul to thee.
11.
“ Yet when I look back on my earlier days,
Then tun’d by a master-hand,
When “ honest Goldsmith’s” beautiful lays
Did Europe’s applause command;


12.
“ Or later still, when silvery Moore,
Attun’d my tenderest notes to love,
And his amorous strains did sweetly pour,
Which maiden’s minds so deeply move ;
13.
“ Or when Spenser ran over my chords with skill,
Chaunting his * Faery Queen,’
Ah! little I then dreamt of future ill,
While sounding his glorious strain.
14.
“ Ah! then were my chords in their youthful prime,
And hope in my notes beat high,
As I heard his magnificent strains sublime,
My heart-strings trembled with joy.
15.
“ Tes, then I was young, and my hopes beat high,
And soar’d like a blithesome bird ;
My strains like the lark, when he mounts the sky,
Gave pleasure to all who heard.


16.
“ But now since we live in an iron age,
Men’s hearts are like iron hard,
Material wealth is now all the rage,
And no one prizes the bard.
17.
“ Hence was I war as useless flung aside,
And my former fame forgot,
Who strikes me now is of bread denied,
And left in a garret to rot.
18.
“ What wonder, then, that my notes should cease,
With my former days of pride,
With heart-strings broke, with withering face,
My spirits within me died.
19.
“ So Sion’s harp, we are sweetly told,
When exil’d from Sion’s hill.
Refus’d its notes in those days of old,
While Judah was suffering ill.


20.
“ Then bear me away to the land of thy choice,
To Australia with skies so clear,
There embryo nations shall hear my voice,
And lend an attentive ear.
21.
“ For there I am destined to shine once more,
There will I grow young again,
Phoenix-like from my ashes I yet shall soar,
And send forth a vigorous strain.”
22.
Thus spoke that harp in a murmuring lay,
And then into silence died;
The youth did deepest attention pay,
' And thus he at length replied :
23.
“My harp beloved ! my friend so dear!
I swear I never will part from thee,
With God for my guide and thee to cheer,
I’ll fearlessly brave life’s boisterous sea.


24.
“ The wind may howl, and the seas may roar,
And I may furl my sails awhile,
Yet soon as the hurricane’s blast is o’er,
In safety still I’ll be seen to smile.
25.
“And all who depend on that guide so true,
Need fear no wreck, altho’ hurricanes wild
Sweep over the globe, yet the faithful few
May calmly rest like a sleeping child.
26.
“ And all who are blest with a friend like thee,
To soothe, and to cheer when opprest with wrong,
Tho’ evil men in their path may be,
They never can grieve o’er their wretchedness long.
27.
“ Thus David did cherish his harp of yore,
Which soothed him oft in his hour of woe,
He touch’d its chords, and his grief gave o’er,
It melted away as melts the snow.


28.
“ And thus will I prize thee, my harp so true,
We never will sever till death -us shall part,
And tho’ thy sweet strains may be heard by few,
I’ll cherish them still in my inmost heart.
29.
“ Tho’ oft as my fingers unskilled to play,
May strike thy chords with a feeble touch,
Yet thou wilt reply with a cheerful lay,
Nor chide the hand which presumes so much.
30.
“ And when we shall be in a distant land,
Forests primeval thy notes shall hear,
For I’ll bear thee still in my faithful hand,
To soothe my soul, and my heart to cheer.
31.
“ One touch on thy chords and thy answering voice,
Sweetly replying in friendly strain, ,
Will cheer my low mood, bid my spirits rejoice,
And pleasure again in my breast shall reign.”


32.
Thus spoke that youth to his harp so dear,
While his hand o’er its chords did stray,
Then its silvery notes, so sweetly clear,
Into silence died away.
33.
Years pass’d away, and a sunnier land,
Th’ adopted home of that youth became,
Yet with him he bore that sweet harp in his hand,
Lov’d for it’s worth, not for hopes of fame.
34.
His adopted home had a virgin soil,
And forests of ages’ growth grew there,
Yet his dauntless heart shrunk not from toil;
Earth soon had to open her bosom bare.
35.
His fields he plough’d, and his corn he sow’d,
And carefully tended his bleating sheep,
His granaries soon with increase o’erflow’d,
And numerous shepherds his flocks did keep.


36.
For now lie had corn, and flocks, and herds,
Like Joh of old his store increas’d,
Yet his purest joy was in tuneful words,
Poured to his harp, as his soul’s sweet feast.
37.
And oft he roam’d the forests alone,
Oft climb’d some precipitous tier,
Then his harp might be heard with a musical tone,
It’s notes ringing sweetly clear.
38.
And oft as he felt the rough storms of life
He touch’d its chords and forgot his wrong,
Even * * * base who delights so in strife,
Euffled him not with his slanderous tongue.
89.
To him he could give but a pitying smile,
Superior to anger and strife,
He look’d with contempt on a being so vile,
Whose heart with foul passions was rife.


40.
Yet were he to enter the lists as of old,
Like Ivanhoo he might be seen,
While his Billingsgate foe with his foul words so bold,
De-Boeuf-like would sprawl on the green.
41.
But calmly he met every ill as it rose,
Having God as the judge of his cause.
With love for his friends, and a smile for his foes,
He sought not the world’s applause.
42.
Thus peacefully liv’d—nay perhaps he still lives,
That youth who to manhood is grown,
And his harp he still loves for the pleasure it gives,
As it speaks in its silvery tone.
43.
And sometimes its notes, in his own cherish’d home,
Are heard by his children and wife.
Who love its sweet tones —thence ne’er may it roam,
At least while he breathes in this life.


44.
Oh ! may it still prove like the friend of his youth,
The friend that can cheer him in age,
May its loud notes be heard in the good cause of truth,
And with evil unceasing war wage.
45.
Posterity then will those true notes approve,
And a laurel shall over him wave,
Tho’ his soul may be gone to its author above,
And his hand be unstrung in the grave.


A Briton's Reply to the French Chreat of
Invasion.
1.
! is “ invasion” now the theme
z' Vw W \ Of every Frenchman’s tongue ?
/—. „ \ Say, has their chief so wild a dream ?
1 So I Deems he himself so strong ?
\J 2.
Then let him try to grasp the prize,
While Britain, with a frown,
Will like a mighty giant rise,
And tread the upstart down.
3.
Yes, let him come, —all France may come,
But whither shall they go ?
Our fertile fields shall he their tomb,
They’ll mate our corn to grow.
o


4.
Are Crcssy, Agincourt, Quebec,
Trafalgar, and the Nile,
(Where Trance so oft received a check),
Are they forgot the while ?
5.
While on the field of Waterloo,
Such glorious harvests grow,
They tell what Britain’s sons can do,
Whene’er they meet a foe.
6.
Look on the sultry plains of Ind,
On Clive’s and Havelock’s deeds,
Then treat invasion’s threat as wind,
Which no true Briton heeds.
7.
Then let the third Napoleon pause,
And mark his uncle’s fate,
Had justice sanctified his cause,
No man had been more great.




12.
Tho’ craven Austria conquer’d bows,
And Italy feels his chain,
Louis Napoleon durst not rouse
The lion in his den.
13.
The French a mighty people are,
Britons esteem them such;
Britain loves peace, but fears not war,
Save that it costs so much.
14,
Great Britain knows not what is fear,
Then let the Frenchmen come,
If friends, they shall receive good cheer,
If foes, they know their doom.


Lines,
WRITTEN ON RECOVERING FROM AN ATTACK
OF INFLUENZA.
A
\ /EATH recently gave a slight knock at my door,
r IfUl) 'i And said “ are you ready for me ?
r lllwffn m alwa J s
v//AaSJ strong, and the weak as you see.”
I suddenly felt a most horrible chill,
But replied while I shudder’d with fright,
“ Pray take your departure, I’ve many things still
TJnperform’d, and much to set right.”
3.
He took his departure, he pass’d from my door,
But going, this warning he gave :
“ I leave for the present, a few years or more,
But remember, remember the grave.


4.
When next I approach thee thy grave may be dug,
Prepar’d too thy coffin and shroud,
I’ll brook no delay, in my cold grasp I’ll hug,
And bow down thy spirit so proud.
5.
Then let those few years to good objects be given,
Be ready when next I may call,
So may you commence new existence in heaven,
And own me your friend after all.”


Impromptu
ON THE MARRIAGE OP A VICTORIAN BACHELOR
TO A TASMANIAN LADY.
1.
6f) produces her nuggets of gold,
/ if/ Which make her so rich and so Tain,
/ YBut Tasmania has also her treasures untold,
\ )° )i °\ / Tho’ some undevelop’d remain.
XjU 2.
Yes, Tasmania produces her pearls of price,
Surpassing all nuggets of gold,
They’re found in the shape of sweet girls so
choice,
Fair samples of whom I behold.
3.
Then Victoria may send all her bachelors here,
To pick up those pearls of price,
Each digger may find a rich treasure so dear,
And depart with the gem of his choice.




On the Death of Prince Albert.
gGSXj
\ ) il'-Ih MjOW hard to read aright the ways of God,
SMj J \ In all his dealings with the sons of earth!
I jThe good arc sometimes chastened by His rod,
\rJ\\J The bad are sometimes prosp’rous from their
\_)CJ birth,
fep eg? Far more than some possess’d of sterling worth;
' ' Earth’s choicest flowers the earliest fade and
die,
So wills our God whose mandate has gone forth,
To summon Albert to His home ou high :
Death does his part, in palaces appears,
Our Queen’s beloved lies low : the nation is in tears.
The nation weeps—not for th’ illustrious dead,
Who’s but removed into a happier life,
But for the living, for that bow’d-down head.
Whose tear-drops prove that sorrow there is rife ;
For our own much lov’d Queen, that stricken wife,
Who thus has lost her early young heart’s choice,
We weep to think that on the eve of strife,
She will not have his counsel, hear his voice,
Whose worth she knew, in whom she could confide,
That friend whose value was best known when tried.


Our widow’d Queen! We can but sympathise
With her who has received this fearful blow,
Our Queen belov’d, now in all nations’ eyes
The first in splendour, and the first in woe.
The mighty and the feeble death lays low,
He slays alike the thoughtless and the wise,
A nation’s grief will not make him forego,
Nor wait one moment for his destined prize;
Nor hut nor palace from his grasp can save,
Alike the inmates quit them for the grave.
And yet could aught appease the tyrant death,
Our Queen’s belov’d had still long years in store,
Wisdom had crown’d him with a noble wreath,
For year by year his knowledge grew the more ;
But all our fondest hopes alas ! are o’er,
And we must bow unto the will of God,
And when on bended knees we Him adore,
Let us not murmur at His chastening rod,
But for our Queen and her loved orphans pray,
That they may be preserv’d and kept in the right way.
Glen Ayr, March 7th, 1862.


The Idler's Lament.
A SATIRE ON THE MANAGEMENT OF THE
QUEEN’S ORPHAN SCHOOL.
L
\ 9 Si ? / were an orphan boy,
r? Pi V And in the Orphan School,
U u \fiiiJ Aty days might then be spent in joy,
r// A IvV Ki n d friends -would o’er me rule.
No need for me to delve and toil,
To earn my daily bread,
My tender hands I need not soil,
Tho’ idle I’d be well fed.
3
This cursed spade now in my hand,
O’er which I toil and sweat,
Eeluctant used at Dad’s command,
These hateful “ spuds” to set;


4
I then would fling it, spuds and all,
Into the Derwent deep,
It’s sight no more would stir my gall,
Then would I soundly sleep.
5
Tet there of late they plough and sow,
Even in these orphan schools,
But then the masters both I know
As either rogues or fools.
6
I like them more than men of worth,
They doubtless are design’d
To teach me how I should “ hold forth,”
Tell lies, and cheat mankind.
7
Why should I “ earn my daily bread,”
While others idly live ?
Why cloth’d in rags ? Why hard my bed ?
The State can luxuries give.


8
The public can pay taxes well,
The public purse is deep,
It pays our priests and parsons still,
Our schoolmasters dip deep.
9
Then since these idlers kept, then why
Not feed and clothe me too ?
I cannot understand why I
Should still have work to do.
10
The public dole my sire must try,
Back’d up by some kind friends ;
’Tis true that he must tell a lie,
But I will gain my ends.
11.
My sire the Bible reads awhile,
And talks of heaven and hell,
How Adam’s sin brought death and toil,
He eating apples fell.


12.
But were not apples made to eat ?
I eat up all I can ;
If stolen, they seem to me more sweet,
Are they not food for man ?
13.
Then why should I be forced to sweat,
And toil out all my prime ?
Because an apple Adam ate,
I’m punish’d for his crime,
14.
If crime it was, his natural bent
T’indulge in choice of food.
(Our priests and Turks who fast in Lent
Or Eamazan, grow rude.)
15.
The latter, doubtless, fast indeed,
The former but abstain,
While all the luxuries they need,
They freely can obtain.




20.
They say that work is good for me,
For Tom, and Jack, and Dick,
But in their hands I never see
The spade, the plough, the pick.
21.
They say that we should toil, and work
To earn our daily bread,
I’d rather be a heathen Turk,
And damn’d when I am dead.
22.
The devil’s invention labour is,
Work must abound in hell,
“In heaven there’s rest,” and therefore ’tis
For this I there would dwell.
23.
Our Parliament in conclave meet,
Still wrangle day by day,
“ The needy, seedy, greedy set”
Like jackals o’er their prey.




28.
Of happy and contented men,
Who were these lands their own,
The state more revenue would gain,
Than from these wilds unknown.
29.
I’ve read the fable of the dog,
Which in the manger lay,
We act like him, or stupid hog,
And settlers turn away.
30.
Tor now we neither use these lands
Ourselves, nor will allow
Men with stout hearts, and brawny hands,
To dig them, or to plough.
31.
Whereas if freely given to those,
Who’d grub, and plough, and sow,
Our wilds would blossom as the rose,
And better times we’d know.


32.
But tis’ the same, where’er I turn,
All’s hollow, insincere,
There’s right and wrong, the right wo spurn,
The wrong most men revere.
33.
Then if my betters thus go wrong,
And gain by doing so,
I, who am of the vulgar throng,
Cannot the right way go.
34.
I will not work, but henceforth play—
The workers are but fools,
The wise make them their natural prey,
And use them as their tools.
35.
And so will I. I will not work,
But on the public prey,
All duties I will shirk, or burke,
Unto my dying day.
Eureka! now hurrah!!


Extempore.
[ON SPENDING AN EVENING WITH MISS—, AT HER
FATHER’S HOUSE]
/OCVOO*
(VJ p (jAYE seen Tier in tbe ball-room sbine,
S I Surpassing all in every cbarm ;
I . yßut seen at home, she is divine, —
V )( °\ / -A® angel in a mortal’s form.


Lines,
WRITTEN APTER READING REVELATIONS,
21ST CHAPTER, VERSE 4TH.
OPE not for perfect bliss on earth,
Qr ||fgl| Eacb has some cross to bear,
/ r (((^9 Tho happiest mortal from his birth,
Of grief must bear a share.
Yet life has also got its joys,—
Health, wealth, and peace of mind
Await on all the truly wise,
For God is ever kind.
Then wherefore is there so much woe,
Why bliss so rare a sight ?
Men are not wise, nor will be so,
Ev’n when perhaps they might.


B’ indulgence errors grow more strong,
If curb’d they weaker grow;
Men know the right—prefer the wrong,
And this a cause of woe.
But soon will dawn a brighter day,
Then all our sorrows o’er,
“ Our God shall wipe our tears away,
And death shall be no more.
All sorrows past, we’ll weep no more,
For nought can give us pain,
All former things are pass’d away,”
And Heav’n and God remain.


Extempore.
Sq(?) NEVER have pray’d for wealth, or fame,
f CS> Nor ever have ashed for length of life,
/ m 7 pray’r has been for a spotless name,
1 Lif J ) Good health, content, and a faithful wife.
XjJ Whether Heav’n has granted my pray’r, or no,
It is for others, not me to tell;
' ' The second is granted I certainly know,
But this is a theme where I may not dwell.
Good health is a blessing so great indeed,
Without it all blessings are little worth ;
Wealth gives no pleasure in our time of need,
And where is fame when we’re laid in earth?
But content is a blessing of greater worth
Than Australia boasts, or far-famed Peru,
A gem seldom found by the sons of earth,
“ The Koh-i-noor” shines with less brilliant hue.


He who's content is a Croesus indeed,
A Eothschild near him a beggar may be ;
When man’s wants are supplied what more can he
need, —
While from wealth’s many troubles he’s free ?
Then if Heav’n but grant my pray’r above,
I never need ask, nor wish for more,
Earth will be an Eden, a bower of love,
Where I with my harp will God adore.
Yes, the praise of God on my harp I’ll sing,
And who can seek for a theme more high ?
My grateful heart will His praises ring,
Till in earth’s cold bosom I calmly lie.
Yes, Death at last shall come as a. friend,
My existence chang’d, but my soul not dead,
My God will my guardian Angel send,
By whom to Him shall my soul be led.
And there I’ll join the unnumber’d throng,
Hymning the praises of God most high,
Myriads of voices join’d in one song,
While all the Spheres stand listening by.


Yes, Angels on Angels, Cherubim
On golden harps in our bright abode,
Shall all unite in one glorious hymn,
To our great Creator, King, and God.
Eastern Marshes, May 25th, 1864.


Extempore.
[ON A LADY PRESENTING ME WITH A ROSE.]
(^O-ZcX
lovely rose from thy fair hand
O (|j CN Is now grown doubly dear to me ;
Thy touch, like that of magic wand,
Hath made it still more lovely be.
Behold it placed in my fond breast,
An emblem of my faithful heart :
My truth to thee let it attest;
Like me it droops from thee to part.
And who can part from thee unmoved ?
I’m happy only where thou art;
And shall I be for this reproved ?
Ah ! who can quite control the heart ?
Let colder souls, and frigid breasts
Condemn what they can never feel;
For me, my fate with thee now rests, —
’Tis thine the wounds thou giv’st, to heal.


Stanzas.
rf^'V)
M aIJ/OW seldom true love is repaid by affection!
I / blm! \ i Love’s softening influence some never feel;
/[ (250 jyS'ome seemingly love, but on closer inspection,
At Hymen’s altar tbey bright hypocrites
kneel.
But those are thrice blest, who with rapture possessing
The persons they love above all in this life:
For me—could I choose —I would ask but this blessing,
To love, and be loved, by a fond faithful wife;
Who’d soothe me in sorrow, and share in my gladness,
Whose fond heart with mine would in unison beat,
Whose smiles would dispel from my bosom all sadness,
Whose councils would aid me when dangers we’d meet j
Who would be the latest my faults to discover,
The last to condemn, and the first to forgive;
Whose form, like an angel’s, around me would hover,
And by her example instruct me to live.


Whose heart would bo pure as the snow on the mountain,
As free from all sin as a mortal’s can be ;
Whose hopes would be drawn from religion’s pure fountain;
Ho hypocrite, as, alas! many we see.
To the failings of others forgiving and tender;
Who would not feel pleasure in marking their slips :
To deception a stranger; her bosom all candour;
Whose heart without danger might dwell on her lips.
Who alike would adorn a cottage or palace;
Contented whatever her station assigned;
Unacquainted with anger, untainted by malice ;
In person as lovely as faultless in mind.
But away with such fancies, ’twere folly to cherish
A hope so delusive, so fatal to rest, —
True love’s like a flower, which blooms but to perish;
We pluck it—it droops and decays in our breast.


Riley Jeffs' (the Bushranger) Last Thoughts.
come, my final hour is come!
{ C •n )And shall I fear to meet my doom?
AC )],\ jNo. Though the gibbet meets my eye
no sadder, breathe no sigh ;
mil (n Ml t^ 6 pain, I will not swerve ;
w w rjjjg d ea th j suffer, I deserve;
Nor would I, if I could, retain
A few short years of grief and pain,
Tor life has ever been to mo
Fraught with woe and misery;
A boon I never would have sought,—
Then why was I to being brought ?
Or, if to life predestined, why
But with ignominy to die ?
But since, e’en from my birth, endowed
With stronger passions than the crowd,
Who calmly through life’s stages go,—
Because they ne’er were tempted so ;


Can I bo blamed for what I’ve done,
When urged by such fierce passions on ?
Shall I, when these brief pangs are o’er,
Revive again—to suffer more ?
Can such, oh heaven! thy justice be ?
Oh! must I bear eternity
Of hopeless suffering ? in such state
’Twere mercy to annihilate.
Soon as my sufferings here are pass’d,
Oh ! could I bo with chaos class’d!
Mingled with nothingness, unseen,
And be, as I had never been.
This would my dying moments cheer;
’Tis life alone, not death I fear!


An Extemporaneous Address to Tasmania.
slumber, Tasmania, when dangers surround
fWM\ thee?
in lou till from ruin no conduct can
W — ?
Has the chill of despair with cold apathy bound
' thee ?
Are thy hopes of the future all laid in the grave ?
Ah! hope should bo never, oh! never, forsaken ;
Though ruin’s grim visage now stares in thy face,
Yet thy energies rouse, from thy torpor awaken,
And quickly thy present distresses will cease.
Wait not for thy rulers ! to them what’s thy sorrow ?
Dream not for a moment they share in thy woe ;
By affluence surrounded, hope smiles on their morrow,
While fortune at present to thee seems a foe.
Eemember, as winter by spring is succeeded,
So bright may futurity dawn upon you,
If sloth be abandoned, frugality heeded,
And you to yourself be but faithful and true.


The Old Maid's Song.
[WRITTEN FOR THE BENEFIT OF YOUNG LADIES.]
In lONCE was eighteen, and was lovely and fair,
Cu Though now an old maiden am I;
f,, jAnd then I was prized as a jewel so rare,
(V/A\Vl se brightness attracted the eye.
\Jj) (0/ Young Sandy first offered his heart and his hand;
All thought I would surely have him;
For graceful his person, and hroad was his land,
But —his whiskers were not in due trim.
Next, an Irishman offered a fond maiden-heart,
And he sighed as he gazed on my eyes;
He said that each glance was from Cupid a dart,
Which pierced him, and drew forth his sighs.
He told me my cheeks bloomed as bright as a rose,
Which spring doth with beauties endow;
He said I was fairer than lilies, or snows,
Which fall on the dark mountain’s brow.


He told me—but why should I tell what he told ?
I found him both constant and true ;
Yet I teazed him, and plagued him, until he grew cold,
And bade me a final adieu.
’Twere needless to mention who next did await;
To all I continued unkind;
But, alas! from experience I’ve learned too late,
Perfection no mortal can find.
Who seeks for perfection in woman or man,
Seeks that which can never le found;
But pardon the faults of each other we can:
Then life will go merrily round.
This maxim, young ladies! on you I impress,
You may learn a good lesson from me;
Oh! had I the knowledge which now I possess,
I would not an old maiden be.


Song.
I S&iSt IHOUGrH beauty captivates the wise,
V t|i / Though kings its slaves appear,
r * -would’st thou seek a nobler prize,
r/7 A \vV en a soul sincere.
Vjj) (uj I’ve felt the power of beauty’s eye,
And could each glance revere,
But now ’tis not for such I sigh,—
’Tis for a soul sincere.
An angel’s form, with seraph’s grace,
How bright and sweet soe’er,
Awhile may charm—but soon gives place
Unto a soul sincere.
But where, oh! where can such be found ?
Where hides a gem so rare ?
Truth whispers, “ Such in heav’n abound;
Earth holds no soul sincere!”


Heki's War Song.
QC&DO
\Oj MjASTE to the tattle field,
/ «pj| X Warriors brave!
I r\r\ yLet no base heart yield
I )( °\y To he a slave.
The foe is before us—
X 7 Fiercely we’ll fight;
Heaven watches o’er us,
Guarding our right.
Our ancestors brave
Look from on high;
Who bends as a slave
Ne’er meets them on high.
Those heroes of old,
Who won bright renown,
In the earth may lie cold,
Yet their spirits look down.


The deeds they have shown us,
Shine bright from their graves;
As sons they’ll disown us,
If we become slaves.
Our children and wives
Each coward will scorn;
Then worthless our lives,
If as slaves we return.
Then let us ne’er fly,
While a foe shall remain;
We’ll conquer, or die;
Glory waits for the slain.


Song.
✓OooQv ,
C^H! I have never fondly loved,
D Q Save once, in boyhood’s days;
Although my heart may still be moved,
When beauty meets my gaze.
But never, never can I love
As I have loved before!
No charms have now the power to move
Those feelings felt of yore.
I gazed with rapture on her eye,
I trembled at her touch,
She seemed an angel from on high;
I fondly deemed her such.
Time has not yet dissolved the charm,
Which bound me in its spell:
She’s wedded—yet my heart, so warm,
Its passion cannot quell.


Though many a year hath pass’d away
Since her I bade adieu,
Still doth her image with me stay;
Tears but my love renew.
Still, still, upon my boyish truth,
I look with fond regret;
The flame thus lit in early youth,
Will burn till life shall set.


Ode to Affliction.
\U G/ODDESS with the marble heart!
?S Affliction! whose envenom’d dart
/ \ Fills human breasts with grief and woe,
\f A°W Hast thou at length become my foe ?
)[J Behold me, then, prepared to bear
All that thou canst inflict of care.
7 Hurl all thy ills, of every hue;
Thou may’st depress, but not subdue.
My soul will rise superior still,
Triumphant over every ill:
With ev’ry shock ’twill firmer grow,
And scorn thee as a feeble foe.
Think not, stem Goddess! e’er to see
A fawning suppliant in me.
Housed by oppression, now I brave
Thy fiercest wrath —nor mercy crave ;
But do thy worst; misfortunes fling;
Perhaps I’ll own that thou canst sting.
So insects, bred by summer’s heat,
Which we may crush beneath our feet,


And kill by thousands, though they die,
We own they can their lords annoy :
As powerless thy most bitter sting,
From me ’twill no submission wring.
Though thou may’st give a transient pain,
My soul its strength will soon regain.
Elastic, as an archer’s bow
Springs from the hand which bent it, so
My soul will thus new strength attain,
And thou shalt feel thy efforts vain.
O’er every scene of future ill
I feel that I shall triumph still.
But, hark! whoso voice is that I hear ?
My Guardian Angel’s hov’ring near,
Who softly whispers, “ I am nigh;
Thy grief has called me from the sky.
Why murmur thou at Heav’n’s high will,
Thou who, even now, art favour’d still ?
All human ills are kindly meant;
By Heav’n in love, not anger sent.
E’en deep afflictions are of worth;
They help to wean the soul from earth,
And lead to brighter realms above,
Even to eternity of love.
If perfect bliss were found on earth,
And man quite happy from his birth,


Say, could the thought of death be borne,
From happiness so rudely torn ?
That thought would every bliss destroy,
Embittering deep all human joy.
Then be content, and murmur not,
Whate’er may be thy future lot.
If woes be thine, submissive bend;
Be sure they have some useful end;
But if from such thy lot be free,
If cradled in prosperity,
Oh ! more than ever then beware,
Adversity has no such snare ;
For Satan then has double power,
To tempt thee in unguarded hour;
To lure thee from the paths thy youth
Has trod, and farther still from truth.
But, oh! let all thy care be given
To tread the path which leads to Heaven;
Thy duties carefully fulfil,
And I will bo thy Guardian still.”


Song.
I , j|sl jAEEWELL! we must part; o’er the ocean
Q J Thou shortly wilt wander away;
r osom now beats with emotion,
\/J A \VI While for thy safe passage I pray.
vxJ If virtue, true worth, and religion,
Can shield their possessors from harm,
Alike unto thee were each region;
Thou never need’st feel an alarm.
But weak are all words in expressing
The thoughts in my heart which arise;
Ah! ’tis when we part with a blessing,
That duly that blessing we prize.
But, farewell! we must part, and for ever,
Thy duties forbid thee to stay;
Then go to thy friends, and may never
Misfortune appear in thy way.


Old to Spring.
L
|||J| sweetest season of the varying year,
S |y|3j N All beauteous Spring! clad in tby robe of
I Q?/Q | green;
I °\ yAt tby approach the opening flowers appear,
And Nature in her loveliest garb is seen,
gipcg What joy to tread the pregnant earth 1 ween!
s 7 And taste the blessings God on man
bestows.
Now bright mimosas deck’d in gorgeous sheen
Bloom all around, and teeming nature shows
Th’ beneficence of God, whose bounty overflows.
2.
Now swarms of bees burst from each busy hive,
T’ extract the honey from each opening flow’r,
They teach mankind how industry does thrive,
And of frugality display the power;


Man squanders time, and till his final hour
Knows not its value ; insects seem more wise,
The ant laborious, far and wide doth scour,
And drags along with toil its heavy prize,
While man looks on the scene with scarce observant eyes.
3.
Now bleating lambs on every side are seen,
See how they play with harmless mirth, and glee,
Thus innocence hath ever happy been,
While vice, and guilt must sad, and wretched be.
These are the pleasing rural sights we see,
At this sweet season when we walk abroad;
Creation’s wonders make all doubts to flee,
Make sceptics bend to their Creator’s nod,
And with reluctance own the omnipotence of God.
4.
Where’er we turn His wondrous works we see,
On earth below, or in the boundless sky,
WTiere worlds in myriads roll in harmony,
Directed all by His omniscient eye;
These know their paths, nor from their orbits fly,
Th’ abode of beings nobler far than man
Some doubtless are. All nature doth deny
That God made aught in vain : all those who scan
Creation, must admit utility the plan.


5.
And thus I deem that all those orbs on high
Are peopled with inhabitants to suit
Each separate sphere. With intellect more high
Than man on earth some stand in high repute,
Others inferior: so beneath our eye
Link joins to link from insect to the brute,
From brute to man: from man to angels, till
We stop at infinite perfection still.
6.
Thus stars on stars but countless worlds appear,
(Our own amongst the least,) each one th’ abode
Of myriads of blest beings; every sphere
With those best suited to its orb endow’d,
So order’d by a life-diffusing God,
Author of good in nature’s wondrous frame,
And tho’ at times we feel His chastening rod,
Tet mercy guides its use: our good His aim.
If not quite blest man is himself to blame.
7.
Tet what are men ? th’ ephemera of a day,
Mere atoms of creation; yet how vain
These petty insects of their transient sway.
“ Lords of creation” is their lordly strain,


As if there were no limit to their reign,
But lo! to-morrow sweeps them to the grave!
Few can their dearest wishes hero attain.
Impotent alike is wealth or power to save
The hero, or the sage, the coward, or the brave.
8.
Man buds in youth like flowrets in the spring,
In manhood blooms like flowers in summer’s prime,
And age like autumn ripest fruit doth bring,
Till death like nipping frost in winter time
Binds with his icy bands. Ah ! could we climb
Beyond the grave to see what follows then,
How we would glow with ecstacy sublime,
And see how vain are the pursuits of men,
And fill’d with love to God, should ne’er offend again.
Termte, Sept. 13th, 1847.


A Hymn on the Glorious Works of God.
view with awe-struck eye
/■ /£»« -v God’s works with wisdom rife,
/ r\r\ yProm those bright orbs that deck the sky,
\ I )\\ / m i crosc °pi c life.
Above, below, on every side,
(S’ Each, perfect in its kind,
God’s works proclaim thro’ nature wide
One great omniscient mind.
There, myriad systems roll on high,
And suns unnumber’d shine,
So bright the scene man’s feeble eye
Shrinks from the sight divine.
There’s nought too vast, there’s nought too mean,
Beyond, beneath His care,
There, mighty orbs: here, mites unseen,
Alike His goodness share.


Oil! had lan archangel’s tongue
His glories to proclaim,
Then should God’s wondrous works he sung
In burning words of flame.
September 19 th, 1859.
HUNTED AT THE “MEKCUBY” STEAM PEESS OFFICE.
