

Poetic
Reflections
in
Rhyme and
Reason
BY E. T. SHORLEY.
RECORD PRINT TO CO TLD [?]SHAMPTON.


INDEX.
Pages.
1. How I Began to Write I —2
2. My Mate Bill 2—3—4
3. The Mascot 5—6
4. The Mosquito Pest 6
5. The Cockies Lament 7
6. Reply to Cockies Lament 7—B
7. What Some People Say 8
8. Winton to Longreach 9—lo
9. Interstate Cricket, Q’land v. N.S.W., at Brisbane,
1922-23 Season 10—11 12—13
10. Price Fixing 13—14
11. Knee Deep 14—15
12. Old Father Time 15—16
13. To a Friend 17
14. The Fall of Life 17—18
15. A Case of Licensed Gates 19
16. Starvation House 19—20—21
17. A Letter I once Wrote to my Friend, my Readers
may find Interesting . . . . 21 22—23
18. Looking Back a Little 23—24—25—26
19. Farewell to Ulam 26—27
20. Neither a Borrower nor Lender Be 2 7
21. The Span of Life 23
22. Poor Old Mat 29
23. In Memoriam (to one who did her duty) . . . . 29—30
24. Kyogle 30—3 1
25. The Outcast 31—32
26. Sing to me of Sunshine 32—33
27. The Valley of the Tweed 33—34
28. Jogging Along the Highway 34
29. Broken Friendship 35
30. The Gamble of Life 35—36
31. The Clermont Flood 36—3 7
32. Mostly Political 3 7—38
33. Political Advice 38—39
34. Should this be so Australia 39—40
35. Wake Up Australia 40—4 1
The following verses were written while the big
guns boomed in the Great War.
36. Australia I Love You 41—42
37. Where the Kaiser s Dream was Shattered . . 42—43
38. Dedicated to the Ex-Kaiser “The Fallen
Champion” 43—44—45
39. How Did You Lose Your Leg 45—46
40. The Lost Swaggy 47
41. Fly On t 48
Dedicated to the late Sir Ross Smith and com-
rades in recognition of their flight from Eng-
land to Australia.
42. We Meet in Peace 49—50
43. Victory and Peace 50—5 I


POETIC REFLECTIONS IN RHYME AND REASON.
“HOW I BEGAN TO WRITE.”
I used to be a dunderhead, a pudden-headed chump,
Till once a curly-headed cove came feeling of my bump;
Said he, you are intelligent—l said to him it’s rot —
He felt again about my head, and seemed to know a lot
He sat and smiled then stroked Jiis beard, then studied me
a while.
And all the time I fancied round his mouth I saw a smile.
He felt my pate a little more, then mused, as if in thought,
A twinkle in the corner of his eye, I though 1 caught.
A useful avocation, yes, he said, should be in store.
If 1 would only take a pen and ink. I’d write galore;
I looked at him and said my friend, you're surely off the
mark.
Advice like this at two-and-six, 1 tell you seemed a nark.
Phrenologist, I think you said, you called yourself, old
man.
Please tell me something sensible, I hardly think you can.
Imagination seems alright, it’s easy now to see.
You’re out to catch a mug to two, I don’t think you’ll
catch me.
The man stood up and looked at me, he said you seem
a fool,
I made a move to knock him down, but kept my temper
cool;
It seemed to dawn on me he knew a bit about his trade,
Profession you may call it as his case he fairly made.
I felt amazed to find that he, could tell me I had missed
An avocation which, he said, would put me on a list;
Where men of fame could only get, an honour don’t you
see,
As well as lots of silver which would just about suit me.
Well, something seemed to tell me, that by chance the
man was right.
Although it seemed absurd to think that I could really
write,
I paid a half-a-dollar and when leaving me he smiled,
But after he had left I thought, oh, what a simple child.


I took my pen as he advised, and wrote, then wrote again.
At first 1 got disgusted, for it seemed to be in vain;
I visited some editors, who scanned my stuff and said.
Your work is hardly up-to-date, but, still 1 went ahead.
The one word perseverance, kept me busy night and day.
Sometimes I felt discouraged, but at other times felt gay;
At last I wrote some verses which a famous Bulletin
Have published in their journal and my fame will now
begin.
I think I now have told you how I first began to write.
I’ve just about explained to you the way I had to fight;
'Twas grim determination roused my interest, and then
I overcame all obstacles, with paper, ink and pen.
The incidents you now have read, have you the moral
caught?
Or has my lesson been in vain, in simple language taught;
Some confidence and energy, some patience and some will,
Then if you try you may succeed, you never will until.
“MY MATE BILL.”
A tale to you I’ll now relate, about a chap I once called
mate,
Twas in the west I first met Bill, at lots of jobs he
showed some skill.
But one day Bill began to fail in health, that’s why I tell
this tale;
To-day he said I feel quite sick, I’ll stay and cook instead
of Mick.
We left Bill in the camp that day, ‘twas the twenty-first
of May,
Of nineteen hundred and nineteen, on cooking Bill
was rather keen,
I said, how will you mix it up? Oh go, said he and stone
the pup—
I’ve cooked before and can again, you cock-eyed blinky,
blanky swain,


A little curry and some rice, I’ll mix them up and make
it nice—
When you return to camp old boy, ye gods that feed you
will enjoy
The damper I will now discard, it drys so quick and gets
too hard.
Yeast bread, quite light, I’ll it rise, behold the treat
before your eyes.
That suet hanging on the wall, I’ll chop into some pieces
small.
I’ll mix it up with fruit and flour, think of the dainties
you’ll devour;
It's simply duff I’m going to make, and watch with joy
as you partake,
A luxury in life should be, in store, you bet, for you and
me.
The old corned beef that looks so tough, will be, 1 think
I’ve said enough—
As tender as the chick in spring, my praises you will oft
times sing;
This day will linger on your mind. I'm thinking fate to you
weis kind.
When you decided 1 should cook, I’ll do that job just
like a book.
Remember, yes, and well I may, when I returned tc
camp that day,
The curry and the rice was there, enough for me and
some to spare;
My mate was mixed up in the stew, with dishes choice
and rather new,
He semed surprised that rice would swell, oh my Elisa
Isabelle.
I looked at him, he said why stare? I said your cooking
seems quite rare,
Just tell me how you learned your skill, at cooking rice
and curry Bill;
I took the little pot he said, but strike me pink and blue
and red,
1 only filled it three parts full, don’t laugh you fat head,
take a pull,


The stuff began to swell you know, and soon I had an
overflow.
You ignoramus, stop your laugh, your dirty mullock and
your chaff;
I filled that bucket and that tin, to waste I thought would
be a sin,
But still it rose up higher, higher, and bubbled over in the
fire.
The bread I heard you of Bill? He looked at me
just fit to kill.
Those hops were made of dynamite, they blew the bottle
out of sight;
Like rice they soon began to rise, the cork has gone up to
the skies.
I’ve had enough of yeast and dough, its up above and
down below.
And Bill, 1 said, about your duff? Don’t rub it in he said
too rough.
While I was looking to the rice, I burnt the pudding,
burnt it twice.
The water boiled away too fast, I had to chuck it out
at last,
That tract I said would be in store, has disappeared, I’ll
cook no more.
But Bill, 1 said, the beef is right? But when I looked, oh,
what a sight,
Instead of soft and juicy meat, ’twas curled and hard like
camel’s feet,
The fire had raged, the water boiled, as with the rice
poor Billy toiled.
Duff, bread, and beef, oh, what a stew, forever he that
day will rue.
Well, Bill. I said, you’ve had some fun, you’re like the
tucker, over done.
I’ll make a Johnnie quick you’ll see, and then a damper
after tea.
Bill sighed a sigh of great relief, he’ll cook no more its
my belief,
The joys of life may pass away, but not the mem’nes of
that day,


“THE MASCOT.”
About some nice young fellows, who around our table sat
And entered into arguments, and talked on this and that;
I met them at Mclnness,’ the story goes that way,
’Twas just by chance 1 met them there, one bright and
shiny day,
I learned to like their table talk* I also liked their style.
As some remark would rise our mirth, and pleasantly be-
guile
The moments as they parsed away, while good things
passed inside
Their mascot was a cockroach, who could never be
denied.
This mascot used to sit beside our comrade brother Lou,
And chirrup little melodies, a lot this mascot knew;
He could not talk, but signs he made, and beckoned tor
the jam,
He thrived on butter, cheese and bread, and liked his
plate of ham.
He’d hop upon our table, and he’d dance upon our plate,
And trail his slimy carcase over everything we ate;
The relish that he placed thereon, upon my mind was nice,
He flavoured up the curry and he flavoured up the rice.
The only name I ever heard, for him, was darling pet,
The sight of him got on my nerves, I hated him, but yet
Upon the wall a notice hung for any one to see,
That he the mascot was to live, in peace and harmony.
With those who at that table sat, the notice also said.
That board had been paid up for him, and that he must
be fed,
I often wonder as I roam, of all the things he shared,
I would have killed him, yes by jove, if only 1 had dared.
He used to lick the dishes with a little yellow pup.
Between the two they did the job, and saved the wash-
ing up;
We talk of labour saving, but this mascot and his mate,
They solved the slavy problem, and they did it up-to-date.
I left that place disgusted, for I could not stand that
roach,
He used to ramble nightly, and upon my pillow poach.
His whiskers used to tickle, as he crawled beside my
cheek,
And gave me icy shivers, I could feel them for a week.


Ah, well, it does not matter, they can have their roachy
pet,
I have found a decent shingle, which is keeping out the
wet;
The roach may have his quarters, with the notice on the
wall,
A timely end may find him, in the soup he soon may falT
But I’ll ne’er forget that mascot, and his cunning little
ways,
I never saw his equal, and the knowledge he portrays.
The cook may find him handy, when she sees him wash-
ing up,
His whiskers curled and happy, with the little yellow pup.
“THE MOSQUITO PEST.”
Mosquitos, yes, they’re here alright.
They buzz and sting and bite all night;
And if you sit upon a log.
They treat you worse than any dog.
In towns these pests are bad enough,
But in the bush they treat you rough.
With bayonets fixed they make their charge.
These insects fear no smoke barrange.
An army of twenty million strong.
They keep on moving one along,
With lustful vigor they attack.
In clouds at sunset, grey and black.
No camerflage can keep them back.
They stab one all along the track:
If one should falter by the way,
A million takes his place they say.
It's hard that we should have to bear
These pests that make us curse and;swear;
Oh, why should God these pests create.
Which man and beast all simply hate.
Some day a scientist may find
A way to rid these pests unkind,
That we may go to bed at night.
And sleep without mosquito bite.
6
POETIC REFLECTIONS


“THE COCKEYS LAMENT.”
The cows are in the clover, and the crows are in the corn,
The cockies’ lot is hard to bear, it makes him feel forlorn;
He rises in the morning, and he ploughs his farm again.
Then watches every passing cloud, and wishes it would
rain.
His pumpkins they are falling’off, his spuds are shrivelled
too,
The sun has scorched his lucerne up, he knows not what
to do,
The flies are here in millions, while mospuitoes spoil his
rest
When he lies down to sleep at night, with fleas another
pest.
Ihe politicians wiangle, then put on another tax
The poor old cockie’s pretty soft, that’s why he gets the
axe;
The flying foxes take his fruit, the dingo takes his sheep.
His pigs get cramp and fever, and it makes him moan and
weep.
Then rain comes down in torrents, and he thinks he’s righ'
at last,
But flood rails all have disappeared, his day-dreams they
are past;
Misfortunes, yes, his portion are, this man upon the land,
I tried it once and chucked it up, I did not understand.
“REPLY TO COCKIES LAMENT.”
They talk about the cocky, and the race he has to lun,
Of hardships that he suffers, they recall them every one.
But they never tell you beef is up, and the price is far toe
high.
For people living in the town, it makes you sigh, oh my.
The townsman asks the price of chaff, and told ten pounds
per ton.
He says the price is far too stiff, and knows he’s being
done;
The maize crop is abundant, but the cockies formed a
ring.
And when you ask the price of it, oh, what a bitter
sting.


Potatoes too are plentiful, the crop was good this year,
He’ll make a fortune out of them, it seems to me quite
clear;
His melons they are juicy, yes, but a bob a go
The Townsman’s share is not too large, as wages are too
low.
His cream cans they are plentiful, they’re all along the
line,
At every little stopping place, I wish that they were mine;
His sorgum and his millet, and his pumpkins flourish too.
While tomatoes by the dray load, help to rise the cockies
screw.
His pigs are fat and lazy, and his fowls lay eggs by scores.
But cocky is a greedy man, he swears and tears and roars,
But he is not so simple as the most of us would think.
His bankbook shows the reason, he is loaded up with
jink.
WHAT SOME PEOPLE SAY.
Some people say that I am mad, because I’m fond of
writing,
It's better far than hanging round and wasting time by
skiting;
1 do not say its poetry, because I am no scholar,
But think by chance the stuff’s alright, it may be worth a
dollar.
In some of it the sentiment is rather good I’m thinking.
At it my troubles I forget, instead some would go drinking
At it some pleasure 1 can find, while writing little snatches,
It helps to cultivate the mind, and smooth the rugged
patches,
If they can beat me they may try, they’ve pen and ink and
leasure.
They 11 find it interesting, and it may become a pleasure;
We each have got a lot to learn, life’s but a stormy ocean.
So up and do your little turn, to keep the world in motion.


WINTON TO LONGREACH.
Once more we are on our journey wend, and turn another
weary bend.
The car speeds out from Winton where the wind blows
hot o’er prairies bare.
The sun o’er head with cloudless sky, sheds rays of haet
that makes us sigh—
It’s over a hundred miles to go, to Longreach, what a
drive, high O.
Our car mates pass the time away by singing songs both
wild and gay,
Ae merrily o’er the track we sped, the car ran well the
driver said;
As up each rise and down each dale, he opened up and
made her sail.
And one by one each mile was past, with shades of evening
falling fast.
The emus and the roos looked shy, as on we sped and
passed them by.
These graceful creatures looked quite grand, but us they
did not understand;
While birds of plumage bright and gay, in radiance passed
their time away,
Beside the dusty endless track, upon the dreary plains
out back.
A lake of water like a sea, in fancy, far away you see.
But it is just a mirage cheat of dazzling haze and fiery heat.
While far away the mountains rise, and seem to link up
with the skys,
We now are far along the track, and drawing near the
halfway shack.
We here enjoy a light repast, the day has turned to night
at last,
Our driver once more takes the wheel, and on again be-
gins to steal;
With confidence this man of nerve, steers on with ease
from curve to curve,
O’er creek and rivulet and dell, he knows his work and
does it well.
9
By E. T. SHORLEY.


We now are near our journey’s end, we’ve turned the last
big crooked bend.
The lights of Longreach loom in sight, and fill our hearts
with new delight;
The Thomson bridge now lies behind, the hand of fate to
us was kind,
Misfortunes none with Cobb and Co., if way out west
you want to go.
INTERSTATE CRICKET, QUEENSLAND v. N.S.W.
At Brisbane, 1922-23 Season.
Between the teams of N.S.Wales and Queensland there’s
a match,
In progress on the 'Gabba ground to-day;
The stalwarts of the southern state, are disconcerted sore,
And tied up with our bowlers all the way.
Remarks were going freely on the score that they would
make.
Five hundred was the mark I heard one say—
But when they faced our bowlers who were fairly on the
spot,
They tore them down in fashion blyth and gay.
Their knock put on one-forty in a painful kind of way,
Macartney was the only man to stay;
He punched and smote our bowlers in a style to please
the gods,
And noble was his effort in the fray.
But Horny had him thinking, as with ginger and with skill
He plugged the ball with vigour and with might,
Till this hero faced a trimmer, which he did not under-
stand.
Which took his stumps and filled us with delight.
The rest was easy-going, for our Barstow found a spot,
While Ayers our brilliant field held out his hand,
And took each catch with pleasure in a manner I suggest
Was perfect, and the compliments were grand.
Five hundred said our critic, by the powers but I was out,
Our boys are proving foemen, look at that—
As one by one each batsman, tried, and failed, then
marched away,
I heard the critics heart go pit-a-pat.
10
POETIC REFLECTIONS


Then Queensland took the creases, but their start was
rather poor,
Another critic ventured just to say
With luck they might get fifty, it will take them all their
time,
For Queensland lacks good batsmen here to-day.
But Thomson came in smiling, with a confidential grin,
Which tokened he would give a good display—
He let the wrong-uns pass him,'while he smote the right
ones hard,
While Billy Rowe looked set and there to stay.
The game was interesting, and our critics smiled and
cheered,
As one by one the runs commenced to pile;
But Mailey plugged consistent till he trapped our Thom-
son out,
This Mailey man’s a terror to beguile.
But Billy kept on smiting, with great confidence and skill,
Until he passed the fifty mark by two;
Then trying for a three’er he was thrown out from the
field,
He played the game as only good men do.
The game is all surprises, and one never knows the luck,
Those southern men are mighty in the field;
They throw the ball like lightening, and as straight as men
can throw.
But still we trust a decent score will yield.
With fifteen runs to catch them, and four wickets still in
hand.
There’s little more to tell to you to-day.
But come along on Monday, and a treat should be in store,
I think you'll see some interesting play.
Monday’s Play.
I mentioned big surprises, and it seems that I was right.
These N.S. Welchmen have their work cut out;
Our bowlers have them thinking, they seem tied up all the
way.
As one by one, they turn them right about.
Their giants went to pieces, our attack was far too strong,
For pep and ginger here were both displayed.
Macartney could not fathom where the ball came from
again.
As once more on the wicket he it played.


Their lesser lights seemed anxious, only Hendy seemed at
ease,
He played some Stirling cricket to my mind,
But Horny took his measure, and his wicket, hip hurrah—
Although it may have been a bit unkind.
They put on just two hundred, it was up hill all the way,
They had to strain and scratch with all their might,
For foemen such as these, who hold traditions at the
game,
They cut a sorry figure in the fight.
The Quensland boys were batting, when the light began to
fail.
And so they turned the job in for the day,
It’s even money betting, who will win now as it stands,
If each can keep his foeman hard at bay.
The critics lost their balance, as they sat and held their
breath,
They seemed to be non-plussed, commenting strong,
To-morrow they will tell you when they see ten wickets
down,
They knew the final ending all along.
I do not share their wisdom, for one really never knows,
I give our boys a chance it’s even sure,
I think they’re going to do it, for they seem the goods to
me,
Seven and two hundred’s not too big a score.
The clouds may damp their ardour, but the sun may surely
shine,
To-morrow when they once more take their stand.
And if they only do it, we’ll enthuse, and roar and shout,
A victory would be immensely grand.
Tuesday.
The fates have been against us, it had rained well through
the night.
The clouds are looming black again to-day;
It’s just the sort of weather that those N.S. Welshmen like.
The ground will help the bowlers all the way.
Later.
But fate thecr uel watchdog, nailed his colours to the mast.
The wicket proved too wet for them to play;
The honours now are even, but its rotton luck you know
That rain should come and spoil the play to-day.


The critics looked disgusted, and one ventured to remark,
They ought to pay our tram fares home again;
Its just the dizzy limit not to carry on the game,
For such a little drizzle of a rain.
But criticising cricket, and each player warps the mind.
They make remarks they do not understand,
Its only men of science, that can talk with common sense,
Our Queensland boys have'done their duty grand.
“PRICE FIXING.”
The poultry yard has been on strike, for quite a long
time now.
And caused the price of eggs to soar and rise.
The rooster looked disgusted, as he strutted round the
yard.
In vain attempts to catch the pullets eyes.
But they were quite disdainful, and equality of sex.
Demanded from the lordlings of the pen,
They held a mothers’ meeting, and discussed both ways
and means,
And carried motions up to nine and ten.
But Mr. Price Commissioner arrived and said that he
Would regulate the eggs they all should lay,
As one of his conditions was to regulate the trade,
And fix the price consumers had to pay.
He called the hen committee, and he listened to each bird,
And then in August tones he made reply,
The price is now three shillings for a dozen of your eggs,
To me it is absurd and far too high.
Now to justify my billet, and this court where I preside,
And show the people I am fair and square,
I order you to lay your eggs, reduce the price by half,
Now go, refuse my bidding if you dare.
So now you hear a cackle as you pass the poultry yard,
The price of eggs is dropped to one-and-six;
And its all through that commissioner who talked to
those old hens,
And countermanded all their little tricks.


Eggs, eggs, eggs me on the drop,
Not because the market has a glut,
Not because consumers are not using them to-day,
But the fact remains they-ve had a cut.
Mr. Price Commissioner has made his duty clear,
That’s the reason they are coming down.
Now the hens are cackling and laying every day,
Instead of holding meetings in the town.
“KNEE DEEP.”
For a long twelve months we had watched the sky.
And the plains laid waste by a glaring sun;
With the creeks and swamps and the billybongs dry,
While the last of our stock died one by one.
When a storm came down, and the scene was changed.
And a cooling stream in the creek ran by—
So 1 went for a bath, but it looked too deep,
While a little frog chimed knee-deep near by.
Knee-deep, knee-deep said this little young frog,
As he sat on a log beside the creek,
I went for a bath for the drought had broke,
Knee-deep, knee-deep, said the frog with a squeak.
’Twas the annual bath when the floods came down.
But the creek looked to me just a bit too deep;
So I turned to go, for I could not swim,
But the little frog croaked knee-deep, knee-deep.
I turned once again as I heard him say,
It is just knee-deep, have a bath to-day;
So I peeled my togs ’neath a shady tree,
As the frog still called knee-deep my way.
I ventured in with a cautious step,
The little frog watched from a nearby log;
So I paddled along in the waters cool,
When I heard go back, from a wise old frog.
Go back, go back, said this wise old frog,
But the little frog chirped knee-deep, knee-deep;
I heard them both and it made me think,
For the little frog still kept on knee-deep.


While the old frog said take my advice,
Go back, go back, or you’ll make a slip;
The old frog seemed very wise to me.
So I dressed once more and I took his tip.
As you go through life you jvill hear a voice,
Which will say go on it is quite alright;
But another voice says be careful lad.
It’s the man that’s in you then must fight.
If you ’list to the one it may lead you wrong,
So list to the two, then make your choice,
For there’s always one that will lead you straight.
So do not start till you hear that voice.
“OLD FATHER TIME.”
If old father time should beckon, and his finger came my
way.
If he said come on old fellow, 1 am wanting you to-day.
If he said my earthly troubles would be over very soon.
He would send me on a journey, it would take me past the
moon.
If he said your bundles ready, come now take it on your
back,
I am waiting now my hearty, just to point you out the
track;
If he said please do not tarry, I would have to move along,
I would say just wait a minute, while I sing another song,
If he said that he was calling, and he simply could not
wait,
He had marked me down to vanish, I was numbered on
his slate;
If he pointed up to heaven, and 1 saw a crown of gold,
I would still hang on and argue, in a manner brave and
bold.
If he said I’ve booked your passage, I would still not want
to go,
To the regions he had mentioned, he could cancel it 1
know,
If he said his time was precious, I would still hang on and
smile,
I wets never in a hurry, I would still say wait a while.


I would say pray scratch my number, if its thee upon
your slate,
Try and hold the matter over till a more convenient date;
There is lots to do around me, I am busy now you see.
There are others to consider, who depend a lot on me.
If he still kept on demanding. I would still put up a fight,
And by chance I would defeat him, which would fill me
with delight;
What a joy to come up smiling, what a pleasant thing is
life,
Though at times we have our worry, and at times a little
strife.
If he said its most important, that a vacancy was there,
And he pointed with his finger, to a cosy corner chair;
And explained to me its comfort, with a future bright and
gay.
I would still keep on advising, it would do some other day.
If he said now hold your horses, wait a while till I ex-
plain,
I would still keep spuring onward, in the hope of time to
gain;
I would try to crush the barrier, he had placed across ray
track,
There’s a race I'd like to finish, ere on earth I turn my
back.
When I’ve passed the storm and tempest, and the sun
shines bright and clear,
In the shadow of life evening, I will leave my old friends
dear;
Then the battel may be over, and the vie’trie may be won
I w.TI gladly join old father, with the golden s-Vcing sun.
As it sinks behind the mountain feu: away down in the
west,
I will gladly take his welcome, as I lay me down to rest;
I will pass the golden portals, if the track leads past that
way,
But until my duty’s ended, let him call another day.


“TO A FRIEND.”
You laugh at me. and jest and joke.
And fun and mullock also poke—
No doubt I often make you smile.
To chaff and badger is youy style;
To you, it lends a graceful charm,
It does not reuse a false alarm;
To me, because I know your ways,
Your face is like bright sunshine rays.
I know you like your little fun,
Your tongue at random seems to run,
It gives me pleasure when 1 see,
Your face all smiles and full of glee;
Good fortune favoured you my friend.
May it continue to the end,
The sweets of life are rich and rare.
To some, life is a load of care.
So now once more I’m on the track.
Smile on my friend till I come back,
The trail is hard, the road is rough.
The battles long, the fight is tough.
With laughter gay, may you live long,
Will be my morn and evening song:
And as I wander on my way
I’ll think of you where ere I stray.
And dangers 1 will face quite brave,
While kindest thoughts from you I’ll crave.
With jokes and riddles, song and jest,
I trust, quite long you will be blest.
When I return, I hope to see
Your face which is so dear to me.
And now farewell, just for a while,
And in my dreams I’ll watch you smile.
“THE FALL OF LIFE.”
You fall in life in many ways,
It's hard to miss a fall;
Perhaps its down a cellar deep,
Or from a treetop tall.


Perhaps you slip upon a peel,
And find the fall severe,
But never fall in love you know,
With May or Amy dear.
The fall of man in Adam’s days,
Was simple to my mind;
The serpent laid the trap for him,
The brute was most unkind.
The fruit was in the garden.
In the shape of Eve to taste;
So Adam got enamoured,
With his arm around her waist.
To fall, is but the way of life,
There’s oft some bitter slip;
To races you will sometimes go.
And get the straight out tip.
But all at once you find the horse
You’ve backed is running stiff;
You've fell and lost your bit of cash.
If you'd have known, just if.
Another way you sometimes fall,
By chance you meet a friend,
Who tells a tale of poverty,
And asks if you will lend
A small amount of money,
As he’s nearly on the brink,
Of ruin and destruction,
But you find it went in drink.
Of course its’ pleasant when you fall
Upon a dear old friend.
Who has a quiet simple way,
And to your whiles will bend.
You say this is the life for me,
And cut a merry dash,
As long as he is sparring up,
He’s fell —you’re on his cash.
’Tis but a weakness of mankind,
So take my word, beware;
Or in the darkness you will find,
You’ve fell into a snare.
To fall it may quite easy be,
You land there with a whack.
The chances are if you have fell,
You’ll never wriggle back.


“A CASE OF LICENSED GATES.”
To-day I heard an argument, a case of licensed gates,
Between some neighbours who I think are not the best of
mates, •
’Twas at the Fitzroy Council, and O’Shanesy was there,
To hear each side as they held forth, he ably filled the
chair.
Our old friend Mick O’Connor had for licensed gates
applied.
Upon a road that leads across towards the river side;
He proved his case by stating that by fencing in his run,
The water all would be fenced out, inside there would be
none.
O’Rooke, said Mick, you’re very mean, too mean to build
a fence.
’Tis not the water troubles you, its silver, gold and pence.
While Murphy stood with glaring eye, and Morgan
shook his fist,
Contortions of the latest, yes, his body seemed to twist.
Well, argument was plentiful, as each side told his tale,
Macnab said no, no gates would he, allow across that trail.
Hold on said John O’Shanesy, you’ve put your case with-
draw,
But Morgan gave a nasty leer, as he passed through the
door.
I studied out the case a bit, and all that I could see
O’Connor’s neighbours had him set, because of jealousy;
The evidence against the case looked very weak to me,
They held it over for a month, an election on you see.
“STARVATION HOUSE.”
I once stayed at a boarding house
They called the place first-class;
I do not wonder now the cause,
Or why the people pass.
No sav’ry smell entices them
Inside that place austere,
So now I’ll tell of things I missed—
The things that give good cheer.


The dressing bell rang merrily,
Each morn at half-past seven.
But morning tea ne’er came our way,
And none came at eleven.
A light repast at 1 o’clock
We took, to cheer the soul.
But nothing more till six o’clock,
So reefed our belt a hole.
On Saturday the rooster crowed—
On Sunday he was dead.
They stewed him tender, luscous bird—
For boarders must be fed.
On Monday came the chicken soup.
The bones were gathered there,
Economy was studied sure,
To make our first-class fare.
No pickles ever came our way,
No vinegar we had.
The face of those that stalked around
So frigid, sour, and sad.
I never tasted salad there,
No cake adorned our board;
I tightened up my belt again,
And smiled just like a lord.
Bananas, yes I We had none there,
The fruit display was poor;
I wonder as I roam along
We did not ask for more.
But being bashful people now.
The belt we pulled again,
It seemed absurd to think that we
Should ask and cause them pain.
In genteel misery we stayed
And pulled our belt again;
The first-class fare was killing me.
And causing others pain.
The silver looked so bright to me
As silver always should.
But still my strength was failing fast,
So left there while I could.


I paid my two pounds five, I did,
Protesting loud and strong;
It my become the theme, perhaps,
Of yet another song. •
For poets must have themes to write,
And they must be quite new;
They may be found in houses where
There’s nothing much to chew.
I hied me back to second-class,
Where one can get a fair deal;
Where one can loosen up the belt
And tighten with square meal.
Where smiles adorn each face I see,
And sunshine paves the way,
The things that count in life with me
And helps me on each day.
o
"This is a letter I once wrote to my friend, my readers
may find it interesting.”
Dear Jim, your note addressed to me —
Came safely and I‘m pleased to see.
The clouds have burst, you’ve had some rain.
And things look bright with you again;
Your offer L decline with thanks, 1 now have
Joined the artists ranks,
I trust your crop of spuds are good—
As you expect I understood.
I used to walk behind the plough,
I tilled the soil, and milked the cow,
I also dug with spade and fork,
While now 1 carry a bag and talk;
1 once rose at the break of day,
When birds sang in their sweetest lay,
I reared my kids to country life.
And brought them up ’mid scenes of strife.
What times I had upon the land.
Fighting pests a farmer grand;
Of which I’ll not enumerate —
I’ve cleaned the lot right off the slate.
It’s pleasant now as I with ease.
Can sing my song and try to please,
Instead of ’neath the blazing sun,
See crops and stock die one by one.


But still I never did complain,
Quite certain it would be in vain,
It mattered little, drought or flood,
The ground burnt bare, or sticky mud;
We shared the joys, and spurned the sad.
We mixed the good up with the bad,
It’s all a part of life’s long track.
That menders in, and out, and back.
I well remember when we went,
To cricket and the times we spent.
We played a better game by far
Relating at the hotel bar.
How once we used to sneak a run—
Of matches lost, and matches won,
Those days are still upon my mind,
Although we’ve left them far behind.
My pony Jim, I used to ride.
And amble miles and miles beside;
Your chestnut mare has seen his day,
He’s old and stiff and worn and grey—
No more he’ll gallop o’er the plain,
Or climb the mountain spur again.
But soon will amble o’er that track
That knows no turn, or wanders back.
Ah me, I started just to rhyme,
A line or two to kill the time;
But memories of the tall gum trees.
And many other things that please.
Have crossed my mind, and spured me on
With interest I look upon
The incidents we both went through,
And how we battled, me and you.
You’re still upon the land old chum,
I trust bright days to you will come;
That in life’s evening when you rest.
With peace and comfort you are blest.
That joy may end a perfect day.
Just as the sun’s last golden ray.
Lights mountain tops and bushlands dell—
The golden rays we love so well.


This note is written in a style,
I trust will bring to you a smile—
That you will scan each line with care,
And as a critic treat me fair*
And as I’m drawing near the end,
My greetings to old friends I send;
So now I close with thoughts of yore,
The days long past, that are no more.
“LOOKING BACK A LITTLE.”
I am looking back a little, as my mind is on the roam,
I am thinking of the hardships, as a youngster when at
home,
I can see my father toiling, what a picture to my mind,
I can see his brow all wrinkled, in my visions far behind.
I can see him in the stockyard, I was just a careless kid.
As he built the yard and cow-bails, with my eldest brother
Syd;
1 can hear them at the planning, as they talked of milking
cows,
Of the horses and the pigstyes, and about six breeding
sows.
I can see the flat before me, in a bend beside the creek.
Father said he’d clear ten acres, it was easy so to speak:
He would leave the big gums standing, he would ring
them so he said,
Then when times were slack he’d burn them, very quick
when they were dead.
Syd. was only fourteen summers, then came Nell and
Bess and me.
And our little baby brother, who 1 fancy now I see;
We were happy then as children, as we understood no
care,
But as mother often put it, we would someday get our
share.
Father bought a dozen milkers, saying they would help
to pay
Just to keep the house in tucker, while he paved and
carved the way;


While he cleared the land and fenced it just he said
to get a start,
Nell and Bess could do the milking, Syd the fencing stuff
could cart.
Things looked bright and we were happy through
the summer days so long.
Father building hopes and castles, joyous as the birds
in song;
Up at daylight in the morning, mem’ries of those days
arise.
Visions of the past are present, in my mind it never dies.
Years of toil and bitter hardship, ended in a sudden
drought,
I had paddled out of childhood, and was just a lanky
youth;
First came blackleg in the poddies, then came fever in the
swine,
In the horses came the strangles, causing them to droop
and pine.
Then the creek gave out of water, so we had to sink a well,
Crops were dead and cattle dicing, nothing on the place
to sell;
Storms of dust and wind around us, how we had to work
and fight,
Troubles now came thick upon us, morning, afternoon
and night.
Well, said dad, its no use crying, now’s the time to burn
those trees.
That ten acres will be ready, for the plough by slow
degrees;
You and Syd can get the rifles, go and shoot some
kangaroos.
That will keep the tucker going, and a fellow from the
blues.
Well, dad started at the clearing, grubbing down about
two feet,
Then he snigged some timber round them, toiling through
the summer’s heat;
After which he lit the fires, then he lit his pipe and
smoked,
Looking on with satisfaction, as the fires he stoked and
poked.


But the Roo’s were shy and wily, Syd and me they
seemed to know,
As we sneaked around to shoot them, gracefully they’d
hop and go:
So disgusted with our mission, once again we took the
track,
There was lots to learn at shooting, 1 remember looking
back.
When we landed home at sundown, things were looking
rather bright.
For a big old gum had fallen, and had set the fence
alight;
It had fallen in the paddock, crashing right across the
fence,
Which was burning like a furnace, and the smoke was
rather dense.
Looking back I see poor father, standing in the withered
corn,
Not a smile upon his features, sad he looked and all
forlorn;
He was pretty even tempered, and he seldom lost his
head,
But I fancy now I hear him, and the language that he
said.
As he saw the palings burning, as he saw the grass ablaze,
Now I’m looking backwards, to the old selection days;
I can see poor mother crying, what a memory to my mind,
Looking hack is Riled with sadness, ah, those days now
far behind.
In the morning what a picture, not a vestage to be seen,
Of the paling fence and stockyard, only stumps where
they had been;
All around was still and hazy, and the sun was flaming
red,
As it rose above the hilltops, father wished that he was
dead.
Day and night the heat was awful, one by one the cows
all died,
I can picture dear old mother, with a broken heart she
cried:


Years of toil had gone for nothing, poor old dad it filled
with rage,
He had wasted half a lifetime, he was now quite grey
with age.
Our selection was a failure, we were tired of the land.
We had started out with vigour, thinking everything was
grand;
Now the place is desolation, ruin marks the spot to-day;
And I linger looking backwards, to the day we came away.
Disappointments, loss and failure, to the land we said
good-bye.
Packing up our load of trouble, father heaved a long
drawn sigh:
Gently mother tried to cheer him, but he pined away and
died.
Leaving us to fight the battle, mother now lies by his
side.
Here’s my story looking backwards, on those mem’ries of
the past,
Fighting failures and misfortunes, breaks the heart until
at last
In the evening of our lifetime, after years of cruel pain,
After years of toil and hardship, mem’ries bitter oft re-
main.
“FAREWELL TO ULAM.”
Farewell, farewell, to Ulam fair,
I leave thee now to ramble;
You’ve been my home for many years,
But life is but a gamble.
I’ve tasted joys and pleasures here,
I’ve also tasted sorrow,
So on 1 pass from day to day,
We know not of the morrow.
A lump arises in my thraot.
To leave my friends behind me;
Fond mem’ries of the past spring up,
I trust that they will cheer me.
My thoughts as o’er the track I wend
Will oftimes fill my leisure.
And bring contentment to my heart,
I trust in fullest measure.


The stormy sea of life is rough,
But what’s the good repining,
Behind the clouds that look so black,
There’s oft a silver lining?
So at the helm I’ll always stand.
And brave life’s stormy ocean.
The laggard never reached a goal,
So I will keep in motion.
I may return to you no more,
1 know not where I’ll travel,
For twisted skeens are now at hand,
They look hard to unravel.
But to the right I trust I’ll keep,
And always do my duty.
To brighten up the darkest hours.
With pleasure, light and beauty.
“NEITHER A BORROWER NOR A LENDER BE.”
It’s bad to borrow and bad to lend.
With anyone who you call a friend ;
It strains relations when you meet,
Or makes you take a most lonely street,
It prays upon your mind all day,
If one has borrowed and cannot pay,
You dream in restless sleep all night.
Your mind is in a most parlous plight.
It’s bad to lend or borrow cash,
To speculate in some venture rash;
On paper one is apt to say—
I’ll borrow for this it ought to pay.
To raise a loan and mortgage all.
With interest in three months to fall,
But calculations may get mixed,
With difficulties you may find you’re fixed.
It’s better to strive along through life
Than borrow and face such daily strife;
It’s better to keep a life long friend,
Than ruin him with some cash you lend,
For many a man’s in straits to-day.
Through borrowing cash he cannot pay,
So follow the rule and save by thrift.
Instead of borrow and boom and drift.


THE SPAN OF LIFE.”
This life is but a fading flower,
As day by day and hour by hour,
We raise our castles higher, higher.
Let us to noble things aspire.
The hand of fortune guides us on,
And steers us ever and anon,
Fate, bitter fate, is with us too
And shows the things we should not do.
This life is but a narrow span,
Lets toil and do what ere we can,
To straighten out the rugged bend,
That helps the weary to the end.
That joy may fill his soul at last,
And show the dangers he has passed.
Upon this raging seething tide,
Where some have fallen and have died,
This life rolls by on fleeing wings,
Its beauties lie in all the things
We do to ease the load of care,
Of these who have more than their share.
The journey may have pitfalls deep,
And craggy mountains rough and steep,
But forward march with vigour new,
And leave behind the foes you slew.
Then at the close of life’s long day,
A silver lining with a ray.
Of pleasure bright, will then appear,
To bring us comfort and good cheer.
And be a guide to those who stay
Behind, to carry on the fray.
To mark upon the sands of time,
Their footsteps noble and sublime.


“POOR OLD MAT.”
Poor, poor old Mat, yes there he lies,
Nobody laughs and no one crys,
And where he goes or how he fares,
Nobody knows and no one cares.
The day was when quite young was he,
And ladies smiled so charmingly,
As he passed by with grace and ease.
Or in the style go as you please.
He’s lost his blythsome foot step now.
And has a careworn wrinkled brow;
He’s blazed the track, has poor old Mat,
Beside his dear old comrade, Pat.
The scorching sun has tanned his skin.
As laurels new he marched to win,
But fate to him has been unkind,
He’s left the joys of life behind.
His gait is stiff, his shoulders bent,
His mind is on the years he spent;
When in his youth he used to sing.
And to his friends great pleasure bring.
Those mem’ries now oft bring a smile,
Which brings some pleasure for the while,
But now old Mat is old and grey.
The poor old chap has seen his day.
“IN MEMORIAM ”
“To one who did her duty.”
Mingled with sorrow, grief and pain.
Ah, me, I take my pen again;
One life is past, one life is past,
The trumpet called she heard its blast.
Beyond the care of human hand,
She’s passed into the happy land.
Credentials such as she could show
Not many take from here below.


Mingled I said with grief and pain,
Thank God her life was not in vain;
But, oh, that hour, that passing hour,
That took her from all earthly power,
Has left a void, ah, who can fill,
Her post of honour, strength and will.
Can we forget the wondrous way.
She worked in failing health each day.
Feble these lines of mine in praise,
Of her, who’s passed beyond the maze;
Eternal rest, eternal rest.
In comfort now her soul is blest.
Her duty grand she nobly did,
Heroically till she was bid
To leave her post, with heartpangs sore,
The post she loved, to fill no more.
Mingled my feelings here to-night,
To think of her who was so bright.
Away, away in paradise.
I see her now, with glistening eyes,
With outstretched hands, prepared to greet
The ones she loved on earth to meet.
She’s revered, loved, and sorely missed,
But to the call she had to list.
Mingled my feelings, ah, what fate,
She now has passed the golden gate;
No shame to see the tears that rise,
And dim the vision of our eyes.
We fain can part, or well afford
To loose her who was so adored;
But over on the shining shore,
We hope to see her face once more.
“KYOGLE”
1 have wandered over mountain slope and plain,
I have marched through glen, and travelled life’s long lane,
Many patches have been even, though quite many have
been rough,
Now I’m landed at Kyogle in the rain.


In the future there’s a chance, I’ll come again,
But I trust the sun, will drive awafy the rain;
For the people seem quite happy, in this glen among the
hills.
Where the sun comes through the clouds now and again.
When the sun shines at Kyogle once again.
And this heavy cloudy weather, slush and rain,
All have varnished for a little, leaving skys of azure blue,
There'll be joy around Kyogle once again.
When I’m sitting at my leisure in the train,
Passing thoughts of you Kyogle will remain;
Through the clouds of life that linger, I will watch for
rays of hope.
Just as you will watch for sunshine after rain.
“THE OUTCAST.”
Standing alone in the gathering gloom,
Slipping the deck ’neath my feet;
No one to cheer me, an outcast am I,
Where is the friend I can greet.
Bitter the tempest that rages within.
Mingled my thoughts of the past;
Ah, but the sting of remorce, how it kills
God but how long will it last.
Out on the ocean of sorrow I drift,
Here, in the sea of despair;
Tossed by its waves, with the pangs of regret,
Where is my haven, oh, where.
Riven my sails, with no harbour in sight,
Billows are driving my craft.
Is there no life line, to pull me to shore,
Show me, oh, show me a raft.
List to the cry of the birds as they pass,
Fleet is their wing in the gale,
Swiftly they’ll fly, to the cliffs high and safe,
Watching my storm battered sail.
Glaring my eyes, as I look thro’ the maze.
Oh that 1 never was born;
Give consolation to one in distress.
Do not reproach him with scorn,


Night doth approach, with the darkness I dread.
How can 1 stumble along—
Fleeting the moments, and weary am I,
Where can I stand firm and strong.
Withered my hopes, show a bright beacon light.
Steer me in safety to rest;
Where I can cling, while the waves toss and roll,
Carry me over the crest.
Early at dawn there’ll be wreakage around.
There as you walk on the beach;
Once more the sight of the derelicts fate,
God, what a lesson to teach:
When 1 embarked on ocean of life.
Trim were my sails and the sea,
Smooth as a millpond, no tempest in sight.
Smiling the world seemed to me.
Breakers were there but 1 heeded them not,
Drifting along with the breeze:
Taking no heed of the warnings 1 saw.
Slowly I went by degrees.
Out ’mid the whirlpools of pleasure and life,
Hurtling along with the gay,
’List to the story, an outcast am I,
Think of the price I must pay.
Now I am shattered, and past the recall.
Soon my last stave will be smashed;
Soon I will roll to your feet on the shore,
There by the waves to be lashed.
Down in regrets to despondency deep.
Battered the wreck now you see;
All that is left of the man 1 once was,
All that is now left of m?.
“SING TO ME OF SUNSHINE.”
It was sunshine, golden sunshine,
That brought visions to my mind.
So I wrote this song of beauty.
While 1 listened to the wind.
Each were telling me a lesson,
In its own mysterious way.
There is joy if life in sunshine,
Fanned by breezes day by day.


Let me take away a picture
Of the sky so blue above,
Let me take away fond mem’ries,
Of the faces that I love.
May the shadows fade before me,
That my vision may be clear.
While you sing the song of sunshine,
'Tis so soothing to the ear.
When I’ve crossed life’s rugged mountain,
And have passed down through the vale;
When I’ve cast my earthly anchor
And I’ve furled my topmost sail.
When 1 close my eyes in slumber.
Let no tear bedim the eye,
Smile and sing the song of sunshine,
It will sooth me where I lie.
Then I’ll lie in sweet contentment.
In the sweetest of repose.
As your voices break the stillness.
With the strains my mind well knows.
In the chorus I’ll be joining.
Then the gloom will fade away,
If you carry on your faces,
Beaming sunshine day by day.
“THE VALLEY OF THE TWEED.”
In the Valley of the Tweed I love to ramble,
I have searched afar for beauties grand and rare;
But I linger in this valley it’s a dreamland,
1 see nothing in this world that can compare.
It’s away, yes far away, in fair Australia,
It was angels planned and featured it one day;
It’s a fairy land bewitching and enchanting,
What a memory to carry as I stray.
Artists’ pen could paint no picture worth comparing,
Singer never sang a song I love so well;
As the birds that sing and warble in that valley.
Where I listen to their music in each dell.


There is glory in the beauties of this valley,
There is glory in each vine and tree that grows;
’Tis a scene of grandeur rich and all inspiring,
Full of happiness, contentment and repose.
Like a sentinel on guard I see Mt. Warning,
So majestic over all that she surveys;
What a destiny below lies in that valley.
And of loveliness a vision it portrays.
“JOGGING ALONG THE HIGH-ROAD.”
Jogging along the highway, jogging along the road,
Singing a song of gladness, cheerfully with our load;
Wearing a smile of triumph, giving a word of cheer.
Helping in times of sadness, happy to know we’re here.
Happy to know we’re useful, jolly to be that way,
Lingering in the sunshine, watching its golden ray:
Driving the clouds before us, keeping them well ahead,
Watching the silver lining, after the storm has fled.
Jogging along the highway, climbing its craggy height.
Watching the mile posts vanish, watching them with de-
light;
Scanning the distant skyline, stepping along with ease.
Getting a little nearer, getting there by degrees;
Looking back o’er the valley, seeing how much we’ve won,
Seeing how far we've travelled, under the blazing sun;
Weary but not defeated, stumbling now and again,
Looking towards the summit, knowing its not in vain.
Jogging along the highway, courage will pull us through,
Setting our face to hardships, taking the task anew;
Never a moments falter, never a doubt may be,
If we would reach the summit, doing it manfully.
Many have gone before us, using a strong right will,
Reaching the spot they cherished, right on top of the hill.
Those are the ones that conquered, under the heat of day.
Jogging along the high road, jogging along the way.


“BROKEN FRIENDSHIP.”
One look, a sigh, a sad good-bye,
Farewell, farewell, we part, but why
A long and cherished friendship broke.
The parted threads create a yoke.
Of agony and wild despair.
Into the void I stand and stare;
And think of the days now far behind,
Fate, bitter fate, has been unkind.
I worship not a shrine of gold,
True friends to me are wealth untold;
A silken thread, so frail, but strong
To show the right, and spurn the wrong,
The tide rolls on and sweeps away
The castles built but yesterday,
'Tis cruel when we pause to think,
What bitter draughts we have to drink.
“THE GAMBLE OF LIFE.”
What is life, ’tis but a gamble,
Dreary if you make it;
Lonesome if you drone around, but
Break the spell oh break it.
Joys are these just for the asking.
Pleasures by the score,
Paradise lies right before you,
Troubles are no more.
Life is there if you with vigour.
Move with rapid stride;
Freedom of the soul enchanting,
Rising with the tide.
Mem’ries of the past forget them,
Make your future bright;
From your shoulders cast the burden,
Work with all your might.
Step into a life of sunshine.
Look at nature grand;
Watch the rising sun at morning.
Lighting up our land.


Watch the flowers with dew drops sparkling,
Watch them after rain;
Do not worry over trifles,
Up and try again.
Listen to the birds in springtime.
Sing their sweetest lay;
Music to the weary traveller.
At the close of day.
Hear the ploughman as he whistles.
Toiling up the field;
Turning up to sow for harvest,
Crops the land to yield.
See the bright and merry twinkle,
Of a starry night;
Gaze upon the silvery moonbeams,
Shedding radiance bright.
Nature teaches you a lesson,
Will you learn it say;
Stir youself and show you’re worthy.
Cast dull care away.
That is life, just try the gamble.
It is worth the stake;
Move along through life’s long journey.
History you’ll make.
In the evening after sunset.
At the close of day.
Life to you has been a pleasure.
Happy, bright and gay.
“THE CLERMONT FLOOD.”
Oh work of nature, why should you
The work of God and man undo,
At Clermont on that awful night.
And leave her in such sorry plight.
Agast, and ruined, torn, destroyed.
With storm and tempest you employed.
Ah, me, of what an awful gale.
Some never lived to tell the tale;
The floods came down and spread alarm.
They never thought of death or harm.
Disaster no, they little thought
How it would set their work at nought.


But 10, the creek soon over-flowed,
the torrent tearing down the road:
Seething and raging might and main,
While heroes went and came again,
A lady fair both brave and bold,
Saved lives quite reckless, we are told.
At daylight what an awful scene,
They never thought it could have been
Their little town which once was there.
Had disappeared, the place was bare.
And all around lay desolation.
Could we but give them consolation.
The lives of men and women went.
To eternal rest we trust they’re sent;
Their earthly joys and cares are done,
The race of life they each have run,
What sacrifice you had to pay.
Oh Clermont, on that awful day.
“MOSTLY POLITICAL.”
The vagaries of men are strange, their passions and their
wiles.
They sometimes near bring me to tears, at other times
cause smiles;
Each one will use his argument, and thinks that he is
right,
The one that is a socialist, is putting up a fight.
He’d equalise our money, and he’d equalise our work,
Each one would have to do his share, and no one have to
shirk ;
For riches then no one would crave, and no one would be
poor,
Each one would share life’s luxuries, just equal and no
more.
The man with speculative mind, the gambler who with
luck
Would very soon be on the track, with no more fleece to
pluck.
The man that is ambitious, and would like in life to rise.
Would be about the equal, of the man that never tries.


The man that is inventive, yes, would throw his tools
away,
He would not study problems out, on equal rates of pay;
The day of cast and colour, would be wiped clean off the
slate,
No more would you object to have, a nigger for a mate.
The one word international, includes the Chow and Jap.,
Or any other coloured race, you’d find upon the map;
Our system is not perfect, but its hard to tell just now,
How we can alter it and live in peace with out a row.
“POLITICAL ADVICE.”
The politician comes along, and says go on the land.
And tells you of your chances there, and says the pros-
pects grand;
He works it out on paper, how much corn you ought to
grow,
But never reckons up how much is taken by the crow.
The cockatoo is also there, and wants his little share,
The politicians oily, and addresses you with care;
He tells you of potatoes, its the crop to make your pile.
By putting in a ton or two, without a blooming smile.
He never mentions hairy-jacks or bandicoots or rats.
Who all expect to have a cut, just think, then, raise your
hats,
He also tells you dairying is just the thing to pay.
If you are not a laggard, and rise at the break of day.
He knows how much the cow should eat, and how much
she should drink,
Then figures out the price of cream, with paper, pen, and
ink;
He says you ought to test them, and just here he’s pretty
right,
But never says a word about, you working day and night.
The politician is a man, who knows just to a zac.
How much it takes to start a farm, and how much you get
He’s proved it by statistics, quoting figures by the score,
He’ll roll them off in millions, showing profits by galore.


He never talks of floods or drought, or fever in the swine,
Or nutgrass in the lucerne patch, not on your life nor mine;
He’ll talk of brands and implements, in catalogues he’s
seen.
It seems to' me once on the land, he thinks you cabbage
green.
He’s just an opportunist, who would like your vote to
catch,
Then just show him you are equal, and are to his wiles a
match;
So farmers do not heed his tales, but when you reach the
fence.
Just have a yarn to farmer Jones, and talk some common
sense.
It’s imposition with the man, that keeps him where he is,
It’s up to you from A to Z to show you know your biz;
Then on the next election day, you’ll do your duty grand,
By putting in a man who your, conditions understand.
“SHOULD THIS BE SO AUSTRALIA.”
When you’re very poor but clever, in this sunny Austral
land,
And ability you show at every turn;
When you try to show your genius with new ideas in life.
Or make some new contrivance or concern.
When you try to show the public, you have energy and
skill
They make remarks that make a fellow sad;
When you try to make improvements that will ease the,
path of life,
They wag their heads and whisper you are mad.
But it costs one hundred millions to import what we require,
Each year we live I tell you, understand.
While the articles we purchase we could manufacture here,
For we have the raw materials in our land.
But the foreign brain is scheming, while we idle out our
time,
And our cash collect with satisfaction grim;
While we wrangle over politics, or to the races go.
To waste our wealth, and satisfy a whim.


Should this be so Australians, I think you all say no.
But study out the reasons and you’ll find
That we have been neglecting many things that we should
do.
And surely to our interests are blind.
We’re basking in a paradise of slumber and repose,
While others do our thinking and collect
They’re looking on complacent, while we dream away our
time.
And reaping what we lose through our neglect.
Now Australians, consider, use the talent we possess.
If a man has good ideas give him a hand;
Do not sneer and whisper softly, he has ’possum in the
brain,
For that man may be important in our land.
If he’s poor, but he’s inventive, help him on with all
your might,
He is working for Australia so should you;
If we stand in line together with a mighty, mighty pull.
It is wonderful the many things we’ll do.
“WAKE UP AUSTRALIA,”
Oh, happy Australia, fair hunting ground,
Bold sportsmen are watching and stalking around;
With tongues that are oily, and plausable ways.
They are scouting around to see how the land lays.
They are here from America, here from Japan,
And any old country to show us they can
Supply us with all sorts of things ’neath the sun,
They are laying out baits, and are loading their gun.
Last year they did splendid, their haul was sublime.
They paddled along with good reason and rhyme.
Near one hundred million, they captured I’m told.
No wonder we’er poor with the loss of this gold,
When 1 study these figures, it makes me feel crook,
And into this problem, we surely should look;
And warn off these sportsmen from our sunny land,
We can do it by working, and do quite grand.


Then let not our heroes who fought for this land,
See is used as a dump, by this Ikey Mo band;
Who are casting their net, with the hope of a catch,
Let us show them Australian’s with them are a match.
We can meet, and defeat, them by playing the game,
Australian ideals should be our one aim.
To build our young nation, they’ll then recognise.
We see in our country the worth of our prize.
Then wake up Australia, and let the world see
We have our resources and ready are we
To build up a nation industrially free,
Depending on no one from over the sea;
Who globe trot the universe markets to find.
Too long we have been to our interests blind;
Let us stand by each other, then easy ’twill be,
To turn down the bagmen from over the sea.
o
The following verses were written while the big guns
boomed in the Great War.
“AUSTRALIA, I LOVE YOU.”
Weary and lonely and far, far from home,
Thinking of loved ones away o'er the foam,
Mem’ries arise of a soft sighing wind,
Away in the bush and old friends so kind.
Oh for the verdure of hillside and plain,
Radiant with dewdrop, or soft falling rain;
Out 'neath the wattle of yellow and gold,
Australia, your sons, long again to behold
Hourly they wonder away at the front,
Shifting their quarters from stunt upon stunt;
Booming with gun fire, with shell after shell,
Dropping around them, oh horrors of hell.
Wading thro’ slush, as they hear cannons roar,
Grim is the battle, and savage the war;
Hungry and footsore, oh, why should it be,
Australia the fairest, they long to see thee.
Cautiously moving and peering around,
Or bounding along o’er shell riddled ground;
Anxiously waiting and watching the foe,
Down in a dugout, so deep down below.


Holding on grimly to ground they have won,
Seeing their comrades drop out one by one;
Fighting for justice, so far o’er the sea,
Australia the fairest they long to see thee.
Fierce is the battle, so angry and long.
After its over we’ll join in glad song;
Once more to see you, their own native land,
Joyful the meeting with old friends so grand.
Eager to meet, and we’ll greet them with cheers,
Mingled’with laughter, with sorrow and tears;
Never again from their country to roam,
Australia the freeest, their own native home.
“WHERE THE KAISER’S DREAM WAS
SHATTERED.”
Old Kaiser Bill came out to kill,
Said he, I’ll give no quarter—
He said, I’ll march through Belgium gay
And make a bloody slaughter.
I’ll show the world the German might.
And cross both hill and river
As on I march with sword and gun
Agast, the world will quiver.
He thought the Belgians would not fight,
How quickly they’ll surrender—
We’ll march our legions o’er her soil.
In twain we soon will rend her.
We’ll treat that nation with contempt.
While England looks in wonder;
Her army is too small to fight,
That’s where the British blunder.
We next will overcome the French,
Her channel ports demolish.
Reduce her forts in one wild rush,
And then will capture Paris.
With God our guide as on we march,
And threaten England’s glory,
Her navy we will soon destroy,
Too late, will be her story.


But Belgium barred the way at Leige,
And caused some consternation;
Why violate our land? said they,
Destroying our small nation.
The answer came in shot and shell.
While canons roared in madness,
That nation which was happy once,
Is mourning now in sadness.
The brutal Hun moved on in pride,
All glory and ambition;
To over-run the French they thought
Would be a small condition.
But British men and guns were there.
The flower of England’s nation,
Beside the gallant French they fought,
With grim determination.
They met the foe upon the Marne,
By ten to one out numbered;
The German host recoiled and fell.
In reckoning they had blundered.
Their rush was stayed, the tide was turned,
The Kaiser’s dream was shattered.
When he retreated from the Marne,
His legions torn and battered.
The Kaiser woke, his eyes were sad,
His heart was dull and heavy;
His vanished hopes had left a sting
Those tolls he could not levy.
That lust of conquest in his soul,
Like fire was slowly burning;
While he, in agony could lie,
His punishment descerning.
“DEDICATED TO THE EX-KAISER.”
(The Fallen Champion).
There rode upon a spectre undismayed,
A mighty stalwart champion all arrayed
In gorgeous trappings, decked with sword and gun.
With lustful eye to conquer and o’er run
A peaceful world in slumber and repose—
Untramelled, not a thought of cruel foes,
Who rallied to his standards floating grand.
Before the breeze, the tyrants of his land.


They girdled on their armour swelled with pride.
Their clarion voice bade others stand aside;
With all o’er powering strength they marched away.
And drank then toast with Gusto to the day.
When in the breeze, with pride their flag unfurled,
Should flutter o’er a stricken ruined world;
While they with scorn, would rule in pomp and might,
These visions gave to them a wild delight.
No thought possessed their vision of defeat.
They marched in bold array their foes to meet—
Before this tide, or avalanch must fall,
All who opposed them, whether large or small.
With arrogence they mingled in the fray,
These legions sprang to arms without delay.
Believing nought could stay their hidious host,
With clinking glasses drinking to the toast.
But 10, they met a foe that barred the way.
Who thinned their ranks at Leige and caused dismay,
A foe that dared to spurn with bitter scorn,
And face the champions legions, though forlorn.
Until with savage blows and hellish fire,
They forced that valiant army to retire;
Not vanquished, no all honour to their name—
They still fight nobly, winning glorious fame.
One stage is reached, that champions hopes now rise.
He sees again the vision of his prize;
But there upon the Marne he meets the best
Of British troops that put him to the test;
While on his flanks brave Frenchmen rally forth,
He reels, retreats, with anger and with wrath,
His diagrams and plans, have gone astray.
And once again he stands, nonplussed, at bay.
With mingled rage once more he turns aside.
And fawns on God his army now to guide;
His thrusts are met, he sighs with ill contempt.
Of foemen such as these, he never dreamt.
But once again he plunges in the fray,
He strikes at Verdun, fails, in grim dismay,
Amazed he stands, downcast, in anger grim,
His cup is filling fast, up to the brim.


With dull remorse once more he strikes again.
But cunning plans all fail, 'tis but in vain;
The tide has turned, no more that callious boast,
No more his legions drinking to the toast.
No victory now, at last he sees defeat,
His mind lies now in thinking of retreat;
Defeated, ah, what fate, those mem’ries rise,
And fill with horror, all before his eyes.
Once Lord and king of all that he surveyed,
With hirelings scattered o’er the world well paid;
To engineer, and undermine, betray,
Thus building schemes in secret for the day
When he should stand triumphant over all.
And bid all nations answer to his call.
While he would rule in grandeur from his throne,
The mightiest monarch, ere the world has known.
That champion now has fallen from his throne.
And to an outraged world has to atone.
Denied the right to tread his native soil
Where angry threats cause him to now recoil.
No jewelled crown now sits upon his head,
But thornes of anguish prick his brow instead;
Dispised, rejected, in remorse he lies.
And vanished is the vision of his prize.
“HOW DID YOU LOSE YOUR LEG.”
How did you lose your leg friend, how did you lose your
leg.
I'll tell you boy it’s an awful tale, but patience I will beg;
Over in France I lost it,, lost it forever my son,
Lost it fighting for freedom, in a hard fought battle we
won.
Early at dawn came the order, charge with your bayonets
fixed,
Over the top with my comrades, I soon in the battle was
mixed;
How I remember that morning, just at the break of dawn,
All through the night we had waited, danger we faced
with scorn.


How did I lose my leg son, how did I lose my leg,
Why am I limping along now, here with this wooden peg,
There as I said before boy, just at the break of day.
Facing the German legions, keeping the foe at bay.
Death and destruction around us, there where the guns
blazed forth,
Hell —but we fought like madmen, grinding our teeth
with wrath,
Bayonets gleaming in thousands, as over the top we went.
Many a brave man sonny, to a heroes grave was sent.
Thats how I lost my leg son, that’s where I lost my leg.
That's where we played the game lad, that’s why I use
this peg;
There son the cannons were roaring, I fancy I hear them
again,
The struggle was bitter and savage, with bullets as thick
as rain;
Shrapnel was flying and bursting, comrades were falling
around,
As into the enemy trenches, we rushed with a leap and
bound,
Lost it and lucky to lose it, easy my head it could be,
Barely an inch and my forehead was smashed, here’s the
mark you see.
Easy to lose your leg son, easy to lose your life,
There ’midst the turmoil of battle, there in the midst of
strife;
You are a young Australian, and someday when you grow
big.
Someday you will do some reading, and into history dig..
Then you’ll remember my story, and then you will under-
stand,
Reading the tales of the Anzac’s, oh glorious noble band.
Proudly you’ll think of our heroes, proudly you’ll think
think of the slain,
Losing a leg was nothing, for justice I’d do it again,


“THE LOST SWAGGY”
The swaggy dragged his weary legs, just at the close of
day,
Thirsty, with water bag empty, toiling along the way;
The sun was sinking to westward, aslant were the hues
it shed,
Embers of day disappearing, fading those rays of red.
Alas, with the night falling fast, there on the sunburnt
waste.
Far, far away from water was he, tucker he had not a
taste;
Footsore, hungry, and weary, memories arose of the past,
Staggering on through the twilght, cursing the die he had
cast.
Exhausted he fell with a groan, no one to help him was
near,
Wandering thoughts of his childhood, thinking of ones
that were dear;
Hope for the future departed, despair filled his soul as
he gazed,
Far, far away at the silvery moon, shedding its heavenly
rays.
Caressed by the dew where he lay, worn by the rays of the
sun,
Feverish slumber and fitful, dreaming of treasures he’d
won;
Waking with starts as the night bird, mournfully screeched
o’er his head,
Woke by the howls of the dingo, praying to God he were
dead.
When morning dawned what a sight, staring and glazed
were his eyes,
His forehead with fever was burning, wailing and low
were cries;
They found him in time just to save him, once more to
give him a chance.
Now with the boys he is fighting, for honour and glory
in France.


“FLY ON.”
Dedicated to the late Sir Ross Smith and comrades, in
recognition of their flight from England to Australia.
Fly on, fly on brave heroes bold, fly on, fly on, through
space
You’ve flown through realms of mystery, and won a noble
race,
O’er snow capped peaks, and desert waste, and pierced
the inky way,
With daring skill and dauntless strength, and blazed a
new high way.
In days of yore we used to sing, of perils of the deep,
When angry winds and tempest caused great waves to roll
and leap.
But now we’ll raise our voices high, for those who dare
to fly.
Our song shall be in harmony, with those who scrape the
sky.
Our planets angels now are shorn of many a rugged bend
The track you’ve blazed, has many curves which lustre to
it lend,
It well portrays what obstacles our race can overcome,
When such as you calculate by diagram and sun.
The height to soar, the speed to go, to bank and beat the
wind,
To pierce great clouds, and fight against conditions most
unkind;
To regulate in confidence to know and understand.
To take your bearings, and to judge, just where and how
to land.
Your calculations all must be, correct, at lightning sped.
No argument, or mixed ideas, a masters mind indeed;
The honours yours, you’ve fought and won, and history
will name.
Sir Ross and comrades who flew home, and won such
glorious fame,


“WE MEET IN PEACE.”
Written at the close of the war, on the occasion of the
thanksgiving services.
We meet to-day to celebrate, our voices now in joy
vibrate.
In victory now we all unite, with heart and soul in wild
delight;
Our flag has stood the storm of Hell, for it our brave men
fought and fell.
They lie enshrined in distant lands, they gave their best
of life’s ebb sands.
They marched away, 'neath banners gay, it seems to us but
yesterday.
We said God speed a safe return, but knew that many
hearts would yearn.
For those that in the fight would fall, who gave their
life who gave their all.
We honour those who nobly died, and weep with loved
ones who have cried.
May we with tender care and mind, be ever to their loved
ones kind.
May we their darkness turn to light, and shield them with
a giant’s might;
The orphan who will see no more, the face he loved in
days of yore.
Let us be merciful and true, and help him on life’s path
anew.
The battle now is nobly won, our foes are humbled one by
one.
The world is freed a tyrant knave, we fought world’s
liberty to save,
For months and years our anguish swayed, but still we
fought quite undismayed,
Until at last we meet in praise, we’ve passed victorious,
through the maze.


Back to their homes and native land, those spared will
soon be marching grand,
As they come streaming to the quay, we’ll meet and cheer
them lustily,
No more they’ll roam in wild array to keep a savage foe
at bay,
Out gratitude is due to those, who met and crushed our
bitter foes.
Then let our mingled joys mid tears, guide us aright
through coming years,
That we may lead a noble life, now we have passed this
awful strife;
That we may know and understand, and take each other
by the hand,
As onward o’er the track we wend, in peace until our
journey's end.
“VICTORY AND PEACE.”
Grim was the struggle and savage the fight,
Over the tyrant of wrong, for the right;
Ah, but the mem’ries of those that were slain,
Thanks be to God, it was not all in vain.
After the shambles of hell, we have won,
Crushing down barriers strong, one by one;
Victory is ours, but the price that we paid,
God in his wisdom the scales justly weighed.
Bitter the struggle, but nobly we fought,
Clash against clash, with our nerves overwrought;
Fighting for freedom, oh, what should it be,
Think of the sacrifice, now we are free,
Free from the tyrant, with honour we stand,
Boldly upholding traditions so grand.
Reason has triumphed, and victory is ours,
Ah but the anguish, thro’ those our dark hours.
Now we can stand with our face to the world,
Looking with pride to our flags now unfurled;
Flying in token of right in our cause.
Oft we will linger, and think as we pause,
What of the after math, if we had lost,
What of the burden, and what of the cost,
Scattered the forces of vision and wrong,
Mighty the victory, glad is our song.


Glistening teardrops will spring to our eyes,
Thinking of those who fell winning this prize;
May we stand firm to the ones that are left,
Making life brighter now they are bereft;
Mingling justice with love to the ones
Who have lost husbands, or sweethearts or sons,
Easing their burdens with words kind and true,
Giving them courage to face life anew.
May cruel war clouds no more find a place.
May we live peaceful, a noble world’s race.
We have won victory, give us long peace,
May the right triumph, and cause wars to cease,
May we make reason our watchword for aye:
Making life brighter, as on day by day.
Over life’s pathway, we cheerfully wend,
Bringing wtih victory, peace to the end.


Songs Worth Knowing.
Australia s Emblem of Gold
Beautiful Sunshine
Sing to me of Sunshine
Valley of the Tweed
Mary Jane from the Farm
Down on the Sands at Emu Park
Natures Merry Music
Australia the Golden
_ - »
Sandgate
From E. T. SHORLEY, Barton Road,
Hawthorne, Brisbane. 2/> each.


Fergerson Street
Rockhampton
Queensland.
31.7.35.
J.G.Fergerson Esq.
Dear Sir.
Under, seperate cover I am sending
you my book;as requested by you.
It gjves me great pleasure to get it into your collect ion,as
little notice nas so far been taken of it.
I am now Just on seventy years of age,and recived most of my
schooling before I was eight years old,so you may Judge the
tne work I had in compiling it,which took me about ten years.
I was M-7 before I had any idear of writing verse, so that I
started a bit late in life for the task.
I have took the liberty to paste my address in the back
and if any one should want tne book I have plenty of it here
as I had three thousand printed last year.
I have also nad published about twenty songs,which I hawked for
years,but no one ener sang them so that they ever became
popular. There are several hundred copies of some of them hero
and if they interest you for your collection you may nave them
at six pence per copy. " \
; I nave done many things in ray fifty y^ears
;in Q'land but am now hawking for a living.
Trusting the book arrives in good order. „ n


Fergerson Street
Rockhampton
15.5.35.
J. G.Fergerson Esq.
Dear Sir.
Yours of tne I2tn to hand witn
P.N.enclosed,l'or which I tnank you very much.
I also wisn to thank you for your Kind remarks on my effort
la am old and weary out it cneers me to find my little book
welcome any viiere.
Has tne late Mrs Rattenburys book came under your notice.
If not I tnink y'u could get it from Munro's booksellers
Rocknampton.
I snail keep your address by me and if at any time any
tning comes under my notice interesting to you I will let
let you know.
Tnanking you once aqain
I am yours faithfully
~£. 7
