

THE ENGLISH ASSOCIATION
Pamphlet No. 27.
Poetry and Contemporary Speech
By
Lascelles Abercrombie
February, 1914


A copy of this pamphlet is supplied to all full members of
the Association. They can obtain further copies (price la.) on
application to the Secretary, Mr. A. V. Houghton, Imperial
College Union, South Kensington, London, S,W.


THE ENGLISH ASSOCIATION
Pamphlet No. 27
Poetry and Contemporary Speech
Lascelles Abercrombie
February, 1914


POETRY AND CONTEMPORARY SPEECH
Theee has always been a steady opinion that, however it may be
with the other arts, to give precise and complete instruction in the
technique of poetry would be decidedly a chimerical undertaking;
and the several recorded attempts to make the whole poetic craft
teachable, as the craft of writing music or painting pictures is said
to be teachable, have rather confirmed this notion than otherwise.
No one, in fact, has yet managed to take the spirit of poetry out of its
habits and methods (as you take a hermit-crab out of its shell) for the
purpose of examining that tissue of habit and method as an empty
but, as far as it goes, complete specimen. It seems then, that poetry —
not, as some have thought, music—is the art in which creative impulse
and expressive technique are merged so as to be indistinguishable. It
seems plain, too, where the poet’s impulse and his technique are thus
inextricably merged ; it is where his characteristic technique begins—
in his diction, in his use of words simply as words, not as elements
of metre, or as servants of a presiding design: there they begin
to go into what we may call his detachable technique. But the
choice of words for their own sake is evidently a part of technique :
and it is just this part that attempts at poetic instruction have either
had noticeably to scamp or to treat as something mysterious and
incommunicable, like impulse itself—the peculiar way poets have of
employing words, and what it is that they are trying for in their
careful verbal compounds. Hence the palpable and inevitable failure
of these attempts to teach poetry; for surely it is the special way a
poet manages his words that marks him most clearly—which does not
mean, however, that this is the most important thing about him.
But a person may have beautiful and elevated feelings, he may have
sound notions and even sound practice in intellectual form, he may
have some command of metre; but if he cannot add to these one
kind or another of what we call the magic of words—thereby
pleasantly avoiding the necessity of thinking out what we really
mean—if he has not the power of making words live with a special
and unusual kind of life in his verses, it is justifiable to question
his right to the title of poet. But if he has this power at all noticeably,
he may have scarce aught else and yet be held to have earned the
title. You may say that what a poet is trying for with his words is


simply to express his meaning ; but it is notorious that things which
might be said decently and straightforwardly, a poet will set out in
a strange way that many people find exceedingly uncomfortable and
others eminently agreeable.
The expression of meaning in poetry, as everywhere else, is
approximate. The thing about poetic diction is that it somehow
manages to hold more meaning, more of its originating intention,
than other kinds of language. It does not only say the decent and
straightforward meaning, according to rules of grammar and logic ;
it contrives to imply a deal of more or less related and, as it were,
surrounding meaning, quite independent of grammar and logic.
All language does something of this. The logical meaning of a sentence
is only an abstract of what we have in our minds ; we look to the
secondary hints and implications in any arrangement of words to
make language an enjoyable means of communication, and to make
the abstract credibly stand for the rich reality of thought. The
distinguishing mark of poetic diction is that it uses these secondary
results of word-combination to an infinitely greater extent than is
common, and is as intent on their deliberate use as on the use of the
logical values of words. It would be useful if we could agree on some
labels for these two kinds of verbal power. The best suggestion
I know of comes from Mr. Arthur Ransome. He proposes that we
should take over from mechanics the names for the two kinds of
energy—kinetic, the energy of motion, and potential, the energy of
position. The driving force of a sentence is what the grammar and
logic of it have to say ; that is the kinetic of words. Quite distinguish-
able from this, the potential of words is due to the way they happen
to come up against one another —to verbal contact and juxta-
position. The terms need not be pressed into a too strict analogy ;
but there is some evident analogy which makes them appropriate as
labels; and they help us to separate clearly the two functions of
words in a way which will be found, I believe, useful.
This distinction is not the same as the distinction between matter
and manner. That covers a much larger area: manner means
manner of conception, of thinking out, of general form, as well as
manner of language. The business now is merely with diction.
But if we try to say exactly what potential of language is, wherein
the secondary suggestive power of words consists, we soon realize
how it is that the poetic behaviour of words has been so seldom
discussed to any profit: for this, the essential and distinguishing
thing in the language of poetry, is a thing scarcely to be defined at all.
It is not what we may call the sensuous qualities of words as apart


from their intellectual qualities ; for I suppose that, in a nice analysis,
even the barest logical statement demands of words something of
their sensuous as well as their intellectual vigour. What we are
after now is the concealed and stored-up power of, so to say, suggesting
beyond themselves which words reveal instantaneously on contact
with other words. It is something like chemical affinity, which makes
elements ready and eager to combine with one another into quite
different substances. The chemist knows that there is something
which we may not too fantastically think of as concealed and stored-
up power in, say. Oxygen and Hydrogen : he knows that when these
elements are mixed you get an explosive state of things; you get,
in fact, potential energy. But to ordinary understanding these
faculties of Oxygen and Hydrogen are not evident till the mixture
is made and sparked : then the faculties are revealed, plainly enough,
in a bang; and the result is quite different from the two element's
by themselves. Just so the poet’s business is to guess accurately
the properties of words in isolation, so that he may mix them in
such a way that potential results—and the igniting spark of his
grammatical and logical meaning reveals this in a poetic bang that
serves and emphasizes his purpose: the resulting combination of
words being something quite different from the words in isolation,
a compound of all their powers.
Or, every sentence in poetry is like a live shell fired from a cannon,
and in mid-flight. There you have both kinds of energy: kinetic
in the onward movement of the shell, potential in the mixture of
chemicals in the shell’s charge. Well, so it is with poetic diction.
The onward movement of the sentence is its grammatical meaning :
that is the kinetic. But it is also charged with potential, in the way
the words are put together so as to explode into a novel dilating
compound of verbal suggestion when the sentence hits the target—
the reader’s mind. And diction is felt to be poetic according as it is
charged with this potential. Indeed, the charging of the shell is
where the specific business of the poet comes in. The shooting of it
is with him pretty much what it is with all dealers in language;
and, while any sentence is to a certain degree explosive, outside poetry
it is the momentum, the sheer weight and movement of the meaning,
that is to do the most of the damage. But the poet relies for his
penetrating effect on a reader’s mind just as much on the charge
of potential his sentence carries as on its momentum. —Life is like
a man play-acting : that might do for prose. But when life is
a poor player
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage,


the meaning is the same, but it has become poetry. There has been
a deliberate use of the potential of language. The sentence has been
as strongly charged with the secondary vigours of language as possible.
The originating reality of thought in Shakespeare’s mind seems to
have reached us with so little loss, not so much because of the straight-
forward meaning, as of the sudden compounding and revealing of
the concealed suggestions in ‘ struts ’, ‘ frets ‘ hour ’, ‘ stage ’.
We must grant, of course, at the start, that kinetic energy, the
onward movement of grammatical meaning in a sentence, is as
absolutely necessary in poetry as elsewhere; for, quite apart from
the fact that, however regrettable some may find it, the mind cannot
live without logic, even the potential of words must be useless without
it: the poetic charge in a sentence could not explode unless it were
carried on something moving; there would be no impact to make
the mingled words go off. To use a chemical distinction, the mere
mixture of several words could not flash into a single and unique
compound. But granted all this, it is the secondary implications
of language—all that makes words capable of potential energy—that
the poet must study in his diction. A too limited sense of this has
deceived the Futurists. They compose a mixture of verbal sugges-
tions, which might perhaps do for the charge of a poetic shell; but
they forget all about shooting it. Poetry is not so easy as that.
Any one can heap up words into a stationary pile ; but the charging
of a moving sentence is a very different sort of work. If we may
liken the double energy of poetic diction to a live shell fired from
a gun, the diction of futurism is like a man letting off a squib in his
hand.
Is there any part of language that is more likely than others to
supply poetry with the potential vigour of words —with their eager
and subtle suggestions, with their complexities of hidden motive ?
Certain, the whole of language must, theoretically, be left open to the
poet: we cannot allow any pedantic hedgerows to fence him out of
this tract or that, with notices stuck up alleging that it is too new
for him, or too old, or too scientific, or too commercial —or even too
poetical. The one condition of his freedom is, that wherever he goes
collecting he must be able to discover and use the potentials of his
finds —whatever intangible electric vitality may cling to their sub-
stantial central meaning, the concealed chemical affinities of words
that make them ready to compound, over and above logic, surprisingly
and beautifully with other words. I suppose it is tolerably agreed
upon, that the time in our literature above all others when the electric
life of words was most amazingly used is the Elizabethan period :


even the smallest Elizabethans have a knack of thrilling our minds
with delicious verbal explosions—though doubtless they often have
nothing else for us. Is it not likely, that the reason for this is that
the poetry of that time was so intimately in touch with common
speech ? In spite of huge avidity, sometimes laudable, sometimes
absurd, for books and learning, the accent and idiom of Elizabethan
poetry seems always close to the accent and idiom of speech. It is,
of course, as different from the actuality of speech as any poetry ;
but yet it very noticeably seems poetry which found its prime material,
not in a language already broken in by literature, but in the language
of people talking, of speech, full of the rapid shadows and gleams, the
expressive irregularities and careless experiments, of conversation.
It could not, perhaps, be otherwise. Elizabethan poetry took place
in the midst of, and as a direct consequence of, the general life of
its time: its language had to belong vividly to its time in conse-
quence—even had to take up the slang of its time. Subsequently,
poetry for the most part took place in a corner, and became an
aberrant form of life : and it was then that poetry developed a
conscience about the use of slang. Moreover, Elizabethan poetry
happened just as modern English finished its schooling. There was
scarcely any language available for an Elizabethan poet except the
language spoken all about him : English (I mean, of course, modern
English) scarcely existed as printed literature.
Well, when poetry is not compelled, like the Elizabethan, to rely
on contemporary speech for the chief supply of verbal potential,
it runs a great risk unless it does this deliberately. Language
exists as indisputably and as wonderfully in literature as in speech ;
but it is speech that is the main reservoir of the poetic power of
language. In the first place, the original element of poetic expression
is the spoken word. It would be absurd to deny the immense impor-
tance of printing and reading to poetry. But the printed word is,
for the poet, nothing but a symbol of the spoken word ; and by always
treating it as that, the poet, when he gets his work printed, manages
without losing his appeal to the ear—the inward ear—to appeal also
to the much quicker and finer apprehension of the eye. But poetry,
however greatly advantageous printing may be as a notation, is not
made out of printed words, but out of spoken words ; it is no abstract
existence of words that the poet has to feel, but their actual changeful
life in speech. Then, in the second place, where do words get their
stored-up potential vigour, from ? They get it almost entirely from
use, from constant use in connexion with action. No two actions are
the same ; but the words for them may very well be the same.


Action never repeats itself; but language has to be for ever repeating
itself. Hence words by continually being used for slightly different
actions get charged with infinite variations and gradations of meaning,
with an aura of subtle suggestions. For this reason, Saxon and Nor-
man English does better in poetry than later imported Latinisms
and Greekisms : this is not due to any secret patriotism in poetry :
it is not because Saxo-Norman words have native antiquity on their
side, but simply because there has been more common use put on
them; that has made them more richly stored with variety of suggested
secondary meaning. And, however interested a poet may be in
far-fetched curiosities of diction (and it is a very admirable interest),
it is the ordinary words continually used in everyday speech that
are most likely to go off in poetry, and thereby to set up sympathetic
explosions of poetic power in exceptional words.
But it would not do to make common speech into a sort of idol.
The mere fact of a word being constantly used in speech is important
to a poet, because of his dependence on the spoken life of words :
if he uses what we call literary words, he can only do so by imagining
them into spoken life. But apart from this, what is important to
poetry is not the bare fact of a word’s existence now in speech, but
the way its existence in speech has empowered it for poetry. Cer-
tainly, speech contains many words that will do for conversation
well enough, but will not do for the intenser life of poetry: they
would be felt there as something foreign and dead. Perhaps one of
these negative instances will show what I am driving at better than
a positive instance. It would be very difficult, for example, to use
the word ‘ bicycle ’ in poetry. There are poets who are expert at
using the machine; but lam sure most poets would confess to an
instinctive repugnance for using the word in poetry. Yet there are
plenty of varied experiences in bicycling, some of them decidedly
impressive and even disturbing. It is not only that they have not
yet had time to get well into the word; the word itself started off
by conveying nothing of the actuality of bicycles or bicycling.
For most people it is a mere arbitrary label for a contraption of steel
framework and wheels; I doubt whether it even conveys vividly
the fact that a bicycle has two wheels. I remember talking to an
old lady about progress; and when we came to bicycling, she
invariably referred to the instrument as a bikle and to the action as
sysling. Why not ? The syllables of bicycle were just as insignificant
to her as syllables of her own invention. In fact, the experience
of bicycling has had to start off from scratch in its race for power
in language : the word for it gave it no handicap ; the word in itself


suggested nothing of what the experience was likely to prove : it
began empty, and an empty word takes a long time to fill. No
doubt that was how all experiences began in the first instance;
but when they began there was no poetry. As far as bicycling is
concerned, the choice of this learned word for it has made us go
back to the ante-poetic state of the cave-men, when words were simply
syllabic labels: like the cave-men’s words, the word bicycling has,
so far, practically no potential at all. The poet Barnes saw this,
and saw what a loss it would be to poetry; for what more fitted
for poetic substance (if only the word were fitted for poetic diction)
than the fact of bicycling ? Barnes proposed that the machine should
be called by a combination of two familiar words. I forget whether his
suggestion was saddle-wheel or straddle-wheel; I think straddle-wheel
would have been the better. But had it been called either of these,
then what a bicycle is would have been really suggested by its name ;
and two rich masses of ideas would have been associated in the word
at its outset, the mixture to be further enriched by specific bicycling
experiences. But before that further enrichment had come, the
word, and with it the thing, would have been immediately available
for poetry. It is, however, an excellent thing that bicycles should
be getting called simply wheels : the improvement, for poetic purposes,
is enormous. The genius of English will perhaps assert itself against
the wholesale coining of learned words for novelties : words that are
strictly, as far as English is concerned, insignificant. That vivid
sense of language which so often surprises us out of America has
already, I am told, turned cinematographs into movies : this ab-
breviation of moving picture (how infinitely better that sounds than
cinematograph !) may give us hope that something may come out
of flying-machine to replace aeroplane.
There is always a tendency, a dangerous tendency, as literature
accumulates, for poetry to develop a language of its own. It is
dangerous, because a conventional select poetic vocabulary is apt
to be apart from the rough and tumble of spoken life : it only has
such spoken life as the poet can imagine for it. A word in traditionally
poetic language may get plenty of use—of use in poetry; but this
kind of use by itself is not good for a word, but rather very bad for it.
The word tends to be put more and more to a precisely identical use:
and this, far from enriching its suggestive power, will very soon
exhaust it. It is use in connexion with action —with the continual
slight variations in what we roughly call the same action—that
keeps a word electric, charged with the implications we call poetic
power. Poetry, then, for its staple language must rely on the words


which common speech keeps newly magnetized. But this does not
mean that a poet must only write in the language of common speech.
The medium of an English poet is the English language, and that is
not an affair of any particular time : it is not what is spoken to-day
that is English, but the whole stretch of English since its beginning
as English. And the whole of it is open to the poet. There are such
rich spoils in the backward of English, that it would be quite hopeless
to think of keeping poets from trespassing there. They see there
hosts of words full of splendid power, words which the dictionaries
say have gone out of employment: though to be sure you never know
that any word alleged to be obsolete now may not be familiar
to-morrow. This may be due to poets and other writers courageously
using them ; but more likely it is due to the way obsolete words have
of surviving in dialect. They come back into general speech more
easily from dialect than from books. Indeed, they come back into
poetry more easily from dialect than from books. A poet, we must
admit, may use any archaic word, provided he does not use it just
as a curiosity, but for some unique life in it. He need not consider
whether his readers know the word: the limitations of their knowledge
of English are not his business, but their own misfortune. His
business is only to be sure that he does himself truly know the word —
know the living spirit of it, and the niceties of its behaviour. And
the best way to feel the complex vital character of some old word
which polite speech has forgotten, is to hear it spoken in dialect.
A poet’s verbal imagination may do much for divining the secrets
of an archaic word ; but there is nothing like hearing it as a natural
member of spoken language for understanding its hidden poetic
power. And country folk have an odd way of using the suggestive
power of words ; perhaps because their speech is little invaded by
new barren words coined out of learning. A little while ago, I asked
two people who knew the cottage where I was staying, what sort
of a flower a certain climbing rose had: I asked a parson and a
ploughman. The parson said, ‘ Oh, it’s an awfully jolly little thing.’
The ploughman said, ‘Oh, it’s an innocent little blow.’ The plough-
man gave me the better notion of the rose in flower.
But whatever experiments a poet may make in reviving old words,
capturing dialect words, schooling new words, the main thing
necessary for his art is the living mode of speech he heafs commonly
all about him. The careless happy-go-lucky explosions of potential
energy in speech he must study and control and exaggerate by
deliberate chemistry. The theoric of his art has its firmest base
on the empiric of conversation. Sporadic liberations here and there


of the poetic power in words is not enough; the whole organism
of his language must be tingling with potential energy. It is only
by working in the language of speech that a poet can get that; the
magnificences and surprises of diction have their best chance of
proving their mettle when they are immersed in and infected with
the nameless indefinable electricity of common speech: though it
must be, of course, common speech mastered by artistic deliberation.
And for this general diffusion of vigour, possibly more important
than single words are phrases and idioms of the common speech,
even when they seem to challenge grammar. The sort of thing
I mean may be instanced in the various colloquial uses of the word
take. Thus, a poet may take in his public, and the public may in
consequence take to the poet, and he may then be taken up by eminent
ladies; but perhaps a critic will take down the poet, and the poet
may reply by taking on the critic, or, more wisely, by taking him off.
Some of these usages may seem too extremely colloquial for poetry.
I suppose it is only that they are of recent growth; and I suppose
also that it only needs time to give them assurance—to make, say,
take in = deceive as proper a phrase as come off = escape, which
Milton used. It is not easy to say what it is that is so very much
alive in such phrases ; whatever it is, the kind of vigour they illustrate
is of the utmost value to poetry. Think of the effect Milton got from
the phrase I have just mentioned, an effect every one must have
noticed :
I knew the foul enchanter tho’ disguised.
Entered the very lime twigs of his spells,
And yet came off.
And as there the passage shifts from pomp to colloquialism, so as
it goes on it shifts again from colloquialism to pomp :
If you have this about you
(As I will give you when we go) you may
Boldly assault the necromancer’s hall.
And in the whole splendid compound of meaning, is it not due to the
masterly use of the keen, rapid, indefinable vigour of the colloquial-
isms that the more obvious and more solid forces of the big words are
so telling ? It is very significant, I think, that Milton, having tried
every splendour of which English is capable, came in his later work
to rely more and more on the words and idiom of speech. And if
English poetry in general really is, as it seems to be, following Milton’s
example, it may be taken as the surest sign of what we have often
heard of—a poetic revival. If it is to get new values out of English
if it is to forge a diction proper to new matters —it will


go for its technical substance to contemporary speech first and
afterwards to the great language of its old triumphs. It is not
only that association with the everyday commonalty of verbal
life enables the verbal nobility to do its work most efficiently. If
poetry has this everyday life in its diction, it can do without the
nobility (though to be sure there is no reason why it should). But
the contrary will not hold. Do not call my instances modern vul-
garisms : the mere fact that they are modern and vulgar will pre-
dispose poetry in their favour. And are they so modern in speech ?
I wonder. Would you not say that let on in the sense of Hah or boast
is a modernism of speech, and perhaps a doubtful one ? Yet I find
one of these senses admirably used in poetry written a very long time
ago. A torturer in the Wakefield crucifixion play says of Christ:
Lo, he lets on he could no ill;
that is, he boasted he was incapable of evil.
Well, I believe that what poetry needs to-day is to learn how
to let on as easily as a schoolboy. Poetry knows too well what can
be done with its approved manner : it would do wisely to see what
can be done with all sorts of disapproved manners of speech —with
take in, for instance, or show up. I even believe that there is not only
convenience but, for poetry, real and positive value, in the use of
forms like don't and won't: forms which are still so conscious of
eighteenth-century disapproval that they can only come into print
wearing an apologetic apostrophe. Don't is not simply a contraction
of do not: it is, somehow, another and slightly different form of
verbal life. lam sure, at any rate, that it is the fine differentiations,
the subtle specializations, in verbal life that poetry most deeply
requires; it is in common speech that these fine differences begin
and grow; it is in poetry that repudiates contemporary speech in
favour of the language it has already tamed that their need will
be most grievously felt.


The following Publications have been issued by the Association,
and those still in print can be purchased by members :
1907-13.
1. Types of English Curricula in Boys’ Secondary Schools.
(Out of print.) Price 6d.
2. The Teaching of Shakespeare in Secondary Schools (Pro*
visional suggestions). (Out of print.) Price Id.
3. A Short List of Books on English Literature from the
beginning to 1832, for the use of Teachers.
Price 6d. (to Associate Members, Is.)
4. Shelley’s View of Poetry. By A. C. Bradley, Litt.D.
(Out of print.) Price Is.
5. English Literature in Secondary Schools. By J. H.
Fowler, M.A. Price 6d.
6. The Teaching of English in Girls’ Secondary Schools. By
Miss G. Clement, B.A. (Out of print.) Price 6d.
7. The Teaching of Shakespeare in Schools. Price 6d.
8. Types of English Curricula in Girls’ Secondary Schools.
(Out of print.) Price 6d.
9. Milton and Party. By Professor O. Elton, M.A.
(Out of print.) Price 6d.
10. Romance. By W. P. Ker. Price 6d.
11. What still remains to be done for the Scottish Dialects.
By W. Grant. Price 6d.
12. Summary of Examinations in English affecting Schools.
Price 6d.
13. The Impersonal Aspect of Shakespeare’s Art. By Sidney
Lee, D.Litt. Price Is.
14. Early Stages in the Teaching of English.
(Out of print.) Price 6d.
15. A Shakespeare Reference Library. By Sidney Lee, D.Litt.
Price Is.
16, The Bearing of English Studies upon the National Life,
By C. H. Herford, Litt.D. Price Is.
17. The Teaching of English Composition. By J. H.
Fowler, M.A. (Out of print.) Price Is.
18. The Teaching of Literature in French and German Secondary
Schools. By Elizabeth Lee. (Out of print.) Price 6d.
19. John Bunyan. By C, H, Firth, LL.D.
(Out of print.) Price Is.
20. The Uses of Poetry. By A. C. Bradley, Litt,D. Price Is.
21, English Literature in Schools. A list of Authors and
Works for Successive Stages of Study, Price Is.


22. Some Characteristics of Scots Literature. By J. C. Smith,
Price Is.
23. Short Bibliographies of Wordsworth, Coleridge, Byron,
Shelley, Keats. Price Is.
24. A Discourse on Modern Sibyls. By Lady Ritchie. Price Is.
25. The Future of English Poetry. By Edmund Gosse, C.B.
Price Is.
26. The Teaching of English at the Universities. By Stanley
Leathes. With a note by W. P. Ker. Price Is.
Members can obtain further copies of the Bulletin (price 6d.)
on application to the Secretary.
Essays and Studies by Members of the English Association.
Vol. I. Collected by A. C. Bradley. Clarendon Press.
2s. 6d. to members.
Contents:—English Place-names, by Henry Bradley; On the Present
State of English Pronunciation, by Robert Bridges; Browning, by
W. P. Ker; Blind Harry’s ‘ Wallace ’, by George Neilson; Shakespeare
and the Grand Style, by George Saintsbury; Some Suggestions about
Bad Poetry, by Edith Sichel; Carlyle and his German Masters, by
C. E. Vaughan.
Essays and Studies by Members of the English Association.
Vol. 11. Collected by Dr. Beeching. Clarendon Press.
2s. 6d. to members.
Contents:—The Particle ing in Place-names, by H. Alexander; On
the Nature of the Grand Style, by John Bailey; Richardson’s Novels
and their Influences, by F. S. Boas; Jane Austen, by A. C. Bradley;
Description in Poetry, by A. Glutton Brock; The Literary Play, by
C. E. Montague; A Yorkshire Folk-Play and its Analogues, by
F. Moorman.
Essays and Studies by Members of the English Association.
Vol. 111. Collected by W. P. Ker. Clarendon Press.
2s. 6d. to members.
Contents:—What English Poetry may still learn from Greek, by
Gilbert Murray; Some Childish Things, by A. A. Jack; A Lover's
Complaint, by J. W. Mackail; Arnold and Homer, by T. S. Omond ;
Keats’s Epithets, by David Watson Rannie; Dante and the Grand
Style, by George Saintsbury; Blake’s Religious Lyrics, by H. C.
Beeching.
Essays and Studies by Members of the English Association.
Vol. IV. Collected by C. H. Herford. Clarendon Press.
2s. 6d. to members.
Contents. —A Note on Dramatic Criticism, by J. E. Spingarn;
English Prose Numbers, by O. Elton; Some Unconsidered Elements
in English Place-names, by A. Mawer; Platonism in Shelley, by L.
Winstanley; Defoe’s True-born Englishman, by A. C. Guthkelch ; The
Plays of Mr. John Galsworthy, by A. R. Skemp ; Dramatic Technique in
Marlowe, by G. P. Baker.
