

Points on the
Cireumference
AN INDIAN VILLAGE:
An outline of the
Foreign Mission WorK
carried on by the
Presbyferian Church of Australia
in the
State of New South Wales:
WM MACLARDY TYPE SYDNEY


Points on the
Cireumference
TEMPLE HILL, SHOLINGHUR.
AN OUTLINE OF THE
FOREIGN MISSION WORK.
Carried on by the
Presbyterian Church of Australia
in the
STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


REV: A.B. BALASUNDRUM.
Mr, Balasundrum has been connected with our
Mission for many years, and has won golden opinions
from all the Missionaries. Having successfully
completed the course of training- required for the
Indian ministry he was ordained on November 6th,
1917, by the Revs. C. A. White and C. E. Turnbull,
assisted by several Missionaries and Indian Pastors.


THE ABORIGINES.
Staff (May, 1918).
North Queensland —
Mapoon: Rev. X. and Mrs. Hey; Mr. and Mrs. R. Percival
Hull. AVeipa: Vacant. Aurukun: Mr. T. W. Holmes and
Mrs. Holmes; Mr. and Mrs. H. L. Dyer. Mornington
Island: Mr. Norman A. Pauli.
"Western Australia —
Fort George IV. : Rev. AV. J. S. Rankin and Mrs. Rankin;
Mr. and Airs. J. Whitecross Patou.
Tire Rev. AV. Ridley, who came to the Colony in 1851,
determined to labour among the aborigines. For several
years he prosecuted his work with great diligence, visiting
various districts including Liverpool Plains, the Peel, Namoi,
Gwydir, Maclntyre, Barwon, Balonne, and Condamine Rivers:
Moreton Bay and the Darling JJowns. At the request of the
Government he published a grammar of the Kamilaroi and
other Australian languages, a .work which attracted the inter-
est of eminent philologists. Those were the days before the
union of the Presbyterian Churches, and Mr, Ridley belonged
to the Synod of New South AVales—only a section of the
Church as it is constituted to-day. It is not surprising that
his work does not seem to have attracted from so small a
constituency the support necessary to enable it to be carried
on, and it was discontinued. Thereafter, the Church contri-
buted for a number of years the sum of £SO per annum to
the work among Aborigines conducted by the Victorian
Church. Contributions were also made towards the work being
done among the blacks by the Church of England in New
South AVales.
In 1891 as a permanent celebration of the Federation of
the Australian Presbyterian Churches, the Mission to the
Aborigines in North Queensland was established. The first
station opened was at Mapoon where the Revs. J. G. AVard and
N. Hey planted the seed so well, but Air. AVard was not per-
mitted to gather the fruit. His widow has most devotedly
continued in the work until recently. The Rev. N. and Mrs.
Hey have had the joy of seeing great and substantial results.
At Alapoon to-day there is a considerable Christian community
•with upwards of 50 communicants. THe Christian couples.


Rev. J. Young Wai & Office-Bearers ,
Chinese Mission & Workers-Newcastle.


with their families, live in homes of their own. The child-
ren —many of them orphans or abandoned by their parents—
are cared for by the Mission, and educated in a school which
has to comply with the requirements of Government inspection.
The girls are taught domestic science, and were honored
recently by having some of their lace and fancy work pre-
sented to Queen Mary who expressed herself in commendatory
terms regarding the work. The men are taught useful trades
and occupations, such as blacksmithing, carpentering, farm
.and garden work, etc.
Work was begun on the Embley River further south in
1897. where a station was established at Weipa similar in its
general features to that at Mapoon. A commodious brick
church was erected in 1905. The Rev. E. and Mrs. Brown
laboured here with considerable success until 1918, when they
retired from the Mission.
The third station was established at Aurukun still further
south in 1904, and was wrought by the Rev. A. Richter,
whose connection with the field was severed by the war.
At Port George TV., in Western Australia, work was
initiated in 1910, and is being carried on by Rev. TV. J. S.
and Mrs. Rankin, and Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Paton with satis-
factory prospects.
The station on Mornington Island, the latest venture of
consecrated Faith, was founded in 1914, and it has become the
first in notoriety through the murder of the Rev. R. Hall,
and the attempted murder of Mr. W. Owen. The heroic
conduct of Mrs. Hall and Mrs. Owen in defending the house
for several days against a hostile section of the blacks has
given this branch of our work a glory and a pledge of ulti-
mate victor}', which should be as a trumpet call to the whole
Church.
The total aboriginal and half-caste population of Australia
is estimated by the Government Statistician at 80,052, but at
a much higher figure by others who are familiar with the sub-
ject. The numbers for Queensland are 11,195, and for Wes-
tern Australia 7844. Tn .their natural state the blacks are
considered one of the lowest races on earth. It can hardly
be said that they have any religion, and such as they have is
of the animistic type, and is largely occupied with the cere-
monies connected with various totems. They have no civilisa-
tion, are purely nomadic, and seem to be largely destitute of
natural affection. The Missionary has literally had to do
everything down to imparting to them what we would regard
as the most commonplace ideas. Notwithstanding this how-
ever, they possess a considerable degree of latent ability,
which responds wonderfully to teaching. The success which


has attended the work has been characterised as a miracle.
But it is the Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes as-
all His works ought to be. The Queensland Government has
always recognised the importance and value of the work done
at the three older stations, and lias given the most convincing
proof of its confidence. The country surrounding these sta-
tions has been formed into an Aboriginal Reserve vested in
two Trustees, one of whom is appointed by the Queensland
Government, and the other by the Church. The Government
has good reason for its confidence, for in Christianising the
blacks they have been given highest form of civilisation,
and the presence and influence of the Mission stations has
been a powerful factor in establishing better relationships
generally between the black and white population in the sur-
rounding districts. The Mission was much criticised in its
early days, and won its great triumph in the wreck of the
Kanahooka. This vessel came to grief some distance to the
South of Mapoon, and under the old regime before the days of
the Missionary those who escaped the waters would have fallen
by the hands of the blacks. But, in this case, those who sur-
vived owed their preservation entirely to the friendly care of
the blacks, and thus a signal demonstration of the beneficent
effects of the Mission was given.
Of what may be termed Spiritual results there are ample
evidences. The work, however, is not of the spectacular
order, and the marvel is that so much has been achieved
within a quarter of a century.
THE NEW HEBRIDES.
Staff (May, 1018).
Main; Rev. 1). L. and Mrs. Paterson. Xogugu: Vacant.
When the union of the Presbyterian Churches took place
in 1865 one of the earliest questions to be taken up was that
of Foreign Missions. The Rev. J. Copeland, of the Xew
Hebrides, addressed the Assembly, and steps were taken to
prosecute Mission work in the Xew Hebrides. By arrange-
ment with the Canadian Church, whose agent he was, the
Rev. J. D. Gordon, was appointed as our Missionary and for
two years lie laboured for us in the island of Santo, including-
6






our present field of Nogugu. Mr. Gordon then severed his
connection with us, and devoted all his strength to the island
of Erromanga, where two years later he won the martyr’s
crown. In 1883, Rev. W. B. Murray, M.A., was ordained in
St. Stephen’s Church, and with his wife was settled at Ambriiu
hut after two years' service he received the call to go up
higher. In 1880 the Rev. J. D. Landels came to the colony,
and the following year with his wife commenced work on
the island of Malo. Mr. Landels laboured successfully there
until 1901, when he retired and took a charge in New South
Wales. He was succeeded by Rev. 1). L. Paterson, who with
Mrs. Paterson, has rendered most valuable service to the
Mission and to the Church. In consequence of an intimation
from the Canadian and United Free Churches that they re-
garded the New Hebrides as the natural sphere of the Aus-
tralasian and New Zealand Churches, and that when their
present representatives' should retire they would not fill their
places, it became necessary for the Australian Churches to
make their arrangements accordingly. Under the re-adjust-
ment which was effected our Church became responsible for
the Northern portion of Santo, including the station of No-
gugu. To this will ultimately be added the Big Bay station,
one missionary being able to 'work both fields.
It is not very easy to i s l bf f hre'accurate returns of the
population, but the most reliable data put the population of
Malo at 800, and that of North’ Santo at 3000. The latter
includes some of the finest specimens of humanity in the
group. The New Hebrideans before the advent' of the mis-
sionary were a degraded race; —or rather races—for the Poly-
nesian and Melanesian tides 1 of humanity meet hereabouts.
And as among other races of primitive nature there is intense
subdivision, even comparatively small islands containing
several communities speaking totally different languages,
and having nothing in common except their barbarism. Their
religion belongs to the animist type, and cannibalism used
to be common. The islands are within the tropics, and are
very fertile. A number of British and French settlers have
made their homes there, and a considerable trade results.
This leads to more or less trouble over the labour question,
as some of the traders display no consideration for the natives
except to recruit them for labour purposes. The Missionaries
do all they can to protect the natives, but they are very much
handicapped, and the way of the wrong-doer is made easier by
reason of the fact that the Government is what is known as
the Condominium, i.e., dual control by Britain and France.
The arrangement does not give satisfaction, and it is hoped
that after the war a better wav will be found. The islands


are linked with the outside world by the efficient service of
the Burns Philp line, which also serves the Mission stations
by an inter-island service. The local affairs of the Mission
are controlled by a Synod of the Missionaries which meets
yearly. At Tangoa there is a Training Institution of which
the Eev. F. G. Bowie is the Principal. There are usually
50 or more students in residence, comprising the brightest
young men from all the islands of the group. They have a
four years’ course of study comprising an education in Eng-
lish, and special Bible study. Upon completing their course
satisfactorily they become native pastors, and under the
Missionary’s supervision take the spiritual oversight of a
village.
One of these men —Winzi—took charge of Mr. Pater-
son’s work when he was on his last furlough, and managed
everything most satisfactorily. He has since been ordained
to the Eldership, and is in a very real sense a right hand
man to the Missionary.
The change wrought in the life and character of the
people by the acceptance of Christ is as elsewhere, most
radical. In Nogugu the war has affected the trade in copra,
hy which the natives make their money. And so when Mr.
Bowie made one of his periodica! visits to the field he found
that the native pastors had been paid nothing for 12 months,
and in some cases even longer. But there was not a murmur
except in one case . Not only so, hut these men hearing of
the sad plight of Belgium, urged their little flocks to send
what money they could to help Belgium, and they sent over
£25. Is there any other community in the Empire that can
match that? It was only a matter of a few years since the
people who did this, or their ancestors, were cannibals.
THE CHINESE.
Staff (May, 1918).
Sydney : Eev. J. Young Wai. Newcastle ; Mr. J. F. Eem
Yee.
f
Work among the Chinese was commenced in 1869 when a
Chinese convert from Victoria named Philip Lee Hyung la-
boured for a time among the Chinese on the Araluen gold








field. In 1872 George All Len was engaged and continued
to labour for eight years in Sydney. Mr. J. Young Wai
was appointed in 1882, and was ordained by the Presbytery
of Sydney in 1898. At first the meetings were held in the
Scots Church school room, and afterwards in a hired house
which used to stand at the corner of Goulburn and Castle-
reagh Streets. This was followed by the erection of a
Church in Foster Street in 1893. The whole of this locality
was subsequently resumed by the City Council for improve-
ment purposes; the Church was pulled down and a new site
was obtained in Campbell Street whereon a substantial and
commodious Church was erected in 1910. In 1897 a weather-
board Church was erected in Waterloo, and is also under the
care of the Rev. J. Young Wai. The work is carried on by
Sunday services in Campbell Street (morning and evening),
and Waterloo (afternoon), Sunday School for children, and
week night classes for teaching the Chinese to read and write
English. These classes require European men to act as
teachers the principle being one teacher to one scholar.
The work is very simple, and any man of ordinary education
can do it. Mr. Young Wai visits most faithfully not only
among his countrymen at their ordinary occupations in and
around Sydney, but also among those who happen to be in-
mates of the various hospitals and Government institutions.
The Church has its own Session, and the elders assist the
minister with the services. The Chinese pay all the working
expenses of the Church and contribute about £OO per annum
towards the Sustentation Fund. Of this amount contributions
totalling about £2O come from members of the Church who
have returned to China, and subscriptions are also received
from several Christian Chinese in the country towns.
In Newcastle work was commenced in 1888 with Mr.
J. F. Kem Yee as Missionary. We have a wooden Church
which was erected in 1898. The Missionary also visits Mait-
land regularly, and he diligently follows up the people in
their homes in and around the main centre. He Occasionally
makes a tour of the Northern towns as far as the Queensland
border, where there are a considerable number of Chinese.
He is assisted in the Newcastle Church by a number of Euro-
pean helpers, some of whom belong to other Churches than
our own.
The Chinese in the Metropolitan district number about
3000, and for the whole state about 10,000. The population
of the Chinese Republic is estimated at 441,000,000. Their
religion is mainly Confucianism, which is rather an Ethical
■system than a religon in the true sense of the word. Taoism


and Buddhism also prevail, but an exposition of them can-
not be included here. It has been said that “Confucianism
represents the intelligence and morality of China : Taoism its
superstitions; and Buddhism its ritualism and idolatry.”
One very encouraging feature of this branch of our work
is the fact that many of the Christians return to China. This,
of course, depletes the local congregations, but the Chinese
have the true missionary spirit, and those Christians who re-
turn to China become, in effect, missionaries in a small way
to their fellow-countrymen.
INDIA.
Staff (May, 1918).
Rev. C. E. and Mrs. Turnbull, Miss McLean (on fur-
lough), Miss Symonds (temporary), Dr. Innes, Dr. Cooper
(temporary), Miss Jean C. Graham, 8.A., Miss Jessie
McCredie. B.A
i
Sholinghur is in the Madras Presidency, South India, and
is about 60 miles west of the city of Madras. The field is
about 30 miles in extreme length, and rather less in breadth.
The area is about 400 square miles, and the population
200,000. The people generally belong to the Dravidian stock
which is one of the primitive races of India; but there is a
strong admixture of the later Aryan blood. The languages
spoken are mainly Tamil in ,the southern end of the field,
while Tamil and Telegu are perhaps nearly equally spoken
in the Xorthem end. It will thus be apparent that our field
lies near the junction of the two races. It requires an
expert to differentiate between the Tamils and the Telegus,
apart from the language.
The whole population may be termed rural. The lar-
gest town is Sholinghur with about 10,000 inhabitants. This
is the headquarters of our work, but Pallipat with a population
of about 3000 in the northern end of the field, 17 miles from
Sholinghur is destined to become equally important as a
centre of work. Hitherto it has not been worked to any
great extent, but Mr. Turnbull has made it his headquarters,






and as soon as the way is opened up, other worisers sliould
be sent to join him. The principal occupation of the people
is the cultivation of the soil and the care of cattle, slieep, and
goats. In some of the villages there are a number of weavers,
and there are also some small pottery works of very primitive
type. There are a considerable number of goldsmiths in Shol-
inghur. The country is picturesque, consisting of bold
granite hills and ridges interspersed with flat land suitable for
cultivation. The climate is very hot, with only a brief sea-
son of comparative coolness. The best rains begin in October
and continue for about two; months. Our connection with
this field began in 1898, when Miss McLean, who had pre-
viously been working under the Church of Scotland Mission
in Kilpauk, Madras, was appointed as the Missionary of our
Women’s Missionary Association at Sholinghur, which had
been opened as a new station under the care of Agues, a
Madras Zenana teacher in 189 T. Miss McLean was joined by
Miss McNeil in 1898 and by Miss D. Symonds, 8.A., in 1900.
Under Miss McNeil, the old hospital was built, and the work
so well begun by her was taken over for a short time by Ur,
Flora Butcher, who was succeeded by Ur. Amy Bobinson for
a few months, and then by Ur. Flora limes in 1910. Under
her care the hospital for women lias become one of the most
valuable of our agencies in tb©?field. These women carried
on the work until 1912 in conjunction with the Church of
Scotland. Then a revision of our Missionary arrangements
was made whereby the General Assembly took over the Indian
field which our ladies had been working, from the Church of
Scotland and assumed the full.responsibility for it. The Exe-
cutive of the W.M.A. were at the same time given seats on
the Assembly’s Committee and the scope of the work was
thus generally enlarged. In 1913 the Rev. C. E. Turnbull
was sent out as our first ordained missionary, and the staff
on the field was constituted a “Mission Council. Our work,
therefore, to-day proceeds along three main lines:—
1. Evangelistic. The Rev. c. E. Turnbull has
the general oversight of the spiritual affairs, and
already there is a baptised Christian community of
381 persons, of whom 132 are Communicants. Rev. A. B.
Balasundrum, who was ordained in 1917, is our first fully
qualified native pastor in this or any other field. lie is a man
of marked ability, and very fine character, and is a valuable
assistant to Mr. Turnbull. It is hoped that there will soon
be a sufficiently strong congregation to call and support him
as their pastor. In addition there are a number of evange-
lists who itinerate from fixed centres in the more important


villages, and come together in Siiolingluir and Pallipat once
a month tor conference and instruction by the Missionary.
These evangelists minister to small groups of Christians in
the villages. They preach the Gospel in the market places
and streets, and conduct regular services in the school build-
ings, where there are any Christians. They also supervise
the work of the teacher-catechists. The Church members
come together for Communion in Sholinglmr and Pallipat. In
Sholinghur, Ramakrishnapat, and most of the villages there
are Sabbath Schools. Once a year all the workers unite and
form preaching bands who for a week go out into the towns
and villages and preach the Gospel to the people who gather
in the open streets. Sometimes they use a Magic Lantern.
This mode of work has been very effective in many places.
Baptisms occasionally take place in the river or in some open
place where there is water.
2. Educational. —In Sholinghur we have two Caste Boys’
Schools, a primary and a secondary. The latter commenced
work in 1917, and already has a large attendance. There is
also a small Caste School at PrJlipat, and all three are under
the general oversight of Mr. Turnbull. They are staffed with
fully qualified Indian teachers whom nearly all are Chris-
tian. Religious exercises and instruction form a regular part
of the School routine. We have' also in Sholinghur the Girls’
Caste School under the charge of one of the lady Missionaries
with an Indian headmaster and a staff of Indian lady teachers.
In Ramakrishnapat and are Caste schools with
hoys and girls attending. Thdse are all of primary classifi-
cation. In addition we have about 25 village or non-caste
schools which usually work to about the third standard, and are
conducted by Indian trained teachers under the supervision of
one of the Missionaries. The urgent need of our work in this
section is Boarding Schools in which the more promising
children from the villages might he further educated. It is
mainly from these children that the Mission workers should
he drawn, and in the absence of hoarding schools we are losing
part of the fruit of our labours.
The higher caste women of India live a life of seclusion
in their own houses, and are not allowed to associate with men
other than their own immediate relatives. It is, therefore,
necessary to take the Gospel to them in their homes. Our
lady Missionaries visit them there wherever they are permit-
ted to do so, and teach them. It is a rigid condition of this
work that the pupil must also receive Biblical instruction.




3. Medical. —This branch of our work was really initiated
by Miss McNeil, although she only had the qualifications of
a dispenser of medicine. Hut the track which she blazed with
so much devotion was followed by Drs. Flora Butcher and
Amy Robinson for a short time, and then oy Dr. Innes,
under whose skilful hands the medical work has developed
greatly. The late Colonel Goodlet becoming aware of the
unsuitability of the existing hospital building, undertook to
erect a new one at his own cost. Unfortunately he was called
away before his plans were fully carried out, but his executors
have honoured his wishes, and the work has gone steadily
on though not without many vexatious delays. At the time
of publication the work is still incomplete. The site obtained
is a splendid one, and lies just outside the town of Sholing-
hur amid very beautiful surroundings. The building is the
finest in the town—indeed in the whole field. Close by
is another monument of the generosity of Colonel Goodlet in
the fine bungalow erected for the medical ladies. This is
complete and in occupation.
The medical work is conducted on the same general lines
as in one of our own home hospitals. There is a large daily
muster of out-patients in addition to those who are tempor-
arily inmates. In the case of all alike opportunity is taken
to tell them of the Great Healer. In addition to the work
done in the Hospital the doctor visits patients in their own
homes, and is liable to be called at any hour of the day or
night. There is a small rented building used as a men’s hos-
pital, under the care of an Indian doctor. The building is
quite unsuitable, the equipment inadequate, and there is
abundant room for a big expansion of medical effort on the
men’s side.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by W. M. Maclardy. General Printer, 34 Clarence
Street, Sydney, for the Presbyterian Church of Australia, Foreign Mission Department.




