

NLp 333.910994 GOR
.
/
'
?OV*m Vo* TOE. Etevit ft* ■"**
I .:
f (ROtSTtor4 .
I
I
I
j
<y lR DfWlO JoMfi .
.
■
.


r\r r vJA
JAMES DALLY
OLD AND RARE BOOKS
Oatlands, Tasmania
Telephone Oatlands 90


ADELAIDE: j
w. K. Thomas A Co., Printers, Grenfell Street, j
C-. — J
No. 2.
POINTS FOR THE PEOPLE
ON
THE RIVER QUESTION
DAVID J. GORDON.
“The River Murray, judged by its length of channel and area
of catchment, should be one of the great streams of the world ;
and, although its volume of water is small, relatively to its
immense gathering ground, it is yet the greatest waterway in
Australia, and its utilisation is of the first importance to the in-
habitants of the States through which it flows. It is, therefore,
matter for surprise that the problems which it is the function of
this Commission to investigate still remain unsettled.” —Report
of Hoyal Commission of Experts, 1902, page 8.




EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
OF THE
RIVER MURRAY LEAGUE.
PRESIDENT ;
Hon. George Brookman, M.L.C.
VICE-PRESIDENT:
Simpson Newland, Esq.
♦Representative P. McM. Glynn, Messrs. James Gartrell,
E. H. Bakewell, G. Fowler §tewart, David J. Gordon,
*F. AY. Young, M.P., Lavington Bonython, *A. AV. Piper,
*E. B. GRUNDY, K.C. (Chairman of Legal Sub-Committee), *G. J.
R. Murray, *AV. Culross, Capt. G. Ritchie, M.P., "Professor
Salmond.
SECRETARIES :
F. W. Young, M.P.
A. E. H. Evans.
* Members of Legal Committee.




THE CLAIM FOR THE FULL
UTILIZATION OF RIVER WATERS.
To render permanently navigable two great rivers, and thus supply cheap
communication to producers for thousands of miles inland; to provide a plentiful
supply of water to vast territories frequently stricken by drought; to throw open
fresh fields for the enterprising trader and mew lands for the producer, is surely
a policy which must appeal to the patriotism of the people of South Australia and
commend itself to their best judgment.—Leaflet No. 1.
Leaflet No. I. was intended as a sequel to the pamphlet “The
Gateway of the Interior: How to Utilize Australia's Great Water-
ways.” It was issued lie tween the time of the closing of the Corowa
Conference and the appointment of the commiission of experts
representing South Australia. New South Wales, and Victoria.
After having visited many points on the Murray, Darling, and
their tributaries, and examining a large number of witnesses, the
Commission made Its report in December, 1902. The volume,
which represents the work of the experts, is a valuable addition
to the literature on the river question. Whilst the report con-
tains ample evidence to justify the claims of South Australia,
the recommendations of the majority failed to satisfy the require-
ments of the three states. They pleased nobody, chiefly because
it was felt that the proposals, if carried out, would not lead to
a permanent solution of the problem. The following is a sum-
mary of the recommendations made by the Commission: —
1. The dhision .of the waters of the Murray on a certain basis of allotment.
3. Construction of storage reservoirs on th e Upper Murray, and weirs at the
Murray Mouth, at the cost of the three states in equal shares. Weir and head-
works at Bungowannah to be provided by .New South Wales and Victoria.
3. Appointment of permanent Commissioners to “control and modify diversions of
natural water’s.”
4. Substitution of special legislation, because of unsuitability of common law doc-
trine of riparian rights to Australian conditions.
5. Carrying out of additional diversion works for benefit of New South Wales and
Victoria.
0. Construction of eight locks between Blanehetown and Wentworth, at estimated
cost of £700,000; Federal Government to be invited to consider the advisableness
of carrying out the work as a “first instalment” of locking the river in the
interests of navigation.
The allotment scheme was unsatisfactory, and the majority
proposals were not in keeping -with the weight of evidence in


favour of cheap means of transit and the admissions made by
the experts in their general observation®. Although the Commis-
sion did not succeed in outlining an acceptable scheme for pre-
serving navigation and extending the opportunities for irrigation,
the experts, in the course of their report, strengthened the case
for South Australia.
CLAIMS OF NAVIGATION.
The following extracts serve to show that South Australia’s de-
mand for the maintenance of a navigable stream is reasonable: —
The navigation of the Murray is, and always has been, largely in the hands of
South Australia. ... Its (navigation) discontinuance is doubtless a great in
convenience and often serious loss to the settlers along the river, who are depen-
dent on water carriage for their supplies and for transit of their products. TO
MANY THE RIVER IS PRACTICALLY THE SOLE HIGHWAY OF TRADE, THE
COST OF LAND CARRIAGE BEING PROHIBITIVE. (Page 31.)
It has already been shown that no apportionment of water can, be made between
the states for irrigation and water conservation without regard to the requirements
of navigation. Sufficient water must be allowed to pass down the rivers to main-
tain navigability as heretofore, and, as time must elapse before the construction o:
locks and weirs, it is important to decide what are the conditions that will secure
this meanwhile. (Page 50.) ,
The conclusion is unavoidable that, although existing vested interests demand
certain substantial concessions in favour of maintaining the navigable condition o'
the rivers, the extension of navigation, except by the construction of locks, is not
to be looked for. . , . (Page 36.)
Over 70 -witnesses examined by the Commission declared that
navigation is “absolutely essential’’ to profitable settlement. At
Bourke the experts -were told that “water carriage meant a saving
of 25 to 50 per cent.’’ to producers.
NATURAL STORAGE RESERVOIRS.
An important point in the claim of South Australia, that Nature
provides ample water to meet all the requirements of navigation
and irrigation, is that the natural reservoirs along the course of
the stream could be cheaply and effectively used for storage pur-
poses. The experts found: —
. . . An important factor affecting the duration of navigation has been the
natural storage in certain lakes—a great part of which flowed out as the
river sank, so maintaining its volume, sometimes for one to two months beyond
that at which would otherwise have ceased. Some of these natural storages are
capable of improvement and regulation, their beneficial effect upon ihe naviga-
bility of the river being thereby extended. (Page 31.)
Lake Victoria, between Renmark and Wentworth, covers an area of 30,000 acres.
The outflow from the lake has been known to keep the river navigable to South
Australia for four weeks. At a cost of about £84,000, some 22,399 millions of
cubic icet could be stored —“a volume which, while allowing for evaporation, would
provide, in times of low river, 100.000 cubic feet per minute for a period of nearly
four months.” (Page 42.)


On the Darling, Lachlan, Murray, and Murrumbidgee, there are numerous lakes
or natural reservoirs that receive large volumes of water in floods. When the
river falls, the impounded water is released and flows back into the stream, con-
tributing largely to its volume. On the Darling alone there are 70 lakes, the
largest being Lake Cawndilla, which has a storage capacity of 7,106,000,000 cubic
feet. Lake Medindie, it is estimated, will impound 16,700,000,000 cubic
feet. The outflow from Lake Medindie alone, after having been filled by flood
waters, has been observed to maintain navigation in the Lower Darling for many
months after it had ceased higher up. (Page 42.)
CONFERENCE OF PREMIERS.
In April, 1903, a conference of Premiers took place in Sydney,
at which South Australia was represented by the Premier (Hon.
J. G. Jenkins) and the then Attorney-General (Hon. J. H. Gor-
don). At that conference the recommendations of the experts
were practically shelved. Mr. Jenkins submitted the following
resolution to this conference: —
1. That this conference is of opinion 1. That the Federal Government should
be asked to undertake as a Commonwealth scheme the locking of the River Murray
from Wentworth to Blanchetown to secure the permanent navigability of the river.
2. That, after this work is completed', the states of New South Wales, Victoria, and
South Australia should respectively bear the cost of conservation and irrigation
schemes within their own borders. 3. That the water not required for maintaining
navigation shall be allotted as follows:—A minimum of 70,000 cubic feet per
minute to be allowed to flow into South Australia, and the balance to be divided
between New South Wales and Victoria as follows: —Two-thirds to New South
Wales, and one-third to Victoria. 4. That an independent permanent commission
be appointed by the Fedteral Executive with authority to maintain these conditions.
This motion was lost, owing to Victoria’s representative (Mr. Ir-
vine) voting against it. Mr. Jenkins then moved in favour of the
navigability of the Murray being maintained, and that further
diversion works should not be proceeded with until some definite
action had been taken to preserve navigability. This was also de-
feated. A compromise was finally agreed upon, making an allotment
of the water on a more generous scale than that proposed by
the Royal Commission. No attempt, however, was made by any of
the states interested to ratify the bargain agreed upon at the
Premiers’ Conference, and nothing came of the proposal. The re-
sult, therefore, of the enquiry by the experts in 1902 and the
conference of Premiers in 1903 was merely to add to the general
information of the subject. No practical advance has been made
since the sitting of the Corowa Conference in April, 1902.
CONSTITUTIONAL CLAIMS OF SOUTH
AUSTRALIA.
South Australia joined the federal union confident that justice
would be done to all as equal partners in the Commonwealth. In


18SG it was claimed, on behalf of New South Wales and Victoria,
that “the whole of the waters of the Upper Murray and its tributa-
ries, and the whole of the waters of the Lower Murray, shall be
deemed to be the property of New South Wales and Victoria.” It
was to this bargain that Sir John See (Premier of New South Wales)
referred when he said:—“ There was a time when we put forward
a claim to control all the waters of the Murray, but since we
have handed over the control of interstate rivers to the Federal
Government the aspect of the whole thing has changed.” The
experts in their report stated that the legal evidence showed
that “any interference with the natural flow of the Murray that
would render the river less navigable would be unconstitutional.”
Representative Glynn, in the course of an important statement
in The Register of May 9, 1904, on the legal aspect, said: —•
“If the solution principle applied by nations such as Russia and Turkey is
beyond Australian statesmanship it may necessitate some of us reconsidering our
estimate of the capacity of us Australians for working the federal system. The
question will, as Mr. Wade seems to think, soon reach the acute stage. In March,
1903, Victoria was taking about 75 per cent, of the water of the Upper Murray
and the Goulburn. Her chief schemes are not yet completed. For instance, thr
Goulburn channel, in respect to the completion of which a tender was recently
accepted, will have a diverting capacity of 103,000 cubic feet a minute, while at
the time referred to I believe the total Victorian diversions amounted to only 51,000
cubic feet a minute. From Albury to Echuca there are 11 cuttings, of whicu
three only are in New South Wale?, made out from 3 to 11 ft. above the summer
level, and I believe that the Deep Creek cutting, 20 miles below Echuca, on the Vic-
torian side, is made to the summer level. I need not go into other schemes with
which your readers have already been made familiar by your own articles. The upshot
of the whole matter is that the time has clearly come for a settlement of this ques-
tion, and that if statesmanship be not equal to it an appeal must be made to the
judiciary. Should the occasion of intervention by South Australia be opportune, I
have little doubt that we shall succeed in establishing our claims to a reasonabla
proportion of the waters.”
lu the course of a paper on “Property in Water” before tlie
Royal Society Conference, held last year in Sydney, Mr, George
Chamier said; —
Victoria, by several works in operation, already draws a considerable quantity
of water from the Murray River. Some important undertakings in prospect would
absorb much more. New South Wales has taken practically nothing from the
river as yet, but it has a projected scheme for an irrigating canal that would divert
a large portion of the stream, and at a time when the water in the river can least
be spared. The interests of South Australia are mostly centred in the navigation
of the Lower Murray, which might thus be seriously affected. Certainly that state
IS FULLY JUSTIFIED IN OPPOSING THE WITHDRAWAL OF SO LARGE A
VOLUME FROM THE RIVER AS TO CRIPPLE AN ESTABLISHED INDUSTRY IS
WHICH IT IS LARGELY INTERESTED.
Viewed on the basis of the principles of law and equity, it is evident that the water
flowing in an interstate navigable river should not be withdrawn, apart from “reason-
able use” of riparian owners, to the detriment of any vested interests in the rivet.
It is no justification for such action to allege that South Australia contributes
nothing to the Murray, as it is quite immaterial where the water comes from. It
is no justification, as between states, to dwell upon the superior importance of
irrigation.
Mr. Chamier advocated locks and storage basins as the only
practical solution of the problem.


LOCKS OR LAW.
South Australia lias no wish to render useless by the force of
law any works already in operation, or to prevent the completion of
schemes calculated to benefit up-stream settlers. All that we ask
is that, concurrent with the carrying out of such undertakings,
there shall be adopted on a national basis compensation works in
the shape of locks and storage basins. If further diversions
are made in the absence of locks the only alternative for South
Australia is law! For less money than the Western Austra-
lian Government spent in providing a water supply for the
goldfields, the three states of South Australia, New South Wales,
and Victoria can construct locks and storage basins, which
will ensure the maximum supply of water needed for both naviga-
tion and irrigation. Mr. McKinney, when head of the water con-
servation branch of the Public Works Department of New South
Wales, admitted that “recent experience of other countries shows
that the latter object (navigation) increases in importance with
increase of population; and that inland navigation, though it
may be in a large measure temporarily superseded by the con-
struction of railways, ultimately more than regains its position
as a trade-carrying agency.” That, in a nutshell, is the argument
in favour of locking—an argument which is all in
the interests of the producer in these remote parts
of New South Wales whose natural outlet Ls by the Darling and
the Murray. The ex-Ohief Engineer of Water Conservation in
New South Wales and his collaborator (Mr. P. W. Ward, now
editor of The Sydney Daily Telegraph), in a report on the utiliza-
tion of the Darling, stated further;—
Obviously one of the first uses to which the Darling River could be put was that
of navigation. No doubt this use played an important part in encouraging the
original occupation. From then till now, land carriage has heavily Handicapped
production. In dry seasons teams have to carry their own fodder, and in wet
seasons the unmetalled roads in a soft country cut up quickly, causing frequent
and costly deilays. Only one railway has so far touched the Darling. The average
carriage rate to shipping ports for western produce is still so high as to be one
of the severest taxes on industrial enterprise in that part of the colony. Additional
railways are certain to be constructed in the course of time; but the experience of the
world proves conclusively that they will not supersede water traffic. Economic
results are often obtained by working the two systems together; but the iron road
cannot destroy canal or river service where there is a level competition. •
RAILWAYS versus RIVERS.
%
The States of Victoria and New South Wales have spared no
effort to destroy the river trade. The former state has tapped
the Murray at nine different points between Albury and Mildura,
and all sorts of devices have been resorted to in order to divert


trade to Melbourne. River-borne goods have been carried over tbe
railways for less than half the rates in some instances that were
charged to Victorian producers, who were subsequently taxed 10
make up the losses on their own railways! In their desperation
to secure traffic the Victorian Government, according to evidence
given to the Royal Commission, resorted to the doubtful practice
of bribing the masters of river steamers to the etxtent of G'l.
per bale on all wool they brought to Victorian ports. New South
Wales has also attempted to defy distance and ignore geographical
limitations. The spectacle lias been witnessed of goods being
carried from Sydney to Bourke —500 miles apart—at a less rate
than that for which similar products are conveyed a quarter of
the distance over any other line in the same state! Settlers
living halfway between Sydney and Bourke had their goods con-
signed to Bourke, and then sent back to them from the river
town, and they saved money by the manipulation! As an illus-
tration of hod r a navigable river can compete successfully against
railways it may be mentioned that at the present time certain
classes of goods for Broken Hill are being carried by rail to
Morgan, thence by river steamer to Wileannia, and from there
80 miles on camels to Broken Hill at less cost than they can
be sent by railway direct from Port Adelaide! Admitting that
the competition of the rivers is bad for the railways—some of
which should never have been built —inland producers reap the
benefit of cheap transit to the seaboard. A saving of from
25 to 50 per cent, is made by producers along the Darling when
that stream is navigable!
NAVIGATION NECESSARY TO SUCCESSFUL
IRRIGATION.
As was pointed out in the pamphlet “The Gateway of the
Interior,” that the retention of the Murray as a navigable stream
all the year round is of the most vital concern to South Australia
can hardly be doubted; and yet comparatively few persons realize
the glorious inheritance which Nature has provided for us in
that direction. No other river in the world lends itself more
readily to locking. With locks, the cast of irrigation can be
reduced to a payable basis, and the valley of the Murray made
highly productive. The success of irrigation largely depends on
the regularity of navigation. Mr. H. G. McKinney. M.1.C.E., who


(ioohva to Wentworth
Wentworth to Mungundie
Wentworth to the junction of
Murrumbidgee
Miles.
G17
1,330
the Murray and
Murray-Murruinbidgee junction t.
Narraudera .... 300
Murray-Murruinbidgee junction to
Corowa 485
Total
acted lor New South Wales for many years as engineer for rivers,
has stated: —"The intermittent character of many of the tributary
rivers, the low rate of discharge to which even the most valu-
able among them are liable to fall, and the small rainfall through-
out by far the greater part of the entire catchment, are factors
which increase both the importance and the difficulty of the
question of intercolonial water rights.” This opinion serves TO
EMPHASIZE THE NECESSITY FOR THE RIVERS BEING
LOCKED AT THE SAME TIME AS THE STARTING OF IR-
RIGATION SCHEMES UP STREAM. The uncertain character
of the (sources of supply would greatly jeopardize the lower
reaches, if water Avere diverted, as is proposed by Victoria and
New South Wales. The same authority regards the Murrum-
bidgee “as a river in the early stages of decrepitude,” and he
says that "it is not difficult to Imagine circumstances under
Avhich injudicious interference Avith the Avaters of the Named
or of the Mclntyre would have a perceptible effect on the River
Darling, hundreds of miles distant.” Mr. McKinney adds: —
“While South Australia contributes practically nothing to the
supply of Avater in the RiA'er Murray, it occupies an important
position in regard to navigation. For a distance of about 470
miles the remnant of the Avaters of the Murray and Darling
Rivers and their tributaries flows through South Australian ter-
ritory to the ocean near Goohva. The magnitude of the question
of navigation may to some extent be realized from the folloAving
statement of approximate lengths of river Avhich are navigable hi
good seasons: —
Although this navigation is liable to long interruptions on the
RiA'er Darling, and is intermittent eA’en on the Murray, still, hi
A'ieAv of the cheapness of Avater carriage, it seems safe to con-
clude that the question of inland naA'igation on the Rh r er Murray
and its tributaries aaIII remain a subject of great importance,


and one in which tiie interests of South Australia must receive
consideration.” That surely is a significant and important, as
it is an honest, admission. Mr. Lindon Bates has pointed out
that the Murray, with its tributaries, “is one of the largest rivers
in the world,” and it suggests singular apathy regarding this great
inheritance that Australians should so consistently ignore the
value of the river systems as highways of trade to the interior.
It has been estimated that the River Murray pours into the sea
annually a volume of water varying from 124,000,000,000 cubic
feet in a very dry year to 1,305,000,000,000 cubic feet in a high
flood like 1890. An ocean of fresh water running to waste! We
have been reproached by our up-stream neighbours for not having
attempted to check this outflow of fertilizing fluid to at least the
extent of providing compensation for the evaporation which takes
place from Lake Alexandrina and Lake Albert. The reply +o
such a complaint is that this work has always been regarded as
the “first step” to a complete system of locks and storage basins
such as will guarantee ample supplies 'of water for “all-the-year-
round” navigation and irrigation. Now that South Australia is
satisfied concerning her legal rights the work will probably be
authorized at an early date. When completed they will con-
stitute further vested interests of a substantial character sucn
as will strengthen the claims of this state.
BARRAGES NEAR THE MURRAY MOUTH.
In view of the fact that the building of barrages has become
a matter of practical politics it will be interesting to briefly review
the projects that have been put forward at various times. In
ISSG Mr. Goyder proposed the removal of the rock bar across
Holmes’s Creek, and to cut a channel through the neck of land
below it at a cost of £10,230. Sir John Coode thought that Mr.
Goyder underrated the power of the causes contributing to form
the bar; that the Goolwa channel would be injuriuosly affected
by the alteration, and that the bar would only be taken a little
further seawards, the crest remaining at the same height. Mr.
Abernetby. in 1857, proposed to separate the channels of the
Goolwa and the Coorong. Lieut. Goalen reported in 1876 that
the main objects had been realized by natural means. Sir John
Coode concurred that in meeting the confliction of currents and
the preservation of shore lines the principle was quite sound, but


the extent and direction were open to improvement in the then
existing circumstances. In 1874 Mr. H. 0. Mais favoured cutting
a canal direct to the sea, just below Goolwa. Mr. Hickson, in
18TG, recommended piling the Murray entrance and sheltering
it by a breakwater 8,200 ft. long, without deepening, and the
establishment of a transhipping place inside the bar. Sir Joan
Goode .questioned whether the result would warrant the expense
of one and a half millions, and thought that east winds would
tend to shoal-up the channel, and that the sand might prevent
vessels from loading outside the breakwater. Mr. Boothby, 30
years ago, proposed a ship canal from Goolwa to Encounter Bay,'
20 ft. deep at low water of spring tides, with two breakwaters of
4,320 ft. each. Sir John Goode thought it would entail a heavy
and constant outlay to maintain the channel, and in the absence
of scour from tidal or fresh water the proposal differed from the
work af the Murray entrance. Sir John Goode was unable to
recommend it. He considered that the only reasonable prospect
of success in making the Murray Mouth navigable for sea-going
vessels would be by the construction of two breakwaters from
the shore—one on either side of the entrance —so as to cover It,
and terminating in not less than G fm. at low water of spring
tides. The united lengths of the breakwaters were to be 11,000
ft., and the cost not less than two millions, without landing ac-
commodation or dredging away the bar. He reluctantly con-
cluded that the Murray Month works involved too large an ex-
penditure, with doubtful success, and favoured fixing the en-
trance of the channel and directing the line of the Goolwa and
Goorong channels by artificial means opposite to the south-east
corner of Hindmarsh Island if it could be done at moderate
cost. Lieut. Goalen’s proposal to protect the sands by promoting
vegetation should be followed. Sir John Goode also suggested
that the closing of the Muudoo channel might contribute to na
tural deepening at Port Goolwa and in the Goolwa channel. In
1890 Mr. A. B. Moucrieff submitted proposals to a Royal Com-
mission, which, while providing for the maintenance of shipping,
contemplated more particularly the stoppage of the inflow of
sea water to the lakes. Mr. Lindon Bates, after considering the
various proposals, remarked that all those who had reported on
the subject concluded that the improvements at the entrance pro-
position was substantially hopeless and very expensive. He came
to the same conclusion, and even a layman, as he notes the drift-


ing sand and watches the sea breaking in, is able to appreciate
the great difficulty of quietening the waves when a strong wind
is behind them and keeping the channel open. One of the last
official acts of Sir Anthony Musgrave when Governor was a visit
to Goolwa, the native meaning of which is “big waters.” Pie
stood on top of 'the narrow strip of land which separates the.
harbour of Goolwa from the ocean sands. Sir Anthony remarked
, on the simplicity of connecting the river with the sea by a navi-
gable channel, thus supporting the proposal of Mr. Mais. in
one of his last speeches the retiring Governor urged South Aus-
tralia “to pawn her shirt rather than lose the chance of capturing
the great river trade!” The Commission of Experts expressed
the opinion in 1902 that “the proper course to maintain a supply
of fresh water is the construction of a work at the outlet to
exclude the sea, so designed as to discharge river floods over its
crest.” In 1903 Messrs. Alexander B. Moncri6ff, William David-
son, and Thomas W. Keele reported on the construction of bar-
rages. Their estimate of cost for blocking up four channels and
placing a weir and lock across the Goolwa channel was £113,000.
This scheme has since been modified to the extent of leaving
the Goolwa channel open, and this will mean a considerable reduc-
tion in the outlay.
A POLICY OF “WATER FOR ALL.”
The policy of the River Murray League is to provide for the
“full utilization of river waters,” and with this end in view the
league advocates (1) the building of barrages on the channels
near the mouth of the Murray for the purpose of checking the
outflow of fresh water from and the inrush of the sea to the
lakes. This work will at least provide compensation water fo”
evaporation. (2) The construction of a complete system of locks
and storage basins. If this were done there would be no need
for further bickering, as, according to the best authorities, there
would then be an ample supply of water to meet the demands
of navigation and irrigation.
"It is inconceivable,” Representative Glynn has said, “that the
opportunities for internal development afforded by Australian
rivers can be much longer ignored; that the permanent naviga-
bility of waterways stretching through 3,000 miles of country of
virgin fertility should not be secured; or that the whole of an


No. of
Estmated
M array—
Locks.
Cost.
Klanchetown to state boundary of S.A..
(5
£(500,000
S.A. boundary to Echuca
. 20
730,000
Darling—
Went worth to Walgett
. 24
020,000
Murruinbldgee—
Junction of Murray to Hay
. 9
321,750
animal discharge, which in low years reaches at Morgan
225,000,000,000 cubic feet, a quantity capable of covering 5,000,000
acres with a depth of 12 in., should be for ever allowed to flow
wastefully to the sea.”
A navigable river is a natural highway, providing the cheapest
possible means of transit for producers. It is to many, as the
Royal Commission of Experts freely admitted, “practically the
sole highway of trade, the cost of land carriage being prohibitive.”
South Australia seeks to keep that highway open, and at the
same time make provision for the requirements of irrigation. For
providing locks and weirs for the navigation of the Murray, Mur-
rumbidgee. and Darling the Commission of Experts estimated the
cost as follows:—
Tata Is r.;> £2,r.71,750
Surely a comparatively small outlay considering the interests in-
volved and the prospective gain! As .Sir Edmund Barton said
when Prime Minister: —“Navigation and irrigation are very
much bound up in one another. Instead of being hostile they a’e
the complements one to the other.”
W.K.THOMAS &. C 2. PRINTERS. ADELAIDE.


|5;0
3 1508 00539352 2


/
'
'
*
, / -6: .
■
/
.
«
