





POLITICAL PORTRAITS
OP SOME OP THE
lEIBEKS OF THE PARLIAMENT
NEW SOUTH WALES,
INCLUDING—
COWPER,
HAY,
ARNOLD,
PIDDINGTON,
Dr. LANG,
ROBERTSON,
MARTIN,
HOSKINS,
D ALLEY,
EORSTER,
WILSON,
DALGLEISH.
DAVID BUCHANAN, Esq.,
(LATE M.P. POR MORPETH.)
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
PUBLISHED BY
DAVIES AND CO., NEWS AGENTS,
YORK AND BARRACK STREETS.
TO BE HAD OP ALL BOOKSELLERS AND COUNTRY STOREKEEPERS.




H yhbbj f ~JUS
TO THE EEV. HE. LANG, I.P.
Dear Sir,
I have great pleasure in dedicating to you the following
sketches of some of your contemporaries, in testimony of the high
appreciation in which your honest and self-sacrificing patriotism
and unswerving fidelity to the liberal cause is held by
Dear Sir,
Yours very sincerely,
DAVID BUCHANAN.
Sydney, 27 th January , 1863.




HONORABLE CHARLES COWPER.
®HERE is no character so much misunderstood by the general
public as that of the great chief of the liberal party, Mr.
Cowper. Many people suppose him to be a cunning,
deceitful man —a species of juggler, whose prime object is
to throw dust in the eyes of all parties. They suppose him
Hjvp to have no opinions of his own, and to be ready to act in
Mi any way that a majority directs him. The people who
think thus of Mr, Cowper were never more deceived in their lives. I
thought highly of the Premier long before I saw him 3 and, although
I cannot say I am intimate with him, I can say, with truth, the more
I have known him the more I have liked him—the more reason I
have had to admire him as a staunch, uncompromising member of the
liberal party. Mr. Cowper is about fifty years of age, has a good
figure and gentlemanly appearance 3 he is very quick and active in all
his movements, both mentally and physically ; his face is intelligent
and intellectual, open, expressive, and very thoughtful 3 his mouth
indicates, with unerring precision, the great decision of character he
possesses 3 his manner is most affable and agreeable, perfectly natural
and unaffected—affording, in this respect, a very favourable contrast
to Mr. Hay, whose affectation and puppyism amounts to absolute
vulgarity. He is very accessible to all parties 5 but you must be
prompt, explicit, and clear in any business you may have with him 3
he is as sharp as lightning, quick and penetrating in his thoughts,
and jumps to a conclusion at a stride, which, from his sound, practical
judgment, he seldom finds reason to alter. Air. Cowper is a man of
very remarkable ability, as, I doubt not, both friends and foes will
admit; but it would be difficult to specify distinctly and minutely
the combination of qualities which entitles him to this character. As
a speaker there is nothing remarkable about him 3 he makes a clear,
lucid, business-like statement 3 he never attempts to play the orator;
he might be styled an excellent parliamentary speaker—he takes up
a position and defends it by an array of the most irrefragible facts 3
he is always listened to with interest and attention 3 he is never
prolix, prosy, or tiresome 3 is always master of his subject, and


displays wonderful tact and discriminattion in eliminating, as mnicli as
possible, all the elements of opposition from it. When he forms an
opinion, not on any speculative subject, but on matters involvimg the
rights of parties, he clings to his opinion with immoveable temacity.
Nothing can shake his resolute firmness when once his mind iss made
up, as witness his conduct on the great question in reference to the
Church and School lands. On this question he was opposed by the
whole House, including his three ' colleagues; still, nothing daxunted,
he upheld his own opinions to the very last, and maintained threm, in
argument, with extraordinary energy and ability. Although I con-
sidered him quite wrong, I mention this as a proof of that porttion of
Mr. Cowper’s character which I admire most, and which few men
possess in so extraordinary a degree; his resolute and determined
firmness of purpose, and which, more than any other quality, fitts him
for the duties of his high office. The power of application! and
aptitude for business he possesses in a remarkable degree —he works
constantly and untiringly, and gets through business with amazing
facility. He is generally at his office before nine in the morning,
both during the sittings of Parliament and recess, and seldom leaves
before five in the afternoon; his energy and activity, and laborious
zeal in performing the duties of his office, have frequently imperilled
his health; his attendance to his parliamentary duties is equally
constant and devoted. He possesses an extraordinary power over his
followers; they look up to him with respect, and repose the most
implicit confidence in his judgment, fidelity, and honour. His tact in
managing the opposition is so unerring in its operation, that it actually
amounts to high talent. The Cowper administration never stood so
firm as it does at this moment, and this is in a great measure to be
attributed to the sound judgment, great sagacity, and true liberalism
of Mr. Cowper himself. He has even made converts from the side of
Toryism, inasmuch as tories, and originally opponents of Mr. Cowper,
have, before resigning, offered to hold their seats till suitable liberals
could be found to take them. The tory party seem to have come to
the conclusion that, as they are completely annihilated as a party,
hopelessly defeated and lost, their best plan is to support the present
Government, inasmuch as they know the men; and if they combine
to remove them, they plainly see that the progress and prosperity of
the country would be greatly impeded, and their tory prejudices would
be fanned into a flame at the thoughts of some unknown adventurers
seizing upon the reins and driving the state-coach at a speed calculated
to derange their somewhat delicate nerves. ■ While the country will
never get a more liberal Government than the present, or one more
anxiously devoted to the best interests of the people at large, what
guarantee have we that, in the event of their removal } we would not
get an administration inimical to every principle, for the attainment
of which the liberal party have so long struggled, and which the


present Government have so zealously guarded and protected. As the,
chief and leader of the liberal party, Mr. Cowper deserves their
warmest gratitude. He has been faithful and true to them throughout
a long career. I defy any member of the liberal party to point to
even one instance of doubtful conduct in his whole life. The late
appointments to the Upper House—including Wentworth, Manning,
&c.—is the only matter that exception can, with any show of reason,
be taken to. I condemned those appointments as loudly as any man
at the time, but it seems Mr. Cowper had them pretty well tied down;
they passed all his liberal measures, and it was quite time enough to
condemn his policy when they refused to do so, and he failed to take
energetic and decisive action in the matter. In negociations of this
description Mr. Cowper’s talent shines out ; he is able, astute, uncom-
promising, and firm, and those qualities are graced by a mild, placid,
conciliatory manner, which seems to melt down opposition, and com-
mands friendship and respect. He has no selfish purposes in view;
has a high appreciation of his own dignity and honour ; and, I believe,
would not hold office a second under circumstances in the slightest
degree humiliating to his character as Prime Minister of this country.
If proof were wanting of his fidelity to his principles and party, I
might cite the instance when Mr. Donaldson was invited to form an
administration, he asked Mr. Cowper to join him, offering him the
position of Premier. Mr. Cowper point blank refused. If we could
know all, I firmly believe the Tory party have left no stone unturned
to gain over Mr. Cowper to their cause. Their anxiety to initiate
him into the mysteries of Bent Street is in some measure a proof of
this. Who ever heard of Mr. Cowper asking any one but gentlemen
holding the most radical opinions to join him in the Government of
the country ? Some people talk of Mr. Cowper having conservative
leanings, meaning thereby that he has an inclination to Toryism. He
has conservative leanings —nay, he is a thorough Conservative; but
he is a conservative of good—not of evil \ he would conserve the ballot
and manhood suffrage, &c. A Tory is a person who respects laws and
institutions in consideration of their antiquity, and from a groundless,
senseless, effeminate dread of change. If any one supposes Mr.
Cowper has the slightest taint of Toryism, in this its true sense, in his
composition, he never made a more grievous blunder. Satisfy Mr,
Cowper that any law or institution is useless or unjust, and down it
comes headlong. He would not hesitate a minute. There is no man
more free of indecision than Mr. Cowper. Even suppose, at first, that
he docs not acquiesce in certain principles, if he sees the vast body of
the people resolutely bent upon their adoption—if he notices the wind
blowing strongly and steadily, and with continually increasing power
from the same quurter—he, without hesitation, ’bouts ship and runs
before it. The wisdom of this policy is borne out by the illustrious
examples of Sir 11. Peel. Wellington, Russell, and Palmerston, who have


ever considered it to be the wisest policy to make timely concessions to
the demands of a majority of the people. English history shows that a
departure from this policy has led to calamities and disasters most fatal to
the happiness of the people and to the security and welfare of the State.
Mr. Cowper,as far as I have seen or observed, is what his whole life proves
him to be, viz., a genuine liberal—he is entirely free from prejudice
—he is a man thoroughly conversant with the world and its affairs,
knows human nature well, is an able diplomatist, sees danger afar off
and makes ample provision for it, makes no enemies whatever,
strengthens his position by a skill and ingenuity which completely
baffles his opponents, steals marches upon them and strikes them
when they least expect it, out-manoeuvres them with a dexterity
which Palmerston might envy,—and so governs the country with a
success which stamps him as by far the ablest man we have amongst
us, and one whose loss would act most prejudicially upon the best
interests of this country. Mr. Cowper has not attained his present
high position all at once, or through the aid of powerful friends. No
public man laboured longer in obscure and subordinate positions; he
worked as a public man for years before he held any high office, and
impressed all with whom he came in contact, particularly his
political opponents, with a very high sense of his capicity, great
industry, and aptitude for business. When I first came to this country
I instantly turned my attention to its political position. I had just
left England, and had there taken a conspicious part in one of the
fiercest political contentions of modern times. I had seen most of
our leaders banished or imprisoned, and our ranks scattered and sunk
in hopeless dismay. We were merely advocating what we have made
the law of the land in this country, I was, therefore, on my arrival,
and since, intensely interested in its political position and history. I
soon marked out the friends and enemies of free institutions. About
this time Mr. Cowpers’ great talents might be said to be
only appearing above the horizon, with all that promise which
has now been so fully realised. I singled him out instinctively
as a true friend of the Liberal cause, and for the last twelve
or thirteen years I have watched most closely the political
history of the country, and the conduct of public men, and am
at this moment more satisfied than ever I was of Mr. Cowper’s truth-
fulness and fidelity to liberal institutions. We have no instance on
record of Mr. Cowper sending for the leading men of the Tory party
to aid him in the formation of a government as was done by some of
our pretended liberals; nor did we ever see him look to the Tories as
the mainstay of his government, as was done by others. He invariably
selected well-known liberals as his colleagues, promulgated a pro-
gramme of the most comprehensive and liberal eharacter, and looked
to the mass of the people for support and triumph. As far as honor,
uprightness, and unflinching fidelity to the liberal cause is concerned,


Mr. Cowper’s history and character will hear the most searching
criticism, and issue from the ordeal perfectly pure and unsullied. I
believe, notwithstanding the few puny detractors he has in the
Assembly, that he stands high in the estimation of the vast body of
the people; that the liberal cause is mainly indebted to his ability,
honesty, and firmness, for its triumph ; that the country has risen to
unexampled prosperity under his rule ; and that to him and his col-
leagues are we indebted for anything we can boast of in the shape of
reform. And yet this is the man and the Government that the
Assembly is occasionally asked to turn adrift at the instance of Messrs.
Wilson, Piddington, Hoskins, &c., men wholly inexperienced; possess-
ing not a tithe of the capacity of the present men ; in no sense so true
to the liberal cause ; and totally inefficient and utterly incapable of
commanding recognition or support. Mr. Wilson has made one or two
very felonious attempts to unseat Mr. Cowper, but without success.
Should he ever attain this very unlikely end, the country will then
witness the melancholy spectacle of—
An eagle, towering in his pride of place,
By a mousing owl hawked at and killed.


MR. JOHN HAY.
IS not my object to be intentionally offensive in writing these
sketches, nor even offensive at all, but not professing to write
qr j panegyrics upon the different members, but simply to give my
own impressions of their public character, honesty, and ability,
(J'j I, of course, may say things that will be unpalatable. If a pre-
qT j cedent for this is wanted, the example of the Sydney Morning
r Herald, the Sydney Mail, the Goulhurn Herald, the Bathurst
Free Press, &c., is at hand, and though I trust I shall never be found
imitating the low scurrility of the writers in the Sydney Press on this
very subject, I hope I may aim more at giving your readers a clear
insight to the personal character, mental peculiarities, startling incon-
sistencies, moral obliquities, and noble traits, if any, so that they may
be enabled to form a just estimate of the different leading men who
shine conspicuously above our political horizon. The second subject I
have selected for dissection, or rather vivisection, is Mr. Hay, the leader
of the high tory party and the hon. member for the Murray. Al-
though I have no personal intimacy with Mr. Play, still we have
always been civil to each other, and I have had a good deal of plea-
sant conversation with him from meeting him casually in my attend-
ance at the Legislature. I have also paid close attention to all he has
said in his place, and have long, long ago, formed a very decided esti-
mate of his merits as a representative and his character as a man. Mr.
Hay is a Scotchman, and not at all a good specimen of that country;
any one not possessed of a quick ear would take him for a thorough-
paced cockney, and in Scotland there is no treason so high as any of her
sons daring to attempt to catch the English accent. But Mr. Hay out-
herods Herod. His accent is an outrageous mixture of the broadest
Aberdeenshire dialect with the most rampant cockneyism. For instance,
he calls “ act” “ ect,” and “ own” he sounds like “ noun,” “ thought”
he sounds “ thote,” all of which is highly ludicrous when taken in con-
nection with his prevailing and studious, but withal futile, efforts to
pass himself off for a Londoner. His manner is most decidedly arti-
ficial and affected, and it is certainly humiliating to find qualities of
this description in a person of his years and pretension—qualities


which we would censure most loudly if we found them deforming the
otherwise graceful demeanour of a hoarding-school girl. Mr. Hay is
beyond all doubt a vastly over-estimated man. As a speaker, he is
contemptible; as a debater, nowhere ; and I cannot for my life under-
stand how lie has acquired the influence which he undoubtedly posses-
ses, unless it is in consequence of his pompous ya-ya-style, his affectation
of a superfine refinement, and from the tendency of the poor, forlorn,
effeminate creatures with whom he mixes, to look up to him as the
type and beau-ideal of lofty hauteur and aristocratic dandyism. But
the main cause of his influence is the deep degrading ignorance and
utter incapacity of the greater portion of his audience. I have heard
Mr. Hay speak the most arrant stuff, mere absolute drivelling ; I have
seen him actually run to seed, and have looked round the Assembly
with a smile to see numerous honorable members, with open mouths
and straining eyes, lapping up the contemptible rubbish, simply be-
cause it came from Mr. Hay, the pink of gentlemen, ha ! ha! and the
crutch of Australia’s limping aristocracy. Mr. Hay is no debater;
never on any one occasion did I ever see him at the commencement of
a debate on any great question, boldly dash into it, lay down the
principles he believes in, support them by iron logic and inflexible
argument, leaving his address a tower of strength, defying the artillery
of his opponents to move a single stone of it. Bid Mr. Hay ever do
this ? No, he knows a trick worth two of that. But on all occasions
he waits till every member has spoken, and then speaks when no one
can reply to him, takes hold of those speeches he has heard conspicuous
for their folly, and sometimes cleverly enough ridicules them, and
then, when every one thinks he has finished—and it would be well for
him if he had the sense to do so—he proses on for full half-an-hour
the most insipid vapid trash, coming slowly, sleepily, and heavily
from his lips, because he is never fluent or animated, until some im-
patient gesture or sound from some of the more rational of his audience
reminds him that he had better wind up; he does so, to the infinite
reliei of the best part of the Assembly. Mr. Hay is very unskilful in
debate, laying himself open to every attack; he is vulnerable at
almost all points, but this is seldom taken advantage of from the facts
I have already mentioned, of his never speaking till the close of a
debate. He is devoid of energy, courage, intrepidity, sincerity, or
earnestness: this was finely illustrated in the late debate on State-aid
to Religion. Although the supporters of this system had neither
talent nor argument on their side—although the abolitionists smoth-
ered them in defeat, and boldly dared their best men to the combat—
yet Mr. Hay, although a supporter of the system, was silent—he never
uttered a word. If he had had a spark of debating power in his com-
position—if he possessed a mind imbued with sincerity and earnest-
ness, would he not have grappled manfully and courageously with this
subject would he not have sprung to the rescue, and gallantly done


all he could for the principle he affected to believe in ? But no, he
knew well there were abler men than himself lying in wait for him,
and had he dared to utter a word in defence of the principle of State-
aid to religion, like Martin, he would only have made the weakness of
the cause more conspicuously perceptible, and like Martin also he
would most assuredly have been flayed alive. Mr. Hay’s unskilfulness
in leaving himself open to attack I have spoken of, Mr. Hay seems to
be aware of this defect himself, which is seen in the caution which
prompts him to avoid speaking till all the men of note have gone before
him. I recollect on a debate on the Fencing Bill Mr. Hay illustrat-
ing the evils of free selection by a squabble that had taken place be-
tween two squatters—the one having free selected on the other’s run,
and angry feelings having sprung up in consequence, they were likely
to have come in personal collision. I will never forget the melancholy
wailing of Mr. Hay over the iniquity of making such a law that could
have any tendency to cause so dire a catastrophe as this; hp even got
quite grand and tragic, and held up to the House the appalling picture
of one of those squatters actually shedding the other’s blood,' and pro-
ceeded with a sickening solemnity—richly comical, from the ludicrously
grotesque ideas involved, and the solemn manner of the speaker—to
predict something too outrageous for human utterance to be the inevi-
table result of free selection. But did Mr. Hay never reflect that this
artillery could have been turned, and was turned against himself with
most destructive effect ? Did Mr. Hay not know that before free
selection existed a most unjust monopoly deprived the people of all
right to the land ? Did he not know that the people, with a forbear-
ance unparallelled, were most considerate and moderate in their de-
mands ? Did he not know that his own party resisted the fair, and
just, and moderate demands of the people with an unprincipled obsti-
nacy which forced the people into an attitude of menace, accompanied
by low murmurings of open violence ? And did he not see far more
danger here —not of one squatter bleeding another’s nose—but of an
entire people roused to resistence and inflamed to madness, and bent
on nothing so much as recking their vengeance on the heads of their
oppressors ? Surely there was far more danger to be apprehended
from resisting the admittedly just demands of the vast body of the
people than any trifling scrimmage that might take place in conse-
quence of one squatter free selecting on another’s run. I never can
respect Mr, Hay as a man, when I reflect that he, in the Parliament
of the country, and in a speech of withering severity, brought a series
of very grave charges against Mr. Martin, on the occasion of that
gentleman being appointed Attorney-General. The speech of Mr. Hay,
containing the charges he belidved Mr. Martin guilty of, is on record j
and how Mr. Hay can reconcile that speech and his belief in the
charges therein contained with the fact of his giving James
Martin his arm into the Assembly on a late occasion, is utterly beyond


my comprehension, and I can account for it in’no way but on an hypo-
thesis most any respect I might have for Mr. Hay.
As an Opposition leader, Mr. Hay conducts his opposition in a manly,
dignified, and honorable way; there is none of the paltry peddling,
trumpery style of Wilson or Piddington about him. If he attacks the
Government, it is on some great and important constitutional question
—not on the appointment of two or three policemen, or like some of
the more contemptible of the opposition, who actually thought to beguile
the ministry from their seats under the magic influence of a tune on
Lady Young’s piano. Mr. Hay, I know, believes that his party is
completely annihilated—that the waves of democracy, as they roll in
upon us, will continually increase in breadth and volume, and all that
he or any of us can do is to govern and direct them by salutary and
enlightened laws, having for their object the equal benefit of all classes
of the community.
13


HONORABLE JOHN ROBERTSON.
«HE Minister of Lands is undoubtedly the most popular man
in the House. Ido not believe there are more than two
men in the House who bear him any ill will, and were I
, r . to mention the names of the two I refer to, the public
Aq.q would not be much surprised. Mr. Robertson has reached a
X-P great position in this country, and the question naturally
arises, what does he owe it to ? Not to wealth; not to
influential or powerful relatives or connections; not to any
advantitlous aid whatever’—but simply to the possession of great
natural ability, unwearied assiduity and perseverance, unimpeaehible
honesty of purpose, a power of application that never flags, and a
devotion to the best interests of the people as rare as it is genuine and
true. Those are the qualities which, in the person of Mr. Robertson,
have borne down every obstacle, have won the respect and regard of
thevast body of the people, and placed him in the distinguished and
honourable position he now occupies. Mr. Robertson, I should say,
is about fifty years of age, slightly above the middle height, his figure
is slim and well made, not sti’ong nor robust, although he is apparently
very healthy; hehas a very fine expressive face, full of intelligence,
which is improved by being left, as Clod intended it, without being sub-
jected to the modern innovation of shaving. The prevailing expression
of his face is very grave and thoughtful, and there is a calm and
classical dignity in his look which many an artist would think worth
painting. His manner is hearty, agreeable, and jovial; he is full of
generosity, cares little about money; there is nothing sordid or
avaricious in his nature, his mind being occupied with far higher pur-
poses. Just place his face alongside the face of a certain very wealthy
member of the House, and how’ startling is the difference; in the one
you can read as plainly, and much more plainly than language can
express it, an open, straightfonvard manliness—a perfect absence of
anything approaching to vice, a clear, upright intelligence, which at
once impresses you most favourably ; the other, with its contracted
lowering brows, its furtive glancing ferretty eyes, its thin compressed
lips, its inability to look you straight in the face, and the pi-ofusion of
red irritable bristles that decorate a low’, narrow, retreating forehead—
all bespeak a grasping pettifogging nature, a low grovelling disposition,


and a relentless and unfeeling cruelty, impervious to every sentiment
of generosity. If the physiognomy of the gentleman referred to does not
hear out all this, then Lavater is a fool, and the Creator of the World
never branded a had man’s bad disposition on his face. Let any one
look at the faces of Dr. Douglass, or the Rev. John West of the Herald ,
and how coarse is the expression ? Nothing on earth would convince
me that these two men were candid politicians, or shake for a mo-
ment the opinion I have long formed of them, and which speaks
trumpet-tongued from every feature of their extraordinary
countenances. There is much more in this matter of physiognomy
than is generally thought. Take a couple of dozen of the worst
prisoners on Cockatoo Island, and compare their faces with the same
number of honest mechanics, and the difference will absolutely
surprise you. I believe, if I never saw either prisoners or
mechanics, and they were all mixed together, and dressed alike,
I could pick out the prisoners in nine cases out of ten. Take
twelve of the leading members of the House of Commons, and com-
pare their faces with twelve common jurors, and by this means you
would get a good lesson on physiognomy, and be very much struck
with its truthfulness. But if the truth of physiognomy was to be
judged by the faces of the men I have mentioned above, the
correctness of their character and disposition are so unerringly and
indelibly marked there that physiognomy requires no stronger
argument to prove its reasonableness than strong foundation in truth.
Mr, Robertson came to this country very young, and must have
received a good plain education. I do not know r whether he was
educated in the classics, which is thought so much of, but if he was
not, he is none the worse of it; those classical men are, in a great
many cases, mere grammatical blockheads, with a perfect knowledge
of Latin and Greek, and a profound ignorance of the world and its
affairs. Latin and Greek certainly give us a greater facility in
acquiring a knowledge of the English tongue, but beyond this they
are valueless, except, perhaps, to admire the genius of Homer, Virgil,
Horace, or Ovid—-genius that has, in my estimation, at least, been
far surpassed by our own Shakespeare, Milton, Byron, and Shelly.
What member of the House of Commons finds his classical lore of
any service to him in discussing the various questions that come up
there ? What want does John Bright feel without it, in launching
his massive English at their head ? Even suppose Mr. Terence
Aubrey Murray and Mr. John Hay can wind up a set carefully
prepared speech with a Latin quotation, and I believe this is about
the extent of their classical knowledge; still, if it were ten times
greater, both of them combined would be nowhere if pitted against
the great sagacity, acuteness, and natural capacity of Mr. John
Robertson. Mr. Robertson is in many respects a very remarkable
man—compelled from early youth to labour hard, he could not have


real much, nor do I believe he has—entering Parliament, fresh as it
were from the plough, his great natural talents were at once recognised
—in a House composed of several lawyers aud squatters of ability, he
at once attacked them in their stronghold, and never ceased till he
completely overthrew them. Mr. Robertson is a thorough earnest,
sound Liberal. One of his first acts in Parliament was to repeal the
obnoxious Masters’ and Servants’ Act—an act most oppressive in its
operation, and conceived in an entirely one-sided spirit, aud giving
power to the master of the most exorbitant and tyrannical description.
Mr. Robertson substituted an act, the present one, which is in every
sense fair and equitable—this act was carried in a House most adverse
to the claims of the working man, and would never have been carried
but for the integrity, energy, and ability of Mr. Robertson. If
there is a man in this country deserves honour and credit for great
public services surely the name of Mr. Robertson will not be
forgotten. His Land Bill has effected a world of good during the
short time it has been in existence, I believe somewhat about six
thousand people have selected land under it, this I call a wonderful
success. Free selection before survey was certainly a great principle,
but I was always of opinion that there was a great deal too much land
reserved from it. The Minister of Lands, however, conceived and
conducted this bill through both Houses of Parliament with unrivalled
ability. On this question he had no equal in the House. He was
more than a match, not only for any man in the House, but for the
whole House put together; and nothing surprised me more than his
amazing acuteness and readiness in dealing with the various
amendments that were made—implying so extensive a knowledge of
the subject, such a quickness and facility in seeing their drift, neither
lawyers nor squatters could cope with him on this subject. The
Land Bill may be said to be the most important piece of legislation
we have passed in this country, with the exception of the Electoral
Act; it shows how just and considerate were the feelings of its framer
towards the people ; the unweared energy and ability with which he
advocated its principles and defended it in its passage through
Parliament should satisfy the most incredulous of hig earnestness and
sincerity on the question of land reform, and should for ever give the
lie to the insinuation—the silly absurdity—that Mr. Robertson
contemplated injuring the principle of free-selection by the
introduction of the Fencing Bill, I have before remarked upon the
great incapacity of a large portion of the present Assembly, and the
readiness with which they used to swallow everything that fell from
Mr. Hay. When the Fencing Bill was under discussion, Mr. Hay
happened to say that it would take the sting out of free-selection—-
meaning, from the fact of all lands being fenced, there would be no
danger or annoyance from cattle straying upon other people’s property.
A large portion of the members, without reason and without rhyme.


immediately rushed headlong to the conclusion that this Fencing
Bill, by some undefined and unknown process, was meant to
annihilate free-selection at one fell swoop. No reason was assigned
for this extraordinary effect, and although only two squatters voted
for the Fencing Bill and half-a-dozen against it, and Mr. Kobertson
ridiculed clearly and lucidly the preposterous idea —still Mr. Hay had
said it, and, notwithstanding his meaning being sadly misapprehended
and misunderstood and a variety of efforts to explain this to the
House, it was all of no use : —a panic had seized upon a number of
the members, and most of them voted against the Fencing Bill—
confessedly understanding little about it, and led to do so from the
mere fact of Mr. Hay saying it would take the sting out of free-
selection. As a speaker Mr. Robertson is very fluent and ready.
His voice is a great drawback to him, which is naturally defective. In
speaking, his action and appearance are very animated 3 he is earnest
and exciteable, speaks with great energy, and seems to throw his
whole soul into the work. On questions affecting the land policy of
the country, impounding, &c., he has no equal in the House, he
understands those matters better than any man in the country,
his great knowledge and experience rendering him very formidable.
On other questions he is not so successful. I believe he never
prepares his speeches in the slighest degree, and he always
speaks best in committee when combating the objections that may be
made to any of his bills ; his readiness and acuteness are very
remarkable. He is always animated and frequently very forcible and
argumentative. He however often provokes opposition by being
unnecessarily severe in his attacks, and there is no man enjoys a bout
of this description more than the Minister of Lands. His industry
and close application to the duties of his office are proverbial: he is
seldom a moment absent from his post from nine in the morning till
four or five in the afternoon. He is beyond all question the ablest
Land Minister the country has ever seen, and any administration
would feel his loss vitaly. He is of immense service to the present
Government, and I trust he may be long spared in life and health to
adorn the position his own great ability and indomitable energy so
well entitle him to. It is as a reformer in our land system that the
name of Mr. Robertson will be remembered, and his services are of a
character well calculated to sink deep into the hearts of the people of
this country. His name will be for ever associated with a reformation
that will create and diseminate more happiness than falls to the lot of
almost any people. Thousands of families, while proudly pacing their
own acres, or sitting comfortably enjoying the fruits of them at their
own firesides, will feel a glow of warm regard and affection for the
name of Mr. Robertson, as they reflect that it is to him they almost
owe everything; that but for his abilty, courage, and enthusiasm in
the cause of land reform, in all probability the old monopoly would


still exist, and they would be landless. It must be a consoling
reflection for Mr. Robertson, amidst all bis toils and troubles, to
think he has opened the way to wealth and happiness to so many of
his fellow beings. This is his grand reward, and I know of no luxury
equal to it. Mr. Robertson was much blamed during the agitation on
the land question for endangering, if not ruining, the pastoral
interest by his land policy. He invariably disclaimed this, and always
maintained that his land bill would promote the best interests of the
squatters —the proof of this is seen in the increased value of those
pastoral properties that have come into the market since the passing
of the land bill. The Minister of Lands is much to shrewd and
sagacious a man even to dream of injuring an interest of such
importance and magnitude as the pastoral interest of this country.
He is one of the few men who have lived to see their own original
policy on any great question embodied in the legislation of the
country, and this great success is mainly attributable to his own
courage, intrepidity, and indefatigable exertions. He fought his land
bill through the Lower House with astonishing energy and talent;
at all hours, late and early, he was there to meet objections; and,
one of the peculiar characteristics of the man, he seemed to be
insensible to fatigue; at two or three in the morning he would get
up and expose the dangeraus and insiduous nature of any amendment
with as much vigour and animation as when the House first met; he
never seemed to be at a loss; every amendment, however ingeniously
conceived, he understood as if by intuition and pounced upon it like
an eaglehawk; his vast knowledge of the subject paralysed and
prostrated his enemies, and he carried his Bill in triumph. But,
not content with this, he consented to become a nominee, and
followed his great measures to the Upper House, and there, in an
atmosphere most obnoxious to him and his measure, and surrounded
by antagonists, he boldly and courageously laboured to indoctrinate
them with his own views. The same undaunted energy which
carried everything before it in the Lower House appeared here; he
quailed before none of them, and tossed about the fallacies of
renowned lawyers with as much ease as if he had been cracking nuts.
After piloting his measure safely through the dangerous shoals of the
Upper House, and having thus seen it made the law of the land, he
returned to the Lower Rouse, and now sits there as one of the most
distinguished representatives of the people. The future historian of
this country, in chronicling its history, will have no more honoured
name to speak of than that of John Robertson.


ME. JAMES MAETH.
« THINK it may be safely asserted that, in all ages, the greatest
amount of talent has sprung from the ranks of the Liberals.
While we acknowledge the appearance, in bygone times, of
C 55 such men as Walpole, Pitt, and Bolingbroke, on the opposite
side, still their brightness paled before the superior lustre of
U such men as Fox, Burke, Sheridan, and Wyndham. Even in
our own day, the whole talent of the Tory party is in the
possession of two men—Derby and Disraeli, and not very
luxuriantly in the latter ; while the Liberals can put forth, at a
moment’s notice, Cobden, Bright, Roebuck (the prince of representa-
tives), Palmerston, Russell, Brougham, and dozens of others, superior
to that superficial plagirist Disraeli. And when we come to glance at
our own political arena, this paucity of talent on the Tory side is very
marked and apparent, while the Liberals could always boast of their
Langs, Cowpers, Robertsons, Arnolds, Forsters—l was going to say
Wentworth, but I disown the man with loathing. The Conservative
party, as they call themselves, though I deny their right to such a
title, crumbled to pieces when they lost their poor, flimsy, superficial
coxcomb leader Donaldson, a man who deserted the poor creatures, and
ran away, when Prime Minister, with a majority at his back, and
earned for himself by this glorious act the spirit-stirring title of
“ Donaldson the Dauntless.” Under those melancholy circumstances,
when I have sketched Mr. Hay, what other man of the party is there
worth wasting a word upon ? What could the most inventive genius
find to say of Mr. M £ Leay, except, perhaps, that he was a walking
automaton, carrying about twenty stone of beef with him, and perfectly
guiltless of possessing anything more notable or valuable. In fact,
in taking a saunter through the garden of Toryism, we find that the
few flowers that used to flourish there are all cut down, and the
honorable member for the Murray is somewhat in the position of the
last rose of summer, with this material diffei’ence, that instead of being
left blooming, he is left withering, alone. lam therefore, constrained
to dig up that curious plant, Martin, and if I cannot extract any
fragrance therefrom, I believe it will be from no want of skill in analysis.


It has frequently struck me with -what ease and facility a man gains
the reputation of ability in this country. Wentworth is thought a
man of genius, although his abilities, such as they are, would be
scarcely visible to the naked eye in England ; and it is a pitiable sight
to see his affected friends toadying and pandering to his strong weak-
nesses, and fooling the weak, silly, vain old man to the top of his
bent. But, as surely as I write it, it will require four or five additional
monuments, and half a dozen more portraits, hung up in various parts
of Sydney, to save the name of Wentworth from the sure and speedy
oblivion which is its inevitable fate. West, the writer in the Herald
(God save the mark), is thought a good writer, and Martin, that I
am going to write about, is considered a prodigy of human genius. I
have taken some pains to guage Martin’s claims to the character of a
man of talent, and I.have formed an opinion decidedly adverse to such
a claim, and I will state shortly my reasons for such an opinion, which,
I doubt not, impartial minds will hold to be amply sufficient. Long
before I saw Martin, I thought him a common-place person, from
reading his speeches; one glance satisfied me he w r as a dishonest poli-
tician ‘ but w r hen I came to Sydney I found his reputation vastly
increased; he had gone to the bar, and was considered a brilliant
luminary.in that murky atmosphere. I went up to hear him, with the
full recollection of the blaze of Jeffery, Cranstoun, M‘Neil, Inglis,
Rutherford, our Scotch advocates, strong upon my mind. The oppor-
tunity was a great one for Martin to display all the great powers of
the advocate if he possessed them. It wms the ease of Hunt v. Love,
and I heard Martin address the jury for a couple of hours, on behalf of
Love. I was sadly disappointed. It struck me that he left entirely
unnoticed points of the case that I imagined he would have made a
terrific handle of; his style of speech at the bar is ineffective, common-
place, and monotonous; eloquence he dare not pretend to, nor does he
ever rise to a swelling high-toned declamation. When I thought of
the great names I have mentioned above, and remembered their im-
passioned and overwhelming vigour, their close and really eloquent
reasoning, their fine polished and fascinating style; the beauty and
variety of their illustration, and the unrivalled power with which they
carried conviction home to their hearers, I could not help looking
upon Martin as a mere Newgate solicitor, trying, by quirks and
quibbles, to obfuscate the intellect of some dreamy English justice.
Martin has lately given us three good opportunities of judging of his
capacity as a speaker and a man of talent. The first was his great pro-
tection oration, his speech on the State-aid to religion debate, and his dis-
play at the inauguration of the Wentworth monument—each occasion
affording him a splendid opportunity to wield his ability. I listened to all
those three efforts, and I want nothing more to confirm me in my original
opinion, that he was a man that the public, in its kindness and discri-
mination, had endowed with qualities that he had no title to—that


his distinguishing feature was a common-place, blustering mediocrity
—that his ideas, no matter what theme, were never elevated or grand,
hut always low and grovelling, his language and style being in exact
keeping. Who does not remember, with derision, his puerile clap-
trap display as the champion of protection, when he argued that com-
merce was not necessary to a nation’s prosperity, and as the principle
of protection would in all probability destroy commerce, he cited the
prosperous state of Japan, where they had no commerce, to prove that
no evil would accrue to us through the stoppage of our commercial
intercourse. This was the sort of nauseous twaddle he saturated a
large gaping audience with for a couple of hours. His speech in
defence of the principle of State-aid to religion, I defy any man to
produce anything so lame, impotent, and inconclusive. It was, per-
haps, the very worst speech that was made on that occasion, displaying
great ignorance of the subject, and a most unbecoming levity in dealing
with a matter of such weight and importance. Argument there was
none, and with the exception of one or two quotations from Dr.
Chalmers, and a most ridiculous application of some words of Burke’s,
there was nothing else worth replying to in all he said. But what
shall I say of the great affair in the Hall of the when the
coarse, vulgar-looking Wentworth, cut in marble, was first shown to
the public? Here was a chance for him, surely ; he had a long notice
of the event; the hall was crowded by the elite of Australia’s bagmen
aristocracy ; and in looking round upon the sublime and lofty demean-
our of the assembled audience, the lines involuntarily forced them-
selves upon my mind—
“ What can ennoble knaves, or thieves, or cowards ?
Alas ! not all the blood of all the Howards.”
On this occasion Martin actually read his oration, showing that he had
given the subject a very careful and extra study. Well, this speech is
extant, printed in three columns of the Sydney Morning Herald , and
can be read by any one who chooses to turn back to it. I say of it,
that a more contemptible, wretched, impudently barefaced piece of
humbug, destitute of talent, devoid of one solitary redeeming line from
first to last, an abortion of a palsied intellect, an imposition upon the
intelligence of the public that would not be tolerated from the veriest
schoolboy in the country, does not exist. Let any one read for them-
selves, and see if they dare dispute this. And yet this is the person
whom we are asked to call a man of talent! No doubt, in answer,
some will point me to his success at the Australian bar; but can
success be avoided at that bar ? Who is there to dispute it with him,
with the single and bright exception of Mr. Dailey ? I ask those, who
would use this argument, what other man is there worth a second’s
consideration ? Let Martin go to the Scotch, English, or Irish bars,
and you would soon see where his success would be. Why, at the


Australian bar, the great appointment of Solicitor-General has been
long vacant, from the inability of the Government to find a man capable
of filling it. I recollect, in Scotland, this appointment being given to
John Hope, afterwards Lord Justice Clerk, and that the Government
were censured most loudly for giving such an appointment to a man of
only ten years’ standing at the bar, although his practice at the time
amounted to about £4OOO a year. This shows the sort of men that
the public expect to fill such appointments at home. I don’t know of
any field that opens up such splendid prospects to a young man of
ability as the Australian bar. But as to the question of Martin’s
ability, I consider him a mere shallow-pated pretender, very ill-informed
on general subjects, the coarseness and vulgarity of his mind most
legibly expressed upon a face destitute of every trace of intellect, and
his intense anxiety to associate with what the poor creature considers
genteel people—the surest indication of a low origin. His character
and consistency as a politician are so utterly hollow and worthless that
even Hay and M‘Leay, whom he so assiduously fawns upon, must
despise him cordially in their hearts. He took office as Attorney-
General (which he never deserved) under Mr. Cowper, although hold-
ing diametrically opposite political opinions, that he might have the
childish pleasure, according to his own statement, of bragging of having
been Attorney-General—an ambition, under such circumstances, as
pitiful and contemptible as the man himself. He then, by unprece-
dented fawning and toadying, tried to curry favor with the Tory party,
but they systematically poured contempt upon him, and repudiated the
low connection. His efforts to gain admission to the society of flunkeys
in Bent-street were of the most frantic description, but the door was, on
two distinct occasions, closed against him. Mr. Cowper has been three
times, unsolicited by him, elected a member of the congregation of
arrant snobs who assemble in Bent-street; and although this fact has
been announced to him on every occasion, he has never darkened the
door of their club—he has studiously avoided them. They have
strained every nerve to get Mr. Cowper in among them, but he had
too accurate an estimate of their worthlessness to honour them with a
visit. If they are men at all, how they must respect Cowper’s conduct,
as contrasted with Martin’s, "who was so solicitous about the honour
which Mr. Cowper despised when so frequently forced upon him ; and
how questionable and hollow must be the pretended friendship with
which Martin is greeted when he visits the Australian Club. But
Martin will not see this. How much more manly would his conduct
have been had he stood upon his own honour and dignity, and turned
his back upon flunkeyism for ever. His status and position at the
Australian bar raised him far above the paltry whipsters of the
Australian Club, and should have for ever saved him from submitting
to any humiliation at their hands. I have yet to learn that there


exists any society in this world where the members of the bar may not
claim admission to, and any one of tbeir number who has not the same
appreciation of the respectability, to use a word I hate, of their high
and attractive profession, depend xxpon it there is something decidedly
rotten in his composition. Imagine Mr, Cowper—pshaw ! It is down -
right sacrilege to mention the two names in the same breath.
23


MR. WILLIAM FORSTER.
§T is very fashionable to sneer at our colonial Assembly as a con-
gregation of all the ignorance and vulgarity in the colony. The
people who indulge in this sort of vein affect to have a high
appreciation of the character and talent of the British House
of Commons. I have spent a considerable portion of ray time
in the House of Commons, seeing that * during a residence of
some time in London the British Parliament was my favourite
resort, and I can safely say, that our Assembly, in proportion to
its numbers, possesses more men of talent than the House of Commons;
and, moreover, if you take away six of the ablest men in the House of
Commons, our leading men are quite equal, if not superior, to any that
would remain. I have listened in the House of Commons to the dullest of
talk, from the dullest of men. I have also had ray ears outraged by
hearing some wretched fellow call law “ lawr,” idea “ idear,” with-
draw “ withdrawer,” and so forth. Why, you have four hundred men
at least in the House of Commons not much more than equal to Tom
Hangar—a parcel of country gentlemen who know nothing beyond the
mysteries of fox-hunting, and who have vegetated on their estates ever
since they were born. This is the class Sir Robert Peel used to play
such tricks with. They are finely represented by Fielding in his
inimitable picture of Squire Western, the only difference being that
the modern fox-hunter is a little more refined in his manner, and
less indelicate in the presence of ladies. I have, personally, known
members of the House of Commons so illiterate that they could not
write an address to their constituents ; and I recollect of doing this
kind turn for one of them, at his own earnest request—the gentle-
man I allude to being the member for the county of Edinburgh (Mr,
Ramsay, of Barnton), a person after the Captain Barclay style, whose
highest aim and ambition was to drive a mail-coach. Ramsay was
a high Tory, that is, he inherited Toryism among other trifles, and
professed it without enquiry; and I recollect creating great amuse-
ment by cunningly insinuating some of the most radical opinions
into his address. Now, in the House of Commons, there are
scores of such men as Ramsay. They know nothing about the great
questions that are discussed there, but merely go to record their


votes as directed by the agents of Palmerston or Derby. In point of
orderly and decorous behaviour, our Assembly stands far higher than
the House of Commons. The British Parliament is the most noisy and
disorderly Assembly I was ever in 3 I have for half-an-hour been un-
able to hear myself speak for yells, groans, and all manner of noises.
In case people should think this incredible, I can specify the exact oc-
casion I refer to. On going into the House of Commons one evening
Smith O’Brien was addressing the House, and the turmoil and noise
was terrific, not a word could be heard, and this continued for half-an-
hour. I have seen frequent scenes of this description 3 besides we have
instances of members sending hostile challenges to each other. And
then we have the case of the member for Nottingham striking, I think,
Sir Benjamin Hall, a severe blow in the House. The colonial As-
sembly, in point of decorum and propriety of conduct, stands far higher
than the House of Commons 3 and I am sure I have listened to debates
in our colonial House that I am certain would have highly gratified the
leaders of the House of Commons had they listened to them. No one ever
dreams of saying that a rich landed proprietor, or nobleman, as they
are in numerous cases absurdly called, is drunk—the thing would be
preposterous —but I have seen the most helpless cases of intoxication
in the House of Commons ; and I have also seen members addressing
the House and swinging about to such an extent, that I momentarily
expected them to stretch themselves at full-length on the floor. In
every sense then our Assembly is superior to the House of Commons,
with the great exception that we cannot boast of men like Roebuck,
Bright, Cobden, &c., still we have men of great talent amongst us, and
one of the most distinguished of these is the subject of this sketch, Mr.
William Forster. Mr. Forster is, in every sense, a very able man 5 I
question if there are six men in the House of Commons superior to him.
He would take a very high position in that Assembly 3 he is just the
sort of man they would listen to —earnest, philosophical, and profound.
He is, I should say, between forty and fifty years of age; has a worn-
out emaciated look ; he has not a good face, although the lines of deep
thought and great intelligence are very perceptible to the practised eye;
he has the appearance of a hard-working, laborious, student, which
he actually is ; he is cold and distant in his manner, not hearty nor
social, yet I cannot conceive any higher or more interesting enjoyment
than to have a night’s conversation with Forster, He is highly edu-
cated, has read extensively, and is possessed of the most original mind,
with the exception of Mr. Cooper, the English Chartist, and author of
the “ Purgatory of Suicides,” I have ever encountered. He is a bold,
fearless, original thinker. I never met a man so infinitively above all
human prejudice ; he subjects all he reads to the searching and pene-
trating criticism of his own vigorous intellect, and only preserves what
passes safely through that trying ordeal; he takes nothing for granted,
but comes to a conclusion in every matter by a process of reasoning


subtle, original, and acute. He is perfectly honest and sincere in every
opinion he holds. As a speaker he is admirable, although his voice and
delivery are against him • his voice is weak, and fails to give proper
expression to the rich vein of original thought he frequently hits upon ;
had he a good voice and good delivery there would be few speakers,
either at home or abroad, that could equal him. The rhetoric of most
members of the Assembly fails to penetrate the subject much; it gene-
rally plays along the surface like lightning along a conductor, and is
equally harmless. Not so Forster’s. He strikes into the subject with
all the power of a thunderbolt, splitting and tearing it in every di-
rection. Pie first, in a clear and luminous style, divests the subject of
all extraneous or irrelavent matter, and having done so, he holds up the
real question at issue, in all its nakedness, for the contemplation of his
hearers • he then bores right through and through it with a powerful
intellectual machinery that nothing can withstand :—he opens up new
fields of thought, lifts up veils that had previously obscured the subject,
dispels the densest mists by an intellectual fire which warms and glows
as he goes along, proceeds with a rising force and gradation until he
swells into a powerful and sustained eloquence, which rivets the at-
tention of the house. He tosses the subject about, turns it outside in,
views it from all points, and when he finishes he leaves an impression
upon the intellectual part of his hearers that it would be difficult to
efface. His eloquence is more the eloquence of thought than beauty of
expression or power of language. I never heard Forster speak without
listening to him with the closest attention, although his voice and de-
livery, as I have already remarked, are much against him; he has the
power of lifting you into regions of thought you had previously only a
very misty and obscure idea of. He is very excitable and quick in
temper, keenly susceptible to irony or ridicule—can’t bear an attack
upon him at all. When he is attacked he hits out with great energy j
has considerable command of satire and invective, and generally gives
quite as much as he gets. He is the leader of the opposition, and has
been Prime Minister. Forster is very liberal in all his opinions. In
politics he is a Radical; and it would have been well for him when he
took office if he had looked to the Liberals for support instead of the
Tories. He is the only man in the House, opposed to the present Grovern-
ment, capable of taking the lead in forming an administration. lie is
highly qualified for the position of Premier, and I altogether repudiate and
deny that senseless, vulgar prejudice which has been so studiously cir-
culated about his being what they call crotchety, because he is inflexible
and unbending in his resolute adherence to the principles he professes,
and will not, under any circumstances, yield up one iota of his fixed
opinions—opinions, the soundness of which he firmly believes in, and
which he has taken more pains than most men to arrive at; because he
will not abandon opinions formed with such careful and anxious soli-
citude, and with so devoted and unmixed a love of truth, he is, forsooth,


called crotchety. He may be impolitic in refusing to concede anythiny
under exciting circumstances, but narrow-minded or crotchety he is
not. His mind is of the most enlarged and liberal character, profoundly
conversant with the world and its history—thoroughly imbued with all
ancient and modern learning—well acquainted with the policy of all
nations both foreign and domestic—familiar with the various schemes
that have been put forward, by great writers in all ages, for the govern-
ment of mankind—and all this varied knowledge and information under
the guidance and government of a bold, vigorous, masculine intellect,
totally untrammelled by prejudice or obscured by bigotry. There is
one part of Mr. Forster’s character that I greatly admire—his manly
independence of thought and action. Pie never fears to promulgate his
opinions, however unpalatable they may be to the community—he cares
not a straw for what his constituents or any body else may think—he
speaks the honest conviction of his mind with fearless intrepidity—
and we admire the truth all the more from the courage with which it is
spoken. There is nothing affected or artificial about him, all is simple
and natural. He evidently despises the hollowness and hypocrisy of
the world; hates and detests the mean, abject, slavish worship of rank
that is so rife amongst us, and which occasionally finds vent in exhi-
bitions of degrading adulation, debasing to the very character and name
of man. Some time ago the Empire newspaper, in a leading article,
charged Mr. Forster with having wilfully shot a black man, for which
offence Mr. Forster’s name was struck off the roll as a Justice of the
Peace. This article and charge of the Empire was by way of reta-
liation for some severe strictures of Mr. Forster’s, in the Assembly, upon
the press of this country, which I know he despises with a contempt
of the most sovereign character. The article of the Empire led the
public to believe that Mr. Forster was guilty of murder in shooting
the blaekfellow, and was meant to lead the public to believe so. Now,
although Mr. Forster could have refuted this vile slander with all the
ease in the world, still his contempt for the paper in question, and his
aversion to demean himself by noticing anything that emanated from it,
prevented him from doing so. I know the exact facts of this case, and
will state them to the public with a most authorative guarantee of their
being strictly and minutely correct and true. About fifteen years ago
Mr. Forster and his uncle (this uncle was afterwards shot by the
blacks), had a sheep run, I believe, in the Moreton Bay district. At
this time the blacks were very dangerous and annoying, as I know
they were from personal experience some five years after, in the same
district, destroying both life and property, sometimes with the greatest
impunity. The squatters were in constant danger of their lives ; their
shepherds followed their flocks armed and on horseback, and they pur-
sued their business in constant dread, seldom a day passing without a
collision with the blacks on some of the various runs. It was a well
understood maxim all over the country, that, if the blacks destroyed the


squatters’ property in any way, their servants should fire upon them
without a minute’s delay. Mr. Forster and his uncle were living on
their station, with this sort of warfare raging at its height; their shep-
herds were'frequently driven home in terror, while the blacks slaugh-
tered what sheep they wanted, and, worse than that, scattered the sheep
all over the hush. Attacks of this description had keen of frequent
occurrence till Mr. Forster one day, as his shepherd rushed into the
head station affrighted, stating that the blacks had taken his flocks
from him, asked his uncle to arm himself and come and see if they
could not put a stop to this sort of work. They accompanied each
other to the scene, each with a loaded pistol and no other arms and no
ammunition; as they approached the blacks one of them attacked Mr.
Forster, and tried to wrench the pistol out of his hand; he, however,
failed in this, and on relinquishing his hold, ran away. As he was
running the uncle fired at him, and it is said struck him, but he neither
fell nor slackened his pace a bit, and it is not known to this day whether
he was mortally wounded, or even wounded at all. The story went
abroad, and a short time after Mr. Forster received a visit from the
Commissioner of Crown Lands, who called as a friend, and enquired into
the particulars of the affair ; he was informed in every particular. Some
time after Mr. Forster received a communication from the Government
of the day that his name had been struck off the roll as a justice of the
peace. No reason was given for this—no charge was made against
him by the Government; he was simply struck off without any reason
being assigned, and Mr. Forster could not tell now, if he was asked,
the reason why he was deprived of the title of J .P. So much for the
Empire’s mighty charge against Mr. Forster. The above is the simple
truth, which Mr. Forster could have written in five minutes had he
liked. I believe he acted rightly in taking no notice of the matter.
He is a man highly esteemed in the House, and not understood at all
by the country. I trust no constituency will ever deprive the Parlia-
ment and country of his valuable services—no Parliament would be
complete without him.
28


MR. JOHN BOWIE WILSON
SAYING- sketched Hay and Martin, the ranks of Toryism can-
not supply me with another man of sufficient capacity o r
note worth saying anything about. Faucett, although a
much better speaker and abler man than Martin, is so sel-
Ypjp dom at his post, and apparently takes so little interest in the
proceedings of parliament that it would be only an act of
x justice to his constituents to surrender a position the duties
of which he so systematically fails to perform. The talents he does
possess are obscured and rendered valueless by a wretched, degrading,
and blind bigotry, arrogant and illiberal in every sense, which mars
the effect of almost all he says or does. Then we have that paltry
little Tittlebat Titmouse from Windsor, whose “ fair large front and
eye sublime, and hyacinthe locks,” are objects of such indisputable
admiration to the house. lie is even a better representative of Tory-
ism than Mr. M'Leay, inane, incoherent, incapable, and imbecile.
What sort of people the Windsor people are I do not pretend to say,
but if I were to judge of them by their representative, surely the So-
ciety for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals would be justified in
interfering. Then there is Morris—a good-natured, amiable, and well-
meaning nonentity, and the rest are as antiquated and obsolete as the
principles which they profess to hold; but most of them affect Tory-
ism, not from a conviction of its truth, but simply because they con-
sider it the most genteel, the most aristocratic side. Well, if this
pleases the poor creatures, now that they are powerless and helpless, it
would be a pity to molest them in the enjoyment of their harmless
halucinations. Having, then, exhausted the whole Tory side in two
men, my future sketches must, of necessity, be taken from the Liberal
side. Mr. Wilson, the subject of the present number, is a Liberal,
and in every sense hostile to the present government. He is rather a
rough specimen of a Scotchman, well educated, but I dare say very
rusty in his classical knowledge. He speaks fluently, and sometimes
forcibly, although never eloquently; he is destitute of all the graces
of oratory. His appearance is uncouth and awkward; his voice harsh


and monotonous, his action neither graceful nor expressive; he, how-
ever, speaks boldly, and enunciates his sentiments fearlessly. He
would pass very well for a plain, unostentatious Scotch farmer; he has
neither vanity nor affectation, but is not without ambition ; his man-
ner is agreeable and simple, naturally intelligent, but he has not read
much on any subject; his face is not indicative of much ability, and
is rather coarse and common-place. His political knowledge is very
meagre; I do not believe he ever thought of the subject till some one
put it into his head to go into parliament. He has travelled a good
deal, and not entirely blindfolded; he has not conversed much with
men of talent either at home or abroad; his mind is a soil on which
every delusion seems to fructify; the most utopian and visionary
schemes find easy access to his belief—every wild chimera, so charac-
teristic of the present age, is accepted by Wilson all the more readily
in proportion to its monstrosity. For instance, that impudent impo-
sition, Phrenology, finds in him an implicit and steadfast believer.
His ideas about cold water, hydropathy, which he practises as a doctor,
are preposterous in the highest degree. This tendency to delusion,
which is one of the main characteristics of his mind, is finely exem-
plified in some of his political theories. Mr. Wilson is a Liberal, and
opposes a Liberal government. I would not object to this if his oppo-
sition was confined to any particular acts which he might reasonably
object to; but he opposes the Government systematically and vindic-
tively, and aims at ousting them, just as much as if the government
held entirely opposite opinions to his own on all subjects; he could
not show more spiteful determination to thwart and annoy the present
government if they were actually the most rampant Tories, and doing
their best to invade the liberties of the people. I therefore denounce
his opposition as selfish and dishonest. It is plain, it is not for the
good of the country he does it, and we are therefore forced to the con-
clusion that it must spring from an insatiable desire, the promptings
of a wild ambition, to take their places. I fearlessly assert that the
present government deserve the sympathy and support of every radical
or liberal in the country. In the first place, we have known them for
years past, in opposition, fighting courageously and determinedly the
battles of the people. To the four men who at present hold office, the
Liberals are mainly indebted for the complete overthrow and defeat, if
not annihilation, of the Tory party. To their indomitable energy,
ability, and honesty, the triumph of the Liberal cause is in a great
measure due, backed, of course, by the unswerving steadfastness of such
undaunted champions of freedom as the veteran Dr. Lang. Never
has the slightest indication of a defection, however infinitesimal,
appeared in any of them; they have been true to their principles and
to their party, and have done more for the substantial benefit of the
people than has ever been dreamt of by all former Governments put
together. Does any one suppose we would have had manhood suffrage


and the ballot if the four men who at present govern the country had
not constantly been in the thick of the fight ? In opposition they
stood out for the rights of the people with inflexible determination;
they assailed a powerful combination of illiberal monopolists, who then
held the reins of power, with a zeal and vigour and commanding
ability which shook them to their foundation, and ultimately crushed
them to pieces. They then took office themselves, and let us now look
at their conduct in a position of power. One of their first acts, revolu-
tionising the whole land system, has led to a continuous and acri-
monious struggle between them and the people’s enemies, resulting in
the defeat of the Government and an appeal to the country. The
country sent them back with unmistakeable marks of confidence and a
triumphant majority at their back, so that they might with ease effect
the reformation that was so much desired. That reformation has been
effected, and I dare say it will be admitted that no piece of legislation
in this country has in so short a time from its passing been attended
with such happy results on the progress and well-being of the people at
large, and bids fair ultimately to effect an amount of happiness and
prosperity for the people of this country unanticipated even by its
warmest advocates. But did the Government stop here ? No, they
have from first to last always shown a most anxious determination to
give effect to the wishes of the vast body of the people. There is no
reform, consistent with just principles, that they have not signalised
themselves in championing. The Chinese legislation met much oppo-
sition, and the Government got considerable obloquy from certain
quarters for the part they took in it, but their sincerity and earnestness
in this as in the land question, carried it through both houses. Their
bill to abolish that most notorious iniquity, State-aid to Religion,
although not going the length I would like, still it severely scotched,
if it did not actually kill the serpent. And, in fact, in reviewing
their conduct, since they took office, if we find a few things to condemn,
we find a great many to applaud, ay, to the echo! and I defy any
honest, earnest Liberal, consistently, to refuse to applaud them with
me. And this is the Government which Mr. Wilson, a Liberal, con-
tinuously, and spitefully, and vindictively, tries to thwart, obstruct,
and injure ! and when we come to ask him his reason, as I have often
done, I am nauseated with some rubbish, some infamous contemptible
rubbish about some twopenny-halfpenny trumpery appointments of
policemen, or the purchase of some wretched skiff or other—matters of
this insignificance that should be entirely in the hands of municipal
bodies, Wilson does not see that he only degrades himself, and liis
opposition too, by meddling with. I therefore say, with justice, that
either Mr. Wilson is not a genuine Liberal, or his opposition is dis-
honest. If he were a genuine Liberal, he would, like Dr. Lang,
(whose honesty no one dares impeach), support the Government in.
the main. Dr, Lang, I know, believes them sincere, earnest.


honest, reformers, and their whole lives justify that belief;
and I further know that Dr. Lang would not support them for
a single second unless he believed they were men good and
true, and of the right stamp. Dr. Lang, the most illustrious
liberal and reformer in this country, whose long consistent life of
arduous labour, and many sacrifices in the cause of freedom and pro-
gress, should be an ample guarantee that the Government is sound at
all points when he supports them, and should also be a very startling
commentary upon the honesty or dishonesty of Mr. Wilson’s opposi-
tion. But it should be a comfort to all true lovers of the liberal
cause in this country to know that Mr. Wilson’s opposition is of a
very paralytic character; there is an amazing want of vitalitv about
it; it only occasionally gives a spasmodic gasp when some indifferent
lamplighter is appointed. He has not the sympathy of the liberal
party with him; and if there was an appeal to the country involving
the fate of the present Ministry, a triumphant majority for them
would instruct Mr. Wilson that the people at large estimate their
services and capacity at their proper value. Ido not object to Mr.
Wilson aspiring to the position of a Minister of the Crown; but I
must be permitted to say that the idea is simply ridiculous. However
anxious he' may be to fill so onerous an office—and I blame
him not for this —my honest opinion is that he is not capable.
He is by no means the stuff that Ministers should be made
of; he has no more nerve, firmness, or determination than a
sucking infant. Under his benignant rule Cockatoo and Darlinghurst
would be transformed into luxurious divans where vice and ruffianism
might recline at ease; prisoners would be taught to reflect that the
perpetration of the most diabolical crimes only made them objects of
interest and commiseration, and elicited, on their behalf, a flood
of the most nauseous sickly sympathy and wretched maudlin
sentimentality, and, as an inevitable result, sharpened their appetites
for crime. Punishment as a consequence of crime, Wilson does not
understand. He prates about reformation, and his ideas on this
subject are so perfectly effeminate and childish that, God forbid, he
should ever have any power in his hands. If society is to be held
together safely or orderly, punishment should follow crime as quickly
and surely as “ the thunderbolt pursues the flash,” A gaol should
be shorn of all its attractive features and made a place that a man
will remember with a shudder. I do not believe that any greater
calamity could befall this country than that such a man as Mr. Wilson
should ever have any power in it: and his notions about crime and
criminals are so dangerous and pernicious that the society where they
were practised would run headlong to disorder and disorganisation.
Wilson would abolish capital punishment, and his, views on this
subject are quite as silly and weak as they are on many other
subjects. One of his great arguments is—•“ You can’t put a man to


a worse use than hanging him.” This he always says very
complacently and with a sort of triumph, as if no one could get over
it. But suppose I said to him, the man we are going to hang could
not have put the man he murdered to a worse use, and we are dealing
far more fairly with our man than he did with the man he murdered,
for in all probability he murdered him in cold blood, and for the sake
of a few pounds, while, on the contrary we are hanging our man for
this atrocious crime and outrage, and if we failed to do so, as rulers
and protectors of society, we would fail in our duties to that society,
our duty to ourselves, and, above all, our duty to our God. Instead
of hanging, Wilson would give them solitary confinement for life.
And suppose I admitted this as an argument, and said to him “ You
cannot put a man to a worse use than locking him up for life,” what
would he say then ? look foolish, no doubt. In contemplating the
murderer I never think of him but with feelings of the most intense
detestation; ail my sympathies lie in the grave of his poor
unfortunate victim, who has likely been cruelly and ruthlessly
murdered, without provocation, for some trifle of money, and shall
we parley a moment about sending such a pernicious ruffian
as the perpetrator of such an outrage to his account ?
Society will have come to a most unwholesome conclusion when
the law is altered in this respect. Wilson maintains solitary
confinement is a heavier punishment than death. Were he a wiser
man I would be apt to suspect his sincerity. Suppose we take him
at his word, how would he like such a communication as this coming
to a prisoner sentenced to imprisonment for life, —“ The Governor,
with the advice of the Executive, has been pleased to take your case
into consideration, and has granted you a reprieve, so that, instead of
being imprisoned for life, you will be taken out to-morrow morning,
and hanged by the neck till you are dead,” I think this would be
sailing a trifle too close to the wind ; —at all events it serves to show
the utter absurdity of the notion that death is not the king of
terrors :—death annihilates hope, and therein lies its sting ; there is
no dungeon so dreary that the rays of hope will not penetrate—no
chains so heavy that hope, with its thousand suggestions, will not
lighten—no despair so black that hope will not, in time, illume with
brightness. But the galling, horrible thought, of being taken out, in
the full vigour of manhood—in all the power of youthful health and
strength, and deliberately strangled out of existence—is a punishment
compared to which all others fade away into nothing. Mr. Wilson
does not think so, because, as I have said before, his mind is prone
to delusion. He and I have always been on good terms, and very
friendly, and I believe he will think none the worse of me for
speaking thus freely of him.


ME. ARNOLD.
CfQT seems my reflections on the character and conduct of the British
House of Commons, in one of those sketches, has raised a dis-
cussion here—the Tory party repudiating my opinions and
denying their truth. Most of these gentlemen, however, have
never been in the House of Commons, and therefore their
opinions ai’e not of much value. I maintain my description of
the British Parliament was minutely correct, and would, with pleasure,
refer the matter to Mr. Parkes or Mr. Dailey, whom, I doubt not,
would willingly attest the truth of my words. There is a vulgar pre-
judice prevalent here, which depreciates everything colonial and
magnifies the merits of everything English—this is mere ignorance
and want of travel. Certainly, we don’t pretend to have amongst us
the great men in science, art, politics, or literature, that England can
boast of, but we have, nevertheless, some very able men in this
country. Our Assembly is, in a great measure, composed of men who
have been in all parts of the world—who have been the architects of
their own fortunes—who have cut their way through every obstacle to
wealth and independence—who, if they are not generally highly
polished, refined, and educated, possess great energy of character,
shrewd, keen knowledge of men and things, great practical knowledge
of the country they live in ; and any man who takes any one of them
for a fool, let him just go and transact some business with him, and he
will soon find how egregiously he has been mistaken. But with regard
to my opinion of the British Parliament, I am glad to be able to fortify
it by tbe opinion of no less a person than the late Lord Macaulay, an
unmistakable authority as I daresay all will admit. Macaulay thus
speaks of the British Parliament in the days of Chatham, which
description applies equally to the present time, with the exception, as
I previously remarked, that the modern fox-hunter is a little more
refined than his ancient prototype : — u The discontented Whigs,” says
Macaulay, u were not perhaps in number, but certainly in ability,
experience, and weight by far the most important part of the opposi-
tion, The Tories furnished little more than whole rows of ponderous
fox-hunters, fat with Staffordshire or Devonshire ale, and who got


drunk drinking to the king over the water, and believed that all the
fundholders were Jews; men whose religion consisted in hating the
Dissenters, and whose political researches had led them to fear, like
Squire Western, that their land might be sent over to Hanover to be
put in the sinking fund. The eloquence of those zealous squires, the
remnant of the once formidable October Club never went beyond a
hearty Aye or No.” The composition of the House of Commons,
although greatly improved since that time by the introduction of mer-
chants, manufacturers, and others, still retains, and ever will retain,
the rows of fox-hunting squires, and you may imagine the scene and
the noise when three hundred of them combine to put a man down by
united and continuous groans and yells, coming from voices that have
been, from their youth, accustomed to waken the echoes with the
spirit-stirring cry of tally-ho ! Our Assembly will compare most favor-
ably with the House of Commons in this respect. With us liberty of
speech is respected ; no matter how offensively a member talks, we
leave it to the Speaker (the properly-constituted authority) to keep
him within bounds. The House of Commons, on the other hand, if
they do not wish to listen to a man who may, perhaps, be telling them
some unpalatable truths, resort to the cowardly, unmanly, and un-
dignified method of attempting to stifle him by continuous and unseemly
yells and noise. Smith O’Brien (who spoke with great ability, sound-
ness, and sense, on Irish affairs), was continually put down in this
way;—Joseph Hume, and even Cobden, have been frequently
similarly assailed; and I have seen a member shout his speech, at the
top of his voice, up to the reporters, amidst deafening yells and noises
of every description. This would, perhaps, be excusable to prevent
the time of a great nation being wasted ; but it is not resorted to for
that purpose—it is adopted as a most tyrannical means of putting down
those whose political opinions are very obnoxious to a majority of the
Assembly. We adopt the fairer and more rational method of listening
to all parties, and meeting them, and, if possible, overthrowing them
with sound, solid argument. Mr. Arnold, the Minister of Public
Works, is undoubtedly one of our most distinguished public men.
Since he first appeared in public life he has been a consistent and
honest Liberal and Badical. He has a fine imposing appearance, tall
and stately ; his face is highly intellectual, and espressive of great
intelligence ; he has a quick, sharp, wicked eye—wicked in the sense
that he could hate most cordially, and would not be slow to wreak his
vengeance on the head of any real enemy ; he is very uncommunica-
tive and distant in his manner to strangers, but always civil and
gentlemanly. He is well-educated and well read, somewhat stiff and
haughty in appearance, but not in reality. He came to this country
an English gentleman of some property, and always associated with
what are vulgarly termed “ the swells ” —in more refined parlance the
“aristocracy.” He, however, always held radical opinions, and


throughout his public life has never swerved an inch from them. There
is something very bold and energetic in his whole character; he
possesses a very powerful intellect, trained and educated in the world ;
his mind is of that peculiar character that, while he can take the most
elevated and comprehensive views in dealing with great principles—
while he can reason with great depth of thought and happiness of
illustration on any constitutional question, yet there is not a man in
the country could cope with him in mere technical matters. He
possesses an amazing subtility, ingenuity and acuteness in questions of
this kind. This was finely illustrated on the occasion, when that
pompous empty puppy, Stuart Donaldson, said in the House he was no
gentleman. Arnold, in reply, stated that by birth, education, and
character, he was at least equal to Donaldson ; at all events he thanked
God that he was not connected with a commercial firm, which he called
an organised swindle. It was immediately moved that the words be
taken down and that Arnold should leave the Chamber. A long dis-
cussion took place upon this, and the upshot was that Arnold should
apologise to the House. On his return Arnold, with great ingenuity,
took a technical objection to their proceedings, and in doing so, he
uttered even more offensive words than formerly—they were a second
time taken down and Arnold again left the Chamber. On his return,
about four in the morning, he took another technical objection that
their whole proceedings were irregular, got the Speaker to agree with
him, and left without apoligizing in any way. As a speaker, Arnold
is very great, but it is only on certain occasions and under certain
circumstances. He cannot speak powerfully or well unless his passions
are excited. As a Minister of the Crown, he is tame, hesitating, and
even prosy. In opposition he was all fire, eloquence, and vigour. His
powers of satire, invective, and ridicule, are tremendous. Every one
must remember that memorable occasion when he charged Martin with
being the anonymous author of a scurrilous letter in one of the public
papers, making reflections painful and insulting to him. On the
occasion referred to, Arnold rose, and in a very quiet gentlemanly
manner, complained of this letter, and charged Martin with being the
author of it—Martin was silent. The long pent-up torrent of indigna-
tion foaming and swelling in Arnold’s bosom at length burst like a
tornado on the devoted head of Martin. He assailed him in the most
remorseless manner—cut him to pieces with the most fierce, savage,
withering invective—poured his bitterest scorn upon him—denounced
him before the House and the country, hurled at him every epithet
expressive of contempt and detestation—seered him with the keenest
ridicule and the sharpest satire—dragged him from his cowardly
anonymous obscurity, and covered him with contumely and contempt.
On occasions of this kind Arnold is indeed an orator; his voice, action,
look, and manner, are all most impressive; his voice trembles with
passion, and is most expressive in its intonation; his command of


language is very great—lie pours from him streams of the most dread-
ful invective, cuts to the heart with a bitter, biting, burning irony,
declaims with great energy and power, and is in every sense a very
able speaker. He is fearless and independent in thought and action.
He has always been, and is now, hated by the Tory party. I believe
the name of Arnold is detested by the Deas Thompson class. This is
the greatest compliment I could pay him. None of the Liberal party
ever so excited the hatred of such men as Donaldson, And how was
this ? Simply because Arnold looked upon them as such a set of
detestable shams, and attacked them with such virulence and success
that they had good reason to hate him ; he despised them, ridiculed
them, fooled them to the top of their bent, and was mainly instru-
mental in defeating and overthrowing them. He exposed them, and
showed them up as a parcel of shallow-pated, selfish, heartless, pre-
tenders, bent upon nothing but their own aggrandisement—base and
mean in all their low, grovelling, self-seeking schemes; their whole
conduct characterised by a vulgar, ignorant, supercilious arrogance and
absurd pretension, which rendered them easy victims to the shafts of
his ridicule and satire, and at once established their claim, on a solid
footing, to the contempt of the whole country. Donaldson, Parker,
Macarthur, Darvall, &c., where are you ? Where is your once power-
ful party of unprincipled, ravenous monopolists ? Where are your rank
and file ? Where are your principles ? Ha ! ha ! I ha !!!—torn to
rags—trampled under foot —thrown to the dirt-heap, as you yourselves
would have been had you not basely ran away, and are now trying to
be made flunkeys at Buckingham Palace—the only situations nature
ever intended you for. I swear by the immortal genius, desperate
valour, and imposing aspect of Tittlebat Titmouse, of Windsor, that
the fall of this party was a good work. They have gone for ever—
melted away—and have only left a few sad remnants of imbecility
lurking about the Upper House, to remind us of the glorious havoc the
artillery of truth and reason has made among them. Mr, Arnold is
frequently blamed as a Works’ Minister; but when you ask them to
specify the fault, they have to find with him they are dumb. In
Parliament his enemies have full opportunity to make out any case
against him, but they never attempt it. He is there every day, to
explain everything, and to meet all objections ; and yet no one attacks
his policy or impugns his conduct in any way. To be sure Dalgleish
occasionally exposes his ignorance and makes himself ridiculous by an
attack upon the Minister of Works, but he only gets scarified from
head to foot for his pains, and the House a hearty laugh over it. Tom
Dangar also distinguishes himself in this way—but dear Tom, take
my advice and rest well assured that the Minister of Works is just a
trifle too many for the whole of you. There is one thing I can say,
and I daresay the whole House will agree with me, that Arnold is a
very straightforward, honest minister—he never humbugs you in any


way—lie says yes or no in an instant—never misleads you, but directly
and at once meets you with a fair downright point-blank refusal, or
the reverse, as the case may he. Now this is a very valuable quality
in a Minister of the Crown, and as rare as it is valuable. The silly
talk about Arnold being the author of the ribald trash of John Smith,
of Congewoi, is preposterous ; the men who accuse Arnold of producing
such wretched, low, scurrilous rubbish, insult his understanding as
much as they calumniate his character. I am astonished no one has
yet hit upon the author of those effusions. I believe as firmly as if I
saw him write them, that the real author of the letters of John Smith,
of Congewoi, is the Rev. John West,* of the Herald. West is an
Englishman, not of high origin, and consequently familiar with the
low Cockney dialect in which those letters are written. His long
residence in Yan Diemen’s Land, the head-quarters of rowdyism, made
him an adept at the use of that wretched slang with which Smith’s
productions abound, and which frequently finds its way into leading
articles in the Herald. West is an old hand in the country, and on
his frequent travels through the bush, on preaching missions, has had
good opportunities of observing the habits of the various animals that
inhabit it. His residence at squatting stations, while on those travels,
familiarised him with all the minute knowledge of those establishments
which appears in Smith’s letters. But now for the strongest proof of
all. What stranger would have ever thought of sending those pro-
ductions to the Mail. A stranger would have known that if they were
accepted by the Mail they would have been accepted by the Herald ,
and consequently the Herald at once preferred, as affording a wider
circulation. But on the hypothesis that West is the author, how
easily is their appearance in the Mail accounted for; —the Mail was
strongly in need of a stimulus to increase its circulation, and bring it
into notice ; and who so well aware of this, and so much interested in
bringing it about, as the Rev. J. West ? The venom, scurrility, and
coarse abuse of those letters is West all over. And the fact of the
marriage of Smith or his daughter appearing as an advertisement in
the Herald shows that it must have proceeded from a man of influence
in that establishment. Yes, Mr. West, knowing and cute as you
think yourself, there are men here a little too far north for you.
* To shew that West is not above doing anything under the rose, the letters
in the Herald, signed, “ Shew your Eed Light,” are from his pen.
38


ME. PIDBIMTOK
fHAYE now almost exhausted all the leading men of the
Assembly. The gentleman I have to-day selected may he termed
a second-class man—very far removed, however, from such men
fas Cowper, Forster, Robertson, &c. Mr. Piddington is a little,
squat, burly piece of pompous vulgarity; he has a very coarse
face, more expressive of grossness and sensuality than indicative
of high intellectual powers. He is one of that class who aim at being
considered our aristocracy. All his political principles are held and
advocated with the view of advancing his social position. Sprung
from the very poorest of the people himself, he now affects to despise
them, because, forsooth, he has made a few paltry pounds, while there
is no man so ready to truckle and crawl and creep before any titled,
empty thing that courtesy gives the name of man to. Piddington
worships rank for its own paltry sake. An invitation from a duke he
would consider a higher honour than an invitation from Thomas
Carlyle. I question if he would consider an invitation from Carlyle
an honour at all. What a flutter a recognition from the Governor
would put him into; under such circumstances the costly studs upon
his spotless dickie would gleam with increased lustre; his little stumpy
figure would bend to the ground under the weight of such an honour,
and all the fluukeyish elements of his nature would start into vigorous
and animated existence ; all the paraphernalia of king-craft, Piddington
contemplates with indescribable respect and awe. I believe, if he saw
the Lord Chancellor march into the House of Lords, smothered in
horsehair and bombasin, with a ponderous mace before him, poor Pid
would prostrate himself in the dust; a sight like this would be too
much for him ; I’ll swear he would involuntarily kneel. I have often
amused myself by imagining Cromwell, the greatest of Englishmen,
coming in contact with a man like Piddington—heavens, how he would
despise him. Even our own wretched aristocracy are very doubtful
about Piddington, notwithstanding all his truckling to them. I
question if he is recognised among the Leas Thomson class, although
his highest ambition is to be classed along with them. lam certain
they would not admit him a member of the Bent-streeC‘Club ; and,


although Piddington knows all this, he has not the spirit or the man-
liness to despise them, but continues to cringe and scrape and curry
favour with them, under the delusion that, some day or other, they
will adriiit him to the outskirts of their society. To be thought
genteel, Piddington has abandoned all his political opinions and turned
Tory, or Conservative as he likes to hear himself called; and this,
also, as a means of advancing his claim to be considered one of our
aristocracy. What meanness, what pettiness, what littleness of soul,
what low grovelling vulgarity and spiritless, unmanly degradation is
there in all this. How the very party he is truckling to, with such
abject servility, must despise him—how he would despise himself did
one spark of high-souled manly principle animate his vulgar carcase.
Nature never intended such men for higher positions than butlers or
beadles, and the very sight of them in any other capacity sickens me
to the soul. Piddington, I suppose, has made his fortune; he attends
very regularly to his parliamentary duties; he comes into the House
with a pompous important look; he even affects to be haughty, and
does not at all like the familiarity of Tittlebat Titmouse from
Windsor. He is very careful in his dress; a man like Piddington
could not afford to go with a shabby coat. He takes his seat with a
heavy scowl upon his face, which ho means for dignity. He is
unmarried, and, I believe, no man ever saw him speak to a lady.
Piddington has not much natural talent; but, from being by profes-
sion a bookseller, he has read a considerable deal upon political subjects;
all other literature he seems to have neglected. His memory is good;
he speaks fluently, but never vigorously; there is an eternal sameness
in his style ; he is never animated, passionate, or powerful—is point-
less and ineffective even when he has a good case in his hands. He
is very fond of quoting from noble lords. How inflated he becomes—
how he swells in importance, as he quotes from Lord Goderich, whom
he calls Lord Goederick ! How the little piece of rotundity glories in
hearing himself pronounce the name of Sir John Burgoyne; what a
mouthful he takes of it, as if Piddington, and Piddington only, by
virtue of his flunkeyism, had the exclusive right to mention the names
of such mighty men. He pretends to be a bit of a financier, although
he does not make much of it. It is highly amusing to see Piddington,
after Mr. Weekes brings in his yearly budget, start to his feet and work
himself into a high state of excitement at the melancholy state of our
financial department; he boils over with indignation, and foams and
fumes for half-an-hour, while Mr. Weekes sits coolly with his head
resting on his hand, and as soon as Piddington has exhausted himself
he slowly rises, and, with one sentence of explanation, knocks the
foundation from under all that Piddington has said, and, as a natural
consequence, the whole superstructure comes rumbling to the ground.
Piddington prates very complacently about property as a qualification
for legislative honours. I repudiate this doctrine entirely. If we are


to have any qualification, most assuredly it should he intelligence. If
the possession of property indicates in the slightest degree the possession
of superior knowledge, howwouldPiddington like to see an Upper House
composed of such men as Clark Irving, Holt, Towns, &c.—men desti-
tute of every quality for such a position. Why, in the Assembly,
where property is well represented, the rich men are mere imbeciles
in comparison to the poor men. I suppose Piddington thinks the
possession of a mind like Carlyle’s not so good a qualification as the
possession of property. I was glad to see the member for the Williams
(Mr. Allen) castigate him so severely the other evening, when he
broached this nonsense; had I been in the House, I would have lent
Allen a hand in this. Mr. Piddington, notwithstanding his gorgeous
studs, his unsullied waistcoat, and exemplary surtout, will never
resemble a gentleman • he looks like a pilot in his Sunday clothes,
and, as he sits in the House, would pass very well for the skipper of
the Sea Witch, studying how to circumnavigate Weekes. Mr.
Piddington is very hostile to the present Government, and tries all in
his power to obstruct and thwart them. When in Parliament,
nothing induced me so powerfully to stand to the present Government
as the opposition of such men as Piddington. He aspires to the posi-
tion of a Minister of the Crown, and I believe this is the aim and
ambition of his life; he is in no way qualified for such an office, and
is most illiberal and narrow-minded in his general opinions; he
opposed manhood suffrage and the ballot, and is in favour of a property
qualification for members. All this is since he made a little money.
He is one of those purse-proud, ignorant people that are so common in
England. A tallow-chandler in England makes his fortune; he imme-
diately turns up his nose at all other tallow-chandlers—professes high
Tory principles, because this is thought to be aristocratic—apes, to a
ridiculous extent, those whom he calls his betters, and is the laughing
stock of all sensible people. Piddington is a fine sample of this class,
I firmly believe, if he had forty thousand pounds, he would give thirty
thousand of it to be made a baronet. Now, is not this sheer, ignorant
vulgarity ? Is it not, in the highest degree, pitiable and melancholy ?
And yet a man holding such opinions as these is returned to Par-
liament under manhood suffrage. We have another atrocious case in
the electorate of Argyle returning a man who never came near them to
solicit their suffrages —a man of whose political opinions, if he had any,
they knew nothing, and who was returned, under such monstrous cir-
cumstances, without opposition. He is a mere imbecile, totally unfit for
the position they have placed him in, and, I have no doubt, a worthy
representative of people who could so' far degrade themselves as to
return a man under such circumstances. The fact of the matter is,
the people of this country are not worth serving, or they would not
put up with such abortions in intellect, as numbers that I could
mention in the present Assembly. As I have before remarked, a bill


for the payment of members would soon clear the House of its
imbecility, and secure the highest talent the country can produce. I
trust this may be attempted next session. It is very amusing to hear
Piddington indulge in the use of those little bits of Latin—those little
phrases that are picked up at the end of the almanac. He frequently
interlards his speeches in this way, which is a cheap way of passing
for a classical scholar. This is mere vanity and affectation, and on
Piddington’s part is most ridiculous, as he has no knowledge of Latin
whatever, and I am certain could not even conjugate a Latin verb.
He is something like Dalgleish in this respect. JDalgleish, in pro-
nouncing lona fide , pronounces fide like “ hide.” Surely they had
much better let Latin alone than torture it in this way; but Dalgleish’s
impudence and effrontery are so great that, if a debate was to take
place in the Assembly on the comparative merits of Virgil and Horace,
Dalgleish would be the most prominent speaker; the important fact
that he knows nothing of either author would be no bar to him.
Difficulties of this kind never operate with men like Dalgleish ; their
ignorance is their best protection. Piddington introduces his scraps of
Latin to keep up his aristocratic pretensions. He is not listened to
in the House with much attention. His speeches are, as Hamlet says,
“ stale, flat, and unprofitable,” He never leaves any impression on
his hearers; when he finishes, you don’t know very well what he has
been speaking about. I don’t think he is much liked among the
members; he is very unsocial —nothing generous or enthrisiastie about
him. He is cold and calculating, distant and reserved in manner,
which, I believe, is affected, as he erroneously looks upon this style to
be most becoming a gentleman. He is about as common-place a person
as there is the Assembly—not by any means well read, generally,
notwithstanding the great opportunities he has had. His political
opinions are antiquated and obsolete ; one would sometimes think that
his brain was rapidly softening, so silly does he often talk. It is a
pity her Majesty could not be persuaded to knight him, and add
another distinguished name to the illustrious Knights of Australia.
42


DR. LAM.
fT would be difficult to find in any country or age a purer or more
disinterested patriot than the now venerable Dr. Lang. Had
Dr. Lang been influenced by selfish motives he might have
vp been enriched by extensive grants of land • had he merely held
ljA his tongue he might have been at this moment rolling in wealth
and luxury instead of being, as I believe he is, possessed of
‘ nothing but his salary as a clergyman of the Church of Scotland.
Dr. Lang, has, I believe, been upwards of forty years in this country,
during the whole of which time he has laboured unceasingly to advance
its best interests, to the complete abnegation of every selfish considera-
tion. He has shrunk from no sacrifice or labour to increase the happi-
ness of the people. He has made repeated journeys to Great Britain,
at his own expense, and induced thousands of the best of emigrants to
come to this country, and has lived to see numbers of them emerge
from abject poverty to wealth and comfort, and to listen to their warm-
hearted outpourings of gratitude and thanks to him as their friend and
benefactor. Few men can look back upon the labours of a long life
with more unalloyed satisfaction than Dr. Lang ; his wide-extended,
warm-hearted sympathies with humanity—his indomitable energy in
prosecuting all his schemes of benevolence—the great success which
has attended all his efforts to promote the happiness of the people of
this country—must, at all times, soothe and comfort him, and add to
the unclouded serenity of his latter days. What a contrast is there in
all this to the selfish, grasping disposition of Wentworth, who has been
so extravagantly belauded by a section of the people. In every act of
Wentworth’s life grovelling selfishness has dictated his whole conduct;
he has sought only his own aggrandisement, and has never hesitated to
avow his want of sympathy with the people by villifying and calum-
niating them on all occasions. His conduct in reference to the erection
of his own monument was in the highest degree absurd and ludicrous
—he attended all the meetings of the committee, and argued against
the opinions of certain members about its site, and took a greater interest
in this contemptible and preposterous affair than even the prime movers
in so notable a piece of folly. Surely a person of the slightest delicacy


of feeling -would have studiously shunned all participation in a matter
of this description ; but delicacy of feeling is an ingredient that the
most searching analysis would fail to find one grain of in the composi-
tion of Mr. Wentworth. He has left this country for ever—left with
the backs of almost the entire people turned upon him ; and if any
Australian historian ever mentions his name at all, he will find some
difficulty in recording any act of Wentworth’s worthy of remembrance.
l)r, Lang, as is well known, is a clergyman of the Church of Scotland,
and only turned his attention to politics when the Synod of Australia,
by a most unaccountable and unjustifiable act, deposed him from the
ministry—deposed him in his absence, and without a shadow of ground
or pretext, and which act the highest Church Courts in Scotland at once
set aside as illegal, oppressive, and unjust. The Synod of Australia
will now have to reinstate Dr. Lang, or suffer a pressure from the civil
courts which they may not altogether relish, I am not in the least
surprised that Dr. Lang should have made numerous enemies among
his ecclesiastical brethren. An upright, sincere, earnest minister of
God himself, he found the clergy of this country in a great measure
composed of men animated by no such earnest zeal in the cause of
Christ; he rather found them deadened by a cold, callous, time-serving
indifference—in some instances given up to immoral habits, and prac-
tising their profession as a mere means of existence, without much
reference to its higher and nobler objects. Under such circumstances,
Dr. Lang, following the straightforward path of his duty, brought the
discipline of the church to bear upon some of them, and in a great
measure rescued the church from this scandal. He was consequently
detested by that portion of the clergy who felt themselves most amen-
able to his strictures ; dissention, heartburning, and disunion, crept in,
and Dr. Lang at last severed himself from all connection with a min-
istry that he could not conscientiously join with in the service of God.
Dr. Lang, many years ago, threw up his state allowance of £3OO per
annum, resolving that in future, if he lived at all, it should be by the
voluntary contributions of the people. He has never had any cause to
regret this step, and has, ever since, been a wann, energetic, eloquent
advocate of the voluntary principle. What a sorry, pitiful figure do
those State-paid clergymen cut, clinging to their paltry pittance with
such tenacity. They have, evidently, no faith in the promises of
Christ, and no belief in the power of their preaching and teaching on
the minds of their congregations : their conduct, when properly inter-
preted, means this, and I think lean almost hear them saying, “Why,
no congregations would ever dream of paying such a cold, sleepy, hum-
drum, inanimate set of drones as we are ; we must therefore cling to
the State-pay, no congregation would look at us if it was a matter of
choice with them.” This is about the truth of the whole matter. The
conduct of the clergy who receive State -aid has done more injury to the
cause of religion, throughout this controversy, than can well be


imagined. Their confession and false belief that it is this contemptible
State money which upholds religion amongst us is quite worthy of
them. They thus confess that religion has so little hold upon the hearts
and minds of the people that if left to themselves they would not sup-
port it—a grosser libel or lie was never published in this world. The
effects of State-aid have so palsied and paralysed the energies of the
clergy that many of their congregations never see them. The clergy-
men themselves know very well that they will get their salaries all
the same, however coolly they take it, and therefore interest themselves
little in the welfare of their congregation—the system is a vile imposi-
tion, degrading to both clergy and people, and vitally injurious to
true religion itself. Dr. Lang has for the last twenty years played a
very conspicuous part upon the political arena of New South Wales.
In principle he is a radical and thorough democrat, with a withering
contempt for that miserable, paltry set, who, without having the accent
of Christians, or the gait of Christians, pagans or men, dub themselves
our aristocracy. And here let me make a few remarks upon the
wretched snobbishness and flunkeyism that pervades society in so extra-
ordinary a degree in this country. Respectability is a great word with
them, but what does it mean—not virtue, morality, or honour ? no, but
simply money. Should any of them make a trifling slip, be found
guilty and sent to Cockatoo Island, this is no bar to their admission to
the aristocratic society of New South Wales on their release : they are
wealthy, and consequently respectable. The society of religionists
known as Glassites, excommunicate any of their members who become
bankrupt, no matter from what cause, so strict and searching is their
discipline. If this discipline were applied to our Sydney congregations
how few would be left to worship God. There is such an eternal talk
about respectability in Sydney society, that I account for it in no other
way than by supposing that most people, having very grave doubts as to
their own respectability, adopt this plan to prevent the general public
entertaining the same doubts. The paltry, insignificant title of knight-
hood which Charles Kean, the actor, bravely spurned from him with
contempt, is wildly sought after by the spurious pinchbeck gentry who
call themselves our aristocracy. When Sir Robert Walpole used to be
troubled with any clamorous and persevering placeman, he held this
title in ierrorem over his head, and gave directions that if he did not
leave the premises he would knight him—this, generally, had the
desired effect. The straining and striving among a certain class of
Sydney society, to be thought superior to others, is pitiable in the
extreme. This is the essence of vulgarity. I have been in what is
called the best society of Sydney. Buckingham Palace not more
expensively or gorgeously furnished than the room I was sitting in,
and yet the conversation going on around me made me think I was in
Petticoat Lane. A virtuous, honest, devoted, man of genius, would
pass unnoticed among them, if poor. While a profligate, empty headed


Lord or Baronet, would make them proud of even an unmeaning smile
from the inane creature. They are a contemptible set, never happier
than when engaged raising a monument to some titled nonentity. Dr.
Lang is the very reverse of this wretched class—he knows how to
conduct himself in the presence of the highest, while his kind considera-
tlon for those in the humblest positions, marks the true gentleman. He
is a man that every liberal politician in the country esteems and regards.
The intrepedity and courage he has displayed in fighting the battles of
the people in this country, have endeared him to all lovers of freedom
—his unimpeachable integrity, truth, and devotion to the people’s
cause have never been for a moment doubted. Even when clouds of
darkness settled over him, and a jail was his fate, he bore up resolutely
and nobly. His undaunted exertions in favor of his son, who was
cruelly sacrificed to appease the malice of powerful foes, who did not
hesitate to strike a blow at the'father, even suppose it must first go
through his son. His wonderful energy in vindicating his own rights,
when villainously assailed (and God be praised that vindication has
now met with an ample reward) —his unequalled patriotism and love
for the country he has adopted prompting him to make such sacrifices
of time, money, and labor, in its cause —all this has sunk deeply into
the hearts of the people, and made the name of Dr. Lang revered, loved,
and respected by the mass of the people of this country. In appear-
ance, Dr, Lang is hale and hearty, though beyond sixty years of age;
he is a good specimen of a Scotch clergyman—tall, strong, and
healthy; he is possessed of great talent, highly cultivated ;
he has read a great deal and travelled a great deal ; his con-
versation is very interesting, instructive, and amusing; there is no
bigotry or fanaticism about him • he is possessed of great humour, has
a keen appreciation of the Ihdicrous, and likes a joke amazingly ; his
mind is stored with every vafiety of information; his society is very
interesting and attractive', all the more so from his mild, quiet,
pleasant manner. As a speafer, he is very able 3 when he speaks
upon great questions that interest him much, he is powerful, philo-
sophical, and argumentative, earnest and animated in the highest
degree, declaims with great vigour, and always commands attention.
He is a warm supporter of the present government, being, in a great
measure, composed of men who stood side by side with him in many a
bygone struggle for the people’s rights. He is a sincere friend of Mr.
Cowper and his colleagues, and this should be a powerful guarantee to
the Liberals throughout the country of the fidelity of the present
government to the cause they have so much at heart. Any young
politician, wedded to the Liberal cause, could not steer a wiser or safer
course than following in the wake of the renowned Dr, Lang. But it
is not as a politician that Dr. Lang’s durable fame will rest, but as an
earnest, zealous, anxiously devoted patriot, who has done more to
advance the prosperity of this country than all other men put together.


He has made some dozen trips to England, and has given the people
of Great Britain a wider knowledge of this country, its wealth and
resources, than they have received from any other source. It must he
a great comfort to him in his latter years to find how completely he
has prostrated all his enemies—how triumphantly he has upset the
decision of our Supreme Court, and scattered his ecclesiastical enemies
to the winds. I only hope he may prosecute them to the utmost, and
mulct them in swinging damages; they deserve no quarter at his
hands. He has the satisfaction of knowing, however, that he has ever
had right on his side ; and he may live the remainder of his days—
which I trust may he long extended —with the consciousness that he
is loved and revered hy all who value the peace, happiness, and
prosperity of this great and rising country.*
* The late persevering, although futile, efforts of the Sydney Morning Herald
to slander the fair fame of the renowned Doctor have passed harmlessly by.
The people look at the great fact of Dr. Lang’s poverty, and knowing how
wealthy he might have been had this been his object, the conviction of his
honesty is consequently irresistibly forced upon them. The name of Dr. Lang
will be revered and regarded long after such paltry pretenders as his de-
tractors havepeft this scene, and are peopling regions where the principles of
Toryism are carried out more stringently than they bargained for, and in an
atmosphere of painful and peculiar warmth.
47


MR. HOSKINS.
aY original intention in writing those sketches was merely to
give some account of the leading men in Parliament, thinking
f 1 that any notice of the more obscure representatives would
neither he interesting nor palatable to the public. I have,
however, had numerous requests to take a step from the
sublime to the ridiculous, from Robertson to Dalgleish, for
instance, with the view of variegating my humble contributions to the
literature of the day and rendering them as a whole, a more complete
picture of the actors on our political stage. Having arrived at this
resolution, you must be prepared for some rather rough handling as a
love of truth is the paramount consideration in my mind in all I say.
As far as I have gone, the truth and fidelity of my descriptions are
generally admitted by very competent judges, and I would not risk
my reputation for those qualities by the slightest exaggeration either
of praise or censure. It is no fault of mine that foolish, vain, ignorant
men sit in our Parliament, they are to be found in all Parliaments,
and even if we had a £3OO a year qualification for voters, this defect
would not, I believe, be abated a jot. My task, then, is simply to
hold the mirror up with a steady hand and reflect men and things
exactly as they are. Mr, Hoskins is an Englishman, and represents
the diggers. He was a digger himself, although Ido not
believe he was bred to manual labour. He has evidently been well
educated, and is well bred and gentlemanly in his demeanour. He is
between thirty and forty years of age, tall and stout, although not
possessed of much physical power. He has travelled a good deal, and
has been a pretty close observer—he has treasured up a variety of
information, and possesses a very retentive memory —his face is round,
flabby, and inexpressive, and has a childish, frivolous look, rather
boyish than manly—it is by no means “ sicklied o’er with the pale cast
of thought”—the prevailing expression being a sort of self-sufficient
flippancy and empty presumption; there is nothing bad in his face,
nor is there the slightest indication of earnest zeal or inflexible
resolution. He is not a man capable of thinking very deeply—nothing
original about him, and a slavish tendency to borrow the thoughts of


other men. The higher order of literature, poetry, or metaphysics,
he cannot appreciate or understand, I believe he could not repeat
half-a-dozen lines from any of our great poets. The strange and
startling eloquence of Shakespeare, his amazing depth and
dazzling beauty, he fails to appreciate— and yet if he only
knew it he could get more political knowledge, more know-
ledge of human nature and human affairs, from many a half-dozen
lines of Shakespeare than from all that his idol, John Stuart Mill,
ever wrote. Mr. Hoskins has not read much, although he has made
great use of the library since he came into Parliament. His
judgment is very weak, —for instance, if he went to hear a speaker
and thought highly of him, an article in the next Saturday Review,
taking an opposite view would make him surrender his pre-conceived
opinion. He is easily led in this way, which argues a want of solid,
sound judgment. He never imagines that the Saturday Review may
be wrong—but this practice of borrowing other people’s thoughts
and failure to exercise or use his own judgment implies
a weekness of mind which is one of Mr. Hoskins’ main characteristics.
In the language of a celebrated writer of old—“ Tie will cram up the
result of other men’s thinking without forming any judgment of his
own at all, and so picking up, in a desultory way, a mass of heterogenous
and unconnected information. He is the greatest bore in the world,
empting upon every man he meet his budget of second-hand facts, of
whose true significance he does not know much.” As a speaker he is
very weak and superficial—he is elaborate and cumbrous —fluent and
flippant—never interesting or attractive —forcible nor powerful—his
voice is bad and his elocution worse. He is never earnest in his
speech although he often affects to be, but it is painfully perceptible.
He makes the most extensive preparation for every display, quotes
largely and is armed with pages of notes—although there is nothing
original or argumentative in his speech —although he throws no new
light of his own, on the subject, still his speech is not without its
value, from the number and variety of authorities he adduces. He is
afflicted with an overweening and boundless vanity, which he cannot
hide. In speaking, he frequently glances up at the reporters’ gallery,
as much as to say, “ Now, did you ever hear such wisdom as that ? be
sure you report it correctly; ” and if any members are conversing
rather loudly near him he complains in a childish, sulky tone, to the
Speaker, and has the nuisance stopped. I would rather try to enforce
attention by the strength and power of my argument than to compel
unwilling listeners by enforcing the rules of the House, Hoskins
opposes the present Government with the view of ousting them, and,
as a liberal, all that I have said of Wilson in this respect, I say of
him. Although Hoskins is a common-place piece of mediocrity, and
never will be a speaker while he lives, he is nevertheless a useful
member and good representative. His statement, that an impounding


bill was a more important matter than the abolition or retention of
four State churches amongst us, will afford a good illustration of the
paltry character of his mind. He attends very closely and regularly
to his parliamentary duties, I believe he is conscientious and honest
in his conduct in Parliament, and deserves well of the diggers whose
interests he has never on any occasion in any way compromised. He sits
regularly on the opposition benches, and I think demeans himself by
his bearing to Hay and Macleay. I should like rather to see him
keep them at their distance. I think more highly of Hoskins than I
do of Hay or Macleay, whom I think nothing of, and should like to
see Hoskins estimate them at their proper value also. He will speak
three or four hours on any great question, which is a sure indication
of weakness. I have an idea, although I have no evidence of the fact,
that Mr, Hoskins has been disappointed in some application to the
Government, which is the only way I can account for his opposition.
This I would have it distinctly understood is a mere surmise of my
own, but I believe, if the truth were known, I would not be far out.
I believe Hoskins is well qualified for many Government employments,
and would be in every sense a credit and an honor to any service he
might enter.
50


MR. ¥. B. BAILEY.
«HE gentlemen of tie bar do not shine brilliantly in our
political horizon. Whether it is that their minds are so
cramped and narrowed by their constant dealing with mere
technicalities, or that they cannot act unless a clear and
carefully prepared case is put into their hands, certain it is
that in our parliamentary arena they are neither
GT conspicuous nor formidable. As parliamentary debaters
they are not to be compared with such men as Arnold, Forster, &c.,
and they seem to be aware of this themselves from their disinclination
to enter the lists with those men. This is very apparent in the
British Parliament. I suppose, Brougham was the only practising
lawyer who ever played a very conspicuous part in the House of
Commons. Pitt and Percival gave up their profession and devoted
themselves entirely to politics. We never see any of the English or
Irish Attorney-Generals or Scotch Lord Advocates shine in debate
in the House of Commons—with the exception of the shrewd,
cunning, deceitful Dundas, they have mostly been silent members.
A court of law is a very different place from a popular assembly and
a clever barrister, well instructed, with his position severely studied,
and all his ground safely and properly taken, and his whole energies
directed to one point, may be quite at home and very able and
brilliant, but when transplanted to the parliament of the country to
take part in the fierce and acrimonious discussion of great national
questions—where party feeling runs high —where mere technicalities
are despised and nothing but great principles dealt with—where
every variety of intellectual power is generally assembled and where
the utmost fi'eedom of speech prevails—the legal mind is not at all
adapted for such an arena. The daily avocation of a lawyer contracts
and narrows his mind and renders him, in most cases, utterly
incapable of taking large or comprehensive views on any question or
a broad and philosophical grasp of the whole subject—they may, in
fact, be considered as a parcel of legal monks cloistered in cells poring
over musty statutes —their minds crammed with all manner of petty
details, and so accustomed to deal with the minutiae of everything that
they are in a great measure incapacitated from shining either as


great writers or statesmen. Certainly the bar has produced some
wonderful intellects, but they have, in most cases, turned to other
pursuits, as in the case of Roebuck in England and Seward, the
present able adviser of the American President, himself a barrister.
We have only, four members of the bar in our Assembly—Messrs.
Dailey, Martin, Faueett, and Windeyer—and Dailey is bejond all
doubt the ablest of the four, either at the bar or in the Assembly.
Windeyer is very weak and inferior—as a Parliamentary speaker, he
is a mere child. His speeches, if you can call them so, being mere
wishy-washy talk ? his voice, action, elocution, delivery, and
appearance are all sadly against him ; when he speaks he stands bolt
upright, fixes his eyes on the table before him, and never lifts them
till ho finishes; he commences and finishes on the same key; he is
destitute of all the power of expressive look or action ; when he is
speaking you are only conscious of hearing a disagreeable noise in
your ears; he runs to the end of his milk and water puerile talk with
all the monotony of a clock running down. Dailey is a very different
man indeed : he is everywhere popular and well liked, and deservedly
so. A man might travel far before he would find so pleasant a com-
panion as Dailey : he is full of humour and anecdote, generous and
genial in a remarkable degree—a perfect gentleman in all his
thoughts, feelings, and actions —social, hearty, and comfortable both
in appearance and practice. Ido not suppose there is a single man in
the country dislikes Dailey. His conversation is most interesting,
attractive, and amusing • his mind is well stored with a variety of
information; he lias a fine taste in literature, and few men have a
more correct appreciation of fine writing or fine anything. In this
sketch I mean to speak of Mr. Dailey as a rising barrister rather than
as a parliamentary debater. As a parliamentary speaker ho is
eloquent, sparkling, brilliant, and witty. He has great command of
language, a fine voice, most expressive in its intonation, and his action
and delivery forcible and animated; his powers of ridicule and keen
cutting satire are very great, as I dare say Mr. Plunkett could hear
ample testimony toj his humour is rich and racy—he is always
listened to with pleasure. I may not be considered very capable of
judging, but I look upon Mr. Dailey as by far the ablest man at the
bar of this country, and if this is not saying much, I believe him
capable of rising to a leading position either at the bar of England,
Scotland, or Ireland. The bar of New South Wales is very destitute
of men of talent. Sir William Manning, as he is called, would cut
but a sorry figure at home—he is the very personification of prosy
ineffective weakness. Isaacs, in the case “ Watt v. Flett,” tried the
other day, occupied seven hours in his address to the jury ! Is not
this a certain indication of great weakness on the part of the counsel ?
Charles Phillips defended Courvoisier in a speech of two hours. John
Inglis occupied about the same time in his brilliant and able defence


of Madeline Smith; and I heard Andrew Rutherford, of the Scotch
bar, and about as able an advocate as ever appeared at any bar,
address the jury in a case which lasted ten days, in a rapid, vigorous
eloquent speech, complete in all its parts, in an hour and three quarters,
The counsel who requires seven hours to address a jury in any case
has most distinctly mistaken his profession. The thing is unprece-
dented in the annals of judicial proceedings. The first time I heard
Dailey speak was some years ago. I was at once struck with his great
natural powers—his natural ability is very great, and if he prosecutes
his profession with zeal and energy, he will soon be the best employed
counsel at the bar. I went up to hear him the other day defend the
Rev. Mr. Watt, of the Congregational Church, on the charge of
perjury. This was a most atrocious case—the rev. gentleman swearing
to a series of the most palpable lies. Dailey could not have given
much attention to the case, having been retained only the evening
before. He, however, made a splendid defence for Watt. I was
particularly struck with his skill, ingenuity, and dexterity in cross-
examining the witnesses. All that the ablest counsel could do for the
prisoner, Dailey did for this man. His address to the jury, which
lasted about an hour and three quarters, was in every sense masterly
—he analysed the evidence with great skill and penetration—com-
mented upon it with remarkable force and intelligence—attacked the
ease for the Crown, formidable and impregnable as it was, with great
energy, eloquence, and ability. He resorted to every means, reasoned
closely and powerfully, raised up various hypotheses of innocence with
great tact and Ingenuity, assailed the feelings of the jury with the
most earnest and impressive appeals, and at length concluded by far
the most eloquent and vigorous address I have ever heard by counsel
in this country. In this address Mr. Dailey’s voice, action, and
delivery, which are all excellent, aided him in a great degree. His
style is clear, distinct, and rapid, his voice rings through the whole
court, and every word he says is distinctly audible. He has a great
command of language, and is most felicitous in his choice of expressions.
He is infinitely superior to Martin or Manning; in fact, neither of
these gentlemen can lay claim to that most powerful of all qualities in
an advocate, eloquence. Manning is not even fluent, and is tame,
cold, and ineffective—l have listened to the ablest counsel at the bar
of England, and for ten years of my life have almost daily listened
to the leaders of the Scotch bar, and enjoyed theirfriendship, and this at
a time when the Scotch bar was peculiarly prolific of men of high talent,
and I am firmly of opinion that Mr. Dailey’s talent would raise him
to a high place among them, —that if he possesses industry and
application, commensurate with his very great ability, he would rise
high at any bar, and would be anywhere, as I trust he shall long
continue to be here, a bright ornament to the bar of Australia. In
politics Mr. Dailey is an enthusiastic liberal and a warm supporter of


the present Government. He is a most enlightened friend of the
people, knowing no distinction among men hut the distinction of
worth and talent. The nobility of intellect and honour is the only
rank that men like Mr. Dailey recognise and pay homage to. Mr.
Dailey is quite a young man, and I doubt not, there is a long and
brilliant career before him. With regard to the case of the Rev. Mr.
Watt mentioned above, I do not believe the annals of human
delinquency afford a more atrocious spectacle of deep dyed iniquity
than the conduct of this man. After degrading the sacred profession
which he impiously followed, he goes deliberately into the witness
box and there invokes Almighty God to attest with him the truth of
a series of the most unmixed falsehoods, deliberate lies, which he
knowingly and wilfully persists in, even to the very last, and in the
teeth of a cloud of the most irrestible evidence. I am all the more
horrified and shocked at the dreadful guilt of this man, because
circumstances, not mentioned at the trial, have come to my
knowledge which place his guilt beyond all question. I beg to offer
my congratulations to the Rev. John West of the Herald upon the
immaculate purity of bis professional brother, I suppose the Rev.
Mr. Watt’s crime is nothing compared to the trifling hilarity of one
or two members of the Assembly. Had tho Rev. sinner been a Liberal
member of Parliament how the Herald would have blown him about
in winds, roasted him in sulphur, washed him in steep-down gulfs of
liquid fire ! Oh, Hypocrisy, Hypocrisy ! how I glory in seeing the
infernal mask ruthlessly torn from your smooth, sleek, villanous
visage.
54


ME. DALGLEISH.
BELIEVE there is not one member out of the whole seventy-
y two who will not agree most cordially with me in pronouncing
yto Dalgleish a most imperturbable and unalloyed nuisance in the
yy, House. A man who will speak upwards of thirty times in one
yJ) night, and almost every night in committee above a dozen, and
yy speak insufferable, intolerable absurdity, in a species of broken
r English, or, at any rate, in language intelligible to himself
alone, is certainly a most extraordinary representative. How he ever
was returned for West Sydney is to me a mystery, and leads to reflec-
tions anything but flattering to the people. Mr. Dalgleish is a Scotch-
man, and by trade what is known at home as a “greasy engineer,” to dis-
tinguish them from the profession of Civil Engineers. And upon the
strength o? being called an engineer, Dalgleish assumes to be con-
sidered a sort of authority on matters, such as the construction of
railways, which even a much superior knowledge of his own trade than
he has would be of no use or assistance to him whatever in arriving at
a proper and sound conclusion upon. His ignorant and interminable
talk upon such subjects has frequently sickened the House, and on
more than one occasion brought down the switching castigation of
the Minister of Works upon him. The House laughs consumedly as
the Minister of Works proceeds to this business, first picking out such
parts of Dalgleish’s speech as he means to reply to, and deliberately
translating them into English. This is no exaggeration, and the
public will easily believe it when I tell them that I have heard Dal-
gleish myself call reimburse reimbruise , expunge, expune , proselitize,
proselite 'd —and numerous other atrocious pronounciations which often
lead me to reflect, that, if he would speak less and study his mother
tongue more, it would work a great improvement upon him, if that
were possible. In appearance, he is above the middle height; has a
very conceited pompous walk \ his face is hideous, especially when he
distorts it, as he always does in speaking ; he has a horrible sardonic
grin, which he means for a smile, and under such circumstances his
mouth resembles nothing so much as a rat-trap. He is entirely un-
educated, with the exception of being taught to read and write, which
every Scotchman is; he has read nothing and knows nothing,
and although Dr. Lang thought he had good natural abilities
before the Dr. left for England this last time, I believe that


there is not a member of the House who thinks less of him than Dr.
Lang does now. Many a weary sigh I have heard Dr. Lang give as Dal-
gleish would rise in committee for about the fifteenth time, and with
his harsh, grating, unmusical voice, his vile English and atrocious
grammar, and ugly, forbidding aspect soon clears the House of every
member but the Government and one or two others. This would
never be tolerated in the House of Commons, the idea of one man taking
up so much time would be speedily put down there. As a speaker Dal-
gleish is ridiculous—it is painful to listen to him. Of all the speeches I
have heard him make, I cannot recollect one thought he ever expressed
worth remembering. When you hear him once you hear him at all
times, and I don’t think any one who has heard him once will express
a desire to listen to him a second time. He speaks on every subject,
no matter what; and notwithstanding the few matters that he can pos-
sibly understand, still this is no bar to him; up he gets and repeats
a lot of stale platitudes; and even if a peal of laughter at some of his
monstrous pronounciations assails him, he does not see it, but speaks on
torturing the very soul of every member, and leaving them lost in a
perfect wilderness of empty, senseless, meaningless words. If any
wretched crane should unfortunately break down, here is a world of
food for Dalgleish’s little peddling mind —to those who are compelled
to listen to his talk upon such a subject, it would he a charity to put
them under chloroform to enable them to stand the operation. He
pretends to show some regard for the economical management of the
finances of the country, but all he attempts in this way is to
attack the salary of some poor underpaid clerk, and there are
many of them in the Government service, or to deprive the
woman that sweeps out some office of her means of existence.
He is a paltry ill-conditioned man at best —selfish and unfeel-
ing as the iron he works among, or else how could he have been guilty
of the indecency of offering any opposition to Mr. Egan’s, the member
for Eden, late application for leave of absence in consequence of a
severe domestic affliction. And is it not deplorable that Sydney, the
capital of New South Wales, could find no better representative than
this—a man who cannot speak three lines of correct English, and who
addresses the parliament of the country in the language of Mrs.
Malaprop ? What would an educated stranger think of the Sydney
people after listening for half an hour to Dalgleish, as their
representative ? What an opinion he would form of the
intelligence, discrimination, and capacity of the electors!
Dalgleish talks about being the representative of labour.
Labour never suffered such a degradation as when it
spoke through such a mouthpiece. If a combination of ignorance,
self-sufficiency, blustering insolence, and absolute inbecility, form the
attributes of a representative of labour, then Dalgleish is one in reality.
I question if there are many mechanics in Sydney who do not now
56


despise and repudiate him as their representative. The members of
the House, to a man, complain of him as an unparelled obstruction to
the business of the country. He effects no possible good in the
House, and seems to go there for no other purpose than to hear
himself talk. There is, in fact, for such a representative, no
purgatory of opinion—nothing short of utter damnation will suffice.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED FOR DAVIES AND CO., NEWS AGENTS, TORE AND BARRACK STREETS,
BY r. CONNINGHAME, 184, PITT STREET.


Ml Will tilt mi huh i'
3 1508 01559833
57
