

The Guild of the Watchmen of Australia.
POLITICAL MANIFESTO.
A GALL TO THE NATION AT THIS TIME OF NATIONAL PERIL
AND DISTRESS
A GENUINE WAY WHEREBY AUSTRALIA MAY REGAIN THE
ROAD TO HEALTH AND PROSPERITY.
NO MORE POVERTY. NO MORE UNEMPLOYMENT.
WORK FOR ALL.
WORK FOR ALL.
We, the .Watchmen of Australia, caH .
on all our fellow citizens to flock to
our political banner, and to save Aus-
tralia by a courageous, live policy from*
her—present-perilous financial depres-
sion,, which, if neglected.will have far-
reaching-repereu9sion»~-on—the—whole
social structure of our Commonwealth.
We will pass in review before your eyes
the histm-wwbich led up to these-finan-
cial straits, Jmtneir true
colours half measures and wrong
treatment which have been decided
upon as remedies, and open out to your
clear vision a genuine way, whereby
Australia may regain the road to health
and the goal of prosperity and social
peace: a way, which is no blind alley,
but a broad High Road, proven and
guaranteeed to get yon there.
THE HISTORY OF THE
FINANCIAL LANDSLIDE RUNS
AS FOLLOWS.
For many years past our nation has
imported in excess of what it exported,
and such deficit as we could not set-
tle with gold, we had to cover by means
of promissory notes or loans, as they
are usually called.
The hour of payment (las stiuclt and
we, who have gaily borrowed are now
required to serve our debts, and
throughout the ages, whether in the
days of Athens, Rome, Newmarket, or
the present, the debtor has ever been
expected by his creditors to forfeit his
liberty to them, in substance, if not in
theory. The big financiers, who are
our creditors abroad, have issued their
summary and their commands which
state that:
(a) we must cease to be optimists, and
realize that the world will not pro-
vide us with an unlimited market
for our products;
(b) that we are heavily in debt to
creditors abroad, to whom, after
t933r»we shall have to repay mil-
lions upon millions annually;
(c) that Australia has to adjust herself
to economic situation more
disasJ.¥Antageous to her than any in
the-last ten-years; that..the world
price leveh-is everywhere falling
rapidly* and. is-likely to continue
fallings thatvthe prices of Austra-


UatL-export. products in the world
meeket aee trot accurately reflected
hjuoaveinents 4n the general world
price level, and that there is con-
siderable reasorv-10, fear that the
tiLkesjaLLhttS£-particular products,
’lbJ&Uifik Australia ns exporter is
primarily interested, will decline
the general price
-leyel. Prices for manufactured
goods in all countries are kept up
by the inelastic character of the
wage system, while primary pro-
duction not employing much labor
is more responsive to the direct
pressure of supply and demand;
Id) that as a consequence our national
income has steadily decreased, and
will continue to decrease;
(e) that' at-«thw»tirny'trf~nnprccedented"
depre9»ie*-***-»ltimpf>"we»*have to
make-
loans*^iort3istwo_4Jullloiwpounds,
—within -tlie.next.£ewj»onths;
(f) that to repay our debts we are de-
pendent on our revenue derived
from the sale of our products in
the world market;
(gL~th.it" l the "Austin Han-secondary in-
dustries inter-
national competition as the world
price -level falls;
(hlthat the*combined effect of
raetqrs has been to alter disposi-
tion in her bargain-
ing to sell n?KqwnpTOducts against
those of the world. In
other
goods must now be
the same volume of Aus-
tetuian purchases;
(k) the financiers finish by telling us
that there is evidence that the
standard of living in Australia has
reached a point which economic-
ally is beyond the capacity of the
country to bear without consider-
able reduction of costs, and an in-
creased per capita output.
The foregoing, in plain language,
means that the Australian must work
harder for less pay; thatwthe markets
of the-world are. slumping; that though
Australia works and reduces
her wMid/will still fall
tlbat consequently Aus-
tralia will chase her debts, yet never
overtake them; tle.t in the end the Am-
tralians will work like slaves and feed
like slaves and get more and more into
debt until every individual citizen is
so in debt through the fact that he is
working for less wages than are suffi-
cient to keep himself on, that the Aus-
tralians will not only be collectively
bankrupt as a nation, but what is worse
individually bankrupt as well; that,
then, we, Australians, shall be sold up
to the highest bidder on the world
market, and will be allowed a pittance
to work in our inheritance, our Aus-
tralia, which has passed under the
hammer out of our possession into
the hands of foreign landlords.
HOW DID WE LET OURSELVES
BE INVEIGLED INTO THIS
SUICIDAL POLICY OF LOAN
INDEBTEDNESS?
(a) Six million people have attempted
the development of a country, which
required 120 million citizens to under-
take the task. They have undertaken
vast developmental works, excellent in
intention" and aim, but the weight of
which falls heavily on its small popu-
lation.
When undercapitalised concerns start
with good intentions on great develop-
mental schemes, they usually find them-
selves in the Receiver’s hands. The
wealth of a nation is not the amount
of gold it has or riches, the wealth of
a nation and its capital are the number
of productive citizens which it pos-
sesses.
We know how to run a business, but
we have apparently been unable to
carry our knowledge into effect in
dealing with the affairs of the nation.
We have left our capital to deterior-
ate by unemployment, and we have not
made use even of the little we had, and
we have pinned our faith in loan
money instead of in work. With three-
quarters of Australia undeveloped,
what cause is there for unemployment?
Lack of capital do you answer? No,
not lack of capital alone, although we
admit we require a population of a
hundred and fifty-three million to do
Australia justice, but because we have
stopped our capital, which is the num-
ber of our productive population, from
working by limiting our currency to
an international gold standard. So
we have allowed the wool to be pulled
over our eyes, and have, metapboric-
ally speaking, put the cart before the
norse; instead of putting the work in
hand with the nation as backer, and
manufacturing sufficient money to
hand to the producers as tokens for
the work they have done, we have col-
lected a quantity of gold in the vaults
of the banks, cither by buying or bor-
rowing it, and on that basic value, we
have manufactured a limited amount of
currency with which to pay for “work
done.” As the currency is restricted
to the amount of gold we possess, ob-
viously the amount of work that can
be put in hand is limited. It won’t
pay for both material and workers’
wages, and so we have been in the
habit of buying materials overseas, and
since we had no money to pay for
them, we have bought them on credit,
i.e., we have gone to the money lenders
abroad, the big financiers, and with the
loans thus floated, we have paid the
manufacturers at home for what we
bought off them. Now, as an offset,
we have produced raw materials in
this country, such as wool and wheat,
and sent them overseas to be disposed
of. For them we received payment,
and these credits we used to pay over
to overseas merchants for imports
they sent into this country. When,
however, the value of our imports ex-
ceeded the value of our exports, we had
again to apply for a loan to the money-
lenders, and so our national debts
grew. We should, of course, have
produced more, and we could have
produced more if it had not been for
the idiotic way in which we made a set
quantity of currency, fixed in so far
as it was restricted to the basis of
our gold reserve or foreign credit,
and limited our production to that
quantity, instead of setting all our
population on the road to prosperity
by enabling work to be done on the
backing of the nation’s assets, such
as the millions upon millions of acres
of crown land, and manufacturing
enough money to give to the workers
as tokens for the work they had done.
In this way, work would have limited
currency, instead of currency limiting
work, as is the case under the present
system.
(b) We are a modern democracy.
Now, this differs from a true democracy
in so far as it is really a disguised
oligarchy. The nation has no longer
a say in the policy of its government,
because the nation has only a limited
choice of ready-made policies for the
adherents of which it is allowed to
vote. Party politics has divided the


political field into a limited number of
paddocks, on each of which a certain
political panacea grows. The citizen,
who wishes to be nourished into pros-
perity by the aid of political devices,
cannot make a free choice, cannot take
a little food from one paddock and a
little food from another paddock, but
must decide as to which political pad-
dock he wishes to browse in, and after
that he has to Cat the diet—take it or
leave it. He cannot leave the pad-
dock until an election has given him a
further choice, and then again he can-
not select those policies which he feels
he needs, but has only a prescribed
choice, limited to the same narrow
range of diets provided table d’hote
fashion—a la carte being out of the
question. The elector, therefore, has
the choice of three evils and that is all
the freedom of selection he has. Under
these circumstances, party politics are
no longer an intelligent concern, but
the party platforms arc merely designed
by an oligarchy, who wish for power
to catch the temporary favour by pro-
mises, which arc not intended to be
kept, of a citizen, who does not think,
because his powers of political thought
arc atrophied by disuse and preven-
tion. Then, as soon as the oligarchy
is in power they think no longer of
the nation, but only of the vested in-
terests on account of which they
sought office. A government put in
by the spade—work and propaganda of
city interests—will only be concerned
with legislation benefiting the cities,
or more probably, the capital city only,
and be oblivious of the urgent needs
of the farmer and the nation as a
whole. The government put in by
the liquor interests will see to it that
legislation favours their patrons, and
the paid politician, who, by the very
fact that he is a man, must look upon
politics as his profession, by which he
earns his living, cannot afford to lose
his seat in Parliament by displeasing
the powerful among his supporters any
more than the ordinary man can afford
to lose his job. In short, therefore,
elections cost money, candidates must
have financial support; for this rea-
son they belong to a party and are
endorsed by it; but the party funds
are largely made up of the contribu-
tions of vested interest, and that
policy pleasing to these latter is
bound to be the hidden goal of the
party. John Citizen is offered a
choice of pre-arranged political plat-
forms, and since he is not encouraged
nor allowed to use his brains or free
choice in the formulating of his coun-
try’s policy, he votes simply for that
platform which appears to offer him
the most immediate personal benefit,
and the nation’s political arena has
thus become degraded into a village
fair, where raucous merchants extol
their wares to attract and gain pos-
session of the money, alias the vote, of
little Johnnie Citizen.
(c) Owing to the above, such good
efforts as six million citizens could have
turned on to the development of this
vast unexplored continent of immense
potential resources have been dissip-
ated in petty schemes, mutually over-
lapping or mutually cancelling, without
national unity, without national har-
mony, which have left the nation both
from an efficiency and national point
of view, fifty per cent, below par in
development in respect of what could
have been achieved.
(d) The easiest way for a profes-
sional, and therefore at-all-cost-posi-
tion-retaining politician to be popular,
is to be lavish with public funds. The
least unpopular way of obtaining these
funds is by loans; for the interest on
these loans requires less additional
taxation than the obtaining of the prin-
cipal by this means would entail, and,
moreover, such additional revenue as
would be necessary can be levied from
the few who are rich, rather than from
the many who are poor. Of course,
the rich will pass on the impost, and
so in the end the poor will, by a rise
in the cost of living, have to pay for
it all the same. These operations,
however, are involved, and the man
in the street docs not look sufficiently
deeply into affairs to notice that he is
being sold a pup. Even if he knew it,
he would rather pay interest on a loan,
which future generations would be
called upon to repay, than to do with-
out the immediate inflation and pseudo-
prosperity, the invariable aftermath and
sequel of a loan flotation. The pro-
fessional politician is a firm believer
in the policy of loan flotation, which
will come home to roost when he has
retired from the political arena, and
when another treasurer will be called
upon to straighten out the financial
tangle.
(e) Admittedly the Australian is an
optimist, and what is more, he is a
man who, as a rule, will disdain to tell
a lie, or put it across his neighbour by
such a low device as smooth speeches.
He is therefore prone to take a well-
told talc at its face value, to which he
is apt to give a too ready credence.
When he is told that Australia re-
quires borrowed money for its develop-
ment, and that the financiers abroad
are eager to help by advancing the
necessary funds, and that they are
urged to this course by what appears to
be purely philanthropic motives, the
Australian accepts the loan in the spirit
in which it was apparently offered, and
believes that such a friendly loan will
not be harshly demanded at a time
when his production is fetching a par-
low price in the market. He
believes that the moneylenders who ad-
vanced him the money will allow him
the usual reasonable price for his
goods, and do their best in helping
him to dispose of them for their mutual
benefit, cvet. if they cannot take them
in repayment of loans.
The Australian is a straight fellow,
and, as a nation, believes that the men
he has put in office to look after the
government and the public purse are
doing their utmost to be worthy of thj
trust imposed in them. He believes
in the officials of his union as having
his interests at heart. He knows that
as a human being he has a birthright
to a decent standard of living, and ap-
points union officials to watch his in-
terests and to see that he is not im-
posed upon. He takes their word
when they tell him that he is in danger,
and that action is called for, and allows
them to decide on the necessary action
to be taken. Arc they not appointed
to watch his interests, and should he
therefore not trust them as we trust
our family solicitor? He himself
would not be unfaithful to his trust,
nor advise wrongly. Why, then, should
he suspect his union officials of double
dealing and treachery? Should any of
the “bosses" warn him that he is being
misled by men who are not faithful, is
it not natural for him to disregard that
as mere strategy on the part of the
opponent to make him dispense with
his main safeguard? It is not as if he
has found the bosses so eager to pro-
tect his interests or to share with him
to the fullest the prosperity of the in-
dustry. What he has got he has had
to fight for, and a good type of union
official gave him what he holds to-day.
Is it not reasonable then that he trusts
his union officials and rejects the ad-
vice of his employers and of the con-
servative press, as being uttered with
the tongue in the cheek as so much
strategy?


Have we given the working man that
opportunity of erudition as opposed to
mere primary school education to en-
able him to assess the true values in
social and political economy? Is his
life not too busy with the struggle for
existence to enable him to meditate
on, or give thought to, the matter of
world markets, industrial costs, organ-
isation, and what is a possible standard
of living? The working man earns a
small sum comparatively speaking, and
computes his salary at so much per
week. The average worker does not
go to dances which cost a guinea a
throw, he does not wear as ’a rule
expensive evening clothes, neither do
his women folk wear fur coats and
satin frocks and diamond tiaras at
£IOO, £25, and £250 respectively. These
may be investments or social neces-
sities, but they are rather glaring. The
difference between an expensive cloth-
ing outfit and Rolls Royce or Packard
on the one hand, and a black shirt and
Chevrolet on the other hand, is some-
what marked. One cannot blame the
worker for thinking that his employers
are very wealthy. The operative is not
a man of big business, he does not hold
with the intricacies, grades, fine distinc-
tions and niceties of the social
economics of present day civilisation;
he can only compare his belongings
with those of his “boss,” and sees the
marked difference in their respective
standards of living with the one dom-
iciled at Moss Bay and the other at
Woolloomooloo, and wonders why this
is so. The worker may not have had
such good opportunities, and we realise
that all men are not equal in brain
power, but, as we said before, the aver-
age worker probably goes in more for
hard commonsense than for deep phil-
osophy, hence our faith in a British
jury. To a working man who works
all day, it seems somewhat incongruous
that a boss whose work apparently does
not entail the sweating of the brow
(the outward and visible and most
easily detected sign of hard work)
seems to have a lot more of this world’s
pleasant things than the operative.
If, therefore, an agitator tells him
that the standards of living of his boss
and him should be more evened up,
he becomes persuaded there may, after
all, be something in the orator’s words.
The Australian feels, and feels rightly,
that the standard of living of all men
should be equal. While there are good
and bad in the world, there can obvi-
ously be no equality as to calibre, char-
acter or brains, but there should be
equality of opportunity and equality of
standard of living. The fact that a
man has brains or money should not
entitle him to better material things
than his fellowman, who may not have
so many brains or so much money. The
standard of living should be measured
by the amount of productive work an
individual does, and the man who
works hard should have more of this
world’s good things than the man who
loafs. The man who wants to work,
but is incapacitated by reason of ail-
ment or deformity, should be given
such work to do as his disability will
allow, and if this is of such an order
as totally prevents his working, the
world should in pity give of the world’s
best.
The Australian is, as a nation, imbued
with a sense of practical Christianity
and so the artificial standards of an
unchristian civilisation irk him consid-
erably. The disparity between the
standards of living of the rich and
poor is constantly before him, and he
knows them to be intrinsically unjust;
when, therefore, paid agitators incite
him to strike against such an unjust
state of affairs, he is by his very sur-
roundings urged to comply with their
advice. He. strikes to show the world
that without labour things would come
to a standstill, and that therefore all
should work, and work hard; and all
should have the means of a decent
standard of living, and for the good of
the nation, none should be expected
to live below that* and none should
live above it. The talented man has no
right to exploit the man less talented;
we have no right to benefit by the mis-
fortunes of others. The talented man
should help his less well-equipped
brother; the prosperous should help
the poor to acquire the means whereby
to obtain prosperity.
Such, then is the history of the
kangaroo’s illness.
The Australian, good natured and un-
suspicious, has been imposed upon by
the specious words of unscrupulous
moneylenders, and sold by self-seeking
politicians, who have mortgaged his
every possession. He is now compelled
to repay short term loans at a time
which is particularly unfavourable to
him. Now, the moneylenders knew
what they were about. Australia is a
desirable land with untold resources,
and one on which a foreclosure would
be an excellent business proposition.
They purposely so arranged it with
the politicians that all our obligations
would fall due together within the
space of a few years. They knew also
that if the impossible were demanded
we would simply be compelled to let
the flood pass over us and challenge
them to squeeze water out of a dry
sponge. If, however, we are not driven
to the absolutely impossible, if we are
given some breathing space, our
national pride in our British word, and
our bond will compel us to settle up
in an impossibly short time and break
our nation in the process. We will re-
duce our own standard of living and thus
destroy our home market. We will
export almost our total production and
sell it on the world market at prices
fixed by the international money-
lenders. The international money-
lenders of Wall Street have withdrawn
and are withdrawing the gold of the
world from circulation, for which pur-
pose they are using the U.SA. as the
stalking horse. By this means they are
restricting the world’s purchasing
power more and more, thus the demand
is becoming less and less, supply is
exceeding demand, although people are
everywhere in want, the prices on the
world market are consequently slump-
ing, and will continue to slump,
especially in the primary products on
which Australia depends for her re-
venue to pay her way. The present
depression is artificially brought about
by the withdrawal of the gold of the
world from circulation. The financiers
are doing this in order to become the
masters of the world. If our exports
had been allowed a fair price on the
world market according to what they
are honestly worth, we would be
creditors and not debtors in so far as
our balance of trade is concerned. Thus
the international fiananciers have rob-
bed us by legal means of our revenue
and then demanded repayments of
debts which could only be covered by
our earnings. We have borrowed the
money, and, of course, we must re-
pay—the iniquity lies in the fact that
the very financiers who prate to us
about the sanctity of financial relations
are the very ones who have deprived
us of our revenue. They have engin-
eered the loans so that they would fall
due at a time when gold was scarce
and the consequent depression would
hang like a dense cloud over the world.
It was they who instigated the war,
which gave Wall Street the opportun-
ity of gaining control of the world’s
gold. Because of their action in


manipulating the loans and the de-
pression, we will have to live on the
smell of an oil rag, and for the next ten
years we will be enslaved. By that
time every value in Australia will have
so fallen through deflation at such a
suicidal rate, that the moneylenders.will
be able to buy up Australia for a
song, and when we have finished
paying off our debts, we will find that
we are no longer masters in our own
house, but that in the process of re-
paying the usurers, to honour as Aus-
tralians the bond that was given by our
employees, the politicians, to our des-
truction and undoing, we have so re-
duced the values of our country as to
have delivered ourselves into foreign
hands, worse than serfs or vassals.
The farmer, though working himself to
the bone, will receive such ridiculous
prices for his produce, that he will, in
order to live, have to get further into
debt, and so he will be sold up; the
foreigner, the usurer, will buy him up
as a going concern, lock, stock and
barrel, human and animal live stock
thrown in. The manufacturer will be
taxed out of existence, since the usurer
has no need of Australian manufac-
tures, and such goods as he does ex-
port, will not repay the freight. He
also will be sold up, lock, stock and
barrel, human and metal machinery
thrown in. So, the usurers are hand-
ling us as wrestlers do to one another.
They have first of all gained a grip on
the national finance, and now we are
trying to undo that grip; we have, by
that very fact, fallen into that far
more fatal grip—their stranglehold on
every individual composing that nation.
At the end of the ten years we shall
perhaps have repaid the national debt,
but every citizen will be the serf of
the moneylenders overseas, who will
cause us to live on the smell of an
oil rag, yet charge us even for the oil
it contains. Three millions will have
to be repaid every month; thirty-six
million pounds every year, to satisfy
our external indebtedness to the
moneylenders; this, at present, repre-
sents a quarter of our export receipts,
but if we adopt this scheme and sell
our go«ds on the rigged market of the
world, rigged by the usurers, that
thirty-six million pounds will within
the next few years represent the whole
of our export receipts, and wool will
realise three-pence per pound and
wheat three-pence a bushel.
That is what a decrease in wages and
a reduction in the standard of living
are going to do for us in our present
troubles. It was the usurers who
moved heaven and earth to induce our
politicians to borrow. LET US RE-
MEMBER THAT!
Let us look at the vicious circle of
reduced wages and increased prices.
When trade is brisk the national over-
head charges are spread over a large
national turn-over, but when trade is
slack, a considerably reduced national
turn-over has still to bear practically
the same overhead, and, as a conse-
quence, the cost of living rises. Now,
when wages are low, the national turn-
over must be less, and thus prices rise.
But the more prices rise the less can
low-waged workers buy, consequently,
the less grows the demand, and pro-
ducers have to retrench. Less people
are then employed and wages are re-
duced, but a reduction in wages coupled
with unemployment still more reduces
the national purchasing power, until
at last the country goes bankrupt. For
this very good reason that king of in-
dustry, Henry Ford, immediately put
up wages all through his plants as soon
as the Wall Street crash had shaken
the foundations of U.S.A. national
finance. The higher wages are, when
accompanied by efficiency, the brisker
will frade be, and the more prosperous
will be the nation, and again for this
very good reason, did President Hoover
move heaven and earth during that
same national crisis to get public
works and industrial expansions
started in order to avoid being drawn
into this vicious .circle of reducing the
standard of living and reducing the
purchasing power—the national dance
of death.
In this way the U.S.A frustrated the
Wall Street financiers and tackled her
slump. They increased thereby the
purchasing power of the nation and
the home market; they put up the
tariffs and protected their industries
even more thoroughly, so as to safe-
guard, at all cost, their home market,
which is every nation’s greatest asset.
We have been advised by the financiers
that we must sell our products in the
world markets, that we must on no
account protect our country from a
flood of imports by means of the rais-
ing of the tariff from countries with
lower standards of living, that we must
continue exporting in order to keep the
exchange at par, even though our pro-
ducts are sold for a song, in fact, we
are only allowed to make for ourselves
such financial yokes, ropes and chains
as will embody us in a chain gang
building the road for a group of usurers
to superwealth and world power.
Such advice is merely intended to
help us along the road to slavery, but
we have a respite of two years; let us
use this period to disentagle ourselves
from such chains as the usurers have
already fastened on us, and to regain
our liberty.
No reasonable man can deny the ex-
istence of an overruling Providence,
Who drew up the clauses of the con-
tract whereby we enter this existence.
Construction and production are the es-
sence of the continuation of Life; de-
struction is its very antithesis. Because
the overruling Providence wanted us
to have Life (that is why He put us
here), He made it the central pivot of
our contract that we should learn con-
struction and production, and turn our
backs on all things negative and resis-
tant to Life. To this end the energy
necessary for the carrying on of ex-
istence was to be derived from two
sources: (1) oxygen, which Providence
grants tis freely in the air we breathe,
and to obtain which we do not have to
work; (2) food, which, by the chemical
processes of the body is the fuel, and
which, in combination with the oxy-
gen, gives us the essential energy with
which to continue existence; and to
obtain this food we have to work, i.e.,
we have to learn to construct and pro-
duce. If we had not been made to as-
sociate work and existence, we might
never have learnt that to Live one must
be constructive and productive; the
surest way of teaching us that Truth
was to give us the greatest incentive,
i.e., if you don’t work you cannot exist 1
But some men did not like work,
and tried to evade that clause in their
contract; they did not want “to eat
bread in the sweat of their brow.”
They still required food to combine
with oxygen they breathed, and if they
themselves did not produce, they would
have to inveigle some of their fellow
creatures to work a little harder, in
order to part up with some food to
them who did not work. Any man
who won’t work is a gambler, because
he lives by devising schemes whereby
he can make bis fellow men part up
with some of their food. The easiest
way was to act as a go-between. A
had produced one thing, B had- pro


duced some other commodity; A had
need of something B had produced,
and B had need of some of A’s produc-
tion. The work-shy gambler arrives,
takes some of A’s production on the
nod, transfers it to B and receives some
of B’s production in return. He re-
turns to A and pays him the debt by
giving him some of what B handed to
him. He has done no productive work,
but at the end of the transaction, he
finds himself in possession of his cut of
A’s production and also his cut of that
of B. There was little need of the
speculator, and the latter has certainly
not produced anything, nor has he en-
hanced the intrinsic value of the com-
modities by any work of his. He has
simply gambled and won. If, however,
he has not taken too great a cut, he
has only cheated himself in so far as
he evaded his Life covenant, which
Providence drew up for his good, in
much the same way as a child does not
really benefit by playing truant. The
work-shy has been childish and a fool,
but has not unduly harmed his fellow-
men. But now the complexion changes,
the gambler takes a greater and greater
cut, and in spreading himself, sqeezes
the producer almost dry. The produ-
cer is so concerned with and keen on
production that he has little time to
give to meditation on the intricacies of
trade. The gambler, however, has
nothing to do except find ways and
means of cheating his fellows, and has
therefore brought this to a fine art,
in which he employs the whole weight
of his influence, ever increasing
through lack of competition on the part
of the producer, who is too busy to
bother about such petty things as get-
ting the better of his fellows, and put-
ting it across his neighbour. The
gambler at last gets a preponderating
influence in the affairs of the nation,
and is able by his power to have legis-
lation passed to suit his ends and to
stop the passage of bills which would
affect him adversely. From this point
he rises to be the arbiter in matters
international, and by his manipulation
of the world market can bring any
country to beggary, cause a tleluge of
unemployment, skin a nation, and in
the last resort instigate a war against
such people as will not slavishly sub-
mit, and reap the proceeds. Here the
gambler shows himself in his true
colours, having developed into the
deepest and most sinister menace to
humanity, because in international
affairs he is not subject to the estab-,;
lished laws of any nation, he is com-(f
pletely lawless and acts without any
restraint. It is that type of gambler,
the international financier, whose com-
mands the banks are compelled to
obey, Australia is up against, and
it is that type of gambler that has
caused this slump and depression of
unequalled magnitude. The main
shackles on which relies to keep us
in subjection are our adherence to the
medium of gold and the gold standard
as a basis for currency, and our depen-
dence on the world market.
BOTH THESE SHACKLES WE
MUST BREAK.
A nation’s wealth is the amount of
productive work done by it, and only
that nation is wealthy all of whose
citizens are fully employed in produc-
tive work. Local production is an
addition to the wealth of a nation, and
is paid for by local currency, a paper
credit, a token for work done. The
nation’s own citizens have, for the sake
of example, done work to the value of
£I,OOO, then the wealth of the nation
has been increased by that amount.
When a nation imports from abroad,
those imports have to be paid for in
exports of gold, or debited by means
of a loan. In the first instance the
wealth of the nation loses the value of
the exports, gains the value of the im-
ports, and the sum total of the nation’s
wealth remains practically constant, as
contrasted with the case of home pro-
duction, where a definite amount was
added to the wealth of the country.
Even in the case of exports paying for
imports, therefore, the country is less
well off than if she produced her re-
quirements at home. Where gold has
to be exported we are dealing with a
commodity which itself is scarce. The
fact that it is hard to obtain often puts
its price at a premium, and since the
demand for it puts up its price, the
country requiring it will have to give
greater value in goods than she re-
ceives in gold, in other words, the ex-
change goes against her. When a
country has neither gold nor exports,
she has to pay for her imports with
loans. It is then that (a) she becomes
hopelessly extravagant and lazy, buy-
ing luxuries because she does not have
to pay cash, and reducing her produc-
tion because the opiate of importation
kills her own powers to produce; (b)
that as her own powers of production
become atrophied through lack of use,
citizens become traders and middle-
men rather than producers; (c) that
since a nation’s citizens cannot live by
taking in each other’s washing, a vast
number of them must necessarily be
thrown out of employment; (d) that
her interest bill becomes a permanent
drain on her revenue, and that to meet
it she will have to increase taxation,
thus still more draining the life-blood
of such of her own industries as have
managed to survive; (e) that she has
to pay back in interest and capital,
probably double what she has bor-
rowed, and that therefore whatever
she bought with loan money has really
proved twice as expensive; (f) that
the support of an ever-increasing un-
employed section will become such a
burden on the producers, that all pro-
duction will stop; (g) that then the
international financiers step in and buy
up the country, lock, stock and barrel,
allowing the inhabitants as a favour to
crawl round under the yoke of sweated
labour, where once they walked with
head erect—free citizens in a land of
their own. The argument is sometimes
advanced that a government must en-
courage imports in order to be able
to levy customs duty. Who pays those
duties? It is not the foreign exporter
who does the paying, it is the importer
who carries that burden and passes it
on to the consumer, and the public
pays in any case. To impose taxa-
tion is to make industry a burden, to
encourage imports in order to derive
customs revenue is not only to impose
a burden on the industry, but to worm-
eat it as well.
The financiers have warned us that
the prices on the world market for
Australian products are going to slump
still lower, then LET US NO MORE
SEND OUR PRODUCTS SLAVISH-
LY TO THAT MARKET. BUT LET
US DEVELOP A HOME MARKET,
EVEN AS THE U.S.A. HAVE DONE,
WHERE WE SHALL GET A FAIR
DEAL, AND BY MEANS OF
WHICH UNEMPLOYMENT WILL
BE BANISHED. THE GUILD OF
WATCHMEN OF AUSTRALIA
WILL SHOW THE WAY. READ
ON!
Providence laid it down as the first
economic law that by our work we
should live. Since Providence did
not put us into the world to die, ob-
viously there mui' be work for all,


and the RIGHT TO WORK IS OUR
BIRTHRIGHT! How have so many
of us been cheated out of it?
Money was invented in order to
facilitate the exchange of values of
work, and money is merely a token
for “work done.” Some substance had
to be used as money. As gold glit-
tered and was scarce, and had already
achieved a vogue because of its beauty,
gold has become a commodity of value,
and thus gold became currency. Be-
cause gold was scarce the money-
counters in the trading game were
limited.
The work-shy gamblers who ruled
trade refused to handle commodities
unless the transfers were carried out
in terms of gold counters. Nobody,
therefore, who did not possess gold
could buy. These financiers then set
to gain control of the world’s gold
output, which they could do by grub-
staking men who would dig for the
stuff. Thus they became the world’s
financiers. Life had now degenerated
into a gambling game in which no one
who did not possess counters of gold
could play. The world trade had be-
come concentrated in the financiers
hands, and anyone who wished to buy
any article had first to buy gold
counters off them by giving them of his
products. But since they controlled
all the counters they could pay what
they liked for a commodity; they had
come into the position where they
were the controlling force in the
world’s power of production. Since
they possessed so much more gold than
any competitor, however much this one
might have gained by hard work, they
could soon crush him by raising the
cost of living against him, and paying
him nothing for his products. Should
a man require products in excess of
the gold he possessed, he would have
to borrow gold from the financiers,
who charged for their loans and
these charges were known as interest.
For the better carrying on of their
moneylending operations they insti-
tuted banks, where people might deposit
their gold, and from whom they might
borrow gold counters to enable them
to sit in at the gamble of existence.
All payments from one part of the
world to another went through the
banks, and the financiers were thus
able to make another charge on the
public, i.e., they extorted payments
which they called exchange rates, and
which they put up against countries
they wanted to get into the
soup, and they justified their ac-
tion by calling it the cost of
transporting gold and the cost of
credit to a slumping country. Being
so powerful, Ihe financiers gained con-
trol over every activity of the nation,
including Parliament and the govern-
ment, and thus caused all legislation
to be passed to suit their far-flung
schemes. They controlled prices on
the stock exchange, where they pumped
people’s money out of their pockets
into their own. They became the ar-
biters of the world, creating booms and
lending money to all, then creating
slumps and calling in those loans, fore-
closing mortgages, turning farmers out
of their places, putting people out of
their houses into the streets, reducing
all to beggary, and then buying them
up under the hammer, lock, stock and
barrel, human stock, live stock, means
of existence all together in the auction
of souls, creating unemployment, starv-
ing all, breaking all, creating social un-
rest, revolution, crushing out the joy
of life, making humans into beasts, and
elevating beasts to command humans,
making kings, unmaking kings, creat-
ing wars, poison gas, broken limbs,
and broken souls, lumps of meat which
once were men, and what for? to
own the wealth and own the world—
the broken world!
AUSTRA LIANS, ARE YOU
STANDING FOR THAT? THE
WATCHMEN OF AUSTRALIA
SHOW YOU THE WAY OUT.
READ ONI
The possession of money has become
the controlling factor in the world’s
production, and since the amount of
available gold in the world is limited
and under the control of the big fin-
anciers, the amount of available work
is limited also and again under the
control of the financiers —hence unem-
ployment. The solution of the de-
pression therefore resolves itself into
these problems: (a) How can we sub-
stitute for the world market to which
up to the present we have been be-
holden for the disposal of our pro-
ducts, a market over which we our-
selves shall have control and where we
shall be independent of the financiers.
(b) What sound method of alloca-
tion and distribution can we substitute
for “the slavery to gold” (the gold
basis) to which at present we are
bound?
(c) How can we deal with the gold
debts we have already incurred and
owe to the foreign financiers, and which
as Britishers we are bound to repay,
without handicapping or destroying the
development and prosperity of obt
nation?
In the solution of these problems lies
the solution to unemployment and the
general depression.
THE REMEDY.
The basis of national prosperity is
the possession of land. Providence has
put us into this world, and a “sine
qua non” is that when we are here we
shall have a place, as it were, reserved
for us, so that our right to be in the
world shall never be questioned, and
that it shall never be possible for any-
one by harsh selfishness and oppres-
sion to elbpw us out of a world where
we have as much right to be as the
oppressor. Providence put us here; it
should therefore not be in the power
of any man to make existence impos-
sible for us by any means whatever,
even though he cloaks them undtj
such high-sounding names, as the
struggle for existence, the survival of
the fittest, world depression, adverse
exchanges, the law of supply and de-
mand, economic necessity, stringency
of money—behind all these cloaks for
the selfishness of a crude civilization
stands the blazing inscription: SIX
DAYS SHALT THOU WORK! No
mention is made of unemployment or
economic depression as being allowed
to suspend this law; the law is quite
uncompromising: “In the sweat of
your face shall you eat bread, six days
thou shalt work, and on the seventh
day thou shalt rest. Providence, Who
put us here, must also have been far-
seeing enough not to give a command
of this nature which could not be car-
ried out; if, therefore, we are told to
work six days in the week, it means
that there is six days’ work available
for every able-bodied person, and that
it is due to a chaotic economic system
that we are deprived of our Divine
birthright.
Now, when a man owns five acres
of land with a house on it, he is as-
sured of; (a) a roof over his head;
(b) a meal, however frugal, the com-
ponents of which he can grow on his
allotment he can never starve unless
he refuses to work at all.


The remedy for the present unem-
ployment and depression is a change
of policy from our present discredited
economic system to the system em-
bodied in the code of the Laws of
Jehovah. Under this new system,
which the Watchmen of Australia
have made their political platform,
with their motto “Christianity in our
time”: (a) All citizens who are un-
employed, or who wish to take advan-
tage of this scheme, will be offered
the perpetual lease of five acres of
Crown land free of all cost. For this
purpose the Crown lands throughout
the Commonwealth will be available.
Suitable areas of ten thousand acres
will be selected as estates for Group
Settlement. Each of these estates will
be sub-divided into a Commonage of
8,950 acres and a township of 1,050
acres. Such estate will be allotted to
200 settlers with their families, if any,
and each settler will receive a five-acre
section on perpetual lease in the town-
ship as a personal holding. The sec-
tions will be allocated by ballot. The
settlers will thereafter be conveyed to
their estate free of charge, and work-
ing co-operatively, they will first get
ready the township. On each section
a house will be built, and the section
will be cleared and fenced. The
houses will be built of easily erected
material under expert supervision. The
raw material, plant, and whatever is
necessary in the way of seeds, imple-
ments and such like to bring the sec-
tions under cultivation will be pro-
vided by the nation, acting through the
Mercantile Department and the Lend-
ing Department jointly of the Crown
Bank, the institution and constitution
of which forms the subject of para-
graph (b) hereunder. While the work
of bringing the estate into productivity
is in progress, interim advances against
“improvements made” will, from time to
time, be granted by the Crown Bank
to provide the means of existence until
the revenue from the crops begins to
flow back. As each holding becomes
ready for occupation, its owner will
take possession, and thereafter will be
able to derive material benefit from
the products of his section. After the
township has reached completion, work
will be commenced on the Common-
age. The Commonage acreage will
be put under such crops as the soil
is most suited for, and, as in the case
of the township, the necessary plant
will be provided by the Mercantile De-
partment of the Crown Bank, acting
on behalf of the nation. The farming
operations on the Commonage will be
under the management of an expert
farmer, who has proved his worth and
capability. The Agricultural experts,
themselves farmers of wide experience,
will outline the scheme of cultivation
for each estate, so as to prevent over-
production or overlapping in any par-
ticular crop, and the manager will be
in charge of the field operations. His
remuneration will consist of a fixed
percentage of the nett proceeds of the
crops obtained. The Crown Bank,
which advanced interim payments,
machinery, implements, seeds, building
material, fencing, fertilizer, and all
things necessary for the development
of the estate, will receive a fixed per-
centage of the nett proceeds of the
crops until the liability of the settlers
has been paid off. The balance,
amounting to, say, three-quarters of
the total, will be divided equally among
the settlers. Each settler will there-
fore be a partner in the settlement,
and share equally in the work and the
profit of the Commonage cropping and
development. Subject to his fulfilling
the conditions of his contract, his house
and section are his own on a perpetual
lease title. Should he for any reason
wish to leave the estate, he can dis-
pose of his goodwill in the section,
but he cannot permanently alienate
the land. By the Law of Jehovah,
every fiftieth year shall be a year of
General Release, when all alienated
property shall be given back to the
original owner, and every man shall
have the right to return to his pos-
session.
Fifty acres of the township will be
national reserve, on which will be built
the Post Office, Town Hall, library,
Crown Bank, store hostelry, and pic
ture theatre. A section of this re-
serve will be set aside for a public park,
and here will be erected the religious
buildings. The Mercantile Depart-
men of the bank will run the store,
purchase the entire production of the
estate, and take charge of the market-
ing thereof.
Since the wealth of a nation is the
production of its citizens, the more pro-
ductive citizens a nation has, the
greater will be the national wealth. A
large population forms a large home
market, and the best security for the
local producer. The U.S.A. believes in
this and practically shuts out the
foreign producers from her markets
altogether. But if the local production
expands, the market must also expand,
and more immigrants must be brought
into the country to create wealth and
expand the local market. While the
U.S.A. held its door open to a good
type of immigrant, there was any
amount of work for everybody.
All unemployed among the Aus-
tralians will first be settled on their
estates, and thereafter an intensive
campaign will be started in Great
Britain to induce the people in the Old
Country to come out to Australia,
where we will give them the same fac-
ilities of land settlement and industrial
establishment. By this means we
shall establish a strong local market,
both for our primary and secondary
industries.
THE CROWN BANK.
Substituted for the present trading
banks, the shareholders of which will
be bought out, there will be established
a central bank, known as the Crown
Bank, having its branches in every
township.
The Crown Bank will act as a clear-
ing house for all debts owed by Aus-
tralians to creditors abroad, receiving
the payments from local debtors and
nttling the liabilities abroad by pay-
ments in gold.
The currency of the Commonwealth
would consist of paper, silver and
bronze, and would not be exportable,
and if exported would not be con-
vertible. In the same manner no foreign
currency could be handled except by the
Crown Bank. Thus the Crown Bank
would be the only legal institution for
the handling of foreign exchange.
The Mercantile Department of the
Crown Bank would be the Common-
wealth’s only wholesale distributor con-
trolling both exports to foreign coun-
tries and imports from abroad. All
commodities which Australian pro-
ducers wished to export would be pur-
chased by the Mercantile Department
at a figure 2 per cent, above world
market prices. It would also be pre-
pared to handle products for local sale
and act as wholesaler between pro-
ducer and retailer. All these services
it would render without charging com-
mission. The Mercantile Department
would not make purchases abroad until
the entire Australian production had
been absorbed in the local market, and
its policy in conjunction with the


Lending Department of the Crown
Bank would be to stimulate Australian
production to the utmost and as soon
as practicable to eliminate foreign im-
ports into this country entirely.
Should anyone try to evade the law
and import direct, he would have no
way of paying for his imports. He
could not send payment through the
Crown Bank, since unless the bank was
satisfied that payments were being
made for lawful purposes, they would
simply refuse to handle the business.
He could not send Australian cur-
rency, because the Crown Bank would
not acknowledge their face value
abroad, and the foreign exporter could
not therefore exchange them into his
own currency.
Under the new system, all trading
banks would be absorbed by the
Crown Bank, who alone, as represent-
ing the nation, would carry on the
banking business of the Commonwealth.
All current and deposit accounts would,
by the absorption of the trading banks,
become Government liabilities, and all
overdrafts would, by the same token,
become a debt to the Crown Bank, and
thus to the nation or State. The na-
tion, acting through the Crown Bank,
would forgive all debts, including over-
drafts, owing to it. Moreover, all who
owed the bank money would be re-
quired by the Act to render an account
to the bank of all amounts owing to
them, and by whom. The bank, in
cancelling the overdraft, would appor-
tion this amount among the several
debtors, who owed money to the bank’s
debtor. The balance owing to the
debtor, after an equivalent amount to
the overdraft had been cancelled,
would be legally recognised and re-
coverable. Any debts, however, parti-
culars of which the debtor had sup-
pressed, thinking thereby to circumvent
the provisions of the Act, would not be
legally recognised and irrecoverable.
The effect of this general forgiveness
of debts would be felt throughout the
Commonwealth, and in many instances
even the State itself, as represented by
the Crown Bank, would benefit in the
end by having some portion of its in-
ternal loans forgiven. The general can-
cellation would, in particular, benefit
the producer, and would, at any rate,
be a practical application of the prayer,
so often uttered • vainly by people
whose Christianity is only for Sunday
use, “Forgive us our debts as we also
forgive our debtors.”
THE LENDING OPERATIONS OF
THE CROWN BANK.
Germany to rehabilitate her cur-
rency after the period of hopeless in-
flation subsequent to the war, sub-
stituted for the old time “mark” a cur-
rency unit known as a “reichmark,”
the basic security of which was not
gold but land. This scheme has acted
very well, and at times the reichmark
is even at a premium in relation to the
pound sterling.
Similarly the Commonwealth will
hand over to the Crown Bank, free-
hold title of all unalienated Crown
land and government property through-
out Australia, and on that basis the
Crown Bank will grant local credits to
assist Australian producers to obtain the
necessary plant, which itself will have
to have been produced in the Com-
monwealth in the generality of in-
stances.
Anyone who wished to go into pro-
duction, after having given reasonable
proof to the governors of the Crown
Bank that he had the ability and
scheme of organisation which would
make it a tolerable certainty that suc-
cess was achievable, would be given
credit facilities by the bank. For
these facilities the bank would charge
no interest. All productive work
could go right ahead, for the Crown
would grant the necessary credit, until
the revenue of the work began to flow
back. Since in this way “work done”
would be the backing for currency and
not gold, the amount of productive
work done by the community would
regulate the amount of bank notes in
circulation, and the bank note issue
would not any longer be regulated by
the amount of bullion in the vaults.
Thus work would regulate the amount
of currency available, and the amount
of available currency would no more
control the available work. There
would then be no more room for the
financier, nor for the hundred and one
brakes on production arising from our
present lop-sided economic system.
Money would always be plentiful,
money would never be tight; there
could never be a rising bank rate to
hamper production; there would be
plenty of work for everyone, and no
one would ever need to be out of work;
there would be an equal opportunity
of advancement for everyone, and any-
one with sound productive ideas could
carry them out and offer employment
to many, being backed by the Crown
Bank for all his requirements and
plant.
Farmers who required funds for the
further development of , their farms
would be backed by the Crown Bank
without interest and without legal
costs; however intensively the farmer
wished to develop his property, the
Crown Bank would stand behind him
to make that possible.
Now, this method of dealing with
credit and finance may, at first sight,
seem revolutionary, but in actual fact
the system is on perfectly sound,
economic lines. In the banking of
the present day an overdraft is more
often granted to a business man on
the backing of his character as judged
by the manager’s sense of psychology,
than of his actual assets. This applies
more especially when money is easy
and business is good. The very origin
of banking is the lending of money to
a reliable person, who is able to make
good use of it, and who will then let
the lender share in his added prosperity
by the payment of interest. Conse-
quently, the action of the Crown Bank
in lending money on the personal secur-
ity of the borrower would not be with-
out precedent. An overdraft is not
invariably granted to a business man
on specified collateral, but often as a
debt secured in the same way as that
of any other creditor, the security being
a man’s standing, ability to bring home
the bacon, and the business goodwill
he has built up. The stock is in itself
not particularly good security, because
some of it may not be paid for, and
in any event, if sold by auction would
probably not fetch a half of its book-
worth. The security of land or goods
may be all right on paper, but it is
little use to have a farm on one’s hands
which one cannot readily dispose of.
The bank finds it more profitable to
leave the owner on the place and let
him work for the creditors, financing
him, frequently, to keep him going,
rather than to sell him up at a loss to
the bank. This shows that the best
security is always a man’s ability to
produce, and that things, unless com-
bined with human effort, soon lose
their value, whether you take, as ex-
ample, a section in a town area where
no one is building, trading, or living,
or whether you take a watch which
is never wound up, or a piano which
is never played.
The only difference between the
Crown Bank’s methods and those of


the present trading banks is that the
Crown Bank lends to stimulate develop-
ment, the State being benefited by the
prosperity of its citizens, whereas the
trading banks lend in order to make
money for shareholders and big
financiers, who require some more im-
mediate return from their investment
than the general prosperity of the com-
munity. Hence the trading banks de-
mand an immediate share of the
debtor’s prosperity, and even demand
that share when that prosperity is
merely hypothetical, whereas the
Crown Bank would be content to lend
money without demanding such share,
leaving its creator, the nation, to bene-
fit by the general increase of prosperity
of its citizens.
The method employed by the bank
in its lending operations would be as
follows:
(a) The Bank would lend—not give.
(b) Before the bank gave credit
facilities, its governors would
have satisfied themselves that
the prospect under review was
sound and promising a reason-
able revenue.
(c) The bank would employ a num-
ber of technical advisers whose
duty it would be to assist the
activities of the producers who
were being financed by the bank,
and who would watch the bank’s
interests.
(dy The account would be secured
by a first mortgage over all
assets, without interest and with-
out legal costs of any descrip-
tion.
(e) The bank would run a special
Mercantile Department, which
would see to the marketing and
distribution of the products of its
clients at the most favourable
rates, without commi ssi o n
charges.
The revenue thus obtained
would be credited to the pro-
ducer’s account and as the pro-
ducer gradually became estab-
lished, the overdraft would be
reduced, and its limit brought
down in harmony with the pro-
ducer’s added prosperity and
lessened need.
(f) If a man did not come up to
expectation, the recovery of the
debt would be just as possible
then as now. But since the bank
would only pay out as the work
proceeded, there would be little
possibility of fraud. Should the
man, through no fault of his own,
as judged by the bank, fail to
make his undertaking productive,
the bank would forgive that
man the debt, and since the
country would be self-con-
tained, and consequently with-
out foreign imports, or the
necessity to find gold to
pay for them, the extreme rarity
of such failures would not affect
the currency. Moreover, since
the bank’s officials would be ap-
pointed with care and discretion,
the right men in the right places
would obviate the likelihood of
subsequent failures through bad
judgment on the part of those
officers on whose recommenda-
tion the loan was advanced.
(g) But the absence of interest pay-
ments and a humanitarian out-
look on the part of those who ad-
vanced the means, would stimu-
late production to quite a re-
markable degree. Moreover,
the bank could afford to be
humanitarian since the content-
ment and prosperity of its citi-
zens would be its aim and object
and ultimate advantage, whereas
the trading banks have to safe-
guard the interest of share-
holders.
THE VALUE OF “LAND
BACKING” FOR CURRENCY OVER
“GOLD BACKING"
Gold can be cornered and withdrawn
from the world circulation. Land re-
mains the asset of the nation, while it
exists as a nation.
The more you spend on the develop-
ment of land, the greater becomes the
value of the basis of your currency.
Work, in very truth, then, determines
the amount of currency in circulation.
In the case of gold, however, the
amount of curency determines the pace
of your national development, and if
you wish, as is natural, to increase
that pace, you have to mortgage your
nation to foreign financiers, with the
risk of landing into a financial swamp
like the one Australia has got into,
which it will take you all your time to
prevent your nation being sucked into.
The accumulation of a gold reserve
is a laborious one, and at any moment
international financiers may stop your
progress to this goal, by creating a
slump in the market and withholding
the gold from you, which they will
most certainly do as soon as they see
that you, as a nation, are after your
independence.
CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM.
In order to establish a form of gov-
ernment, which will rule for the good
of the people, and on whom the nation
will be able to rely as true leaders, all
Houses of Parliament as at present
constituted, should be abolished, and in
its place a United Commonwealth
should be governed by an elected
council consisting of seven members.
Constituencies have proved a bar to
equal representation, and do not
achieve the greatest good of the nation
because:
(a) the number of voters in each
varies, making the votes of one
group of citizens more powerful
than those of others;
(b) the boundaries of constituencies
are frequently changed, if the
party in power can by this means
remain in office in defiance of the
will of the nation;
(c) members are apt to put the good
of some powerful interests in their
constituencies before the good of
the nation as a whole. They
behave in Parliament more like
contending solicitors guarding
the interests of their clients from
encroachment rather than as
legislators, who should be the
Watchmen of the nation as a
whole. All this makes party
politics very petty and parochial
in its outlook, and deprives poli-
ticians from that universal re-
spect and trust which, as leaders
of the nation, they should possess.
The respect granted to some of
the most eminent judges in the
Empire’s High Courts of British
Justice and that granted to the
nation’s legislators, should be on
a par—it is very obvious that this
is not the case at present.
To avoid all these pitfalls, constitu-
encies and electioneering should be


abolished, and the following method of
election substituted:
(a) Any citizen who considered that
he had the necessary qualifica-
tions to rule his country should
be allowed to put forward his
candidature. Eor this purpose
he would have to apply to the
Registrar of the Supreme Court
for a form, on which in answer
to questions he would have to
give the fullest details of his
qualifications which rendered him
eligible for a seat in his nation's
legislature. He would have to
fill in this form in his own hand-
writing and forward it with a
recent photograph of himself en-
closed. A special division of
High Court judges with techni-
cal assessors, such as an expert
in the judging of character from
handwriting, would choose from
among the applications the
seventy which they considered
most suitable as covering, all
round, the best qualifications.
A booklet would be edited em-
bodying the information rendered
concerning himself, verified by
documentary evidence, of each
selected candidate, together with
a facsimile of his photograph. A
copy of the booklet would be
sent to each elector, and on an
appointed day, officials of the
High Court would collect the
voting forms enclosed in each
booklet from each elector, on
which the voter would have re-
corded his choice of seven can-
didates from among the seventy
submitted. The seven who scored
the greatest number of votes
would form the legislature. Thus
it would be the cool judgment
of an electorate, uninfluenced by
the excitement of election meet-
ings and a play on selfish and
temporary motives, misunder-
standings and apprehensions,
which would choose seven of the
nation’s best, chosen for their
ability and character, to guide
the nation and keep it on the
road to prosperity. These men
would have severed their con-
nection with every vested inter-
est, they would be men of proven
moral worth, and of a standing
as at present only judges of the
Crown possess, which is the place
advisers of the Crown should
hold. The policy of such a gov-
ernment would be stable and
courageous and uninfluenced by
the growls of vociferous min-
orities. Election meetings would
be prohibited, and any candidate
canvassing the electorate would
be disqualified and render him-
self liable to criminal proceedings
for contempt of court.
The representative of the King,
who would be known as the
King’s Lieutenant, would have
the right, as interpreter of public
opinion, of sending proposed
legislation back to the legislature
for amendment or of referring it
to the High Court. In the case
of the latter alternative, the
Court would appoint a day for
hearing argument, and any body
of citizens could engage Counsel
to plead against the proposed
legislation and to state their case.
The legislature could, if it chose,
instruct Counsel to state its case,
and, after hearing argument on
both sides, the Court would give
its considered judgment, accord-
ing to which the proposed legis-
lation would be sent up to the
King’s Lieutenant for signature,
or the Court would advise His
Majesty to exercise his power of
veto, and the legislation would
be quashed.
THE FOUNDATION OF THE
NATION.
The Watchmen of Australia believe
in God Almighty. We believe that
God, being the origin of our Life,
wishes to lead us to knowledge, pro-
gress and development. The game of
life is His. He therefore knows exactly
what instructions should be observed to
make a success of life. These He gave
to men by inspiration, in the same way
as beautiful music is given to men by
inspiration. These instructions are
embodied in a code known as the Laws
of Jehovah. Jehovah took one race of
men, the national characteristics of
whom best suited His purpose, and
made a covenant with them, that they
should bring these Laws to the notice
of all nations, to persuade them to ob-
serve them. In addition they were
actively to endeavour to loose the
bonds ef wickedness, to undo the
burdens, to let the oppressed go free,
and to break every yoke. On His part,
He promised to grant them the fol-
lowing facilities for the carrying out
of their work:
(a) They were to rule over many
nations, but no nation would rule
over them. ( Refer Bible: Deu-
teronomy, chapter IS, verse 6.1
%
(b) They were to be the financial
leaders of the world. (Deuter-
onomy, chapter 28, verse 12.)
(c) No weapon formed against His
chosen race was to prosper.
They were to be invincible.
(Isaiah, chapter 54, verses 13-17).
(d) They were to be a holy people
unto the Lord Jehovah. He
chose them to be a special people
to Himself, above all people that
are upon the face of the Earth.
(Deuteronomy, chapter 7, verses
6-8; Deuteronomy, chapter 14,
verse 2.)
(e) They would develop into a Com-
monwealth of Nations, spreading
their dominion over the Earth,
the chief of which is, of course,
the control of that Highway of
the Nations—the High Seas.
(Genesis, chapter 35, verse 11;
Genesis, chapter 22, verse 17;
Isaiah, chapter 27, verse 6; Deu-
teronomy, chapter 28, verse 13;
Numbers, chapter 24, verse 7;
Jer., chapter 51, verse 20.)
As a seal to the covenant, and as a
sign that they were the chosen race
of Jehovah, to bring His laws to the
nations, and persuade them to keep
them, the nation of God had to ob-
serve the Sabbath day to keep it holy.
(Refer Exodus, chapter 31, verses 13-
18.)
The nation was in ancient times
called Israel, which means chieftains
under God, but now this covenant
people are called the British Race, the
word British having the meaning of
covenant race, the ancient language of
Israel, which in spite of the wear and
tear of the ages is still the foundation
of the English language. The word
English means messenger race, and
this, as we might expect, is the usual
term applied by the foreigners to the
British, for to them we are messengers,
and to ourselves, as we view the rela-
tionship in which we stand to the Al-
mighty, we are a Covenant Race. The
nation of Israel or the British Race,
can historically be traced in their
journeyings from Asia to Great Britain,
and this need cause no surprise, since


it is a well known historical fact that
all the .European races came from Asia
at the time of the “Volksverhuizing”
as the Teutonic races call it. The
main point to remember is that the
British are in no sense Teutonic and
that the terra Aryan, strictly used,
only applies to the British race and
no other. When you compare the
Israelite mandate with the achieve-
ments of the British Commonwealth,
you see at once that they tally.
The British Commonwealth is unique
among the empires of the world, past
and present, on account of:—
(a) Its extent.
(b) The number of coloured races
who dwell under its flag.
(c) Its commercial activity, its lead-
ership in the world of finance,
and the pre-eminence of its mer-
cantile marine.
(d) The natural tendency of our
nationals to assume the leader-
ship among foreigners, which the
latter feel almost hypnotically
compelled to concede, wherefore
from the Belgian Congo to the
Argentine, men of the British
Race hold the “key” positions
and are at the “helm.”
(e) Its national acknowledgment of
the sanctity of personal liberty.
(f) Its reverence for justice, with its
guiding principle, that an ac-
cused is innocent until proved
guilty.
(g) The strength of public opinion,
which always takes sides with
the weak and defenceless, and
“seconds” the cause of the under-
dog, and which sees some good
in the worst of nations, and is
ready to forgive and forget, even
blaming themselves when the op-
ponent is justly blameworthy.
It is our object now to establish the
Law of Jehovah in Australia, for we
then have the promise that then there
shall be no poor amongst us, but all
shall be comfortably provided.
SCHEDULE A.
THE LAW OF JEHOVAH.
Penonal and Moral Statute —Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart and with all thy soul and
with all thy strength and with all thy
mind.
The above keeps one in tune with
the Source of Life and Love. Life
and the power to love will then be
within us, whence follows the second
statute:
Thou shall love thy neighbour as
thyself.
If we love our neighbour as our-
selves we cannot do to our neigh-
bour anything which we ourselves
would not care to suffer at the hands
of our neighbour.
National Statutes —Remember the
Sabbath day to keep it holy: six days
shall thou do all thy work, but the
seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God. In it thou shah do no man-
ner of work, thou nor any of thy
household, for the Lord blessed the
Sabbath day and hallowed it.
The Sabbath was given us for
spiritual recuperation. During the
stress of the week, we stand in danger
of losing touch with Jehovah, Who is
the source of our life and the length
of our days, wherefore we stand in
danger of becoming so engrossed in
material things as to forget our God
and His laws which make for the hap-
piness of mankind, if observed and fol-
lowed. Therefore, on the Sabbath, if
we refrain from work, we shall have
time to study the Word of God and
communicate with the Almighty. We
shall be then spiritually refreshed, and
since we cannot have a healthy body
unless the mind is healthy, the spiritual
recuperation of the Sabbath is nec-
essary if we wish to feel vigorous
bodily during the week that follows.
Jehovah is our life according to the
scientific proof of universal existence;
the observance of the Sabbath secures
us in the possession of the Life which
only He can give.
Ye shall not walk in the customs
of the gentile nations. I am the
Lord your God, which have separ-
ated you from the peoples. Ye shall
be holy unto me: for I the Lord am
holy, and have separated you from
among the peoples, that ye should be
mine. Thou shall rise up before the
hoary head, and honour the face of the
old man, and thou shalt fear thy God.
Ye shall do no unrighteousness in
judgment, in meteyard, in weight or in
measure. Just balances, and just
weights shall ye have. Ye shall not
deal fraudulently nor lie to one an-
other. Thou shalt not oppress thy
neighbour, nor rob him: the wages of
a hired servant shall be punctually paid.
I am the Lord. Thou shall not hate
thy brother in thy heart; thou shalt
not take vengeance, nor bear any
grudge against the children of thy
people, but thou shalt love thy neigh-
bour as thyself: I am the Lord. Ye
shall keep my Sabbaths and reverence
my sanctuary; I am the Lord.
Cease from superstitions, and be not
defiled by them: I am the Lord. Every
fiftieth year shall be a year of General
Release, when all alienated property
shall be given back; and ye shall re-
turn every man unto his possession.
And if thou sell aught unto thy neigh-
bour, or buy of thy neighbour’s hand,
ye shall not wrong one another: ac-
cording to the number of years after
the General Release, thou shall buy of
thy neighbour, and according unto the
number of years of the crops, he shall
sell unto thee. According to the mul-
titude of the years thou shalt increase
the price thereof, and according to the
fewness of the years, thou shalt dim-
inish the price of it; for the number
of crops doth he sell unto thee. And
ye shall not wrong one another, but
thou shalt fear thy God: for I am the
Lord your God. And the land shall
not be sold in perpetuity, for the land
is mine: for ye are strangers and so-
journers with me. Ye shall at any time
allow your neighbour to buy back his
possession. If thy brother be waxen
poor, and sell some of his possession,
then shall his next of kin redeem that
which his brother hath sold. And if
a man have no one to redeem it, and
he be waxen rich, and find sufficient
to redeem it, then let him refund a
proportionate amount of the purchase
price for which he originally sold it,
in accordance with the space of time
which separates them from the Year
of General Release, and he shall return
unto his possession. But if he be not
able to get it back for himself, then
that which h# sold shall remain in the


hands of him that bought it until the
Year of General Release, and then
shall it be returned to its original
owner and his family, and he shall re-
turn unto his possession. If a man
sell a dwelling house in a city, for a
full year 'he shall have the right of
redemption; and after the expiration
of this period, if the property remains
unredeemed, it shall belong in per-
petuity to him who bought it: it shall
not be returned in the Year of Gen-
eral Release. And if thy brother be
waxen poor, and he cannot meet his
obligations, then thou shah uphold
him: Take thou no interest payment
of him nor any commission for the
help thou givest him, but fear thy
God: that thy brother may live be-
side thee. Thou shalt not give him
thy money on interest nor the means
of life at a premium: I am the Lord
your God, which have given you this
land. If ye walk in my statutes then
will I establish my covenant with you,
saith the Lord God.
At the end of every seven years
thou shalt make a Release. And this
is the manner of the Release: every
creditor shall release that which he
hath lent unto his neighbour; he shall
not exact it of his neighbour, and his
brother, because tbe Lord’s Release
hath been proclaimed. Of a foreigner
thou mayest exact it: but whatsoever
of thine is with thy brother, thine hand
shall release. (Howbeit there shall be
no poor with thee, if thou wilt only
diligently hearken unto the voice of
the Lord thy God to observe all His
commandments.) If there be with
thee a poor man, one of thy brethren,
thou shalt not harden thy heart, but
shalt surely lend him sufficient for
his need. Beware that there be not
a base thought in thine heart, saying
the seventh year, the year of Release,
is at hand, and thou give him nought.
Thou shalt surely give to him,
neither shall thine heart be grieved.
Thou shalt not wrest judgment, neither
shalt thou have respect unto persons,
neither shalt thou take a bribe. That
which is altogether just shalt thou fol-
low. These are the laws of national
economics laid down by the Almighty,
and in resume they enjoin the follow-
ing:
(1) —The basis of national prosperity
is the possession of land. Therefore,
every citizen, who is a paterfamilias,
shall be given a portion of the land,
which is God’s, and that land shall be-
long to him and his seed from genera-
tion to generation. It shall never be
alienated in perpetuity, but it shall be
released by the purchaser at the Year
of the General Release. Hence there
can never be a permanently landless
unemployed shifting population and a
thriftless ancestor can never impovish
his family in perpetuity by the sale of
the ancestral possessions.
A man who owns land can never be
homeless, nor can he starve while he
can till his ground to produce food.
The essentials of life arc guaranteed
to him. Inflation of land values would
be impossible.
(2) —The rich are enjoined to help
the poor by lending them their needs.
But these debts must never become
a deadweight burden from under which
the poor man is unable to rise. The
wealth of a man must never make him
supreme by the perpetual oppression
of the poor. There must be no inter-
est charges, compounding interest upon
interest, which frequently means the
repaying of the original debt thrice
over. Every seven years, all debts arc
called off and every man starts again
with a clean sheet. So man is taught
not to regard wealth and possession as
the all in all of existence. He who
has, must give to him who has not,
the want of the one being sufficient
reason for tbe generosity of the other.
He must give gladly, as unto the Lord,
helping his neighbour in the way which
gives his neighbour the greatest per-
manent benefit.
The great principle underlying this
law being that life is transitory and
that a soul cannot take his riches with
him when he retires from the earth;
in other words: Lay not up for your-
selves treasures in earth where moth
and dust doth corrupt, and where
thieves break through and steal, but
rather lay up for yourselves treasures
in heaven.
(3) —Man must never benefit him-
self by the misfortunes of his fellows.
(4) —Every man shall deal squarely
by his neighbour, so that there will be
no cause for friction and no oppression,
so that the nation may fear their God
and prosper.
(5) —There must be a strong feeling
of national patriotism and chivalry.
(6) —We must keep separate from
the gentiles. Therefore our finances
must be in no wise entangled in or
controlled by the foreign nations. We
must be self-supporting in everything,
so that we are not in any way be-
holden to foreigners for our means of
existence, and that their rulers can
exercise no form of authority over us,
and so that none of our people can in
any wise be influenced by foreign
counsel or bribery. We must in
everything be a nation apart, helping
the gentiles, materially and spiritually,
but not being beholden to them in any-
thing so that our eyes may be rivetted
on our God, and so that we may be
under the law of God, not under the
law of men.
(7) —Therefore must we keep holy
the Sabbath of the Lord our God, and
reverence His sanctuary that we may
always be mindful of the Rock whence
we were hewn, and the Pit whence we
were digged and thence inhale the
strength to keep these laws. For
then will it be well with us, and the
Most High will walk among us and He
will be our God and we shall be His
people. And there would be no more
poverty, no more financial distress, no
more debility, and no more unemploy-
ment.
SCHEDULE B.
THE COVENANT OF JEHOVAH
WITH HIS PEOPLE ISRAEL,
THE BRITISH RACE.
Thou art an holy people unto the
Lord thy God; the Lord thy God hath
chosen thee to be a special people unto
Himself, above all the people that are
upon the face of the earth, because
the Lord loved you.
Know therefore that the Lord thy
God, He is God, the faithful God, who
keepeth covenant and is merciful.
Thou shalt therefore keep the com-
mandments and statutes and the judg-
ments which I command thee this day,
to do them. Wherefore it shall come
to pass if ye hearken to and do all
these commandments, that the Lord
thy God shall bless thee, and multiply
thee. He will also bless the fruit of
thy womb, and the fruit of thy land,
thy corn, and the flocks of thy sheep


Thou shall be blessed above all
people; there shall not be male or fe-
male barren among you or among your
cattle. And the Lord will take away
from you all sickness. Thou shall also
consider in thy heart, that as a man
chasteneth his son, so the Lord thy
God chasteneth you, therefore thou
shall keep the commandments of the
Lord thy God.
If ye walk in my statutes, then I
will give you rain in .due season, and
the land shall yield her increase, and
the trees of the field shall yield their
fruit, and ye shall eat your bread to
the full, and dwell in your land safely.
And ye shall chase your enemies and
they shall fall before you.
And I will walk among you, and
will be your God, and ye shall be My
people, and ye will receive a blessing
that there will not be room to receive
it, so great a blessing will ye receive.
Ye shall loosen the bands of wick-
edness, and undo the heavy burdens.
Ye shall let the oppressed go free, and
ye shall break every yoke, that the
world may know that the Lord your
God is mighty, a Lord of lords, who
regards not persons, nor takes reward,
but who is the Trustee and executes
the judgment of the fatherless and the
widow, and those who have no means
of self-defence.
Therefore thou shall love the Lord
thy God, and keep His charge, and His
statutes and His judgments and His
Commandments ALWAYS.
This manifesto is issued by the
Executive of The Guild of the Watch-
men of Australia, at their headquarters
at" Sandalwood, South Australia.
Should you wish to hear further de-
tails of our platform or historical
proofs that the British Race are
Israel, and the future developments of
our nation's history, as also how the
Great Pyramid is concerned in all this,
please write to us.
P. KNIGHT,
Lieutenant.
Sandalwood, S.A.,
Ist October, 1930.
rostead fir Omshy, printers, Delmont’s Huilding, Ansu-i Avenue, Adelaide. ’Phone C. 1531
