

RIL
Policy of the
Protestant People’s Party
of Australia
“Protestantism is Patriotism"
This association was formed with the purpose of awakening
the Protestant population of Australia to the dangers which are
confronting this country through anti-British activities, and to
take action to accomplish the reformation of the political
public, economic and social life of this country.
THE MAIN AIMS AND OBJECTS OF THE ASSOCIATION
ARE:
(1) To elect Protestants to Parliament.
(2) To defeat Roman Catholic action.
(3) To combat recognition of the pope and hi* representa-
tives.
(4) To protest against Australian representation at the Vati-
can and Ministerial visits.
(5) To defeat Roman Catholic controlled immigration.
(6) To oppose government grants to Roman Catholic institu-
tions, including schools.
(7) To preserve British justice from Roman Catholic inno-
vations.
(8) To thwart priestly interference in politic*
(9) To insist on trial of clerics in open court for offence*
against the common law.
{10) To demand periodical inspection of denominational in
dustrial institutions.
(11) To enforce the Four Freedoms of the Atlantic Charter.
(12) To review' public service appointments.
(13) To oppose exchange of representatives between Eire and
Australia, until the former gives due recognition to
the British Monarchy and Government.
(14) To guard against discrimination in housing allotment*
favouring Roman Catholic*


(15) To put down fraud and "grtfft”; and to reduce taxation
(I 6) To purge the rolls and simplify the electoral system.
(17) To legislate for the good of all.
PROGRAMME
(I) To watch all parliamentary proceedings in the Pro-
testant interest: and for the protection of the people when
their rights and privileges are being infringed: to raise opposi-
tion to enactments contrary to the Protestant interest; to cause
inquiry to be made in connection with departmental administra-
tion, when Protestant public servants are being discriminated
against in favour of Roman Catholics; to re-establish British
constitutional traditions in the Civil Service, so that the old-
time principles of integrity and impartiality may be revived and
perpetuated.
(2) It may support the candidature of any Protestant can-
didate it deems prudent, and shall endeavour to influence the
selection of suitable Protestant candidates demanding a pledge
of loyalty to the Protestant cause and resistance to Roman
Catholic pressure, if elected. Or it may put forward candidates
independently, under the title of Protestant People’s Party,
using its own policy and programme of political action.
(3) The association shall interest itself in local, municipal,
State and Federal Elections to promote suitable candidates; and
to secure in every direction the dominance of the Protestant
conception of social, political and religious life, without pre-
judice to innocent or peaceable dissenters therefrom.
(4) It shall be the association’s purpose to maintain gov-
ernment according to the British constitutional principles and
traditions: and resist all activities that would disrupt the unity
of the British Commonwealth of Nations.
THE FOLLOWING GENERAL P.P.P. POLICY HAS BEEN
AGREED UPON:
(1 ) Defence. Full support for the Policy of the British Com-
monwealth of Nations, and co-operation with other
powers concerned in the Pacific.
(2) Industrial. The Protestant People’s Party supports the
principle of Conciliation and Arbitration, while recog-
nising that anomalies in the operation of the present
system require to be eliminated.
(3) Education. We favour a policy of co-operation between
Federal and State authorities in order to assure equal
opportunities for education including higher education


for all, according to ability, irrespective of financial
status.
Health. We support the establishment of a national
health scheme with a view to building up the health
of the nation.
Housing. Every encouragement and assistance be given
to enable a citizen to become the owner of bis own
home Kv
(a) the fullest co-operation between the Federal and
State authorities and private enterprise.
(b) the extension of price control to prevent excessive
building costs and inflation.
(c) the exemption of all building materials from
Sales Tax,
(d) where necessary, homes to be provided without
deposit,
(e) loans to be provided for provision of homes at a
rate of interest representing the cost of money
and management.
(f) immediate steps to be taken for the elimination
of slum and sub-standard areas.
Development. We pursue a vigorous policy of develop-
ment of Australian resources through water conser-
vation and irrigation extension and unification of
strategic railways and highways, and decentralisation.
Constitution Reform. We will inaugurate the calling of
a constitutional convention for the purpose of:
(a) making the Federal Parliament sovereign,
(b) the re-adjustment of Federal electoral boundaries.
(c) the functioning of Government through local gov-
erning bodies.
Immigration. To encourage an immigration policy,
which will safeguard the Protestant supremacy of our
King and country.
Taxation, (a) No taxation on basic wage or its equivalent
wheie dependents are supported.
(b) Substantial reduction of present rates of taxation
on overtime
(c) Examination of the effect of high taxation on the
expansion of industry and commerce, with a view
to its reduction in the interests of higher production.
(d) A progressive reduction of all taxation as circum-
stances permit.
Social Security. (a) Support for the principle of a


02250333 3
national retiring allowance free of any Means Test
based on contributions and the extension of the same
principles to unemployment and health insurance-
(b) The development of a larger and more efficient
population in order to check the alarming decline
in the strength of the British Empire by (i) a cam-
paign of education to debunk the social stigma
attached to the large or moderate sized family by
the false standards of the 20th century; (ii) the
removal of economic disabilities of parents by in-
creased child endowment, commencing at five shil-
lings for the first child and rising by two shillings
and sixpence per child to fifteen shillings for the
fifth and each subsequent child.
(11) Financial Policy. The P.P.P. supports a financial policy
of national control of credit directed by the Federal
Government through the Commonwealth Bank only.
(12) Transport and Communication. To provide the most
efficient means of transport for the people in town
and country.
Funds are urgently required. Send donations to: R. G. Sarina,
Secretary, Box 35, Broadway, Sydney.
(Authorised bi/ Rev. C M. Roberson, 27 Victoria Parade , Manly)
“The Rock" (printed weekly) will give all the latest details
of the Party’s activities.
THE MANAGER
ROCK NEWSPAPER CO., I 1 0 Glebe Road, Glebe
BOX 26, P. 0., GLEBE, N.S-W. ’Phone MW 1659
Please enrol me as a Subscriber to “THE ROCK”, for which
1 enclose subscription—-
For Twelve Months
13/-
..6/6
For Six Months
Name
Address
Please see that name and address are written distinctly so
as to avoid error. Country and interstate cheques add exchange.
PfOleslan! Publications, ilO Glebe Point Koed, Glebe MW 1659
