

TWOPENCE
Patriotic Pamphlets,
Eighth Edition.
No. 17.
POPE and KAISER
IS ROME
PRO-GERMAN?
A LECTURE BY DIGBY BERRY, M.A.
(Late Canon of St. Paul’s, Melbourne, and Examining
Chaplain to the Bishop of Melbourne.)
1915.
Australian Statesman and Mining Standard,
Melbourne and Sydney.


PART I
THE PAPAL GOVERNMENT,
Britons throughout the Empire are wide awake to the
danger which threatens us from Germany, but they seem
to me to be fast asleep to the danger threatening us from
another enemy much older and much more subtle than
the German Emperor, of which enemy I have to speak to
you this evening, '■*
If I declare to you my suspicion that Papal Rome
has been in league informally and secretly with the Kaiser
in his designs for the destruction of the British Empire,
you will set down this suspicion to the account of my
bigoted Protestantism. But if you have the patience
to listen to the evidence I am about to set before you,
I think you will have to admit it is sufficient, if not to
procure a conviction, at least to establish a very strong
prima facie case in a court, and sufficient to produce a
moral certainty in our minds.
FIFTEEN YEARS AGO.
I must first ask you to carry back your thoughts and
memories to the time of the South African War. You
may remember that at least in the first year of the war
the Boers seemed to count upon help from Germany, and
not from Germany only, but they even expected that Eng-
land would be involved in trouble with two or more of
the European Powers, and would have to withdraw her
troops from South Africa. “President Kruger . . . believed
“that, whatever happened, Europe would not allow Boer
“independence to be destroyed.” “Historians’ History,”
xxii., 302. If it be asked why should the Boers have
any such expectation as this-, the answer is that sugges-
tions of this kind were made by the newspaper Press
of several different countries of Europe, and I shall show
you that the newspaper Press evidently received these
suggestions from Rome.


FIRST WITNESS.
My first witness shall be a Roman Catholic gentleman
residing in the Tyrol, that is, in the Alpine region of
Austria adjoining Italy. The most Roman Catholic
country in Europe is Austria, and I think the Tyrol is
the most Roman Catholic part of Austria. This gentle-
man, writing to “St. James’ Gazette,” of May 30th, 1900,
says: —“It is deplorable that the Tyrolese are, to a man,
clergy and laity, dead against us, and I as a Catholic
am continually wondering how it is that the Church
to which I belong has allied itself to Leyds and Co, (of
course, he means the Boers) all over Continental Europe
to preach what we must acknowledge to be the greatest
crusade ever preached against any nation since the days
of Peter the Hermit. What advantage the Vatican
authorities expect to reap passes my comprehension, but
it is an undoubted fact that the organised Press and in-
fluence of the greatest Christian Church in existence is
doing its utmost to sow hatred and distrust of the British
Empire wherever it can. . . . The pro-Boerism of the
Tyrol is the vehicle of the anti-English Crusade which
has become an important political factor all over Europe.
It is painful to have to confess, but it is precisely where
Catholicism is a great power . . . that the downfall of
England is prayed for with a fervour not exceeded by
that of St. Louis for the destruction of the Paynim.”
SECOND WITNESS.
The next witness is “The Globe” newspaper of March
2nd, 1900. Referring to “the envy, hatred, and all un-
charitableness” manifested towards us in most of the Con-
tinental States, it remarks :—“The Boer War neither ori?
ginated it nor intensified it. There is assuredly no love
for Dutch Colonists in those Ultramontane quarters whose
hostility to England has been most fiercely displayed, and
if we had been engaged in a contest with any other enemy
it would have been equally manifest. ... A stupendous
campaign of lies has been organised against us. The
revelations of the Frankfort ‘General Anzeiger/ enforced
as they are by the ‘Cologne Gazette/ lay bare the whole


machinery of a conspiracy whose operations have sup-
plied every newspaper which would accept them.”
You will observe that the “Globe,” as well as the cor-
respondent of the “St. James’ Gazette,” is surprised that
Roman Catholic newspapers should be so pro-Boer in
their sentiments, but both are convinced that the secret
is to be found not in any love for the Boers, but in
an intense hatred of the British Empire.
THIRD WITNESS.
My third witness is the Rome correspondent of the
“Daily Mail,” of December 25th, 1899:—“I very much
doubt, among the many evidences of Continental hos-
tility to England during the Transvaal crisis, if there has
been any more striking than the attitude of the two prin-
cipal organs of Rome, viz., the ‘Osservatore Romano,’ the
chief Roman Catholic journal of the city, notoriously
subsidised by the Vatican, and the ‘Voce della Verita,’
generally considered to be one of the organs of the Jesuit
Fathers. . . . Together with the ‘Osservatore Romano,’
it has always been consistently anti-British, and their
tirades have simply disgusted fair-minded men.”
FOURTH WITNESS.
So far we have seen ample evidence of hatred against
Britain, but had this hatred any hope of translating
itself into action for the downfall of that British Em-
pire against which it was directed? My next witness
supplies the answer to that question, and it is the most
important witness that could be called, namely, the Rome
correspondent of the most influential daily paper in the
world, the London “Times.” Writing on November Bth,
1899, he says: —“Since the outbreak of the Boer War
the Vatican Press, headed by the official ‘Osservatore
Romano,’ has given numerous proofs of bitter animosity
towards England. But the extraordinary outburst con-
tained in yesterday’s issue of this particular paper sheds
not a little light upon the workings of the clerical mind,
and renders possible some comprehension of the purpose
underlying what had hitherto appeared to be sporadic


ebullitions of fanatical imagination. In fact, the under-
lying idea seems to be the expectation that a Franco-
Russo-German Alliance, by intervening in favour of the
Boers, will shatter the prestige of England, now and ever
held to be the chief prop and mainstay of Protestantism.
... It may be remembered that shortly before the war
began, the ‘Osservatore Romano’ put in the form of a
communication from an unnamed correspondent, the
question whether this Anglo-Boer War was not provi-
dential, and whether Protestantism might not be ruined
by it. Catholics were, therefore, exhorted to have patience
and faith in the God of Armies. . . . Contemporaneously
the ‘Voce della Verita’ hinted darkly at impending
events of grave importance, and industriously promul-
gated the idea of the forthcoming humiliation, of England
by the combined forces of Russia, France, and Germany.”
How observe that this was “before the War began,”
and, therefore, indicates that the Government controlling
these official papers was fully aware that the War was
coming, and was cognizant of a conspiracy against British
rule in South Africa, and was indeed a partner in that
conspiracy, because it was at the same time busily en-
gaged in fomenting hatred to Britain on the Continent,
in the hope of combining against us two or more of the
European Powers, who, directly the war broke out, and
the country was depleted of troops, would be able to strike
a deadly blow at our power.
IN FRANCE.
Before leaving the subject of this newspaper cam-
paign against Britain at the time of the Boer War, I
must show you the form which that campaign took in
France, and the conviction in the mind of Frenchmen
that it originated from Rome. M. Guyot, editor of
the “Siecle,” referring to the storm of calumny and hatred
against England in the Clerical and Reactionary i.e
Anti-Republican) Press of France, said:—“The Clerical
and Reactionary Press in France receives its inspiration
straight from the Vatican. . . . The principal reason
of the hostility shown to England is that Rome wills it.
The Vatican hates England for many reasons, but chiefly


because she is powerful, common-sense, and anti-Clerical.
The ‘Osservatore Romano,’ which is the organ of the
Vatican, and the ‘Voce della Verita,’ which is that of the
Jesuits, lost no time as soon as the War was begun in
starting an anti-English campaign.”
As a sample of what a high-class French newspaper
of this school was ready to say against England, here
is an extract from “L’Autorite.” Under the heading “‘The
Nation of Prey,” an editorial article says:—“England is
at this moment playing her part as the great freebooter
more cynically than ever. She is a real nation of prey,
without scruple, remorse or conscience, cowardly in the
presence of the strong, truculent towards the weak, never
hesitating to appropriate what is within the range of her
guns, and mocking in scandalous fashion at International
rights, honesty and justice. At no period, however, of
her mad career of spoliation and brigandage has she more
thoroughly deserved to succumb before a coalition of
outraged Europe.”
This is from a paper intended for the educated classes.
If I were t° read you extracts from “La Croix,” which
is written for the masses and has a circulation of more
than a million, you would be moved to laughter by their
absurdity even more than moved to amazement at their
malignant mendacity.
THE JESUITS AND THE PRESS.
As to the extent to which Rome has succeeded in in-
fluencing the French newspaper Press at the time of
which we are speaking, let me give you the words of
a Frenchman, Urbain Grohier, In an article in “The
National Review,” entitled “Anglophobia, a warning from
France to England,” he says: —“The policy of the Jesuits
has never varied throughout their history. Its end is
domination; its means comprise every form of crime.
But it has discovered one modern weapon which is mar-
vellously adapted to its purposes, namely, the Press. In
France the Society of Jesus has created a ‘Yellow Press,’
which is a vast fatcory of lies, defamation, and calumny,
and which their diabolical genius works with masterly
skill.” (“The National Review,” 1900, page 44.)


FRENCH REPUBLIC FRIENDLY.
It .would be a great mistake, however, if we sup-
posed that the hostility of the “Yellow Press” of France
meant the hostility of France itself. On the contrary,
the French Republic did not depart from its friendly
attitude to Britain, and I think I am right in saying
that the firm refusal of France to have anything to do
with a European coalition against our country was the
chief cause why the idea of such a coalition fell to the
ground. The fact is that the French Republic was en-
gaged at the time in its own conflict against the Jesuit and
Roman influence, which was as hostile to the free and
liberal French Republic as it was to England itself. In
the same article Gohier says again: “What does this
manifestation of Anglophobia mean? . . . We are en-
gaged in a struggle which will decide the character of
our common civilisation during the approaching century.
On the one hand is Liberty, Justice and Progress, on
the other Political Servitude, Oppression, and Reaction.”
As regards Germany and the influence of Rome over
the German Press at the same period, “The National
Review” sums up the matter by saying:—“During the
South African War all the important German papers,
with one exception, loudly called for intervention by the
powers of Europe,”
We see, then, that fifteen years ago there was a fierce
jerusade against England in the newspaper Press of Rome,
Austria, France and Germany, and that the origin of this
crusade was in Rome.
POWER OF THE PAPAL GOVERNMENT.
Some of you will scarcely believe me when I speak
of Papal Rome as having so much power to influence the
thoughts and feelings of European nations on political
subjects. But that is because you do not know what the
Papal Government is. You are accustomed to think of the
Vatican as the Palace of a great Christian Bishop, the
head of the largest Christian denomination in the world,
and I have not time at present to explain to you how
mUch more it is than this. I have not time to demon-


strate to you that the Vatican is much more a vast poli-
tical and financial institution than one of a religious
character, especially for the past sixty years, during
which it has been coming more and more under the con-
trol of the Jesuits.
Let me only offer you the testimony of a man who
had an intimate knowledge of the inside working of the
Vatican, himself an English Homan Catholic, who left
the Church of Home because he felt that he could not be a
true Englishman as long as he remained in it. I mean
the late Lord Robert Montagu. Here is what he writes:
—“‘lntrigues of the Pope!’ Was he not a gentle, guile-
less old man ? That may be; but yet he must do the bid-
ding of the Curia of the Vatican. The Curia is a Cabinet
of long standing, great practice, experience, and knowledge
of affairs. It never ‘goes out’ by the action of an ad-,
verse majority in a representative Chamber. It never
suffers change, except as one member or another drops
off by old age and death. Like the Russian Cabinet, it
comprises all the best intellects of Europe and the Hew
World. It combines the astuteness of the Italian, the
solidity of the Englishman, the inventive genius of
the American, the clear subtlety of the Frenchman, the
dogged perseverance and persistence of the German, the
duplicity of the Oriental, and the falsehood of all. All
those varied intellects have been carefully trained for their
work, and been experienced in diplomacy; while from the
intimate reports derived from priestly confessors all over
the world, the best and most detailed knowledge of the
characters and intentions of statesmen, and the passions
of people, are ready to their hand. The Vatican is the
centre of all the intelligence and information of the
world; and every bishop has periodically to visit Rome,
in order that his inmost soul may be probed, and his
continual reports may be tested. Such is the Cabinet
with which Protestant statesmen hope on equal terms
to cope!” (“Recent Events,” page 26.)
ITS MOTIVE.
But suppose that the Papal Government has the power
to bring about the downfall of the British Empire, why


should it desire to do such a thing? Nowhere in the
world do Roman Catholics enjoy more liberty than in
the British Empire. Nowhere do they find a more hos-
pitable refuge in distress; in no country is money more
liberally given for their purposes than in countries be-
longing to this Empire. One would think that the most
elementary sentiment of gratitude would keep back Rome
from the desire to damage, much less to ruin and destroy
a power from which she receives so many favours. I
am sure that this question must arise in your minds, and
I only know one answer to it, and that is, that the very
liberalism of Great Britain, diffused as it is over the
fifth part of the habitable globe, is the greatest of all
obstacles to the realisation of a hope which Rome has
cherished for sixty years and more, I mean the hope of
what is called in Rome’s peculiar phraseology “The Re-
construction of Society.” By “Society” Rome means
what we call the Civilised World, and the way to “re-
construct Society” is to bring the Civilised World with
all its States and Governments under the authority of the
Holy Father who sits in the Vatican Palace at Rome.
THE SYLLABUS.
In 1864 Pope Pius IX. astonished and dismayed all
Europe with a Proclamation called an Encyclical to which
was attached the notorious “Syllabus of Errors.” This
latter document consisted of a list of eighty alleged false
and mischievous opinions current in the modern world,
which must all be renounced and forsaken before the
world could be reconstructed and built up into what was
called “Catholic Civilisation.” These “errors” had all
been condemned at different times by Pius IX., who now
collected them in this catalogue, the full title of which
is: “A Syllabus containing the principal errors of our
times, which are noted in the Consistorial Allocations, in
the Encyclicals, and in other Apostolical Letters of our
Most Holy Lord, Pope Pius IX.”
In order ,to givb you some idea how thoroughly all
British notions of freedom and justice are condemned
in this notorious document, I will just give you twelve
samples of the rights which it claims for “the Church,”


claims, that is, by condemning the refusal of them to “the
Church” as “error”:—
The Church has the right—
To require the State not to leave every man free to
profess his own religion. (15)
To exercise her power without the permission or
consent of the State. (20)
To employ force. (24)
To claim dominion in temporal things for the Clergy
and the Pope. (27)
To require that temporal causes, whether civil or
criminal, to which clergymen are parties, should
be tried by ecclesiastical tribunals, not by the
Civil or Criminal Courts. (31)
To prevent the foundation of any National Church
not subject to the authority of the Pope. (37)
To deprive the Civil Authority of the entire govern-
ment of Public Schools. (45)
To refuse to show the plan of study in Clerical Semi-
naries to Civil Authorities. (46)
To hold Kings and Princes in subjection to her juris-
diction. (54)
To require the Sacrament of Marriage as essential
to every contract of Marriage. (62)
To require that the Catholic Religion shall be the
only religion of the State. (77)
To require the State not to permit free expression of
opinion. (70)
The Syllabus closes with the words: “They are in
damnable error who regard the reconciliation of the Pope
with modem civilisation as possible or desirable.”
This is not all, but it is enough to show you that before
the dream of a “Catholic Civilisation” can be realised
the civil and religious freedom which is the strength and
glory of British rule all over the world must be abso-
lutely swept away. As long ago as 1859 Cardinal Man- 1
ning told his bishops in England that Jheir task was “To
bend or break the will of an Imperial race,” and I can
only suppose that Rome finds the process of bending the
will of the British Empire too slow, and considers that
the chance of breaking it, when a really good chance


offers, is not to be missed. Such an opportunity was pre-
sented by tbe South African War, fifteen years ago, and
was presented again by the present war before it had
become apparent which way its fortunes were going to
turn.
THE TEMPOEAL POWEE.
But before it could become possible to set about the
great work of establishing this precious i “Catholic Civi-
lisation” over the world, it was absolutely necessary that
Papal Eome should get back all its temporal power, and
all that that rather ambiguous expression “Temporal
Power” had ever been understood to mean. We know that
Eome has made no secret of its determination to recover
its temporal power at the very earliest opportunity, but
it is not always realised that this determination makes
Papal Eome, of necessity, the deadly enemy of the King-
dom of Italy. The very first step to the recovery of the
temporal power would be the dismemberment of the Italian
Kingdom, and Italians know perfectly well that United
Italy has no greater enemy than the Vatican Government.
Before the outbreak of the Franco-German War in
1870, when Pius IX. felt that the temporal sceptre was
slipping from his grasp, he hoped to recover it by a
French victory over Protestant Prussia, and his faithful
servants, the Jesuits, set to work with might and main
to bring about this Franco-German War.
It happened that the celebrated Vatican Council of
1870 had been sitting for about six months when the war
broke out. A German, Professor Friedrich, was in Eome,
attending the Council, and keeping a diary of it. In
this diary he says, writing on the 2nd of May:—“l have
it from one who is in a position to know, that there will
be a war between Prussia and France in 1871. There are
whispers of an understanding between the Curia, the
Jesuits, and the Tuileries.” (Kolnische Zeitung.)
On the 14th of July the Emperor Napoleon had
definitely decided to maintain peace, but was overborne
by two of his Ministers, and by the Empress Eugenie,
“instigated and instructed by the Jesuits.” When, at
the Ministerial Council he definitely yielded, evidently


with a heavy heart, the Empress cried triumphantly: “This
is my war! With Clod’s help we will overthrow Protestant
Prussia!” (“Historians’ History of the World?’ vol. 15,
page 518.)
The hopes which the Vatican and the Papal party
throughout Europe indulged before the Franco-German
War were, by God’s mercy, rudely shattered. At the
commencement of the conflict it was openly asserted
by Papists that the struggle between Papal France and
Protestant Prussia was destined to put a speedy end to the
trials and troubles of the Roman Church; that the Pope
would regain his full temporal sovereignty, and that his
enemies and lukewarm friends would be subdued. The
immediate result was very different from that which was
anticipated. The Papacy received so severe a blow that
she has not even yet recovered from the impact. The
declared enemies of Papal rule triumphed, and her own
children spoiled her of her goods.
I have been a long time in conducting you to that
which is the main point of my lecture, namely, the evi-
dence of collusion between the German Kaiser and the
Vatican Court in the designs which led to the present
war. It was necessary, however, to begin by showing
you first that in the Papal Government Great Britain has
an enemy which fifteen years ago made strenuous efforts
through the newspaper press of Europe to bring about the
downfall of our country by stirring up against us a
coalition of European Powers. There is not the least
reason to think that within the past fifteen years the
attitude of Rome towards us has changed. Indeed, hos-
tility to British freedom has been the normal attitude of
Papal Rome for many centuries, as the history of Eng-
land abundantly shows, even going back so far as seven
hundred years ago, when Pope Innocent 111. denounced
Magna Charta, the great Charter of English liberty, calling
it “audacious wickedness,” and even one hundred and fifty
years earlier when Pope Alexander 11. gave his blessing
to the Norman Invasion of England, and sent a conse-
crated banner to the Norman Conqueror, as well as a
diamond ring with a hair of the Apostle Peter enclosed
in the diamond. (!)


PART 11.
THE KAISER.
A NEW ALLY OF AN OLD ENEMY.
The “Curia Romana,” or Papal Court, whose modern
seat is the Vatican Palace, is indeed a very old enemy
of the liberties of our country, but about the beginning
of the Twentieth Century, a few years before, or a few
years after, I am not sure which, this ancient enemy
found a young ally in a very unexpected quarter. Kaiser
Wilhelm 11. ascended the Throne of the German Empire
in 1888, and from the beginning of his reign showed that
he cherished the ambition to make Germany first among
the Powers of Europe and of the world. These ambi-
tious ideas had been instilled into his mind in early life
by his tutor, Dr. Delbruck. Perhaps some of you have
seen the map of the future German Empire which the
present Kaiser hoped, and perhaps still hopes, to create.
This map shows Germany and Austria united and Hol-
land annexed as a part of the Empire. Its northern
boundary is the Baltic and the North Sea from the fron-
tier of Russia to the Mouth of the Rhine, and its Southern
Boundary touches the Adriatic Gulf. But this future Pan-
German Empire is intended to be the great Colonising
and Maritime Power as well as the supreme of Contin-
ental Powers, and the great obstacle to this latter part of
the programme is, of course, the Sea-power of Great
Britain. The mask of pretended friendship to Great
Britain is now, therefore, entirely thrown off, and the
destruction of the British Empire is the declared object
as it has for a long time been the secret object
of the German Emperor. You see, therefore, that the
political views of this nominal Protestant Monarch co-
incide at least to this extent with the political views of
Papal Rome.
But there are other reasons of a different and a stronger
kind which make it absolutely necessary for the further-


ance of the Kaiser’s designs that he should conciliate the
Vatican and obtain its co-operation as far as possible. If
Germany and Austria should ever become one Empire,
the Roman Catholics will be a very large majority of the
population of that Empire, and it will become essential to
the success of Imperial legislation to obtain the approval
and concurrence of the Vatican for almost every important
measure.
“THE CENTRE.”
Even as it is at present, there had been for seventeen
years before the accession of the present Kaiser a strong
necessity pressing on the rulers of Germany to conciliate
the Vatican. In the German Reichstag there is a very
strong party known as the Centre. It has no political
platform of its own, hut is devoted to the interests of
the Roman Catholic Church, and by its numbers can turn
a minority into a majority for whichever party it chooses
to support.
As for the origin of this Central Party, if we turn
to Dr. Eriedric Nippold, the author of “The Papacy in
the Nineteenth Century,” he informs us that it was a
creation of Papal influence in Germany. The late
Pope Leo. XIII., when he was still Cardinal Pecci, is
said to have conceived the idea of promoting Roman
interests by obtaining an ascendancy over the representa-
tive Parliaments of self-governing countries, and the result
of his policy has been the creation of the so-called Nation-
alist Irish Party in the British Parliament and the Central
Party in the German Reichstag, while attempts have been
made to achieve the same kind of object in the United
States Legislature, and more recently in the Italian Parlia-
ment. I am fully convinced that the same kind of design
has been carried out with considerable success in the Par-
liament of the Australian Commonwealth, and when I
questioned Sir George Reid on the subject about nine years
ago his answers confirmed me in this opinion.
The Kaiser has therefore to reckon with this important
Central Party, and to make concessions to it as the price
of measures which he has so much at heart.
“From the moment that the present Kaiser’s ambitions


and designs, the fruit of the teachings of Delbruck, began
to develop, he obtained the loyal support of the ‘Centre,’
the most powerful party in the Reichstag, without which
he could never have carried out his determination to
create a navy powerful enough to challenge this country’s
$ maritime supremacy, aud we need not be surprised to hud
that this party is chiefly composed of Roman Catholics
who, in supporting the Kaiser’s ambition, forwarded that
of Rome. There is indeed a considerable Socialist min-
ority in the Reichstag who are not only opposed to the
military ambition of the Kaiser, but to the autocratic
power wielded by him, but these were absolutely powerless
so long as the Government could count upon the support
of the ‘Centre.’”—(“Rome and Germany,” page 150.
A MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING.
We see, then, sufficient reason why the head of the
German Empire, though a nominal Protestant, should
endeavour to cultivate friendly relations with Rome. Now
let us look at a few examples in which we see him putting
forth endeavours in this direction.
In a speech delivered by him at Aix-la-Chapelle in 1902,
the Kaiser said that: —
“It was with pride and joy that he was able to tell them
that the Pope said to his special Ambassador who went to
Rome on the occasion of the Holy Father’s Jubilee, that
he (the Pope) had always kept a high opinion of the piety
of the Germans, and especially of the German Army, and
the Ambassador was to tell his Sovereign that the country
in Europe where control, order and discipline still pre-
vailed, together with respect for authority and regard for
the Church, and where the Church could live, was the
German Empire, and for that the Papal See was indebted
to the German Emperor.” From “The Daily Telegraph,”
June 21, 1902.)
A VISIT.
In May, 1903, the Kaiser made a visit to Rome, in the
course of which he put higher honour on the Pope than


any European Sovereign had shown him since the down-
fall of the Temporal Power and the founding of the King-
dom of United Italy. His State visit to the Vatican is thus
described by Dr, Alexander Robertson, of Venice:—
“When the Kaiser was in Rome in May, 1903, and paid
a visit to the Pope, his conduct excited the indignation of
the whole Roman population, and was severely commented
on by the Italian Press. Instead of going unostentatiously
as a private individual, as King Edward did (although, I
think, it had been better if neither had gone), thus show-
ing a regard for the feelings of the King of Italy and his
Government and people, he went in the most ostentatious
way possible. The visit was made on the afternoon of
Sunday, May 3. Starting from the Palazzo Odescalchi,
the seat of the Prussian Legation, the state carriages,
drawn by four and six horses, all of which he had brought
from Berlin, formed a cavalcade a quarter of a mile in
length. For the occasion the main streets of Rome,
through which he passed, were lined by soldiers of all kinds,
grenadiers, lancers, carabiniers, cuirassiers, hersaglieri, and
alpinisti. The route was lined with Roman citizens; but
little cheering was heard until the Emperor reached the
Piazza S. Pietro and the Piazza Santa Maria, when he was
greeted by the plaudits of the crowds of priests and monks
and German pilgrims, who were assembled in those places.
In the Vatican, members of the leading families of the
* black party ’ were there to welcome him and escort him
to their chief. The Kaiser entered the Vatican at 3.15,
and left at 4.20; and, as the result of the visit, instantly
all the Clerical papers announced, with a flourish of
trumpets, that the Kaiser had assured the Pope that he
would take fresh steps in favour of Roman Catholic
interests throughout the Empire, and Monsignors went
about Rome saying that the Church would not have long
to wait for tangible proofs of the fulfilment of this pro-
mise. Ko Sovereign, since the creation of the Kingdom of
Italy, ever before so honoured the Pope, and as a conse-
quence showed such disregard for the feelings and inter-
ests of the Government and people. Kor has any Pro-
testant Monarch been honoured (or, I should rather say,
dishonoured) by the Pope as the Kaiser has been; for, to


the amusement and disgust of all Italy, the Pope never
fails to have a Te Deum sung in St. Peter’s in honour of
his birthday!” (From “The Papal Conquest,” pages 325-
326.)
“The National Review” refers to this visit as “an elec-
tioneering enterprise,” and it says that “according to the
Catholic Press the Emperor promised to use his influence
to remove disabilities existing in Germany with regard to
certain Catholic Orders, and to allow the Jesuits who were
expelled by Bismarck to return. It ia also asserted that a
permanent representative of the Holy See was to be re-
ceived in Berlin.”
KAISER VISITS ENGLAND.
From Italy the Kaiser continued his tour, and about a
month later was in England, where he received an address
of welcome from English Roman Catholics, of which the
following are the principal points:—
“May it please Your Majesty, We the undersigned mem-
bers of the Catholic community of Great Britain and Ire-
land, which numbers some six millions of people, desire
to approach Your Majesty and to convey to you our
warmest thanks and gratitude for the wise, generous, and
far-seeing policy wdiich Your Majesty has carried out in
dealing with your Catholic subjects since you ascended the
throne of your forefathers. Your Majesty has repeatedly
shown your appreciation of and complete confidence in the
warm loyalty of your Catholic subjects, and by many other
beneficent and kindly acts, especially in your dealings with
the venerable occupant of the Holy See, you have won the
esteem of Catholics all over the world. While Govern-
ments less progressive and enlightened than your own
have shown bigotry in dealing with the See of Rome, and
have in some cases refused official recognition to that
ancient Sovereignty, Your Majesty, with a large and true
appreciation of the issues involved, has placed the relation
between your Empire and the Holy See on a basis of
reciprocal respect and confidence.” (“The National
Review,” 1903, p. 524.)


18
A FRIEND IN NEED.
In 1906 occurred another conjunction between the stars
of Rome and Germany, even more important, though not
so picturesque as the last. The Kaiser had dissolved the
Reichstag because it had refused to make the necessary
grants of money for suppressing the Herero rising in Ger-
man South-West Africa. The Central Party and the
Socialist Party had been united in this refusal, but when
a new Reichstag was summoned, it was found that while
the Socialists had lost a number of seats, the Centre had
lost none, and in the Session which ensued the Kaiser ob-
tained what he wanted, the Centre being now on his side.
His friend at Rome had given the word, and the Centre
had obeyed. Remarking on this change of attitude, the
Roman correspondent of the German “Tageblatt” remarks
that everybody at the Vatican is confident that the Kaiser
must govern with the aid of the Catholics , whether he
wants to or not. The Roman “Stampa” also says: “The
Pope will not only advise but command the Catholic leaders
in Germany to support Prince Buelow, in order that the
Kaiser may be put under valuable obligations to the Vati-
can.” (“Daily Mail,” January, 1907.)
AN INTIMACY.
At this time the reigning Pope was Pius X., Leo XIII.
having died in August, 1903, The Kaiser’s relations with
Pius X. seem to have been, if possible, more cordial than
with his predecessor. I will again quote from Dr.
Alexander Robertson, who has been Presbyterian Chaplain
in Venice for about thirty and whose intimate
acquaintance with Italian politics probably exceeds that of
almost any Englishman; —
“The Pope, as I have already had occasion to say, feels
very much at home in the company of Venetians, and
talks freely to them on most subjects. In this way the
Kaiser and his strange doings form not infrequently a
topic of conversation, or at least a subject of passing re-
mark. Indeed, this can hardly be avoided, for his por-
trait is a prominent object in the Pope’s rooms. Here it
is on a table, there it hangs on a wall, yonder it is in an


album; whilst on his breast, suspended on a massive gold
chain, sparkles a magnificent cross, composed entirely of
emeralds, a gift of the Kaiser to Leo XIII. When any-
one noticing these things calls the Pope’s attention to
them, a smile of amusement lights up his face as he comes
out with his favourite joke about the Kaiser, Why, he is
my best ‘European friend!’ The statement is a joke,
and yet it is a literal truth. No Catholic fanatic in the
world is more punctilious than he is in sending his homage
and congratulations, and flattering speeches and presents
to the Pope on his ever-recurring personal festivities, such
as the anniversaries, the semi-jubilees and jubilees, actual
or prospective, of the day on which he was bom, or was
christened, or became a priest, or began to climb the
ecclesiastical ladder, or reached its summit and vaulted
into the chair of St. Peter.” (“The Papal Conquest,” p.
324.)
About two years ago some friends of mine passing
through Rome in the course of a tour, visited the Vatican
Palace and were shown the usual sights to be seen by
strangers in that vast and famous palace. They were
then asked if they would like to see the presents received
by the Pope from the German Emperor, but finding that
the room containing these treasures was locked, and that
to obtain the key would involve a considerable delay, they
preferred to visit some of the picture galleries instead.
I only mention the incident to show that the Kaiser’s pre-
sents must be of considerable number and value if they
are kept locked up in a separate room.
TWO GERMAN BLACK POPES.
I have only one or two more items of evidence before
my case is closed. There could scarcely be a stronger
proof of the influence of the Kaiser at the Vatican than
the fact that the present General of the Jesuit Order, ap-
pointed since the War began, is a German, and that his
predecessor was also a German, nominated by the Kaiser
in 1906, and accepterd with cordial approval by the Pope.
The General of the Jesuits, sometimes called “The Black
Pope,” has enormous power and influence, supposed, in-


deed, to be greater than that of the Pope himself. It is
not difficult to understand this when we remember that
the entire Jesuit Order is bound by a solemn vow of obedi-
ence to him. What the numbers of the Jesuit Order
may be I am unable to say, but it was stated in Johannes-
burg newspapers since the outbreak of the present War
that there are thirteen hundred of them in Germany, and
that they had all offered their services to the Germon Go-
vernment. The author of “Rome and Germany re-
marks that for ensuring the success of its attempt to de-
stroy the British Empire, “Germany has the incalculable
advantage of possessing the combined assistance of all the
powerful and astute secret societies of Rome.” What we
have already seen is enough to show us that this statement
is hy no means incredible, and when we speak of the secret
societies of Rome it is well to remember that each one of
them, whatever its name may he, is not really different in
character from the Jesuit Society, because the entire
Roman system within the past sixty years has become
thoroughly “Jesuitised.” But who can calculate the enor-
mous influence wielded by that mysterious Jesuit Society,
now not much less than four hundred years old? If we
may trust their own official statement they have at their
absolute command no fewer than twenty-five million per-
sons scattered throughout the world, every one of whom is
secretly bound by a solemn promise of obedience to their
orders. Think what that means! The population of
England is about thirty millions, so here is a secret society
numbering ae much as five-sixths of the population of
England.
SPIES.
Even making allowance for very considerable exagge-
ration in that which the Jesuits have told us about them-
selves, there must be some truth in the astounding esti-
mate to which I have just referred, and a question which
it irresistibly suggests is, does this enable us in any de-
gree to account for the extraordinary system of espionage
which Germany has somehow succeeded in organising all
over the British Empire. Has spying, and ferreting out


of secret information, and diffusion of false information
been a characteristic of the German nation hitherto ? Or
has it been a characteristic of any nation known to His-
tory? But, on the other hand, it has been one of the
leading characteristics of the Jesuits for the past three
hundred years, as everyone must know who has read the
history of that singular and most formidable society.
In this connection it has always seemed to me strange
that, amid all the outcry against German spying in our
own country of South Africa, one has never heard any
mention of that very large German monastic institution
in Natal, known as Marien Hill. The monks who man-
age it are of the Trappist Order, but practise very dif-
ferent methods from the original I rappists. At any rate,
they are all German and all Romish, and while there has
been an outcry against Lutheran German Missionaries, I
have never yet seen a word of suspicion against these
Romish Germans. Yet who knows for what purpose they
may have been sent to this country ? A friend who had
spent some little time at that institution learning to make
boots suited for what he called the simple life, told me
that, among other interesting information offered him by
these excellent monks, they had told him that by means of
heliograph signals they could communicate with the
Northern part of Rhodesia within an hour.
CONSTANTINE’S BANNER.
The real question is, how far did the Pope’s Govern-
ment know and approve the warlike designs of its inti-
mate friend the Kaiser, and the last piece of evidence that
I shall offer you bears very directly on this question.
About three weeks before the outbreak of the present war
the late Pope, not many days before his death, sanctioned
the opening in a suburb of Rome of a new church called
“The Church of the ‘Holy Cross,’ ” intended to commemo-
rate the victories of Constantine, the first Christian Em-
peror. Considering that Constantine’s victories were
won about sixteen hundred years ago, it seems rather late
in the world’s history to be building a church in memory
of them. However, the church was built, and was opened


on the 12th of last July, arid On the same day Dr, Muhl-
herg, the Prussian Envoy to the Holy See, presented to
the Holy Father on behalf of the German Emperor a
facsimile of the famous banner of Constantine. His
Excellency was accompanied by Count von Spee, Aide-
de-camp to the Kaiser and Commandant of the Cuirassiers
of the Imperial Guard. “The purple folds of the ban-
ner,” says the French paper “L’Univers,” “are richly em-
broidered with precious stones, and bear the monogram of
Constantine, while medallions of Constantine and his
three sons adorn the actual pole. The message accom-
panying this gift voiced the keen interest with which the
Imperial donor had followed the Constantinian celebra-
tions, to which end he had sent this memorial to be sus-
pended in the new Church of the Holy Cross as a souvenir
of the victory gained over Paganism. The Holy Father
was delighted with the gift, and sent a most gracious
message of thanks through Count von Spee. The Envoys
afterwards” called on Cardinal Merry del Yal, who spoke
much about the banner, which he greatly admired. He
■also informed Count von Spee that the Order of St.
Gregory the Great had been bestowed on him by the Holy
Father.” (“L’Univers,” July 24. See also “Tablet,”
July 18.)
To understand fully the significance of the Kaiser’s
presentation to the Pope it is necessary to understand that
a Homan tradition makes Constantine the Great the
original donor of the Temporal Power to the Popes of
Rome. The Donation of Constantine was long believed
in as a genuine document in the Middle Ages, but is now
well-known to have been a forgery, and it is also well-
known that the real donor of the Temporal Power was not
Constantine but Charlemagne, who lived about four hun-
dred years later. When the reigning Pope received the
Temporal Power from Charlemagne, he wrote this Em-
peror a most effusive letter of thanks and laudation, in
which he hails him as a second Constantine raised up to
give back to the church all the power and authority which
she was intended to have.
The original Latin of this letter you may see in Mos-
heim’s Church History, and, remembering the whole his-


torieal incident, it is scarcely possible to avoid seeing what
the Kaiser meant by his gift, namely, that he himself was
a second Charlemagne, and a third Constantine, raised up
to restore the Temporal Power to the Pope. When we
remember that before this end could be achieved the
Kingdom of Italy must be violently broken up, and the
fairest peninsula in Europe deluged with blood, we shall
have our own thoughts about the Giver and the Receiver
of this costly present, and as if to make it impossible for
us to mistake the object which the Kaiser had in view, he
himself actually let fall one word in a recent address to
his soldiers which seems to lift the curtain for a moment
upon the whole plan within his mind. I allude to the
speech reported by cablegram in the Johannesburg papers
of some time in October last: —
“They want to kill Germany. If we win, the most
splendid Empire in the world will rise, a new Roman-
German Empire.”
In this one word “Roman,” the Kaiser seems to have
betrayed the position. The silence of the present Pope
on the atrocities in Belgium seems to have disappointed the
Roman Catholic world, but the intercourse which we have
already noticed between the Kaiser and the Vatican would
make speech more embarrassing than silence. On the
other hand, if we may trust the testimony of “Lloyd’s
Weekly Hews,” the Cardinal Archbishop of Cologne, as
late as the Bth of February, in addressing the “People’s
Association for Catholic Germany,” was so loyal as to
eulogise his Emperor in these words: —
“Trust in the Kaiser, who embodies in himself the
virtues of his forefathers,” ( !)
COKCLFSIOK.
Why do I think it necessary to speak publicly on this
subject? Because I feel certain that at the close of the
war the Pope will be put forward as the only man in the
world fit to preside over a Peace Federation of Europe.
The suggestion has already been made in a certain class of
newspapers. Here, for example, is one from the
“Catholic Times” of September 4th last:—“lt is possible


/ ' 34
—we like to think it possible—that a new Europe, emerg-
ing from the struggles of the old, will look round for a
centre of universal acceptance of the principle of peace,
and find that centre in the See of Peter. Nowhere else
is there a throne in Europe so free from the ambitions and
struggles of the dynasts, so aloof from the commercial
antagonisms that divide men and nations, so opposed to
war, so desirous of peace.”
As for that last statement, the history of Europe for the
past nine hundred years cries out against the falsehood of
it. Nevertheless, I fear it will be believed like so many
other falsehoods. I fear it all the more since the British
Government has been so infatuated as to open an Embassy
at the Papal Court. And if it is believed and is put in
practice, what will be the consequence? The only words
fitted to describe the consequence are the words of Scrip-
ture Prophecy: —
“When they shall say, Peace and Safety, then sudden
destruction cometh upon them.” (I. Thess. 5; 3.).
“There shall be a time of trouble such as never was
since there was a nation, even to that same time.”
(Daniel 12: 1.)
The only comfort for those times will be that the End
of the Age is very near, and the Coming of the only true
King. , , _
“Be ye also patient; establish your hearts, for the Com-
ing of the Lord draweth nigh.” (James 5:8.)
Varleys Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.
