

-ooCX>Qo*-~
SYDNEY:
POPULAIRE.
fl Oomie Opera in Three ]?efe,
#-THOMAS MOSER-#-
AND
HECTOR R. MacLEAN.
V'
As performed at Government House, November, 1886.)
00
f
CTBBS, SIIALLARD, AND CO., PRINTERS AND BINDERS,
KOSKING PLACE, PITT STREET.


DRAMATIS PERSONAS.
George Rowlock (an athlete of the sensational type),
Charlie Danvers (a scholar , of no athletic instincts at all).
Muriel (a worshipper of muscle as opposed to intellect , with no
vcdid reason for her faith).
Clara (ditto , so long as she can outwit her rival),
Spavin (a trainer of animals , in which category he includes anything
that has lungs , he it man , beast , bird, fish or insect),
Long Odds (a man who loolcs upon animated creation in the aggregate
as simply things to bet on or gambling implements , so long as
they can be pitted against each other ; who also is prepared to
speculate on any contingency , no matter how expansive the field
may be),
Bookmakers (persons of similar idiosyncrasies).
Chorus of Girls (who try to study the chances of life , and who have
an idea that they are capable of solution on a lawn tennis
ground ),
Balance .of Characters (and the more material one for the authors)
?The Audience.?


POPULAIRE:
A COMIC OPERA IB THREE ACTS.
Act I. Scene I.
[Scene. ?A Lawn Tennis ground. Enter Ladies , dressed
usual costume adopted in the game .]
in the
Chorus,
The craze about
Is altered for Athletics,
And muscle is more popular than brains
So whate?er our private passion,
We?ll ne?er go out of fashion,
Until we find it verging on the wane.
Mukiel ?( solo ),
Though we cannot tell at cricket
A knee-pad from a wicket,
Nor have the least idea of the game,
We attend at all the matches,
Clap our hands at all the catches,
When we see that other people do the same.
Chorus ?So whate?er, &c.
Muriel.
For horse races and regattas
May be very serious matters,
If you note the true position of the case,
Since these so-called recreations
May involve the fate of nations,
If a horse or man should fail to win a race
Chorus,
So whate?er the ruling passion,
Let us ne?er be out of fashion ;
For you cannot tell in this spasmodic age
What to-day is new and great,
Is to-morrow out of date ;
Go, shout ? Hurrah ! ? athletics are the rage.


Muriel. ?What a glorious day for the country if George beats
the American !
All.?And what a dreadful thing if he lose !
Muriel. ?Pa says he can?t do that, for the odds are six to four
on him ! Take it in gloves, girls ! whenever you can !
All.?But how does your pa know ?
Muriel. ?He got it from the newspapers, and the newspapers
get it from the bookmakers !
All. ?Are they literary men ?
Muriel. ?Of course they are ; they take notes of everything.
I have seen them writing them down in books at the race meetings.
All. -We never knew that before.
Muriel. ?But wait! lam told that George takes his exercise
this morning with his trainer. If we stand here, we shall see him
pass.
[Enter George, muffled up , preparatory to taking a sweating walk .
He surprises the girls, ]
George ( recitative ). ?Daughters of my native land, I salute
All ( recitative ). ?And champion of our shores, we return it!
Muriel. ?Are you cold ?
George. ?No ! lam not cold ; but my trainer says I am too
beefy.
Muriel.? What is that?
George.?Too much flesh on me. It will all come off* after
twenty-mile spin.
All.?What! in pieces ?
George. ?No, ladies?in perspiration !
All. ?Oh ! ?oh ! ?oh !
[Proceeds to take dumb-bells from his pocket.]
George. ?ln a double sense, now, ladies, I purpose taking a
?turn with the bells.? The difference between these and yourselves
is simply that they are dumb; and married men who marry belles
often wish the latter were so too.
Clara. ?Do they ! Your opinion may be possibly of more value
when you have had some experience.
George.?Quite so. But of that?anon.
[Swinging the bells.]
To be a modern Hercules
Is the acme of ambition ;
For talent is not worth a jot,
Unless you?re in condition.
However great may be your skill
(To use it too you?re willing),
There?s not a man would back you
For a solitary shilling.
For in the betting market
You?ll never get position,
Unless ?the talent ? arc assured
That you are in condition.


The best man may not win, ?tis true?
Through accident, of course ;
For in a race this difference
Exists ?twixt man and horse :
The man wins if it suits him to,
According as you bet him ;
The horse itself, poor honest brute,
Would try if you would let him.
But in the betting market
The premier position,
The favoured point you wish to gain,
Depends upon condition.
[Enter Spavin, the Trainer .]
Spavin. ?O? course it depends on condition ; and I ?spcct that
if you win, some o? these here young ladies thinks there?s a chance
o? their changing theirs. ( Ogles the group pleasantly.)
All fbashfully ), ? Oh, what an unexpected sentiment from
such unpromising material !
Muriel ?(solo ).
When knights, of old, their falchions drew,
As ancient poets sing.
The prize for chivalry was then
The daughter of the king.
But now small chance the maiden has
Herself the prize to yield ;
For there are, sportingly to speak,
? Too many in the field.?
Chorus ?? Too many in the field,? &c.
In love, like everything in which
In contest we engage,
The competition must increase
In each succeeding age ;
And perseverance has at last
To circumstances yield,
Because the cry will louder be,
? Too many in the field.?
Chorus ?? Too many in the field,? &c.
[N.B. ?During the singing of the Chorus , the rest of the girls point to
themselves, ana ironically smile at Muriel, whilst George and
his Trainer cross and recross the stage , the latter throwing water
on him , efcc., after the manner of trainers at pedestrian matches .]
Muriel [to Trainer ). ? Has he lost any beef ?
Spavin. ?Well, Miss, he was a trifle beefy at the start, but I
fear that he has pulled up a trifle groggy . I?ll strip him presently,
and rub him down before he gets his feed.
Muriel. ?You talk about him as if he was a horse.
Spavin. ?So, in a manner o? speaking, he is. Miss. Men is
hanirnals, and hanimals is men in the matter o? training them. It?s
only a difference in the way o? feeding them.
[Exeunt George and Trainer , and enter Bookmakers , headed by Mr,
Long Odds. They bow to the ladies , who retire to one side of the
stage,]


The Girls?( recitative.)
Kind sirs, we ask in some confusion
How comes about this rude intrusion ?
The strangeness of our situation
May, perhaps, evoke an explanation.
Chorus of Bookmakers.
We?re the Ring ! We?re the Ring !
And we?ll bet on anything !
The only source of troubles
Are the trebles and the doubles,
To the Ring ! To the Ring ! To the Ring
We bet on every single thing that you may choose to name
No matter if we get long odds, to us ?tis all the same ;
Wc bet on boevt-race, cricket mutch, on horses, or on men,
And, win or lose, if not ii dead broke,? we?re game to bet again.
Chorus ?We?re the Ring, &c.
Name an event and give a date, when once that date we?ve got
We 11 bet you that the thing comes off, or else that it does not;
If you re married that you?re single, or if single you are wed,
Or lay you that before that time the pair of us are dead.
Chorus ?We?re the Ring, &c.
[Re-enter George, holding a telegram .]
George.? The Yankee will not pull me here, so I?m off to
meet him by the next boat.
Clara.?ls the mail in ?
George.?Yes.
Clara.? Then Charlie Danvers is back. An old flame of ours
Muriel.
Muriel.? Of mine ! was he ? Upon my word I quite forget.
[Enter Charlie.]
George.? lalk of the ,eh ? Here he is !
Charlie.? Muriel ! Have you forgotten me ?
Muriel.? Very nearly ! What brings you back ?
Charlie.? Why, have not I finished at Cambridge? Surely
you heard of my success. J
Muriel.? No !At least I never read in the papers about it,
Were you in the Eleven ?
Charlie.? No ! I?m not a cricketer.
All (surprised). ? He was not in the Eleven !
Muriel. ?Surely, then, you were in the Eight ?
Charlie.? No ! Indeed I can?t row.
All. He was not in the Eight! nor in the Eleven { implorinijhj)
Spare this suspense. Oh, say that you were in something !
Charlie (confounded).? Well, the fact is I was in the first
Four !
All.?Four what ?
Charlie. ?Wranglers.
All. Wranglcrs 1 What is a wrangler ?


Lom; Odds (coming to the front). ?Pardon, dear ladies ; but 1
can put you right. Wrangler was bred by E. K. Cox, by Yattendon
?dam, Petrel.
Spavin. ?And a game old ?oss he was. Tom Ivory made pots
>? money on him,
Charlie (sings.)
What means this conversation touching matters
Zoological ?
Is a man to be esteemed in a manner
Hippological ?
That man was of the monkey tribe, Darwin
Surmised, of course,
But who has e?er suggested his relation to
A horse ?
Bookmakers.
Yes ! In the betting market they?re both alike, of course ;
No difference appears to us betwixt a man and horse.
George,
Can you run ? can you swim ? can you cricket ? can you row ?
Whatever sport you fancy best, pray let us kindly know.
If there?s any money in you, these gentlemen are willing,
For the honour of the country, to invest their bottom shilling.
Bookmakers ?(Chromatic Cadenza ).
Yes ! yes ! Oh, yes ! Oh, yes !
We?re the Ring ! We?re the Ring !
And we?ll bet on anything !
Had we possessed the knowledge
That you were bred at College?
Like a horse that runs a race,
We?d have backed you for a place.
j-r 7J /~ii ( We?re the Ring ! and we, &c.
Full Choru *\ They?re the Ring ! and they, &o.
Charlie. ?The summit of ambition ! To be bet upon as if I
were a horse, or a dog, or even a pigeon ! Has intelligence come to
this?
Spavin (eyeing him critically). ?There ain?t money in you, Sir !
You ain?t got reach or loins for a rower; no legs for a runner ; no
tieye for cricket or billiards. Why, hang me, if you?re fit for skittles !
Charlie. ?Perhaps pluck goes further than muscle !
Spavin. ?What?s the good of ?pluck? without ?lights!?
Why, you?re as narrow-chested as a curlew ! (Sings.)
I kno wed a man, whose history
Exactly hits your case.
He came to me, and then says he,
? I?ve got to pull a race.?
? By contract were you made,? says I,
? The trick you?ll never do.?
? Don?t mind appearance,? answered he,
? ?Tis pluck w ill pull me through ! ?
Charlie. ?And did it?
Spavin. ?Well, in a manner o? speaking, it did.


For he pulled hisself stone blind,
And struggled to the end ;
And that young cove had pluck, as he
Showed plain?you may depend !
For these remarks were all he made,
When lifted from his boat:
? IVe lost! ? says he. ?You have,? says I,
And went and cut his throat !
All.?Oh !?oh ! ?oh !
[The zohole Company crowd round Spavin, and dray him to the
footlights.]
The Girls.?Did he really pull for the honour of his country ?
Spavin.?He said he did, Miss !
Girls.?The patriot !
George. ?The modern Curtius !
Bookmakers.? The fool!
Chorus?sotto voce,
? This was the way he argued, when lifted from his boat:
IVe lost my country?s honour, so I?d better cut my throat ! ?
Muriel. ?Should you lose, George, don?t do anything so
plebeian as cut your throat.
George. ?Though not disgraced, in such event, it will be my
duty to immolate myself on the shrine ot my country.
Long Odds. ?The country will immolate you, young man !
You will be saved the trouble !
Muriel. ?Tragic as the fate of this young man was, still with
him it was ? Death before dishonour ! ?
Charlie. ?Or, more properly speaking, after it.
Muriel. ?Well, after it, if you choose to be so critical; but no
doubt he got his reward for his nobility.
Spavin.?l don?t know what you call reward. He got three
months.
All the Girls.?Why, do you mean to say that he did not kill
himself ?
Spavin.?Not he !
George.? But the attempt was made, and the example still
holds good.
Chorus.
? Though from censure for failing he?s hardly exempt,
Let us truly be thankful, ?he made the attempt?
Yes, he made the attempt!
(Gun fires.)
George (recitative). ?There is the signal for the sailing of the
steamer. Igo ! My country invites me !
[The Girls and Bookmakers follow him.]
Chorus,
Athletic Guardians ! to whose hands we yield
Our champions tutelage in Hood or field.


Girls. ?Protect our nation?s honour we implore !
Bookmakers. ?And keep the shortest odds at six to four !
Girls.?Yes, we implore,
Bookmakers. ?At six to four,
&c., &c.
[j Exeunt all but Charlie, ivho catches Muriel as she leaves the
stage, ]
Charlie (drawing her to the front), ?Muriel ! one word before
you go !
Muriel.?Unhand me, Sir! What is it that you want? ?
you?you pigmy !
Charlie (calmly), ?Simply to inquire, Are you mad?
Muriel. ?Certainly not! What do you mean ?
Charlie (chantant).
I mean that, through sheer base inconsistency.
This man of muscle you prefer to me.
Song.
What myst?ry this I?m left to solve,
Despite my triumphs won
On classic fields ? Prestige of ? Brain ?
Must yield to that of ? Bone.?
What spurred ambition ? fired my hope ?
The coming man to be ?
It was the thought, thou fickle one !
I was engaged to thee !
Muriel. ? You were engaged to me?
Charlie. ?You were engaged to me !
Both.?The circumstance | j plainly } scc *
That you were once engaged to me.
Muriel.
The pace at which we live, alas !
Gives no time to reflect;
And to recall all love affairs
Is what you can?t expect.
For memory cannot keep the pace
At which we go ?you see !
And hence the fact I quite forget
You were engaged to me.
Both.
No matter ! no matter !
The circumstance | j | see *
That you were once engaged to me.
Charlie. ?Is our engagement, then, at an end ?
Muriel. ?Don?t I tell you, I forget all about it. But as you
say we were engaged, let the bargain stand till after George pulls
the race.


Charlie.? And if lie loses ?
Muriel. ?Then it?s on.
Charlie.? And if lie win?
Muriel.? Then it?s off.
Charlie (exit). ?So am I.
Muriel (exit).? And so am I.
Ha ! ha !
Scene 11.
[ Water. Mail steamer seen, decked with flags, leaving the Harbour.
Jijntfr Girls , waving handkerchiefs , and Bookmakers with their
books. Supers supposed to he taking odds.]
Chorus of Girls.
Hero ! to thee adieu we wave !
In peril let thy heart prove brave ;
Heed not the wind or billows? roar 5
Let that scare,
Mal-de-mer,
Haunt thee not, we now implore,
Ere thou reach the foreign shore !
Bookmakers.
Starting now' at six to four !
Girls.
We now implore !
Bookmakers.
At six to four !
Long Odds and Friends.
May no bird of evil omen,
Be it man or be it woman,
Get at you, we all implore !
Race to sell,
Knowing well,
In that case, w r e?d all deplore
Starting you at six to four.


Act 11.
[Scene ? Early morning in the street*. Enter Girl* , muffled up in
wraps.]
Muriel. ?The telegram giving the result of the race is to be
posted outside here. We shall not have long to wait.
[Enter Bookmakers. ]
Long Olds.?There is sure to be a crowd here before long, and
we may do some business. I heard that the Yankee was ? got at,?
so we can lay another point.
The Girls.
Who are those ?
They are the literary men !
Reporters for morning papers !
Fellow patriots !
Muriel ( addressing the Bookmakers,
Dear sirs, to tell us will you choose
What time we may expect the news ?
Long Odds ( recitative.)
With certainty I can?t the news impart,
But now the race should be about to start;
Whilst both the men sit broiling in the sun,
And anxiously await the signal gun.
Chorus.
? They are waiting for the gun.?? F. Myers,
They are waiting for the gun, they are waiting for the gun,
As armies wait while leaders chances count;
Their soul for conflict yearning, their eyes with passion burning,
And foot in stirrup ready for the mount;
For the gun that beacons action, for the gun that thunders ?charge !?
For the summons that lets loose the close array !
For the clang and clash of battle, and the rifles? thickening rattle !
And the riot and the glory of the fray !
They are waiting for the gun, &c.
They are waiting for the gun, they are waiting for the gun,
As knights of old, when tourney lists were barred ;
Forgiving and forgiven, each hopes victory or heaven,
But will maul the other merciless and hard ;
Waiting, heads bowed down on breastplates ; eyes bright through
visor bars,
For the king at arms to bid the warden fall !
For the herald?s ? laissez allez ! ? then the swift and headlong sally,
And the ? derring do ? that wins or loses all.
They are waiting for the gun, &c.


[. During the singing of the Chorus , Charlie enters , and scowls in
disgust at the Girls.]
Charlie (aside). ?Disgusting ! a parcel of romantic girls, who
ought to be in bed, staring at a brick wall, to find out whether a
fellow has pulled a lump of wood through the water faster than
another fellow !
Bookmakers surround him.
Ist. Now, sir, what?s your fancy ?
2nd. Can I do business with you ?
3rd. Six to four I lay.
Long Odds. ?Come, now, sir ! take your pick ! We?ll do
business, I know ! Who?s your fancy ?
Charlie. ?What?s that to you.
Long Odds.?Why, won?t you hack your country ?
Charlie. ?lf you mean George Rowlock, I won?t back him. I
wish he may
Long Odds. ?Ah ! now I see my w T ay to business. Lay against
him ! Nothing like laying against a man you don?t like ! I?ve had
much consolation from it. It relieves the mind.
Charlie. ? And the pocket!
[Enter Telegraph Boy , who posts telegram on the wall. All crowd to
read it.]
Long Odds (reads), ?? The native won by three lengths. The
American got the spasms.? (Cheers.)
Chorus? Girls.
The honour of our country?s saved ! We?ve got the champion oar !
Bookmakers.
And nailed the Yankee dollars through our laying six to four.
[.Exeunt all hut Charlie and Clara, who stops , staring at him.]
Charlie. ?l suppose it is all over with me now.
Clara. ?What is the matter with you, Charlie ?
Charlie. ?Never mind ! It is your friend?that?er?Delilah !
I suppose she?ll marry this antipodean Samson !
Clara. ?l never heard that Samson was a ?pulling man.?
Charlie. ?Well, he pulled a house down, and then was sold by
a woman, like I am. I hope she?ll sell George Rowlock.
Clara. ? He?ll never marry her. He?ll jilt her now that he is
the hero of the day.
Charlie. ?Will he ? Then she doesn?t get me ! There is re-
tribution in store. Did you ever hear that beautiful poem, ? The
Cat and the Mice ? ?
Clara. ?Is it a nursery rhyme?
Charlie.?No, it is not a nursery rhyme; it is a poetical
parable. I shall sing it to you, to an original air.
the cat and the mice.
A saucy young tabby cat sat by a hole,
On sporting intent;
An inquisitive mouse to the aperture stole,
To see what she meant


He was seized in a moment with teeth and with claws,
Then let go, to be playfully tossed in her paws,
To give him more pain.
Then pussy, deceitfully turning her head,
And making-believe that she thought he was dead,
Shut one eye.
It happened just then that this mouse?s own brother
Looked out from the hole ; him she ?spied with the other ;
And so sly
She grabbed at and missed him ; when, to her dismay,
His friend, lately captured, had scampered away.
The moral is plain.
Clara.?ls it ? Who wrote that stuff?
Charlie [severely), ?The talented author of that parable is
dead. He died through woman?s perfidy, in this simple faith?
? Allah is great, and Ouida is his prophetess.?
Clara. ?Poor Charlie ! Why despond ? ( coaxingly ). Don?t
you know the adage?? There are as good fish in the sea as ever
were caught ! ?
Charlie.?Perhaps so ; but there are fish and fish, and a man
who fancies whiting may not care about schnapper !
Clara (aside), ?The bear !
Charlie. ?What are those flowers you have ?
Clara.?Only a bunch of blossoms !
Charlie. ?Why did you pluck them ?
Clara.?l did not pluck them. They were blown off.
Charlie. ?Give them to me. (He shreds the leaves.)
(Song.)
Blossoms of Spring tide,
Scarce w?ere ye blown !
Swept by the Summer gale.
Shattered and gone !
Scarce has the warm ray
Left ye an hour ;
Reft of the sunshine !
Ye die in the shower !
Spurred by Ambition !
Harassed by Care !
How sharp the transition !
From Hope to Despair !
Like these frail blossoms !
Crushed in an hour !
Reft of the sunshine !
We die in the shower !
(Published by Weekes & Co., London.
Clara (aesthetically). ?Oh ! lah?ovely ! The wail of a broken
heart! Support me ! (Falls on his shoulder.)
Charlie (drawing off.) ?Support you! How can I support a
woman on three hundred a year in these aesthetic days ?


Clara (< brightening suddenly up.)? l see my way ! I?ll help
you to revenge ! ( Dramatically .) Let us conspire. (Sings,)
Although ?tis clearly understood we don?t care for each other,
Except in a Platonic way, like sister and like brother,
The simplest of flirtations may produce an alteration.
(Spoken, ) Charlie (perplexed),? With whom ?
Clara (archly), ?Oh, with Muriel !
Muriel (from the rear , who has been watching them), ?
For which this party will device all kinds of preparation !
Charlie.? Platonic, of course.
Clara.?Oh ! clearly ! of course !
Muriel.?Oh ! clearly ! of course I
Trio. ?The source of | love is Platonic, of course !
Charlie. ?Good-bye.
Clara. ?Good-bye.
(They look at each-other irresolutely , and he kisses her).
Trio. ?Platonic, of course !
The source of r | love is Platonic, of course !
Exit Charlie.
Clara (spoken with a puzzled air) ?
No difference appears to me,
Twixt Tweedledum and Tweedledee,
(Turns round , and confronts Muriel. They rush into each other's
arms, and kiss each other passionately. )
Both ( separating , and aside), ? ? The kiss of Judas ! ?
Muriel (clasping Clara round the waist), ? Have you seen
Charles Danvers lately, dearest ?
Clara (confused). ?Well ! hum ! Yes ! but?er?not so very
lately, my own ! (aside) She knows all about it !
Muriel. ?Shall you see him soon again, darling ?
Clara. ?Perhaps, love ! Why ?
Muriel.? l know you?ll delight to do anything for your dearest
friend.
Clara. ?Can you doubt it, my precious ?
Muriel (releasing her arm , with strong expression), ?Then tell
him I love him Passionately ! Devotedly ! Madly ! (sarcasti-
cally) I know you?ll be charmed to bear the news.
Clara. ?What do you mean ?
Muriel.??Tis plainly seen
From my demeanour, scorn expressing,
Both you and he
Were seen by me
Vows of a mutual love confessing.
Deny it not! \
Clara. ? But list to me ! j
Muriel. ?Pray have your say.


Clara. ? I think I may.
Two strings your bow is not requiring ;
And selfishly
It seems to me
You quarrel with me for one desiring.
Deny it not. 1
Muriel. ? But list to me. J
[Gun fires, and both run to opposite sides of stage,]
Muriel.? George has returned, and soon my fate is sealed?
Clara.? For now you see ? two Richmonds in the field.?
Clara ( passionately ). ?
Do you think in the choice of my lover,
By you I?ll be strictly confined ?
Muriel (with hitter irony), ?
Oh ! no, dear ! I leave the field open
As soon as I?ve made up my mind.
Both. ?How kind ! Ha ! Ha ! Ha ! Ha !
[Exeunt,]
Scene 11.
[l Vate*, Enter Girls and Bookmakers awaiting the landing of
George.]
[Chorus,)
Crowned with laurels ! Champion oar !
Welcome to your native shore.
[During the chorus George enters in travelling costume , followed
by Spavin, who wheels in on a truck a huge case labelled
Trophies, with care. All rush forward to welcome him,)
George. ?Girls ! I am here.
Charlie [ironically), ? They see you are.
George.? And I need scarcely say that when I was there I was
all there!
[Sony.)
With glory enfolded, with victory crown?d,
How proudly I gaze on my rivals around ;
They w?ould rise if they could, but none venture to try,
All marvel and murmur, he reigns, and oh ! why
He reigns over all; he?s invincible still.
Shall I give them a reason ? I can, and I will?
?Twas for love it was done, ?twas for love it was done,
And it was but for one? for thee.
Full flagons and trophies, and cups by the score,
Proclaim how I?ve plied my magnificent oar ;
And heroes laid under, and champions put down,
Arc but steps that have led to my sceptre and crowm ;
But was it for this that I conquered ? ah ! no,
My darling, thy bright eyes a surer guess show.
?Twas for love it was done, &c.


Act 111. Scene I.
[Picnic party on the lawn . George and the Girls playing tennis,
George and Muriel Solos and Waltz.]
George.?
Of all the games in which
The sexes intermingle,
There?s none so fascinating
To people who are single ;
For though in point of skill
The game may be deficient,
It has a charm about it
Known but to the proficient.
?Tis?
Ah! What?
Spooning on the lawn !
What pastime so ethereal as spooning on the lawn ?
Muriel.?
The birds may warble forth,
The rosebuds blossom out,
And all that sort of thing, you know,
That poets write about.
The balls may briskly fly,
The game exciting grow ;
But the one sweet charm about it,
We girls prefer to know?
?Tis?
Ah! What?
Spooning on the lawn !
What pastime so ethereal as spooning on the lawn ?
George.? What do you say, girls, to coming down to the
river to see my champion outrigger ?
Muriel. ?Which is to carry you to victory once more !
All.?We will.
[Exeunt.]
[Enter Charlie.]
Charlie (aside). ? Gone to look at the bark that is to bear him
to victory, eh ? I hope they will examine it carefully to know it
again. How about Nemo, eh? They can?t find out who Nemo is
before the race, and if he lose they won?t find out after. Nemo !
eh ? Ha ! ha !
[Enter Spavin, who overhears the word *' Nemo .? lie proceeds to
examine the picnic basket.]
Spavin (aside).? Nemo ! Why, that?s the dark ?oss, that is !
If I could only find out his real name, there?s a pot of money in it.
(Takes a drink out of a bottle.)
Charlie (aside). ? A good idea calling oneself Nemo (Turns
round and confronts Spavin, who tries to conceal the bottle.) Halloa !
What the devil are you doing here ?


Spavin, ?Beg pardon, sir, but I am a trainer, and I came to
see Mr Er?er.
Charlie (aside). ?Am I discovered ? (aloud) You don?t mean
Mr. Nemo ?
Spavin (aside). ?This cove, may be, knows him. (Aloud)
That?s him, sir !
Charlie (aside). ?It is all over ! This fellow knows the secret,
and I shall have to bribe him to silence. (Aloud.) Can you keep a
secret, fellow ?
Spavin. ?Well, I?ll do my best, Sir, for a consideration, you
know. But, you see, without a trifle, it might kind o? get the better
o? me, and come out. What do you think a fair thing, now, ?tween
man and man ?
Charlie. ?l?ll tell you this. I am Nemo ! If you keep my
secret and get my boat ready at the starting place (for I am training
miles away from here), I?ll give you twenty pounds !
Spavin. ?And if I split on you ? I can make more from the
bookmakers by doing that.
Charlie (seizing him by the neck). ?Then I?ll hand you oyer to
the police at once for being on private premises for an illegal
purpose, and stealing liquor ; and when you come out of gaol I?ll
throttle you!
Spavin.?Let me go, Sir. I?ll do it.
[Charlie releases him. Duet ?Charlie and Spavin.]
If you?re asked by any person
If the stranger?s name you?ve heard,
Knit your brows and shake your head,
Say it currently is said
That his name
Spavin.?
Charlie. ?
Is what ?
Hush ! Hark !
Keep it dark !
Mum?s the word !
Spavin.?But his name ?
Charlie. ? Mum?s the word !
&c., &c.
[Exeunt. ]
[Re-enter George and the Girls.]
George. ?l tell you it is a certainty ; the fellow is a rank
outsider ! No one knows anything about him.
Charlie. ?But are you in condition ?
George. ?Good enough to beat him !
Muriel. ?But, remember !
That on the last occasion
You took up this position,
That none get public confidence
Unless they?re in condition.
[Enter Bookmakers .]
(Chorus. )
For in the betting market, &c.


When white spray was flashing in sparkles of light,
Thy form, love, thy face, love, were ever in sight;
When sinews were failing, and trouble seemed nigh,
One glance, love, inspired me to conquer or die ; �
When voices by thousands like thunder-peal roar?d.
Thy smile, love, was ever my dearest reward.
?Twas for love it was done, Ac.
(Published by Weekes & Co., London.)
All.?Hurrah !
George (to Spavin? recitative). ?
Display the trophies of my skill,
Tell how I won them?
Spavin.?
That I will.
(Song.)
When first we pulled the champion race,
A grocer said that in that case
His trade he would then advertise,
And give this jug as an extra prize,
And here?s the jug !
All.? Is that the jug ?
Spavin.? Yes, that?s the jug !
(Chorus.)
Trophies brings he from afar ;
See displayed the spoils of war !
Bowl and flagon, jug and jar !
Spavin.? At cricket every prize he wins :
He smashed their kuckles, bruised their shins,
The ? slop clothes ? prize was easy won,
For he bowled all out without a run ;
And here?s the jug !
All.? Is that the jug ?
Spavin. ?Yes, that?s the jug !
(Chorus.
Trophies brings he from afar,
See displayed the spoils of w r ar,
Bowl and flagon, jug and jar !
Spavin.?At jumping, running, boxing too,
He puts ?em all their faces through,
And stayed among ?em day by day,
?Till they?d no more jugs to be took aw r ay.
And here?s the jugs !
All. ? Are those the jugs ?
Spavin.? Yes, them?s the jugs !
Charlie (addressing Muriel). ?
A man gave me this letter,
For your friend ! For your friend !
To which it may be better
To attend ! To attend I
[.Muriel hands George the letter.']


George (read 6*). ?
Sir, ere I leave the country to return, I think, no more,
I purpose to contest with you your claim to champion oar.
If you can pull at once, Sir, please kindly to let me know ;
And at present I subscribe myself, yours very truly,
r Nemo!
Spoken.
George ?Nemo ! Nemo ! Who is Nemo ?
All. ?The greatest sporting authority in the country ! Oh,
what a responsibility on your shoulders !
George -
Be he Nemo, or Cloanthus, or Old Charon on the Styx,
Did he think to have surprised me, or to put me in a fix ?
No ! No ! My country?s honour has such claims I can t forego ;
Champion course ! The usual terms ! I?ll write and tell him so !
All. ?Hurrah !
[Long Odds hands him National Flag,]
(Chorus.)
Trophies brings he from afar,
See displayed the spoils of war,
Bowl and flagon, jug and jar !
(The 7W/.S-, tfec., are piled up behind George, one on the top of the
other, in the farm of a pyramid ; and Long Odds hands him
the National Flag.
(Chorus.)
See our country?s flag unfurled ;
Hail the Champion of the World !
[Curtain falls. J


George ( turning round). ? What impudence ! Who are these
fellows ?
Bookmakers (chorus). ?
We?re the Ring ! We?re the Ring !
And we bet on anything.
The only source of troubles
Are the trebles and the doubles !
Long Odds (solo). ?
When any little sport is on, and we can hunt it out,
You?ll find, like little busy bees, we?re there or thereabout;
The speculating public make a point to us to look
For all gambling information, so we open up a book.
For we?re the Ring, &c.
And in that book are records which ?twere better to forget
Concerning the misfortunes of the foolish folk who bet;
Their losses earn them sympathy, but ours the other thing,
There?s pity for the spendthrift, but no mercy for the Ring !
For we?re the Ring, &c.
George ?May I ask in what point of view you look upon your
business ?as a Profession ?
Long Odds. ?Certainly ! and a public necessity in these days.
George. ?And that is why no law is applied to you. Clear
out, please !
Charlie (solo). ?
As I may quote hereafter, pray give your attention
To a trite little adage which here I may mention.
Girls ?What is it ?
Charlie?That there?s many a slip ?twixt the lip and the cup,
Bookmakers. ?And you never can tell till the numbers are up.
(Exeunt Bookmakers. )
Quartette (Muriel, Clara, George and Charlie.)
Muriel and Clara. ?
George.?
Charlie. ?
George.?
Charlie. ?
All. ?
These mysterious forebodings
Fill our souls with blank dismay
Lest the prize, so newly won, as
Speedily be snatched away.
Cease your fears ! they?re idle phrases,
Simply used to raise suspicions ;
Tricks employed to rig the market,
By these cunning metallicians.
Certainly ! the whole transaction
Ranks amongst the tamest jokes
Treat this Nemo with derision,
And his challenge as a hoax.
He has no show.
Just so ! Just so !
Oh, no ! Oh, no !
He has no show !


(They retire , and on turning confront Spavin, who has pantomimi-
caMy been hard at work on the remnants of the picnic basket , and
is half fuddled,)
George.? : Halloa ! As you have finished the feast you may as
well take the empty platter away.
Spavin.?All right, Sir.
[Exeunt George, Charlie, and Girls.]
Spavin (solus), ? Well, I may as well have a feed when I has
the chance. I?m, in a manner o? speaking, ?bust up,? and that?s
what?s the matter with me. My character has been took away?
wenomous. If I trains a ?oss and he lose, they says I run him in
plates. If I trains a man and he breaks down they says I hocussed
him ; and now when I last turn my mind to pigeons, and trains one
as couldn?t fly a yard (as I said before I took him, mind you), and
he lose, they says I filled his crop wi? duck shot. Ain?t it a
spiteful world ? You bet !
[Enter Bookmakers.}
(Solo and duet.)
Bookmakers. ?
No nonsense now inform us.
Without equivocation,
Or mental reservation,
Is this a man whom we know,
Whose surname?s that of Nemo ?
Spavin.?
Yes, you know him !
Bookmakers. ?
Then we know him ?
Spavin.?
Yes, you know him !
Well then, hark I
Keep it dark 1
Never let his name be heard.
There?s nought in him ;
Bet agin? him.
Keep it dark ! Keep it dark 1
His name is?
Bookmakers. ?
Spavin.?
What ?
Mum?s the word I
(Bookmakers collar him.)
Bookmakers. ?
You better had believe us ;
If you mean to deceive us
Some other game you?ll wish you had preferred.
Spavin.?
I tell you there?s nought in him ;
You?re safe to bet agin? him.
Bookmakers.?
But his name I But his name !
Spavin.?
Don?t I tell you, ? Muni?s the word.?
Bookmakers.?
You will not tell us more ?


Spavin.?
The odds are ten to four.
Bookmakers.?
You?ll not tell us ? You?ll not tell us ?
Spavin.?
The odds are ten to four.
Bookmakers.?
But the tip !
Spavin.?
It is straight.
Bookmakers.?
That?s enough.
Spavin.?
Mum?s the word !
[Exeunt.']
[Enter George, in rowing costume.]
George.? Halloa ! Are you here guzzling still ?
Spavin,? A meal?s victuals is a chance with me now-a-days, Sir.
I?m dead broke. A modest five bob might, as the papers say, cause
you to hear something to your advantage.
George.? My advantage ?
Spavin.? Yes, your advantage ! You don?t know who Mr
Nemo is. I does ! There, you have it !
George.? Well, I?ll give it. (Hands the coin.)
Spavin.? You won?t split on me ?
George.?No. Out with it!
Spavin.? Well, I?ll whisper it. Mr. Danvers !
George.? Oh, he be hanged ! You?re drunk ! Take this
basket away ! (Hustles Spavin off. )
George (soliloquising). ? Charley Danvers ! Absurd ! Why he
cannot pull a stroke on his own admission, and not a soul has ever
seen him in a boat. The fellow?s drunk, and lam five shillings
poorer. Muriel has to give me her answer to-day. I must bring
her to the point.
(Enter Muriel.)
Muriel. ? Dear George, would you mind letting my answer
stand over for another day ? It is so sudden.
George.? Sudden, you call it, after I have been pressing you
for weeks? There is some other reason ! Surely this hollow boat
race has nothing to do with it ?
Muriel. ? Oh, dear, no !
George. ?Because, if you are afraid of my losing, you can
make your mind easy ; for, from what I hear, that fool Charlie
Danvers is the Nemo! Look at the pair of us, and say what chance
he has !
Muriel.? Oh, don?t say Charley Danvers ; anyone but him !
George (aside). ?Halloa ! What is in the wind now ! I
thought that I had wiped that young man out. (Aloud) Why
anybody but him, Muriel ?
Muriel. ? Don?t ask me ! I am so confused and nervous I
don?t know what I am saying.


George.?But I know what I ajn saying, and it is simply
summed up in this ?Good-bye !
Muriel. ?Oh, no ! Don?t leave me like that !
George.?l am to wait till to-morrow, when the boat-race is
over, for an answer, am I ? Perhaps you will wait for my question.
(Exeunt,)
Muriel (ballad), ?
Swiftly ?tis flowing, my heart with it going,
To the long river that laughs in the light;
Soon they?ll be straining, brave oars, for the gaining,
Who shall be winner, my winner, to-night ?
Dearer than brother, the one as the other?
Murm?ring river, 0 tell me aright;
By blue sea thou cravest, say who shall be bravest,
Who shall be hero, my hero, to-night ?
River, fair river, while thy waves quiver,
Thine shall be flowers each day ever bright;
Swiftly thou?lt bear him, till proudly I hear him,
Hail?d the brave winner, my lov?d oned, to-night.
[Exit Muriel.]
[Enter Charlie, bringing a pair of sculls.]
Charlie.?l can?t beat the fellow, I know ; but I can foul him.
You lose the race, it is true, but who knows what you would have
done if you hadn?t fouled him ? Personally, I don?t know how to
foul a man exactly. I suppose it means to run bang into him at
once, and then stop pulling, and claim the foul yourself. Then you
stop pulling, and decline going on. It is one way of claiming a
race, I admit, but it is the only chance I have. Halloa ! here?s a
confounded girl coming now.
[Enter Clara ]
Clara.?What! are you going to pull? I thought you could
not row.
Charlie.- Who said so?
Clara.?Why, you said it yourself.
Charlie. ?I said I could not pull. I did not say I could not
row. I mean to follow the race, (aside) and a good long way
behind, I expect.
Clara.?Now Charlie, don?t try to deceive me, because you
can?t do it. You are going to pull George Rowlock. He will beat
you. Muriel will throw you over, and you will have none left to
sympathise save?
Charlie.?Who ?
Clara.?Me !
Charlie. ?Oh heavens, after this I
Clara. ?What ?
Charlie.?Leap year I


Clara. ? ( Ballad .)
And have you forgotten me quite, dear ? or, say do you sometimes
dream
What life might have been, if we wandered still, together by wood
and stream ?
Do you think of the days when thy love was all the world could
give or take ?
And say with a sigh, they were happy days, just for the old love?s
sake.
And do you e?er sit in the twilight, and think of that wint?ry day
We met and parted, and journey?d forth, each on our separate way ?
I turned and stood for a moment, dear, and look?d in your face to
take
Its memory on my way through life, just for the old love?s sake.
And do you e?er think they were bitter words ? their memory haunts
me yet;
Do you wonder how I could say them all, and wonder if I forget ?
Yet, dear, my heart has forgiv?n you long, though I thought at first
?twould break,
And when?er I think, ?tis kindly still, just for the old love?s sake.
Sweetheart, just for the old love?s sake.
(Published by Glen & Co., Melbourne.)
Charlie. ? Ah, ?Just for the old love?s sake.? I never knew
anything about this old love.
Clara. ?Why, you silly boy, we were engaged once.
Charlie. ?Permit me to repeat those lovely lines which I
heard with such pleasing sensations in (to speak in a parliamentary
sense) ? another place.?
The pace at which we live, alas !
Gives no time to reflect;
And to recall old love affairs
Is what you can?t expect;
For mem?ry cannot keep the pace
At which we go, you see ;
And hence the fact I quite forget
You were engaged to me.
She,? You were engaged to me.
He.? You were engaged to-me.
Both,? The circumstance / I \ see,
(I plainly j 9
That you were once engaged to me.
[Curtain.]
Scene ll.? (Water.)
(Enter Muriel and companions , and Bookmakers.)
Itecit, Muriel and Chorus?
Spare us suspense, and now inform us, who this
Rival chance to be,
Long Odds. ?The fact is, ladies, I can?t tell you,
More than what was told to me.


Chorus ?What was that ? Now, come tell us that.
Long Odds, Bookmakers, and Girls.?
We saw a man, who told us all he
Knew about the case,
And of the stranger?s chances said
He is not in the race.
His name we said?his name we said
His name, pray have you heard ?
And all that we got out of him
Was simply ? Mum?s the word.?
Muriel. ?How utterly unsatisfactory. Does he, then, pull
incognito ?
Long Odds.?l don?t know, Miss, but I should think in the
ordinary flannels.
[Gun fires.]
(Chorus.)
Off, off they dart, with a splendid start, and, swift as a falcon?s
flight,
Each plies his part with a giant?s heart, till the dark wave foams
with white ;
And the cheers of the crowd re-echo loud, and the people surge and
seethe
As our heroes strain each nerve and vein, and row for the Victor?s
wreath !
And, above the roar,
From the echoing shore,
Swells the cry of the Ring ! ? Six to four ! ?
They come ! they come !
Yes ! yes! they come, and our lips are dumb till?hurrah ! we see
him now
With his strength well nursed, our Champion?s first, and a bright
smile lights his brow ;
For he sees from afar, like a radiant star, his love in her beauty
stand
To greet him there, and to crown his prayer with the gift of her
heart and hand.
And, above the roar,
From the echoing shore,
Swells the cry of the Ring ! ? Ten to four ! ?
He wins ! he wins !
Now he nears the goal, and, with raptured soul, he sees where the
guerdon lies ;
He has sculled his race at a marvellous pace, and exults in the
promised prize.
Bring the laurelled crown ! Let our heads bow down ! Be our
Champion?s path of flowers !
Let his fame be sung with a poet?s tongue?for, hurrah! the
Victory?s ours.
And, above the roar,
From the echoing shore,
Swells the cry of the Bing ! ? Twelve to four ! ?
(Repeat.)
Bring the laurelled crown ! Let our heads bow down ! Be our
Champion?s path of flowers !
Let his fame be sung with a poet?s tongue?for, hurrah !
[Collapse. ]


[George waves his hat to the Ladies on the hank , and simultaneously
capsizes.]
Girls.?Oh ! oh ! oh !
Save him ! look ! he?s going down !
Bookmakers. ?He?s lost our money !
Let him drown I
(Oeorge wades out.)
Long Odds.?You melted away at the distance.
Muriel (aesthetically). ? And now he comes up dripping.
Girls. ?Where?s the Champion did o?erthrow him?
[Enter Charlie.]
? Here is Nemo ! Perhaps you know him ! ?
Muriel (rushing to meet him). ? My own ! my own despised
one!
Clara. ?And mine ! and mine !
Girls. ?And ours ! yes, all of ours !
Muriel. ?Dearest Charlie ! oh ! you surely must be a Native !
Charlie. ?No ! I?m not a Native.
Girls.?Mercy on us ! He is not a Native . Surely you are
English ?
Charlie.?No !
Girls (more excited). ? Irish ?
Charlie.?No !
Muriel.?Oh! spare our agony. Say you were born some-
where !
Charlie. ?Yes ! I am a native of China !
(Chorus.)
Oh ! horror of horrors ! you can say what you will,
If the bitterest cup could prove bitterer still,
Increased our dishonour by many degrees,
Now our flag is haul?d down by an Anglo-Chinese.
Charlie, ?Well, I suppose a man is not answerable for where
he was born ?
The Girls (struck with the idea). ?No more he is ! We never
thought of that!
(Recit. and Chorus.)
Muriel. ?No ! no ! no ! Mongolian birth shan?t interfere
With our pre-engagement, dear.
Charlie. ? But I resign, I resign.
George. ?The belt you won?t wear long, I fear ;
I?ll challenge you within the year.
Charlie. ? Ah ! I resign, I resign.
Bookmakers.?
Our money?s lost, give one chance more;
We?ll back your friend at tea to four.


Charlie,? But I resign, I resign.
(Chorus). ?May perdition be his lot,
Love and honour know him not.
Charlie.?Pray, cease objurgation, and cheerfully hark
To what you?ll observe was my former remark,
(Chorus). ? What was that ?
Charlie.?There?s many a slip ?twixt the lip and the cup,
Bookmakers and Chorus.?And you never can tell till the
numbers are up.
(Curtain).
Finis.


/
? * ?
.
?
'
. ...
