

POPULAR GOVERNMENT
FEDERATION.
A. B. PIDDINGTON,
Member for Tamworth, N.S.W.
PRICE - OIsTE SHILLING.
(Sgirntg :
ANGUS & ROBERTSON.




POPULAR GOVERNMENT
FEDERATION.
A. B. PIDDINGTON,
Member for Tamivorth, X.S. W.
ANGUS & ROBERTSON.


NOTE.—This pamphlet comprises a paper on “ Federation and
Responsible Government,” read before the Australasian
Association for the Advancement of Science, January
11th, 1898; and an article on “ The Senate and the
Civil War in America.” The substance of the latter appeared
in the Daily Telegraph of February 3rd, 1897, and is here
reprinted, by the courteous permission of the proprietors of
that Journal j a Postcript being added.


Federation and Responsible
Government.
The English nation and all the free communities that have
sprung from its loins, govern themselves under constitutions that
bear a strong family likeness and include a certain birth-mark
that is unmistakeable. In Canada, in Cape Colony, in Tasmania,
New Zealand, and the mainland colonies of Australia, as in the
parent country, the whole business both of making and of
executing laws is carried on under the guidance of a Cabinet of
Ministers of the Crown. The characteristics of Responsible
•Government are thus set down by Freeman k
The theory of cabinet government, of what is commonly called
constitutional or parliamentary government, is that the legal
functions of the King, and a large portion of the legal functions of
Parliament are transferred to a body of Ministers. These Ministers
are appointed by the King, but, as they must be chosen by him
out of the party which has the upper hand in the House oi
Commons, they may be said to be indirectly chosen by the House
of Commons itself. They exercise the executive functions of the
Crown, and they possess a practical initiative in all important
points of legislation. If their policy is censured, or even if any
important ministerial proposal is rejected, they resign office.
They may indeed escape for a season by dissolving Parliament, but
if the new House of Commons confirms the adverse vote of its
predecessor, there is no hope for them left.
This may be frankly accepted as a just description of the
institution, for though it might be objected to Freeman’s authority
that in matters of judgment (whether of men, of passing events,
or of systems) he has been with unusual frequency falsified in
the onward course of time, yet so far as exact narrations of
historical fact are concerned, he is certainly a writer upon whom
we can lean with our full weight. It is hardly necessary to bring
out the obvious implication in his words, that the Ministry depends
upon the confidence of the House of Commons only, and that
the attitude of the Second Chamber does not affect its existence
or powers This flows, indeed, from the necessities of the case.
No man can serve two masters, and no executive council could
be dependent upon two different chambers for the right to carry
-on the government of the country.
“ The House of Lords,” says Gladstone, 2 “ though a great power
in the State, and able to cause great embarrassment to an Ad-
ministration, is not able by a vote to doom it to capital punish-
ment. Only for fifteen years, out of the last fifty, has the
Ministry of the day possessed the confidence of the House of
Lords. On the confidence of the House of Commons it is immedi-
ately and vitally dependent.”
1 Presidential Government, Historical Esssays I, 383.
2 Gleanings I, 236.


A like rule applies throughout the Empire. In this colony, e.g.,.
a Ministry has now held office for nearly four years, which would
have been dismissed in less than four hours had the Legislative
Council been the arbiter of its fate.
Such then is the system of Executive with which we and our
kin are familiar, and the object of this paper is to investigate the
working of that system under a Federal, not a consolidated,
government. A practical foothold may usefully be got for the
discussion by taking the Convention Bill of 1897 and enquiring—
First, what effect that Bill would have upon Responsible Govern-
ment 1 and second, whether any change in the Bill need be made,
or can be made—consistently with the essentials of Federation —
to secure the continuance of Responsible Government! The
main structural features of the Convention Bill, so far as con-
cerns this enquiry, are:—
1. The cession to a Federal Parliament, by the federating
colonies, of a jurisdiction exclusive over some,
concurrent over other, specified subjects.
2. A Federal Parliament, composed of two Chambers,,
exercising co-ordinate powers—a Senate in which
each State of the Union has six representatives, and
a House of Representatives in which each State is
represented in proportion to its population.
3. An Executive Council composed of Ministers summoned
from either House, and exercising the whole executive
authority of the nation.
Our first question may now be narrowed down to this: “What
form will the Executive Government take if it is composed of mem-
bers who must sit in a Parliament of this structure 1 ” But before
passing to that investigation, it is important to vindicate the use
of the term “co-ordinate powers” of the Senate and House, and
this involves an examination of the “ money powers ” of the two
chambers by which, it is alleged, substantial preponderance for
all time is secured to the House of Representatives. The matter
is adjusted as follows :
1. The House of Representatives has the exclusive right
of originating Bills which (a) impose taxes, or
(b) appropriate revenue —Money Bills proper.
2. Both Houses have complete co-ordinate rights over
Bills which impose or appropriate fines, license-fees,
or fees for services—Money Bills incidentally.
3. “ Tacking ” general measures to Money Bills and
“ amalgamating ” different Tax Bills in one measure
are expressly forbidden.
4. The Senate may affirm or reject Money Bills proper,.
but not amend. It may, however, suggest amend-


ments to the House, and both Houses must eventually
agree, or the Bill will not pass.
5. The Senate may not amend any Bill in such a manner
as to increase any proposed charge on the people.
It is contended that these provisions secure to the people of
Australia, their prescriptive right of unmodified self-taxation
through their representatives, and promise a predominance of
authority to the representative House. Is this contention sound 1
Fortunately we are not obliged to fashion forth an answer by the
sheer dint of our own powers of calculation. The American
nation has already hammered out that answer on the ringing
anvil of experience. Their Senate has an authority over finance
substantially the same as that which is proposed for the Senate
of Australia. The Constitution of the United States lays down
the rule in these words 1 :
All bills for raising revenue shall originate in the House _of
Representatives ; but the Senate may propose or concur with
amendments as on other bills.
The points of difference between this and the proposals of
the Convention Bill have no real significance. For example :
Appropriation Bills are mentioned expressly in the Australian
measure, but not in the American, as being solely within the
competency of the House to originate. But in practice the same
restriction operates.
“ The Senate,” says Foster, 2 “ has been shorn of but a. single
power, that to originate general appropriation bills, which the
House has, by their continuous rejection when sent there, refused
to permit it to exercise successfully, although the Senate has more
than once recorded a protest asserting its prerogative.”
Then follow words of great importance to our subject: —
But in practice, through its power of amendment, the loss is
rather nominal than real.
Again, that power of amendment to which Foster attributes
this vast effect of nullifying the privilege of originating
Appropriation Bills, is given to the American Senate in the words
“ may propose or concur with amendments,” —to the Australian
Senate by the roundabout method of forbidding the Senate to
amend, and then allowing them to suggest amendments and
reject the Bill if their suggestions are not adopted. No
distinction in practical result can be drawn, especially when it is
remembered that in a two-Chamber Legislature the competency
of either House to amend the Bills of the other is really neyer
more than the competency to “ suggest ” amendments—the
assent of the originating Chamber being always invited and
always needed that the Bill may become law.
1 Art. I. Sec. VII. Sub-sec. 1. 2 Constitution of the United
States—l., 496.


“ Whether,” says Sir S. Griffith, 1 “ the mode in which the Senate-
should express its desire for an alteration in Money Bills is by an
amendment in which they request the concurrence of the House
of Representatives, as in other cases, or by a suggestion that the
desired amendment should be made by the latter House as of
its own motion, seems to be a matter of minor importance. A
strong Senate will compel attention to its suggestions; a weak
one would not insist on its amendments.”
Indeed, so long as the right of the Second Chamber to destroy a
Money Bill by rejection remained (as in England) a dormant
right, only to be exercised, if ever, upon some great national
necessity, the question of a Second Chamber’s right to amend
(i.e., to invite concurrence in amendments to) a Money Bill
would be largely one of inter-cameral etiquette. The Repre-
sentative House would simply decline to concur in the amend-
ments it disliked, and dare the Second Chamber to reject the
Bill. The amending power is a sensible corollary to the rejecting
power, and such was its origin in the American Constitution.
“ The founders of the American Republic,” says Bright, 2 “ found
that in England the Lords could not begin Money Bills, could
not alter or amend them; but that theoretically—because the
matter had never been decided—theoretically they had power
to reject. But, then, what was the conclusion which they came
to ? They said the very same thing that the House of Lords had
said in the year 1671 —‘ It is perfectly childish to say that the
House of Lords cannot alter, abate or increase, but yet shall be
able to reject.’ They knew well that, although there was that
theoretical right in England, yet, practically, it had never been
enforced, and they came to the conclusion that if they should give
to their own Senate power to reject, it would be necessary also
to give them the power to amend.”
And as it is a sensible corollary to the rejecting power, so in
combination with that power the amending power is a valuable
perquisite of legislative influence ; but only in such combination.
In England the rejecting power is obsolete; in these colonies it
is obsolescent if not obsolete, but in the Convention Bill the
Second Chamber has revived for it the long-disused right of
rejection as a faculty deliberately re-invested with life and
vigour.
The last remaining point of difference between the money-
powers of the two Senates—apart from the express prohibition
of ‘tacking’ and ‘amalgamating’ which relieves the Australian
Senate from exceptional forms of pressure—is that this body can
originate minor Money Bills. The value of this novel investiture
is wholly conjectural, for until such a privilege went into regular
operation no one could tell how much or how little it might be
made to cover.
1 Notes on the Adelaide Convention Bill, 1897, p. 4. 2 Speech on
Tax Bills, House of Commons, July 6, 1860.


There remains indeed to each House of Representatives a
residuum of the ancient privilege of Englishmen to mould the
national finance—viz., the exclusive right of originating Taxa-
tion Bills and Appropriation Bills. We shall see that the
remark of Foster as to the latter class applies equally to the
former—the Senate’s power of amendment makes the absence of
originating power nominal rather than real.
And this brings us to the last stage of our task of guaging
the militant value of the peculiar powers of the House of Repre-
sentatives over Money Bills. Is the bare originating power,
apart from a prohibition to the Senate of either rejecting or
amending, enough to give predominance over both financial and
general legislation to the representative Chamber 1 Here again,
evidence of the highest quality and of unanswerable force is
presented by America. The originating power was offered by
the small States at the Philadelphia Convention, as a quid pro quo
for their equal suffrage in the Senate. At the time, Madison
described it as having “ nothing of concession in it,” and
“ being nothing more than a nominal privilege.” His opinion
has been fully vindicated. A distinguished member of the
Senate, Mr. G. P. Hoar, of Massachusetts, contrasts the
position of an Englishman (who is never taxed to the extent
of sixpence without the considered consent of his represen-
tative) with that of an American. 1 He inquires how it is
that “ the House has been deprived of the equality with the
Senate which the framers of the Constitution contemplated,” and
decides that “ the surrender of the power of amendment, then,
as it has invariably been construed, was the surrender of the whole
privilege.” He even demonstrates that, as a consequence of the
way the House does its business, the exclusive origination of
Money Bills puts the House at the mercy of the Senate, which
in the session-end conferences invariably defeats the House. So
that “ the barren and empty privilege of originating bills of
revenue and bills of supply,” as he calls it, has brought this to
pass, that “ when the large States accepted the clause in question
as a partial equivalent for the equality of the small States in the
Senate, they accepted a further limitation of their own power.”
The uses with which the bare originating power is credited
by those who expect it to make the House the stronger Chamber
are (1) It ensures the taxation of the people “in the matter,
the measure, and the time ”' 2 by their representatives alone, (2) It
enables the Lower House to dismiss a Ministry in whom it has n‘t>
1 The Conduct of Business in Congress. —North American Review,
Vol. CXXVIIL, p. 113, et stqq. 2 House ot Commons Reso-
lution, 1671. Hallam’s Constitutional History, 630.


confidence, (3) It is a final weapon of coercion of the Upper House
to compel them to pass non-financial measures by the threat of
withholding supplies. This last contention is probably the result
of confusing control over the Crown and its Ministers, which the
“ power of the purse ” always gave, with control over the Lords,
which it never gave. It can be dismissed shortly by mention of
the fact that no popular House in the Empire has ever brought
the Second Chamber to assent to legislation it disliked by
refusing to vote supplies, and that in America this has been done
but once 1 , though there the Lower House would be far more
likely to do it than where (as with us) that very Ministry must
take the lead in withholding supply, which depends on supply for
its own existence.
With regard to the dismissal of a Ministry by a refusal of
the House to vote supplies, that of course is an admitted result of
the originating power,
“It seems to have been thought,” says Sir Samuel Griffith, 2 “by
some members of the Convention that the maintenance of the
system of Responsible Government would be largely dependent
on giving paramount powers to the House of Representatives
with respect to Money Bills. It may be remarked, however, that
the exclusive right of originating Supply Bills and the power to
refuse supplies are the real basis of the power which the popular
House exercises over the Executive Government.”
But (as in the quotation just made) it must be understood
that originating does not mean introducing, but passing money-
grants. If the House refuses to pass them a Ministry must re-
sign. It follows that a Constitution which confers a similar
right to the Second Chamber serves out to that Chamber exactly
the same weapon over the life of a Ministry. Under the Con-
vention Bill the Senate can refuse supplies; it shares therefore
with the House the power of 1 dooming a Ministry to capital
punishment,’ in Gladstone’s phrase.
“But at least,” it will be said, “the exclusive right of
initiating taxation gives a financial superiority to the lower
House.” The experience of the very nation which owed its birth
to the doctrine of No Taxation without Representation proves
the contrary. Everyone knows how the American Senate deals
with the taxation proposals of the representative Chamber.
“ The Senate,” says Bright, 8 “ does amend, and does reject, and
does deal with finance in a manner which has never been per-
mitted, nor even proposed in this country,”
while the history of the Freetrade Senate’s modifications of
the protective “ Tariff of Abominations” in 1828, and of the Pro-
tectionist Senate’s modifications of the somewhat freetrade
“ Wilson Tariff” of 1894, are convincing proofs that the power
iln IS7B. Vide Foster. Constitution of the United States, p. 497, n.
2 uhi mpra. übi supra.


of amendment with the prospect of veto in reserve can be
employed so as to wholly recast the fiscal proposals that
originate in another Chamber. The vassal who can only marry
with his suzerain’s approval may time after time exert in vain
his hollow privilege of choosing personally; his wife will be as
much chosen for him by rejections successively exerted until the
choice of the suzerain is offered, as if the latter exerted the
choice himself in the first instance.
In the case of Appropriation Bills there is said to be this
modicum of value in the exclusive right to originate them that it
enables the Lower House to throw upon the Upper the responsi-
bility and the popular odium of disorganizing the Civil Service
by refusing to pass supply after the House has taken the
initiative. But here again practice disproves conjecture—the
Senate (as we have seen from Foster) exercises as good a power
as that of originating in its power to amend ; and Bryce 1 relates
that—
“ The Senate in particular knocks about remorselessly those favorite
children of the House the Appropriation Bills.”
it is no exaggeration to say that if the House of Lords were
to attempt to amend an Appropriation Bill—which is the life-
blood of the control of the whole public service —the House of
Lords would be in imminent danger of extinction.
Upon an analysis, therefore, of the scope of the representative
House under the Convention Bill with regard to financial legise
lation, it must be clear that no advantage is given to the House
in point of statutory powers over the Senate, and that the
Parliament of the Convention Bill resembles the American
Congress of which (though possessing a like illusory preference of
the House in financial powers) Bryce says' 2 : —
“ The United States is the only great country in the world where
the two Houses are really equal and co-ordinate.”
This is also the view of Bagehot B —our most acute consti-
tutionalist :
“ The evil,” says he. “ of two co-equal Houses of distinct natures is
obvious. Each House can stop all legislation, and yet some
legislation may be necessary Most constitutions
have committed this blunder. The two most remarkable Re-
publican institutions in the world commit it. In both the
American and Swiss Constitutions the Upper House has as much
authority as the second. It could produce the maximum of im-
pediment—the deadlock, if it liked ; if it does not do so, it is
owing not to the goodness of the legal constitution, but to the
discreetness of the members of the Chamber.”
The ground is now cleared for a return to our earlier
question as to the form of Executive likely to result when
Ministers are necessarily members of a Legislature of the Ameri-
can or Swiss type. Here we search in vain for direct experience,
1 American Commonwealth I, 183. 2 lbid 184. B English Constitution. 97.


the Convention Bill having left this important element—it is not
fair to say, to chance—but to the formative influence of time and
events. The American, the Swiss and the Australian documents
thus present a series. In the former the Houses are co-ordinate
and the Executive is excluded from the Legislature; in
Switzerland the Houses are co-ordinate and the Ministry
is elected for a fixed term by both Houses; in Australia
the Houses are co-ordinate, the Executive is part of the
Legislature, and no provision is made as to whether it shall be
responsible to one Chamber or the other, or both together. The
expectation of the framers of the Bill is professedly that the
Executive Government will be lodged in a Cabinet controlled by
the House of Representatives, and this is sometimes stated, not
as an expectation but as a fact accomplished. “ Responsible
Government has been put in the Bill ” we are sometimes told
with a confidence not likely to be shared by those who recall the
many disappointments of the American Constitution. Yet,
except in an imperfect statement of premises, the reasoning
which leads up to this belief is so unexceptionable that the
certainty with which it is avowed may be easily understood. It
is this : in all existing Constitutions of the Empire, Responsible
Government has been secured, not by any express provision, but
by simply enacting that there shall be Ministers uf the Crown
for Executive ofiices and that they or most of them may or shall
sit in Parliament. Since, therefore, similar directions are
contained in the Convention Bill, it is inferred that a similar
result will follow.
But in this reasoning the distinctive and exceptional feature
of the Bill—the cardinal departure from the British model—has
been overlooked, and the determinant factor of the whole problem
has been thus kept out of the count. The feature to which I allude
is the novel basis, authority, and function of the Second Chamber.
In no Constitution of the Empire does that body possess these
characteristics—(l) An avowedly different interest from the
representative house as its basis. (2) A complete immunity
from liability to yield its wishes to the mandate of the nation.
(3) The representation of map-divisions apart altogether from
their populations. On the contrary, all Second Chambers in the
Empire are expected to advance the same interest as the First—
viz. : that of the nation ; and they are all expected, according to
the accepted sense of the Constitution, to carry out every
unmistakeable fiat of the constituencies of the representative
house. There is, therefore, in the English bi-cameral system, a
latent unity of interest and a latent supremacy of one Chamber
which renders government possible. But the Convention Bill
has changed all that by introducing the requirement of a new
assent to legislation—that, viz., of the States of the Union,


expressed through the Senate. We have no longer two Chambers,
each commissioned to voice the assent of the same master (with
a rule providing for finality between them), but two Chambers,
-each commissioned to voice the assent of a different master—the
Senate that of the States, the House that of the Nation.
It it is upon this rock that Responsible Government would
split, and it was this rock that the framers of the Canadian
Federation saw and avoided. By creating a Nominee Senate, by
avowing in their preamble that the British Constitution was their
model, and by taking power, though not extensive power, to add
to the Senate if necessary, they obtained a Senate which was
■designed to represent and has represented the general interest of
the country, which was designed to prove and has proved duly
amenable to the chosen policy of the nation. And they assured
a free career for Responsible Government.
The path of failure was not in their case avoided by a
fortunate hazard or by the calculations of a high sagacity. They
had seen it clearly, and seen a great nation stagger along it in a
Civil War of a magnitude yet unequalled in the world’s history,
and they profited by the experience which their neighbours had
bought so dear.
“ Everybody knows,” says Bryce 1 “ that it was the Federal system
[meaning, of coarse, the American type] and the doctrine of State
sovereignty grounded thereon, and not expressly excluded, though
certainly not recognised, by the Constitution, which led to the
secession of 1861-2.
To this it may be added that it was the Senate in particular
which was, before the War, at once the asylum, the pulpit and
Hie fortress of the doctrine of State Right. A passage of
Bryce 2 bearing upon this question has been the subject of some
misunderstanding.
“ Questions relating to States’ rights,” says he, “ and the greater
or less extension of the powers of the national government have
played a leading part in the history of the Union. But although
small States might be supposed to be specially zealous for States’
rights, the tendency to uphold them has been no stronger in the
Senate than in the House. In one phase of the slavery struggle
the Senate happened to be under the control of the slaveholders
while the House was not; and then, of course, the Senate
championed the sovereignty of the States. But this attitude was
purely accidental, and disappeared with its transitory cause.”
It is of course true that the tendency to uphold States
Rights was as strong in the House as in the Senate. But the
capacity to uphold them was vastly different. In the House
■each State exercised the normal influence of its population upon
legislation; in the Senate each State, populous or the reverse,
had for a badge and attribute, as well as a weapon, of State
sovereignty, an equal voice. It is thus that the apologists of
American Commonwealth 1., 336 2 lbid 1., 182.


Secession, e.g., Jefferson Davis 1 and Spence 2 allude to the equal
suffrage of Stales. Again, the “phase of the slavery struggle,”"
of which Bryce speaks, lasted from 1820, when first Secession
on behalf of slavery reared its head, till 1860, when it
flung itself, heated and tierce from its forty years’ secretion
of venom, full at the throat of the nation. It is known,
of course, in a general way, that the Senate before the War
was a great stronghold of slavery; it would surprise some to
find with what uniformity of occurrence that disproportionate
influence upon the counsels of the nation, which their equal
standing in the Senate gave to the slave-holding States, was em
ployed against the will of the nation, voiced by the House of
Representatives, so as to further the growth of slavery. It was
the Senate, wringing its triumphs in every instance from an
opposing House, which procured the extension of slavery to
Missouri, Texas, New Mexico, and Utah, and in part to Kansas
and Nebraska. By doing so they not only broadened the breed-
ing ground of slavery, but they kept up a preponderance, and a
prospect of preponderance, of pro-slavery votes in the citadel of
State Right—their own Chamber. So successfully did they utilize
their advantages that by 1860 they had indoctrinated not only
the South, but a great body of moderate men 8 and even some-
extremists 4 in the North, with their tenet of Secession. What
was more important still was that they had provided Secession
with an enormous war-resource of £500,000,000 worth of 5
human property and all the vast territory over which the wrong
and agony of four millions of enslaved men and women were distri-
buted. Without these substantial auguries of success, Secession
would have been a mere legal dogma, or at most a useful theoretical
menace with which to extort concessions from the more pacific
men of the national party.
The Canadians lived too near all this to mistake its warning,
and they carefully avoided the mistake of giving their solar
system two suns.
“ A certa'n prejudice ” (says Mr. Garran (! ) “ against American
institutions—and especially against ‘State Rights,’ which had re-
cently been discredited by the civil war—tended to prevent a
close imitation of the American Constitution.”
1 Rise and Fall of the Confederate Government I, 144. 2 The Ameri-
can Union (published duriig the war), p. 228. 3 e.g., the chief
general of the Union, Winfield S(ott, thought that the North
ought to say to the Southern States, “Wayward Sisters, go in
peace.” 4 e.g. Horace Greeley. 5 The estimate of Spence,.
uhi supra 144. eThe Coming Commonwealth, 82.


The Canadian Senate, accordingly, has no commission to
represent the Provinces, nor does it possess an insuperable veto.
“ There ought to be,” says Bagehot, 1 “in every Constitution an
available authority somewhere. The sovereign power must be
- come-at-able .” The Canadians lodged it where the English have
lodged it, in the House of Commons.
But experience is too often what Coleridge called it, a
lantern hung in the stern of the ship, casting its light only on
the waters that have been left behind, and our Convention Bill
reproduces what the Canadians discarded—the American Senate.
A reliance on ante-bellum eulogies of the general beauty of the
American Constitution—an particular on Mr. Justice Story’s elo
quent panegyric written 27 years before the War—and upon post-
bellum praises obviously intended for the Federal system at large,
not the Senate in particular, has induced many to forget the
bitter disillusionments of America before the War, and her four
years’ disruption from 1861 to 1865. They have accordingly
left it to “ rest upon the knees of the gods ” whether Australia
shall ever go through a like period over some controversy which
may now (as secession did at the formation of the American Union)
lie in embryo within the womb of time —its very possibility
unsuspected.
A war involving the loss of a million men and costing the
North ;£2,000,000,000, exclusive of property destroyed, 2 was a
terrible price to pay fora workable government. But the Americans
paid for it, and they have got it. Partly through the hopeless
debility of the House, but still more because the War has cured
the provincial tendencies of the Senate—at least for the present
—deadlocks seldom arise, and when they do the Senate usually
prevails. 3 There can be no doubt, also, that modern observers
such as Bryce, 4 and Maine, 5 and Gladstone, 6 have truly stated
the result of the Civil War when they tell us that it has en-
gendered a national feeling which has borne down the sentiment
of State Right and prostrated the doctrine of Secession. Any
resuscitation of these is almost impossible. It is, however, a
fact that in the panic of the last Presidential election, when the
sparsely-peopled and comparatively poor trans-Mississipi States
put the fear of a social revolution into the hearts of the populous
and wealthy States of the East, the possibility was mooted that
the latter might yet have to stand alone. No prospect seems at
present more remote, but should it draw nearer—and no country
is so ripe for a culbute generate as America—the constitution of
1 übi supra, 98. 2 The Estimate of Professor Shaler, of Harvard.
United States of America, 11., 24. 8 Bryce, 1., 183. 4 ibid
passim. 5 Popular Government, 197. 6 übi supra, 226


the Senate still affords the old suggestions of State Sovereignty
to the East, and to the West the old premiums of abnormal
influence to discontented minorities ; and that body could again
become the natural fortress of intending rebels against national
action.
In the XXVth Chapter of his work on the “American
Commonwealth,” Bryce relates fully the reasons why its founders
made no attempt to engraft the Cabinet system upon the Constitu-
tion, but he has elsewhere, given in advance an opinion as to
what would happen from an attempted admixture of the two.
“Such a system” [i.e., of equal and co-ordinate Houses]
“ could hardly work, and therefore could not last, if the Execu-
tive were the creature of either or of both,” The question, how-
ever, still remains open what the effect will be of attempting (by
prescribing that Ministers must be members of the Legislature)
to secure an Executive responsible to one House in a Legislature
of co-ordinate Houses. No investigation of this question would
be of any value which left out of sight the invisible elements of
political strength, such as the usages of the people, the prestige
of particular Chambers, the attraction of high place and wide
opportunity to able and ambitious men, the moulding force of
ability and ambition upon the apparently rigid forms of a con-
stitution. There can be no doubt that at the outset of the
Commonwealth Act the mere force habit would evoke the
practice of an Executive responsible to the representative House
alone. But it must be remembered that the Senate of Australia
would be one of the most powerful Second Chambers in the
world, being even more dignified than its American model,
because chosen by the direct election of colonies as wholes. A
seat in such a body would never be obtained by any man unless
he possessed great faculty, if only the “ faculty of getting him-
self elected,” as Carlyle says. He must reach his place either by
high ability or wide repute, or else by the support of some
powerful organization.
“ A very large constituency,” says Bagehot, 2 “in quiet times is
the necessary, almost the legitimate, subject of electioneering
management : a man cannot know that he does not throw his
vote away except he votes as part of some great organisation ; and
if he votes as a part, he abdicates his electoral function in favour
of the managers of that association.”
But, however he secured election, the Senator of
Australia would be a man wearing the star and garter of a vast
constituency whenever he rose to speak; and how would such a
magnifico compare, in his own esteem or that of his province or
of the nation or of the outside world, with the inferior creatuie
who is returned to Parliament by a fraction of his own electorate
the whole colony 1 Add to chis the longer duration of his office


(six years instead of three), the glamour of his quasi-ambas-
sadorial function, and the greater manageability for business or
debate of a small chamber, and, whatever the strictness with
which equal powers are assigned to the two Houses by statute, the
Senate mustbecomethe more powerful engine of legislation. Can it
be supposed that such a body, comprising the strongest and most
ambitious politicians of the continent, and animated by an esprit
de corps of unusual intensity, would be content to be ignored for
long in the formation and control of the Cabinet? Every victory
over the Lower House in matters of legislation (and such
victories, as in America, would be neither rare nor insignificant)
would increase the Senate’s prestige and make its share in the
Executive Government a matter of course for two motives :—to
admit capable men to their natural rank, and to facilitate the
passage of legislation.
It is by just such processes as these that the Executive has
gradually become responsible to the House of Commons. Every
victory over the Crown in matters of administration, as o.g. r
Peel’s victory on the Bedchamber Question or over the Lords in
matters of legislation, as e.g., Grey’s crowning victory 2 in the
Reform Act, is regarded by constitutional writers as one of the
steps which has led to the growth of the Cabinet system, because
it has gained for the Commons that predominance which alone
makes Responsible Government possible. The Australian Senate
could prevent such a predominance from ever arising. Possessing
the power to permanently veto any measure—“ The Senate,” says
Bryce 3 of the American prototype, “would reject twenty House
Bills as readily as one”—it can paralyse the legislative efforts of the
Lower House. Possessing the living powerof rejecting and altering
Money Bills, it can paralyse the administrative arrangements of
the House. Even without putting forth its final resource and
refusing supplies it could, by thwarting Government measures,
wreck any M inistry. and do this with complete indifference to the
public opinion of the nation, because it is not answerable to the
nation but to individual provinces. The consequences may be
divined from the words of Sir S. Griffith 4 ;
The extent to which the Senate’s power of veto will be used for
the purpose of claiming a share in the choice of the Executive
Government will not depend upon the form in which they are
required to express their wishes, but upon the resoluteness with
which they are prepared to insist upon them. And this will
depend upon public opinion. _
In considering, however, the force of public opinion, the
mental focus has again to be adjusted to the new situation and
we shall then see not one agglomerate ‘ public opinion ’ but
several individual ‘ public opinions.’ We are accustomed to see
1 1 aswell-Langmead, English Constitutional History, 7U4-705.
2 Bagehot. 99 et seqq. 1., 183. 4 uhi sui/ra.
1., 183. 4 uhi supra.


Upper Houses bend to ‘ public opinion.’ But to a Senator
‘ public opinion ’ will mean, not, as it does to a Peer or a
Legislative Councillor, the opinion of the same public as that
which elects the representative House, but the opinion of the
public of his own particular province. The Senator from
Tasmania will inquire from the Launceston, not from the Perth
Examiner , what ‘ public opinion ’ means as far as his duty and
his interest are concerned. “I am a Georgian first and an
American afterwards,” said a member of the American Senate.
And if the Senate is made (as it is in the Convention Bill) liable
to dissolution, this provincial tendency will be intensified.
Whenever the interests of the nation chanced to conflict with
the interest of particular provinces, an election of Senators—
the very hottest moment of the controversy —would only serve to
weed out in those provinces the very Senators who had put the
national interest or wish above that of their State. Unless,
indeed, we are to assume that the passage of the Commonwealth
Act will operate as a repeal of human nature and that the
provinces which now battle for equal representation in the Senate
will not use it if they get it. In framing an instrument of
government, however, the universal practice of statesmen is to
assume the permanency of men’s ordinary instincts, and it is a
strong instinct in the average man to use what power is given
him, and even to believe that is vindicating his man-
hood and discharging a constitutional trust by exerting
that power to its fullest extent. The valour and
pertinacity of the Southern States of America in a contest,
which to the best men amongst them, such as Lee and
Jackson, was fought on behalf of what they believed a constitu-
tional power, are an enduring illustration of this. It could not
then surprise us, if, upon provincial questions, each province should
elect to the House of Provincial Rights the champions of that
province’s interests. And we must expect, too, that when a
dissolution seemed likely, nearly every Senator would vote (not
like an American Senator whose tenure is fixed) with one eye on
his State and one on the nation—but with both eyes on his
province and his back turned to the nation.
The services, then, of a dissolution and of public opinion,
will utterly decay in the new order of things, and no longer be
available to incline the balance of power to the Lower House,
while the whole environment and character of the Senate will
incline that balance to that Chamber, so far as legislation is con-
cerned, and soon by consequence, to administration. For in modern
times the dictum of Montesquieu that the executive and legisla-
tive branches of government must be kept distinct if liberty is to
be preserved, has fallen into complete disesteem. The two are now
felt to be almost as useful to one another as a man’s two arms,
and the peculiar efficiency of the system of Responsible Govern-


merit is partly due to. the fact that under it a Minister has not
only complete control of the executive forces of government, but
the best conceivable opportunity of procuring new legislation in
his department whenever that is essential for its effective
administration. And is it likely, or even possible, that a synod of
provincial deities, such as the proposed Senate, would obey for
very long the “ self-denying ordinance ” (observed, no doubt, at
the outset of the government) which would exclude them from
the most important office, in peace or war, and the most attractive
-(because the most suitable) to men of parts and energy, which
the country has to offer—viz , the post of Cabinet Minister ?
Many, if not most of them, would have worn the cordon bleu of
a place in provincial ministries ; they would expect to fasten beside
it the cordon rouge of the Australian Cabinet. Quick in resource,
and trained in Parliamentary manoeuvre, they would soon find
that the power of their House over legislation and administration
was equal to the enterprise of supplanting an obnoxious (and
possibly inferior) man taken from the Lower House, by one of
their own number and choice. And if, as is probable, the
Senate became practically the dominant house, it would acquire
first virtual and then actual ascendancy over the Executive
Government. It would do so for the same reason as the House
of Commons has done so, by virtue of exercising the highest
degree of attracting force. The Executive Government would
thus become, by what the very origin of Responsible Government
shows to be a process of nature, the executive satellite of that
legislative planet, which, being the weightier, exercises the
greater measure of the force of political gravitation. Of the
two chambers of the Convention Bill the Senate seems the more
likely to prove the masterful planet. The process which we here
foresee depends, of course, upon the assumption that the nation
will sit idly by, and not notice or not regard what is done. But
the decay of popular control of the government might, possibly,
after infinite tumult, be arrested by a compromise in the nature
of the Swiss executive \ or possibly, too, the violent disputes
likely to occur in such a scheme of things, might end in the
people, to use a phrase of Heine’s, “ hewing down their own
fabric in order to get fresh air again.”
I have said nothing of the so-called solvent for deadlocks in
the Bill—the provision, viz., that in a certain contingency, three-
fifths of a joint sitting of the two Houses should suffice to pass
a, measure. It is admittedly tentative, and does not affect the
relative status of the Houses, because the representatives of a
majority of millions in Hew South Wales and Victoria over
1,200,000 in the other four colonies could still be defeated by the
representatives of the minority. Some other device is therefore
necessary to save Responsible Government (in the familiar sense
of the term) by countervailing the balance of power conferred


upon the Senate in the Convention Bill, and making the National
House, i.e., the nation, the supreme authority in those affairs, the
very reason for assigning which to the Federal Parliament, is
that they are national. The knowledge that the Constitution
contained such a resource would prevent the need for its frequent
employment from arising. “ Its existence was as useful as its
energy,” said Bagehot of the dernier ressort of the English
system —swamping the Peers—and its promised application in
the case of the Reform Bill. A referendum of the voters of the
nation upon a measure in obstinate dispute would appear a sensible
way of ensuring both the national supremacy and also some finality
to political controversy. The obvious objection to the suggested
‘ dual referendum *— i.e., concurring majorities of the States and
of the nation at a general poll on the measure is that
it merely shifts the conflict from the halls of the Legislature to
the polling-booths, with no promise of finality. Two parties are
not likely to settle their differences by a contract under seal when
they have refused to do so by a simple agreement in writing. If
the National Referendum presents difficulties and is incongruous
with other parts of the Parliamentary system, and if the total
result appear but a cumbrous apparatus where simpler mechanism
would have effected the same purpose, it should be remembered
that a mechanical solution is only suggested as a corrective for
the unworkable parts of the machinery already created by the
Convention Bill. No bi-cameral system of Representative Go-
vernment can be expected which will be logical, but at least the
crowning unwisdom can be avoided of leaving final authority
undefined, with the serious consequence that the Executive
Government is practically offered as a prize to be wrestled for
between two bodies of equal statutory powers, trusting to some
difference in the imponderable elements of constitutional strength
to effect a decision upon no wiser principle than
“ the good old rule,
****** simple plan,
That they should take who have the power,
And they should keep who can. ’ 1
Our existing Constitutions proceed upon a different rule—a
rule involving the most profound element of morality, viz., re-
sponsibility. As the Executive is responsible to the representa-
tive House, so that House is in turn responsible to the nation,
and thus the nation is ultimately responsible for every executive
and legislative act. It is only as the conventional mould into
which & at present the self-government of the people is poured
that Responsible Government is of any substantial importance
to them. If it seemed good to this or a succeeding generation to
1 A free-booter’s eulogy of the predatory habits of the animal kingdom..
—Wordsworth, “Rob Roy’s Grave.”


throw away that mould, and shape another, such, e.g., as an elected
Executive, to receive the same metal—the acts of the nation
there need be no loss. It is the metal, not the mould, that is of
value.
Left as it is, the Convention Bill promises to debase that
metal by a large alloy of oligarchy, for such has been the effect, as,
according to Maine, 1 it was the express design, of the resulted
amalgam of the American Constitution. And it must be borne
in mind that the great power of the nationally chosen President
in that country interfuses a vast element of national influence
into the government, which is completely without counterpart in
the Convention Bill. The Senate of that measure could hardly
have been constituted more conformably to purpose if the object
had been to create real oligarchy while keeping up the appearance
of popular government. By enacting a franchise of one man
one vote, then railing off the voters of the consummated nation
into their ante-union boundaries, and finally assigning to the
communities thus segregated equal voting power in the Senate,
irrespective of their present or future disparity in numbers, an
appearance of democracy is retained while in principle and in
fact that condition of things is revived, which has made the names
of Old Sarum and Gatton synonomous with the oligarchical system
of pre-Reform days.
It is said, however, that any alteration in the Bill which
would make the Senate subordinate to the House of Representa-
tives would not result in a legitimate or scientific federation, and
would even involve the Convention in the trespass of exceeding
its commission, which is, to draft a Federal Constitution —
though the American founders, by the way, travelled outside the
scope of their authority in far more than the alleged misinterpre-
tation of an adjective 2 . The product of this technical trans-
gression of theirs is held up as exhibiting the only true type of a
Federal legislature, to be accepted with almost implicit deference.
In particular, the creative wisdom has been admired, which having
to combine the desire for the bi-cameral system with the necessity
for compromising between the State Sovereignty and National
Sovereignty, gave each claimant a legislative chamber to itself.
To the mind of Euclid it would be the last step in a reductio
ad ahsurdum to say that the particular angulus terroe known
as Illinois is both equal to that known as Delaware ( i.e ., in its
representation in the Senate) and greater than it (i.e., in its
representation in the House) ; but such is the tendency to
adore a paradox which is at first hardly tolerated, that this “ first
1 Popular Government, 227—230. “ The constitutional composition of
the Senate is a negation of equality.” “It is a vulgar error that the
House of Representatives was somehow intended to be a more demo-
cratic assembly than our House of Commons” [i.e , of 1787.]
? Garran uhi supra, 58.


great compromise ” of the Union “extorted”—to apply the
words of J. Q. Adams—“ from the grinding necessity oi a
reluctant nation ” has been exalted into a pure and imperishable
principle of political science.
The truth is that neither America nor Switzerland, which
copied the United States scheme (though with important modifi-
cations) 12 years before its collapse in the Civil War, possesses
any monopoly in the distinguished adjective “Federal.” Canada
and Germany are both known to political science as Federations,
and in both of these countries provinces are represented with
due regard to their population and influence, and care is taken
that legislation and administration shall be in harmony with the
interests of the nation, and above all that the sovereign power
shall be ‘ come-at-able.’ So far indeed as theoretical science goes,
the history of modern federal unions illustrates the operation of
that law of ascent of species—as demonstrable in political, as it
is in natural, history—which tells us that every being which
elevates itself in the scale of creation, does so by casting off or
reducing to rudimentary size all useless appendages, while it
retains and developes every limb or organ which contributes to
its strength and symmetry, but, above all, to its existence. Thus
there are three distinct stages in the evolution of the Federal
type of government. In the earlier American Unions ( the Con-
tinental Congresses 1774 and 1775 and the Confederation of
1781) the central government operated bn the States, not upon in-
dividual citizens; equality of the States in the control of the
government being an accidental adjunct to what was rather a
loose Confederacy than a national government. This type, it
was soon seen, would never prove strong enough to maintain its
own existence, and in 1789 was evolved the present Constitution
of the United States. The intermediary action of the States to
obtain obedience from citizens to the National Government was
now abandoned, the government acting directly upon all indi-
viduals. The equality of all States in the control of affairs
(originally due to the impossibility of procuring statistics on
which to found proportional representation 1 ) was retained in a
Senate; and a House of Representatives was introduced which
was to have been a countervailing organ in the Legislature,
but has proved wholly inferior in skill and striking force. This
type maintained a turbulent existence till 1860, being reproduced
meanwhile in Switzerland in 1848. In 1860 the prototype under-
went a violent disruption. By a process comparable to that of
gemmation or segmentation in the earliest species of animal life,
the part of the Union—the Southern States—which was cut free
from the whole body reproduced the parent type in the Confeder-
ate Constitution. The process of conquest combined the severed
Foster uhi supra , 17»


parts anew in 1865. Since that date the American type of
Federation is practically extinct in its own country—the silent
growth of national spirit having obliterated the feeling of Stare
Ri"ht, so far as that term covers special State influence in
national affairs. Nor has it appeared anywhere else. The
Canadian and German Federations threw off both co-ordinate
Chambers (for in Canada the first, in Germany the second branch
of the legislature has the preponderance assigned to it) and also
equal representation of the States, while retaining the direct
action of the government upon the individual.
Apart, however, from evolution, the method of induction
applied to the four recognised existing federations would show
what is the essence and what the accident of a Federal system.
All of them exhibit the direct operation of tjie central Govern-
ment upon the citizen, and a delimitation of two spheres of inde-
pendent authority, in one of which a National organ controls
subjects defined as National, while in the other various Provin-
cial organs control subjects defined as Provincial. To extend
this line of division into the structure of the National organ by
having a Chamber for Provincial control as well as a Chamber
for National control is, by the verdict of the world, an accident,
not an essential, of Federation. At least the four nations who
are impanelled as a jury are divided two against two, dnd the
burden of proof lying always upon those who plead custom
against reason, the proponents of the American type are nonsuit.
Securus judicat orbis terrarum. In Dicey’s words, “it is the
division of powers which forms the essential distinction between
a Federal system, such as that of America and Switzerland, and
a Unitarian system such as that which exists in Russia or Eng-
land.” 1
It would certainly seem absurd to describe as a unification a
Constitution which, in a country like Australia, leaves to inde-
pendent Provincial Parliaments (whose structure and powers are
inaccessible to National interference) the control of those great
departments of Government—Lands, Mines, Justice (including
Criminal Law), Education, and the Public liVbrks ancillary to
these, as well as Liquor Laws and every other subject (including
Municipalities and Local Government and, apparently, a great part
of Company Law) which is not set out expressly in Clauses 52
and 53 of the Convention Bill. With the spheres of authority
thus strictly mapped out, there could be no merger of provincial
individuality ; and such a scheme of Government —however the
National organ were constituted —would be a Federation accord-
ing to the meaning attached to that term by such writers as
Dicey, Maine, Bryce, Bagehot, and Freeman. The latter writer
has indeed let fall one or two expressions which have been
1 Law of the Constitution, 145


construed to justify the assertions that to all legislation in a true
Federation the assent of the States as well as that of the Nation
is needed, and that, accordingly, a Senate of the American pattern
is essential. Thus, for example, at p. 213 of his “ History of
Federal Government in Greece and Italy,” we read
“ The principle of equality of votes for every State, great and small,
has always been adhered to in one branch of the Federal Legisla-
ture, and it has always been rightly defended as a necessary check
on the supremacy of mere numbers.”
Yet this very passage is filled with argument to apologise for
the omission in the Achaean League of proportional representation,
which is hailed as a valuable political discovery to the credit of the
Lycian League, the latter being elsewhere 1 described as “probably
the best constructed Federal Government that the ancient world
beheld,” and (in the next sentence to that quoted) as
attaining, in virtue of proportional representation, to “ full theo-
retical perfection.” The explanation is, probably, that Freeman
was thinking of a “ branch of the Federal Legislature ” which
should act “as a necessary check on the supremacy of mere
numbers ” in the manner and to the extent in which the Second
Chamber acts in Freeman’s country, i.e., as a delaying and revising,
but not permanently destroying Chamber. To suppose anything
else is to bring this distinguished writer within the range of
Bagehot’s condemnation, when he writes 2
“In both these Constitutions [the American and the Swiss], this
dangerous division is defended by a peculiar doctrine with which I
have nothing to do now’. It is said that there must be in a Federal
Government some institution, some authority, some body possess-
ing a veto in which the separate States composing the Confedera-
tion are all equal. I confess this doctrine has to me no self-evidence,
and it is assumed, but not proved.
The “peculiar doctrine” of which Bagehot speaks, is supposed
to derive great support from the fact that the Southern States
reproduced this cardinal feature of the American Union. It
seems to have been forgotten that the seceding States left the
Union because they carried the doctrine of State Rights to its
extreme, and believed that the Constitution justified Secession.
A vast volume of learned authority was on their side in England
as well as in the Southern Confederacy. They had no quarrel with
the Constitution of the Union ; it was their watchword, always on
their lips before the War, and always in the hearts of their best and
bravest men, such as Lee, Stonewall Jackson, Longstreet, and J.
E. Johnston ; to have discarded it would have been to belie their
own professions. Is it then so brave a compliment to a written
i lb d, 163.
2 uhi supra, 98.


Constitution, that it should leave its master-right, the right to
maintain its own existence, open to such ambiguity that to quote
the words of Foster 1 “ The dispute as to the construction of the
Constitution was too mighty to be decided in a court of justicel”
Or, from another point of view, is it valuable testimony to the
worth of the Senate, that the enemies of Union and of Freedom—
the Castor and Pollux of voyaging humanity—should have been
so satisfied with its previous operation as to embody it in
their new Constitution 1 Imitation is the sincerest form of
flattery; whether it is the truest form of compliment depends
somewhat upon the imitator.
Apart however from mere inference, the actual history of
the Southern Confederacy’s fortunes under the Confederate
Constitution affords the most damaging comment on the doctrine
of State Right. The Southern President, Jefferson Davis, found
himself embarrassed at every turn by the very State Right
theory, for which he had left the Union. His bulky history of
the “ Rise and Fall of the Confederate Government ” teems with
instances of this, and impartial testimony confirms his complaints 2 .
“ The doctrine of State Rights, says Foster 3 , “ was a formid-
able obstruction to the military operations [of the Confederacy.”]
And again 4 we find this doctrine prompting the seceding
States to negotiate for seceding from the Secession. “ The doc-
trine of State Rights further injured the Confederacy by
attempts of the State legislatures to institute separate nego-
tiations for peace and seccession from the Jonfederacy.”
But perhaps the worst instance arose in 1864, when sheer
military necessity forced the President, backed by the high
authority of Lee, and supported by the House of Representatives,
to propose the employment of negroes in the army 5 . Then
indeed did Jefferson Davis view his own feather on the fatal
dart. So obstructed was he by the Senate that at last, in
urging the project upon one of that body, he exclaimed, “If the
Confederacy falls there should be written on its tombstone 1 Died
of a theory.’ ” In the following year the war was at an end, and
the Confederacy had been killed, partly by a theory—that the
State Rights of the South were superior to the rights of the
citizens’ majority of the North ; partly of a fact—that the
citizens’ majority of the North had, after Sherman's “ four long
years of bloody war,” beaten down the State Rights of the South,
and in that great patriot’s phrase ‘regenerated the Government 6 .’
l uhi supra, 185. 2 Foster, 189, et seqq. a ubi supra, 201. 4 Ibid, 204
5 Rise and Fall I, 515 —519. 6 Sherman’s Proclamation after
Lee’s surrender at Appomatox. Battles and Leaders of the
Civil War IV., 755.


It would appear, then, that the example of the Southern
Confederacy is not a happy one for those who espouse the
American model of legislature incorporated in the Convention
Bill. It would appear further that according to the science of
Federalism, the revival of that model would be an instance of
degeneracy of species— i.e., of reversion to undeveloped type. The
Convention may be saidtohave adopted the modern scientific view
in that, by refusing to apply the system of equal representation
in the Senate to later acceding States, they have discarded it as
a principle, and that further, by their provisions with regard to
the financial powers of the Chamber, they believed—though
America’s experience disproves their belief—that they were dis-
carding the principle of fully co-ordinate Houses. There would
therefore be nothing inconsistent with their own proceedings, and
certainly nothing inconsistent with their federative commission,
if they were to insert in the Bill some provision which would
definitely place the preponderant share of legislative and
executive authority in that chamber which represents the nation
and which does under our existing system control, and should
under any system control, and control alone, the Administration
of every self-governing community in the Empire.


The Senate and the Civil War in
America.
“ la questions of power, then, let no more be heard of confi-
dence in man, but bind him down from mischief by the chains of
the Constitution.” The warning uttered in these words of
Thomas Jefferson indicates what should be the point of supreme
care in the framing of any Constitution.
Important, for instance, as is the question of financial
adjustment, still more important as is the distribution of the
subjects of legislation respectively entrusted to the Federal
Parliament and reserved to the State Legislatures, none of these
problems is comparable in dignity and consequence with the
question how that body shall be constituted which wields the
substantial power of the new nation.
In this respect the Federal Convention of 1897 has repro-
duced in substance the proposals of the Commonwealth Bill of
1891. As the Convention Bill now stands, the Federal Parlia-
ment is to consist of two Chambers, exercising co-ordinate
powers of legislation —first, a House of Representatives, elected
by the people of each State or Colony, in proportion to its
numbers: second, a Senate, elected by the people of each
Colony as one electorate, and consisting of six members from
each State. The bi-cameral arrangement here described is a
■copy from the Constitution of the United States adopted in
1789, and it is the writer’s purpose to trace, by a narrative of
votes and proceedings, the actual working of the American pro-
totype in a conspicuous instance, and in this way to exhibit the
practical results of the attempt made by a great, a versatile, and
a patient nation, richly endowed with the genius of self-govern-
ment, to reconcile government by the people with government by
the political and geographical entities called States. The subject
from the history of which illustrations will be drawn is that
of human slavery—involving thus a controversy, not of mush-
room growth or transitory interest, but one which, beginning
almost with the birth of the Union in 1789, lasted till its
reconstruction, after the greatest of human wars, in 1865.
To determine how far the form of government existing in
America was a contributing cause of the delay and loss incurred
over the final settlement of the slavery question, it is only
necessary to scrutinise the conduct respectively of the two
branches of Congress —the House of Representatives and the
Senate. For as each of these bodies has co-ordinate powers, it
was within the compass of either to adopt or reject, for its part,
such legislation as would bring a happy issue out of the conflict


of interests and opinions involved. One such issue was certainly
that forecast by Lincoln shortly before his election as President; —
“ I say, then, there is no way of putting an end to the slavery
agitation amongst us, but to put it back upon the basis where our
fathers placed it, no way but to keep it out of our new territories
—to ’-estrict •it for ever to the old States where it now exists.
Then the public mind will rest in the belief that it is in the course
of ultimate extinction.” (Nicolay and Hay’s Lincoln, 11., 152.)
We shall see soon that this settlement was in effect offered
time after time in the Legislature, and we shall see, too, upon
which branch of that Legislature the guilt of rejecting the
profferred settlement must lie. The facts are as follows ;
The admission of Missouri.—ln 1819 the people of Missouri
applied for admission to the Union, and a bill to admit the new
State passed in the House of Representatives by 98 yeas to 56-
nays. The measure so passed contained a clause prohibiting the
extension of slavery to Missouri, but the restriction the Senate
struck out by a vote of 22 to 16. Next year the House again
sought to have Missouri admitted as a free State, and the Senate
again refused. Finally, in 1821, the Missouri Compromise was
adopted. The Senate succeeded in engrafting slavery upon the
new State, but consented to its exclusion from certain adjoining
regions north of Missouri’s southern boundary. By this arrange-
ment the pro-slavery party in the Senate got the “ bird in the
hand ” —a re-inforcement of Senators from a fresh slave State—
and in treating later of Kansas and Nebraska, we shall see what
the “ two in the bush ” —the promised exclusion—were worth.
New Mexico. —The Missouri struggle had threatened the
grim fate of disruption to the Union, but it “passed like the
other waves under the ship,” to quote from John Adams’ letter to
Jefferson at the time. It proved but the type of a series. In the
year 1846 the war with Mexico, arising out of the annexa-
tion of Texas—itself the fruit of an intrigue to keep up pro-
slavery preponderance in the Senate, for Texas was already
slaveholding—had reached the stage of negotiations for peace.
The Government desired to procure some territory from Mexico,,
and as slavery had in that country been abolished for the past 20
years, it was proposed in the k House of Representatives that the
exclusion of slavery should be a condition precedent to the acqui-
sition of any Mexican territory. This was the famous Wilmot
Proviso, and prevailed in the House by 80 votes to 64. In the
Senate, however, it was talked out, and never became law. In
the following Congress a fresh House again voted by 108 to 80,
to exclude slavery from New Mexico, and also from California,
the people of which were now asking for admission without slavery y
but the Senate again stood in the way. It attempted to “ tack ”
to the Appropriation Bill a measure of its own, admitting the
new territories, and silent as to slavery, and failing to coerce the
House in that manner, ended the session with the two aspirant
territories again left outside the Union.


Oregon.—ln 1846, too, a bill to admit Oregon, then recently
acquired from Great Britain, and therefore not possessing any
slaves, was carried in the House, with a prohibition of slavery,
by the great majority of 134 yeas to 35 nays ; but the champions
of slavery, thus “ snowed under,” to use an American phrase, in
the Council of the nation had still their darling and sure refuge
in the Council of the States—the Senate. By that body the bill
was “ laid on the table ” ( i.e ., indefinitely postponed) by 26 yeas
to 18 nays. In the next Congress, however, the Senate, for the
first and only time in this long record, did, after a hard fight,
give way—their concession costing slavery some coveted influence
in the Senate, but nothing more, as for climatic reasons slavery
could never take firm root in Oregon.
New Mexico, California, Utah.—ln 1850, after an intense
struggle between House and Senate, with free and ominous
threats of secession, the long-delayed admission of California and
New Mexico took place, Utah also coming into the Union at the
same time. The terms were :—California to be admitted as a
full State, practically, though not by express law, for the time
free ; New Mexico and Utah as territories (i.e.. nascent States),,
without power to interfere with slavery. The House voted time
after time to apply the Wilmot proviso; the Senate as steadily
rejected it, and in the end triumphed. For the “ concession ”of
admitting California as she desired, the Senate got a more effec-
tive Fugitive Slave Law, compelling Federal officers to assist
slave-catching, even in free States. The Senate also defeated the
attempts of the House to abolish slavery, with full compensation,
in the district of Columbia. The operative measures all emanated
from the Senate, and in the House, though at first rejected, were
at last reluctantly accepted. At the time of this crisis the free
States had a population of 13,300,000, while that of the slave
States (including 3,200,000 slaves) was but 9,600,000. Yet
under equal State representation, 13 millions of white men had
only 32 votes in the Senate, while less than half their number
had 30 votes.
Kansas and Nebraska.—ln 1852 the House passed, by 98
yeas to 43 nays, a bill admitting Nebraska to the Union. This
region lay within the limits of free soil, covered by the Missouri
compromise, and so would of necessity have become a free State.
The Senate rejected the bill. In the next Congress, however, a
leading Senator proposed to organise from the petitioning country
two new territories, Kansas and Nebraska, upon the principle of
“ popular sovereignty,” i.e., that the people of a territory might
as they chose vote slavery up, or vote it down. A bill with this
provision, and with an express repeal of the sacrosanct Missouri
Compromise (by the slavery half of which the Senate had for
30 years been profiting), passed the Senate by handsome
majorities on every critical division, and by a series of neat


manoeuvres was in 1854 just engineered through the House on a
narrow majority.
As soon as it became law, the free States of the North and
the slave States of the South began pouring in immigrants with
a view to gaining a numerical ascendancy under “ popular
sovereignty.” A condition of civil war ensued, in which the
hero-fanatic John Brown (whose soul soon after was to “go
marching on ” in the war-song of tens of thousands of Union
soldiers) figures as an adroit and insatiable combatant. The
bordering State, Missouri, now bore the harsh fruits of slavery
in violent hordes of men, who, under the guidance of Senator
Atcheson, poured over the frontier to swamp the resident voters
at every election. In the end the slavery party in Kansas was
defeated, but upon the House passing a bill to admit Kansas as
a full State with a free Constitution—that being the choice of
her citizens—the Senate promptly rejected the bill.
In 1856 President Buchanan urged Congress to pass for
Kansas a Constitution permissive of slavery, and obtained in
Kansas itself by gross frauds. The Senate passed the measure
recommended, but the House refused concurrence, requiring that
the Constitution be re-submitted to the people of Kansas, now
known to be thoroughly “free soil.” The Senate refused to
agree to this suggestion, but eventually there was an indirect
reference of the question, and Kansas clearly voted slavery down.
Yet, even now, when the House would "have admitted Kansas as
a free State, the Senate, obstinate to the last, refused its con-
currence. It was not till January, 1861—and on the very day
that Jefferson Davis and other leading Senators, having thrown
up their allegiance to the Union, hied to the South to inaugurate
civil war—that the Senate consented to admit Kansas as a free
State.
The Senate Resolutions of 1859.—We are now nearing the
election of Lincoln, the secession of the disaffected States, and
the outbreak of the rebellion; and let those who rely on “ the
spirit of compromise ” and “ reasonable give and take ” to correct
gross anomalies in the adjustment of political force, observe how
at this delicate juncture, when feeling was running dangerously
high, the possessors of the State power bore themselves. The
Senate, under the guidance of Jefferson Davis, passed in 1859 a
series of pro-slavery resolutions, extreme in type, one of which,
by denying either to Congress or to a territorial legislature the
right of excluding slavery from territories of the United States,
carried the doctrine of property in human beings to the highest
pitch it ever reached, of precise and arrogant avowal. This ex-
travagance alienated many previous adherents of the slave
power in the North, and went far to effect the election of
President Lincoln in 1860. Yet, though the great Liberator now
proposed only to confine slavery within its existing limits, the


popular endorsement of that proposal was reason enough for the
South to announce that the Union was dissolved. A few months
later the Union flag at Fort Sumter was fired on, and the Civil
War began.
Upon a review of these episodes, in number so many and in
type so uniform, it seems a just inference that the disproportion-
ate representation in the Senate of the smaller States of the
Union did from 1820 onwards contribute largely not only to the
growth of a vicious system, with its resultant bad government,
but also to the momentous catastrophe of 1861. Had the
American Constitution either been based upon the representation
of citizens, or else provided any machinery whereby, even if tardiiy,
the veto of the House of the States might be over ridden by the
House of the people, as that of the President may be over-ridden
by both Houses, the Civil War might never have been fought, and
slavery might have been extinguished in America with little
more violence than was employed to repeal the Corn Laws in
England, or put a stop to convict transportation in Australia.
But the written American Constitution, like that of the Common-
wealth Bill, and unlike the unwritten British Constitution, con-
tained no resource whereby the will of the people at large could
be made to prevail; and with a written Constitution, every
component of it is apt, like Shylock, to “ stand upon the bond.”
A Senate installed by a solemn writing in an unqualified inde-
pendence is little likely to waive its documentary right and bend
to the popular resolve. Had the American Senate done this,
had Missouri been admitted free, or New Mexico, or Utah, or
the twin territories of Kansas and Nebraska, had the Fugitive
Slave Law never lent the aegis of Federal authority to a domestic
institution peculiar to the Southern States, had slavery been at
least banished from Columbia and the capital of a nation which
detested it, we can hardly conceive how the Slave Power in
America could ever have grown into that colossal strength and
saianic audacity which emboldened it to rend the Union, and
set up a rebel Confederacy. But a vicious principle in the body
politic, like a germ of disease, is sure to propagate itself, till by
some forcible interruption it is either killed or kills its host. The
principle of equal State representation, growing by wdiat it fed
on, induced the Senate to force slavery upon new States, that
these in due course might bring fresh allies to the original
principle itself. And by a further multiplication of the parent
mischief, the visible advantages to sectional interests, and the
constant spectacle of the artificial strength thus conferred upon
individual States as States, built up in those that were normally
weak, the delusive sentiment of their paramount importance as
isolated entities—“ sovereign States,” as they loved to call them
selves. Thus, with almost every Southerner, since he could
redress in the cotmcil of the States his disparity in the council of


the nation, allegiance to his State came to appear a higher duty
than allegiance to the nation ; and the sophists who held the
South to its terrible task of rebellion were easily able with one
breath to assert that slavery “is become the chief stone of the
corner ” of the rebel Government—the actual words of its Vice-
President—and with the next to pursuade their followers that
they were fighting not for slavery, but against coercion of
“ States.”
The writer yields to no one in admiration of the great souls
who gave to America her Constitution. He concedes, too, a
certain fanciful beauty in the arrangement which makes citizens
equal in the House, States equal in the Senate, House and Senate
equal in framing laws ; but he submits that the history of the
American Union did not end, but began, with the Constitution
of 1789, and that in that history many a dark and bloody page is
■due to the attempt, then first made and never since in every
feature copied, to set up a house which, though divided against
itself, should yet stand.
POSTSCRIPT.
When this subject was discussed in the Convention, it was
denied that equal State Suffrage in the Senate was responsible
for the Civil War on two grounds ; first, .because in that case, the
victorious Northern Army in 1865, having the Constitution at
its feet, would have abolished so mischievous a feature in it; and
second, because in that case, the seceding States would never have
copied equal State Suffrage for their Senate in 1861. Both these
contentions do but set up hypothesis against history. The facts
of the career of the Union from 1820 to 1860, and of the
Senate’s influence upon that career, are matters not of argument
but of record ; of what value, then, is it, to insist that those
facts could not have been what they were, because in that case a
certain occurrence in 1861 or another in 1865 would have been
different 1 The events of history are not bound to be consistent.
In this case, however, they are consistent. As to the South
adopting that fatal blemish of the American Constitution and of
the Convention Bill which seeks to make One Man One Vote
work harmoniously with One State One Vote, 1 it has already
been shown that this was only to be expected ; their whole pro-
ceeding was to exalt the latter principle over the former. The
1 If the former principle is right, those States which have more men ought
to have more votes in any legislative chamber ; the latter is therefore
the explicit and unalterable rejection of the former. It is not
denied that the two phrases have a similar sound. So too has “ One
Estate, One Vote ” —a principle with which One Man One W>te is still
warring in Victoria. The latter is an assertion of equality, “ the
constitutional composition of the Senate,” says Sir H. Maine “is
the negation of equality.”


other hypothesis—that of the Northern Army amending the
Constitution vi et armis depends in part upon misstatement,
in part upon concealment, of material facts, for any appearance
of reason it may have, I have shown elsewhere 1 that the
Northern Army never had the Constitution, but only the
■Southern subjects of the Constitution, at its feet; it was always
the servant, never once the master, of the Constitution and its
Chief Magistrate. Again, the North itself consisted of smaller
and larger States, its army being drawn from all; and where would
have been the cohesion of that army if the smaller States of the
North had been threatened with a military subversion of their
existing and constitutional measure of national influence 1 Had all
the Southern States been small, and all the Northern large, the
latter might perhaps have mended the Constitution while they
had their fighting tools in hand; as it was, would Napoleon
himself have run the risk of such a mutiny as must have followed
the attempt?
This instance may indeed warn us how irrevocable equal
State representation is when once it is established. It cannot be
abolished by peaceful methods because the consent of each State
is necessary to such an amendment 2 ; and the American example
shows what difficulties surround any attempt at armed alteration.
To adopt equal State Suffrage means therefore to do what we
have been recently warned against doing by the Spectator—the
Dr. Sobersides of English journalism—and put our free young
limbs into a straight-jacket,
A final word to make clear the connection of things in
the origin of the Civil War, “Slavery caused it,” say historians
with a moral bent, such as Justin McCarthy and Horace
Greeley; “ State Right caused it,” say those with a constitutiona-
list bent such as Bryce and Ropes. Both are right. State
Right was the professed reason—the official casus belli, but the
desire to extend slavery was what prompted the active assertion of
the State Right of secession. And it was the colossal interest to
which slavery had grown which encouraged the belief that this
State Right might be successfully maintained. Now the Senate
stood in loco parentis to each cause, being the representative
Chamber and the instrument of State Right, the propagator
of slavery. Equal State Representation comes into the matter
(first) because it was bound up in every way with State Right,
(secondly) because through it alone were the slave-holding States
able so to dominate the Senate as to build up slavery to its
■eventual magnitude, “The old system of the Union,” said
Gladstone, after the War, 3 “always appeared to me to place the
whole power of the North at the command of the slave-holding
interests of the South.”
I S. M. Herald Sep. 13 and IS, 1»97. 2 Article V. of the Constitution
of the United States, Clause 121 of the Convention Bill.
3 Russell’s Gladstone, 155.


JAff
p (4-{S2-
/vj
BEATTY, RICHARDSON & CO.,
PRINTERS,
PALING’S BUILDINGS, SYDNEY.




