

PORT FAIRY
1810-1954




Foreword
This Souvenir is being issued by the Committee of the Port Fairy
Hospital as a means of raising funds for the building of a new Maternity
Wing.
The Port Fairy Community Hospital was established over 100
ears ago, and has an outstanding record of service to the community.
It now behoves the present Committee, with the full co-operation and
support of the community, to ensure that facilities at the Hospital are in
keeping with the demands of the rapidly developing district.
It is our intention to build the new Maternity Wing on the most
modern lines so as to ensure the best possible treatment and comfort.
As the aim of producing this Souvenir is to raise funds, it has in-
tentionally been produced in a very modest form, but we trust that you
will appreciate it in the knowledge that in buying it you are making a
valuable contribution to our funds.
Grateful acknowledgment is made to the Port Fairy branch of the
Country Women’s Association, to Miss M. Condon and to Hanley Bros,
for permission to use the informative article on Port Fairy’s History em-
bodied in this Souvenir.
Thanking you for your support.
E. JOHNSON,
President.


Port Fairy - A Land of Enchantment
On April 25, 1810, Captain James
Wishart, in his white-winged cutter,
“The Fairy,” sailed up the river
Moyne (Gnarn Kolak), where never
before had any craft save the bark
canoe of the aborigine been seen, and
so delighted was he with his new
found shelter spot—as many tempest-
tossed mariners have since been, even
to the present time —that he named
the place “Port Fairy,” and made it
a haven for many years afterwards
when oh seal-catching expeditions.
From that date, the history of
Port Fairy commenced for, until
that auspicious morning, this
part of Australia, on the far sou-
thern coast, 180 miles by rail
from the capital, Melbourne, had
been a terra incognita to the
white man.
Rumours and records are extreme-
ly vague and rare in matters of
history respecting the Port for many
years subsequent to its discovery.
EARLY WHALING.
In 1836. the Launceston “Examiner”
(/Tasmania) mentioned that “The bay
whaling at Port Fairy had commenc-
ed with every prospect of a success-
ful season ...” Ten years prior
to this, however, in 1826, Captain
John Mills had visited Port Fairy,
and Captain Campbell’s first voyage
from Tasmania was made in 1836,
when he resided here for six months
during the whaling season. Captain
Griffiths (whose name is borne by
the island at the mouth of the Moyne
river) preceded Campbell. He erect-
ed on the island a residence and “try
works” for the “rendering down” of
the shoals of whales which were then
captured here. The Griffithses —fa-
ther and son —and the Millses—John
and Charles —combined farming with
their whaling operations. These men,
with their families, established a
thriving settlement, several rude
dwellings being erected along the
bank of the Moyne. Supplies were
brought from Tasmania.
The “Sydney Griffiths,” 400 tons,
built by Griffiths in Tasmania, was
the first ship to sail direct with a
cargo of wool from Port Fairy to
London, In 1848, the last whale was
captured professionally in Port Fairy.
5120 ACRES AT £1 AN ACRE.
In 1835. Lieut. Surveyor Wedge vi-
sited Port Fairy in the interests of
the Government of New South Wales
which then, and until 1851, controlled
the whole of the territory now com-
prised in the boundaries of Victoria.
His report and private advices led
Mr James Atkinson, a Sydney solici-
tor. to cast his longings towards the
locality, and in 1839 he applied for
5,120 acres “in a parish unnamed, at
Port Fairy,” and so Port Fairy was
bodily handed over at £1 an acre—
an act which strangled the progress
of the place intended by nature to be
the “entrepot” for the whole com-
merce of the Western district of
Victoria. Despite this drawback,
population was attracted, and Messrs
Wm. Rutledge & Co., in 1839, estab-
lished a mercantile business. The
history of Port Fairy for the next 20
years was virtually created by this
firm who flourished throughout the
district. In 1844-6, farming families,
introduced by Atkinson, were in evid-
ence.
EARLY BUILDINGS.
In 1847, the Stag Hotel (now Sea-
combe House) was erected by Captain
Saunders. Somewhat earlier, the
“Old Merrijig,” a hotel on the comer
of Campbell and Gipps streets, was
built. Portion of this building is
still in use as a residential. In this
building, the first Belfast Road
Board held its meetings, and the
first police and other courts were also
conducted there, prior to the erection
of the present court house in 1858.
In 1847, the building now occupied by
Port Fairy Textiles was a business
premises, and later owned and occu-


When Port Fairy was a " Windmill Town”
This early photo, shows a scene at the corner of Sackville and Bank Streets, then known as “Wilson’s
Corner In those days Port Fairy was known as " The Windmill Town” and mills were a common sight.


pied by Mr J. B. Holden, founder of
the present auctioneering firm of
Messrs J. B. Holden & Co.
FIRST MUNICIPALITY.
“The District of Belfast” was the
first municipality established in the
Colony of Victoria, being proclaimed
in 1852, and comprised the present
Shires of Belfast, Dundas, Warrnanir
bool and Minhamite and Borough of
Koroit. In 1858, the recently arriv-
ed Governor of the Colony, Sir Henry
Barkley, visited the municipality and
was entertained at the newly erected
Star of the West hotel.
It was about this time that James
Atkinson granted lands for public
purposes—Town Hall, Mechanics’ In-
stitute. Oddfellows’ Hall—his sole
patrimony to the public in return for
the Special Survey advantages. The
present gardens area was secured
about this time, it having been used
to graze the police horses, which
numbered some 18 to 20 animals, for
there were at that time eight mount-
ed and six foot police stationed at
Port Fairy.
In September, 1863, the municipal-
ity was proclaimed the Borough of
Belfast, and in this year the Govern-
ment grants-in-aid were considerably
reduced, and the Council, fearful, ap-
parently, of the ability of the town
to support separate municipal gov-
ernments, proposed an amalgamation
with Belfast Road Board, but the pro-
posal was not persisted with.
The buillding of the Mechanics’ In-
stitute was commenced in 1864, and
the Council voted £25 to the fund.
In December, 1864, James Atkinson
died in Sydney, but because the Spe-
cial Survey was encumbered, Port
Fairy was destined to be under the
ban of absenteeism for another 20
years. Atkinson’s son, heir to the es-
tate, continued under the same con-
ditions up to the decimation of the
property in 1885.
TOWN’S LIGHTING.
About 1886, a start was made to-
wards illuminating the town, but it
was not until 1868 that the streets
were lighted with four kerosene
lamps.
With the coming into being of the
municipal gasworks, the town was
subsequently lighted by gas lamps,
until December 21, 1928, one of Port
Fairy’s "‘red letter” days, when the
State Electricity Commission’s light-
ing was switched on. To-day, not
only the town, but the whole of the
surrounding countryside is lighted
and powered by the State Electricity
Commission.
CHANGE TO BELFAST.
The boundaries of the Port Fairy
electoral district were altered in
1877, and Sir John O’Shanassy, who
was the elected representative, im-
mediately interested himself to have
the name of the harbour changed to
Belfast, which was done with the
consent of the Council. In 1878, our
present Post Office site was select-
ed and the foundation stone was
laid in May, 1880. The erection of
the Free Library-Lecture Hall was
also commenced in this year, the site
being secured from the Temperance
Society for a term of 99 years. The
enclosing of the central area of the
Botanic Gardens as a recrea-
tion reserve was carried out in 1881.
The present Borough Council office
premises were secured in this year,
and the weighbridge erected in front
of the premises at a cost of £206/4/.
The gasworks buildings were erect-
ed in 1884 at a cost of £3,500, and
the first fire lighted in March, 1885.
The Norfolk Island pines, still
gracing the south end of Sackville-
street, were presented and planted
by Thos. Hutton and Wm. Fowling,
the latter being the founder of the
legal practice now carried on by his
grandson in Port Fairy.
At the close of this year. Smith,
Whitley and Anderson purchased the
4,300 acres of the Belfast Special
Survey for £45,000, and anticipations
of an immediate return to prosperity
were created.


The Disastrous Flood of 1946
These pictures were taken during the floods of 1946
great damage was done to property and the wharves
and fishing fleet received a battering from flood waters.


A View of Port Fa[?] Over 60 Years Ago
This photograph was taken nearly 70 years ago and it should be noted that Port Fairy did not have the avenues of lovely Norfolk Island Pines
that now line its streets. These trees were planted over 50 years ago and are the admiration of visitors to the town. This picture was taken from
the “Old Mill” in Gipps street and the expansive view gives some idea of the prosperous and thriving town Port Fairy was even in those days


[?]ry Over Si Tsois Amo
that Port Fairy did not have the avenues of lovely Norfolk Island Pines
are the admiration of visitors to the town. This picture was taken from
of the prosperous and thriving town Port Fairy was even in those days


GREAT LAND SALE.
On March 31. 1885, the Great Land
Sale took place, and the great incubus
of absentee landlordism, which for
nearly half a century had overshad-
owed the community, was removed by
one wield of the auctioneer’s ham-
mer. The auction realised £90,000 —
that without the payment of a single
penny of cash by the purchasers be-
fore disposing of the whole estate.
In 1881* the Borough Council
decided, on petition from the
ratepayers, to change the name
of the town to its original desig-
nation of Port Fairy.
The export of potatoes in this year
from Port Fairy totalled £O,OOO tons.
RAILWAY.
On December 8. 1887, the ceremony
of turning the first sod of the railway
connecting the town with the metrop-
olis was performed, and on July 19,
1888, the first spike was driven in the
first sleeper laid on the railway line
to Koroit. The contractors commen-
ced the line at Port Fairy because of
the cheapness of landing at the
wharves on the Moyne river the nec-
essary material, and during this year
several vessels, heavily laden, reach-
ed the Port. On January 1, 1889,
the first journey was run on the new
railroad with a Sunday school picnic
to Maher’s HilL On November 12,
the first train through from Mel-
bourne arrived in Port Fairy, convey-
ing the Railway Commissioners and
a number of Departmental officials.
On February 24, a children’s demon-
stration marked the opening of the
railway to Port Fairy, and a huge
banquet was held on the 25th, in the
Lecture Hall.
The question of a water supply
for the town was discussed by
the Council, as was the same
matter many times afterwards,
but it was not until 1939 that a
supply was turned on in Port
Fairy,
In 1890. the purchase of the land
fronting Campbell street and the sea-
shore from the Syndicate was effect-
ed, the price paid being £ISOO for the
162 acres—a mere bagatelle for so
great a public patrimony. The land
was named Southcombe Park out of
compliment to the then Mayor.
The Governor, Lord Hopetoun, vis-
ited the town in 1894, the visit being
an occasion for much festivity. The
usual loyal address was presented and
a banquet held,
THE HARBOUR AND SHIPPING.
Port Fairy harbour has always been
a safe anchorage for vessels of small
capacity, and with dredgings of the
Moyne river undertaken by the old
Priestman dredge over the years, sev-
eral sizeable boats have navigated
the river. During the 1927 “Back-to-
Port Fairy” celebrations. H.M.A.S.
“Yarra” came up the river and berth-
ed at the fishermen’s wharf. Her crew
of several hundred men joined in
the town’s celebrations for a week
Wrecks were frequent, in the eany
days, mainly because of the ignorance
of the character of the anchorage of
the river.
The first steamer to enter Port
Fairy bay was the paddle steam ship
“Manchester,” of 200 tons, which ar-
rived in 1850 from Sydney. She re-
mained in the trade for about three
years, fares being £7 to Melbourne in
the cabin and £3/10/ for steerage
accommodation. The freight rate
Was £4 per ton. In 1854, the original
Western Steam Navigation Co. was
floated to trade between Melbourne
and Port Fairy and Warrnambool but
was wound up in 1856. In July, 1882,
the Belfast and Koroit Steam Navi-
gation Co, was floated, and the stea-
mer “Casino” arrived in Port Fairy
at a cost of £14,250, In 1895, the
Company bought out the interest of
Portland and Belfast Steam Naviga-
tion Co., which was in difficulties,
paying £4,000 for the s.s. “Dawn.”
The Belfast and Koroit Steam Nav-
igation Co. was the only steamship
Company existent in the Western
ports until June, 1939, when the Com-
pany went into voluntary liquidation.
The “Casino” faithfully served tRe
Company on the Melbourne-Port
Fairy-Portland run for about 53
years, until 1932, when she was
wrecked on one of her weekly trips


Holiday Makers on the Moyne
This is a picture of the Moyne on the occasion known as “Terang Day.” In years gone by, as many as six
special trains brought visitors from as far away as Terang to enjoy a day at Port Fairy’s famous beaches.


at Apollo Bay, with the loss of ten
of the crew of 18, This was a seri-
ous blow to the Company who, how-
ever, soon afterwards purchased the
s.s. “Coramba,” which continued in
the trade for only about 2 years
when it, too, came to grief off the
coast during rough seas, the whole
of the crew, including those who
had been saved from the steamer
“Casino” being lost. Another
ship was put on the run for a time,
but with the loss of two ships by
wreckage and the advent of competi-
tion from road transport, the Com-
pany was forced more or less into
liquidation.
The river Moyne is a safe anchor-
age for Port Fairy’s fishing fleet—
the largest in Victoria—and, period-
ically, the traditional and picturesque
ceremony of the “Blessing of the
Fleet” takes place.
iNSTITUTIONS AND
CHURCHES.
Interesting history which, of nec-
essity. must be only briefly referred
to here, attaches to Port Fairy’s old
established institutions.
The Mechanics’ Institute, first
termed “Lending Library,” was es-
tablished in 1856. The Port Fairy
Hospital and Benevolent Asylum, as
it was first termed, was founded in
1846, and cared for the ill and aged
for many decades. In 1865, the cen-
tral portion of the present hospital
was constructed, and about 1932, the
benevolent department of the Institu-
tion was closed and the hospital re-
modelled and termed the Port Fairy
Community Hospital. Since then,
many ambitious improvements have
been completed until, to-day, we
have a worthy institution, with ev-
ery modern appliance, caring for
public, intermediate and private
patients.
Christian worship was introduced
in 1848, when the Episcopalians com-
menced a wooden church on tne land
where St. John’s old schoolroom now
stands. In 1854, the land was sold,
and the St. John’s Church of Eng-
land, a handsome bluestone structure,
was commenced. The Catholic church
was first in William street, being the
stone portion of the present St. Pat-
rick’s school, until 1859, when the
present imposing bluestone edifice
was erected on the hill at the west-
ern entrance to the town. The con-
tractor for St. John’s in 1855 built
the Wesleyan Church, their first
church being a wooden building on
the same site. The Presbyterians
first held worship in a wooden build-
ing in James-street until their pre-
sent church was built, their minister
marrying the first couple in Port
Fairy in 1853. Many private and
denominational schools were conduct-
ed and in the latter part of the last
century the present St. Patrick’s and
the State schools were established.
The Agricultural and Pastoral
Association first functioned as a
joint Society with Warmambool, un-
der the title of the Villiers and Hey-
tesbury Agricultural Society, and the
first show was held at Port Fairy on
April 26, 1853. In 1862, each town
decided to run a “lone hand,” and
the Belfast A. & P. Society was
formed. Prior to acquiring the pre-
sent showgrounds, in 1886, shows
were held at Port Fairy East,
The Oddfellows established a
branch, Loyal Prince Albert Lodge,
with seven members, in 1848. In
1885, the Port Fairy District of the
Manchester Unity was created, this
being the second District formed In
the Colony. The Masonic Lodge was
found in 1871. and the A.N.A. in
1890. The Buffaloes held high festi-
val at the old Caledonian hotel for a
while. This Lodge was revived
about ten years ago and now has a
flourishing membership. The H.A.
C.B.S. was inaugurated about the
turn of the century and now has a
prosperous membership. The branch
of the Country Women’s Association
was formed in July, 1932, the first
hon. secretary being Mrs P. N. Jen-
kins. who now resides at South Yarra.
The branch celebrated its 21st birth-
day in 1953.
The Belfast “Gazette” was first
published on April 4, 1849, and as
the Port Fairy “Gazette,” with
which is incorporated several mush-
room publications, issued for varying


The Lighthouse at Port Fairy


periods through the years, celebra-
ted its centenary on April 4, 1949.
In 1853, the State Savings Bank
was established with 26 depositors,
having to their credit £1283/14/9.
GLAXO FACTORY.
In 1919, employment and popula-
tion were given a great impetus with
the erection of the Glaxo factory at
Port Fairy North, by Messrs Jos.
Nathan & Co., an English firm who,
for the following years, until the
second world war, manufactured
large quantities of cheese, butter and
Glaxo. About 1940, the manufacture
of cheese and butter were discontinu-
ed, and the Company concentrated on
the production of dried milk prod-
ucts for home and overseas con-
sumption.
Glaxo. Laboratores (Aust.) Pty., Ltd.
have embarked on an extensive en-
larging of their factory premises, at
a cost of many thousands of pounds,
and when this is completed several
additional products will be manufac-
tured,
AN OLD-WORLD CHARM
IN PORT FAIRY.
Picturesquely situated at the mouth
of the placid river Moyne, with
Boarding school bay on the South and
Port Fairy Bay to the East, Port
Fairy has an old-world charm.. As
one strolls through the well planned
town with its beautiful tree-lined
streets, one is struck by the number
of tiny stone cottages, nestling for
the most in old, tree-shaded, out-of-
the-way spots, which must be well
nigh 100 years old. Not to say that
there are not many modern homes,
for there are, the present expansion
in home building being most evident.
The latest adjuncts to our architec-
tural achievements are a palatal
picture and concert theatre, just
opened at a cost of £50,000, and an
Infant Welfare Centre-Rest Room,
at present in course of construction.
Nothing is more refreshing for the
physically or mentally weary than to
wander along either of the lovely
beaches of Which Port Fairy may
boast. The sight of a setting sun
on a Summer’s evening over the
South-Western sea, or a rising moon
beyond the rippling waters at the
East is something the beauty of
which my feeble pen is too weak to
portray^
Port Fairy holds a lure for its
native-born residents, many of
whom have never lived any
place else. Even those more
venturesome who, perhaps, wan-
dered in their youth, love to
return because they feel, as did
the song-writer, that—
“ ’Mid pleasures and palaces tho’
we may roam.
There is no place like Home, Sweet
Home.”
September, 1954.
At the recent C.W.A. Henty
Group conference, the foregoing
epitome of Port Fairy’s history
received the second award in
the Historical Competition. It
was compiled by Miss M. Condon,
a former hon. secretary of the
Port Fairy Branch.




Port Fairy “ Gazette n Print
