

C. GAVAN DUFFY :
PORT PHILLIP
Melbourne Review, Oct 1876
Vol I, pp. 385-409




THE
MELBOURNE REVIEW
No. 4.— October, 1876.
PORT PHILLIP.
A PRELIMINARY CHAPTER IN THE POLITICAL HISTORY OF VICTORIA.
In the lobby of the National Gallery there hangs a rude pencil
sketch of a weatherboard hut on the slopes of the Yarra, over-
shaded by sombre masses of the primeval forest, which less than
forty years ago was the sole seat of state and authority in Mel-
bourne. There are citizens who remember that pre-historic period
when Captain Lonsdale, police magistrate from Sydney, possessed,
in rudimentary development, nearly all the powers now distributed
between the Legislature, the Executive, and the Judiciary. But the
bulk of the population—the new chums and the new generation—
stand too far off from that era to know it by personal experience,
and are still too close to its familiar transactions to see them in the
historic perspective, which sometimes clothes the past with poetry
and romance. Young Australians are, indeed, apt to glance at the
early history of their country with the eye of the scorner ; to find
pleasant subjects for banter and burlesque in the legend of the twin
Founders, reared at the dugs of the same she-wolf of convictism,
struggling over the site of the future metropolis; or, of the fathers
of the state hurrying to Liardet’s beach to seize their spoil of Sabine
maidens as they issued from the hold of the immigrant ship. But
the early history of the colony deserves quite other treatment. The
first settlers have left a record of capacity, fortitude and resources,
which may claim an honourable place in the annals of British enter-
prize. They had not, like the pioneers of the Western Continent, to
struggle with powerful tribes of fierce and subtle Indians, or to
repel the invasion of European enemies of the mother country, or to
face the hardships of an inclement climate and unfruitful soil; but
they had to control and govern masses of men suddenly recruited


from the ends of the earth ; recruited not only from the British
islands and foreign countries, but from the hulks and penitentiaries
of convict settlements ; they had to encounter on brief notice serious
social and political problems, lying quite outside their ordinary ex-
perience, and to assume responsibilities and exercise authority “ unto
which they were not born,” and the manner in which they discharged
these weighty and unforeseen duties is well worthy of being
recorded.
Towards the close of the last century the spirit of maritime
adventure, which three or four generations earlier had enabled Eng-
land and Spain, Holland and Portugal to become conquerors and
colonizers in distant regions, broke out afresh in Europe; and Eng-
land and France despatched rival expeditions to the Pacific in
search of unknown or unexplored lands. The English expedi-
tion was a notable success. Captain Cook discovered the eastern
coast of Australia, and inflicted upon it the cumbersome name of
New South Wales. The discovery was turned to good account; the
discontented colonies in North America had barely renounced the
rule of the mother country, when by founding her first settlement
at Botany Bay, she took possession of a continent destined to fur-
nish a compensation for their loss. This memorable transaction hap-
pened on the eve of the first French Revolution.*
The history of Port Phillip, however, belongs exclusively to the
present century. In 1802 Captain Flinders, one of Cook’s associ-
ates, sailed for the Pacific in command of a new exploring expedi-
tion, and on nearing the southern coast of Australia discovered a
noble land-locked harbour, with a single inlet from the ocean, guarded
by clifls and shelving hills. It was one of the cases of simultaneous
discovery, of which the annals of science and exploration disclose so
many; when Flinders reached Botany Bay he found that he had
been anticipated a few weeks by a little craft despatched by the
Governor of that settlement, who had already named the harbour
after his earliest predecessor, Governor Phillip. The good news was
reported to England by the first homeward bound ship, and the
Colonial Office acted on it with a promptitude which has some-
times been wanting when the need was greater. Early in the ensuing
year two ships freighted with convicts were despatched to take pos-
session of the new region;—for at that time and till a generation
later, the chief use of a British colony was to receive the outcasts and
*The continent of Australia was discovered by Captain Cook in 1770 ; occupied in
1788 by a convict settlement at Botany Bay.


purchase the manufactures of the mother country. David Collins,
the commander of the expedition and the governor of the intended
settlement, landed his men a few miles within the Heads, which lock
the entrance of Port Phillip harbour, and sat down upon a sandbank
in Point Nepean; a narrow peninsula, with the raging surges of
the Southern Ocean breaking on its outer cliffs,, and the tranquil
waters of the bay within bathing shores gay with native shrubs and
creepers. After a hasty and careless inspection of the neighbour-
hood, he pronounced it “an unpromising and unproductive country,”
deficient in water and unsuitable for settlement. The district is now
familiar ground, and though on a superficial view its general
character appears arid and sandy, within a mile of the site of Col-
lins’s camp there are tracts of volcanic soil of singular fertility rest-
ing on a subsoil of limestone, and abundantly supplied with whole-
some water, and the country pronounced unfit for settlement is
occupied by the pleasant gardens and villas of a fashionable water-
ing place. The land-locked harbours, which he barely entered and
made no attempt to explore, was itself but the gateway to regions of
rare productiveness and beauty, and of other regions rich in the
precious metal, as the Eldorado of the poets.
Among the officers of the expedition, the actual character of the
country could not have been altogether unknown; there has been
preserved a letter from the wife of one of them to her sister in
England, which rivals the enthusiasm of later colonists for the
new country: —
My pen is not able to describe half the beauties of that delightful spot (we
were four months there). Much to my mortification and loss we were obliged to
abandon the settlement through the whim and caprice of the Lieut. -Governor. . .
Port Phillip is my favourite, and has my warmest wishes. During the time
we were there I never felt one ache or pain, and I parted with it with more
regret than I did my native land.*
Governor Collins, who had assisted in founding the settlement of
New South Wales, and must have acquired some experience as a
bushman, was strangely misled. His judgment may have been in-
fluenced by the fact that his superiors unwittingly set a bonus upon
failure by authorising him to draw an increased allowance (exceed-
ing a year’s salary), in case it should become necessary to transfer
the settlement from Port Phillip. After loitering for over three
months at the mouth of the harbour, he sailed away to the neigh-
* Originally published in a “ Collection of Letters for a History of New South
Wales.” London, Valpy, 1812.


bouring island of Van Diemen’s Land, of which he became the first
Governor; and happily saved Port Phillip from the discredit of
becoming a penal settlement and the disaster of being “ sown with
rotten seed.”
For more than twenty years the country lay vacant, and was pre-
sumed to be worthless on the strength of Governor Collins’s report
to the Colonial Office. But at length individual enterprise was about
to rediscover it. On the eastern border of the continent there had
existed—as we have seen—for more than a generation, a penal set-
tlement, named New South Wales, but popularly known in England
as Botany Bay from the temporary site of the first encampment. Its
head-quarters were at Sydney, on one of the loveliest harbours in
the world, and it was ruled by a military Governor, claiming
authority over the whole unknown continent. In 1824 two enter-
prising gentlemen (Messrs. Hume and Hovell), belonging to its hand-
ful of free settlers, organised an expedition to cross the unexplored
lands which lay between them and the port named after Governor
Phillip two-and-twenty years before. With some slight assistance
from the Governor, and by liberal expenditure of their own means,
they got an expedition on foot, and succeeded in accomplishing their
undertaking;—an achievement which, for its boldness and its results,
deserves an honourable place in the history of exploration. The
distance, even by the devious route they followed, was under a thou-
sand miles, and the road is now a familiar path; but the distance
could be only remotely estimated by the adventurous travellers,
and they were plunging into an untrodden wilderness, which
imagination peopled with ferocious beasts and treacherous savages.
The Governor of New South Wales, who accounted himself a sharer
in the glory of the expedition, wished to signalize it by occupying
the new country, and he soon after despatched an official party to
make survey and reconnoissance for a settlement; but there was a
power above this formidable potentate greater than he. The Colonial
Office on being asked for the requisite sanction positively refused to
multiply settlements, and the attempt was necessarily abandoned.
For a second time Port Phillip escaped the evil destiny of being
occupied by convicts.
The discovery, however, proved to be not without fruit, and of a
wholesomer sort than grows in official hot-houses. The news got
bruited abroad not only in Sydney but in Yan Diemen’s Land, which
in the twenty years since the expedition of Governor Collins had
grown to be a considerable settlement; and by-and-by Hume


published his impressions of the new country, glowing with the
enthusiasm of a discoverer. An expedition was projected from Van
Diemen’s Land on the receipt of the earliest authentic news; but in
a settlement ruled by military authority, and consisting almost
exclusively of convicts and their descendants, the impediments to
individual action were as great as in the realms of the Czar or the
Sultan; and it was only after years of delay, and when several
official persons were propitiated into taking some pecuniary interest
in the project, that a company was at length permitted to come into
existence. When this company was fairly launched a rival project
immediately followed, according to the habit of the enterprising com-
petitive northern races; and early in the year 1835 two sets of
adventurous colonists were preparing to sail from Hobart Town, the
principal port of Van Diemen’s Land, to explore the shores of Port
Phillip. The first expedition was organised by Mr. Gellibrand, who
had been Attorney-General of the colony, and included among
its members a scion of the gubernatorial house, and was com-
manded by John Batman. Batman, who was a native of New South
Wales, had been originally a blacksmith, but by energy and courage
had raised himself to a certain prosperity and distinction. He is
described as a man of remarkable endowments.—“ Tall and well pro-
portioned, and of prodigious strength, inexhaustible energy and
indomitable will.”* This young giant had distinguished himself in
capturing bushrangers, had made himself familiar with the habits of
the aborigines, and what perhaps furthered his ambition no less
than these services, had skill to find favour with Governor Arthur
and his little court. But he had latterly fallen into habits of
self-indulgence, which had somewhat impaired his strength and
elasticity. At length, on the 12th of May, 1835, he sailed in a little
vessel of thirty tons, accompanied by a party of three white men and
seven aborigines, and after beating about for seventeen days in the
narrow straits, which are now crossed with as much punctuality as a
ferry on the Yarra, landed on a promontory within Port Phillip
harbour, now known as Indented Head. With characteristic energy
he opened immediate communication with the natives through his
Blackfellows, and in a few days concluded a contract with certain
chiefs of the local tribe for the purchase of the tract of country lying-
bet ween the present Melbourne and Geelong. By an instrument
carefully prepared (by Mr. Gellibrand it may be surmised) the chiefs
Jagajaga, Bungaree, Cooloolock, Yanyan, Monmarmaler and others
* Ponwick’s Discovery and Settlement, West’s History of Tasmania,


did duly give, grant, enfeoff, and confirm the possession of this dis-
trict to him and his heirs for ever; having received therefor a
valuable consideration, to wit, certain tomahawks, blankets,
looking-glasses, beads, pockethandkerchiefs, and other treasures,
liberally computed as of the value of £2OO.
He entered immediately into possession of his principality and
commenced the exercise of ownership by naming conspicuous places
after his relations and friends ; a nomenclature, however, of which
modern geography fails to take any notice. When the purchase
was formally reported to Governor Arthur, that potentate considered
himself bound, by a recent decision of the Colonial Office, to take
some objection to the force of the grant; not on the ground that the
Crown was the guardian of the natives, who were in a state of pupil-
age, and imperfectly skilled, it may be presumed, in the law of real
property, or on the ground that the position of chief in a savage
tribe does not confer a feudal tenure in the common lands of the
tribe, which he is empowered to sell for his private advantage, but
because the lands in question were no longer the property of the
natives, but of the Crown of England. The Crown, it seems, by
erecting a flagstaff six hundred miles away on a coast which the
Yarra Yarra tribes had probably never seen, had quite extinguished
their right in the soil upon which they were born. But Governor
Arthur did not doubt that the royal owner would deal
liberally with the colonisers. And in due time the Colonial
Office, under the mesmerism of Governor Arthur, adopted this
view of their duty, by giving Mr. Batman’s company, in exchange
for their marvellous conveyance by the Yarra chiefs, a “ remission
order,” (that is an order receivable by the Colonial Treasury
as cash in the purchase of Crown lands) for the sum of
seven thousand pounds. The district originally exchanged for
beads and blankets now comprises the capital of the colony, the
cities of Geelong and Collingwood, the ports of Sandridge and St.
Kilda, wide stretches of agricultural land studded with homesteads
and vineyards, and a suburban settlement where one may ride from
sunrise to sunset among the villas and cottages of a wealthy and
cultured class.
Meantime the second expedition had sailed three months after the
first. It was under the command of John Pascoe Fawkner, though
an accident compelled him to confide the control in the first instance
to one of his associates. Fawkner, like his rival, had been an
artizan, but by energy and intelligence and the happy fortune of new


countries, had gradually risen to other and more liberal pursuits, and
had latterly become a journalist, and more ordinarily an agent and
spokesman for the convicts. He already approached the mid-way of
life, and by a curious fortune was now making his second adventure
in Port Phillip, having when a boy accompanied his father (one of
the prisoners of the Crown) in the expedition to. found a penal set-
tlement, which Governor Collins relinquished more than a generation
before. The new comers as soon as they approached the shore were
warned by Batman not to become trespassers upon his purchased
territory; but they were little disposed to admit his claims or sub-
mit to his authority. The later adventurers in the first instance,
and finally both expeditions moved up the bay and along the River
Yarra to a swampy valley, close to the river, and little more than a
mile from the coast, lying between four low shelving hills, where the
strange birds and wild animals of the country then found shelter,
but where now stands the city of Melbourne. An angry contest
over their respective rights ensued, and was not speedily composed.
But the rivals soon found they had a common enemy stronger than
both. The Governor of New South Wales, who claimed authority
over the entire continent, as fast as individual enterprise could dis-
cover it, no sooner heard of the landing in Port Phillip than he
announced himself by a proclamation, warning these adventurous
pioneers of a new nation, who presumed to seek a home where the
Colonial Office had recently decreed that no home must be sought,
that “ they would be considered as trespassers, and become liable to
be dealt with in the same manner as other intruders on vacant land
of the Crown.” They proceeded however on their way, facing cheer-
fully on all hands the privations of such an enterprise; beds of
opossum skins or blankets, spread under a tree and canopied by the
skies, rations of tough mutton and dough baked in the ashes, and
sometimes in insufficient quantity, but seasoned and made digestible
by visions of great prosperity to come. In a little time they
settled down to fixed pursuits —Batman and some of his associates
to feed sheep and cattle, and become the type of the squatters, who
have up to the present time occupied a large share of the history of
the colony; Fawkner to be in turn a publican, a cultivator, and a
journalist—a type of the squatter’s opponents, the dwellers in towns,
the men of enterprise and movement. Death cut short the career of
the younger and more vigorous rival in a very few years, but
Fawkner, as we know, lived to see and share the marvellous
prosperity of the new country.


While these colonisers from Van Diemen’s Land were clinging to
the coast and squabbling over barren soil, little suitable to the farmer
or the grazier, the country was about to be penetrated from the
interior by a more important expedition. Major Mitchell (in later
times Sir Thomas Mitchell), the Surveyor-General of New South
Wales, having been brought to the borders of the Murray by official
duties, crossed that river with an efficient party and entered on the
unexplored territory lying beyond. By a singular fortune his
unguided course lay through some of the finest tracts in the country.
He passed over the pastoral plains of the Loddon, clothed with the
luxurious grasses which a genial winter rears abundantly in that
region, but the fierce midsummer sun cuts down like a scythe; over
the lofty Australian Pyrenees, with landscapes of enchanting beauty,
and into the rich alluvial lands of the West, now the wheat field of
Victoria. At length he observed the waves of the ocean flowing
into a silent harbour, and close by this harbour the smoke of a
settlement, where he discovered, with amazement, evidences of the
skill and enterprise of civilised man. In fact while Batman was
organising his company tardily under official patronage, and Fawkner
was gathering his humbler compeers, Mr. Henty, a trader in Laun-
ceston, had, without sound of trumpet, despatched his sons with sheep
and rations, and the equipments of a whaling station, to adventure
on their own account. They had sat down on the shore of a little
harbour 200 miles farther westerly, that is farther from their starting
point, than Port Phillip ; had commenced to fish and to cultivate, and
were already eating the products of the soil. The Hentys were,
if not the founders, at least the first settlers of Port Phillip ; and
it is pleasant to know that they did not miss their fitting reward.
After the lapse of an entire generation from their landing, one
might see these pioneers of progress still living—prosperous and
influential men ; four of the brothers being at the same time members
of Colonial Parliaments, in the colony whence they emigrated, or in
the colony of which they were the first settlers, and the hamlet
they founded having grown into a town sending two members
to a local Legislature.*
The Surveyor-General comprehended the full importance of his
discovery, and must have enjoyed one of the highest of human
pleasures. He declared he had found another England, under more
genial skies and with its lands still free to be distributed as prizes
to industry and enterprise. “It is a region,” he said, “more extensive
* Portland,


than Great Britain, equally rich in point of soil, and which now lies
ready for the plough in many parts, as if specially prepared by the
Creator for the industrious hands of Englishmen.” To fix its relative
value to all the territories already known on the continent, he
named it Australia Felix, a title which it long retained.
From this discovery immigration to Port Phillip dates. When the
tidings reached New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land they
inflamed the adventurous with visions of a magnificent prosperity, of
countless flocks to be depastured, and wide estates to be carved out
of this bountiful land. When they reached Home, and young
men were told of pastures like those of Devon and Meath, and arable
tracts equal to the wheat lands of Norfolk and Tipperary, without
owners, and ready to receive as masters the first bold and lucky
comers, a passion for emigration began to stir among the middle
classes. Gibbon Wakefield and the more reliable men placed in the
van of his colonial projects, had already awakened an interest in new
countries, which this revelation was well calculated to inflame. Nor
were these expectations, high pitched as they were, ill-founded.
The lands of the Australian continent were then free to be granted
at the will of the Secretary of State, or to be sold at a nominal price,
or to be temporarily occupied by consent of the Governor at
Sydney, with just enough risk from the jealousy of the native
tribes to add the charm of a certain excitement and romance to
the adventure ; and it will be seen as the narrative proceeds into how
fruitful a possession the first comers entered.
The Governor at Sydney, accepting facts which he could scarcely
control, recognised the intruders on Crown lands by despatching an
officer to administer justice. In less than a year after the date of
the prohibitory proclamation, Captain Lonsdale landed at Port
Phillip, clothed with the uncircumscribed authority of a police
magistrate, delegated by a military government. Before his arrival
the settlers, with notable good sense, had provided for the maintenance
of order by a mutual engagement to submit all disputes to the
arbitration of one of Batman’s company who had formerly filled the
office of stipendiary magistrate in Van Diemen’s Land.* A year
later a more definite recognition followed. The Governor himself,
at that time Sir Richard Bourke, made a personal visit to Port
Phillip. This quasi royal visit was a great event for the infant
settlement. Towns were now laid out, and town and country land
submitted for sale on behalf of the Crown. The port was inspected
* Mr. James Simpson.


and partly surveyed by the commander of the ship of war which
accompanied the Governor, and the waters lying nearest the
settlement named, after the surveying officer, Hobson’s Bay. One of
the principal streets was called Bourke, in gratitude for the
Governor’s visit; and another obtained its name from Governor
Collins, in gratitude, let us hope, for that official having so promptly
carried away his two shiploads of convicts. The seat of the original
settlement was named Melbourne, after the pleasant Epicurean who
was then supposed to be Prime Minister; another town nearer the
bay, believed to be better situated for a commercial capital, was
named after the reigning monarch; and a third, which had greater
natural advantages in soil and situation than either, if fortune had
been kind, retained for bay and the settlement the native names of
Corio and Geelong. And now authority was established, and the
“ intruders upon the vacant lands of the Crown ” had official
permission to live and to flourish, if they knew how.
The earliest want of a new community is a medium of
exchange. There was no money, and orders on merchants in
Sydney or Hobart Town, of uncertain value, did duty for it. But
the banks of Sydney and Hobart Town speedily found it to
their interest to establish branches in Melbourne. A newspaper,
and soon afterwards a rival newspaper, appeared; the first
conducted by Mr. Fawkner, who anticipated the device of Kossuth’s
“ Pesthi Hirlap,” by issuing it for a time in manuscript; type being
scarce in Sydney, and type-founding an unknown art. After a tough
struggle with the wrath of the Sydney Government at the audacity
of unlicensed printing in a settlement where there was no one
empowered to issue a license, the press at length got established in
Melbourne. Grazing stations began to be “ taken up” (as the colonial
phrase runs), and one reads with curious interest of flocks being
folded upon sites now occupied by prosperous towns or teeming
goldfields. Melbourne in those days was a straggling village, where
the fathers of the settlement were content with slab shanties, or
wattle-and-daub huts; one or two brick houses erected soon afterwards
never entirely ceased to be objects of reverence to early colonists,
even when they were difficult to discover in the middle of a populous
and extensive city. To build, indeed, was not an easy task ; for
the Sydney Government continued to keep itself alive in the memory
of the colonists by levying heavy license fees on such industrial
enterprises as brick-making and lime-burning, essential to the
foundation of a country. But Sydney merchants had speculated in


town allotments, and Sydney squatters had taken up cattle-runs
in Port Phillip—men able to make themselves felt at head quarters ;
and after a time the importance of the new settlement was, in some
degree, recognised by the appointment of a Superintendent to
administer its local affairs, under the authority and direction of the
Governor at Sydney. Thus the Port Phillip district of the colony of
New South Wales was constituted.
On the 10th of September, 1839,'tkree years after the landing of
Batman and Fawkner, Charles Joseph Latrobe arrived in Melbourne
to undertake the duties of this office. He had been educated among
the Moravians, with a view to his becoming a minister of that sect,
but ultimately sought a career in the public service. The Colonial
Office had employed him in a mission among the West Indian
negroes, and he had published a book of travels, marked by thought
and cultivation. He had been sent to Australia, it was surmised, to
become a guardian of the aborigines ; but got promoted to the care
of their white brothers. It must be admitted that he was fairly
qualified for the task he was given to perform, which was little more
than to be the medium of communication between the distant
Sydney Government and the adventurous shopkeepers and sheep
farmers who constituted the new settlement. But quite different
work awaited him after a time, which demanded stronger and
sterner faculties than any with which he was endowed. The colonists
received him with delight as a precursor of the self-government for
which they already longed. The Port Phillip Patriot congratulated
them that they were not to be subject to a military or naval
martinet, but to a civilian, a traveller and a man of letters ; and burst
into a strain of triumphant prophecy over the destiny that awaited
them. “He comes as our good genius, to develope our resources and
place us high in the scale of colonies. Colonies ! nay, he comes to
found a mighty empire.”
With the Superintendent arrived some of the apparatus of local
government. A branch of the Colonial Treasury was opened at
Melbourne to receive the Customs duties and land fund ; a Court of
Quarter Sessions, and, after a little, a Supreme Court, with a resident
judge, were established; a Government surveyor took up his quarters
in the district; but all these officers, from the highest to the lowest,
constituted merely the outpost of the establishment at Sydney, from
which they derived their authority and received their instructions.
The first enthusiasm of the colonists speedily cooled; they grumbled
at this Sydney supremacy, and formally demanded some direct


authority in their own affairs. To make themselves heard in
Downing-street from the Antipodes, when a voyage to Europe
occupied half a year, and the sailing of a ship was an event in the
annals of the settlement, was not an easy task. But the settlers had
among them men who were active, resolute, and not easily to be
turned aside ; and three years after the arrival of the Superintendent,
their prayer was granted, in a small degree, by the establishment of
Municipal Councils in Melbourne and Geelong. This concession was
received with immense enthusiasm, not so much, perhaps, on account
of the local improvements which the municipalities were expected
to undertake—though there were high hopes on that score—as because
in communities where no legislature exists, municipal institutions serve
the important purpose of communicating authoritatively the wishes
of the governed to the governors. And already, when this concession
was made, the ambitious young community had an object in view
upon which it had set its heart. The settlement had increased with
singular rapidity. In 1841 it contained upwards of twelve thousand
inhabitants, a third of whom resided in Melbourne ; where already
four hundred stone or brick houses had arisen to supplement a
thousand wooden edifices, which had in part superseded the original
wattle and daub huts. Nearly four hundred thousand pounds had
been expended in the purchase of town and country lands, and the
farmers produced a hundred and twenty bushels of grain annually
in addition to potatoes and hay. But the most remarkable increase
was in the flocks and herds depastured on the public lands; the
fortunate owners of which were speedily becoming the wealthiest
and most influential section of the community.* Among all these
classes there existed a strong desire that the district might be
separated from Sydney and constituted a distinct colony. The Sydney
officials, indeed, had not used generously the supremacy they
enjoyed. A moiety of the funds arising from the sale of land in a
district was ordinarily returned to it in public works ; but the settlers
of Port Phillip found it impossible to get the benefit of this practice.
Sales of Crown lands were held at distant and irregular intervals ;
less, it was alleged, to satisfy local wants than to suit the
convenience of speculators in New South Wales; and sometimes,
before the appointment of the Superintendent, allotments situated
in the centre of Melbourne had been submitted to auction,
not in that town, but in Sydney, which was more inaccessible to the
people of Port Phillip at that time than Constantinople is to the
* Archer’s Statistical Register,


citizens of London in our day. The State is justified in exacting a
high price for the public lands if the money is to be expended for the
local or general benefit of the purchasers;—in making roads for
example to carry their produce to market, or in securing them the
prompt administration of justice. But the Sydney Government
required an inordinate price, and returned only a trifling proportion
of it in public improvements. Another motive for desiring separation,
which did not operate less strongly, was of a moral rather than a
material origin. The settlement had been founded by free men, and
they were determined that it should not be polluted by convicts;
whereas New South Wales, which dominated over their interests so
haughtily, consisted of a population more than one-half of which was
actually under penal discipline when the settlement of Port Phillip was
founded. A Separation Movement, as it was called, sprang up, of which
Mr. Edward Curr, a sheep farmer from Van Diemen’s Land, and a man
of remarkable energy, was at once the Wilberforce and the Clarkson,
the most conspicuous apd the most laborious member; and it
commanded the sympathies of the entire community. The new
Corporation became a mouthpiece for this public sentiment, and
served, moreover, as a training school in the management of public
affairs ; and it is a fact creditable to the young settlement that the
men elected to it during the period while it was the only represen-
tative body in Port Phillip proved afterwards, when the trials and
responsibilities of self-government came, to have been among the
most capable men in the community.
But another and a greater change was at hand. New South
Wales, originally ruled by a Governor with absolute power, tempered
only by a right of appeal to the Colonial Office twelve thousand
miles away, had long claimed from the Imperial Parliament some
form of self-government; and in 1843 a Legislative Council was
created consisting of twenty-four members, two-thirds elected by
the colonists, one-third nominated by the Crown. The Port Phillip
district had six members assigned to it; a boon of which it could
take little effectual advantage, for the men upon whom it might best
rely could not abandon their shops or stations to live in a distant city
only reached by a voyage averaging a fortnight. The representation
was valued chiefly as a still more authoritative organ for demanding
Separation, upon which their minds were now firmly fixed. In the
second session of the new Assembly, the Rev. Dr. hang,* who had
* Dr. Lang had been elected in preference to Mr. Edward Curr, the Father of the
beparation movement, mainly, it is said, by appealing to national and sectarian feeling,


been elected for the Port Phillip district though a resident in Sydney,
moved the Assembly for an address to the Queen praying that Port
Phillip might be erected into a separate colony. The motion was
supported by the representatives of the district, but opposed by
all the members for New South Wales, with a single exception, but
a memorable one—that of Robert Lowe, who is now employing his
great powers upon a more conspicuous stage. The utter failure of
the motion induced the Separatists to carry their complaint to a
higher authority. They memorialised the Home Government,
setting forth the grievances to which they were subject and
the remedy they sought. The application was answered with
unexpected promptitude. The late Earl of Derby, then Lord
Stanley, who when a young man had seen something of colonies,
administered the Colonial Office at this time, and frankly recognised
the force of their claims ; but in order to proceed upon safe grounds,
he directed the Executive Council of Sydney to take evidence on the
question. The Executive Council, consisting of Government officers
looking to the Colonial Office rather than to the colonists for favour,
entered on the inquiry without any predetermination to render it
abortive. After hearing all the evidence tendered to them, they closed
their investigation, with a report in favour of Separation. But by
the time the report reached England, Sir Robert Peel’s Government
was broken up on the Corn Law question, Mr. Gladstone sat in the
seat of Lord Stanley, and the work was in some measure to begin
over again ; the fluctuation of Government in England proving at
all times a fruitful source of trouble and delay to the colonies. The
leaders of the movement, however, did not slacken their exertions.
The Press kept the subject constantly before the community, meetings
were held, funds subscribed, and an agent despatched to England to
“flap” the Colonial Office on their claims. New wrongs were
instanced to increase the public ardour; money had either been
refused for necessary works by the Legislative Assembly in New
South Wales, or voted and then treacherously diverted to some
Sydney project. A few light-houses, wharves, jetties, and custom-
house offices for the essential purposes of trade, a couple of gaols,
Mr. Curr being an Englishman and a Roman Catholic ; Dr. Lang, a Scotchman and a
Presbyterian Minister. Dr. Lang has been, in my opinion, an extremely useful as well
as a remarkably able public man ; but it seems to have been always impossible to
reckon upon the moment when he would start aside from the common path on an
impulse of this stor. I had the satisfaction, a generation after separation, to induce the
Parliament of Victoria to recognise his services in that transaction by a grant of £IOOO.


some police-offices, and a court-house for the administration of
justice, a lunatic asylum, a post-office, and two small bridges
constituted the entire public works which had been executed in the
Port Phillip district. These were merely the necessary equipments
of the Executive; the agencies for collecting its revenue and
upholding its authority; not undertakings primarily designed for
the public convenience. A little later a bridge was commenced over
the Yarra at Melbourne, the only considerable bridge erected in a
country larger than England; while a quarter of a million of
contributions to their Land Fund had been sunk in Sydney improve-
ments. At length, in the summer of 1848, when Europe was
electric with revolutionary passions and the hope of marvellous
events, a peaceful coup d'etat, but effective in its way, was struck on
the small stage of the aspiring little settlement. At the nomination
of the Port Phillip members to serve in the Sydney Legislature
which happened at this time, not one candidate appeared. Mr.
Leslie Foster,* who afterwards took a notable share in colonial
affairs, had in the first instance been a candidate, but at the last
moment was induced to retire. Nothing, it was conceived, would so
effectually realise to the Colonial Office the distrust and contempt
entertained by the colonists for the existing system as an abstention
like this by an entire community ; and it would have the additional
advantage of compelling a more respectful attention to their demands
in the New South Wales Legislature, as that body could not proceed
legally to business in their absence. The local authorities were
alternately in a panic and a rage; and exercised all their skill to
defeat the popular device. A few days later, at the nomination for
the borough of Melbourne, which was separately represented, Mr.
Foster reappeared as a candidate. He was duly proposed and
seconded, and as a single vote would suffice to elect him the ingenious
strategy seemed for a moment to be defeated. The colonists,
however, had not exhausted their resources. It was moved by Mr.
Thomas M'Combie, and seconded by Dr. Greaves (to whom we may
safely attribute the device), that the Right Hon. Earl Grey, then
Secretary for the Colonies (for there had been another change), was
a fit and proper person to represent the borough. A poll was taken,
and the noble Earl was elected by a triumphant majority over his
local competitor. Mr. Latrobe, the Superintendent, and official
persons in general were much scandalised at this profane use of the
name of a Peer and a Cabinet Minister; for in those days the official
* Now Mr. Foster Fitzgerald.


uniform in colonies usually covered a temper and demeanour closely
akin to those which flourish under plush—grand and haughty to the
ordinary world, but deferential and submissive to its proper master.
Such a people, they said, were manifestly unfit for self-government;
which is scarcely, I think, the reflection it will suggest to a candid
reader. The Secretary of State, however, took the matter, like a
man of the world, in good part; and it was doubtless this stroke
which awoke him thoroughly to the conviction which he soon
afterwards expressed, that Port Phillip representation had become
an unreal and illusory, not a substantial, enjoyment of representative
institutions.*
But 1849 arrived, and the hope held out by Lord Stanley five
years before was still far from accomplishment; and in the life of a
growing settlement five years is a huge span. It was confidently
stated, indeed, in letters from London, that the Colonial Office had
at length made up its mind to assent; but the colonists had been
taught by experience that there were many slips between the
promises of that department and its performances. Suspicion and
anxiety grew intense when it was accidentally discovered, by the
publication of papers submitted to the Imperial Parliament, that the
Superintendent had been sending home confidential despatches to
the Colonial Secretary, assuring him that any form of constitution
which substituted a chamber elected by the people for such a nominee
Council of Advice presided over by the Governor as had formerly
existed in New South Wales would be “ill suited to the real state
of the settlement, and would render the administration of its
government a task of extreme difficulty and responsibility.” A
community thwarted in its dearest purpose is not often forbearing
or even just; and the comments of the Press on the Superintendent’s
confidential despatches were ferocious enough not to be pleasant
reading even at this distance of time.
But though the Act erecting a new colony was not forthcoming,
the colonists learned that the Colonial Office meditated transmitting
them a gift for which they had not asked. A ship freighted with
ticket-of-leave men was despatched to Port Phillip, on the pretence
* The Sydney Legislature could not be constituted without the Port Phillip members,
and the Governor ventured on the step of ordering a new election to be held for the Port
Phillip district at Geelong (which cherished an angry rivalry with Melbourne), and
though the Separatists set up Lord Palmerston, the Duke of Wellington, Lord John
Russell, and Sir Robert Peel, local men (of considerably less distinction) were chosen
by the Geelongese.


that New South Wales had invited convicts, and Port Phillip was
still undeniably a district of New South Wales. From the
foundation of the colony there had been a general understanding
among the settlers to keep it free from convictism. For the two or
three unsettled years before the arrival of a Superintendent, some
persons had applied for assigned servants, according to the practice
of the time. But from the period when the new community became
organised, it seems to have steadily determined upon two things ; to
claim self-government, and to shut out the felonry of Great Britain
and Ireland. In 1845 a cargo of convicts from England arrived in
the bay, but the news created such a storm of wrath in Melbourne,
that they were ordered by the Superintendent to proceed to Van
Piemen’s Land, where more than forty years before Governor Collins
had carried their predecessors. And now in 1849, when the desire of
self-government was about to be gratified, the renewal of the
attempt wounded their pride as much as it alarmed their fears. A
meeting was held, organised by Mr. Edward Wilson, whose name is
inseparably connected with the resistance to this social pollution till
its complete triumph; and where Mr. Fawkner and Mr. O’Shanassy,
Mr. Heales and Mr. J. S. Johnstone, all of whom were destined to
take a conspicuous part in the affairs of the colony, were spokesmen
of the popular determination that the convicts should not be received.
The magistrates of the city and district met soon afterwards, and
endorsed the popular decision. By a fortunate coincidence the
Governor of New South Wales, Sir Charles Fitzroy, was on a visit
to Melbourne at the moment; able to witness the excitement, and
hear the personal remonstrance of the colonists. So effectually did
they use this opportunity that Sir Charles, a ci-devant dandy, aiming
only to keep things quiet, speedily promised that no convicts should be
permitted to land in Port Phillip till the feelings of the community
were made known in Downing-street. The colonists on their side
had already arrived at the determination that no convicts should be
intruded upon their wives and children, whatever might be the
response of the distant oracle. The prison ship, however, the
“ Randolph,” in due time reached Hobson’s Bay,* and the captain
refusing to be bound by the concession of the Governor, insisted on
his right to land his passengers ; inasmuch as if he failed to do so he
would imperil his insurance. Another public meeting was imme-
diately called, at which Dr. Greaves, Mr. Colin Campbell, Mr. Lachlan
Mackinnon, Mr. M'Combie, and Mr. Langlands, all representative men
* The “ Randolph” arrived in the Bay on August 9th, 1849.
B


in a certain sense, renewed the protest of the colony. They declared
that England had no constitutional right to tax the colonists for
Imperial purposes by requiring them to maintain a portion of her
criminals ; that the introduction of felons would discredit the fair
name Port Phillip had begun to acquire in England, and deter the
most eligible class of emigrants from coming out, and finally, “ that
they had never received convicts, and were prepared to undergo
any extremity rather than submit to do so.” It was determined
that the prisoners should not be permitted to land. This
intrepid resolution, like all daring action, was originally the work of
a few, but it suited the temper of the people, and was adopted with
as near an approach to unanimity as can ever be attained in
communities where individual opinion is free. “ The convicts
must not land,” became the popular watchword. The Governor
was in those days an absolute sovereign ; wanting, however, the
instrument without which absolute government is only a consti-
tutional fiction. Having as little the temper as the resources
necessary to play the part of a tyrant, he adhered to his
promise, and the captain at last yielded to his peremptory orders, and
set sail for Sydney. Thus for the second time in half a dozen
years the colonists successfully protected themselves against the
mischievous errors of the Colonial Office. But the flame was too
violent to subside with a temporary success. It spread to Sydney,
where the convicts were also refused admission, though the Imperial
Government were able to plead a certain amount of local sanction
for sending them there; finally it spread to Van Diemen’s Land,
then still a penal settlement, but where the younger colonists were
determined to deliver it from this reproach. Popular meetings, and
munificent contributions in all the colonies, marked the depth of the
public feeling, which finally resulted in an Intercolonial League, with
its head quarters in Van Diemen’s Land, to secure the complete
abolition of transportation to the Australian colonies. Though
convicts had never been received in Port Phillip or South Australia,
the colonies had a common interest in bringing the system to an end,
as eveiy prisoner who escaped from Van Diemen’s Land loved to
make a grand tour of the colonies for his amusement and profit.
Mr. West, an Independent minister, and a man of vigour and
culture, became president of the League, and was its chief motive
power, and did not relax his work till the end in view was
accomplished. The movement was conducted throughout within the
limits of the law which regulates public order, even as that law is


interpreted in Crown colonies, but the younger men were impatient
of repeated disappointments, and the daring spirit which emptied the
taxed tea into the waters of Boston harbour might have been easily
awakened by any arbitrary stroke of authority. The Imperial
Government, however, though tardy in their decision, being much
embarrassed with the difficulty of disposing of their criminals,
gradually yielded all that was demanded of them.
Meantime the Port Phillip question was at length making
decisive progress in England. A committee of the Privy Council, to
whom the subject had been referred by Earl Grey, reported in favor
of erecting the district into a separate Colony, and suggested that
the name of Victoria might be conferred upon it; and an Act of the
Imperial Parliament gave effect to both these recommendations
In the opening of the Australian summer, November 11th, in
the year f 850, the news of these events reached the new colony.
The joy of the people passed all bounds. There were public
rejoicings for four days; processions, sports, bonfires, illumina-
tions, public and private feasts could scarcely exhaust their
enthusiasm ; and to the present time every recurring anniversary
is celebrated as a public holiday under the title of Separation
Day. When the delirium had abated a little, there were
not wanting grounds of apprehension and cavil in the new statute.
The Imperial Parliament, feeling ill qualified to deal with minute
details demanding local knowledge, had empowered the New
South Wales Legislature to fix the franchise and distribute the
representation of the new colony at its discretion. But the New
South Wales Legislature were precisely the persons whom of all
others the new colonists most feared and distrusted. From the
date of Mitchell’s discovery, Sydney merchants and bankers
had taken possession of large tracts of the public lands of
Port Phillip, which they held as tenants of the Crown, and
the town population were jealous of their monopoly, and
disposed to fear the subserviency of all their class on political
questions to the representative of the Crown. These squatters
were supreme in the Sydney Legislature, and it was feared
they would employ their power to make the representation in
the new colony partial and unequal. This fear did not prove
ill founded. When the Act fixing the representation of Victoria
became law, it was found that thirty thousand of the town
population got seven members, or one member to every five thousand
inhabitants ; twenty-one thousand of an agricultural population got


three members, or one member to seven thousand inhabitants;
seven districts, chiefly pastoral, with fourteen thousand inhabitants,
got seven members, or one member to two thousand inhabitants;
and a number of purely pastoral districts with five thousand eight
hundred inhabitants got three members, or one member to nineteen
hundred and a fraction. Squatters had obtained three times as
much political power, relatively to their number, as townsmen and
farmers. Speaking at a later period of this distribution, an adequate
judge affirmed that “ the rottenest of the old English rotten boroughs
ivcis respectable compared to the impostures of “ representation ” that
have been deliberately created in Victoria.” * And this legacy from
the Sydney Legislature did not prove a light evil in the end.
On the 11th of July, 1851, the Governor-General at Sydney
issued writs for the first election; on the 15th of the same
month Mr. Latrobe was sworn in to the office of Lieutenant-Governor,
to which he had been elevated; the principal persons in the public
service underwent a similar happy metamorphosis, and from being
subordinates in Melbourne, an outpost of New South Wales, became
judges, Executive Councillors and heads of departments, in a separate
State; and the Colony of Victoria was definitely organised. Captain
Lonsdale, the first police magistrate, who had long acted as secretary
to the Superintendent, was hoisted to the office of Colonial
Secretary; from the body of the colonists the Governor was able to
select an Auditor-General in Mr. Charles Hotson Ebden, one of the
first squatters who crossed overland from Sydney after the discoveries
of Major Mitchell; and an Attorney and Solicitor-General in Mr.
William Foster Stawell and Mr. Redmond Barry of the local bar.
Mr. Hoddle, a surveyor who had been relegated to the Port Phillip
District many years before by the Sydney Government was named
Surveyor-General. These gentlemen had after a little to bear the
strain of new and unprecedented responsibilities; and were long
held accountable for much which they could not control as well as
some things which they undoubtedly mismanaged. Mr. Chapman in
a pamphlet bearing his name*f* ventured to declare that the
Lieutenant-Governor of Victoria found himself surrounded by “the
very weakest Executive in all the colonies.” Mr. Lowe somewhat
later, and when the censure was certainly less applicable, assured
the House of Commons that the Victorian Executive “having been
* Mr. Chapman, ex-Colonial Secretary in Van Diemen’s Land, now a Judge in
New Zealand, writing to The Times.
f Responsible Government for the Australian Colonies, by H. S. Chapman.


trained in the school of dependence upon New South Wales, when
everything of importance was referred to Sydney, were totally
unequal to the duties which unforeseen circumstances threw upon
them.”* But in the opinion of the colonists, the officers selected from
their own ranks made a favourable contrast in aptitude and ability
with the effete veterans of the old system; and it is certain that Mr.
Stawell, who as Attorney-General long continued to direct the public
affairs of the colony, was a man in many respects singularly well
qualified for his office. Of a vigorous intellect, indefatigable industry,
and clear integrity,he only wanted more sympathy with the mass of the
community, and less of that love of victory at all costs, which is the
weakness of strong men, to be an eminent ruler. At this period,
however, he can scarcely be regarded as a free agent; he was the
adviser of the Governor only as far as his advice was sought,
and it was still supposed to be the first duty of a colonial
functionary to satisfy the Colonial Office; to satisfy the colonists came
only second after an immense interval.
The new colony consisted of a territory the size of England and
Wales, lying in the most southern, which in this hemisphere means
the most cool and temperate, region of Australia. It is embraced on
the south by the Pacific Ocean, which now carries the commerce of
Europe and Australasia into five seaports; two of them landlocked,
and among the safest in the world; and on the north by the
Murray, a great river navigable for nearly a thousand miles. It lies
in the same latitude as the warmer countries of Southern Europe,
possesses a climate with all the charms and many of the
inconveniences which distinguish the climate of Italy and Greece,
and produces abundantly whatever fruits or cereals are to be found
between the Mediterranean and the Hebrides. Since Columbus
gazed with rapture on the teeming valleys of Cuba, no man had seen
a new country more richly endowed with the gifts of nature.
A great change had taken place in the character and extent of
the population, their pursuits, and their possessions during the
fifteen years which had elapsed since the landing of Batman. The
four white men who constituted that expedition were now
represented by a population of nearly eighty thousand. It had
grown with a rapid, steady increase. In 1841, as we have seen,
the population had reached twelve thousand. In the five years
between 1841 and 1846 it nearly trebled; in the four years
between 1846 and 1851, this great increase again more than
* Memorandum on Australian Constitutions.


doubled. Of these eighty thousand, above half resided in
Melbourne and the surrounding district. Official statistics*
estimated the members of the learned professions at that period at
three hundred and fifty-five, and “ other educated persons ” at a
thousand. Among the mercantile and enterprizing class there had
been some sudden reverses, owing mainly to over speculation in
land, but there was a sound trade steadily extending, and some
conspicuous instances of great prosperity. Building land, which had
been purchased at about £4O an allotment of half an acre, at the
early land sales, sold in a few favourite positions for £4O a foot.
The houses in Melbourne had increased to upwards of four
thousand, of which three thousand were of stone or brick; the
remainder “of all shapes, sizes, materials, and colours.” But no mere
statistics and no European experience will realise to a stranger the
actual aspect of a new town in a new country. The four thousand
houses, which look so trim and regular in a tabular return, were sown
in patches over a wide straggling township, where groves of wattles
and clumps of gum still reared their sombre foliage. Next to the
ambitious stone house of the successful merchant there squatted
perhaps, a wooden shanty, roofed with zinc or tin, or it might be a
tent, or a hut constructed out of packing cases, or there was a vacant
space strewn with broken bcttles and the tin boxes which carry
unwholesome dainties from Europe. Bight in the middle of the
highway stood, perhaps, the stump of a gigantic gum tree,
lately felled or burned; at ten perches distant you saw
some public establishment -at which you needed to transact
business, but between you and it ran a natural watercourse cut by
the semi-tropical rain in the porous soil —a rapid current if it were full,
and if it were empty such a chasm as one may fancy yawned for
Curtius in the Roman Forum. Close to the busiest marts of
industry was often a quagmire, upon which a flock of geese found
recreation; and men plunged through swamps of mud and sludge
or raised clouds of gritty dust, as they tramped through the city to
their daily industry. It resembled a settlement in the American
Far West in its external aspect, but with the external aspect
the resemblance ceased. There was no violence or disorder, no
roughs or rowdies. No man carried arms, every man knew all those
whom he met, as he might know his neighbours in an English country
town. Outside the official class there was practical equality, and a
man’s social -position depended upon his character and capacity alone.
* Archer’s Statistical Register.


The dress and habits of the people were simpler than those of a
village at home, and nobody considered any task menial which was
necessary to the successful pursuit of his business. Old colonists
love to tell stories of Mr. Suchaone carrying home the groceries of
his customers in a hand-barrow; or, Mr. Suchanother standing
behind his bar in shirt sleeves and open vest; both having attained
to a rank in latter times which lends the stories a touch of malice.
But this is the common history of new settlements ; Miles Standish
no doubt blackened his own jack-boots on occasion, and John Arden
probably carried home the dinner of his chief on a skewer ; only life
was more indolent on the banks of the Yarra, and less coloured by
ceremony or checkered by action than in military stations. The
settler in the frozen swamps of Canada, or under the biting winds of
Massachusetts, had to maintain a constant struggle with nature that
he might win daily bread and shelter, and his labour was liable to
be interrupted by the savage whoop of the Redskin ; but the genial
air and bountiful soil of Australia tend to create a certain generous
indolence and insouciance, which characterised the population at
that time, before gold, the great disturber, came; and to the dwellers
in towns the native race was not an object of terror so much as of
contempt and pity. The colonists were indolent, it is said, but not
idle; it is certain that they established the essential agencies of
civilized life with commendable promptitude. Churches and schools
of the principal Christian denominations had been built in Melbourne,
and were served by a clergy who lived in tolerable peace together.
There were two or three national societies and the rudiments ol a
club; but institutions for public amusement or culture there were
none ; and they were not greatly missed, for the habits of the people
were purely domestic. An annual race meeting indeed brought out
the whole population in their holiday attire; and in later times, when
rival amusements are not wanting, it has still the same attraction.
The young Australian loves the horse with an attachment that
resembles the passion of the Arab or the Scythian rather than the
tepid good-will of the European.
In the country districts the squatters reigned supreme. There
was some beginning of a farming class, fifty thousand acres of land
were under cultivation; but a prodigious expansion had taken place
in pastoral pursuits. The squatters employed nearly seven
thousand men rearing stock and saving wool, and their sheep had
increased to upwards of five millions, accompanied by a proportionate
supply of horses and horned cattle. The fertile lands discovered by


Major Mitchell had found masters, and masters who knew their
value. A friendly critic of the period* paints these pioneers of
civilization a little en beau. In a pamphlet published in London in
1850, he affirms that there might be found among them “ men retired
from their professions, whether clerical, military, naval, legal, or
medical; and the younger sons of good and even noble families, who
preferred seeking an active independence to pursuing the lounging
life of drones in the mother country.” There might also be found
among them, however, prudent overseers, and even shepherds and
stock-riders who had managed to buy out their masters; and
adventurous farmers and artisans who had risen by prudent
industry to find an opening in this fortunate pursuit. Their precise
tenure of the public lands and their relations to the Executive were
questions which constantly disturbed the future annals of the
colony; here we have only to take note of the inevitable influence
of a class so prosperous in a community so limited. Their prosperity
however, had not been without check; there had been serious
fluctuations in the value of money and in the price of wool; but
though individuals suffered the class had prospered. The
stock in the colony was valued at three millions and a half, of
which nearly all was theirs, and the fixed property in purchased
land, houses, and improvements belonging chiefly to other classes
was barely worth as much more.
To estimate this community by its numbers alone would give a
very inadequate gauge of its power and resources. Every fifth man
you met had done some successful work. He had made a prosperous
business, or reclaimed and fenced wild land, or imported valuable
stock, or explored new country, or at lowest had built a house and
planted an orchard and vineyard, when orchards and vineyards were
in effect nurseries for the whole community. Or he had taken a
part in the successful resistance to the Colonial Office on the convict
question, or co-operated in the movement for Separation. At any
rate he had furnished evidence of a certain vigour and decision of
character by crossing two oceans to seek a new home. And the
life of the squatter who in those days lived on his station, and
partook of its cares and toils, and its occasional dangers, was training
in a sort of rude chivalry—rude enough in truth sometimes. Who-
ever has seen the charming mansions and gardens and the graceful
plantations and parks which a few of the great flockowners have
created in latter years, will not be warranted in assuming that they
* Mr. Leslie Foster,


developed by natural progression from brick or wooden villas and
patches of green kitchen garden. In not a few cases they were
preceded by squalid huts roofed with bark, and standing in the
midst of shambles or peltries, reeking with foul air, and where fruit,
vegetables and milk were unknown luxuries. And the feats of
chivalry were often no more than unequal encounters with the black
man. But those early settlers were trained by the nature of their
pursuits to frank, fearless lives, at a time when men travelled with
no other guide than the firmament and the landmarks of nature, and
no protector but their right hands. Highways and bridges or punts
there were none; and houses of entertainment in the Bush were far
apart; but hospitality was universal, and if there were no question
of their “rights,” of which they were as jealous as Alabama
planters, these big bearded, sun-burnt men were pleasant hosts
and good fellows; and for any adequate public need would
have furnished such soldiers as rode after Stonewall Jackson.
The settlement had escaped by a singular fortune—not to
be too much rejoiced over, perhaps —the sufferings and perils
which tried the early colonists of America; but if they were
not disciplined in war, they had been taught the equivalent virtue
of self-help, not having been too tenderly fostered, as we have seen, by
the Colonial Office, or aided in any manner from the resources of
the empire. Into this peaceful community, free from all gross
excesses, not fevered by the desire of sudden wealth, reposing like
untroubled water under the genial sky of the South, there was soon
to burst a turbulent stream, and presently a rancid sewer ; and many
years passed before the sediment disappeared and the waters were
again clear and tranquil.
C. Gavan Duffy.
[The position and treatment of the Aborigines, after the occupation of Port Phillip,
is a subject that can only be properly considered apart. They were certainly of a low
type among aboriginal races ; but they were represented to be lower than they
were, by some of those who were rapidly displacing them from their hunting and
camping grounds. They ate the dead bodies of their enemies ; it is alleged that they
had no word for prayer and no idea of a Supreme Being, and that they destroyed their
children as callously as a white man destroys a litter of puppies ; and it was inferred
that as they resembled the lower animals in so many respects, they might be equally
subjugated to the will and interests of civilized man. But some of the early explorers
found them apt and intelligent (before they were taught to drink and swear) ; and in
later times they have proved to be capable of considerable discipline. The worst stain
in the history of Australian colonisation is the too tardy interest felt in the fate of the
black race by the bulk of the colonists, and the cruel employment of the agencies of
civilization to destroy them by some of the early settlers.]


TWELVE MONTHS’ LEAVE.
It is now about twenty months ago that I had the
experience of being in a ship becalmed for six consecutive
days within sight of Wilson’s Promontory; before this I had asso-
ciated the various peaks, Mt. Latrobe, Kirsop Peak, and the Boulder
Range, with pleasant recollections of beautiful scenery and of many
enjoyable days encamped on or near their summits in times gone by;
now however they forcibly recall a tedious week of ennui
and wearisome “ whistling for wind.” Our ship was ten days from
Melbourne before she was clear of Kent’s group, and the long, last
embrace of Australia became decidedly monotonous; at last how-
ever we found the wind and for many a day had enough and often too
much of it.
After nearly a quarter of a century’s residence in Aus-
tralia, jaded with many a year’s close application in a scientific
occupation, and with broken health, I had been compelled at last to
adopt the course—so often urged on me before—of seeking restand
renewed health by taking a year’s holiday and visiting the land of
my younger days. I had experienced the truth of Lord Derby’s
warning when speaking of the necessity of holidays and recreation,
that those who neglect taking the absolutely necessary periodical
holiday will eventually find themselves compelled to do so.
I had embarked in the sailing ship “LochMaree,” bound to London
via Cape Horn, which for all our slow progress at first, was as fine a
ship as one would wish to take a voyage in, a very yacht, a fast sailer,
and a splendid sea boat; it is with regret, however, I have to make
one serious detraction from what were otherwise all good qualities,
her store room was insufficiently provided.
The voyage was a moderately good one, and not altogether devoid
of incidents, one of which was extremely sad. A lady passenger fell
ill with acute rheumatism, from which she was apparently recover-
ing, when a relapse with dangerous symptoms set in, and she died
in twenty-four hours. What made matters worse, the ship
was running in a very heavy following sea, and the torture caused to
the poor sufferer by the rolling and tumbling about can be easily
imagined by those who have suffered from this painful disease. The
most solemn and impressive rite of burying the dead at sea was made




