

VICTORIAN HARBORS.
PORTLAND.
REPORT
BY
SIR JOHN COODE, C.E.
December 1879.




VICTORIAN HARBORS.
PORTLAND.
5 Westminster Chambers, London, S.W., December 1879.
Shi,
I have now the honor to submit my Report on the improvement of the Harbor
of Portland. The points on which the Victorian Government desires to have my
opinion, and to which I shall, therefore, direct attention, are—
-Ist. The improvement of the present shipping facilities by means of a
harbor or dock for vessels ; and,
2nd. In the event of the subject of a breakwater being entertained by the
Government, what would be the most suitable site for, description, anc
construction of such a work.
This Report is illustrated by three drawings, numbered 1,2, and 3 respectively.
No. 1 is a copy of the Admiralty Chart showing the western portion of Portland Bay,
from Danger Point to the coast, about four miles to the westward of the entrance of the
Fitzroy River. No. 2is a plan showing on a large scale the features of the shore from
near the Lighthouse on the Observatory (or Battery) Hill, to a point about 300 yards
northward of the principal jetty, opposite Julia street. This plan also shows the
depths at low water, with lines representing the contours at each fathom; it is
founded upon a special survey made under the direction of Mr. Steel, Inspector-
General of Public Works, in compliance with a memorandum framed by me when in
the colony, and after inspecting the locality. No. 3 gives the details of the works I
have to recommend for execution, as hereinafter more particularly described.
Portland is the most westerly town and port in the colony of Victoria; the hay
is well sheltered from westerly gales, hut is open to those from the south-east; it
appears, however, that gales from the latter quarter occur hut seldom on this part of
the coast, and rarely do any damage to shipping. The holding-ground consists chiefly
of stiff blue clay and sand, and is stated to be good. I have the authority of Captain
C. B. Payne, R.N., Chief Harbormaster of the colony, for stating that vessels may lie
here with safety in any weather if provided with good ground-tackle. In confirmation
of this, Mr. Rosevear, who has been for 29 years in charge of the Harbor department
boats at Portland under Captain Payne, informed me that he never knew a vessel to
drag shoreward. Mr. Eastman, the principal lightkeeper at Battery Hill lighthouse,
from his having been stationed there for 19 years, has had exceptional opportunities
for observing the hay; he also stated to me that he had never known a gale in
Portland Bay which vessels “well-found” could not ride out with safety.
There is an almost constant surf on the shore, which makes it difficult and
sometimes dangerous to beach boats, a circumstance rendering it all the more necessary
that additional shelter should form an important feature in any works to be undertaken
for the improvement of the port.
The trade of Portland is now, for the most part, carried on by coasting and
intercolonial steamers, and occasionally large vessels load wool for England, which,
as a rule, discharge their cargoes into, and load from lighters whilst lying at anchor in
the bay, these lighters plying to and from the existing jetty ; hut the coasting
steamers come alongside the jetty and discharge and load cargo thereat in fine weather!
At present there is no protection either for the steamers, the sailing vessels, the
lighters, or even for the fishing boats belonging to the port; from the constancy of the
surf before referred to such protection is very much needed, and the more so as it
appears that the fishing boats are hauled up on to the deck of the old jetty now disused
for goods or passengers, but this structure is in such a condition that it will not be
much longer available for even that purpose.
Drawings.
Physical
features.
Present trade and
shipping facili-
ties.


After due consideration of the character and extent of the trade to be accom-
modated, both present and prospective, and a careful study of the capabilities of the
site, I have to recommend the works wbicli I shall now proceed to describe.
Works recommended.
There can, I imagine, be no question as to the convenience to the trade of the
port which would result from the provision of sufficient shelter to enable vessels to
come alongside either a pier or a jetty and discharge their cargoes independent of
weather, and without assistance from barges. Nor can it be denied that shelter is
much desired by that deserving class of the community, the fishermen, to enable them
to carry on their avocations with a greater degree of regularity and safety than at
present. With the provision of protected berthage for steamers and sailing vessels,
the wants of the fishermen would, to a great extent, be met, as they would then be
enabled to beach their boats on that portion of the shore which would be sheltered in
all weathers, whilst barges would no longer be required, seeing that cargoes would be
discharged direct from the vessel’s hold on to a quay.
Two of the most important questions to be determined in connection with this
enquiry are —Ist. Can the requisite accommodation be best afforded by a pier or similar
structure, to be ultimately incorporated into a complete scheme of harbor facilities, or
by works partaking of the character of a dock, with capacity for extension hereafter to
provide for growth of trade ? 2nd. What are the least extensive works which might
be relied on to meet present requirements ?
With regard to the first of these questions, both a close harbor and a dock,
with their necessary adjunct works, have received my careful consideration ; but it
was evident from an early stage of the detailed investigation, that, in this case, the
dock project would be considerably more costly than the close harbor, especially with
regard to first outlay, seeing that the underwater configuration of the bed of the bay
is such as to necessitate —in connection with the maintenance of a deep-water approach
to a dock or basin—the construction of a sheltering pier or arm, of sufficient extent of
itself to form almost the first instalment of a close harbor. Were a dock to be
adopted, a depth of three fathoms at low water would not be reached on the most
favorable line at a less distance than 750 feet from the shore, and hence, to provide
sufficient shelter to vessels leaving or approaching during heavy weather, a pier in a
northerly direction of fully 1,000 feet in length would be required. I therefore
unhesitatingly recommend the adoption of a project providing for a dose harbor
ultimately, in preference to one associated with a dock or basin. Nor is the harbor
plan to be preferred on the ground of saving in first and future outlay alone, inasmuch
as the conditions of the site are such as to render it possible to provide more extensive
accommodation hereafter by the harbor plan than by any other, always supposing that
the outlay is confined within reasonable limits.
This brings me to a consideration of the second question to which I have
alluded, viz., as to the least extensive works which might be relied on to meet present
requirements ; these are indicated by full red color on drawing No. 2, apd may be
described as follows :
Upon referring to the drawing it will be seen that contemplative works have
been laid down thereon in three distinct characters, the first section being tinted red,
the second crossed by red lines, and the third tinted brown ; the second would
be incorporated with the first, and the third with the first and second, so as to form,
when the whole are complete, a comprehensive close harbor having a low-water area
of 48 acres, provided with ample jetty accommodation and all proper facilities.. I
would not, however, suggest the adoption in the first instance of more than that portion
which is tinted red, as the accommodation afforded thereby would be sufficient to meet
the requirements of the port both now and for some years to come. It is, however,
my practice in cases of this kind, and more especially with reference to a port in a
district which is rapidly developing, to put forward what, in my opinion, might be
regarded as the fullest accommodation of which the site is capable, so that, as the
necessity may arise for extended facilities, such additions may be made from time to
time in accordance with a previously matured design, with a view to the ultimate
execution of the latter in its entirety. By adhering to a well considered mode of
procedure, clashing of parts, confliction of interests, and, not infrequently, considerable
outlay and inconvenience will be saved.


The first instalment of the works would consist of the formation of a line of
railway from the point G on drawing No. 2 (where it would join with the existing
system near the switch which connects the railway leading to the present jetty with
the standage lines) and running therefrom along the shore towards the pier to
he hereafter described, so that the stone, &c., for the latter may be conveyed thereon
to such an extent as may be desirable.
I would propose to commence a pier from the point A on drawing No. 2, i
extending therefrom in a N. £ E. direction for a length of 1,200 feet, terminating at B,
in 21 feet 6 inches at low water of spring tides, and 24 feet 6 inches at high water.
The first 200. feet would consist of a wall of concrete, formed in situ , finishing with a
stout abtrtment or cross-wall of concrete, as shown on fig. 2, drawing No. 3. The
remaining 1,000 feet of this pier would be formed of massive blocks of Portland cement
concrete,'mostly of two sizes, weighing 23 tons and 16 tons each respectively; these
would be laid in the form of a solid section with sloping bond, in the manner shown on
figs. 5 and 6, drawing No. 3, the “slices” or rows of blocks inclining towards the shore,
with a batter of 3 inches to a foot. In cross-section the blocks would be well bonded
or toothed, and the outside tiers, on the harbor and sea faces, securely joggled with
concrete-in-mass, deposited in long bags of jute sacking lowered into grooves moulded
in the blocks. The upper course, for a height of 4 feet, overlying the tops of the
sloping blocks, would consist of Portland cement concrete deposited in situ over
the entire width of the pier, except under the crane roads, which would be carried
on blocks of concrete, properly toothed into the masswork as shown. Fender-
piles, mooring-bollards, boat-steps, and other fittings would be furnished throughout
the length of the pier so as to adapt it, from the root to its termination, for
the berthage of vessels and craft along its inner or western face. At a distance
of 200 feet from the point A the depth is 4 feet 6 inches at low water, and it
is only at 600 feet from A that a depth of 3 fathoms at low water is reached;
therefore, from a point 200 feet seaward of A, out to the existing 3-fathom contour,
it will be requisite to excavate the sand along the line of the solid section of the pier,
so that the foundations of the latter may, throughout, be not less than 20 feet below
low water, in order to provide for subsequent deepening under the lee of the work. I
would suggest that this sand excavation should be executed either by driving temporary
sheeting in short lengths, to form dams, and pumping out the sand from within, or by
sinking an iron caisson in advance of the scar end of the work, in this case also
pumping out the sand and lifting the sides of the caisson after the blocks have been
laid. In any event it is absolutely necessary for the success and subsequent utilization
of the pier, that the foundations should be sunk to the depth before described and
shown on the drawings. The pier surface throughout its entire length of 1,000 feet,
from the commencement of the sloping-blocks outwards, would be pitch-paved, and a
sheltering parapet provided as indicated ; landward of this point the parapet would be
continued, but of lighter section, merging into a boundary-wall at A.
The roadway would be 27 feet wide in the clear, and furnished with a single
line of rails, and a ‘‘passing-place,” laid to the colonial gauge ; also with a line adapted
for the powerful wide-gauge portable steam-crane to be used in setting the blocks.
The extreme width of the pier would be 34 feet, and its coping throughout, on the
harbor side, would be 9 feet above high water, or 12 feet above low water. Along the
back of the work a rubble apron would be deposited in order to prevent the rebound
from the sea-face scooping out the sand at the foot of the structure. A pier of the
character I have described would be of ample strength to withstand the stroke of the
heaviest seas, and would afford sufficient, but not more than sufficient, quayage width
to adapt it for trade purposes.
At a distance of 150 feet from A, and at a right angle to the work just
described, which is referred to on the drawings as the “east pier,” I would propose to
form a wharf of dry rubble masonry, resting on a bank of stone, tipped from barges, of
the character shown on fig. 4, drawing No. 3. This wharf would be 350 feet in
length, and joined, by a curve at its eastern end, with the sloping-block portion of the
pier ; from the return at its western termination it would be carried landwards in the
form of an embankment on the line indicated on the plan.
Previous to the execution of this wharf, the stream which now flows past the
south side of the Botanical gardens would be diverted at a point just below the bridge,
and discharged directly seaward.


The space between the “proposed 18 feet contour” on drawing No. 2, and the
harbor face of the east pier, would be dredged to a depth of 18 feet at low water of
ordinary spring tides, or 21 feet at high water of those tides, thus providing berthage
of that depth throughout the entire inner face of the proposed east pier, 1,000 feet in
length. The dredgings are intended to be landed and utilized in reclaiming the area
of 8 acres at the root of the east pier, which could not fail to be of great value for
subsequent use as a site for sheds and warehouses, and for stacking timber, &c.
The final portion of the works which I have to recommend for adoption in the
first instance, provided the necessary funds for their execution are forthcoming, would
consist in the erection of an open jetty of colonial wood, described on the plans as the
'“east jetty,” starting from the face of the wharf before referred to and extending
therefrom in a direction parallel to that of the east pier for a length of 450 feet. The
mode of construction proposed to be adopted is shown on figs. 1,7, and 8, drawing
No. 3. After the execution of the dredging just alluded to, this jetty would be
adapted for the berthage of vessels and steamers along each of its faces, and, as will be
seen from the detailed views, it is intended to be furnished with a double line of rails
on the colonial gauge.
I estimate the cost of the proposed works as follows :
1. Diversion of existing stream ; forming railway from point G-, at the
junction with the present system to the site of the proposed works,
together with the construction of the east pier to the point B with
the permanent railways, fenders, and other fittings complete, including
the provision of the special plant required for the pier ... ... £146,890
2. Proposed wharf and reclamation, the latter formed with dredgings from
the harbor bed, the cost of which is included in item 3 ... ... 6,930
3. Dredging the bed of the harbor to give 18 feet at low water of spring
tides over the entire area between the proposed 18 feet contour line,
drawing No. 2, and the inner face of the east pier ... ... 11,250
4. East jetty, 450 feet in length, with railways complete ... ... 10,230
Total estimated cost of works recommended for adoption in first)
instance, to be distributed over a period of six years ... ...j 1 70,300
These sums include the provision of a sufficient allowance for all plant,
contingencies, and supervision. They are based upon the current rates of labor and
materials prevailing in the colony, according to the available data and information, and
are believed to be amply sufficient to cover the cost of the works if executed by
contract. The amounts given are exclusive of purchase of land, and do not provide
any charge on account of the dredger except that for the payment of the crew, and for
fuel, stores, and “up-keep” of machinery during the execution of the worts, it being
assumed that the use of one of the colonial dredges would be granted free of charge,
provided all working expenses were defrayed. It is also based on the assumption that
no material will be met with over the area proposed to be deepened which cannot be
raised by the dredger, which point should be definitely cleared up before the
actual commencement of operations, seeing that the borings already taken do not
embrace the whole of the area proposed to be dealt with. Prior also to the letting of
any contract a new set of detailed soundings should be taken outside the limits of the
recent survey, where covered by the proposed works. The figured depths given on
the accompanying drawings have been taken from the Admiralty survey of 1869, being
the only information now available on the subject, the new survey not extending for
a sufficient distance to the north and west to cover the site of the works, although
prepared under Mr. Steel’s direction in every particular, according to the memorandum
of my requirements left with him when in the colony.
Should it be considered desirable to reduce the extent of the accommodation
which I propose to afford in the first instance, and consequently of lessening the
immediate outlay in connection therewith, this can be done by deferring for a time the
execution of say, the jetty; or of the wharf, dredging, and jetty; in the latter case
sanction being given as a first instalment only for the connecting line of railway and
the projected east pier, in which event the immediate expenditure would be confined to
the sum of £146,890. It will not, however, be practicable to afford any useful shelter
or berthage for steamers and sailing vessels in all weathers for a less sum, seeing that
the works would provide a length of 350 feet only after the depth of 3 fathoms has


been reached, although shelter for boats and barges could be obtained by the partial
execution of the pier itself.
The second instalment of the projected works for future execution, crossed by
red lines on drawing No. 2, consists of the prolongation of the east pier for a length
of 320 feet, until it terminates at the point C, and of the formation of a north pier
1,900 feet in length, z.e., from D. to E. and from E. to F., the former bearing E. \ S.,
and the latter S.E. f E., thus forming, with the works recommended for early
construction, a close harbor, having an entrance between the pier heads 320 feet in
width.
Some diversity of nautical opinion will doubtless arise as to the precise width
and aspect of this entrance, and the extent to which the east pier should overlap the
north arm; I have laid down on the plan what, in my view, will be the best position
and width for the entrance, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, and more
particularly bearing in mind the increased growth in the number of steamers as
compared with sailing vessels. I have added a note to drawing No. 2to the effect
that the precise direction of the outer kants, and the extent to which the overlap
should be provided can be determined hereafter, when the piers have arrived at the
points where the bends must be made.
The third instalment of the complete system of works consists of two jetties
parrallel to the east pier, a further reclamation of 3J acres in extent at their base, and
one of still larger area along the western face of the harbor ; a patent slip for the
repair of vessels being provided in the north-west corner, parallel to the north pier.
This extension contemplates further dredging in addition to that previously described,
both with respect to area and depth. Upon the completion of the final instalments,
the area of the harbor at low water would, as before named, be 48 acres.
After the east pier has been carried to the point B, considerable, although not
absolutely perfect, shelter in all weathers would be afforded to the existing main jetty,
the utility of which will thus be increased in a marked degree, and vessels will then be
enabled to come alongside that work on many occasions, when it would be now
impracticable for them to do so.
Upon the completion of the second instalment of the complete design for a close
harbor, it would be desirable to remove the outer portion of the existing jetty to at
least the extent indicated by crossed red lines on the plan, so as to afford means of
ready access to the wharfage along the north pier.
The first section of the works being completed, the south corner of the existing
deep railway cutting might be filled in, and a triangular shaped addition thereby made
to the roadway in the manner shown on drawing No. 2, and described by a red note
thereon. I have not, however, estimated for this improvement, as the cost of its
execution would no doubt be borne by the Railway department.
With regard to the question of a breakwater: As requested, I have indicated
by green color on drawings Nos. 1 and 2 the site and lines, which would, in my
opinion, be the most suitable for such a work, if at any time the subject should
be entertained by the Government.
In view, however, of the amount of shelter which would be afforded to all the
vessels engaged in the trade of the port (present and prospective) by the works
hereinbefore recommended and shown in red color, and in view, also, of the statement
of Captain Payne as to the character of the anchorage, confirmed by others having a
long and intimate acquaintance with the locality, it appears to me that the consideration
of the breakwater question may well be postponed to the distant future.
As to the construction of such a work, if undertaken: lam inclined to believe,
from the information at present available, that stone suitable for a mole, u a pierre
perdue ,” may be found in the locality, and within such a distance as might render
this the most economical, as it certainly would be the simplest, kind of work
to adopt.
When a necessity may arise for the determination of this question, the resources
of the surrounding district as regards yield of stone will, doubtless, have been further
developed, and much better means thereby afforded of deciding this question than exist
at the present time. It is almost superfluous to mention that it would not be
practicable to construct sheltering works of a permanent character on the lines


suggested for a possible future breakwater without entailing such an enormous outlay
as would be altogether uncalled for at present, having regard to the wants of the port
and the colony.
Here, as at the other ports examined on behalf of the Victorian Government,
I have to express my obligations to Mr. Steel, C.E., Inspector-General of Public
Works, and to Captain C. B. Payne, R.N., Chief Harbormaster of the colony, for
valuable assistance rendered at the time of my inspection, and to the former for
information recently supplied with the survey plans and sections, &c. My thanks are
also due to the mayor, Mr. Trangman, and Councillors Pile and Keiller, who
furnished particulars relative to the trade of the port, &c., at the time of my
inspection of the bay and the surrounding coast.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
JNO. COODE.
The Honorable the Commissioner of Public Works,
Melbourne.
By Authority: John Fekkks, Government Printer, Melbourne.
