

Portable Hospitals and Huts
DŒKER. SYSTEM
by
CHRISTOPH & UNMACK.
Owners of the patents and Manufactures
COPENHAGEN.
Dœcker Hospitals and Huts Factory
London Office: 35 Eastcheap,
London E. C.


The following prizes have been awarded to
Dœcker System.
Prize:
Gold Medal and 5000 francs at the International Competition
for an Ambulance Hut held by the Central Committee of
the Red Cross Antwerp 1885.
Diploma of Honour:
International Exhibition of the Red Cross, Antwerp 1880.
Gold Medal:
International Hygiene Exhibition, Berlin 1883.
International Health Exhibition, London 1884.
do. do. , do. 1884.
Worlds Exposition, New Orleans 1885.
Six Silver Medals.


Ihe Portable Hospitals and Houses, which form the
subject of the following remarks, are the invention of Capt.
v. Doecker, of the Danish Army, and have been further
improved by Messrs. Christoph &. Unmack, of Copenhagen,
the owners of the patents.
The houses consist of wooden frames covered with
specially prepared paper felt or other waterproof material,
and afford perfect shelter not only against wind and rain
but also against heat and cold.
The construction varies according to the uses for
which the houses are intended.
for Military or other tents the frames are only covered
on the outside with a waterproof covering.
For Hospital and Military barracks the frames may be
covered on both sides, leaving between the two coverings
a space of one inch, which may be either left as an air
space or be filled with wood, cork, silicate of cotton, or
sny other bad conductor of heat. The covering on the
! nside is made fireproof by being impregnated to that effect.
The floors are of planed boards and varnished.
Ihe Wooden Houses for habitation, emigrants, store
bouses, work shops, etc., are covered on the outside with
Wedge-cut boards, planed on the inner surface and rabbeted.
They may, if desired, be further covered with thin boards,
Paper felt, or with both at a time, and these buildings will
afford excellent, cheap, and healthy living rooms. These
bouses are very suitable for export, for the use of emigrants,
et c., and can be packed so as to take up very small space.


The Barracks, when required, are fitted with ventilating
stoves and baths. The Hospital Barracks are always so
made that a heating stove, which at the same time acts
as a ventilating stove, can at any time be put up.
Military Huts.
(For plans see appendix.)
PI. 111. Tent for the men. PI. IV. Mess Room, Assembly Room or
Lazaretto. PI. V. Officer’s tent.
Since 1882 the huts have been in a yearly increasing
demand for use in the Danish army, and have given great
satisfaction to both officers and men, as they are much
pleasanter to live in than canvas tents, being comfortable
and proof against both rain and wind, and comparatively
cool in hot weather. They are therefore also much healthier
for the soldiers. Many expressions of satisfaction have
been received on the part of the military authorities, both
from the Minister of War, the Director of Stores, the
medical staff, etc., who all expressed great interest in and
satisfaction with the huts. Officers and men alike testified
to the pleasantness and good ventilation of the huts.
In England the Military tents as well as the Mess Huts
and Hospital Huts have been used at Pirbright and Aider-
shot Camps, from where they were sent out by the War Office
to the troops in Egypt, at Lichfield, Chelsea, etc. At the yearly
meeting of the National Rifle Association at Wimbledon, in
1883, some of the Military Tents were placed at the disposal of
the Association. The Secretary, Captain Edmond St. John
Mildmay, thus expressed himself on their use: »I have much
“pleasure in certifying that the Doecker Military Felt
“Tents which you sent to Wimbledon, stood the test of
»the variable and often very severe weather we had in
»camp this year exceedingly well. On some occasions
“during the fortnight of the meeting, we had very strong
“gusts of wind which swept over the camps, and also
“deluges of rain, particularly on Saturday, the 14th of July?
»but the tents were in no way affected by either. They


»were generally approved of as being well adapted to per-
»manent camps.«
These huts require no sustaining lines, and the passages
between them remain free and unencumbered. When
necessary, the huts can for the same reason be placed
closer together than canvas tents, double the number
within the same area, which means that a camp for 20,000
men using these tents can be established within the same
circumference as would at present be filled by 10,000 men,
leaving the same amount of free passages. This together
with the improvement in the sanitary conditions and the
greater durability, will more than outweigh the increased
cost of these huts.
Each of these huts will accommodate from 12 to 14
men, but they are also made in smaller sizes, either on the
same type or with slanting walls as PI. 11, B. for 4 or 5
men. These latter types are also suitable for hunting, fishing,
and other occasions where a temporary and easily moveable
shelter for the night is required.
Portable Hospitals.
(For plans see appendix.)
PI. I. A & li and I. E have, besides the wards, a room for the nurse, a
closet, and a small kitchen or lobby. PI. I. G has 2 wards, room for nurse, 2 closets,
2 store rooms, and a small kitchen or lobby. PI. XII. has 0 rooms for 1 or
2 heds, bath, kitchen, closet and lobby. PI. XIII. A. D. are expressly made for
the double purpose of use during epidemics and in war. PI. XIII. A A., the
same, only provided with awning for use in hot climates.
Besides sharing in the advantages common to all isolated
hospitals on the cottage system, the Doecker Portable Hos-
pitals offer the following advantages as compared with other
similar buildings:
1- Facility of erection, dismounting, and transport. The
erection of a hospital can be done within 24 hours,
and in less than half that time it can be taken down
and packed for transport. The hospital is thus available
with the shortest notice at any spot where an infec-
tious disease may have sprung up, and isolation of
the patients can at once be effectually carried out.


2. The ease with which they are disinfected. The sides,
partitions, roof and floor of the hospital all consisting
of panels, they are easily disinfected by giving each
panel by itself a good wash or treating it with some
disinfecting solution.
3. Their perfect power of resistance against rain and wind,
heat and cold, and the perfect system of ventilation
adopted.
The defects attaching to canvas hospitals, notwithstand-
ing the improvements introduced, had long been strongly
felt, and even the best types of wooden and iron hospitals
were open to many objections, such as the impossibility of
perfect disinfection, their chilliness in winter, and their
absorption and retention of heat in summer, so that they
are scarcely inhabitable either in cold or hot weather.
When, therefore, the Doecker Portable Hospitals were
first publicly exhibited at the Hygienic Exhibition in Berlin,
in 1883, they attracted great attention, and it was generally
admitted that here at last the path had been entered which
alone could lead to perfection in this class of buildings.
The Doecker Hospital was awarded the Gold Medal of the
Exhibition, and Capt. v. Doecker himself was honoured by a
special acknowledgment by the Empress, the Emperor also
conferring on him the order of the Red Eagle.
Again at the International Health Exhibition in Lon-
don, 1884, a Gold Medal was awarded to the Doecker
huts which had already been distinguished at the Inter-
national Fisheries Exhibition, in 1883. At the Internatonal
Exhibition at Antwerp, 1885, a Diploma of Honour was
awarded to the Doecker Portable Hospitals. At the World’s
Exposition at New-Orleans, 1884—85, the » First Degree of
Merit" was accorded to the Doecker System in the shape
of a Gold Medal.
In September, 1885, an International Competition for
the best ambulance barrack was held in Antwerp by the
Red Cross Society, under the auspices of the Empress of
Germany who placed a sum of 5000 francs and a Gold


Medal at the disposal of the Society, to be given as a prize.
The hospital should be so constructed that it could be used
both during an epidemic and in war, and a series of con-
ditions further specified the claims that are now put to a
structure of this character, and which never before had been
satisfactorily carried out.
The composition of the Jury (see p. 12) showed that the
competing hospitals would have to pass through a severe cri-
ticism both from a practical and scientific point of view.
Amongst the (30 different systems competing, the Doecker
Hospital was unanimouly declared by the Jury to be the
most perfect, and to it was awarded the Empress Prize and
Gold Medal. The .perfection attained by these hospitals is
the result of practical experience in cooperation with scien-
tific and medical knowledge. If imitation is the sincerest
form of flattery, the Doecker Hospitals have no reason to
complain in that respect and it was a singular incident that
a system, obviously inspired by the same ideas as the
Doecker System, was sent over from the other side of the
Atlantic by a gentleman with the patronymic of »Ducker«.
The huts PI. XIII. A. B, C, particularly when intended
for military use, have been so constructed that the packing
cases, when emptied, are put together and used as floor.
This serves the double purpose to save the transport
of a special floor and to preserve the cases from being
destroyed, when stored away, and lost. But apart from these
considerations the usual floor is perhaps preferable.
In 1883 an Act was laid before the Lower Chamber
°f the Danish Diet for the construction of a Quarantine
hospital. The House expressed itself in favour of the
Doecker system, and the Minister submitted the question
to the Royal Sanitary Commission asking for their opinion
as to the adaptability of the system for this purpose.
Ihe owners of the Doecker patents were requested
hy the Commission to put themselves in communication with
fhe special Committee appointed to consider the question,
h soon appeared that the development then attained by


the hospital huts of Mr. v.Doecker did not fulfil the require-
ments of the Committee. The makers then indicated
alterations in the huts which they knew would comply
with the conditions laid down by the Committee, and in
order to enable them to make a practical trial they offered
to construct a hospital hut for 9 beds with 1000 cub. feet
of air for each bed, with double roof and walls and two
ventilating stoves which, according to the calculations of
Captain A. B. Reck, R.E., would satisfy the requirement
for a perfect renewal of the air twice every hour.
The experiments then took place, and proved that
the construction now satisfied all the demands that had been
made. It was now possible to introduce into the building more
than 25,000 cub. feet of heated air per hour, instead of
the 19,000 feet exacted by the Committee.
The result of these trials, commenced in 1883 and conti-
nued well into the winter of 1884, was such that the construc-
tors were requested to send in plans for various buildings
required for a quarantine establishment. It was then seen,
what to the makers had been evident from the beginning, that
the Doecker hospital huts were not suited for replacing the
entire range of buildings necessary for such an establishment,
but that their particular sphere would rightly be defined as
that of structures suitable for use as hospital wards, their
arrangement satisfying all requirements for this particular
purpose, and their price being sufficiently moderate to allow
of their being used with advantage for the enlargement of
permanent hospitals and in cases of epidemics. Ihey thus
offer a means for avoiding the overcrowding of hospitals
against which so many complaints have justly been made,
and which renders perfect disinfection such a difficult task.
The report of the Royal Sanitary Commission having
been concluded, the Ministry of Justice proposed in the
budget for 1884—1885 the construction of a quarantine
establishment composed of epidemic barracks on the Doecker
system. It was pointed out by the Ministry that the price
for an establishment on this system, would effect a


saving of £ 665 as compared with a similar permanent establish-
ment. A sum of £ 4,000 has been granted for acqui-
ring a number of these huts.
The project was accompanied by a declaration of
the Chief of the Copenhagen Fire Brigade, Captain Meyer,
R.E., who, after experiments with small barracks on the
system, declared them to be less exposed to the danger
of fire than wooden barracks, and classified them in this
respect with houses half stone half wood.
Having taken cognisance of the Report of the Royal
Sanitary Commission and the Chief of the Fire Brigade,
the Municipality of Copenhagen bought the hospital hut
which had served for experiments, and erected it at the
Gresunds Hospital, there to continue the experiments. It
remained there from July to October, 1884. The experiences
there acquired were so satisfactory that at the time of the great
measles epidemic in the autumn of 1884 the Burgomaster,
Mr. Borup, fearing an overfilling of the Blegdam Hospital,
which has 180 beds, bought the barracks then disposable, viz,:
2 hospital huts PI. I.E,
3 hospital huts PI, LA.
forming together 10 wards with above 35,000 cub. feet of air.
In comparing the cost of these huts with that of perma-
nent buildings, we shall take for comparison the Blegdam
Hospital, which is built for epidemical cases on the cottage
system, and the building of which has cost about £ 52,000,
not included the site, which is more than 20 acres. It
contains 180 beds with abt. 1000 cub. feet air to each bed.
The sick wards alone cost more than per bed.
Calculating on the basis of the cubic content of air in
this hospital, the 5 Doecker huts bought for this hospital
Would afford sufficient room for
32 beds which at £V2O would have cost
while the actual price of the huts was
3 IA at
2 IE at £m)
thus showing a saving of 2,368


Considering the great ease with which the barracks
can be disinfected and ventilated, the risk of admitting
even the double number of sick would not be great, which
makes the difference so much the greater. The Committee
appointed by the Red Cross in Geneva, in 1883, to make
a report on the construction of moveable hospitals, only
required a space of 428 cub. feet for each bed, on which
basis the hospital huts PI. I. A would afford room for 12
beds and PI. I.E for 26 beds, and it would render the
comparison much more favourable still.
The Municipality of Frederiksberg, a suburb of Copen-
hagen, has decided to acquire 2 hospital huts of the class
I.E, with a cubic space of 10,000 feet each, or together
20,000 cub. feet in the sick wards, with room for 20 beds,
allowing thus to each bed a cubic space of 1000 feet.
The cost of permanent structures for 20 beds each
with 1000 cub, feet of air, and calculating as above a cost
of for each bed
would amount to 2,400
while 2 of the huts, Class I.E, only cost . £ 800
or a difference in favour of the huts of £ 1,600.
It is also intended to use these huts, when no epidemics
prevail, as adjuncts to the newly erected hospital of the
Commune, for replacing the canvas tents hitherto hired in
summer for use of convalescents and sick under observation.
For these purposes the huts will thus now be available all
the year through independently of the seasons.
The quarantine hospitals will in case of war be placed
at the disposal of the military authorities.
In England and the Colonies the Doecker huts have
found an extended use, and, as will be seen from what
follows, under very varying climatic conditions. H. M. Consul
in the Eastern Soudan, Mr. A. Baker, used two of the huts for 2
years in the Soudan and found them »excellent substitutes for
»tents being much roomier and much cooler by day and
»warmer by night and strong enough to resist the periodical


»gales of tropical climates, which ordinary tents are
»not. The »Colonel’s hut« PI.V. made a comfortable
»living room in all but the hottest weather. As to
»the wood work, two years of the hottest sun had
»no perceptible effect on it, though all exposed wood work
»in the Soudan is very soon warped out of shape«. Consul
Baker’s huts were not fitted with awning as were the 2
large Hospital huts sent out to the troops at Suakim by
the War Office, and those sent to different places in Egypt
by the Princess of Wales’s Branch of the National Aid Society.
One of the latter was erected at Wady Haifa where it earned
from Colonel F. Duncan, C. 8., the commanding officer, the testi-
mony that it was »exceedingly good and commodious«. Outside
the tropics, and where the rays of the sun are less pene-
trating, an awming beneath the roof is preferable, as an outer
awning requires a larger space for the hut.
Lecturing upon the »Hygiene of War« at the Parkes
Museum in 1883, Sir Robert Rawlinson, C. 8., expressed
himself highly satisfied with the Doecker Huts exhibited at
the International Fisheries Exhibition thinking these hospi-
tal huts the most perfect portable structures so far as
he knew invented for the purposes intended.
The annexed report by Dr. Horace Swete of Droit-
wich R.S.A. proves the great assistance he derived from
the use of one of these hospitals during an epidemic.
Both in England and in Germany these hospitals are
steadily being introduced by the sanitary authorities at
the recommendation of many prominent medical men,
m their efforts for being prepared to meet any sudden
outbreak of infectious diseases, experience showing that
the existing means are nearly everywhere insufficient for
the purpose, and that hurried preparations are not only in
most cases ineffective but also cause increased expense.
At the Quarantine Congress held in Antwerp in 1885,
general admiration was expressed for the Doecker Hospitals,
a nd members expressed their intention, each in his district


or country, to advocate the introduction of the system
as being the best adapted and cheapest.
The cost of maintenance of these hospitals as compared
with that of permanent buildings is only small. The latter
require much work and a considerable time for a thorough
disinfection to secure the destruction of all infectious matter,
whenever they have been used for any virulent epidemic,
such as small-pox, scarlet fever, typhus, diphteritis, or cholera.
The portable hospitals being easily taken to pieces, and all
corners and joints being readily accessible, only require to
be well washed either simply with soap and water or with
a sublimate.
Wood enters in a proportionally very small degree
into the construction, and the impregnated surface of the
paper felt is not apt to retain the germs of disease.
As to durability, taking the duration of these hospitals
at 20 years, which may be considered a very low figure,
as they will probably last double that time, the difference
in price is still sufficiently large for their profitable employ-
ment. Besides which, very likely within 20 years quite
other requirements will be put to hospitals than at the
present day. Even having recourse to the radical process
of the Americans, who burn the structures every eighth or
ninth year, to make quite sure against the possibility of
infection, these hospitals would still have the advantage
on their side.
To rural communities these hospitals offer the great
advantage that they are easily transported to the exact
spot where the epidemic has broken out, thus avoiding the
removal of the sick and minimising the danger of spreading
the disease.
The food for the patients will have to be prepared
outside the huts, the only accommodation inside the huts
being a small compartment where water can be boiled, etc.
As to the indispensable baths, it may happen that
they are not always obtainable in cases where the huts
serve independently of any permanent hospital. Special


huts have therefore been constructed for this purpose.
They are placed at one end of the hospital with direct
access from one to another through double doors.
The huts will find their application in small communities as
well as for temporary use on any spot where an epidemic
has broken out, for immediate treatment of the sick under
the best possible conditions for effective isolation, and also
as reserve buildings to permanent hospitals to prevent
overcrowding, and when doubts arise as to whether it is
prudent to continue the extension of permanent buildings
in face of the large expenses required by the continuously
increasing demands by the medical science for improve-
ments in permanent structures and their maintenance.
Huts VIII. A.
for warm baths were constructed at the request of the
Danish Royal Sanitary Commission to be used in connec-
tion with the portable hospitals, when in use for
epidemic diseases, warm baths being then indispensable.
Bath rooms may of course be constructed so as to become
a part of the hospital hut itself as shown in PI. XII. The
bath room can be delivered complete with heating appa-
ratus, bathing tub, etc.


APPENDICES.
I.
INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION FOR A SAMPLE MODEL
OF
AMBULANCE HUTS
ARRANGED BY THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMITEE OF THE RED CROSS AT GENEVA,
HELD AT ANTIVERT, SEPTEMBER, iSSs-
PRIZE; A GW DEDAL AND 5,110(1 FRANCS, OFFERED BV 1.1.1. THE EMPRESS
OF HERMAN V, AWARDED TO MESSRS CHRISTOPH & UNMACK OF COPENHAGEN
FOR A HUT ON THE DOECKEP. SISTEM.
MEMBERS OF THE JURY.
Dr. CELARIER, Inspector-General of the Army Sanitary Service
(Belgium).
ALBERT ELLISEN, Esq., C.E., Secretary to the French Red Cross
Society (France).
Surgeon-General Dr. CODER (Germany).
Prof. Dr. v. LANGENBECK, Privy Councillor, Surgeon-General a la
suite (Germany).
Dr. WERNER, Major-Surgeon (Germany).
JOHN FURLEY, Esq., Vice-President and Hon. Director of Stores
of St. John Ambulance Association (Great Britain).
Surgeon-General Sir THOS. LONGMORE, C. 8., Q. H. S., Professor
of the Army Medical School at Netley (Great Britain).
Dr. CARSTEN, Gen. Secretary of the Dutch Red Cross Society
(Holland).
Commander Dr. BAROFFIO, Colonel, Medical Inspector of the
Army (Italy).
G. MOYNIER, President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross at Geneva.


II.
List of buyers of Doecker Portable
Hospitals and Houses.
Europe.
Austria: Stadthalterei in Vienna.
Belgium: Ministry of War.
Commune of St. Josse-ten-Noode.
Denmark: Ministry of War.
Ministry of Justice.
Commune of Copenhagen.
of Frederiksberg.
of Aarhus.
District of Praesto.
of Randers.
King Frederik the 7th Charitable Institution of Jaegerspris.
Bath of Marienlyst.
of Klampenborg.
Iceland Fisheries.
United Steamship Company.
Count Rantzau.
Hoick Hardenberg.
Baron Bille Brahe.
O. Bache Esq. M. Royal Academy of Fine-Arts,
and many others.
England: War Office.
Foreign Office.
Metropolitan Asylums Board.
Brentford Local Board.
Droitwich R. S. A.
King’s Norton R. S. A.
Llanelly Local Board of Health.
Nottingham Town Council.
Orsett Union.
National Aid Society, Princess of Wales Branch of.
Pratts Club.
Victoria Gold Company Lim.


Prince of Wales.
Baroness Burdett Coutts.
Alfred Morrison, Esq.
Countess de Noailles.
T. A. Readwin, Esq.
Rev. G. Townsend W T arner,
Germany: Ministry of War,
Augusta Hospital, Berlin.
Kinderheilanstalt,
Allgemeines Krankenhaus, Hamburg.
Town Council, Brunswick.
Marienstift near
Town Council, Wisbaden.
Liibeck.
Wismar.
Hildesheim.
Breslau.
Greifswalde.
Greece: King of Greece.
Ministry of War.
Holland: Red Cross Society,
Commune of Schagen.
Hungary: Red Cross Society.
Italy: Municipal Council of Palermo.
Russia: Red Cross Society.
Servia: Ministry of War.
Sweden; Ministry of War.
Commune of Mahno.
America.
United States: War Office, Washington,
Argentine Republic.
Asia.
Siam: King of Siam.
Africa.
Egypt: Morice Bey.
Director of the Water Works,


III.
Reports and testimonials.
I.
Commune-hospital, 19th October, 1882.
Complying with your request in letter of 3rd ; nst . f or a report on
the hut supplied by you to the Blegdams-hospital, I have to inform you
that the hut was erected during several months last autumn and also this
summer, and occupied by patients from the 28<h June to the 26th August.
It appears from the statement of the superintendent of the hospital,
confirmed by the home physician, that the hut was perfectly able to
withstand rain and wind and only very little affected by atmospheric influences.
It is light and airy, not too close during the hot part of the day, and not
too cold during the night, so that it must be considered to offer a plea-
sant room for the patients, and one far preferable to canvas tents.
Penger.
Rentzon.
To Capt. v.Doecker, R. D.
11.
Copenhagen, lb (h October, 1882.
As commander of the camp on the Amager Common this year, I have
much pleasure in pointing out the pleasant change which the recruits of
the Ist regiment of artillery have made by having to use Doecker tents
instead of canvas tents. The Doecker tents have the advantage of being
cooler in hot weather, and warmer when the weather is cold, than canvas
tents; they are almost completely dry in even the heaviest rain, and some
small deficiencies (such as the ridge covering being a little too narrow and
the end pieces a little too large) can easily be altered.
During the month of September I occupied a Doecker hut (Colo-
nel’s hut), and in every way preferred it to the double canvas tent I had
hitherto occupied. I am able to certify that these huts afford a very
comfortable living room.
Lauritz Lunn,
Captain R. Danish Artillery.
T ° Capt. v.Doecker, R. D.


111.
Copenhagen, 20‘1> October, 1882.
It gives me great pleasure to comply with your wish and let you know
my opinion of the felt tents constructed by you.
As physician to the Frederiksberg Hospital I lived in one of these
tents during the months of June, July, August and September last, the tent
being placed in the gardens of the hospital. It afforded very pleasant
shelter in all kinds of weather, and proved to be completely impenetrable
to rain and wind, and the variations of the outer temperature were com-
paratively very little felt in the interior of the tent. Your huts are in
every respect very much preferable to the common canvas tents, the many
and great inconveniences of which I have had the opportunity of becom-
ing acquainted with during two encampments. On the whole Ido not
hesitate to say that a felt tent on the Doecker system is the healthiest
and most pleasant dwelling In summer time any one could deshe.
Yours respectfully,
Ove HØegh-Guldberg,
Physician.
To Capt. v.Doecker, R. D.
IV.
Rath Marienlyst, I st October, 1882.
I have great pleasure in being able to express the satisfaction which
my visitors as well as I myself have experienced in the use of your felt bathing
cabins, which possess all the advantages one could wish for: they are
comfortably warm and are inpenetrable to the wind, consequently one is
not exposed to catching cold by draught, which is a common complaint
with bathing cabins of canvas or wood.
I intend to use exclusively these felt bathing cabins on wheels foi
easy removal under the frequent changes of weather here. As to cost,
they have the advantage over wooden cabins, that they may be easily
packed up in cases at the close of the bathing season and stored away
for the winter.
Most respectfully yours,
Olaf JØrgensen,
Lessee of Bath Marienlyst.
Elsinore.


V.
The Danish Section of the „Red Cross“.
Copenhagen, Bth May, 1883.
Mr. v.Doecker, retired captain, has presented to the Central Com-
mittee of this Section the felt tents patented according to his system.
According to the informations and the certificates vve have recei-
ved, these tents have been employed in the service of the army and
the hospital department, and have given much satisfaction. They are
strong, capable of being easily used and transported, impenetrable, and far
cooler in summer and warmer in winter than those formerly in use here.
This very year also, the War department has ordered a large number
of them.
The Committee, feeling convinced that Mr. v. Doecker’s huts may
expect a future as temporary military hospitals, have great pleasure in call-
ing the attention of all, who look with favour upon the work of the
»Red Cross«, to them.
The President of the Central Committee of the Section.
Thomsen,
General.


VI.
EXTRACT OF THE TENTH ANNUAL REPORT
TO THE
RURAL SANITARY AUTHORITY OF DROITWICH
BY
HORACE SWETE, M.D.S.S.c, CERT. CANTAB.
Medical Officer of Health, sc.
THE HOSPITAL FOR INFECTIOUS DISEASES.
During the first outbreak of Small-pox at Iladzor, it was determined
to erect a hospital to which cases of an infectious character might at once
he removed, A sub-committee was formed and inspected one of Doecker’s
Field Hospitals in use for Small-pox cases at King’s Norton, which was
found fully to answer the purpose. Your Authority therefore purchased one
of these Hospitals with accommodation for eight patients and a nurse, and
the total expenses of erection, purchase and furniture amount to € 256
Os IQd. This hospital was intended to be used in different parts of the
district, being erected at the place of the outbreak. Here arose a very
practical difficulty that was not anticipated, that of obtaining land for the
purpose. It was first erected near Uroitwich, but the adjoining Urban
Authority felt themselves much aggrieved at having such a hospital within
sight of their town, and undertook to move it to Stoke Works, and back
again to Droitwich at their own expense. Even at Stoke Works, in the
neighbourhood of the outbreak, it was very difficult to obtain a plot of
ground for its erection. This difficulty has compelled me to form the opinion
that it is necessary, if the hospital is to be erected in time to stamp out
an outbreak of disease, a permanent situation must be found for it; there
should not be less than 20 yards around the hospital fenced off, and if a
still larger piece of ground could be obtained, it would be better. The
hospital is now completely furnished in every respect. The only addenda
required will be properly constructed earth closets and an iron house so
arranged that it may be used as a store house for the hospital and its
furniture when not erected, and when erected, as a kitchen and wash-house,
disinfecting chamber or mortuary, and private earth closet for the nurse.


It has been suggested that if the hospital is to have a permanent
site, why not have built a hospital at once; but reflection will shew that
the temporary hospital is a very great saving of expense. It is far supe-
rioi in a sanitary point of view to any timber or iron hospital, and a
brick or stone building must be erected to the satisfaction of the Local
(/overnment Board, and has already been shewn to be a very costly affair.
If a permanent site is procured and the foundations laid down, my
expelience of the hospital is, that I could erect it, furnish it, and bring
patients in within six hours from an outbreak of Cholera, Small-pox, or
I ever. Nothing is worse than a »too late« policy with infectious diseases,
eaily isolation not only will stamp out the disease, but save the expense
of compensation in destroying clothes and bedding; this alone during the
year has cost your Authority £ 8 7s. sd.
I must therefore strongly urge upon your Authority not to delay
in obtaining a suitable plot of ground for the purpose.
I consider that the hospital answered its purposes admirably during
the very hot weather; it was never oppressively hot, the ventilation being
most perfect; there was some leakage through the chinks of the screens
forming the roof, but that would be easily prevented by having slips of
wood or iron overlapping the joints, which may be added at a very small
expense.*)
These Field Hospitals have been sent out by the Government to the
seat of war in Egypt. The nurse who had experience of canvas, wood and
iron temporary hospitals, spoke most highly of the comfort of the Doecker
Field Hospital, and the ease with which it was kept clean.
Scarlet h ever has occurred in a few instances. Small-pox made its
appearance at Stoke Works in a formidable form. A portion of a field in
an isolated position was obtained, and the Portable Field Hospital erected,
hive cases were received, three of them being of a very verulent type.
All recovered, the attention and skill of the trained nurse employed being
most praiseworthy. I have no doubt that to the use of the effective little
Hospital was to be attributed the satisfactory result of completely stamping
out the disease. Thorough inspection was made of the houses at Stoke
Works, the bedding of the patients being destroyed, and the houses
thoroughly disinfected.
. . . . Such an epidemic would, I believe, have been cut short,
had all the children been remowed to a hospital for isolation, Avhere
' This will not be required if the precaution to fill up the insterstices with putty is
taken. Author's note.


everything worn by them could have been satisfactorily disinfected. It
shews the value of the field hospital now in the possession of the Autho-
rity, but at the time the worst cases occurred, it was in use at Stoke
Works with Small-pox.
Should such another epidemic occur, I shall at once advise the
hospital to be opened even if the attack was stamped out with only a few
cases. The experience of last year at Ombersloy will shew that it would
be well worth the expense even in the mere saving of rates, not to speak
of the more severe loss of life.
VII.
The American Association of the Red Cross,
Washington D. C. 1 A' l Novbr. 1885.
Gentlemen.
In acknowledging the receipt of your pamphlet describing the por-
table barracks of Christoph & Unmack (Doecker System) it affords me
great pleasure to congratulate you and the manufacturers upon the well
deserved honour accorded to the Doecker System of portable barracks in
the award of the Empress of Germany’s Prize and Gold Medal at Antwerp
in September last.
When at the instance of the American National Association of the
Red Cross its Branch Society in New-Orleans during the latter part of
the late Exhibition occupied one of these barracks as an Emergency
Hospital, its adaptability to the purpose and general excellence were self
evident, and had the structure arrived and been erected in time for the
Jury of Awards to have passed upon its merits, it must undoubtedly also
have been accorded the highest premium*). Taken all in all it is without
question the most perfect structure of its kind I have as yet seen.
Yours respectfully,
sig. John Hitz,
of the American Association of the Red Cross,
Washington D. C.
‘The ..First Degree of Merit" in the shape of a Gold Medal has been awarded by the
Jury to the Doecker Hospitals (see above p. 4).


IV.
PRICE-LIST.


All prices include foor and packing and ddk
IV at all ports and
railway stations in England.
All Expences after arrival of goods,
in port or
ilwaystation for Buyer’s account, likewise duty, if any.
Length
Breadth
' Height
tills
Height
to
the ridge
Cubicspace
in
the wards
Weight
Measurement
when packed
Number
of
Price
Type.
Nett.
lbs.
Gross
lbs.
up
ft. 1
in
ft. |
—
it in
ft.
in
Oubicfeet
Oubicfeet
Package
£
I.A-B
HOSPITAL double coated all over with 2 wards,
nurse room etc., roof ventilators, and
16
10
4
5200
arrangement for putting in stoves . . .
42
7
i
8
6500
8200
530
27
205
Do. do. with awning (Plan XV)
*
”
• I
,
"
8800
590
31
223 a 230
Do. do. with 2 stoves
’*
"
7100
32
220
I.E
LARGE HOSPITAL double coated all over with
2 wards nurse room etc., roof
ventilators and arrangement
19 j
;
17 »
11
12100
for putting in stoves
72
4
8
1
11370
15200
980
47
350
do. do. with awning
w
”
*
“
0
•
52
400
Jo do. with 2 stoves and ventilating
14200
funnels
»
"
*
"
"
17:100
1070
52
400
I.G
do do. double coated all over with
2 wards nurseroom, 2 closets,
2 storerooms etc., roof ven-
tilators and arrangement for
19 -1
f I
8
11
12600
75
6
1
11.L0
15800
1020
50
375
»
»
**
•
*»
it
55
425
do do. with 2 stoves and ventilating
14700
i)
»
*
•
17900
1110
55
3
425
10
II. I!
TENT FOR SPORT with packing to be used as
8
2
8
•
n
„
400
26
13
8
13
"
»
»
»
1280
1450
85
6
25
III.
do. with packing to be used as
III. A
8
2
8
i 6
f 6
I 1!
•
»
»
»
540
30
f)
15
IV.
32
10
151'
4
7
8
3475
3960
4800
300
18
120
50
13
8
13
4
8
1
7
8
1260
1800
2150
140
9
3
V.
VIII.
L/ULkHN HDo mn
8
2
s
„
»
»
275
400
40
9 a 10
43
8
7
1 6
8
9
7
»
1300
1550
150
8
VIII. A
X.E
XI.
8
8 1
850
2
■
1100
90
(i
25
95
oU iVliVillfiN.
AMBULANCE HUT with wagon to be packed in
1(1
4
16
6
G
9
9
2400
1190
2600
160
1
XII.
QUARANTINE HOSPITAL with 4 wards for 1
bed and 2 wards for 2 beds bath-
room with bath and stove and
19
1 ?
8
U
1
10120
19000
arrangement for putting in stoves. .
82
1 2
•
23000
1650
61
505
do do. with stoves and ventilating funnels .
•
1 ”
'*
”
21400
25600
1800
70
565
XIII. A
HOSPITAL 1 ward, movable panels on 3 sides
•
and arrangement for putting in stoves. The
32
10
19
7
8
11
8
6350
„
5600
500
12
173
250
315
XIII.B
XIII.c
XIII.iy
49
4
19
19
19
7
8
0
11
8
9530
»
7500
700
17
(15
8
7
11
8
12800
..
10700
950
22
49
4
J 1
Q
11
1
8840
6100
7500
450
27
205
32
It
u
8
6350
»
„
16
191 a 198
XIII. AA
do. do. (to. cio. wiui lilies
1
PRICHIST.


Axel E. Aamodt. Copenhagen.






















