

PORTUGUESE
INDIA
TO-DAY




PORTUGUESE INDIA
TO-DAY
NOVEMBER
19 5 0




CONTENTS
Page
Land and People .5
Historical .9
Undemocratic Government . . . . 12
Economic Exploitation . . . . .15
Denial of Civil Liberties . . . . .19
Religion in State Policy .... .23
Struggle for Freedom .... .26
Portuguese Arguments ..... 29
Conclusion 34
Appendix—Mahatma Gandhi on Portuguese Rule 35




Land and People
-The Portuguese settlements in India comprise Goa, Daman
and Diu.
All three form enclaves within the Indian State of
Bombay. Goa is on the Konkan coast; Daman, including
•the small territory of Pragana-Nagar-Avely, lies on the
Gujrat coast at the entrance to the Gulf of Cambay and
Diu, a tiny islet along with Gogola and Simbor, two
isolated spots, lies on the southern fringe of the Kathiawar
Peninsula. Together they cover an area of 1538 sq. miles
and have a population of 6,24,177 inhabitants, according to
the census of 1941. Administratively they constitute a single
unit somewhat pompously designated by the Portuguese as
“Estado da India.”
Goa, 1,400 sq. miles in area, is the largest and the
'most important of the three. Roughly triangular in shape,
.it has for its base 62 miles of coastline washed by the
Arabian Sea. Like that of Bombay, the outstanding physical
•feature of Goa is the low range called the Western Ghats.
The Zuari and the Mandovi are the two most important
rivers of Goa. At the mouth of the former is the fine
deep-sea port of Mormugao and at that of the latter Panjim
or Nova Goa, the capital of Goa. Climatically Goa
•resembles the adjoining Indian territory. Dry between
October and May, it receives most of its rainfall from the
#outh-west monsoon between June and August,


The People
Racially, the people of Goa derive from Aryan stock.
According to Skanda Pur ana the Aryans came to Goa
from Trihotrapur, modern Tirhut in Bihar, and established
agricultural colonies in the strip of land between the Ghats
and the Sea. Goans are descendants of these Aryan
settlers.
Goa’s population is just under 600,000, of whom Hindus
form roughly over a half, the rest being Christians and
Muslims.
Hindu or Christian, Goans consider India as their
motherland. They speak Konkani, a language spoken
on the Konkan coast and having close affinities with Marathi
and Sanskrit. The old social structure has persisted and
Goan Christians adhere to the caste system like Hindus.
Every generation of Goans renews its ancient ties of kinship
with Indians by marriage.
Dependence on India
Nature has been generous to Goa. Its soil is fertile.
It has iron and manganese deposits and a fine waterfall,
the Dudh Sagar which can be made to yield cheap
electricity. Its harbours are deep and well protected from
wind.
But even after 450 years of Portuguese rule Goa
remains undeveloped. Only a third of the land is cultivated
and it produces not even one half of the country’s require-
ments of rice. Goa has a few handicrafts and no industry.
Its exports are few. It cannot provide a livelihood for the
people, a large number of whom have to emigrate to India.
Some 1,50,000 Goans, representing a fourth of Goa’s
population, live and work in India. Many of them occupy
high positions in the industrial, commercial and official life
of India and remit their savings to Goa. These remittances,
which amounted to Rs. 40 million in 1949, play a vital role


in Goa’s economy. They enable Goa’s middle class to keep
up a reasonable standard of living, provide money for
administration and make good the trade deficit. Without
this money Goa’s economy would crumble.
Besides providing Goans with employment, India runs
the only Portuguese railway—the 52-mile W.l.P.R.—and
provides foreign exchange for Goa’s imports from sterling
areas. A large part of Goa’s trade is with India, and the
earnings of the port of Mormugao are mainly from Indian
trade and shipping.
Portugal exercises sovereignty over Goa but shirks its
fiscal responsibility. The note circulation of Goa’s only
bank, the state-controlled Banco Nacional, is restricted by
a statute. It is utterly inadequate for the needs of the
people, and but for the free circulation of Indian money
trade and commerce in Goa would come to a standstill.
Goa’s education also underlines the dependence of the
country on India. All Goan students, except an insignifi-
cant minority, appear for the Matriculation Examination
of the University of Bombay. In the only Portuguese
secondary school in Goa attendance is gradually decreasing,
there being only 400 students out of the full capacity of
1,200. There are no facilities in Goa for university educa-
tion. The only vocational institution is the medical school
at Panjim. For higher education, liberal as wall as
professional, Goan students have, therefore, to come to
India.
Goa is thus firmly bound up with India. Geographically,
it is part of India. Economically, it has no existence apart
from India. Ethnically, culturally and historically the
people of Goa and India are one. In other words, Goa is a
limb of mother India.
Goans Desire Union with India
In view of these bonds it is but natural that the people


of Goa, Daman and Diu should passionately desire reunion
with India. They have unequivocally expressed their
wishes through their political organization, the Goa
National Congress. The Congress, which represents an
overwhelming majority of Goans, adopted the following
resolution at Belgaum in June 1949 :
.. ..■ n i . •'. .
“The National Congress (Goa) correctly interpreting
the anxious aspirations of the people declares that Goans
are one with the people of India, bone of their bone, flesh
of their flesh, that Goa has no place but in the bosom of
the motherland and her people desire to cast off for ever
the yoke of the foreigner so that they may be free to
vindicate the elementary right of self-determination and
to shape their future destiny within the Indian Union.”
It was in deference to the clearly expressed wishes of
the people of Portuguese possessions and in view of the
unbreakable ties between them and Indians that the Prime
Minister of India stated in Parliament on February 6, 1950,
that the possessions “will have to come to India.” This
statement is in conformity with his Government’s declared
policy of ending colonialism in Asia.


Historical
the Portuguese incursion into India had its origin in the
ambition of Prince Henry the Navigator to wrest the
lucrative spice trade of Europe from the Venetians and the
Egyptians. To achieve this object it was necessary to
discover a direct sea route to India. Bartholomeo Diaz set
out in search of it, and eventually Vasco da Gama following
in his footsteps rounded the Cape of Good Hope and reached
Calicut in 1498.
At that time the Malabar Coast was divided into a
number of principalities, jealous of one another and afraid
of the Zamorin of Calicut. The unstable political situation
provided an excellent opportunity for Portuguese adven-
turers. By the skilful use of force and intrigue, they set
up a few trade establishments along the Malabar Coast.
From these footholds they preyed upon Arab and Egyptian
ships laden with spices. K. M. Panikkar in Malabar and
the -Portuguese describes such an act of piracy committed by
the Portuguese fleet under Estavo da Gama, which the King
of Portugal had sent out in 1502, in the following words:
“A ship belonging to a brother of Khoja Kassim of
Calicut was returning from Mecca. Da Gama stopped it
and plundered the goods. ‘The Captain-Major’ says the
admiring author of Las Lendas da India, ‘after making the
ship empty of goods prohibited any one from taking out
from it any Moor and then ordered them to set fire to it ’
No pleading could assuage the thirst of the Portuguese for
blood. This is a typical example of the inhuman and almost
demoniacal cruelty of the Portuguese adventurers.”


Before long the Portuguese turned from trade to
conquest. Alfonso de Albuquerque came to India in 1509-
determined to set up a Portuguese empire in the East.
The Zamorin of Calicut blocked his ambition in India.
Albuquerque, therefore, resolved to get him out of his way.
First he made war upon the Zamorin. Having failed to
subdue him by force, Albuquerque induced the heir-
apparent to poison the ruler. Nor was he ashamed to brag
of his intrigue. Boastfully he wrote to his King, “Nam-
piadiri slew the Zamorin with poison, because in all my
letters I bid him to kill the Zamorin with poison.”
In pursuance of his imperialistic policy, Albuquerque
attacked and occupied the island and the city of Goa, then
ruled by the Adilshahi dynasty of Bijapur. Triumphantly
he rode into the city and had his fill of brutality and blood.
With great satisfaction Albuquerque wrote to his Sovereign
in December 1510, “I then burnt the city and put everything
to the sword and for days continuously the people shed
blood. Wherever thfey were caught and found, no life was.
spared to any Mussalman, and their mosques were filled up
and set on fire . . . We calculated 6,000 souls to have
been killed, Mussalmans, men and women, and of their
militian archers many died. It was, my Lord, a great deed
well fought and well finished.” Muslim women, whose
husbands had been killed in war or butchered, were con-
verted to Christianity and married to Portuguese soldiers.
It is difficult to imagine a more cruel and barbarous war
than this of which the Portuguese hero boasts.
Presently, he set himself to drive out the Arab and
Egyptian ships from the Indian Ocean and with this end
in view captured Malacca in 1511 and Ormuz in 1515.
Albuquerque was recalled in 1515 and died on the way
home.
The Portuguese dream of founding an empire in the
East faded with the departure of Albuquerque. There were
several causes for the decline. The naval supremacy, the


basis of their conquest, trade and power, passed from the
Portuguese to the Dutch and the British. With a few excep-
tions Albuquerque’s successors were corrupt and greedy
men. The Portuguese ruling class in Goa lived a life of
indolence and luxury which the Imperial Gazetteer of India
describes thus:
“The work of conquest was over, and it left behind it a
gay and wealthy society of conquerors who had nothing to do
. The gentlemen had to be amused. There were no
hotels or inns in the city but boarding houses and gambling
saloons.
Such gambling houses were not places for respectable
women, and while the male society thronged their saloons
the Portuguese ladies were shut up at home. The society
of Goa, therefore, divided itself into two idle populations
... an idle population of men in the streets and
gambling houses, and an idle population of women in the
seclusion of their homes. This was one of the first results
of the intensely military spirit with its contempt for peaceful
forms of industry, on which the Portuguese power rested
in India ... A European zanana life grew up and
brought with it some ugly consequences. A lady valued
• herself in her female coterie upon the number and the
daring of her intrigues.”
It is no wonder that the Portuguese were unable to
retain their possessions. In 1622 the English and the Shah
of Persia joined hands to wrest the naval base of Ormuz
from the Portuguese. Later, one after another, the Dutch
seized Malacca in 1641, Ceylon in 1656, Quillon in 1661,
Cochin and Cannanore in 1663.
Whatever was left of their dominion in India came in
for severe battering at the hands of the Marathas.
The fact which stands out in this brief history is that
the Portuguese acquired Goa, Daman and Diu by force.
They are retained by force. African and Portuguese troops
are everywhere in Goa, and it would appear as though the
country were only recently occupied.


Undemocratic Government
the Portuguese rule in Goa has always been authorita-
rian. The liberal trend initiated by the first Republican
Government in 1910, by granting Goa a measure of financial
autonomy, was short-lived. The Carmona-Salazar fascist
regime took away the meagre financial powers. The Council
of Government was shorn of its deliberative functions, and
local self-government was all but abolished.
Goa today has an administration in which all
power tapers to the Minister for Colonies in Lisbon. All
measures of importance must be initiated by this supreme
autocrat. He approves all enactments and decrees, sanctions
the budget and makes appointment to high posts.
The Governor General of Goa, Daman and Diu is his
“agent.”
Associated with the Governor General is the Council
of Government which the Colonial Act of 1935 has reduced
to a shadow of its former self. Of its fourteen members
nine are official and nominated. The remaining five are
elected by only forty of the richest tax-payers in a popula-
tion of 6,24,177. The Council is presided over by the
Governor General. Its functions are neither legislative nor
deliberative but merely advisory.
For administrative purposes Portuguese India is divided
into three districts: Goa, Daman and Diu, each under a


Governor. The Governor General himself is responsible
for the government of Goa. It is sub-divided into eleven
Conselhos, each under an Administrator nominated by the
Governor General. The lowest unit of administration is
the Parish where the nominated Regedor acts as a police
informer.
There is hardly any local self-government. The muni-
cipalities, which used to be democratic bodies composed of
elected members, are now filled with the nominees of the
Governor General.
The judiciary in Goa has no tradition of independence.
It is a limb of the executive authority. The illegal actions
of the Government cannot be challenged in a court of law.
Even if this were possible no' one in Goa would do it, for
the court would never return a verdict against the Govern-
ment. “The function of the judiciary,” the Chief Justice
of Goa declared recently, “is to administer justice with due
regard to its loyalty to Portugal.”
It is evident that the Government of Goa is a
complete negation of democracy. Goans have no voice in
framing the laws which govern their daily lives nor in
determining the taxes they have to pay. Democratic
institutions have been suppressed or subverted. Wherever
it exists the elective system is rigorously circumscribed and
rendered ineffective.
The Salazar regime will never allow a democratic
government to be set up in Goa for it is opposed to demo-
cracy even in Portugal. Soon after assuming power the
dictatorial regime set about transforming Portugal into a
“New State,” a replica of the fascist “New Order.” The
Parliament was suppressed and replaced by an Assembly
packed with party men. All political parties, except the
Uniao Nacional, were suppressed and elections were stage-
managed. The corporative feature of the state was
borrowed from Italian fascism.


Outmoded Concept
The colonial policy of the Salazar regime is based on
racial arrogance. Article 2 of the Colonial Act of 1935,
which is the charter of Portuguese administration overseas,
states that “it is part of the essential objects of the
Portuguese nation to fulfil its historic mission of possessing
and colonizing overseas dominions and of civilizing the
native population inhabiting them, as well as to influence
them by its culture . .
Such an attitude is not only inconsistent with the
principles of democracy but constitutes a standing provo-
cation to the peoples of Asia. Moreover, it is contrary to
the spirit of the United Nation’s Charter which re-afhrms
“faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and
worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and
women and of nations, large or small.”


Economic Exploitation
before the advent of the Portuguese, Goa was a
prosperous city. During the Kadamba 'rule it enjoyed
trade relations with no less than 14 countries and attracted
to its harbour almost the entire coastal trade of Western
India. Khawaja Mahmud Gawan, the Bahamani Wazir,
once described Goa as “the envy of the islands and ports
of India.”
The effect of 400 years of Portuguese rule has been
picturesquely described by a Goan patriot. “Materially our
land is a forgotten backwater where time seems to stand
still. Our port, one of the three finest natural harbours in
the world, is undeveloped and empty. Our cities and towns
are in ruins or fast hastening towards decay. Our villages
are deserted or empty of that bold peasantry, the country’s
pride, which once destroyed can never be supplied. Our
fields await the plough. Our people have migrated in
thousands to the four corners of the world in search of
livelihood which they cannot find in their homeland.”
The present plight of Goa is the result of historical
causes as well as of exploitation. Goa was well off during
the first few decades of Portuguese rule. However, when
the Portuguese lost their mastery of the seas to -the Dutch,
its pre-eminence in trade began to diminish.
Moreover, the Industrial Revolution, which transformed


the economy of many European countries, left Portugal
untouched. The progress of industrialization in Britain,
France, Germany and what was then British India brought
in its train a new standard of living unknown to the
agricultural economy of the past. While other countries
forged ahead, Portugal stagnated. Goa inevitably shared
this stagnation.
For want of opportunities in their homeland, Goans
began to emigrate to India’s industrial centres such as
Bombay and Calcutta, where they could find remunerative
employment and modern education for their children. With
the advent of the railway, the trickle of emigration grew
into a flood and even the labouring classes began to leave
their fields and homes to work in Indian factories. Today
nearly one-fourth of Goans live in India.
So far the Portuguese have done nothing to arrest the
decay of Goa. In fact whatever ingenuity they possess is
employed in exploiting the country.
Old accounts are raked up for pretexts to take money
away from Goa. After -the revolt of 1-895, Portugal ordered
a garrison and a gun-boat to be kept in Goa. For their
maintenance, Goa received subsidies from the monarchy of
Portugal. When Salazar came to power he totalled these
subsidies, charged compound interest on them and presented
Goa with a demand for Rs. 10,00,000. While Goa is made
to repay this so-called debt to Lisbon, no attempt is made
either to recover the loan which the Goa Treasury was
compelled to advance to the colony of Timor, or the royalty
payable by the Portuguese Bank, the Banco Nacional
Ultramarino, for the banking monopoly it enjoys in Goa.
Goa’s trade policy is determined in the sole interests
of Portugal. Unwilling Goa has, for example, been saddled
with a Customs Union, under which the partners forgo
75 to 80 per cent of customs duty on trade with one another.
Since Goa does not export anything to Portugal, and


imports wines, sardines and olive oil the Customs Union
benefits the latter at the expense of the former. The annual
loss to the Goa Treasury under this arrangement is
Rs. 135,000.
m rnM '
Goa used to buy sugar from Mauritius and Java.
Following the Customs Union the country was forced to
turn to the Sena Estates Sugar Co. of Mozambique, a
British syndicate in which high Portuguese** officials hold
shares. Goa has to pay a higher price for sugar from
Mozambique and loses customs duty in the bargain. The
loss suffered by Goa on this account in 1947 was Rs. 390,000.
Equally unhelpful is Portugal’s fiscal policy. A
Portuguese Bank enjoys monopoly in Goa. It is of little
help in financing trade or industry. It accepts deposits but
they do not earn interest. Loans are granted rarely and
at prohibitive interest. The main, almost the only function
of the Banco Nacional is to issue bank notes. The issue
is restricted by statute, and without the free circulation of
Indian money economic life in Goa would come to a
standstill.
Another method of exploitation is to appoint Europeans
to high posts in Goa, where they draw high salaries and
allowances.
Taxes are increasing progressively without there being
a corresponding expansion of the welfare activities of the
Government. The increase is reflected in the budget figures.
From Rs. 5,83,500 in 1944 the revenue went up to
Rs. 14,71,625 in 1949. To the casual observer this may
indicate a steady rise in national income. In reality the
higher revenue is the result of higher custom duties, stamp
duties and the new occupational and industrial taxes.
Besides other taxes, the “assimilated” Goans have to pay
a military tax although no facilities are provided for
military training.


Even if the Portuguese rule had not been responsible
for exploitation, Goans would still have been justified in
overthrowing it. The “do nothing” policy of the Portuguese
is largely responsible for the backward state of Goa’s
economy. The Portuguese have made no serious attempt
to foster industry or improve agriculture in Goa. The
result is that Goa’s dependence on imports is increasing
while its exports continue to decrease. The gap between
imports and exports has increased from Rs. 1,30,00,000 in
1937 to Rs. 4,10,00,000 in 1948. The trade deficit as well as
the rising cost of administration are met from the hard
earned money of the emigrants in India. But what will
happen if the remittances stop?


Portuguese Possessions in India




Goa is under complete censorship. Nothing can appear
in print unless passed by the censor —not even calendars
and handbills (note the censor’s certificate at the right
hand bottom corner of the illustrations above).


Two Negro soldiers (in the foreground)
guarding a military motor transport depot
Where political prisoners are tried
by Panjim’s Military Tribunal


Denial of Civil Liberties
we have shown that the Portuguese rule in Goa
is undemocratic as well as predatory. Like all authori-
tarian regimes it keeps itself in power by denying
to the people even a vestige of civil liberties.
There is neither freedom of speech nor of association in
Goa, Daman, and Diu. No meeting, however innocuous its
purpose, can be held without the permission of the autho-
rities nor a talk given .without a visa from the Censor.
How the administration abuses its powers will be clear
from an occurrence .in February, 1948. Mahatma Gandhi
fell to an assassin’s bullets on January 30. Goa mourned
the tragedy as profoundly as the rest of India. A committee
of ♦influential citizens decided to hold a condolence meeting
on February 12, and permission was requested from the
authorities accordingly. The request was turned down. It
was only when an ex-Chief Justice had waited upon the
Governor General and apprised him of the resentment in
Goa that the meeting was allowed on certain conditions.
The names of the speakers were to be intimated and their
speeches submitted to the Censor. Neither applause nor
“Mahatma Gandhi Ki Jai”* were to be allowed.
Meanwhile the National Congress (Goa) in Bombay
*Tvictoi'y to Mahatma Gandhi."


had secured a portion of the Mahatma’s ashes from the
Premier of Bombay. The urn containing the ashes was
received by the people’s representatives at the border.
Throughout the night and until midday on the twelfth,
silent reverent people of all communities filed past the
urn as a mark of homage to the departed leader. The
request to carry the ashes in a procession was disallowed
and this time the Portuguese authorities were adamant.
Even social functions are not free from the unwelcome
attention of the police. Not long ago, a tea party organized
in honour of a highly qualified Goan surgeon educated in
Portugal was broken up by the police because permission
had not been obtained to hold the function.
Even sport and literary gatherings require the assent
of the authorities.
Gagging the Press
The Press is gagged. More than two dozen Indian
newspapers and periodicals have been banned. Pro-Indian
and pro-Congress Goan newspapers have been suppressed.
Others have been obliged to change their policy, and they
are subsidized to carry on pro-Portuguese propaganda.
Even this subsidized press is not trusted. Large sums
are demanded from newspaper proprietors and publishers
as security. Censorship is strictly enforced. The “copy”
is required to be submitted to the censor by 11 p.m. The
censors are military officers, wholly innocent of journalism.
The case of Heraldo will show how the censors perform
their duties. This paper wrote a leading article on the
1948-49 budget and submitted it to the Censor. In a mood
of expansiveness engendered by frequent resort to wine he
passed the article. When it appeared the next day the
police promptly pounced upon the paper, seized all the
copies and confiscated the security of the publisher.
The Portuguese call this censorship “benevolent and
educative,” How benevolent ap4 educative it is will be


clear from a perusal of Goan newspapers which provide
dull and uninstructive fare. Important political events in
India, such as the inauguration of the Republic, are blacked
out. Official statements and comments must be displayed
prominently. Refusal to do so resulted in the suppression
of “A voz da India,” and its editor Mr. Antonio Sequeira
had to flee from Goa.
Advertisements, calendars and even wedding invitations
are censored before they can appear in print.
Goans Isolated
Goans are prevented from visiting the Indian Consu-
late under threat of imprisonment and deportation. Asso-
ciation with the Consulate even on the social plane has
brought severe punishment on many.* Officials were
penalized and in some cases transferred to other areas in
the Portuguese Empire for the offence of attending a party
given by the Indian Consulate in honour of Her Excellency
Vijay Laxmi Pandit, the Indian Ambassador in Washington.
A bank official, Mr. A. N. Karmalkar, was ordered to proceed
to San Tome, a small island off the west coast of Africa.
He resigned his post and is now in India.
Pressure Tactics
In an effort to counteract expression of popular
enthusiasm, following the statement of the Indian Prime
Minister, the Portuguese authorities forced Government
employees and others to sign letters of protest against the
statement and send telegrams to the Portuguese Govern-
ment.
Dr. Furtado, Judge of the administrative court in
Panjim, was dismissed from his post on his refusal to sign
the protest and was threatened with exile. Subsequently
he and his wife fled to India. Recently Dr. Furtado wrote
* Names of the persons concerned are not being mentioned lest
they are subjected to further harassment.


a letter to the Governor General of Go&. In that letter he
said: :
“When you summoned me to your office and asked me
the reasons tor my not signing the protest against Pandit
Nehru’s declaration, it was easy to foresee what the future
held in store for me. My frank answer that I was not
against India and, therefore, found it hard to sign, irritated
Your Excellency so much that you ordered the Director of
Civil Administration to immediately dismiss me.”
“You also let yo.ur vindictive intention transpire in the
terrible threat that the Minister for Colonies would decide
whether I would be sent to Cape Verde or some other
colony.”
“I can understand that as a representative of a colonial
power Your Excellency should try to force me not to be
against the Power you represent, but I would never allow
you to trample on my birthright of being for India in order
that the most beautiful sentiment which is second only to
God’s will, might not be defiled?”
Dr. Furtado is a Catholic and was an officer of high
standing in the administration. The reader can well
imagine the plight of other minor Goan officials.
All political activity is illegal. So the Goa National
Congress is obliged to hold its meetings in the adjoining
Indian territory. The only party that can exist inside
Goa is the fascist Uniao Nacional. The constitutions and
the executive committees of even religious and social asso-
ciations must be approved by the Government. Citizens are
arrested on mere suspicion and the courts are powerless to
give them relief.
Goa is a full-blooded police state.


Religion in State Policy
the story of Portuguese rule in India is one of inter-
ference with the beliefs, customs and traditions of the
subject people.
The story begins with . Albuquerque. To consolidate
his conquest of Goa he decided to exterminate Muslims. “I
leave,” he wrote to his King, “no town or building of the
Mussalmans. Those who are taken alive I order them to
be roasted.” As mentioned earlier, Muslim women whose
husbands had been killed in war or butchered were forcibly
converted and married to Portuguese soldiers.
A Royal Charter had been issued as early as 1519
reserving medical aid to Christians only in order to induce
the poorer Hindus to embrace Christianity. The edict of May
23, 1559, debarred Hindus from holding any public office.
Private festivities which were not Christian were banned.
The edict of 1567 forbade marriage, cremation and upanayan
(sacred thread) ceremony of Hindus and proscribed their
religious books. Hindu temples were ordered to be des-
troyed all over Goa and their properties made over to
Catholic churches.
The intolerance of the Portuguese was not confined to
matters of faith. They interfered with the everyday life
of the people. The instrument for the suppression of Goan,
culture was the Holy Inquisition which operated in Goa for


two centuries and a half. Christians appeared before the
tribunal for disobeying decrees, edicts and pastorals, and
Hindus for sacrilege and sortilege. The inquisitors went
to the length of devising a new code of conduct for the
“natives.” The “natives” were not to use in their food
rice cooked without salt, nor grow the tulsif plant in their
homes. Men were .not to wear the dhoti* and women were
to eschew the choli.** Later, the Konkani language was
attacked and Goan priests were asked to learn Portuguese
within a limited period. It was impossible to be more
ridiculous and despotic.
While other Indian customs w 7 ere interfered with the
caste system, which is against the spirit of Christianity, was
left untouched. The reason is obvious. The Portuguese
were not serious about spreading Christianity. Their
main object was to use Christianity to consolidate their
conquest, and the caste system helped them keep Goans
divided. In fact, to the caste system the Portuguese added
a hierarchy of their own which divided the inhabitants into
“people of Western civilization,” “assimilated” and
“natives.”
The political aims of evangelization were summed up
by a Bishop in his letter to the King. “When the Portu-
guese, my Lord, conquered India,” he wrote, “they took
great pains in establishing convents for religious orders so
that they might make conquests for religion. This should
not but be advantageous even for the State for only the
Christian religion could make the people docile and make
them submit themselves whole-heartedly to the Sovereign
and thus it has come to be.”
As for the fascist regime of Salazar, its policy is clear
from article 248 of the Carta Organica of the Portuguese
f Medicinal plant grown in most Hindu homes.
* Untailored garment worn by men below the waist.
** Short blouse worn by Indian women.


Colonial empire which declares that the Catholic missions
are the “instrument of national culture and influence.” The
Concordat of 1940, a treaty between the Holy See and Por-
tugal, compels the ecclesiastical authorities to see that in
the teaching of special subjects such as history the legitimate
Portuguese and patriotic sentiment be taken into considera-
tion.” Then there is Article 24 of the Colonial Act which
states that “the Catholic missions in the overseas territory
are the instrument of civilization and of Portuguese national
prestige.”
Among the Portuguese in Goa there is perhaps none so
virulently imperialistic as the Patriarch, D. Jose da Costa
Nunes. He is using religion and the Church organization
to influence the minds of Catholics. “I can and I must
inculcate,” he says “with the Church’s programme of work
love for Portugal and condemn the imbecility of its (Goa’s)
incorporation into greater India.” He seeks to preserve the
Portuguese rule in India by inciting Goan Catholics against
their Hindu brethren.


Struggle for Freedom
the people of Goa never submitted tamely to the alien
rule, although every effort was made to crush them.
Whenever an opportunity came their way they raised the
standard of revolt.
During the first 250 years of Portuguese rule, they
rebelled at least twenty times. The Ranes, a Rajput tribe who
once manned the Maratha armies, rose in 1857, 1871, 1895 and
1912. They were eventually put down with the utmost
ruthlessness. In 1871 and 1895 revolts they were joined by
the “native” garrisons. On the latter occasion the brother of
King Carlos himself came to India to suppress the rebellion.
The Ranes were broken up in 1912 and the pick of their
youth deported to Africa where they perished.
The Indian National Movement under the leadership
of Mahatma Gandhi, which was so conspicuously successful
against British rule, could not fail to have its repercussions
in the territory occupied by the Portuguese. But owing to
the fact that the population in Goa, Daman and Diu is only
a little over half a million and owing to the extremely
authoritarian character of the Government, no organized
movement of an overt character could develop. Nevertheless,
in 1946 a non-violent movement with the very limited
■object of securing civil liberties for the people was initiated.
It began on June 18, and spread to the four corners of


Goa. Goans of all communities defied the law by peace-
fully holding meetings, taking out processions and offering
satyagraha. Doctors, lawyers, teachers, clerks, students,
peasants and women threw themselves in the struggle.
The intensity of the struggle was matched by the
violence of the authorities. Peaceful crowds were
beaten up by armed policemen. Arrests were indiscri-
minate. Special tribunals, which had no legal sanction,
were set up to try the patriots. The leaders of the move-
ment T. Bragance Cunha, Ram Hegde, Parshottam Kokod-
kar, Jose Inacio Loyola, and Laxmikant Bhembre were
tried by military tribunals, awarded savage sentences and
imprisoned in the island fortress of Peniche in Portugal.
Evagrio George, Guilherme Tiklo, Dr. Vinayak Mayenkar
and a dozen others were put in Aguad prison in Goa.
Foreign troops Portuguese and Negro were brought in
to terrorize the people.
The authorities pursued their vendetta in jails also.
The patriots were lodged with ordinary criminals and put
on a starvation diet. The following tele'gram, published in
the Harijan of August 18, 1946, throws light on the
treatment meted out to the imprisoned patriots.
“Parshottam Kokodkar arrested in connection Satya-
graha movement, Goa. In spite being political prisoner
imprisoned dingy ill-ventilated cell in company criminals
waiting trial for murder and robbery. Food supplied most
ordinary ... In respect food authorities turn deaf ear.
He is on hunger-strike since last three days. Authorities’
attitude arrogant offensive.”
The desire of the Goans for self-determination and
their suppression has had wide repercussion. Firstly, it has
tended to encourage the belief in the rest of Asia that no
justice is to be expected from the democratic powers whose
defence of democracy is inconsistent with their indifference
to the prevalence of imperialism in Asian regions. Secondly,
in India itself public opinion finds it intolerable that India,
after the achievement of independence in 1947, should have


pin points on its map where colonialism challenges the
self-respect of its people.
A Fake Promise
In December, 1946, the Salazar regime promised a new
statute as a sop to the people. More than a year elapsed
before the draft was made public. It conceded only a
limited measure of municipal franchise.
The Governor General nominated a committee of 21
members to consider the proposed statute. Later it was
referred to a committee of 62. Although the committees
consisted of officials and nominated members, and the
people’s representatives were excluded from them, they
considered the draft unsatisfactory and proposed radical
changes.
From the discussion in the committees it was clear that
the Portuguese had no desire to shed the fascist character of
their rule. And even this jejune measure has been shelved
now that the Portuguese believe that the emergency has
passed. Dr. Salazar has in fact made it clear that the
question of reforms in Goa is not urgent. “They are family
issues,” he said, in his speech in October, 1949, “which
neither have the volume nor the seriousness to justify a
different path to be chalked out to the affairs of our India
from those followed by our ancestors under the Portuguese
flag.”


Portuguese Arguments
we have described the hardships and iniquities which
the people of Goa have to suffer. Owing to these and
the unbreakable bonds with their Indian brethren, Goans
passionately desire reunion with India. The Portuguese,
however, have no desire to withdraw from Goa and they
are employing high pressure propaganda to mislead the
world. Their arguments together with our comments are
given below.
First Proposition: Goa is neither a colony nor a
possession but a legitimate autonomous part of Portugal.
Comment: Between Goa and Portugal intervene the
Mediterranean, the Red Sea and the Arabian Sea and vast
stretches of Africa, Arabia and Asia. The distance between
Lisbon and Goa is about 6,000 miles. Geographically,
therefore, Goa is not a part of Portugal; it is a part of
India.
The inhabitants of Goa belong to the same race and
speak the same language as their brothers and sisters of the
Konkan coast in the State of Bombay. They have no
affinities with the people of Portugal.
Linguistically, racially, and culturally, therefore, Goa
is not a part of Portugal as it is a part of India.
The territories now known as Goa, Diu, and Daman are


the relics of the age of loot and grab when the coloniaL
powers of Europe brought into existence the historical
phase of imperialism. That age is commg to an end and is
being replaced by ideas of equality, national self-determina-
tion and, in the words of the U. N. Charter, “faith in funda-
mental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human
person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations,
large and small.” Asia, which was enslaved for centuries,
has, to a large extent, become free, and is no longer in a
mood to acquiesce in the continuation of colonialism.
Second Proposition: It is not the economic importance
of Goa that makes the issue vital to Portugal. Goa is a
liability rather than an asset to the finances of metropolitan
Portugal. What matters are the human values involved.
I ,
Comment: Imperialistic rule with all the arrogance it
involves distorts human values for both the ruler and the
ruled. The Portuguese Government’s conception of human
values is indicated in Article 2 of the Acto Colonial. In
view of the rising tide of Asian renaissance and nationalism,
to assert that the historical function of the Portuguese
nation is to possess, colonize and civilize overseas nations
is an affront to human dignity and decency in international
conduct, not to mention the provocation it gives to the people
of Asia.
As pointed in an earlier chapter, the economic benefits,
to Portugal from Goa are not inconsiderable.
Third Proposition: Goans enjoy complete equality
with Europeans in matters of employment, civic rights and
social life, and have culturally become different from
Indians, with whom they have racial affinity.
Comment: The above assertion cannot be justified by
any test. According to the census of 1941, only about 3
per cent of Goans speak Portuguese as against 92 per cent
who do not. The alleged “cultural” differences between


Goans and their neighbours, who 'are citizens of the Indian
Republic, are obviously less than those between Goans and
the Portuguese who are foreigners in Goa and have their
homeland thousands of miles away.
The classification of Goans into “Portuguese,” “assi-
milated” and “natives” refutes the claim regarding equality.
Goans cannot enter the Officers’ cadre of the Army. The
top-ranking civilian posts are also held by Europeans.
Fourth Proposition: Goans do not wish to break away
from Portugal as has been proven by protests against Mr.
Nehru’s statement of February 6, 1950, and affirmation of
loyalty by all sections of the people of Goa.
Comment: The above statement is a fabrication in so
far as it suggests “affirmation of loyalty by all sections of
the people of Goa.” It is the kind of totalitarian propaganda
which stands discredited in the free world.
Dr. Furtado’s letter to the Governor General of Goa
shows how “protests” are obtained from officials and others
under duress and coercion. The “demonstrations” of loyalty
are stage-managed. The Goa treasury is poorer by several
thousands of rupees every time such demonstrations are
staged.
To say that Goans desire to remain under Portugal is
to suggest that they have neither self-respect nor intelligence.
Goans would be less than human if they preferred slavery
to freedom. If what the Portuguese say about them is
correct then, one may ask, why is there a reign of terror
in Goa ?
Fifth Proposition: Goa has the same, indeed more,
reasons than Pakistan for a separate existence. Goa
has been a part of Portugal since 1498, and the Indian
Republic came into existence only in 1947.
Comment: The analogy of Pakistan to justify the


continuation of Portuguese rule in Goa is untenable. -Paki-
stan is separate from India but free and independent of
foreign rule. The comparison could be justified only if Gga
were to become free and independent.
Furthermore, the basis on which s India agreed to the
secession of areas now known as Pakistan was that of
territorial self-determination as evidenced by a vote of the
majority of its inhabitants or their representatives.
The Indian people won their independence from British
rule in 1947. Goans too desire a similar independence.
This is a legitimate aspiration, for no people likes to con-
tinue to be an enslaved nation.
Sixth Proposition: The disappearance of Portuguese
India would be an irreparable loss for the Christian spirit
created there. Goa has today tendencies and aspirations
purely occidental, thus forming a bridge between the
Orient and the Occident. Goa is the Catholic capital of
all Asia.
Comment ; This is, indeed, a desperate argument. It
implies that the forcible occupation of a foreign territory
by Portugal is necessary for the maintenance of tjie
Christian spirit. The assertion that Goa is the Catholic
capital of all Asia is intended to confuse the issue and
invite the sympathy of all Catholics, and as such, it will
deceive none. In fact, Christianity flourished in India for
1,400 years before the Portuguese came to Goa.
The Constitution of the Indian Republic guarantees
freedom of conscience and of worship to all its citizens and
follows closely the doctrines which are enshrined in
the U.S.A., under the principle of the separation of Church
and State. There are about six million Christians in India.
Their representatives occupy important seats of power in
the Central and State administrations. As against six
million Christians in India the total population of Goa is


& little over half a million of whom more than 50 per cen{
are non-Christians. To argue that the Christian spirit
would be promoted by the subjection of 250,000 Goan
Christians and a similar number of non-Christian Goans
to Portuguese rule as against their equal participation with
six million Christian citizens of the Indian Republic will
convince none.
The Portuguese are doing their best to dissuade the
people of Goa from demanding reunion with India. Goans,
however, are not taken in by this interested propaganda.
They are convinced that their economic, cultural and
political interests will be served best by rejoining their
Indian brethren.


Conclusion
To sum up :
t
1. Culturally and racially Goans are a part of the
Indian people. Economically Goa is dependent on
India.
2. The Portuguese acquired Goa by force and hold
it by force. They have no moral justification for
the continuance of their rule.
3. Portuguese rule has gravely sapped the economic
strength of Goa.
4. The authoritarian regime in Goa has deprived the
people of civil liberties.
5. Religion is exploited by the Portuguese for political
ends.
6. Conditions created by Portuguese rule in Goa are not
conducive to the moral, spiritual and economic
progress of the people who want the alien rule to
end immediately so that they may take their
rightful place in India.


APPENDIX
Mahatma Gandhi on Portuguese Rule
Text of Gandhiji’s letter dated August 2, 1946, to
H.E. Jose Bossa, Governor General of Portuguese India, in
reply to his letter of July 18, 1946.
It was kind of you to write to me in reply to what
I had written in Harijan about Goa affairs. I suppose
you know that I have visited Mozambique, Delagoa and
Inhambane. I did not notice there any Government for
philanthropic purposes. Indeed I was astonished to see
the distinction that the Government made between Indians
and the Portuguese and between the Africans and them-
selves. Nor does the history of the Portuguese Settlement
in India prove the claim set forth by you. Indeed, what
I see and know, of the condition of things in Goa, is hardly
edifying. That the Indians in Goa have been speechless is
proof not of the innocence or the philanthropic nature of
the Portuguese Government but of the rule of terror. You
will forgive me for not subscribing to your statement that
there is full liberty in Goa and that the agitation is confined
only to a few malcontents.
Every account, received by me personally and seen in
the papers here in this part of India, confirms the contrary
view. I suppose, the report of the sentence by your Court
Martial of eight years on Dr. Braganza and his contemplated
exile to a far off Portuguese Settlement, is by itself


a striking corroboration of the fact, that civil liberty is a
rare article in Goa. Why should a law-abiding citizen like
Dr. Braganza be considered so dangerous as to be singled
out for exile ?
Though the politics of Dr. Lohia probably differ from
mine, he has commanded my admiration for his having
gone to Goa and put his finger on its black spot. Inhabitants
of Goa can afford to wait for Independence, until much
greater India has regained it. But no person or group can
thus remain without civil liberty without losing self-
respect. He has lighted a torch which the inhabitants of
Goa cannot, except at their peril, allow to be extinguished.
Both you and the inhabitants of Goa should feel thankful
to the Doctor for lighting that torch. Therefore, your
description of him as “stranger” would excite laughter, if it
was not so tragic. Surely the truth is that the Portuguese
coming from Portugal are strangers, whether they come as
philanthropists or as governors exploiting the so-called
weaker races of the earth.
You have talked of the abolition of caste distinctions.
What I see has happened is that not only no caste distinction
has been abolished but at least one more caste, far more
terrible than the system “caste,” has been added by the
Portuguese rulers.
I, therefore, hope that you will revise your views on
philanthropy, civil liberty and caste distinctions, withdraw
all the African police, declare yourself whole-heartedly for
civil liberty and, if possible, even let the inhabitants of Goa
frame their own government, and invite from Greater
India more experienced Indians to assist the inhabitants
and even you in framing such Government.




