

POSTAL REPOEM.
SPEECH
OF
J. HENNIKEE HEATON, M.P.
FOR CANTERBURY,
IN THE
HOUSE OF COMMONS,
Saturday , llth August, 1889.


POST OFFICE REFORMS.
In the House of Commons on Saturday, August 17,
1889, on the Vote for £5,400,000 for Post Office
Services—
Mr. Henniker Heaton said: I regret to inter-
vene at this late stage, thl fag end of the session,
to call attention to the administration of the Post
Office in regard to home, foreign, and colonial
business. It is not my intention to oppose the Vote
now proposed, but I must complain of the shortness
of the notice given. My first complaint on behalf of
the public is in regard to
Halfpenny Post Cards.
The House is aware that during the past four
years I have endeavoured to force the Postal autho-
rities to sell halfpenny post cards for their face value,
a halfpenny each, as is done in every country in the
world but our own. Penny post cards are sold at
their face value, then why not halfpenny cards ?
Now a poor man cannot purchase a post card under
(6363) A


three farthings, though he may get them a fraction
cheaper if be purchase a large number at a time, for
which of coarse he has no use. It would be
interesting to quote the evasive replies given to me
by the Postmaster-General to questions which I
have put to him on this subject at various
times. On the 28th May, 188 G, the reason given
why halfpenny post cards cost more than a halfpenny
each was that the Government contract with De la
Eue & Co. was of such an exorbitant character
that the Post Office authorities could not afford to
sell them at that price. Upon this I attacked the
contract and the contractors, and, with the assis-
tance of other Hon. Members, I succeeded in getting
the contract annulled, and saved at least £40,000
per annum to the Post Office and taxpayers of the
country. Thereupon I called upon the Government
to reduce the price of the halfpenny post cards.
After consultation with the Treasury and the
expenditure of much valuable time in thinking out
this important reform the Postmaster-General agreed
that in future ten cards should be sold for 6 d., in
place of nine cards for 6d., a reduction of about a
tenth of a penny per card ! This prodigious reduc-
tion, this wonderful liberality, will probably involve
a fresh coinage of farthings. I maintain that no
public advantage has been gained, and no reduction
made worthy of the name. (Hear, hear.) The
Postmaster-General now takes refuge behind the
general statement that halfpenny postage does not
pay, and that the whole halfpenny postage business
on newspapers, circulars, post cards, &c., is carried on
at a loss. I maintain that there is not a title of


evidence to support this statement; on the contrary,
I believe that the halfpenny business results in a
handsome profit. Before the Select Committee on
the Revenue Estimates, where the Secretary of the
Post Office made this astounding statement, I cross-
examined him, and he was utterly unable to prove
the allegation. Further than this, the present
Postmaster-General confirmed the statement often
before made by his predecessors, that the total
average cost of collecting, stamping, and delivering
a penny letter amounted to about one-eighth of a
penny, leaving seven-eighths of a penny profit. In
other words, the cost to the Post Office was half a
farthing per letter, and it is therefore ridiculous for
the Post Office authorities, in the face of this know-
ledge, to say that halfpenny postage does not pay.
And if anything further were wanted to confirm
this, I would put the case of newspapers which are
sold at a halfpenny each. It is well-known that
many of the halfpenny newspapers, containing but
few advertisements, pay handsomely. The news-
paper proprietor is able to purchase paper, print the
paper, and pay a large staff of able contributors,
whose salaries exceed by far the amount received for
advertisements, and the proprietor is enabled to
address and deliver the paper to agents for little
more than a third of a penny per copy. In turn
the agents sell the paper, deliver it, and collect the
money for a remuneration of less than a farthing
per copy. Therefore I say that the Postmaster-
General, with a guaranteed enormous circulation of
ready-addressed circulars, &c., must make a tre-
mendous profit, because, in addition to the other
A 2


arguments, 20 letters are often delivered at one
0 7
house as against one halfpenny newspaper.
1 now come to another matter —namely, that of
Privately-printed Post Cards.
It is in the knowledge of the House that stationers
and others were last year able to sell their own post
cards, stamped, however, by the Inland Revenue
Department, for per dozen. In four years the
number of these privately-printed cards rose from
three millions to fifty millions per annum. The
Post Office authorities, alarmed at the growth of
this private enterprise, had the meanness —for I can
call it by no other word—to increase the charge for
impressing the Queen’s head upon these cards from
Is. to Is. 6d. per thousand, although the actual cost
of the labour was only 6 d. The authorities hoped
in this way to crush out the rivalry. My next sub-
ject of complaint against the Post Office is that the
public are
Not allowed to affix Stamps to Post Cards,
even though the cards are conformable in size and
in every other way to the regulations of the Post
Office. Surely it is much more easy for a letter-
carrier to deliver a neat, stiff card with a halfpenny
stamp affixed than the huge circular of a merchant
or the unwieldy prospectus of a company-monger.
I need not repeat that in every continental country
the public are permitted to affix stamps to post cards.


When in Austria a few days ago I myself affixed a
stamp to a post card which I sent to my right hon.
friend, the Postmaster-General, and it was duly
delivered. On this post card I wrote begging him
to grant a similar facility to the people of England,
and I hold in my hand his letter in reply, in which
he contents himself by stating that he “ cannot hold
out any expectation that it would be possible to
adopt the suggestion.” He does not give a single
reason why he cannot comply with the request —
and why ? Because it is impossible for him to do
so. This is too common-sense a matter for the Post
Office authorities to agree to. I now come to
another grievance in which I have already the sym-
pathy of the House, and that is in regard to
Be-addeessed Letters.
The Postmaster-General informed me some time
ago that he was aware that letters arriving from
France or any other foreign country may be re-
addressed and are delivered free of cost, but that
letters from one part of the United Kingdom to
another are charged additional postage if re-
addressed. This is a monstrous state of affairs, and
most unjust as I shall presently show (hear, hear).
By the Postal Union agreement we are bound to
deliver all letters sent to us from abroad and every
farthing of postage is retained by the country from
whence they come. On the other hand, the whole
revenue from inland letters is retained by our Post
Office, and it is the least the British Postal Authori-
ties should do is to give the same facilities to our


own countrymen as are extended to foreigners
(cheers). I will now pass to the question of
Circulars in Unsealed Envelopes.
I cannot understand why circulars and trades-
men’s accounts are not permitted to be sent in
unsealed envelopes, as is done in continental coun-
tries, at a charge of one halfpenny each. The
present system of sending these documents in sealed
wrappers, but open at both ends, is cumbersome and
inconvenient. It is excessively stupid to prohibit
the use of unsealed envelopes for they are more
readily examined than large circulars in gummed
wrappers, and are much more easily handled. And
this stupidity is more apparent when we consider
that while we in England are forbidden to use these
unsealed envelopes, we are inundated every day
with them sent by merchants, learned societies, and
lottery agents from all parts of the continent; for
in this case, also, under the Postal Union Conven-
tion, our Post Office is compelled to deliver them.
I hold in my hand a large envelope containing the
catalogue of one of the principal booksellers in New
York, which was sent to this country for a postage
fee of one halfpenny. A reform in this direction
would be most popular (hear, hear). I may also be
permitted to call attention to a grievance in connec-
tion with the
Illustrated Newspapers.
We are all proud of those splendid art produc-
tions iti England—-the £ ‘ Illustrated London News,”


the “Graphic,” the “Pictorial World,” and other
papers of a like character. It is the custom of the
proprietors of these papers to issue at different
periods of the year those beautiful coloured supple-
ments with which you are all so familiar. Thousands
of pounds are sometimes paid to eminent painters
for the originals of those pictures, and enormous
sums are spent in reproducing them. They occupy
the engravers, lithographers, and printers frequently
three, six, and twelve months in preparing for publi-
cation. Now the Post Office authorities insist on
not alone the word “ Supplement ” being printed on
each of those pictures, but also insist on the date of
issue being printed thereon. I need hardly point
out that it is excessively inconvenient to have to
print the date' in advance, because perhaps on the,
very day named on the Supplement some national
calamity, such as the death of the Emperor of
Germany or of some member of our Royal family,
may occur. In such case it would be manifestly
improper and against good taste to issue copies of a
painting of a comic subject in tens of thousands
throughout the land on that occasion (hear). Some
time ago I brought this question under the notice of
the Postmaster-General, who certainly gave me
reason to hope that he would relax this regulation
insisting on the date being printed on the Supple-
ment. I now again ask him to give this matter his
favourable consideration.
I now, Sir, approach a matter of great local im-
portance, and 1 trust I have a full sense of the
gravity of the responsibility that will rest on me if
I say anything that would cause want of confidence


in the British Post Office. Yet, Sir, lam bound to
warn the Postmaster-General that the number of
thefts of letters by
Dishonest Letter Carriers and others
employed in the Post Office is alarmingly on the
increase, and that the complaints I received were
sufficient to justify me in asking the question I did
in the House of Commons a few months ago. From
the reply the Postmaster-General then gave me,
I learnt that the number of I’ost Office officials
found guilty of and dismissed for irregularities was
335 last year, and that on an average more than
three men per week were convicted and sentenced
to long terms of imprisonment for stealing letters.
The number not found out was not estimated, nor
are the numbers given of those who were “ cautioned ”
for “ suspicious conduct ”or “ carelessness.” I admit
that, considering the thousands employed in this
great department, the number of convictions may
appear to be small, yet I maintain it is sufficiently
large to justify the House of Commons in inquiring
whether the thefts cannot be diminished. The
great majority of the letter carriers and others
employed, let me say, are ill paid but excellent and
courteous officers. But lam informed by an intelli-
gent and high official, that some of the appointments
are not made with sufficient care, hence the liability
of the whole staff to Be brought into disgrace
(cheers). Surely, with the enormous profits of the
Post Office, we can afford to pay the employes of
that department salaries and wages which would


not alone ensure our getting the very best men, but
place them beyond temptation in the responsible
positions they occupy. Leaving home administra-
tion, and every-day local mismanagement, I now,
Sir, turn to the relations of the British Post Office
with
Our Colonies and Dependencies.
The House is familiar with some of the facts of
the most grievous anomaly I am about to deal with
in relation to the question of the postage to India
and the East generally. I have frequently pointed
out that the cost of postage of a letter from England
to India is 5 d., while a letter may be sent from
France, Germany, and other continental countries,
to our own territory of British India for half the
rate, namely 2 \d.
In order to more forcibly and clearly place the
matter before the House, I will venture to occupy
your time for about six minutes, while I rapidly
read the correspondence on this subject which
passed between the Secretary of State for India
(Lord Cross) and myself. I am committing no
breach of confidence in saying that Lord Cross
fully sympathises with me in this matter, and
desires a reduction of the postage, but he says the
question must be settled by the British Post Office
authorities. On the first of April of the present
year I wrote to Lord Cross as follows


36,
EATON SQUARE, S.W.
Ist April, 1889.
High Postal Rates to India.
My Lord,
In the interests of all Her Majesty’s subjects of what-
ever colour, who live in India, and of all at home who
have business or private relations with them, I have the
honour to draw attention to the scandalous state of our
postal arrangements with the Indian Empire.
The letter rate to British India from France, Germany,
and Russia is 2 \d., from the United Kingdom s d. Con-
sidering the magnitude of our interests in India, it would
hardly have been surprising if the difference had been the
other way, and our rate had been half the continental rates.
Again, English newspapers for India and China are now
regularly posted in France. One firm in Cornhill saves
1,300/. a year by the operation—which is a dead loss to
the revenue. In the case of Ceylon, the same British mail
steamer which brings newspapers to Colombo for IJd. each
is carrying newspapers to Sydney, 5,000 miles further, for
one-third less, or one penny !
This state of affairs, which is, on the face of it, most
discreditable to the organising power of the English Post
Office, has been complained of by every Chamber of Com-
merce in England, and especially by India and other
merchants.
I am myself prepared to prove that a letter may be
carried from any point on the globe to any other for one
penny at a profit, and that universal penny postage is fast
coming within the range of practical politics. But with-
out entering into the wider question on this occasion, I
have the honour to enquire whether your Lordships, in
the interests of the entire Anglo-Indian community, does
not see some way of insisting that facilities at least equal
to those enjoyed by continental nations shall be granted
to Her Majesty’s subjects


On one occasion the Postmaster-General argued that it
was better that our newspapers for India should be posted in
France, because if they were posted at home, increased ex-
penditure would be involved “ for sea conveyance from
Brindisi to Bombay.” But under contract, the Indian mails
are carried by the P. and 0. Company for a fixed sum, irre-
spective of their bulk. Not only so, but in many cases the
newspapers never leave French hands, are carried in French
vessels, so that the English revenue receives nothing on
the transaction. In the case of Ceylon it was argued that
Ceylon is in the Postal Union. But France also is in the
Postal Union, and none the less charges fifty per cent, less
for postage to this English colony than we do. Lastly,
the French who charge fifty per cent, less on Eastern
correspondence than we do, spend fifty per cent, more on
subsidies to their packet services than we do. The amount
voted by the French Government last year for mail steam-
ship subsidieswas 25,600,000 francs, or more than 1,020,000/.
as against 641,000/. voted for mail packet services by Great
Britain. Such facts speak for themselves.
I have the honour to be, my Lord,
Your obedient servant,
J. HENNIKER HEATON.
To the Right Hon.
Viscount Cross, G.C.8.,
Secretary of State for India.
To this I received the following reply :
India Office, Whitehall, S.W.
1 6th April.
Sir,
I am directed by the Secretary of State for India in
Council to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
Ist inst., suggesting that the rates of postage on letters
and newspapers to India should be reduced by one-half
and one-third respectively.


In reply, I am to assure you that Viscount Cross is
very sensible of the anomalous state of things to which
you draw attention, and that he would view with much
satisfaction any reduction in the postal rates between
England and India which could be effected without im-
posing any undue additional burdens upon the taxpayers
of the latter country, whose interests he is especially bound
to consider.
His Lordship desires me, however, to point out that
such a reduction, if made, would be made mainly, though
not exclusively, in the interests of England and of the
English community hi India, and that the larger share of
any loss of revenue which it might cause must necessarily
fall upon the English taxpayer. He considers, therefore,
that the matter is one in which the initiative should not
be taken by him or by the Government of India.
I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
J. A. GODLEY.
J. Henniker Heaton, Esq., M.P.,
36, Eaton Square, S.W.
On April 20th last, I again wrote to Lord Cross
as follows :
Carlton Club.
20th April.
My Lord,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of April 16, 1889, on the subject of the existing high
postal rates to India.
I am much pleased to receive your assurance that you
are sensible of the anomalous state of things to which 1
drew your attention, and that you would view with much
satisfaction any reduction in the present rates. This ex-
pression of opinion will materially strengthen my hands.


You, however, appear to consider that the initiative in
remedying the evils of which I complain should not be
taken by you, or by the Government of India, and there-
fore, I infer you are of opinion that the first step should be
taken by the British Government.
Before addressing the Chancellor of the Exchequer and
the-.Postmaster-General on the subject, I venture to take
the liberty of placing before you one or two facts
immediately affecting the Indian Government and its
finances, which I humbly submit may fairly be placed
before Mr. Goschen and Mr. Raikes in supporting the
case.
Up to 1858 the subsidy for the Indian packet service
was properly charged to the Admiralty, the mail steamers
being regarded as an auxiliary naval power. For some
reason, however, this was entirely altered, and on the Post
Office was placed the whole burden, although the following
protest was made: —“ The claim that the Post Office
should be charged with the whole expense of this packet
or ocean service must be considered as barred by the
simple fact that few of the mail packets were established
either by the Post Office or for merely postal purposes,
their expense being far beyond what such requirements
would justify. To assume that these packets were really
established for Post Office purposes is to charge the Govern-
ment with the most absurd extravagance. The West
India packets, for instance, were established at a cost of
£250,000 per annum, though the utmost return that was
expected from letters was £40,000, leaving the £200,000
a clear deficit ” (Post Office Report 1863). Subsequently
a Select Committee of the House of Commons recom-
mended that “ a fair proportion of the expense should be
charged to the Admiralty, and that the Post Office should
only be charged for the actual transmission of mails.”
This recommendation has been ignored.
When last year a fresh contract with the P. and O
Company was made, a saving of £107,000 a year was


effected, making a total of over one million sterling in the
ten years’ contract. I would ask whether the Indian
Government profited by or was credited with any pro-
portion of this saving by the Chancellor of the Exchequer ?
I may say at once that I have failed to discover in any
Parliamentary document any record of such credit to the
Indian Government, which is still called upon as in former
years to pay into the British purse, as its contribution to the
mail service, the same amount as was paid before the
saving was made, viz., about £63,000 per annum. I main-
tain that this saving of £107,000 a year would enable the
Post Office to reduce the rates for letters to India to the
level of the French tariff.
I have, &c.,
J. HENNIKER HEATON.
To the Right Hon. Viscount Cross, G.C.8.,
Secretary of State for India.
On the 28th May I sent the following letter to
o 0
the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and a copy to the
Postmaster-General :
36, Eaton Square, W.
mh May, 1889.
To the Right Hon. G. J. Goschen, M.P., Chancellor
of the Exchequer.
Sir,
I have the honour to forward herewith a copy of the
correspondence on the subject of the charges for postage
to India and the British Possessions in the East, which
has recently passed between the Right Hon. the Secretary
of State for India and myself. You will gather from the
tone of Lord Cross’s letter of 16th April, that whilst he is
fully sensible of importance of the subject, he thinks
that, as it is one which primarily affects the British tax


payer, the initiation of any reform should not be taken by
the Indian Government.
I therefore venture to address you, as Keeper of the
Public Purse, and to emphasise the facts which I have so
often quoted, showing how unfairly the English com-
munity is treated as compared with foreign nations in
respect to the charge for postage to India and the East.
It will scarcely be denied that the freer and cheaper
the means of communication between countries the better
it is for trade and commerce, and a fortiori every restric-
tion upon intercourse must operate in a contrary direction.
It is surely opposed to all the tenets of Free Trade that a
Manchester or Liverpool merchant should be handicapped
to the extent of 50 per cent, in the matter of postage to
India in favour of a merchant of Marseilles. Why should
we in England have to pay s d. for a half-ounce letter to
India or China, whilst from France or Germany the postage
is
Revenue, because the whole amount of the receipts
for postage to India amounts to no more than £63,030 per
annum.
But what is the effect of the present state of things ?
Letters and newspapers are now sent by thousands weekly
to France to be there posted at the lower rate, thus
enabling the senders to pocket a considerable sum to the
detriment of the English Post Office Revenue, for if the
rates for England were reduced to the level of those for
France, all these letters and papers would go direct
through our Post Office, and the postage thereon would
represent so much clear profit, as the mail steamers being
subsidised it matters not whether they carry ten tons of
mails or ten pounds. Therefore I contend that from the
point of view of revenue alone the correct policy would be
to lower the rates. I maintain and lam fortified by the
experience of the past that so far from the effect of the
postal rates being to decrease the revenue the result will
be a very large augmentation of the receipts owing to


the increase of correspondence which will naturally
follow.
I contend also that every saving effected in the Ocean
Postal Service (and the economies of late owing to
increased competition have been very great) should be in
some measure at least devoted to the cheapening of
rates. Now, on the last contract with the P. and O.
Company, to India and the East, there is a saving of
£107,000 per annum, as compared with the previous one,
or a total of over a million sterling in the ten years
during which the contract has to run; yet I cannot find
that India has profited to the extent of a single rupee
by this arrangement, though the saving would allow of
rates being lowered 50 per cent, and still leave a hand-
some surplus.
The Post Office is most unfairly saddled with the whole
cost of subsidies to Steam Companies, whereas the
Admiralty should pay the greater part of this large
charge, the subsidised steamers being in reality an
auxiliary naval power for use in an emergency, and they
have been actually so used.
It is only within the last thirty years that this
absurdity has been perpetrated, and though a Select Com-
mittee of the House of Commons in 1888 reported strongly
against it, the system still continues, and the Admiralty
does not pay anything like its fair proportion.
Were the proportions payable by the Post Office and
the Admiralty equitably adjusted, as they should be, the
profits of the Post Office would show a very large increase,
and you would, I feel sure, be justified in consenting to a
reduction of rates all round which would satisfy the grow-
ing public demand for cheaper postage.
I would call your especial attention to the fact that
the French Government pay in subsidies £400,000 a-year
more than we do for mail packet service, although their
Colonial possessions and their foreign trade are insignificant
as compared with those of this country. For the main


tenance of British commercial supremacy it pays ns to
subsidise our splendid mail steamers.
The surplus revenue derived from the Post Office now
amounts to over £3,000,000 per annum, and whilst I do
not propose that any of this should be touched, I think
that the public should participate in any profit beyond
this by the lessening of the postal rates, which are
admittedly excessive as compared with those of other
countries.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
J. HENNIKER HEATON.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer in reply informed
me that he had referred the correspondence to the
Postmaster-General for his report, but subsequently
I was curtly informed that “no action would be
taken with regard to the postage to India.” Well,
Sir, I have no doubt, if I challenge a division of the
House on this question, that the Government will
find themselves in a minority.
My correspondents in India, particularly officers
stationed at Quetta, write to tell me with what
contempt for the British Post-office they receive their
English letters and newspapers every week bearing
French postage stamps. I have handed the Post-
master-General a list of forty British Colonies to
which the postage from France, Germany, and
Russia is half the rate charged from England. Sir,
it is shameful and discreditable that this state of
affairs should be tolerated for a day longer (loud
cheers). There is one other matter in connection
with this subject which excites laughter and derision.
In Shanghai there are English, French, and German
(6363) B


post-offices. Incredible as it may appear, the post-
age of letters to England, if sent through the French
or German post-office there is 2 \d. , but if posted in
the English post-office at the same place the rate
charged is s d. per letter. Of course little business
is consequently done at the English post-office. At
Zanibar a similar state of things exist— s d. postage
to England in the English post-office, and
postage to England in the French post-office. Yet
the Postmaster-General sits quietly by, knowing of
these absurdities, and makes no effort to remedy
them. I would like to say now one word in
regard to
New Zealand Postal Kates.
It was officially announced that the postage by
the all sea route to New Zealand was reduced to 4 d.
But, Sir, unless the sender of a letter to New Zea-
land is pretty alert he will discover that his friend
or correspondent in New Zealand who receives the
letter will be fined Bc?., should the sender only put
a 4c?. stamp on the missive. The fact is that 4c?. is
charged,on letters sent to New Zealand by the
P. and 0. and Orient Companies, while if sent by
the New Zealand Shipping Company, or the Shaw,
Savill, and Albion Company the postage is 6c?. per
letter. Sir, it may be expected before I sit down
that I shall say something in regard to
Ocean Penny Postage
to all parts of the Empire and to American. The
scheme is, in my judgment, on the eve of accom


plishment. Since the question was crudely sub-
mitted to the House four year ago, and 142 members
then followed me into the division lobby, I have
received great sympathy and encouragement from
the press of this country and America, and from
leading public men who are enthusiastic about its
realisation. We are now awaiting with some
anxiety the taking of the important step of the
appointment of a Select Committee of the House of
Commons to inquire into the practicability and
feasibility of the scheme. The Government cannot
much longer refuse this Committee, which will
inquire into the trade done and the correspondence
carried on between England and all parts of the
world, and the cost of establishing Ocean Penny
Postage. I have reason to believe that at the
commencement the loss will not exceed £60,000 a
year above the present estimate, and we have saved
£107,000 a year already on one contract for the
conveyance of Indian mails.
I deeply regret time will not allow me to say more
if this vote is to be agreed to this evening, but even
at this last hour of the session I must enter these
protests, and however much I respect the Post-
master-General in his private capacity, I still think
the faults I have directed attention to are a serious
blot upon his administration of a great and im-
portant public department. I will conclude by
thanking the House for the patience and forbear-
ance, and kindness with which I have been listened
to whilst pointing out these postal grievances and
suggesting reforms. (Loud cheers.)


LONDON
HARRISON AND SONS, PRINTERS IN ORDINARY TO HER MAJESTY
st. martin’s LANE.
