

POSTA GE TAMPS
OF
WAR
Price
4½d.
net.
‘Stamp Collecting Handbooks
No. 2.
By D. B. Armstrong.
SECOND EDITION.


Is your Collection for Sale ?
Specialized or General Collections,
small or large lots bought for cash.
The largest buyer of Kings' Heads.
/
• END FOR MY LATEST LIST OF
TWENTIETH CBNTURV STAMPS.
F. B. SMITH,
432, STRAND,
LONDON, W.C.
'Phone : 3975 Gerrard,
Telegrams: "Philasmit, Westrand, London."
m. ■


Postage Stamps of War
(1854-1914)
By Douglas B. Armstrong.




Postage Stamps of War
(1854-1914)
By DOUGLAS B. ARMSTRONG
(Editor of the “Stamp Collectors’ t/Innual,’’ etc.)
TO WHICH IS ADDED A
CHAPTER ON WAR AND
THE STAMP MARKET - ■
By W. H. A. WILLIAMS.
Stamp Collecting Handbooks,
No. 2
Edited by R. E. R. Dalwigk
(Editor of '‘Stamp Collecting”)
LONDON :
THE HOLLOWAY PRESS CO. (Philatelic Dept.)
449. HOLLOWAY ROAD. N.




PREFACE.
THE great success of No. 1 of the “ Stamp
Collecting Handbooks” (Notes on King’s Heads)
has influenced our publishers to produce the
present volume upon a subject of such topical
interest that it can hardly fail to appeal to all classes
of Collectors.
Mr. Douglas B. Armstrong has made a special study
of which this book is the result—War Stamps and the
Mails in War.
Readers of Stamp Collecting will remember the series
of articles entitled “The Postage Stamp in War” by
the same author.
We hope at a later date, to add another volume to
this series concerning the philatelic history of the
present terrible conflict.
R. E. R. ADLWICK.
London, Oct., 1914.


THE ALLIES.


THE ENEMY.


“Stamp Collecting Handbooks
Vol. I.
"NOTES ON KING’S HEADS."
SOME PRESS OPINIONS.
“ Collectors of moderate British Colonial Stamps who
are interested in the financial side of the hobby (and vvho
is not ?) should not fail to obtain a copy of a fascinating
and valuable booklet entitled “ Notes on Kings I lends.
It is from the pen of Mr. W. H. A. Williams, a well-
known expert in modern issues, and affords an invaluable
guide to the actual market value of these popular issues.
With its notes on twentieth century rarities and much
inside information, it is a volume that no would-be
successful collector of Edwardians and Georgians can
possibly aftord to dispense with.’
Daily Express.
“This is No. 1 of “Stamp Collecting Handbooks,”
edited by R. E. R. Dalwigk, Editor of Stamp Collecting.
The book is of the popular handbook order and is a model
of typography. The title is descriptive of the contents
and the text will prove very readable and interesting.”
MeReel's Weekly Stamp News.
“If these new handbooks, which are under the able
editorship of Mr. R. E. R. Dalwigk, are kept up to the
standard of No, 1, Stamp Collectors will be the better and
wiser for their publication.”—
Stamp Collectors’ Fortnightly.


Postage Stamps
of War.
WAR’S grim record inscribes itself in many
strange and unexpected quarters, but
nowhere more prominently than upon
the postal issues of the nations concerned.
It is, indeed, somewhat of a paradox that the
humble postage stamp, the emblem of peace
and commerce, and of the concord of nations,
should be so closely associated with wars and
rumours of wars, yet few modern campaigns have
failed to have their trace upon the pages of the
stamp album.
Already stamp collectors are opening up fresh
pages in their albums for the reception of new
issues arising out of the present great war in
Europe, which even now have begun to make
their appearance, and in after years will be fraught
with a deep historical and romantic interest.
It may not be without interest, therefore, at
this juncture, to review briefly some of the most
notable examples of postage stamps whose issue
has been occasioned by the wars and conflicts
of the latter nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. The collection and study of war stamps
constitutes one of the most fascinating phases


of the stamp collectors’ hobby, and, as will be
seen, the subject is by no means lacking in interest
for the uninitiated.
Apart from the special cancellations of the
military post-offices applied to the contemporary
postal issues of the combatants, particular issues
of actual adhesive stamps serve in many instances
to mark outstanding events of modern warfare.
CRIMEA.
The invasion of the Crimea by the allied forces
of Great Britain and France in September, 1854,
affords the earliest instance of the use of the
adhesive postage stamp in war —fourteen years
after its inception. A base post-office, in charge
of an official of the General Post Office, with a


small staff of assistants, was opened in Con-
stantinople in November, 1854, with ad\ance
offices at Scutari and Balaclava, for dealing with
the correspondence of the British forces in the
field. The stamps used by these military post-
offices comprised the current Id. red, and 2d
blue, of Great Britain, distinguished by the
postmarks with which they were cancelled Iwo
types of cancellation were employed, the first
consisting of a Crown between two stars set in
an ellipse of heavy bars ; and the second, of a
star flanked by two cyphers. 1 hey weie used in
conjunction with a date stamp formed of the
inscription “ Post Office— British Army,” ar-
ranged in the form of a circle, with the date and


control letter “A ” in three lines in the centre.
On the withdrawal of the allied forces from the
Crimea on June 12, 1857, the use of these special
postmarks ceased. It is worthy of note that
this was the first occasion on which British
postage stamps were employed outside the
country of their origin. Stamps of the period
bearing Crimea postmarks are of considerable
scarcity, and are much sought after by collectors.
On the French side the stamps employed by
the military post-offices on the campaign were
those of the Imperial issue of 1853-60 with the
head of Napoleon 111., cancelled with rhomboid
postmarks composed of a number of small dots,
and enclosing various initials and abbreviations
to indicate the different divisions, such as A.0.8.C.
(Armee Orient Bureau, Central), A.O.—A. (Armee
Orient Bureau, A. to P.), &c.
AMERICAN CIVIL WAR.
Very strikingly is the great struggle between the
rival factions of North and South in the American
Civil War of 1861 brought home to the stamp
collector through the medium of two distinct
series of postage stamps issued during these
parlous times.
As a result of the secession of the Southern
States, considerable quantities of the regular
United States postage stamps of the series 1851-60,
on hand at Southern post-offices, fell into the hands
of the Confederates. In order to prevent these
stamps being brought into use to the detriment


of the United States Revenue, it was deemed
expedient to make an immediate change in the
design of the Northern postage stamps, and,
with the advent of the new series, to declare ail
previous issues invalid for postage. Accordingly,
on August 15, 1861, an entire new issue of postage
stamps was brought into use throughout the
Federal States, displacing that of ten years
previous, which was declared to be demonetised.
In the Confederate States the general issues of
the Republic gave place, on October 18, 1861,
to a special issue bearing the likeness of President
Jefferson Davis, somewhat crudely printed by a
firm of local lithographers in Richmond, Va.
Meanwhile it had been decreed as far back as
March 15 that, pending the preparation of par-
ticular postage stamps for the Confederacy, all
postal charges should be prepaid in cash. The
inconvenience of this method induced a number
of postmasters to issue their own provisional
postage stamps for local use. Unpretentious
in design, and limited in number, several of these


Confederate Postmaster Stamps are of such extreme
rarity as to be almost unknown.
Towards the end of 1861 a confidential agent
of the Confederate Government was dispatched
to England, provided with funds for securing the
necessary dies and plates for printing a new
permanent issue of postage stamps, which were
accordingly ordered from the famous London
house of Thos. De La Rue & Co. Only the
5 cents, denomination of this series was actually
issued, however, for the vessel carrying the original
plates, and a further consignment of 1 and 5


cents stamps, fell in with an United States
cruiser off the port of Wilmington, N.C., when the
plates were thrown overboard, but the stock of
stamps was captured by the Federals. Further
local issues followed down to the end of the war,
when the regular postage stamps of the United
States were again brought into use throughout
the Union.
Amongst the philatelic souvenirs of the American
Civil War must also be included the curious
postage stamp currency employed in the United
States during a temporary shortage of small coins
caused by the war.
THE FRENCH IN LOMBARDY.
The French victories over Austria on the plain
of Lombardy, resulting in the annexation of


Savoy to the French Empire, and the successes
of the Mexican campaign, were duly commemorated
by the addition of a laurel wreath to the portrait
of the Emperor, as shown on the French postage
stamps.
FRANCO-GERMAN WAR.
Louis Napoleon’s triumph was destined, how-
ever, to be short-lived. War with Prussia broke
out in July, 1870, and by the end of September
the investment of Paris was complete. As a
result the Imperial Government was overthrown
and the Republic restored. So soon as it became
evident that Paris would be besieged the Com-
mittee of Public Safety caused the stocks of
postage stamps available in Paris to be distributed
amongst the provincial post-offices, but these
were speedily exhausted, and as no further supplies
could be obtained from the beleagured capital
the Delegation at Tours decided to create a pro-
visional 20 centimes stamp, representing the
French inland postal rate at that period, for use
in that part of France unaffected b} 7 the hostilities.


The branch Mint at Bordeaux, to which city the
seat of Government was subsequently transferred,
was entrusted with the preparation of this stamp,
the design of which, showing the head of Ceres,
emblematic of the Republic, was based on that
of the first French stamps issued in 1849. This
design was engraved on stone by a local artist,
Mons. Leopold Yon, whose name, in tiny capitals,
was cunningly introduced into the vine leaf in
the hair. From this engraving lithographic
transfers were taken to make up the stone for
printing the stamps in complete sheets; the
“ Bordeaux ” stamps being all produced by this
process instead of by typography, as in the case
of the normal French issues. The actual printing
of the stamps was carried out under the super-
vision of M. Delebecque, Director of the Mint
at Bordeaux, by the local firm of Angele - Delilc.
No perforating machines being available, the
stamps had, perforce, to be issued without this
convenience. Between November, 1870, when the
Bordeaux provisionals first appeared, and March,
1871, when they ceased to be printed, a total


of 410,000 sheets of 300 stamps were struck off ;
in addition to more than two and a-half million
provisional postage due stamps. The dies and
lithographic stones were all destroyed in the
August following.
Meanwhile, in besieged Paris itself, the public
had protested against the continued circulation
of stamps bearing the effigy of the deposed
Emperor. An instance is recorded of the Imperial
portrait being actually cut out of the stamp
before it was affixed to the letter, and there is
no doubt that public feeling ran high on the
subject. To meet the emergency, therefore, the
discarded plates of the Republican issue of 1849-50
were unearthed and again pressed into service,
and printed from throughout the siege. When
the war was over this type was generally adopted
for the French postage stamps, new plates being
made from time to time for values necessitated
by alterations in the postal tariff. The heavy
war indemnity exacted by Germany made neces-
sary the raising of the charge upon inland letters
from 20 to 25 centimes, and that of town letters
from 10 to 15 centimes, stamps of these values
being issued in September, 1871.
Interesting philatelic mementos of the Siege
of Paris exist in the form of letters sent out of
the city by special means adopted to ensure
their penetrating the Prussian lines, including
balloons, pigeons, and clockwork devices resembling
small submarines for travelling under the waters
of the Seine. For the balloon post special cards


Balloon Post Letter used during the Siege of Paris, 1870.
The departure of Gambetta from Paris in the Balloon
“Armand Barbas” on Oct. 7th, 1870, during the siege.
and letter-sheets were issued, whilst letters sent
by this service bore the superscription “ Par
Ballon monte,”


On the Prussian side particular postage stamps
for use in the occupied French provinces were,
issued from the postal administration of Nancy
in September, 1870, for the use of the civil popula-
tion, and were employed as far afield as Abbeville
on the North, and Le Mans on the West. The
severe type set design of these stamps, consisting
merely of the word “ Postes,’ and the value
inscription upon a network ground, was evidently
prepared by the officials of the Imperial Printing
Works in Berlin, more with a view to practical
utility than with any eye for artistic effect. They
remained in general use until March 24, 1871
when, following the conclusion of peace, they were
withdrawn from circulation in all districts except-
ing the ceded territories of Alsace and Lorraine,
where they were employed provisionally until
superseded on January 1, 1872, by the first
unified stamps of the German Empire. To
philatelists this issue of the German occupation
is familiarly known as “the stamps of Alsace am]
Lorraine,”


CHILI AND PERU.
During the invasion of Peru by the Chilean
forces in the war of 1879-84, the contemporary
postage stamps of Chili were issued in a number
of occupied Peruvian towns between the dates
July, 1882, and October 22, 1883, and may be
found with the postmarks—inter alia —of Arica,
Callao, Iquique, Lima, Paita, Pisagua, Pisco,
Tacua, Yea, &c.
A number of the current Peruvian stamps were
also overprinted with the device of the Chilean


Aims, and so issued for public use in December,
1881, followed at the New Year by a further over-
print of the inscription “ Union Postal Universal,”
with the word “ Peru ” at the foot, in token of
the provisional administration. Following the
entry of Chilean troops into Lima on January 17,
1881, and the unification of the Republic of Peru,
on December 2, 1885, a number of local provisional
issues of postage stamps were made in various
departments of the Republic, which, however,
are too numerous to particularise.
ARABI PASHA’S REBELLION.
It was at the engagement of Kassasin in the
Egyptian revolt that the then newly-organised
Army Post Office Corps received its baptism of
fire, a detachment in charge of a field post-office
being attached to the expeditionary force under
General Wolseley, which landed in Egypt in
August, 1882. The contemporary Id. and 2|d.
stamps of Great Britain were issued by this military
post-office, cancelled at first with a small “ E ”
in red ink, and afterwards by a narrow lozenge-
shaped mark composed of small dots, which
finally gave place to conventional circular date
stamps, inscribed “ British Army Post Office,
Egypt,” round the circumference. This mark
was again employed in the operations in the
neighbourhood of Suakim in 1884.
MAJUBA HILL.
The postage stamps in use in the Transvaa
when the burghers, repudiating the British domin


ion, proclaimed the second Republic at Heidelbnrg
on December 16, 1880, bore the stately profile of
Queen Victoria, but after the disaster at Majuba
Hill early in the following year the country was
handed back to the Boers, subject to the suzerainty
of Great Britain. This event was signalised by the
surcharging of the Queen’s Head stamps in local
currency and ultimately by the re-issue of national
postage stamps emblazoned with the arms of the
South African Republic. In this manner is the
great historical event perpetuated in the memory
of the stamp collector.


CHINO-JAPANESE WAR.
Japan honoured the memory of two Princes of
her roval house who fell in the war with China
by placing their portraits upon the two commemo-
rative stamps issued on August 1, 1896, to mark
the conclusion of the peace of Shimonoseki,
GR7ECO-TURKJSH WAR.
On the retirement of the Greek forces from the
Northern part of Thessaly between April 12 and 24,
1897, the public Treasuries of Larissa, Trckala,
Cardizza and Agina, containing large stocks of
postage and revenue stamps fell into the hands of
the enemy. In order to prevent the circulation of
these stamps it was ordered that the stocks of
stamps on hand at the other treasuries should be
impressed with the official seal, a round handstamp
having the Greek crown in -the centre and the
word TAMEION (Treasury), followed by the name
of the province, round the circumference.
The Turkish occupation of Thessaly was followed


by the issue, early in the year 1898. of postage
stamps of curious octagonal design, showing in the
centre beneath the sign manual of the Sultan, a
vignette of the town of Larissa. They remained
m circulation for a short period only, and were
withdrawn so soon as the terms of peace had been
agreed upon by the two governments.
MATABELE REBELLION.
Stamps of .the British South Africa Company
surcharged “ One Penny ” or “ Three Pence ” and
issued at Bulawayo in April, 1896, recall the dark
days of the Matabele rebellion. The capital,
Salisbury, where the headquarters of the postal
sendee were located was completely cut off from
Bulawayo, and in consequence no fresh supplies
of postage stamps could be obtained. Recourse
was at first had to surcharging new values upon
such stamps as were available, but eventually these


became completely exhausted and the Cape Govern-
ment was requested by wire to lend a small supply
of its own stamps to meet immediate requirements.
This was done, the stamps being overprinted
“ British South Africa Company ” and used
provisionally until the end of the war, when a
new permanent issue was obtained from England;
THE SUDAN CAMPAIGN.
The first series of postage stamps for the Anglo-
Egyptian Sudan comprising the contemporary
stamps of Egypt overprinted “ Sudan ” in French
and Arabic, and issued at Wadi Haifa Camp on
March 1, 1897, was almost exclusively employed in


franking correspondence of the British and Egyp-
tian Armies under Lord Kitchener engaged in the
reconquest of the Sudan, the establishment of the
post offices coinciding with the advance of the
troops.
The design of the present stamps depicting an
armed camel postman crossing the desert with
mails from Berber to Khartoum, is the work of
an army officer, Col. E. A. Stanton, 0.L.1. A
picturesque series of stamps for use on military
telegrams in the Sudan was in use down to the
year 1902, the design showing a detachment of
the camel corps on the march.
SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR.
There is no lack of philatelic souvenirs, on either
side, of the great war between Spain and the
United States over the liberation ot Cuba. Military


post-offices supplied with the contemporary issue
of the United States accompanied the American
troops, specimens so used being distinguishable
only by means of their cancellations
Consequent on the American occupation of Cuba
a series of provisional stamps was issued fiom the
town of Puerto Principe, overprinted with the
word “ Habilitado ” and new value on the obsolete
stamps of the Spanish regime. The substitution
of civil for military government was followed by
the appearance of contemporary United States
postage stamps overprinted “ Cuba and new
value in local currency, which continued in use
until replaced by an issue of permanent design
prepared in the'U.S. Bureau of Engraving and
Printing.
In Porto Rico and the Philippines the same
procedure was followed, ordinary stamps of the
United States overprinted being supplied for
temporary use.
A Cdlbertian episode of the war is recalled by the
overprinting of the U.S. stamps for the Pacific
Island of Guam. When the U.S. cruiser “ Charles


ton ” steamed into the harbour of Agana and fired
a shot from one of her big guns to demand the
surrender of the island, the Spanish governor put
off in a launch to apologise for his inability to
return the “ salute ” as he had no ammunition
for his batteries. He was unaware that the count-
ries were at war and greatly surprised when he
ound himself a prisoner. Subsequently Guam was
placed under the control of the Navy Department
as a coaling station and for a time the stamps used
there were overprinted with the name of the
island.
The other islands of the Marianne group which
remained under Spanish control after the annexa-
tion of the Philippines by the United States,
overprinted their stocks of Philippine postage
stamps with the inscription “ Mariannas Espan-
olas ” to render them valid for postage, the
regular Spanish issues of the Philippines having
been demonetized. At the conclusion of the war
these islands, together with those of the Caroline
group, were sold to Germany, and in due course


were provided with stamps of the usual German
Colonial type.
Various provisional stamps were issued during
the early stages of the war by the Spanish authori-
ties in Cuba and Porto Rico, whilst at home a
special War Tax stamp was brought into use,
which was required to be affixed to all letters in'
addition to the ordinary postage fee.
The curious local stamps of the Philippine
revolutionaries under Aguinaldo must also be
counted amongst the philatelic souvenirs of the
Spanish-American War.
SOUTH AFRICA, 1899-1902.
Perhaps the most familiar of all war stamps
both to the stamp collector and the layman
are those which owe their issue to the Great Boer
War.
On the occupation of Bloemfontein in March,
1900, instructions were given for the whole of the
available supply of postage stamps of the late
Orange Free State to be overprinted with the
initials “ V.R.1.” for use under the military


administration, and the same was done as regards
the contemporary stamps of the Transvaal after
the fall of Pretoria three months later. The
overprint was afterwards changed to “E.R.1.” in
consequence of the accession of King Edward VI I.
For a time there was a veritable “ boom ” in
V.K.l.’s, and a scramble to secure some of the
rarer varieties. Every officer and soldier brought
or sent home sets of these paper trophies, whilst
the stamp collecting world was almost wholly
given over to the study and collection of “ raised
and “| level ” dots and specimens with “ dots
omitted.”


Mortimer Menpes, in his “ War Impressions,”
draws the following pen picture of the state of
affairs produced by the issue of these V.R.I.
stamps :
“ During this campaign there was an extra-
ordinary craze which had never before occurred
in any war in the world, but may possibly play a
very considerable part in the wars of the future ;
and that is the craze for postage stamps. . . .
*****
“,1 was now quite an authority on stamps, and
a rabid collector, too. Nothing ever happened
connected with stamps without my being on the
spot. All my thoughts were of stamps, they
were food and drink to me.
*****
“All the world lived at the post-office now.
Generals jostled sergeants, and privates hustled
doctors in the eagerness to buy up the twopence-
halfpennies, but I noticed that in a rush for a
missing dot the doctors invariably came out on
top, while the clergy came in a very good second.”
Special siege stamps were issued in a number of
South African towns during their investment by
the Boers at different periods in the war, amongst
them being Lydenburg, Rustenburg, Schweizer
Renecke, Volkrust and Wolmaranstad, but most
famous of all issues of the South African war are
the renowned siege stamps of Mafeking. At first
these stamps took the form of contemporary
stamps of the Cape of Good Hope and Bechuana-
land Protectorate overprinted at the offices of


the “ Mafeking Mail ” with the words “ Matching
Beseiged,” and a new value to meet the high rates
of postage upon letters sent by Kaffir runners
through the enemy’s lines. There was also a
local issue for use upon messages conveyed
between different points within the defences
which was produced by a photographic process.
One of these stamps bore a representation of a
cyclist orderly, whilst on the other appeared the
portrait of the gallant commander of the garrison,
Major General R. S. S. Baden Powell. The finest
collection of these historic postage stamps extant
is owned by H.M. the King, whose enthusiasm for
the hobby of philately is well known.
When the Boer forces seized Vryburg in Novem-
ber, 1899, they surcharged the Cape stamps found in
the post-office with their values and the letters
Z.A.R. (Zuid Afrikanish Republic), afterwards re-
placing them by the current issue of the Transvaal.
In May, 1900, the town was' re-occupied by the
British, who retaliated by surcharging the Boer
stamps “ V.R. Special Post.”


The last phase of the war is represented by the
crude type set provisionals issued at Petersburg,
in the Northern Transvaal, whence the seat of
Government of the South African Republic had
been removed during March and April, 1901.
They were roughly printed in the press of “ De
Zoutspanberg Wachter,” and on the arrival of the
British troops in the district the remainders were
destroyed.
RELIEF OF THE PEKIN LEGATIONS.
The field post-offices attached to the Indian
contingent forming part of the allied army dis-
patched to the relief of the Pekin Legations
during the Chinese Boxer Rising of 1900 were,
as usual, supplied with the contemporary postage
stamps of British India. For convenience of
reckoning it was decided to fix the rate of exchange


at 4 cents to the anna, and as this allowed a slight
margin it was deemed expedient to place some
distinguishing mark upon the stamps sold in
China at this rate, to obviate the possibility of
their being exported to India in large quantities
at a profit They were therefore overprinted with
the initials C.E.F. (China Expeditionary Force),
and so distinguished are employed to this day
by the British and Indian troops of the North
China command. Chinese stamps surcharged
“ British Railway Association ” are likewise remi-
niscent of the dark days of the siege of the Lega-
tions.
The military post-offices of the other allies,
French, German, Russian, Japanese, American,
Italian, etc., all made use of the regular home
issues of their respective countries without dis-
tinguishing overprint, and these also must be
counted amongst the philatelic records of the
Boxer Rising.
RUSSO-JAPANESE WAR, 1904-5.
For the benefit of the widows and orphans of
soldiers who fell in the war with Japan, the Russian
Government issued early in 1905, a set of charity
postage stamps adorned with reproductions of
monuments to national heroes. They were sold
for 3 kopecs in excess of their actual postal values,
which sum was appropriated to the war fund.
In commemoration of the great Triumphal
Military Review at the conclusion of the war, two


particular postage stamps showing trophies of arms
were placed on sale by the Imperial Japanese Post
Office, for one day only, on April 30, 1906.
ITALO-TURKISH WAR.
The war between Italy and Turkey which ended
in the annexation of Tripoli is recalled by the
overprinting of the present Italian postage stamps


with the name “ Lybia ” which has been bestowed
on her new protectorate, and with the names of
a number of Aegean Islands during their temporary
occupation by Italian troops.
BALKAN WAR.
The special issues of postage stamps arising out
of the war between the States of the Balkan League
and Turkey are by far the most numerous of any
stamps of war, and space forbids more than a
passing reference to them. They include Greek


stamps overprinted “ Hellenic Administration
for the occupied districts of Thrace, Macedonia,
and Thessaly, and in Crete ; in addition to local
issues for the islands of Lemnos, Samos and
Mytilene, and independent issues emanating from
Albania, Epirus and Thrace.
Bulgarian and Greek stamps also exist overprinted
Dedeagtch, Cavalle and Gioumultzina, when those
towns were wrested from the Bulgarians in the
second phase of the war.
In addition we have a permanent Greek war
series in two designs, inscribed “ Expedition of
1912,” the first showing Jupiter in the guise of an
eagle with a serpent in its beak soaring above
Mount Olympus, as an omen of victory taken from
a bas relief on the West front of the Parthenon,
the work of the sculptor Phidias, and the second
depicting the famous vision of the fiery Cross,
which, according to popular legend appeared to


the Emperor Constantine the Great in the year
313, with the motto “ In hoc signo vinces.”
Turkey celebrated the re-capture of Adrianople
by the creation of a handsome postage stamp
vignette of the world-famous Mosque of Selim
in that city, whilst the union of Crete with Greece
is commemorated in the design of a special 25
lepta stamp, which depicts the hoisting of the
Hellenic flag over the bastion at Suda Bay.


Other notable wars and campaigns that are
denoted by special stamps or postmarks include
the Abysinnian Expedition of 1867, when Indian
stamps were employed by the field post-offices,
and cancelled with the letters ‘ F.h. set in
a rhomboid frame; the occupation of Schleswig-
Holstein by Austria and Prussia, and sub-
sequently by Prussia only, the stamps of the
revolutionary movement being superseded at first
by a conjoint issue, and later by separate issues for
Schleswig (occupied by Prussia) and Holstein
(occupied by Austria). After the Austro-Prussian
war of 1866, however, the two Duchies were
formerly annexed by Prussia, and used the contem-
porary stamps of that kingdom, until they were
superseded in 1868 by those of the North
German Confederation.
The Carlist insurrection in Northern Spain, in
1878, provided some interesting lithographed
labels bearing the likeness of the Pretender, Dorn


Carlos. The military operations against the
Carlists also led to the introduction of war tax
stamps by the Spanish Government on January 1,
1874. They bore a design of the Arms of Castillo
and Leon, and were required to be affixed to all
letters, for a certain period, in addition to the
ordinary postage.
The stamps issued by the Provisional Govern-
ment in Spain, following the revolution of Septem-
ber, 1868, also come under the category of war
stamps, as do also all stamps of Bosnia which
appeared under the military administration.
During the war with Paraguay (1864-70) the
Brazilian naval and military forces were furnished
with some unpretentious labels, bearing a plain
type-set inscription in a rectangular frame,
reading “Exercito” (Army) or “Armada (Navy)
—e operacoes contra o Paraguay,” which franked
their letters free to all parts of Brazil.
Stamps of Eastern Roumelia overprinted with
the Bulgarian Lion in 1885, mark the revolt of that
State, and its union with Bulgaria as South
Bulgaria.
A curious set of labels printed in a large variety
of colours, with the Spanish Arms in the centre,
and inscribed “Espaiia-Correos—Vranquicia Postal
Expedicionario Ejercito—Melilla,” appeared at
the time of the Spanish expedition to Morocco in
1893, but are believed to have been issued merely
by a private speculator and without any official
status.
Whijst Crete was occupied by the Allies during


the insurrection of 1898, special stamps were
issued both by the British and Russian authorities
in their respective spheres of influence.
The Indian stamps overprinted “ British Somali-
land ” in 1900, although appearing at the time of
the military operations against the Mad Mullah,
were not supplied to the Indian field post-offices,
which made use of the ordinary home issue without
overprint. Those additionally overprinted “On
H.M.S.” for official purposes, however, were
chiefly employed by the military authorities at
that time.
Prior to the introduction of adhesive postage
stamps there are many postmark souvenirs of
war that are of surpassing interest, amongst them
relics of the Napoleonic Wars, the campaigns of
Frederick the Great, the French Revolution, etc.,
etc.., but these, together with purely postmark
varieties evolved during more recent campaigns,
do not come within the scope of this work, which
is primarily concerned with special issues of adhe-
sives influenced by war.


PART II. —STAMPS OF THE GREAT WAR.
AT the time of writing the war of the nations
is scarcely three months old, yet it has
already produced no inconsiderable num-
ber of postal and philatelic mementos,
which are being added to almost daily
Postmark varieties so far constitute the larger
proportion, but there have also been some highly
interesting issues of adhesive stamps by the nations
involved, and “ the cry is still they come.”
A collection of war stamps and postmarks forms
one of the most fascinating permanent and in-
structive records of the present great European
crisis. Even for those who arc not themselves
collectors it will possess in after years a deep
historical interest. By securing all varieties as
they appear such a collection can be formed at
comparatively small cost.
Red Cross Stamps.
A remarkable philatelic feature of the Great War
has been the number of Red Cross charity postage
stamps that have been issued by the combatants
on both sides : a class of stamp that has hitherto
played an inconspicuous part in the pageant of
the stamp album.
Stamps of this character, sold for varying
amounts in excess of their actual postal denomina-
tions in aid of the national Red Cross Funds have
been issued recently in France, Monaco, Morocco,
Belgium and Russia, while others are said to be


in preparation. In Germany, it is reported that
the entire stock of German Colonial stamps on
hand for sale to collectors and dealers at the special
stamp collectors’ bureau in Berlin have been
imprinted on the face with a large Geneva Cross,
to the same end, but as yet this rumour lacks
confirmation.
It is to be hoped that every stamp collector
will see to it that one full set at least of all Red
Cross stamps issued by the Allies finds place
in his album, thus contributing his mite toward the
noble work of that magnificent organisation, the
Red Cross.
Other War Stamps.
Not all of the postal issues of the Great War
have been, however, of a charitable nature, as
witness the German stamps overprinted for use m
Belgium under the Imperial Governor-Generalship .
stamps of Togo in the familiar German Colonial
type overprinted “Anglo-French Occupation ,
Indian stamps overprinted I.E.F. for the use of the
military post offices of the Indian Expeditionary
Force in France, etc.
The naval and military postmarks and censor
marks of the different armies are also worthy of
attention, and make an important contribution
to the philatelic record of the war.
The following notes upon the stamps and
postmarks of the Great War that have come
under the notice of the writer up to the time of
going to Press, bring the story of the postage


stamp in War right down to the present time.
They are of necessity somewhat brief and incom-
plete owing to the impossibility of obtaining definite
information concerning some of the issues whilst
hostilities are in progress, but an effort has been
made to include all important varieties together
with such details as are at present available.
When Peace shall once more have come into her
own further particulars regarding many of these
war stamps will doubtless be forthcoming, and
doubtful points cleared up. It is hoped to embody
these in a subsequent volume, which will also
contain a record of the issues appearing after
the publication of this work, in the form of a
sequel, the two books constituting a complete
popular history of the Postage Stamps of War.
Great Britain.
The embodying of the Territorial forces following
the outbreak of war with Germany on August 4,
1914, resulted in many cases in a local shortage of
|d. and Id. stamps, and amongst the earliest
philatelic souvenirs of the Great War must be
counted letters and postcards from Territorials
marked “ No stamps available ” to which ordinary
Postage Due labels have been affixed by the postal
authorities. An early example was inscribed “No
obligation,’’ but instances are known where the
full amount of postage due was collected by the
postal authorities, although instructions were
subsequently issued by the Postmaster-General
that no charge should be made upon such com-
munications.


With the dispatch of the British Expeditionarj-
Force to France and Belgium in the early days of
August, the Army Post Office Corps, forming a
special service section of the Bth County of London
Territorial Battalion (Post Office Rides) was
mobilised and placed in charge of the postal
arrangements of the Expedition, under the direc-
tion of Colonel W. Price, C.M.G., Director of Army
Posts.
Created by Royal Warrant at the time of
the Egyptian campaign of 1882, the Army Post
Office Corps first saw service under Lord Wolseley,
and later a detachment took part in the operations
round Suakim. in 1884-85. In the South African
War 1899-1902, the establishment of the Army
Post Office Corps in the field reached a total of-
-648 of all ranks, several of whom were killed in
action, while about 50 died of disease. A number
of base offices and some fifty field post offices were
maintained in operation during the war, and high
tribute was paid to the efficiency of the service
by Lord Roberts in dispatches. An indication of
the amount of work that fell to the lot of the Army
Post Office Corps in the South African War may
be gleaned from the fact that in a single week
313,416 letters, etc., and 19,019 parcels were
received from England and sorted and distributed
to the troops, and 108,150 letters and registered
packets were forwarded in the home mails.
Until the outbreak of the great European War,
the Army Post Office Corps had not since seen
active service.


Ihe following is a copy of an Army Order
relating to the organisation of the Army Postal
Service in the present war :
THIRD ARMY ORDERS.
By Lieut.-General Sir W. E. Franklyn. K.C.B.
Commanding Third Army (Central Force).
Headquarters, Luton Hoo,
28th September, 1914.
Part 11.
87. Army Postal Service.
An Army Postal Service R.E. (Territorials)
is in course of formation, and when complete
will be attached to the Central Force as follows ;
WAR ESTABLISHMENTS.
At each Army Headquarters.
1 Assistant Director of Postal Services
(A Subaltern).
1 Staff Sergeant.
BRANCH FIELD POST OFFICES.
At each Army Headquarters.
1 Sergeant.
2 Sappers and Pioneers.
At each Divisional Headquarters.
I Sergeant.
3 Corporals.
5 Sappers and Pioneers.
At each Mounted Brigade Headquarters.
1 Sergeant.
1 Corporal.
1 Sapper or Pioneer.
At each Infantry Brigade Headquarters.
1 Corporal.
2 Sappers and Pioneers.
As regards payment, etc.
Further instructions will be issued as to the


date upon which these details will join for
duty :
R. D. Gubbins,
Brigadier-General, D.A. & 0.M.G.,
3rd Army.
About fifty field post offices, as well as a number
of Base and Advance Base offices, appear to be
operating with the British Army on the Continent.
The earliest tvpe of cancellation applied to the
correspondence of the Expeditionary horce con-
sisted merely of a circular cancelling stamp formed
of a number of heavy bars, and reminiscent of the
early English duplex postmarks. This mark,
bearing no indication as to the date and place
of posting, was in use during a brief period only
and has now been superseded by the regulation
type of date stamp with two concentric circles
inscribed round the circumference ARMY BASE
POST OFFICE, ADVANCE BASE POST OFFICE
or ARMY POST OFFICE, 1-50. A second type
of postmark with a single outer circle is also
known. Regulation Field Service postcards with
an impressed Id. stamp and printed on the back
with a carefully tabulated list of stereotyped
messages such as “ I am well,” “ I am wounded,
“ I am in hospital,” etc., are supplied to British
troops on active service, the method of use being
merely to cross out such sentences as do not
apply to the particular case.
In addition letters and postcards are impressed
with the Censor’s mark in red (as illustrated), the
highest number so far recorded being No. 394.
Unlike the Army, the Royal Navy has no


regular postal corps of its own, but correspondence
for the Fleet is handled by a special branch of the
CENSOR.
NAVY.
ARMY.
great Central Sorting Office of the General Post
Office at Mount Pleasant. This department is
in daily communication with the Admiralty as
to the whereabouts of the various vessels, and
letters addressed to the care of the G.P.O. are
forwarded with the least possible delay. Navy
letters in times of peace are usually cancelled
with the ordinary postmark of the town at which
they are put ashore. But the necessary conditions
of secrecy obtaining in war time have evolved
a large number of curious postmark varieties,
a few of which are the subject of the accompanying
illustration.


The formation of concentration camps for the
internment of alien enemies in Great Britain,


as prisoners of war, is responsible for Ihe creation
of yet another group of war postmarks, which we
illustrate. Numbers 1,3 and 4 are Censor’s marks,
and No. 2 the “ frank,” all being impressed in
violet ink.
Austria.
Two particular charity-postage stamps in aid
of a Fund for the relief of widows and orphans of
soldiers killed in the war were issued by the
Austrian Government on October 4, in accordance
with the terms of the following Ministerial decree
of September 24, 1914 :
“ ISSUE OF NEW STAMPS OF FIVE AND
TEN HELLERS.
(For the assistance of Widows and Orphans of
Fallen Warriors).
" During the continuation of the war, new
stamps of the 5 and 10 hellers denominations
will be issued, which will be sold at 2h. above
face value, that is, the stamps are sold at 7 and
12 heller respectively. By purchasing the com-
plete sheet of 80 copies, the price is skr. 40h. and
9k. 35h. The proceeds gained in this way will
be devoted to the aid of the widows and orphans
of fallen warriors.
“ The stamps are eight millimetres longer than
the current 5 and 10 h. stamps, and they bear the
design of these and besides, in the space between
the portrait of His Majesty and the figures of
value, is placed “1914” in white figures on
coloured ground, surrounded by foliage ornament.
“ The new stamps will be issued on and after
October 4th, 1914.
“ Until further notice these stamps may be
used, besides those of the current issue, for


franking postal matters of the Interior service and
exchange service with Hungary, Bosnia, Herze-
govina and Germany.
“ Exchange or return of these stamps are
not entertained.
“ (Signed) Schuster, M.P.”
From the description given it would appear
that these stamps resemble closely the elongated
birthday commemoration issue of November, 1910.
Check List.
October 4, 1914. Chanty postage issue. Two
values. Head of Emperor Francis Joseph I.
Types of 1906 adapted. Dated “ 1914,” Surface
printed at Imperial Printing Works, Vienna. No
watermark. Perf., 12£.
5 (7) heller green.
10 (12) rose.
Hungary.
A similar issue has been made in Hungary,
where the remainders of the 5 and 10 filler Mood
Relief stamps have been overprinted in black,


“ Hadi segely ” (War Relief) across the centre,
and on the label at foot, obliterating the original
inscription, “ Ozvegyeknek es arvaknak ket (2)
filler ” (for the widows and orphans, 2 fillers).
Check list.
October, 1914. War Relief Stamps. Overprinted
as above on Charity issue of November, 1913, in
black. Surface printed and overprinted at Hun-
garian National Printing Works, Budapest. Wmk
Multiple Cross. Perf. 15.
5 (7) filler green.
10 (12) ~ rose.
The military post-offices attached to the Austro-
Hungarian Armies in the field will be making use
of the contemporary postage stamps of Austria
or Hungary, cancelled with Special dies, inscribed
“ K.U.K. FELDPOST,” or with some similar
inscription, but at the moment of writing no
specimens are available for reference.
Belgium.
The German invasion of Belgium was followed
by the establishment of Field post-offices in all
Belgian towns along the line of advance, and
accordingly many of the current German postage


stamps may be found with Belgian postmarks.
Towards the end of September the civil postal
service in all the occupied districts was taken
over by the German postal administration, with
headquarters in Brussels, and on or about October 1
a series of four special stamps for use under the
Imperial Governor-Generalship of Belgium was
provided, by overprinting corresponding low values
of the German type of 1902, inscribed “ Deutsches
Keich,” with the word “ Belgien ” and value in
" centimes.” The overprint in two lines of
black Gothic type was applied at the Imperial
Printing Works, Berlin, resembling that on the
“ Cents ” series for the German P.O. in China
of 1905.
Check List.
October 1, 1914. Provisional issue of German
occupation. Overprinted “ Belgien ” and values in
Centimes, in two lines of black Gothic type upon
contemporary German issue of ISO 2. Surface
printed and overprinted at Imperial Printing
Works, Berlin. Watermark. Lozenges. Perf., 14.


3 centimes on 3 pfg. brown.
5 ~ on 5 green.
10 ~ on 10 ~ red.
25 ~ on 20 ~ blue
The above issue is stated to be merely of a
provisional character, it being proposed to substi-
tute for it in due course, permanent stamps on the
lines of those issued for Alsace and Lorraine, etc.,
in the Franco-German War of 1870-1871.
Of doubtful authenticity are Belgian stamps of
the 1912 series overprinted diagonally “ Deutsches
Reich,” specimens of which are being offered in
certain quarters. Following the destruction of the
Belgian National Printing Works, during the
bombardment of Malines two series of Red
Cross Postage stamps for internal use only
were manufactured at Antwerp by lithography,
the one in design showing the national me-
morial to the war of Independence of 1830
three Belgian soldiers, one of whom is wounded,


defending the flag ; and the other a modern
portrait of Belgium’s gallant young King, Albert I.
They were issued on October 3, and were sold for
double face value at post-offices in that part of
Belgium not as yet occupied by the German armies.
Check List.
October 3, 1914. Red Cross Postage stamps.
Lithographed on white wove unwatermarked paper
at Antwerp. Perf., 13J. Geneva Cross in Red
on all values.
{a) National Memorial.
o centimes green.
JO „ red.
20 ~ purple.
(i b) Head of King Albert I.
10 centimes brick red.
20 ~ purple.
The printing of the regular Belgian postage
stamps of 1912 with head of King Albert must
have been suspended quite early in the war. At
that time preparations were in progress for the
production of a new permanent pictorial issue
by the Dujardin process of dry printing from line-
engraved plates, for which special machinery was
on order in London, but the outbreak of war has,


for the time being at least, quashed this issue.
Military postmarks and censor marks are believed
to have been affixed to the contemporary postage
stamps of Belgium prior to the final withdrawal
of the Belgian government from its native soil,
but no particulars are available at the time of
writing.
A Belgian post-office is operating in the little


town of St. Andresse, near Havre, where the
Belgian Ministry is at present enjoying the hos-
pitality of France. Ten centimes is said to be
the charge upon local letters and 25 centimes
to Havre, and ordinary Belgian stamps with por-
trait of King Albert are used and obliterated with
a special postmark.
Canadian Contingent.
A few years ago an up-to-date postal corps
was added to the Canadian Army, and a held
post-office under its direction accompanied the
Canadian troops who landed in Great Britain
in October, 1914. A special postmark of a large
circular pattern surmounted by a crown and with a
maple leaf in the centre is applied to correspondence
passing through, this office, as shown in the
illustration.


France,
As early as August 18 a provisional Red Cross
postage stamp was issued in France under the
authority of M. Thomson, Minister of Posts and
Telegraphs, the current 10 centimes postage stamp
in the Sower design being imprinted on the face
with a small Geneva cross and the figure “ 5c.”
iu vermilion near the foot of the stamp, and sold
at post offices for 15 centimes, five of which were
appropriated to the Red Cross Fund. This was
later followed by a permanent stamp of the same
character, but with the Geneva Cross and additional
value incorporated in the design, together with
the inscription “ Croix Rouge.” Although their
use is.entirely optional many thousands have been
sold in France during the past few months.
Check List.
August 18. Provisional Red Cross Postage
stamp overprinted “ t 5c.” on contemporary
French postage stamp at Government Printing
Establishment, Paris. Perj., 13i and 14.
10c. (15c.) carmine.
September. Permanent Red Cross Stamp. Sur-
face printed
10c. (15c.) carmine.


The following is the text of the official decree authoriz-
ing the issue of Red Cross postage stamps in France :
“The President of the French Republic; on the ad-
vice of the Minister of Commerce, of Works, of Posts
and of Telegraphs, Decrees.
Article I. A special postage stamp is created styled
“Stamps of the French Red Cross.” The public shall
have the privilege, in the interior region only, of using
this stamp, which will be valid for postage up to the
extent ot 10 centimes only.
Article 11. The stamp is sold for 15 centimes. The
difference between the sale price and the postal value,
after allowing for the regular rebate of 1%, will be
diverted to the commission instituted by the decree of
August Bth, 1914, by the Ministry of War, under the
authority of the Military Department of Health and
with the approval of the Societies forming the French
Red Cross.
Article 111. As a temporary measure, and pending
the printing of the new stamp, the public will have at
their disposal ordinary postage stamps of 10 centimes,
bearing in surcharge the device of the Red Cross and
the figure 5 centimes.
Article IV. The Minister of Commerce and the
Minister of Finance are charged, each in their own
part, with the execution of the present decree.
Given at Paris, the 11th August, 1914.
For the President of the Republic, the Minister of
Commerce of Works, of Posts and of Telegraphs.
Gaston Thomson.
The Minister ot Finance.


Consequent on the removal of the seat of
government from Paris to Bordeaux at the end
of September, the French Government Printing
Establishment was transferred to Marseilles, where
a branch stamp printery has been created, which
will be charged with the production of the current
French postage stamps whilst hostilities continue.
Beyond a slight re-arrangement of the sheets,
which will in future consist of two large panes
only, it is announced that there will be no difference
between the stamps printed in Marseilles and
those formerly produced in Paris, but when the
Marseilles printings do make their appearance
philatelists will doubtless discover some slight
divergency in shade or paper that will enable
them to be differentiated. The field service post-
card supplied to the French troops is a much more
elaborate production than its British prototype,
emblazoned with a cluster of the flags of the
Allied nations in colours, after a design of Mons.
Stern. It is cancelled with the French military
postmark “ Tresor et Postes ” in a concentric
circle, and bears no indication of value, being
inscribed “ Correspondance des Armees de la
Republique-—Carte en Franchise ” whilst a table
is provided for the name, rank and corps of the
sender to be filled in. On the reverse side is
printed that only general matters are to be referred
to and no indication given as to the whereabouts
of the sender, failing the observance of which rule
the card will not be transmitted.


Germany.
Here a number of Censor marks and naval anci
military cancellations are in use, details of which
are not at the moment obtainable. Mr. S. R.
Turner informs me that he has the Censor’s mark
upon a letter dated as early as July 31, 1914.
Geprüft.
German Colonies.
It is reported from Berlin that the stock of
German Colonial postage stamps in the existing
“ Hohenzollern ” design, on hand at the special
stamp collectors’ post-office in that city, has
been overprinted with a large Geneva Cross and
sold for the benefit of the Red Cross Fund, but
at present the rumour is unconfirmed.
Indian Expeditionary Force.
Some 24 fully equipped military post-offices arc
included in the regular establishment of the Indian


Army, a number of which have been attached to
every expeditionary force sent out of India in
recent years.
A somewhat curious anomaly exists in connection
with the use of postage stamps by these field
post-offices, soldiers’ letters being in reality con-
veyed free of charge in accordance with an an-
nouncement in the Indian Postal Guide, but with a
view to facilitating their transmission postage is in
the first place prepaid in the ordinary manner by
means of adhesive stamps, the total value of those
used by each unit being recovered at monthly
intervals.
In the case of the Indian Expeditionary Force
in France, it has been found expedient presumably
on account of currency differences, to overprint
the contemporary Georgian postage stamps of
British fndia supplied to the military post-office
with the initials I.E.F. in large black Roman
capitals.
Check List.
October, 1914. Contemporary Georgian issue
of British India overprinted “ 1.E.F.” in black


Roman capitals at the Government of India Central
Printing Office, Calcutta. Watermark, Star.
Perf., 14.
3 pies, grey. 3 annas orange.
I anna, green. 4 ~ olive.
1 anna, carmine. 8 ~ mauve.
2 annas, purple. 12 ~ carmine lake.
2\ annas, blue. 1 rupee, brown and grsen.
Luxemburg,
German postage stamps are stated to be in
use here, the last issue with portrait of the Grand
Duchess Marie Adelaide being temporarily with-
held from circulation.
Monaco.
Following the example of her French protector,
this tiny Rivieran principality has overprinted its
current 10 centimes postage stamp with the portrait
of Prince Albert, with the Cross of Geneva, and
additional value “ 5c.” for sale in aid of the French
Red Cross.
Check List.
October, 1914. Overprinted “ + 5c.” on con


temporary Monaco postage stamp of 1901-2.
Head of Prince Albert. Surface printed on
medium, white wove unwatermarked paper. Perf.,
14 and 135.
10c. (15c.) red.
Montenegro.
The contemporary postage stamps of the Black
Mountain Kingdom, bearing the likeness of King
Nicholas I. are doubtless being employed by the
field post-offices attached to the Montenegrin
forces operating in Bosnia and Herzegovina
against the Austrians.
Morocco.
For a period of three weeks from September
Ist, 1914, the current 10 centimes stamp of the
French Post Offices in Morocco with value over-
print in Arabic, was on sale in aid of the French


Red Cross, additionally overprinted “ PRO-
TECTORATE FRANCAISE ” in two lines in
black supplemented by the Red Cross and figure
“ 5c.” in red.
Check List.
September Ist, 1914. Provisional Red
Cross stamp. Overprinted as above on French
issue for P.O. in Morocco of 1911. Surface
printed at French Government Printing Establish-
ment, Paris. No watermark. Perf., 14 and 13L
10c. (15c.) blue on carmine.
Newfoundland
A particular postage stamp to be sold for 25
cents in aid of the National Relief Eund, but
whose postal validity is limited to 2 cents, is
reported, through an American source, to be about-
to make its appearance in this British colony.
New Guinea.
Following the seizure by an Australian expedition
of the former German possession of Kaiser Wilhelms-
land on the Australasian island of New Guinea,
the stock of postage stamps in the regular German
Colonial type on hand at the chief post-office at
Rebaul is stated to have been converted to postal
use under British Administration by overprinting
with the cypher “ G.R.1.” No details as to the
values, etc., so treated have been received up to
the time of going to press with this volume.
Poland.
The following extract from an American news-
paper refers to what is, presumably, a mythical


issue of stamps circulated for political purposes,
and entirely devoid of any postal validity. The
“ New York American ” prints a dispatch from
Petrograd (St. Petersburg) in which it quotes
a Galician soldier as saying :
“ When we left Vienna we were told the Austrians
had taken Belgrade. At. Cracow we were told all
Servia was conquered and the army was approach-
ing Nish and that the Germans had entered \\ arsaw.
When we were led to positions we were informed
that a Polish monarchy was already established,
proof of which was shown by stamps with the
effigy of King Sobieski the Third.”
Russia.
Field post-offices accompanied the Russian
advance into East Prussia in the early stages
of the war and were supplied with stamps of the
1912 issue with portrait of the Czar. Specimens
may, therefore, be found with the postmarks of
towns in that region, It is assumed that Russian


stamps have likewise been employed in Galicia
and other districts penetrated by the Czar’s
armies.
At Petrograd there has just been placed on sale
a series of Red Cross postage stamps showing the
Hags of the Allied Nations with their staves en-
circled by a laurel wreath, against the background
of the Rising Sun.
Samoa.
In a like manner to those of German New Guinea,
the stock of former German colonial stamps
found in the post-offices of the Samoan group
has received the imprint of the Royal Cypher,
and a new value in English money for use under
the New Zealand administration. According to
information to hand, the series comprises seven
values, as follows :
Check List.
October, 1914 (?). Overprinted “ G.R.1.”
and new value in British currency on German
Colonial issue of 1900 inscribed “ Samoa.” No
watermark. Perf. 14.
Jd. on 3 pfg. brown.
Id. on 5 pfg. green.
Id. on 10 pfg. carmine.
2|d. on 20 pfg. blue.
3d on 25 pfg. red and black on yellow.
4d. on 30 pfg. black and orange on buff.
sd. on 40 pfg. black and carmine.
6d. on 50 pfg. purple on buff.
Servia.
Servian stamps of the current issue have no
doubt been in use by the field post-offices attached


to the troops operating in Bosnia and Hungary,
but no particulars can, at present, be given regard-
ing the precise form of postmark, etc.
Switzerland.
A correspondent in Switzerland sends me two
field service postcards stamped with the national
arms, which accordingly travel free through the
post. The one for use by the soldiers themselves
bears a notice in German, French, and Italian to
the effect that the whereabouts of the troops
must on no account be disclosed, while the other,
to be used by friends and relations in communi-
cating with the troops on mobilization, states that
the correct address of the various units may be
ascertained from the official military post bulletin.
Togo.
For several weeks following the occupation of
the former German West African colony of Togo
by a combined British and French force, the
ordinary current stamps of the adjacent British
colony of Gold Coast were employed in franking
foreign letters, whilst for local postage the old
German colonial stamps were temporarily allowed
to do duty. A stamp of the German colonial
type overprinted “ G.R.T.” by means of a rubber
handstamp was, it is true, noted in a newspaper
paragraph, but it is believed to have been un-
authorised.
By the last West African mail in October,
however, came to hand examples of the first


authentic postage stamp issue under the con-
dominium, in the form of erstwhile German Colonial
stamps inscribed “ Togo,” overprinted in three
lines of heavy face black type “ Togo, Anglo-
French Occupation,” and in some cases new values
in British currency also. Only values up to 50pfg.
have actually been seen, but the higher denomina-
tions are understood to exist with this overprint.
Check List.
October (?), 1914. Provisional issue. Over-
printed locallv as above on German Colonial issue
of 1900-14. Surface printed at Imperial Printing
Works, Berlin. (W) watermark lozenges. Perf., 14
4d. on 3 pfg. brown. 40 pfg. black and carmine.
Id. on spfg. green (W.). 50 pfg. purple on buff.
10 pfg. carmine (W.). 80 pfg. black and carmine
20 pfg. ultramarine (W). on rose.
25 pfg. black and red 1 mark carmine (?).
on yellow. 2 marks blue.
30 pfg. black and orange 3 marks violet and black • .
on buff. 5 marks carmine and black
* * * *
This completes the record of the postage stamps
and postmarks of the Great War down to the


commencement of November, 1914, so far as the
available data will permit.
It is safe to assume that the stamps referred to
are but the forerunners of countless other issues
Suggested design for the British War Stamp,
sketched by Messrs G. T. and S. R. Turner.
and varieties that w ill serve to perpetuate the
memory of the War of the Nations in the minds
of stamp collectors for all time.
END,- -
The author desires to acknowledge his indebtedness to
Bright dv Son and Mr. M. A. McGoff for the loan of
specimens illustrated in the present work, and also to
“ Stamp Collecting."




War and the Stamp Market.
By W. H. A. WILLIAMS.
WAR loaves its mark on everything. There
is hardly in existence anything so in-
significant as to be impervious to the
wondrous changes wrought by such a
war as this in which we are still in the throes
as I write.
Great as have been the effects in the financial
world in this country, the shock has been
withstood with a greater ease than the most
sanguine would have prophesied six months ago
- —and stamp collecting as a hobby has, along with
interests of superior magnitude, stood firm.
I have often known the Philistine say, “ We
will wait and see how your hobby stands the first
few weeks of some great national calamity.”
Well, the first few weeks are now long since
passed, and the hobby flourishes, perhaps, cir-
cumstances taken into account, as it never did
before.
In spite of the dislocation of our usual methods
of life all the stamp dealers of importance
are still doing good business and enquiries in the
trade produce hardly one discordant note. August
and September were quiet, but August and
September are always quiet, for the leisured classes
have not returned to their homes and their stamp
albums in these months.


Business naturally is slightly below the normal
level; there are too many good philatelists serving
with our forces to leave no effect on the dealers.
There is probably no vocation which pursues
philately so ardently as that of the Army, whilst
there are many collectors of importance in the
Navy. Hundreds more who formerly followed
civilian life have volunteered for service and these
good citizens are naturally quiescent so far as
their philatelic activities are concerned.
There has, however, been no panic. No fine
collections of Twentieth Century stamps have
been slaughtered at half face. No accumulations
of fine “ Sydney Views ” are to be found at one-
third catalogue price. All these things and more
were prophesied, but those who know give the
same information—that there never was a time
in the history of stamp collecting when less stamps
were on the market.
This does not spell panic, nor does it spell any
fall in prices. All that exists at the present time
is a temporary lull and a natural and inevitable
quietude, inseparable from occasions when one’s
attentions and pecuniary resources arc centred
on more vital interests.
We will examine in more detail the possible
and probable effects.
Rarities.
Business in these gilt-edged securities during
the war will be quiet. 1 hey will not depreciate
in value, and none will be picked up at low rates,


except by accident —the latter contingency is nut
confined to War time ;
There is no better investment than a rare
stamp : this is true of all times. The individuals
who handle them are not as a rule affected and
frightened out of their senses at the first cloud
which looms on the financial —or philatelic
horizon.
Medium British Colonial Stamps.
There will be a steady increase in demand for
these stamps. For years they have occupied a
truly “ medium ” position, but the boom in
patriotic feeling will bring them more into their
own.
Twentieth Century Colonials (always the most
popular type of medium stamps) will occupy the
same firm positions whilst the new issue business
will boom. Collectors will see the chance of
obtaining plenty of provisionals issued through
exigencies occasioned by the war, and will accord-
ingly make sure that their supply of new varieties
is not allowed to lapse.
Good old imperforate British Colonial stamps
are still almost unobtainable in tine condition at
any discount of Catalogue rates, and this will
hold good.
Foreign Stamps.
Old German States, on account of the present
unpopularity of anything German, will show to
more normal position. They have been overrated


for some years now, but the depletion of the
Germanic exchequers and the consequent attrition
of individual German’s means will bring so many
of these stamps on the market that tire prospect
is by no means bright for these stamps.
German Colonials will naturally enjoy a tem-
porary boom, but we should not advise a too
lavish expenditure on these stamps.
After the War.
Immediately following the successful termination
of this war—and we anticipate no other result-
lire attentions of the stamp-collecting public,
along with other classes of Society, will be so
occupied in the new trade openings, etc., that
it is at this time when the stamp business will
possibly be very quiet.
Afterwards, however, the hobby will re-occupy
the strongest possible position, and the recent
rise in prices will be more than maintained.


THE UP-TO-DATE
WEEKLY STAMP JOURNAL.
Id. Weekly. Illustrated. Id. Weekly.
Edited by R. E. R. DALWIGK.
Great Britain’s most popular Stamp Paper noted for
yfEWS and ORIGINALITY.
***#*♦***♦***♦♦*♦♦**♦***
Subscription ; 5 - per annum.
(52 numbers.)
ft***********************
The regular features include: Gossip, Philatelic Finance,
complete New Issue Chronicle, Popular Countries, etc., etc.
Illustrated WAR NEWS I lustraled
All the very latest Philatelic War News in word and picture.
SPECIMEN COPY ■ \\d. post free.
“ Stamp Collecting/’ S9?h , Xw^r?.'n.


Uniform with this Volume.
“ Notes on
Kings’ Heads”
AND
TWENTIETH CENTURY COLONIALS
IN GENERAL.
BY
W. H. A. WILLIAMS.
The Standard Market
Authority on Modern
British Colonials. . .
Invaluable to ail
0 Collectors of these
Popular Issues. . .
Post s|d. pree
THE HOLLOWAY PRESS CO. &“ u ‘)
449, HOLLOWAY ROAD, LONDON, N.


Ilm.r.ovvAY Prkss Co.,
Philatelic Printers ,
449, llor.t.owAv Road,
London, N.




Stamp Auction
Sales.
Ail interested in the study of Philately would find it
advantageous to obtain our Auction Catalogues.
We hold Stamp Auctions twice weekly, alternate
Wednesdays and Thursdays, and EVERY SATUR-
DAY.
Those who have not already done so should attend
these sales and see for themselves the great advantage
of this mode of purchasing.
Collections are received from all parts of the world for
unreserved sale, and we have held 700 sales, selling a
quarter of a million lots during the past 15 years.
Distant buyers are also catered for, as we value out
lots and give any desired information.
Expert Advice Free.
HARMER, ROOKE & CO.,
Stamp Auction Specialists,
69, FLEET STREET, LONDON.
Telephone-
-12296 Central.
Telegrams—
Philators, Fleet, London.”


* Stamps for Beginners 1
A Popular Guide to
’Stamp Collecting,
D. B, ARMSTRONG
and
R. E. R. DALWIGK.
Fully Illustrated,
Price 6d. net.
Post free 7jd.
Published by “ Stamp Collecting”
89, Farringdon St., London, E.C.
