

LESSON TWENTY-THREE
POSTER
DRAWING
THE AUSTRALIAN SCHOOL OF SKETCHING
SYDNEY; N.S.W.


LESSON TWENTY THREE
POSTER
DRAWING
Specially written `by
FRANK NEWBOULD
With Reproductions of Posters by the
Author and other Artists
THE AUSTRALIAN SCHOOL OF SKETCHING,
SYDNEY, N.S.W.




VENTNOR
ISLE OF WICHT
FOR SUNSHINE
THE
ROYAL HOTEL
FOR COMFPRT
TRUST HOUSES LTD
Reproduced by courtesy of the Sun Engraving Co., Ltd.
Mr. Newbould’s “ Ventnor ” poster.
The author's methods in designing this poster are described on page 12


SCARBOROUGH
Mr. Newbould’s L.N.E.R. poster for Scarborough.
(Reproduced by courtesy of Messrs. John Lane, The Bodley Head.)
In this striking poster Mr. Newbould achieves an unusual note by the unbroken white
sky. This has the double effect of throwing up the name, owing to the latter being in colour,
and of cutting out the skyline very clearly. The buildings are treated with great simplicity,
yet the necessary effect of detail is quite sufficient. The handling of the grass-clad slopes
and trees, in two flat tones, is as simple as it could be, and yet expressive. The red gunwales
of the boats give unusual brilliance to the whole without detracting from the main mass of
the town itself. Note the simple treatment of the white foam on the water’s edge. The
whole of this poster should be carefully studied in connection with Mr. Newbould’s text matter.


LESSON TWENTY-THREE
POSTER DRAWING
poster artist, unlike many of
frjSO his brothers of the brush, is not
an ar^ on bh hut a salesman as
$ W0 U—just as much a salesman as
I the man behind the counter or the
commercial traveller with his
sample-cases. It does not matter
how striking a composition he may make or how
vivid a colour scheme he may devise, if the finished
poster lacks selling-force the artist has wasted his
time and, with it, his employer’s money, the
printing, the paper, the bill-posting and the
costly space on the hoarding which has been rented
to display his work.
This point is one that I cannot too strongly
impress upon the mind of the aspiring poster
artist; and I would even suggest that his first
exercise in lettering should be to draw in bold
block-letters the searching question, “ WILL IT
SELL THE GOODS ? ” and that he should pin
this up in front of his drawing board as an ever-
present reminder of what commerce expects of
him.
From this it must not be deduced that I mean
that the artistic side of the poster should be
neglected—far from it; I mean simply that the
artistic and commercial problems of a poster
composition should be considered side by side.
One sometimes finds that a portion of a design
interferes with the prominence that it is desired
to give the article advertised, and although the
offending item may in itself be charming, if it
does not contribute to the real end in view it
should be made wholly subservient to it or even
eliminated. And this point, in its turn, probably
opens up another problem—the artist may find
that he has so ruthlessly cut out secondary
details that he has left himself little more than a
representation of the article to he advertised.
These two points therefore are those between
which the poster artist must steer a middle course..
He must remember that, while elimination is the
secret of all true poster art, elimination does not
mean the production of something bald and empty.
In other words, he must learn the art of leaving
out, but he must also learn the art of when to stop
leaving out.
The factor which predominates in the design
of a poster is the important one that the poster
is intended to be seen from some distance, not
close up. This rules out all fine detail at once.
Not only will it be wasted labour and cost, but
it will reduce the effectiveness of the design when
seen under practical conditions. Also, a poster
is, in the vast majority of cases, seen only in a
passing glance. People do not stop on the
pavement to study posters at length like they do
pictures in a gallery, as a rule, and in many
cases they see them from moving vehicles, in
which case they cannot stop if they wished to.
Thus we have our next condition, that the
message of the poster must be so displayed that
it can be read practically at a glance. Thirdly,
the poster is surrounded by competing posters,
and therefore must gain attention by brilliance of
colour and design. It is true that it is becoming
the practice on the better class of hoardings to
isolate each poster by a strip of blank paper
from its fellows, thus giving it more chance to
stand out than when posted right up against the
next one, as was formerly done, but even so,
this is not yet universal practice, and when it is
done, the others are still near enough to be
competitors.
The real function of a poster, therefore, lies
more in the direction of what is called “reminder
advertising” than in introducing a new product
which requires lengthy explanation. It has a
power of impressing name of the product on
the mind that cannot, of necessity, be equalled
by other forms of advertising, since it is seen day
by day (sometimes, in these days of night
illumination of hoardings, by night as well).
The newspaper or magazine advertisement has
the advantage in its ability to convey close detail
or long paragraphs of information, but once seen
is more often than not thrown away when the
paper has been read : the poster forces itself on
the attention every time the observer passes it—
at least a well-designed one does—and so
impresses the product it advertises on the mind
by constant repetition.
Small posters, placed in special positions
where there is opportunity to stand and study
them at some length, are sometimes used with
great success, and these can of course carry an
amount of detail which would be worse than
useless in a large one. The beautiful single-sheet
posters of the London Underground Railways are
a case in point: these are posted on the stations,
where people are glad to have something to look
at while waiting for a train, and some of them
are worthy of a place in any art gallery. They
are also put in the entrances to stations where
people can see them without actually being
travellers on the railway, and without impeding


the progress of other pedestrians on the pavement.
For the same reasons, it is found possible to use
these small posters to carry quite long arguments,
in type, which would never be read if employed
on a larger scale. But, speaking generally, poster
work does not touch this side of advertising,
and the student will be well advised to look
upon poster design as demanding strength and
simplicity before everything else.
The laws of colour harmony laid down in
Lesson 19 must be at the student’s finger ends,
as it were, before he can hope to make satisfactory
poster designs. A very great deal of the success
of a poster depends on its colour-scheme, and
many a poster has proved a commercial failure,
although the idea was excellent and the draughts-
manship irreproachable, because the colouring
was weak. It must be remembered that in large
towns the air is, as a rule, not of the clearest, and
for it to be seen effectively at any distance, the
colours must be able to carry through smoke-
laden air; also, the billposter pastes the posters
on the hoarding by pressing them down with the
paste-brush afterwards, and this leaves a film of
paste over the face of the poster, which dulls
delicate colouring to an appreciable extent.
Finally, the artist has to consider cost of repro-
duction, and as every separate colour used means
an extra printing, the fewer colours he can get
his effect with, the better chance he will have of
getting his work accepted. When composing a
colour scheme let the artist, at the same time, take
into consideration the tone scheme. If for
instance, the main item of interest happens to be
a steamship with a black hull and white upper
works, the background will have to be dark enough
to show up the light parts of the ship and yet
light enough to show up the black hull; in other
words, a middle tone halfway between the two
will have to be used. On the other hand, if the
whole of the ship be light in tone, white hull,
yellow funnels and so forth, a much stronger
background may be used with impunity. Let it
always be remembered that the colour behind or
beside an object is just as important as the colour
of the object itself, and that the one makes or mars
the other. A blue is never so blue as when it is
surrounded by red. If this method of showing up
or emphasising the various points of interest in a
poster is carefully and intelligently applied, the
artist will find that he very rarely will need to fall
back on the use of a black outline to throw up his
figures; the contrasting tones, light on dark
or dark on light, will do the work much better,
and, moreover, by this means he will be able to
avoid that “ papery,” map-like effect that often
follows the use of a black outline. Broadly
speaking, the true poster should be a question of
masses and not of lines.
At one time it was customary to treat all poster
work with a thick black outline round everything,
but this style, though still seen, is going out of
favour. Designers have found that if the colour-
masses are skilfully chosen and placed, just as
striking contrast can be obtained without, and
the brilliance of the general effect is certainly
heightened by omitting the black line. The black-
line method still has its uses, as in representing
an article containing many small parts, separa-
tion of the colours by the black line is often the
only way in which confusion can be avoided, as
soon as the observer gets a little way back from
the poster. For instance, red against orange
would show very little division a short distance
away, but separated by a black line the two
colours would preserve their individuality much
better. Even where articles must be shown which
contain much detail, however, a great deal can be
done to simplify the treatment by placing one
part in strong shadow, so that no detail at all is
contained in that portion: this will also, by
contrast, throw up the detail in the other portion,
and quite a strong effect will be obtained. If, on
the other hand, the article had been evenly lighted
and an attempt made to show all the detail
thereby, in nine cases out of ten the result, from
the poster standpoint, would be weak and ineffec-
tive.
In the same way lettering should not rely on
outlines to throw it up. There is no reason why
an outline should not be used as an enrichment,
but the wording should, in the first place, stand
out by reason of the light and dark contrast
between the colours and tones of the lettering and
its background.
PERMANENCE OF COLOURS
There is still another point to be considered,
though it is not taken into account by artists as
often as it should be, and that is the permanence
of the colours when exposed to light. A poster
which fades badly after a week or two’s life on
the hoardings is a very bad advertisement for the
product concerned, and may do much to prejudice
the public against it. Certain colours are notori-
ously fugitive to strong light,’ and these should be
avoided. The artist can to some extent test the
permanence of his colours himself by painting
them on slips of paper and exposing to full sun-
light for a week or two, though this is not a
really reliable guide, as certain colours are fugitive
when ground in water, and fast in oil, and vice
versa. If he can consult a practical printer and
ascertain from him the relative permanence of
colours in printing-ink form he will be on the
safest ground, of course, since it is that which
really matters in the long run. The fact that a


Original was Double Crown size.
(See page 11 for explanation of this term.)
colour is permanent in paint is no help to him if
the same colour is fugitive in printing-ink.
Generally speaking, however, nearly all mauve,
heliotrope and violet shades are liable to be
treacherous, and should be used with caution.
Red is a colour which appears to be a matter of
cost more than anything else; a cheap red ink
fades out almost to invisibility in a short time,
but reds prepared with a genuine vermilion base
can be got which will stand well. Practically all
the browns, and the darker blues and greens are
fairly safe.
A poster by Mr. Newbould for the London
Underground, which controls the London
United Tramways.
by courtesy of “ Commercial Art ”
and Messrs. W. F. Sedgtvick, Ltd.)
This reproduction should be compared with the
small preliminary sketch shown below, which
has been specially reproduced from Mr. New-
bould’s sketch-book to illustrate his working
methods; it will be seen, for instance, that to
improve the composition the church tower has
been moved a few yards to the left. The “ for
sale ” board against the house below the church
has been deleted, as unnecessary and confusing,
and the whole generally simplified. Note how
simply yet effectively the tramcar itself is
suggested on the extreme left, on the bridge.


‘By Courtesy of Messrs. 'Bobby & Co. Ltd.
An attractive handling of a poster for a series of shops in which variety and good taste in
presents are suggested. The articles are few in number, but are well chosen for contrast
of shape and colour. Note how little attempt is made at “ natural shading,” and yet how well
the desired effect is attained. The student should learn from this example that accuracy of
drawing and good composition and colour are essentials whose absence cannot be compensated
for by any amount of fussy “ shading up.”


'By courtesy of Messrs. ‘Bobby & Co., Ltd.
An example of a poster for the same chain of stores as on the preceding page Continuity
is given by the employment of the same style of lettering, and to a certain extent, by the
adoption of the heavy mass of black in the lower half of the poster. At the same time,
the two are quite different in effect owing to the white cut-out treatment of the “ Gifts
one compared with the enclosed border style of the “ Summer Sale ” poster. The rich
colouring of the poppies suggests summery out-of-doors associations, repeated by the use of
poppy-red for the words “ Summer Sale.”


Painting by Carlton Studio , Ltd.
By courtesy of Lever ‘Bros., Ltd.
This poster has been printed in several sizes and proportions, but the shape reproduced
above is fast becoming the popular one, thus displacing the upright 16-sheet which has so long
been the dominant size on the hoardings. Mr. Newbould considers that this is due to the
increase in the speed of modern transit, which naturally allows a long horizontal poster to be
taken in by the eye to greater advantage than an upright. The poster itself is a very fine piece
of work and creates an atmosphere of freshness and cleanliness admirably suited to its subject.
The package is shown with great distinctness without exaggerating its size, advantage being
taken of its bright colouring to place it against the white sheet. The lettering is simple and
dignified in style and is perfectly balanced both in position and colour. The yellow border
gives a final touch of light and brilliance.


One well-known poster artist employs an
ingenious method of checking the effect of his
poster drawings as they will finally appear on the
hoardings. He has one end of his studio covered
with patchwork of violently-contrasted colours,
arranged anyhow. By pinning up his drawing on
this background and viewing it from the other end
of the room he can see at once if the poster is
likely to be “ killed ” or whether it will stand out
in any surroundings. Sometimes a simple
re-arrangement of colour masses will make all the
difference to the strength of the design.
Where very simple designs are concerned, it
is sometimes possible to try varying effects by
cutting out the masses in coloured paper and mov-
ing them about till the most striking arrangement
is obtained. The famous poster designers of the
’nineties, the Beggarstaffe Brothers (the nom-de-
■plume of two artists, Nicholson and Pryde) are
said to have worked out their fine compositions in
this way.
POSTER COLOURS
Poster drawings can, of course, be made with
practically speaking any colours the artist chooses,
the more so as they have not to face the test of the
camera, as in process work, but for convenience
and speed in working ordinary water colours do
not approach the special poster colours now
obtainable. Several firms of artists’ material
manufacturers now list these, usually in glass jars,
though some also put them up in tubes. The latter
have the advantage of always providing perfectly
clean colour, whereas jars often get contaminated
with other colour, as there is often a great tempta-
tion, when working in a hurry, to dip the brush
straight into the jar, without stopping to wash it,
or to get a clean palette-knife for the purpose. If,
too, the screw top is lost from a tube, the drying-
up of the colour is not so rapid as when the lid of
a jar is mislaid, owing to the much smaller area
exposed to the air. These poster colours dry
perfectly flat, and are made in a range of colours
sufficient for all requirements. They also have the
great advantage, at any rate in the best makes, of
covering over each other completely. Clifford
Milburn & Co., of 85, Fleet Street, London, who
originated them, make very good ones in this
respect —it is quite possible to paint the light
colours in this firm’s series over the dark ones
with the assurance of their drying out quite
opaque. Personally, I chiefly use Rowney’s poster
colours laid on with a sable. I find these colours
should be applied in a fairly thick state, and if it
is desired that they should be flat I use them so
thick that they will not drip even if the board
is upright. A mahlstick prevents the wrist
becoming tired and also steadies the hand in
addition to keeping one’s sleeve from smearing
any part of the design that is not dry.
Probably by the time the student reaches this
lesson he will already have formed his own
personal taste in boards—most artists find one
that suits their style better than another after a
while. Many workers use a smooth-surfaced
water-colour board, of any good make, such as
Milburn, Dudley Tennant, Robinson, Winsor &
Newton, etc., others preferring the “ mat”
surface.
I work on an ordinary white mounting card,
or sometimes on a grey or buff-tinted paper pasted
on to the cardboard; but if I am engaged upon
a quad-royal I use <£ continuous ” cartridge
pasted on to a sheet of beaver board or similar
material. Something of the sort can always be
got from a dealer in builders’ materials. Some
artists work straight on to the beaver board, but
in that case it must be sized before it is used. As
a rule, I work standing with the drawing inclined
slightly back.
PRACTICAL WORKING
Coming to the question of practical working,
the first thing that most beginners to poster work
ask is, whether the original drawing is done the
full size of the finished poster. In a few cases they
may be, but this is quite the exception. Plenty of
drawings for posters are made no larger than a
single sheet—20 in. by 30 in.—for a 16-sheet
poster. The lithographer enlarges the design on
the stone, either photographically or by hand, and
if the drawing has been carefully planned and
made, this method is perfectly satisfactory.
Obviously the average artist would not have either
the room or the time to work full size—to say
nothing of the cost of materials. Cost and
convenience of transport is another argument in
favour of working on a small scale—it would be
no light matter to get a full-sized original of any
poster larger than quad-royal to and from a
client’s office for inspection.
In England the unit of size is the “ sheet,”
and posters are spoken of as 4-sheet, 8-sheet,
16-sheet, and so on. The sheet is a double-crown
one, measuring 20 in. by 30 in., so that a 4-sheet
poster would measure 40 in. by 60 in., an 8-sheet
would be 80 in. by 60 in., and a 16-sheet 80 in.
by 120 in.; 32-sheets and even 48-sheets are also
used, though not so much as the 16-sheet, owing
to the comparative scarcity of hoarding accommo-
dation for them. If the poster is to be a 16-sheet
I make it about 40 inches high; if a double-crown,
double-royal or quad-royal I make it the actual
size.


A plan that I often adopt myself, especially
when handling landscape posters, is to eliminate
as much as possible, especially in the foreground,
and to allow myself to elaborate a little more at
the point in the composition to which I am
attempting to lead the eye. As an example, take
my poster of Ventnor (see page 3). In this every-
thing else has been reduced to its simplest form
so that the utmost value might be got out of the
little town nestling against the distant headlands.
In this case the eye makes a following movement,
and the only feature which really arrests it is the
panel of lettering which tells the story, and is, of
course, the only reason for the existence of the
poster. This is only one of many methods by
which simplicity without baldness may be
obtained. In the design the plain spaces act as
a foil to the detailed portion and the details
prevent the plain spaces from appearing dull and
uninteresting. It is all a question of balance.
The same principle applies equally in the case of
figure composition, though here it is often more
difficult to carry it out. It is a comparatively
easy matter to move, say, a tree or a cliff a few
yards to the left or right; but one cannot amputate
a man’s arm if it is found to be in the way; the
solution would probably be that the entire pose of
the figure would have to be re-considered.
Returning to this Ventnor example, I make
it a working rule in the case of a commission like
this to wander about the place in question for an
hour or two and try to get hold of the atmosphere
of the place. At the end of that time I shall have
decided what the character of the resort is; it may
be a place of fashion or it may be of the quaint,
old-world type. Also I shall have noticed that
there are two or three points of vantage in or about
the town from which a good composition could
possibly be made. I then visit these various
points, making no sketches, and return to the
town, where I proceed to make from memory
several very rough diagrams in pencil of composi-
tions suggested by the different aspects of the
town which I have seen in my rambles. Very
rough scrawls are these, say about two inches by
three inches. The most promising of them I then
try to elaborate on a slightly larger scale as far as
possible from memory. (See centre sketch on page
3.) The reason why I do not do this part of the
work on the spot is that when the landscape is
not actually before my eyes my sense of composi-
tion has freer play; and as I fill in the various
landmarks from memory the tendency is for them
to appear in the place that I think best from the
point of view of composition, which may be a little
at variance with the actual positions.
How r ever, it is much more important, at any
rate from the poster artist’s point of view, that
the composition should be perfectly right than
that it should be exactly topographically accurate.
The various features in the landscape should be
regarded as isolated notes of music which it is
the task of the poster artist to arrange into one
striking and harmonious chord. One cannot, of
course, take too many liberties with a place or
it ceases to be that place. The atmosphere is the
great thing to try to catch.
The next step is to take my memory sketch
back to the spot from which I obtained the
impression on which it was based, and compare
it with the actual scene. Probably I find that I
have placed, say, the pier in quite an impossible
position and it must be altered more in accord-
ance with the facts. And so Igo on, in the end
effecting a compromise between what I think ought
to be and what is. I then take written notes of
the most important colour features; but I rarely
make any outside colour sketches, preferring to rely
on my memory and written notes. I have done a very
considerable amount of outdoor colour work in the
past, and it is probably on that acccount that I
do not now find it necessary. Nevertheless, I
cannot too strongly urge the beginner to go direct
to Nature in the first place, otherwise there is
bound to be a sub-conscious tendency to borrow
colour schemes and compositions from the work of
other men.
The composition finished, I have no more to
do beyond sketching a few of the details of the
various features, natural and architectural, which
I intend to incorporate in the finished poster.
(See bottom sketch on page 3.)
On returning to my studio I re-draw my
composition, this time about one-half Imperial
size, very carefully and with every detail even to
the smallest figure, for this drawing will be my
guide when I am working on the actual poster.
Now for the colour scheme. I pin a piece of
thick tracing paper over the pencil drawing and
roughly mass in the colours. As I use the ordin-
ary solid poster colours there is no difficulty in
laying them on the tracing paper, especially as
I do not mix much water with the colours and so
avoid stretching and cockling the paper. I may
rough out only one or several of these colour
schemes before I am satisfied. Now we come to
the steady grind of enlarging the design to the
size of the finished drawing.
If the rough has been done smaller than the
finished drawing is going to be made, it can easily
be enlarged by “ squaring ” —ruling squares on
the drawing card an inch apart, and putting
squares on the drawing card in the same propor-
tion—i.e., if the rough has twelve squares, say,
down its depth, the drawing must have twelve
also. These squares will, of course, come as much
larger than those on the rough as the outer dimen-
sions of the drawing are greater than those of the
rough.


Specially designed for this course by Mr. Leonard Cusden
EXERCISE
1. Design a poster, 16-sheet proportion for any
household commodity—tea, soap, etc. Five
colours to be used. To contain only name of
article, and a short phrase of about 7 or 8 words
Send your preliminary pencil compositions, and
a coloured drawing of the selected one, about 5 in.
by 7\ in.
2. The poster reproduced opposite is for a ship-
ping line, and the horizon line is cleverly suggested
by the short section of it visible across the moon,
although it is not actually drawn right across.
Copy this poster, altering the proportion to an
8-sheet horizontal one, and add the following
wording in one additional colour, selecting this
yourself : “ Travel by the Magician Line and see
the world. Fares now reduced. 5 ’ The additional
colour is not necessarily to be employed for all this
wording: use it for such portions as you think
fit, and make use of the existing colours for the
remaining wording. Make your drawing about
6 in. by 8 in.
3. On a piece of tracing paper, in pencil only,
indicate an alternative arrangement and spacing
of the above lettering and write in what colours
you would suggest in place of what you have put
on the colour drawing.
This diagram shows how poster sizes are built up from the single sheet
(20 in. by 30 in. or “ double-crown ”) unit. (See also page 11.) Thus,
sections 1 to 4 would be a 4-sheet poster, measuring 40 in. by 60 in.
Sections 1 to 8 would be an 8-sheet poster; 1 to 16 would be a 16-sheet
(80 in. wide by 120 in. high, or Oft. 8in. by 10 ft.). A 32-sheet would
be two 16’s side by side, or 13 ft. 4 in. by 10 ft., and a 48-sheet would be
three 16s’, or 20 ft. by 10 ft.


Then, by watching carefully where the lines
of the rough cut the squares, it is easy to draw
on the card the same shapes, by making the lines
cut the larger squares on the card in the same
places. If the artist prefers, he may simply draw
straight away to the larger size, following the
rough as a general guide, but the squaring is a
very useful check in getting the main masses in
their right places.
The principle was gone into in full detail
in the Lesson on C£ Drawing from Photographs
in Pen and Ink 55 (No. 11), and in that Lesson the
method of making a transparent gelatine sheet
of squares was described also; this is useful in
any case where it may be desired to preserve the
rough uninjured. Alternatively, the proportional
compasses mentioned in the last Lesson are useful,
if possessed, though comparatively few artists
use them. If the rough has been made the same
size, it can be traced, though this is not always
very successful, as the spontaneity that should
mark a good rough is very hard to recapture
under the process of tracing, and a re-drawing is
often better from this point of view.
Assuming that the artist has received a
commission for a poster, he will probably be told
the size and number of colours permissible;, if
not, he should get this information, as without
it he can do practically nothing. The lettering—.
at any rate the principal part of it—will have
been given him, and he must from the beginning
see that this forms an integral part of the design.
Correct balance and spacing of the lettering is of
extreme importance in a poster. Lettering has
already been considered in Lesson 21, but for
poster work the more delicate styles shown therein
will find very little use—bold, heavy styles are
practically essential for the purpose, and the less
there is of it the better. Clients may require a
little tactful handling at times in this respect as,
if unused to the requirements of poster work, they
are apt to want a great deal of wording got in,
and this will defeat its own object. Not only will
the passer-by have no time to read it, as a rule,
but its presence will prevent the rest of the design
standing out as it should. It should therefore be
the artist’s aim to point this out, and if difficult
to persuade the client by argument, it may pay to
do two roughs, one with all the lettering asked for
in it, and one with it greatly simplified. When
the client sees the bolder effect of the simpler
drawing, he will generally see the logic of the
artist’s contention better.
In preparing the finished drawing the artist
must remember always that he is not painting a
picture for close inspection in a room, but to be
seen at a distance. If he is working actual size,
it is fairly easy to keep this in mind, but the
point needs careful consideration when working
on a smaller scale for the printer to enlarge.
A very useful tip, which will often save hours
of work, may be mentioned here: it sometimes
happens that a mixing of two or three tints
finally dries out just too light for the purpose
required. Although it should be a rule always to
test any mixture of tints on a piece of the same
card or paper as is being used, first, sometimes
one goes by the appearance when it is ayfarently
dry, but is in reality not dry thoughout, and the
artist may find to his dismay that some hours
later a large patch of colour has dried out just a
shade too light for his purpose, quite throwing
his colour scheme out of balance. If an air-brush,
or aerograph, is possessed, it is a simple matter,
comparatively, to spray a transparent layer over
such portions and bring them to the desired depth,
but many artists do not possess this instrument,
and in any case the student will hardly be likely
to do so. The device about to be mentioned will
therefore be of use: simply spray “ fixative,”
which is a solution of shellac in spirit, used for
spraying over charcoal or pencil drawings to
prevent them rubbing, and sold by all dealers for
that purpose, over the portions it is desired to
darken. This preparation is applied with a
diffuser consisting merely of two tubes fixed at
right-angles, one being put into the bottle and
the other in the mouth. A sharp blow with
the breath down the latter pipe will send a
fine spray out of the other tube on to the work.
It will be found that the effect of the fixative is
to lower the tone of body-colour slightly,
and where the lowering desired is only slight, this
will often provide just the difference required.
A “ mask ” of tracing paper must be cut, if it is
not desired to cover all the work, leaving only the
portions to be sprayed exposed, of course.
Often a design is much improved by a simple
thick-line edge or border to it. Strips of different
coloured papers cut and laid along the edges form
a ready means of testing the effect of this, and
where there is any doubt, this should be done
before spending time in painting in a border,
which might have to be taken out again after-
wards.
HOW POSTERS
ARE PRINTED
The student has already learnt, in the Lesson
on colour line work, the effects to be got from
overprinting colours, and of course the same
applies to lithography, the process by which
practically all poster work is done. It may be of
advantage to say a few words on this interesting
process, which differs entirely from all the pro-
cesses we have encountered up to the present


Instead of printing from a raised surface, as in
either type or block printing, where the ink only
touches the raised portions, litho work is printed
from a uniform flat surface. The student will
naturally ask, how is the ink confined to the
pattern required ? It is done by taking advantage
of the natural antipathy of grease to water.
Lithographic stone is a peculiar, very fine-grained
stone capable of taking an extremely smooth
surface, and of absorbing grease to a very great
extent. The litho artist draws on this stone with
a special ink consisting largely of greasy matter,
prepared either in the form of chalks or liquid
ink to be used with pen or brush. In the majority
of work the camera does not enter into the ques-
tion at all, as it does with all process work; the
litho artist copies the original drawing by hand,
and of course draws it in reverse —left to right.
These men acquire great skill in drawing lettering
backwards, and from the final print it is impos-
sible to tell that it was originally drawn that way.
Photo-lithography as it is called, is used where
the artist’s drawing is photographed on to the
stone, which is prepared specially for the purpose,
but a great deal of work is still done by direct
hand copying.
When the litho artist has drawn the reversed
copy on to the stone —there will be as many stones
as there are colours, of course, and each will have
on it only such portions of the design as that
colour is used on —the portions where the ink has
been put will have absorbed the grease in the ink.
The stone is then wetted, and those portions resist
the water, but the parts of the stone where no ink
has been put absorb water freely. Then, when the
stone is put in the printing press, and the ink
rollers of the press pass over it, the wetted portions
of the stone will not pick up any ink from the
rollers, but those portions where the litho artist
has drawn take the ink readily, so that the print
on the paper is a facsimile of what was drawn on
the stone. This is, of course, a very brief outline
of the process, but it explains the main principles.
If the litho artist puts his ink on solid, the print-
ing-ink will also be transferred to the stone in
solid masses; if an intermediate tint is required,
this can be done by having the stone slightlv
roughened instead of perfectly smooth, and by
putting in such portions with litho chalk, used
lightly or heavily, as required. Just as with
chalk on rough paper, the stone will take it only
on the tips of. the roughed portion, and conse-
quently a sort of grain is formed, which prints
up as a fine-grained tint or a dark one, according
to the pressure used in chalking, of the particular
ink used. Thus any desired tint of each colour
can be obtained, and these can be over-printed
just as with mechanical tints in line block work.
The fact that the chalking is done by hand allows
of any gradation of tone or shading being
obtained, but this effect should be employed
sparingly, as in poster work fine gradations of tone
are lost when the poster is seen at a little distance.
For giving effects of roundness, however, and
similar cases, the graduated shading which litho-
graphy gives is sometimes very useful.
BRANCHES OF
POSTER ART
Having considered full size posters, we may
turn lor a moment to two branches of the art,
much in use. First, showcards. These are
usually not larger than about 20 by 15, and may
be considerably smaller. They are much used for
window display purposes and for standing on shop
counters, and can therefore show more detail,
proportionately to their size, than a poster,
though there is a marked tendency to-day to keep
them almost as simple. Owing to their smaller
size, it is often practicable to use rather more
colours than in large posters, though this is again
offset by the larger numbers usually printed, so
that economy in colours is still very desirable.
Lithography is probably the largest-used process
for these, though in the smaller cards either colour
line blocks or three-colour halftone work is also
employed. For the latter, of course, the artist
can disregard the number of colours he employs,
and paint as for an ordinary picture, as three or
four-colour halftone work reproduces all colours
with fair exactitude—indeed, in the best four-
colour work the reproduction of the original is
practically exact. Drawing for colour line work
has already been explained in Lesson 18, and for
colour halftone work, especially four-colour, he
may disregard the question of reproduction alto-
gether, and paint to please himself—and his
client, of course! For three-colour halftone he
will do well to exercise care in the use of blacks
and greys, and three-colour work does not bring
out black very truly; greys are apt to assume a
purplish tone, as there are only three inks used,
yellow, red and blue. Four-colour work employs
a fourth printing in black ink, from a panchro-
matic negative of the original, and this brings out
the blacks and greys that the three-colour process
alone tends to lose.
Showcards are, of course, drawn actual size,
there being no advantage in working to any
smaller size, as the actual job is well within work-
ing limits in size. Many showcards are simply
small reproductions of existing large posters,
sometimes with the addition of extra lettering
which would not be advisable on the large poster
for reasons already explained.


The other branch referred to is the poster
stamp. This is a tiny poster reproduced on
gummed paper, intended to be stuck on backs of
envelopes or on parcels, and on letter-paper. It
gives great scope for real skill in condensing the
subject matter to the very simplest terms, as the
size is usually about an inch wide by one-and-a-
half inches deep. Brilliant colouring, extremely
simple design, and the minimum of lettering are
the essentials. Lithography is the usual process
for this work, as it offers advantages technically
in printing large numbers on a sheet by trans-
ferring down on to stone by what is called the
“ step and repeat ” method. The flat colouring,
too, is preferable in such a small size to making
reduced blocks by colour halftone, as the
“ screen ” or dots of the halftone are too visible
in so small an area. Gold and silver printing
are sometimes employed, as the small amount used
makes this feasible on the score of cost, and very
brilliant effects are sometimes produced by using
only gold and black, or silver and dark blue, and
similar combinations. Two printings are usually
enough for poster stamps, more tending to con-
fusion of effect. Heavv black borders can be used
to advantage in poster stamps as they make an
effective contrast with the white envelope or
wrapping paper on which they are stuck.
Finally, let me say that I consider one of the
most important points in poster designing is to
have the composition and colour scheme definitely
and finally settled before beginning work on the
finished drawing. It is both easier and quicker to
alter the small preliminary sketches and schemes
than an elaborate drawing. I realise fully that one
often feels inclined to say : “Oh, I know just how
it’s going to look. I can go straight on to the big
one. 51 My advice is, Don’t do it. Have the
finished effect there in miniature before anything
else is thought of. I never submit a rough sketch
for a poster less than 20 inches by 30 inches in
size. 1 consider this to be the smallest possible
size that will give my client an adequate idea of
what the finished job is going to look like. Do
not let the rough sketch be too rough : the
mental eye of the artist may have carried it much
further than what is on the paper discloses, but
the client is looking at the thing through his own
eyes, which do not show him what is not apparent.
