

253. 2


POSTSCRIPT
TO THE
LETTERS OF CALVINUS,
{ -TO
THE REV. DR THOMAS M‘CRIE
THE REV. MR ANDREW THOMSON,
(
ON j
A LATE PARODY OF SCRIPTUR E,
f f , v .■#,
V*
INCLUDING . s,>. • . '
i ■
‘A COMPARATIVE VIEW OF THE LAX AND: TIT „ Cv-
*■ 1% V ... • ✓/'
DOCTRINES ENTERTAINED OF MINISTERIAL • *
'• ••■ ‘r
CHARACTER AND DCTV. \
EDINBURGH :
Printed by Aberncthy % WaUcet,
FOR JOHN FAIRBAIRN, (SUCCESSOR TO MR CREECH.)
1817.




POSTSCRIPT, &c.
“ Ye Clergy, while your orbit is your place,
“ Lights of the world, and stars of human race;
“ But if eccentric ye forsake your sphere,
“ Prodigies ominous and view’d with fear.”
“ Will not the sickliest sheep of every flock
“ Resort to this example as a rock ?
“ Strike up the fiddles, let us all be gay,
“ Laymen have leave to dance when parsons play.”
Cowper.
TO THE REVEREND DR M'CRIE, AND THE REVEREND
MR THOMSON.
I have now to redeem my promise of closing,
with a short valediction, the series of letters which
I have presumed to address to you. That I have
delayed it till now, has arisen from the unpleasing
predicament in which you, Mr Thomson, have
recently been placed, and from which I hoped to
see you completely extricated, before summoning
you to farther controversy. I had no desire to
raise my voice against you at a time when you
were stung with the detraction of ignoble rivals,
and deafened with the furious philippics of un-
candid foes. To yourself, I have already ex-
pressed by letter, my conviction of the injus-
tice of the assault you have had to sustain :'


and I would now repeat what I then took the li-
berty to hint, that since good men, standing on
an eminence, are so much exposed to the shot of
detraction, and so encompassed with a cloud of
watchful malignant observers, it behoves them un-
weariedly to display and sustain that “ breast-plate
of a heart untainted,” which alone can render them
completely invulnerable,—to trust their footing
for not one moment to those slippery places where
even a feeble blow will stagger and embarrass ;
and to leave not a heel undipped in defensive
purity, to give lodgment to the shaft of malice.
Scruples of conscience will not be credibly pro-
fessed by him who scruples not to associate him-
self in literary league with the profane ; nor will
lack of time to prepare for the pulpit apologize
for a minister who can find time to compose lu-
cubrations for a magazine teeming with blasphe-
my and slander.
Nothing can be more nauseous and disgusting
than that apologetical cant, which has of late dis-
tilled so plentifully from the lips of a certain set
of persons, by whom your adherence to the Ma-
gazine is anticipated, and which is universally
applied as an opiate to public displeasure, when
excited by ministerial levity and indecorum.
“ Ministers (it is said) are but men; and the
failings of men must be pardoned in them. It is
hard to deny them a cheering sip of the indulgen-
ces so heartily quaffed by the rest of society: and
it is cruel and impolitic, in times like these, when


the world is so wicked, and the clergy certainly
betterthan othermen, to single out their eye-motes
for reprehension, to make every nice offence of
theirs sustain its comment, and rigidly to urge
their exclusion from the very scenes and societies
which their presence would be most calculated to
improve. By a charitable mixture with the pro-
fane, they will have the best chance of reforming
them : if the one bate a little of their severity,
the others will in civilit bate as much of their
coarseness : piety, descending from her airy pin-
nacle in the clouds, will stoop in order to be more
diffusively useful; and vice, though neither sha-
med nor banished, will at least not be chilled by
harsh reproof into despair, but kindly won, (like
the traveller in the fable,) to throw off that exte-
rior of grossness which Burke has told us is half its
evil.” This is the philosophic slang of those chari-
table sinners, who would extinguish the light that
reveals their own wanderings, andpainfully reminds
them, like Satan, of where they ought to be, and
are not, —who would level the distinction between
lay and clerical purity, not by rousing the laity
to emulate the personal purity of the clergy, but
by persuading the clergy to cast their distinctive
purity away. They desire that your office and
its professional duties should be the only distinc-
tion between } T ou and them, —that you should
quit your sanctity with your gown and pulpit, as
a lawyer throws off his jargon with his wig. They
scout the idea that your whole life should be


what a Sabbath is, or should be to other men ; and
would much rather behold you (like Fielding’s
Trulliber ) dealers in sermons on Sunday, and in
hogs all the rest of the week. To sooth and sa-
tisfy them, you must “ speak unto them smooth
things, and prophesy deceityou must handle
their pitch, and, like St Peter in the porch, even
venture on a little profanity for quietness and good
fellowship’s sake; you must be just such moderate
reformers of impiety, such decent sinners, as the
bulk of the French clergy were before the revo-
lution. They would have you dilute your piety,
that it may be the more pleasantly and generally
swallowed; adulterateyour leaven, under pretence
of more extensively leavening the mass ; and bear
faint and partial testimony to the truth, that the
foolish and incredulous may more readily believe
you. They are fond of insisting on the inefficacy
of the virtues of a few ; and would fain demon-
strate that the influence of religion no more de-
pends on the pious lives of the clergy, than the effi-
cacy of medicine depends on the healthy florid
faces of physicians and apothecaries. They hope
to purchase indulgence to themselves, by granting
it to you, when they have persuaded you to stand
in need of it; and cannot see, or do not choose to
remember, that guilt is not divided, but multiplied
by participation. They desire, that in running
your race, you should look oftener behind than be-
fore you,—content with keeping ahead of the
mass of mankind, and laying to your souls the flat-
tering pharisaical unction, (hat you are not so bad


as other men. They are content that the disciple be
not above his master, and require the master to
be content with whatever elevation will keep him
visibly above the disciple. They desire to see
you “ despise small things,” that thereby you
may “ fall by little and little;” and would fain re-
lax your nerves with the notion that not much is
committed to you, and not much will be required
in return, —that your function is not so peculiar-
ly heavy, as to require that you should be unu-
sually strong to support it. When they behold
a clergyman, who “ speaks not as pleasing men/’
who diligently “ watches, and sleeps not as others
do,” who preaches whatever is awful and impor-
tant in Christian doctrine, and illustrates in his
practice whatever is beautiful and sublime in
Christian morality,
“ With all Elijah’s dignity of tone.
K And all the love of the bclov’d St John,”
they denounce him as a fanatic in doctrine, a pu-
ritan in practice, a speaking death’s head, who
makes religion inimical to the enjoyments of
mankind, and scares away sinners from repen-
tance, by shewing abruptly how far they must
go, and refusing to let down the ladder of peni-
tence to suit the weakness of their pious re-
solves and penitential exertions, when they pro-
pose, like Sir John Falstaff, to “ repent, and that
suddenly, while I am in some liking.”
Akin to the laxity of life which they permit to
the clergy, is the laxity of doctrine which they re-


quire from them. Every thing that breathes of
warning and penal retribution is to disappear and
be hid, like the one half of the sea of eternity in
the Vision of Mirza. The Deity is to be invest-
ed with no other moral attribute than mercy, —a
mercy that will level the distinction established
byhis justice, and announced by his word, between
the sheep and the goats ; and so boundless and in-
discriminate, that none need fear to exhaust it.
Christianity is to be viewed as a system, not indi-
cating means, but announcing the certainty of
salvation ; —a system so blindly devoted to human
felicity, as to survey, with equal eye, the happiness
sought by some in receiving, and the enjoyment
preferred by others in rejecting it ;• —a system that
holds out guilt as the object of pity, without attach-
ing to it any thing to be pitied ; —a system that
for a moment proclaimed the heinousness of sin
by a tremendous expiation, and then nullified the
proclamation by confounding guilt and goodness
for ever in the same character and fate.
Such, I trust, are not the men whom you will
suffer to cut the cloth of your demeanour, or
bend you like reeds to the wind of their doc-
trine. You must be sensible that their definition
of ministerial duty, if intended as a copy from
the source of your ministry, has been transcribed
very incorrectly from the original. You know,
and knowing you will not be sorry to be remind-
ed, that ye are the guides to a distant promised
land ; and whether as a pillar of cloud or a pillar


of fire, your province is, day and night, to direct
the march, and kindle the hope and ardour of
those who follow your footsteps. You are sup-
ported by the industry of the rest of mankind, who
incur toil and privation for your temporal sup-
port, that you may watch without ceasing for
their spiritual preservation ; and exempt you from
the curse of physical labour that followed the
fall, that you may teach them by example the
moral purity and innocence that went before it.
You are kept up from the hurry and gross bustle
of life, like coins, that the stamp of excellence be
not effaced or weakened by promiscuous inter-
course and traffic with the world. You have
every help to purity that human institutions can
afford. The very system of public tuition, of
which you are the ministers, possesses a strong
reactive principle, calculated for the instruction of
yourselves. In your congregations you are encir-
cled by mirrors, that reflect your characters, and
enable you “ to read your history in a nation’s
eyes.” In every part of your duty, you are sup-
posed to be, for yourselves, taking immediate aim
at heaven, and for others, looking diligently,
lest any man fail of the grace of God.” You have
no legitimate collateral cares to distract you,—
nothing to provoke or pardon a momentary wink.
If you create such impediments to yourselves,
you are liable for all the consequences ; and well
you know that a little obliquity with you will
spread as it descends, till it carry a host to a dooip


that they will read by other flames than those of
the stars. Jf ye neglect, like Eli, a single branch
of your duty, and commit even a fault of omis-
sion, the grosser crimes it begets will involve you
in their ruin. The religion of the bulk of man-
kind, like the pool of Bethsaida, is apt to stagnate
into inefficacy when left to itself; and, to ren-
der it beneficial to its possessors or others, the in-
fluence of foreign excitation is absolutely neces-
sary. To you the troubling of the waters is com.
mitted ; and in such a station, you ought to leave
not a grain of time unweighed, since every mo-
ment, well or ill applied, will extend its conse-
quences to the advantage or prejudice of man-
kind through all eternity. The excellent writer
from whom my motto is taken, has thus glanced
at the effects of ministerial degeneracy ;
“ When nations are to perish for their sins,
’Tis in the Church the leprosy begins;
The Priest, whose office is with zeal sincere
To watch the fountain and preserve it clear.
Carelessly nods and sleeps upon the brink,
While others poison what the flock must drink.”
You know assuredly that the frequency of an
offence, and its venial estimation with the mass
of mankind, can form no extenuation in the eye of
that law which you administer and walk by; that
religion accounts no road the safer for being
thronged and broad ; and that the more the
lights of piety are dimmed or extinguished a-
round you, the more urgently are you called
on to feed the sacred fire you tend, and shew


to others where they may rekindle their devoi
tion, and what its lustre ought to be. It is tho
province of religion and its ministers to supply
the inefficacy of human laws; and one of the
greatest defects of such laws is, and always has
been, that frequency and example must detract
from criminality and mitigate punishmentin
short, that, to a certain extent, we must respect
the maxim, that quicquid nmllis peccalur inultum.
No such maxim can be ascribed to religious juris-
prudence ; and the minister who admits it, be-
trays his post to the most dangerous of the ene-
mies he has undertaken to repel. The Deluge
teaches you that there is universal punishment
for universal guilt; and St Paul has told you
that the aera of general corruption is the time
when you are more particularly called on to
make full proof of your ministry.” He has
foretold, that “ the time will come when they will
not endure sound doctrine ;” and it is in that time
he commands you to “ be instant in season, out of
season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suf-
fering and doctrine.” You are not, in any cir-
cumstances, to bear false or faint testimony, or
to do evil that good may come ; but, confining
your attention to the nature of your ministry,,
commit the success and efficacy of it to its Found'
er,—who will take their part from the book of
life, who take one particle from the message he
commands them to deliver.
Now can you persuade yourselves, that, if you


were to lend your patronage to a publication
which has openly insulted religion, and violated
honour, humanity and truth ; —if you were to in-
terpose your authority to hinder a tree that has
borne such fruit from being hewn down, and to
help to water the ground in which it is planted,—
you would, in so doing, he “ walking worthy of the
vocation wherewith ye are called,” walking like
men commanded and professing to “ live in the
spirit,” and “ as lights in the midst of a crooked
and perverse nation,” or exhibiting an example
calculated to keep your weaker brethren from
stumbling, to strengthen the weak and abash the
wicked ? Would you be acting up to the character
of men commanded to hold all your “ conversa-
tion in heaven,” to do in the name of your great
Master “ whatever ye do in word or deed,” to
“ abstain from all appearance of evil,” and “in
all things shew a pattern of good works ?” Ido
not mean to reproach you for contributions ac-
tually and unwittingly made to a work of this
description, and not subsequently withdrawn.
Having given a gift, (for I should be truly sorry
to think you had received wages from a purse
made heavy by blasphemy,) perhaps it became
you not to recall it, or to upbraid : You may for
once have unwittingly and innocently played with
a knave for your partner: But when your eyes
are opened, and your associate has been detected
psing loaded dice, then farewell, a long farewell
to all your dignity, if you ever sit down with him


again. You might flatter yourselves with the
idea of having cured his leprosy ; but the world
would more readily believe that you had caught
it from him, if you continued to hold fast his fel-
lowship, or joined with him in any song but a
penitential Tyburn elegy. You cannot take it
on Justice Shallow’s authority, that there is real
charity in helping a knave, because he stands
more in need of help than an honest man.
Between the lay parodist and the clerical asso-
ciate, who voluntarily steeps his bands in the
other’s cup, the moral distinction, I confess, ap-
pears to me by much too fine to hit the sense of
mortal sight. The clergyman who should mix
his grain with such chaff, and unbend his mini-
sterial rigidity in such association, would find the
dignity of his office converted into an incum-
brance instead of an advantage: the same shower
that idly pattered on his hearer’s hat, would prove
perdition to the teacher’s wig ; the eminence of
his function would become a millstone about his
neck, in place of a stone of Ajax in his hands, and
would sink him to the bottom, while others only
skimmed the surface of impurity and disgrace.
His fellowship with the scorner would rise against
him in the pulpit; and the levity which in other
men would make precept ineffectual, in him
would make precept ridiculous and disrespectable.
His discourses would no more carry his hearers
to a higher world, than the tears and longings of
Alexander could transport his army as far. Burke


has somewhere mentioned, that he once inquired
of Garrick why the appearance of a Senate on the
stage invariably excited the laughter of the au-
dience ; and that Garrick informed him the rea-
son was, that the richly robed persons and well-
wigged faces of the senators were, in spite of their
disguise, recollected in the humbler functions of
scene-shifters, candle-snuffers, and first and se-
cond mob. The clergy will appear just as ridi-
culous arid misplaced in the pulpit and gown, if
they suffer themselves to be recognised as the
fellow-labourers of Jack-Puddings, and the asso-
ciates of scoffers and fools. If it be true that
white hairs ill become a fool arid jester,” ! am
sure white bands as ill become his companions;
and his companions you are, or seem to be, if you
either assist him with actual dr
permit him even to use your names as cyphers to
decuple the apparent force of his party.
Knowing, as ye do, that 'every idle word is to
be accounted for by him who utters it, see that
by your patronage ye encourage not in others
that Worse than vain babbling that supplies merri-
ment to miscreants and fools, but conveys regret
and loathing to the wise and good. If perchance
ye be foUnd among such candidates for abhor-
rence, contempt and condemnation, “ come out
that ye be not partakers of their sin.” Socrates,
though unfortunately for himself, a patron of the
Athenian: theatre, yet quitted the assembly with
indignation when he detected an immoral senti-


ineht in the composition of his friend Euripidesi
Neither private friendship nor public laxity and
indocility could induce him to countenance what
his conscience condemned. If you will not listen
to his heathen authority, listen at least to that
wise man who has said, that “ when wisdom en-
tereth into thine heart, discretion shall preserve
thee, understanding shall keep thee, to deliver
thee from the way of the evil man, from the man
that speaketh froward things.” You know with
what disgust and detestation many of your re-
spectable lay brethren have expressed themselves
with reference to the publication I have alluded
to, and to all who are concerned in it. I hope it
is not true (as reported) that a certain minister,
from whom I should have expected better things,
with a polite apostacy from God’s grace to good
humour, scrupled not to pronounce these men
puritanical and righteous overmuch. Do not you
allow the laity to be “ more upright in heart to
sanctify themselves than the priests,” or more
ready to “ keep their mouths as it were with a
bridle,when the ungodly is in sight,” than the
priests who preach such restraint to them. If
you have not on this occasion stepped forward to
impel the tide of moral opinion, I trust at least
you have not braved the risk of being yourselves
cast away by consenting to swim against it. ■ If
ye have not openly condemned the scorner, at
least “ have no company with him, that he may
be ashamed.” “ If a man shall sin against God,”


as the blasphemer has clone, “ who (it is asked
by high authority) shall entreat for him ?” It
may befit you to entreat for, but certainly not
to countenance him ; and if a shadow of such
unworthy countenance be credibly imputed to
you, who are
“ To us the imagined voice of God himself;
The very opener, and intelligencer.
Between the grace, the sanctities of heaven,
And our dull workings: O, who shall believe
But you misuse the reverence of your place ?”
Remember the awful expostulation indignant-
ly proposed to him who, seeing the wicked, con-
sented with them. —“ What hast thou to do to
declare my statutes, or that iliou shouldest take
my covenant in thy mouth ?”
You cannot surely commit so gross a mistake,
as to construe the present quaking and quailing
of the Publisher and Editor, for (that much abu-
sed term) repentance j nor can you, surely, flat-
ter yourselves with so vain a fancy, as that by
tarrying with them you can repress their profa-
nity, and refine their effusions, —like strainers that
are clogged themselves with the impurities they ar-
rest. There are moral transmogrifications as un-
likely as the noted physical conversion of a hog’s
ear into a silken purse. Blasphemy has sold
well for once j and the Magazine would not take
a swan in exchange for the goose that has laid it
this golden egg. Charm you never so wisely,
you (retaining your own respectability) can no


more impart respectability to this Magazine,
than Sancho could have fulfilled his vow of crea-
ting Dapple a Poet-Laureat. Call, like Canute,
to the blasphemers, “ Thus far shall ye go and no
further in impiety,” —stretch yourselves down as
the banks that are to compress their effusions,
and you will be the first to be defaced and drown-
ed, when they can venture on another inunda-
tion. Their treatment of your remonstrance has
shewn to all, except those who are determined not
to see, how cheap they hold you. They are at
present in bad odour with the respectable part of
the public, and they will be glad enough that
you should help them to dispel it, though they
find it not at all offensive in the coin with which
it is accompanied. Every rogue likes better to
commit offences than to be punished for them,
and would fain gather the roses-without the thorns
of sin. If you help to pluck out the thorns, you
will probably be allowed to keep them for your
reward. Now that the scourge of legal discipline
has been hung over their heads, they may have
slunk to their holes for a season, like wasps in
wet weather. While the storm rages, the pirates
heave their guns overboard, furl their canvas, and
scud under bare poles. But a calm will restore
their spirits, and send them back from praying
to privateering ; their patched and blemished
sails will again be unfurled, and your characters,
fairly at sea with them, must share their fate and
lie at their mercy. “ Though he humble himself


and go crouching, yet take good heed, and be-
ware of him. —Set him not by thee, lest when he
hath overthrown thee, he stand up in thy place ;
neither let him sit at thy right hand, lest he seek
to take thy seat, and thou at the last remember
my words, and be pricked therewith.—One that
goeth to a sinner, and is defiled with him in his
sins, who will pity ?”
Can any private kindness or pity for the Pub-
lisher or Editor of the Magazine prevail with you
to violate a public duty ? I would fain hope not.
You will probably hear that you should not forsake
an old friend in adversity, and many other truisms
familiar to the eloquence of miscreants in distress.
But every honest man knows that the rights of
friendship end where the wants of rogues begin.
If the parodist has vowed, like Slender , that “ he
will ne’er be drunk while he lives again, but in
honest godly company j” be not you the. com-
pany that are to encourage and countenance his
brutality. Punishment and repentance, though
not inseparable, are near of kin ; and you should
blunt the edge of neither. If he prefer comfort
to penitence, let him seek a comforter in Dame
Quickly, who will “ bid him be of good cheer,
and not think of God.”
“ It is good to be zealously affected always in
a good thing.”—But if your rapidly successful
labour, and task completed ere the close of day,
leave you time to halt in “ pressing toward the
mark for the prize of your high calling,” and to


run races in the lower walks of literature, —at least
do not run down the slope which your more use-
ful and important toil has surmounted, —and at
least decline a course where you must start with
asseS for the plate. If the sun of your piety
must rest at times, and descend from travelling
in the firmament of ministerial duty and dig-
nity, let it set in the ocean, and not in a horse
pond. The slime of it, besides defacing your
beauty, will itself look all the uglier for'your
presence. Your Publisher, like the country play-
house manager, is snowing away as hard as he
can with brown paper ; and if you let him
tear your bands to whiten his shower, you only
make yourselves ridiculous, and crown the absur-
dity of the spectacle. The most arrogant and
overweening ambition is a “gloriousfault,” com-
pared with a grovelling “ downward appetite to
mix with mud.” We wonder to see flies and
grubs in amber; but we sicken to see “ a jewel
of gold in a swine’s snout.” Are you afraid of
seeming to be expelled from the fatuous frater-
nity of the Magazine ? You might as well be a-
shamed of expulsion from Bedlam*
Do you accuse me of undervaluing the lay
scribblers of this Magazine ? T admit they are fit
enough for their department, if there be such a
department in letters as that of fighting the bat-
tles of a bilious bookseller. “ A decent Priest,”
says Pope, “ where monkeys are the gods,”
decent chieftains I allow them to be, where their


Publisher is the precious Helen of controversy.
I certainly do not include every single man in the
opinion I have expressed of the Squad. Chemists
tell us that there is silver in all lead, and gold in
all copper : but mingled masses are justly denomi-
nated by the predominant quality and greater
quantity. The Editor has announced, (and per-
haps truly,) that the eminent physiologist Dr
G , and I believe also Dr B , so distin-
guished for his useful labours in mechanics, are
among his “ more honoured” contributors. Whe-
ther such butter as this will incline these gentle-
men to partake of his parsnips, I presume not to
divine ; but I think they will both be much more
honoured by the breach than the observance of
his behests. As for the first of them, he has an
appetite for controversy more voracious than dis-
criminative, which I hope will not outlive his
youth, but which has already associated his name
with Joanna Southcote and her accoucheur, and
interwoven his history with the adventures and
achievements of Gall and Spurzheim. As for the
other, I would fain hope we may suppose that
the mean and malignant insult offered in the Ma-
gazine to the accomplished Editor of a more ex-
cellent Encyclopedia than that which he himself*
superintends, was not the sop that coaxed him to
enter so unclean ia kennel, —the bone that enlist-
ed him a jackall to the Magazine. ' It should
teach him at least, how far to value the blushing


honours which his Editor’s favour has showered
so thick upon him.
But perhaps some gentle reader, smit with the
love of sacred song, adjures me to consider that
these are not all the precious particles that a nice
hand may extract from the mass of vulgar ore.
“ Consider, I pray you, that the Magazine is aid-
ed by that eminent poet who drank so deep of
the Winandermere Helicon,—who has written
more verse than Waller, and Otway, and Gray,
and Goldsmith put together,—who has seen a se-
cond edition, and has been reviewed,” &c. &c. Sec.
Ido consider all that; and lam sorry that he,
who is certainly very well qualified to be some-
thing better than first poet of a magazine, should
contract to sing on such boards, and crave to be
admitted man of rhyme to so pitiful a troop. I
think he has grown up to be a thriving bouncing
promising poet; visibly above the average wea-
vers of that long and lank versification with which
the market is so drugged and glutted ; but cer-
tainly not yet a very great writer either of prose
or verse. The lowest appraiser of his genius
must acknowledge, that if his past productions are
to be but the vestibule to something grander and
more spacious, he has a fair prospect of gaining a
permanent niche in the Temple of Fame, and lea-
ving a lasting structure behind him. But if these
blossoms are not to be followed by something
more solid and excellent, —if in the hurry and hot-
bed of a second-rate magazine, he be confirmed


in the nabit of accelerating, instead of maturing
his effusions, —then his blossoms will have their
day, and that day will be done whenever his li-
ving influence ceases to sustain them. He will
then have the pleasure of hearing in his lifetime
all the praise his name will gather; for the ma-
gazine memoir that might perhaps decree his
apotheosis, would have to execute its own sen-
tence, or suffer it to continue a dead letter. One
of the least digested effusions he has already put
forth, contains a curious passage, that reminded
me of Homer and the Newgate Calendar at the
same time. When that father of verse concludes
a line witli a tender image or expression, he is
fond of repeating it in the beginning of the next*
as if he “ lingering loved to shine upon it,” and,
like his own Jupiter, raised his eye with reluc-
tance from a bright and happy spot that had fill-
ed it with pleasure. The same predilection is
visible in the passage of this writer’s work to
which I have alluded, where we find him singing
thus :
“ Rang’d till you are dead!
Rang’d by the neck.”—the convict, a poem.
I have heard from more than one quarter, that
a certain busy fingered gentleman, who has car-
ried into letters the habits of a very controversial
profession, and who has already constituted him-
self the defender of the Covenanters against an
eminent novel writer, of the Usury Laws against


Mr Bentham, and of the Poor Laws against Mr
Malthus, has now, in the true spirit of a profes-
sional gladiator, enrolled himself in the ranks ot
this Magazine. This really seems to be the age
of apostacy and open dereliction of principle;
and perhaps it may be too much to expect, that
the common taint should be escaped by such as
at once are green in years, and grey in author-
ship. Still I disbelieve the information. We may
err in calculating the consistency of human vir-
tue, but not so readily in assuming the consisten-
cy of human vanity; and accordingly the man-
ner in which this writer has been lampooned in
the Magazine, seems to me to testify as strongly
as probability can, that he will never strengthen
it by assistance which he at .least will no doubt
consider exceedingly valuable.
" Whose hand is that, the forest bear doth lick ?
“ Not his, that spoils her young before her face.”
The most characteristic of the Magazine Small-
folk, is one who hopes to be called the adversary
of Leigh Hunt,—a feeble wriggling dandiprat,
crank with folly, void of understanding,—impell-
ed by vulgar effrontery and school-boy petulance,
to exemplify the proverb, that a fool and his
words are soon parted, and that the empty ves-
sel makes the greatest sound. Mr Hunt, instead
of contemplating this stingless buzzing insect
with the decency of disdain most befitting his
own superiority, has done him the honour of


branding him with contumelious notice, and
inviting him to wash off the stain if he can, by
giving up his name. But, no ; such garbage as
his, like a fargone flounder, glitters only in the
dark. His Bookseller has decorated him with the
collar of a critic; but a resetter has as much
right to invest a footpad with the badge of a turn-
pike-keeper, in order to legitimate his exploits on
the high-way. He would fain imitate Mr J
the reviewer’s castigation of Moore: but he imi-
tates him as a dancing-master imitates the carriage
of a gentleman, and has as little of his brains as he
has of his liver. He professes, like a true craven,
“ the better part of valour j” breaks only words,
but keeps whole weapons; and is as true to his
prototype Pallet with the sword as with the pen.
Like a pursued trout, he darts to the mud, and
seeks to revenge his disgrace by casting more
dirt from his hole at Mr Hunt. Truly, it has been
said, and wisely has it been appointed, that a curst
cow has short horns. He is a worthy stirrup-
holder to the beggar on horseback, whom the
Bookseller hired, like Balaam, to curse his ene-
mies,—a meet companion for Bavius, and Maevi-
us, and the other foundered pads who fill up the
Publisher’s poetical stud, and limp after the muse,
like urchins, with salt in their pockets, pursuing
sparrows. When a beggar fancies himself a prince,
he is often cured by straw and a strait waistcoat.
What a flood of folly might be repelled, if the
same remedies were applied to literary lunacy.


Among the compeers of this worthy, may be'
classed the sage who subscribes his productions
with the title of “ Observer.” One might have
thought an animal of this genus secured by his
insignificance from all hostility, and privileged
to “ unpack his heart” with harmless nonsense,
without- molestation. But pediculi pediculis infes-
tantur ; and the poor observer has got an ear very
nearly bitten off by a brother trooper to the book-
seller, who signs with the first letter of the word
Noodle. This' N, on the other hand, though a
most choleric coxcomb, has escaped a bite, and
received a good deal of slavering from a panegy-
rist, who declares that .Wordsworth is a mere
pettifogger, and N. a most sublime and amazing
magazine genius. The panegyrist, (Mr D.) in
his impatience of nameless obscurity, brags of a
punchbowl intimacy with Burns, and of a more
intelligible intimacy with a Parliament of literary
bailiffs and nobly-raging cheesemongers, who, he
assures us, are blind to the existence of all but
truly great writers, and one day, with sweet sim-
plicity, asked of him as their oracle, “ Who the
d—l is this William Wordsworth?’’!!! This is
really like the Senatus Consultum of the moles
and bats, who are said, in full assembly, and af-
ter special investigation, to have voted the eagle
near-sighted. I remember a Highland gentleman
asking, at a public dinner, “Who the d—l was
Pletcher of Salton ?” and then refusing to drink
the health of the Scottish patriot, because a


wag assured him that Fletcher was a man who
had been transported for sheep-stealing. Little
minds, like Procrustes, indulge their ambition,
in chopping down the great to their own size,
and exercise their generosity in stretching the
mean to unnatural dimensions: hence the crea-
ture who tries to make Wordsworth’s genius-
sink rebuked before him, willingly adores the
immensity of N.’s understanding,' and in all like-
lihood supposes that the world of letters would
be at an end, if N. should cease to buz in it. A
pig would not refuse to admit that the crow sings,
for he hears him caw near the ground; but I
daresay he is a sceptic as to the vocal powers of
the lark.
In short, this • Magazine advertises a literary
Ring or Tournament, where the dwarfs and sub-
altern squires are admitted by way of interlude,
to hug and compliment, or to cuff' and cross-but-
tock each other, while the knights of the Edin-
burgh and Quarterly Reviews are at rest; where
Dunce, and Noodle and Zany, D. and N. and Z.
according to the state of their bile, may either
laud and sing to each other like the braying Al-
dermen in Don Quixote, or may play at thief
and beadle, and, casting their bald disjointed
chat at each other’s heads, gravely assure the
world, that they stand out not as base gladiators
(their real characters,) but as the Horatii and
Curaiii of conflicting genius and wit. In the ge-
neral struggle and anarchy that now confound


the realms of literature, a universal system of pil-
lage seems to be resorted to ; and I have already
noted its prevalence among the literary lurchers
of the Magazine. Under this system, the Dunces
enjoy many advantages denied to their natural
enemies. . For though the wits may take out let-
ters of reprisal, the plunderers have nothing
worth stripping them of; and what they have
purloined they contrive to make it disgraceful to
recall. Like Jack Pudding in a pantomime men-
tioned by Dryden, when they spit in their neigh-
bour’s porridge, they secure it to themselves.
I pity Dr Chalmers, who must stand and be
slavered by such a mouthing lathery blower of
grandiloquent common-place as the Publisher of
the Magazine has thought proper to unkennel at
him.
One dedicates in high heroic prose.
And ridicules beyond an hundred foes.”
If the Doctor must be kissed by this execu-
tioner of his reputation, I trust he has too much
spirit not to resent the abusive osculation. Fa-
tuity is innocent when it only lolls out the
tongue; but when it licks, it is shudderingly of-
fensive. The man or boy who has been delivered
of the stuff 1 allude to, practises a marvellous
heaving of speech ; like a blind man in his walk,
lifting his legs to a most superfluous elevation.
Yet he evidently and devoutly believes that he
writes like Chalmers, and loves what he thinks
like himself. He -apes his peculiarities as Mr


Skriech in Guy Mannering imitates the tones of
his minister : he is as like his great example and
theme, as a storm in a horse-trough is like a tem-
pest at sea. In vain he vapours and puffs out pa-
ragraphs : for as Socrates said of his mother, that
though a most able midwife, she could not pos-
sibly deliver a woman who was not with child ;
so no collocation of words, however pompous, can
put sense into the words themselves, when there
is none in the speaker.
With this sketch of the men with whom you
are supposed to associate, (a supposition that
might cause your veiy bands to blush,) I now.
Reverend Sirs, take my leave of you. Whether
my exertions have done or will yet produce any
good effect, I confess I am unable to divine. If
you should do what I think becomes you on this
occasion, and what you well know many good men
look for at your hands, I am sure I care not though
my lucubrations be denied all share of the appro-
bation, and be considered utterly superfluous. It
is only an opposite line of conduct on your part
that can transfer to them a portion of the creditthat
ought to belong to you. I hope I esteem your
characters too justly to be mistaken in thinking
that the expostulation I have employed must ex-
cite any feeling rather than hostility towards me
in your hearts. “ Am I therefore become your
enemy because I tell you the truth ?” I hope
and believe lam not: but even if I should, the
same honesty of intention that exposed me to


blame would enable me to support it. 1 know
that we are commanded “ not to rebuke an Elder,
but rather entreat him j” and though I be myself
an elder at least in years, a man who has achieved
“ the silver livery of advised age,” I trust I have
not forgotten your official and personal respecta-
bility, nor suffered myself to rise above the tone
of entreaty. “He that hateth to be entreated is
in the way of sinners j” and that you may never
stand in such a way, is desired by none more
earnestly, than by
Your obedient Servant,
Calvixus.


