

GEORGE MURRAY &. CO , LTD , PRINTERS, SYDNEY.


GrEBAT
ECONOMY IN FARMING.
DOUBLE TOUR CROPS PER ACRE
BY USING
GERMAN POTASH SALTS.
12 Per Cent. Pure Potash.
ANALYSIS GUARANTEED.
The Best Fertilizers for all Crops,
RESTORING EXHAUSTED SOILS.
PRICE :
Kainit £4 per ton.
Sulphate of Potash - - ~ £l6 per ton .
Sold in Bags of 2 cwt. each.
No Charge for Bags.
DELIVERY AT STORES—PRICE, NET CASH.
delivered to any wharf or rail on payment of cartage.


POTASH MANURES
AUSTKALIA.
J( BOUT twenty years ago the question of manuring had become a
Q/% vital one in the oldest settled districts of New South Wales, more
especially amongst the orchards of the County of Cumberland and
the Dairy Barms of the Illawarra District.
The manure that was most readily available, and in fact the only
one in the opinion of many of the old-fashioned agriculturists, was
bonedust. Of course, stable manure was well known and highly valued,
but it was available in very limited quantities, principally for the market-
gardeners in close proximity to the cities and towns.
Peruvian guano had been tried with good results, but its very high
price and deteriorating quality prevented it from becoming largely used.
As the whole of the soils of the earliest settled districts of Australia
are deficient in phosphoric acid and lime, no manure could have been
more appropriate in their first stages of falling oft than bonedust. This
manure gave excellent results alike on the sandy loam and the stiffer
loams, in the orange orchards, the market gardens, the nurseries, the
pastures, and the paddocks cultivated for maize, potatoes, green feed,
lucerne and hay.
Generally speaking, the soils in the oldest farming districts of Australia
contain from two to five times as much potash as phosphoric acid ;
and the result was that there were few signs of the temporary exhaustion
of the available supplies of that most valuable soil ingredient, potash*
for many years after many farms had cried out for supplies of phosphate
of lime.
Twenty years ago the words potash manure and Kainit were
unknown in Australia except to a few students of agricultural chemistry,
who imported a few bags of the different salts of potash to check their
theory in the experimental field. The writer had the privilege of trying
potash on fruit trees, vegetables and pastures, and consequently became
the apostle of potash manuring.
Within the past four years potash manures have been introduced in
fairly large quantities into Australia, and are now used as an ingredient of
all the complete manures manufactured by the Sugar Refining Company,
the Meat Preserving Company, the Australian Bonedust and Fertiliser
Company, and Albert and Co.


Soils of Australia.
We have the analyses o£ hundreds of samples of soil from all parts of
Australia to compare with similar analyses of American soils, and the most
striking difference between them is in the percentage of potash. The
striking results achieved by Sir Humphrey Davy in his analyses of soils,
when he was able to indicate the excess of sulphate of iron as the cause of
the barrenness of a soil, and to cure that defect by adding lime to
decompose the injurious salt of iron, gave farmers great expectations of
the value of soil analysis, which have not always been realised. Chemical
analysis cannot always distinguish between a fruitful and an unfruitful
soil; for though it can indicate what chemical constituents are present, it
cannot tell in what form they exist —whether available for the plant’s use
■or not. But it can show the measure of its possible fertility, and can
enable us to determine whether a soil is capable of fertility or not, and it
can warn us of deleterious ingredients which may make a soil useless until
it has been properly treated.
Potash in Australian Soils.
There is no need to-day for any argument on the necessity for potash
an a fertile soil. No crop can grow without some potash, and a deficiency
of it in soils shows itself at once by the meagre growth of all commercial
crops. In the absence of available supplies of potash in the soil,
plants have not the power of making starch out of the carbonic acid and
water vapour of the atmosphere. Without starch there can be no woody
fibre found, no carbohydrates or heat-giving substances, no sugar. Tille,
.the great French agriculturist and chemist, goes so far as to say: —
“The lack of potash in the soil is coincident with the potaw
“ disease, whence we may draw a second conclusion, that when plants are
“ deprived of their dominant mineral constituent, and consequently of one
“ of the most essential constituents of their existence, they become the prey
“ of inferior organisms, such as microscopic fungi, aphides, &c.”
How are the soils of Australia in general supplied with potash ?
The chemists’ analyses show that the basaltic, granitic and many alluvial
soils are fairly well supplied, containing from ‘2 to ‘7 per cent, of that
valuable constituent; but the best of these are not rich when compared
with the best soils of California, which contain as high as 2 per cent., and
the very fertile meadows of England and Ireland, which often contain as
much as 1 to 2 per cent, of it.
Our loamy soils in the County of Cumberland, and in many other parts
of Australia, formed by the decomposition of shales and slates, together
with adjacent sandstone formations, contain from ‘OS to 2 per cent, of
potash, and many of our black alluvial soils rich in vegetable matter and
very fertile, owing to their depth, good mechanical condition, and favorable
subsoil for drainage contain no more than this percentage.
Other sandy loams, again, which look well, are found to have low per-
centages of potash from ‘O2 to ‘O7 per cwt., and soon show signs of
temporary exhaustion if continuously cropped with maize, sorghum, potatoes
and oaten hay, which make very considerable demands on their supplies of
potash. The light sandy loams of the Blue Mountains and many of the
coast plains, which have been formed entirely from sandstone formations
without any admixture of basalt, granite or wianamatta shale, are in-
variably poor in potash, and when net deep and well drained soon
show the sure signs of potash hunger in the fruit trees and crops of all sorts.
As a matter of fact, however, the supplies of potash are generally
from twice to five times as great as those of phosphoric acid, and


the consequence lias been that our orchards, cultivation paddocks, and
pastures have needed manures, supplying phosphoric acid (bonedust
and superphosphate of lime) much sooner than those supplying potash.
It is only about twelve years since potash manures were introduced into
Australia and were used experimentally by the writer on fruit trees, peas,
and potatoes. He has since that time written a number of articles and
delivered many lectures on the necessity of potash for many of our
long-worked soils, more especially for fruit trees of all sorts, and maize,
sorghum, potatoes, and vegetables. About five years ago the Sugar
liefining Company began to make different grades of manures, containing
various proportions of superphosphate of lime, sulphate of ammonia,
and sulphate Of potash. The highest grades, containing 4 to 8 per
cent, of potash, have made themselves highly appreciated among our
progressive agriculturists for certain crops and appropriate soils. Pour
years ago Mr. Alban Gee recognised the necessity of making the Meat
Preserving Co.’s 8.8. manure (bonedust and dried blood) into a complete
or general manure by the addition of potash in some form, A good
many tons of P. 8.8. manures (containing potash, blood, and bones) have
since been sold, and many of our best fruit-growers now demand some
percentage Of potash (from 2-| to 10 per cent.) in whatever manure
they use.
But still the total quantity of potash salts imported into Australia
is comparatively small —a few hundred tons.
Let us look at the figures for other countries.
In 1880 Germany used 23,768 tons of Kainit and 4,136 tons of other
crude potash salts. In 1892 that great agricultural country used 363,223
tons of Kainit and 48,803 tons of other crude potash salts. During this
latter year the enormous total of 1,320,282 tons of potash salts were
dug out of the immense Stassfurt mines, and exported to the chief agri-
cultural countries of the world.
During 1891 Great Britain used 23,495 tons of concentrated potash
salts (four times as rich as the crude salts), and North America used
40,870 tons of these concentrated salts, together with 115,245 tons of the
crude salts.
There can be no doubt that as soon as the general body of our
agriculturists recognise how valuable an addition potash makes to the
ordinary bonedust and dried blood they will use large quantities of the
concentrated sulphate Of potash and of Kainit proportionate to the
figures indicated above.
Origin of these Potash Salts.
Early in the last century, Stassfurt, in the province of Saxony, in
Northern Germany, was famous for its extensive salt works, but it was not
till 1857 that the Prussian Government discovered, by boring at a depth of
1,080 feet, a great stratum of rock-salt, after having drilled through a
deposit of so-called refuse salts, consisting largely of compounds of
potash and magnesia mixed with common salt, which were then
considered worthless, but which are now recognised as of inestimable value
both to the agricultural and manufacturing world.
Up till this time wood-ashes were the only source of potash for manure,
and they were becoming too valuable for other purposes to be used for
manure. About this time the great researches of Liebig showed how
essential potash with other mixed matters was for the sustenance of plant
life.
Hence the vast potash deposits at Stassfurt began to attract attention,
and soon both the crude salts and the concentrated potash.


Wheat -
- 25,704,939
bushels.
Oats ------
- 5,724,142
55
Barley -
- 1,186,409
Maize .
- 9,262,061
Other Cereals, Peas and Beans
Potatoes -
- 1,144,316
379,286
tons.
Hay
1,071,585
55
Bruit
500,000
55
Sugar Cane -----
- 1,015,424
55
Vegetables -----
965,600
55
Cheese -
- 11,843,878
lbs.
Wine -
- 3,604,262
gallons.
Tobacco -
20,000
cwt.
Turnips, Sweet Potatoes, Arrowroot
95,000
tons.
Butter -
- 42,000,000
lbs.
Wool
- 552,800,000
?)
compounds were used by the intelligent German farmers. The success of
potash manuring in increasing the yields and in improving ttLO
quality of fruits, grain, and all forage crops soon created an enormous
demand; and to-day these works employ 4,000 miners and 5,500 manufac-
turing labourers, besides chemists, engineers, clerks, superintendents, and
others.
These potash, deposits had their origin many ages ago in a vast
ocean, the water of which gradually receded, leaving near the coast lakes
which still retained communication with the great ocean by means of small
channels. The waters of these inland lakes were continually evaporating
and being replenished through the channels connecting them with the main
ocean.
First the less soluble materials, such as gypsum or sulphate of lime,,
were deposited ; then came rock-salt with a slowly thickening layer, which
ultimately reached 3,000 feet, and is estimated to have taken 13,000 years in
This is succeeded by deposits of salts of potash and
magnesia mixed with common salt. The entire deposit is 5,000 feet
thick, the potash deposits averaging from 50 to 130 feet, and extends in
area from the Harz Mountains to the Elbe in one direction, and from the
city of Magdeburg to the town of Bernburg in another. It may be safely
asserted that Stassfurt possesses a comparatively inexhaustible supply of
potash salts, and is at present replenishing the drain of potash from the
fields of Europe and America, and supplying the whole World
with potash.
Drain of Potash from our Fields.
It has been calculated that an average crop of the United States
removes 1,476,904 tons of potash from the soil.
Let us make a similar calculation for the chief crops of Australia which
are removed from our fields and are about entirely lost in the great cities
and towns of the world, whence their fertilising elements disappear through
the sewers into the sea.
These main products remove from our Australian soil at least 58,177
tons of potash every year, but not even in this year, 1894, have we
attempted to replace more than \ per cent, of this essential constituent of
fertility.


To replace the whole of it and then leave our soil as rich as before, we
should have to import into Australia about 116,000 tons of concentrated
sulphate of potash, or 464,000 tons of Kainit.
RESULTS OP POTASH UPON POTATOES.
Plots 5, 6 and 10 received no Potash.
Potash was applied to Plots 7, 8 and 9, producing the Largest
Yield and Profit.
The day has not yet come when we need to replace the potash we take
out of our rich basaltic soils year by year, fgr we have immense reserves
there on which to draw for the first 20 years ; but we positively assert that
large areas of our oldest settled districts and of our poorer soils now need
the replacing of potash, as well as the phosphoric acid and nitrogen which
we have been in the habit of providing for the past 20 years in the form of
bonedust, super-phosphate of lime, dried blood and sulphate of ammonia.


Let all intelligent fruitgrowers study the following
figures:—
COMPOSITION OF THE ASHES
YAEIOUS
FEUITS.
PHOSPHORIC
POTASH.
LIME.
MAGNESIA.
IRON.
Apple.
Pear .
Plum .
3568
13 59
5169
15 20
59-21
1004
15 10
Prune...
Orange
Lemon
Grape
Peach...
Apricot
Fig ...
Strawberry
Almond
68-83
14-08
48-94
227 L
12-37
48-26
29-87
1109
63 14
10 42
74-46
16 02
59-36
13 09
48-60
11-20
49 24
13-47
18-50
27 95
17-66
43 63
Cherry
Damson
Olive ...
51'85
15-97
45-98
12-65
13 83
6007
1572
Gooseberry
Quince
Chestnut
38-65
1220
19 68
27-39
1311
43 32
39 36
Note how these different ashes vary in composition. Look at the
column of figures under potash, and you will see that the ashes of peaches
contain nearly 75 per cent, potash ; those of apples not half as much.
Under phosphoric acid you will see that the figures vary from
nearly 44 per cent, in the ashes of almonds and quinces, down to less than
one-fourth that amount in grapes, and less than one-fifth in olives. The
other columns are not deserving of special attention, and are merely given
to convince our readers that the substances, iron, magnesia, and lime, are
generally of small importance compared with potash and phosphoric
acid, and will be abundantly supplied in the bonedust and dried blood
used to furnish the essential constituents.
How to Use Potash Manures .
We do not wish to be understood to advocate the use of potash
manures alone. They can seldom be used profitably alone, because
they furnish only one of the three essential elements of plant-food, and
their best results are generally developed when they are judiciously used in
proper proportions with some form of phosphoric acid and of nitrogen.
The character of the soil —whether loamy or sandy, its previous history
as to cropping, and the nature of the crops to be now grown —must be
considered in determining the amount of potash, to be used in our mixed
manures.
One-sided fertilisation dops not pay for long. Sulphate of ammonia or
dried blood will for a season or two stimulate crops to use up all the
available supplies of potash and phosphoric acid, but as soon as those are
exhausted the nitrogenous manure can do no work alone. So long as the
loamy soils of our orange orchards, cane-fields, and maize paddocks
contained good available reserves of potash, the use of bonedust, supplying


only phosphate o£ lime and nitrogen, was profitable and satisfactory; but
as soon as the supplies of potash were reduced below the full demands of
the crop, the bonedust ceased to give satisfaction, and potash has now to
be added.
Potash, salts have a marvellous power in encouraging the growth
of leguminous plants—clover, lucerne, peas, beans, cow-peas, lupines, etc.;
and the patient investigations of Schultz, Maerker, and Wagner, in
Germany, followed by hundreds of experimenters in Great Britain and
America, have shown us how to add nitrogen (the most expensive con-
stituent of our manures) to our soils without great expense, and at the same
time improve the mechanical condition of our soils.
Manuring with potash salts, together with some form of phos-
phoric acid (bonedust, superphosphate of lime, or Thomas’ phosphate),,
provided there is a fair supply of lime present, will always ensure good
crops of these leguminous plants, which have the power of drawing their
supplies of nitrogen indirectly from the air. Good crops of cow-peas, when
ploughed in, have thus added to the soil as much as 200 lbs. of nitrogen per
acre, which would cost £6 to purchase in the form of dried blood. The
leguminous crop may be fed to animals and the nitrogen supplied to the
soil in the shape of their dung, and should always be succeeded by a cereal.
The best scientific agriculturists of Germany, Great Britain, Prance,
and America have proved this exclusive potash-phosphate fertilisation to
be economical, and to be successful in producing sure crops and paying
crops.
To see the effects of potash, in “ bringing in ” clover, use 8 to 4 cwt.
of Kainit in an acre of pasture in autumn; in the early spring the clovers
hitherto almost invisible will form the greater part of the pasture, and the
best grasses succeeding the clovers in the summer will be much encouraged
in their growth.
What Form of Fotash to Use .
The three forms of potash now available in Australia are sulphate of
potash, chloride or muriate of potash and Kainit. The first, when of 95
per cent, purity, contains about 50 per cent, of pure potash, and is very
valuable for most crops, especially fruit trees, potatoes, beets and tobacco,
for which the other two forms are found unsuitable. The sulphate is very
useful for mixing with bonedust and other manures to give a certain per-
centage ef potash.. Thus, 1 cwt. of high-class sulphate of potash mixed
thoroughly with 19 cwt. of bonedust and dried give a ton of general
manure very useful for the majority of crops on loamy soils, which may be
assumed to contain 2-| per cent, of potash (K 2 O) ; 2 cwt. of sulphate with
18 cwt. of bonedust and dried blood will give a ton of general manure
containing 5 per cent, of potash. The chloride of potash is more variable in
its composition, yielding from 35 to 58 per cent, of potash ; a fair sample
of 89 per cent, purity should yield about 50 per cent, of potash. This form
of potash is very useful for all cereals —rape, peas, beans, asparagus,
cabbages and other vegetables, but is injurious to tobacco, potatoes, sugar-cane
and beets for sugar.
Kainit contains about 25 per cent, of sulphate of potash (equal to
per cent, of potash), with varying percentages of common salt,
sulphate of magnesia, and chloride of magnesia. It thus needs about
four tons of this manure to furnish as much potash. as one ton of
the sulphate, and it is not economical where freight, cartage and
expenses of spreading are heavy. The writer, however, found it specially
valuable for asparagus as a top-dressing in autumn with a mulching of
stable manure ; for pastures, when applied in autumn with an equal weight


of good bonedust; for potatoes, with superphosphate of lime and dried
blood applied in the drills ; and for peach trees, as an excellent preventative
of the black aphis when applied round the stem of the tree at the end of
winter.
RESULTS OP POTASH UPON MAIZE AND SORGHUM.
Potash produced an Increase of 30 to 50 Bushels of Ear Corn
per acre.
A careful study of the following figures will show the students how all
orops (except almonds) take much more potash than phosphoric acid from
the soil —sometimes three to five times as much. A rotation of wheat, oats,
potatoes and hay takes three times as much potash as phosphoric acid. A
rotation of wheat, oats, mangels and hay, four times as much. And yet our
farmers and fruit-growers, while sometimes restoring in part the phosphoric
acid, never attempt to replace the potash.


TABLE
SHOWING HOW MANY POUNDS OF THE FERTILISING
CONSTITUENTS ARE WITHDRAWN PER ACRE BY AN
AVERAGE CROP.
d
M
rC
CO
-4-i
O
Ph
d
M
lio
c 3
O
PM
O io
'CO
o
Qj
m
O
Pi
®
be
o
H
-b>
£
O IO
‘S o
O c,
rPI Cb
Ph
m
O
PM
[25
P
a>
o
M
Wheat
Peppy
Hemp
Cotton
Hops
Rye .
Barley
Oats .
Maize
Tobacco
Rice
Sugar Cane
Cabbages
Cauliflowers
Lettuces
Sorghum
Buckwheat
Peas
*153
*254
Horsebeans
Cucumbers
Onions
Soy Beans ( Soja
hispidd)
Lupinis, Yellow (Lu-
pinus lutcus )
Potatoes
*297
Swedes
Oaten Hay
Mangels
Apples
Pears
*155
119
Sugar Beets ...
Cattle Turnips
Carrots
Plums
Prunes
Oranges
Lemons
Grapes
Peaches
Apricots
Figs... _ .
Strawberries
Almonds
Meadow Hay
Corn Fodder, Green...
Clover, Green (Tri-
folium praleuse) ...
Lucerne ( Medicago
satura )
Clover ( Trifolium
repens)
Red Clover ( Trifolium
#l7l
*289
Cherries
Damsons
Olives
ipcarnatum
Esparsette
Seradella
*239
*l2B
Gooseberries
Quinces
Vetches
*149
Rape
* These crops have the power of getting the greater part, if not all, of their
nitrogen indirectly from the air, and need, therefore, only potash-phosphate
manuring.


Kainit as an Insecticide and Fungicide.
In America Kainit is regarded as the best remedy for the boll-worm
that infects the cotton-plant. Three years ago the writer sprayed a few
peach trees and Japanese plums that were infested with aphis with a
solution of 1 lb. of Kainit in a gallon of water, and soaked the soil around
the trunks of the trees. I have not seen any aphis on those trees since, but
trees which were sprayed with kerosene emulsion, tobacco water, and resin
wash (all lost their fruit) had a second batch of aphis within a week, and
were infested the following year
Mr. W. Haywood, of Oaklands, Pambula, Hew South Wales, has
experimented with 2 cwt. of Kainit per acre, with other manures, on
potatoes, and where he used the Kainit he got an increase of 25 per cent, in
the crop, and noticed an entire absence of potato-grub. Por potato-seed
that is infected with the 'larvae of the potato-moth (lita solanelld) I can
confidently recommend soaking in a solution of Kainit (1 lb. to a gallon
of water).
A great many peach-growers in Hew South Wales have found that
good dressings of potash, whether in the form of wood-ashes or potash,
salts, are the best remedy for the peach-rust (Fuccinia pruni), which
injures the trees so much in the autumn.
Professor James, of the Ontario Agricultural College, says:—
“It has been proved that destructive pests more readily attack fruit
“ trees which are deficient in mineral matter. It has been invariably found
“ that trees affected with these diseases are deficient in potash more than
“ anything else, and by adding to the soil more potash you enable the trees
“ to make a more vigorous growth and withstand such attacks.”
This statement is equally true of all fruit trees and very many farm
crops.
Kainit has another special value on the farm where horses and cattle
are stabled and their manure conserved. Owing to the magnesia it contains
it has the power of fixing or retaining ammonia that is formed by fermenta-
tion in the manure heap. About 3 lbs. of Kainit for each 100 lbs. of
manure, if sprinkled over it when fresh, will prevent the escape of the
gas ammonia, and will also enrich the manure heap with an additional 4 per
cent, of potash.
Times of applying Fotash Salts .
All potash salts should be sown in the autumn if used by themselves,
or with slowly soluble manures like bonedust, dried blood, and Thomas*
phosphate; if used with soluble manures like superphosphate of lime and
sulphate of ammonia (such as the Sugar Eefining Company’s Hos. 3,4, and
5 Manures), they should be used in the early spring, but not allowed to
come into contact with seed.
Potash manures should generally be ploughed or harrowed in, but they
may well be used as top-dressings for pastures.
Kainit is specially valuable for peaty soils and for light and open
sandytsoils, for its magnesia salts, by their water-absorbing properties, have
a marked effect in making and keeping such soils moist and compact. Clay
loams and wet soils are less benefited by Kainit, and demand smaller
dressings of the concentrated salts of potash, together with annual
dressings of lime, to liberate the latent supplies of potash in the clay.


Potash Increases Percentage of Sugar in
Plants .
When I first commenced experimenting with potash manures on
fruit trees I was struck principally with the superior juiciness and sweet-
ness of the fruit from the trees treated with manures containing 5 to 10
per cent, of potash. Prom one peach tree four years old, I got 13 dozen of
large fruit, 24 of which weighed 16 lbs. 14 oz., an average of Hi oz.
each.
Oranges from trees that have been regularly manured with a fair
percentage of potash are always sweeter, heavier and finer than those
from trees that have received only bonedust and dried blood.
The scientific reason is simple. Potash causes a brisk formation
and circulation of starch. This substance is elaborated out of the carbonic
acid gas of the air and water, but only in the presence of potash in the
plant; being first organised in the leaves, made soluble in the cells, and
passing on as sugar into the fruit.
Potash manures thus help to improve the quality of fruit and of
vegetables. It is found in large quantities in passion-fruit, grapes, lemons,
oranges, mandarins, plums, apples, pears, rhubarb leaves and stalks, peaches,
asparagus, and many other fruits and vegetables, combined with citric
malic or tartaric acid.
General Pules to Regulate Potash
Manuring.
1. —Light sandy soils and peaty soils, as a rule, are very deficient in
potash, and will not, therefore, grow first-class crops of potatoes, barley,
maize, sorghum, fruit, clovers, peas, beans, and other potash-loving plants
without good dressings of potash.
Loamy soils that have been continuously cropped without restoring any
potash may have their supplies of available potash so much reduced as to
need good dressings of potash manures. Lime will be very valuable in
breaking up such soils and liberating further supplies of potash from its
insoluble compounds.
2. —Meadows and pastures are particularly benefited by potash
manuring, especially in combination with bonedust or superphosphate, for
the finer grasses and clovers are thereby much encouraged, and the worthless
grasses and weeds are crowded out.
The clovers grow luxuriantly in the spring, and lay up large supplies of
nitrogen from the air, which obviates the necessity of using large dressings
of expensive nitrogenous manures.
3.—Peas, lucerne, Prench beans, broad beans, Luna beans, clovers, and
leguminous plants in general need only potash-phosphate manuring, getting
their nitrogen from the air at no cost. Old impoverished soils can thus be
enriched with nitrogen at small expenses either by ploughing in the green
crop when in blossom or by feeding it to animals and returning at least 75
per cent, of the elements of fertility in the form of their dung.
4.— Potash, manures when used by themselves should always be
applied in the autumn and lightly ploughed in.
When used in complete manures they should be applied before the
seed and lightly buried.


For pastures they may be spread broadcast in autumn, and should
always be mixed with some pbosphatic manure. For fruit trees the
•complete manures should be applied at the end of winter, and dug or
ploughed in.
s.— Potash, manures always give best satisfaction when there is
plenty of lime in the soil. If there is known to be a deficiency of lime, a
dressing of one ton per acre should be lightly harrowed in during the
autumn every three years.
6. —Manures containing potash salts should be mixed immediately
before using, for they are apt to set and become hard.
7.—Deficiency of potash in the soil always aggravates the ravages of
insect and fungus pests. Fruit trees liberally supplied with potash in well-
balanced manures never suffer so badly from such diseases as the rust and
the curl-leaf of peach trees, the rust of the orange, and the shot-hole of the
apricot. Kainit is a good remedy and preventative of aphis.
Formulas for some Complete Manures.
In offering these formulae for mixtures suitable for the principal
crops of Australia, we would mention that they are the outcome of our
own experiments, combined with our experience of the results of the
operations of other people in the different colonies.
The materials recommended are not in all cases the very best from a
scientific point of view, but are the best and cheapest from our Australian
standpoint. Nitrate of soda would be better than dried blood for some
crops, but its present price in Australia forbids its use, as it never can be
worth to us as a manure more than £lO a ton.
Sulphate of ammonia is quicker and more effective than dried blood >
but it is also much dearer ; 1 per cent, of the nitrogen in the former
costing 135., in the latter 10s. For our tropical and sub-tropical districts
liable to heavy rains, it is too soluble and apt to be washed out of the soil.
Again, Kainit is strongly recommended for some crops as asparagus,
mangels, clover, peas, cabbages, and sorghum; while for others, such as
tobacco, sugar-cane, sugar-beets, and potatoes, it is not generally so suitable
as the concentrated salt —sulphate of potash.
Wherever freights and cartage make it expedient to have our
manures as concentrated as possible, Kainit may well be replaced by one-
quarter of its weight of sulphate of potash.
The prices indicated are those prevailing in the capitals—Sydney,
Melbourne, Brisbane, and Adelaide.
Manure companies which make the manufacture of manures their sole
business will gladly make the different mixtures with no charge for mixing,
as they get their profits from the raw materials.
The amounts per acre recommended for use vary according to the soil.
The loamy soils of fair quality that have not been cropped continuously
for many years, the lighter dressings indicated will give satisfactory results,
while for our poor sandy loams which, owing to proximity to good markets,
pay for heavy manuring, the heavier dressings will not be too much. We
have seen 12 cwt. of imported manure at £lB 13s. a ton used for cabbages
with excellent remunerative results, and we are not therefore afraid to
recommend 6 to 12 cwt. of equally good manure at much lower cost.
Heavy manuring often pays where light manuring does not.


RESULTS WITH POTASH UPON POTATOES.
An increase of 161 i bushels of Potatoes resulted from the use
of 800 lbs. of KAINIT and 400 lbs. PHOSPHATE. A clear
gain of £8 per acre.


Formula for Manures, showing relatiue weights of each ingredient in a Ton of Manure; chemical percentages, quantities
per acre recommended for the principal crops of Australia and cost per Ton.
CROPS ROUGHLY GROUPED INTO
INGREDIENTS IN A TON OF COMPLETE MANURE.
COMPOSITION PER CENT.
QTJAN-
COST
CLASSES.
Bonedust
Super-
phosphate
Dried
Blood
Sulphate
Ammonia
Sulphate
Potash
Kainit
Potash
Phosphor
ic Acid
Nitrogen
Lime
PER
ACRE
PEE
TON.
A. — Wheat, Oats, Barley, Rye, Rice, Grass,
Per cent.
Per cent.
Per cent.
Per cent.
Cotton
B. — Cabbages, Cauliflowers, Tomatoes,
Celery, Onions, Asparagus, Lettuces,
4-cwt.
4-cwt.
6-cwt-
1-cwt.
1-cwt.
4-cwt.
5
7-8
5
13-14
3'4-cwt.
101/-
Silver Beet, Spinach
3 „
4 „
6 „
1 „
2 „
4 „
78
6-7
5
12
5-10 „
110/-
C- — Oranges, Lemons, Mandarins, Bananas
D. — Peaches, Nectarines, Apricots, Pine-
5 „
4 „
6 ,.
2 „
3 „
7-8
8-9
67
15
412 „
128/-
apples. Plums, Strawberries, Figs,
Olives, Grapes, Persimmons, Passion-
fruit, Mangoes, Almonds, Cherries,
Prunes, Guavas, Cherimoyers
— Peas, Beans, Clovers, Lucerne, Pea-
5 „
3 „
6 „
2 „
4 „
10
7-8
67
13
4T2 „
135/-
nuts, Cowpeas, Lupines, Vetches
— Apples, Pears, Quinces, Gooseberries,
4 „
6 „
2 „
8-cwt.
10
9T0
1
17-18
3'6 „
93/-
Loquats, Raspberries, Blackberries,
. Currants, Mulberries
6 „
4 „
8-cwt.
2
5
9T0
5-6
16-17
4-10 „
103/-
G.—Pumpkins, Melons, Cucumbers, Sweet
Potatoes, Squashes, Mangels
H.—Turnips, Carrots, Parsnips, Chicory,
Swedes ...
3 „
4 „
4 „
1-cwt.
2 „
6-cwt.
89
67
4
12
4'8 „
107/-
4 „
7 „
3 „
1 „
1 „
4 „
5
10
34
19-20
3-6 „
100/-
I. —Sugar-Cane, Sorghum for Sugar, Beet
J. Maize, Sorghum for food. Castor Oil,
6 „
5 „
6 „
1 „
2
5
10T1
5-6
18
3-5 „
111/-
Hemp-rape, Sunflower
5 „
3 „
6 „
1 „
i „
4-cwt.
5
7'8
5-6
13-14
3-5 „
100/-
JG Potatoes, Tobacco, Hops, Buckwheat
5 „
6 „ |
4 „
1 ” 1
4 „ |
10
10
4-5
19
4-6 „
126/-


Australian Testimony about Potash in
Manure.
taP!xm ' Hawkesburt Agricultural College Farm. —The principal (Mr.
J. L. Thompson) reports that the soil of the farm is a light sandy loam,
containing ’O4 to '057 per cent, of potash (=4O to 57 parts in 100,000).
The best manure for general crops is found to be equal parts of bonedust or
superphosphate of lime, dried blood and Kainit. To show how poor the
soil is, it is sufficient to indicate that the yield of wheaten hay without
manure was only 11J cwt. With 280 lbs. of Kainit and 175 lbs. of super-
phosphate it was 1 ton 14 cwt. with a profit of £2 11s. 9d. per acre, and
with this same manure made complete by the addition of 280 lbs. of sulphate
of ammonia, the yield was 2 tons 11 cwt., with a profit of £3 Bs. 3d. per
acre. With oaten hay the yield was, without manure, 18i cwt; [with 175
lbs. superphosphate of lime and 280 lbs. of sulphate of ammonia it was 2
tons 15 cwt., and by the addition of 280 lbs. of Kainit it was raised to 3
tons 18 cwt. per acre. Potatoes, with no manure, yielded 5 tons 16 cwt. per
acre ; with 5 cwt. of a mixture of two parts of Kainit with one of super-
phosphate, the yield was increased to 8 tons 6 cwt. Mangels, with a
complete manure, containing 600 lbs. of Kainit (equivalent to 5 per cent,
of potash), gave 19 tons 13 cwt.; but without potash there was no crop.
Maize gave 39 bushels per acre without manure ; with 5 cwt. of a mixture of
equal parts of bonedust, dried blood and Kainit gave 85 bushels 40 lbs.;
and with a soluble complete manure, containing 8 per cent, of potash,
gave 77 bushels ; 400 lbs. of the first mixture gave 16 tons 2 cwt. of green
fodder.
Mr. J. H. Willis, of Geeenbank, Corowa, experimented with a complete
manure, containing 8 per cent. Of potash, on his vines, and got 547
lbs. more grapes from 225 vines manured with 2 cwt. of manure, and these
continued to give better results next year also.
Mr. H. T. A. Chapman, of Mitchell Island, Manning Eiver, tried
8 per Cent, potash manure on potatoes. No manure gave 3 tons;
6 cwt. of manure, 7i tons ; and 8 cwt. of manure yielded 10 tons 9 cwt. of
Early Eose potatoes.
Mr. W. Haywood, of Oaklands, Pambula, tried a mixture of two parts
Kainit, two parts wood-ashes, one part superphosphate, one part bonedust,
at the rate of 6 cwt. per acre, which increased the crop by 25 per cent.,
and, when the Kainit was used, there was an entire absence of potato grubs
(Lita solanella), which badly infested the rest of the crop.
Mr. A. W. Littlejohn, of Moorbank, Liverpool, by using 4 per cent.
Of potash in his manure, increased his crop of oaten hay from 1 ton to
3 tons per acre.
Mr. S. D. Johnston, of Balmoral, reports that by using 4 per Cent.
Of potash in his manure he can get splendid crops of vegetables out of
poor soils of sandstone formation.
Mr. P, E. Adams, of Casula, Liverpool, finds that 7 lbs. of a complete
manure containing 8 per cent potash is fully equal to 3 cwt. of the
best farmyard manure for his peaches and vines.
Mr. J. B. Linsby, of St. John’s Park, Canley Yale, says he got
splendid crops of potatoes, plums, lemons, oranges, and passionfruit by
using 8 per cent, of potash.
Captain Pockley, of Gordon, dressed some of his peach trees with
4 lbs. each of 8 per cent, potash manure, and got from these trees
heavy crops of fruit measuring Hi inches in circumference and weighing
Hi oz. each


Mr. J. Lilly, of Wamberal, Gosford, testifies that by using 6 cwt. of
8 per cent, potash manure, he raised his yield of potatoes to 11 tons
per acre.
Mr. Thomas Salmon, of Hornsby Junction, says: “ Eor stone fruit
“ I prefer manures with potash, as this addition of potash is what we
“ want.”
Mr. E. Gauntlett, of Galston, says that the addition of 7\ per
cent, of potash to bonedust and dried blood makes a marked improve-
ment for potatoes, and he likes the addition of potash also for his
maize, oats, and cabbage crops.
Kainit on Potatoes in Ireland.
A series of valuable experiments has been carried out at the Munster
Educational Earm near Cork to try the comparative value of farmyard
dung and artificials.
Dr. Sullivan, of Queen’s College, Cork, reports that the yield with
no manure was 5 tons; with 2 cwt. of Kainit 13 tons 19 cwt.; with 4 cwt.
of Kainit 14 tons 6 cwt, per acre.
Professor Ville on Potash Manure .
Professor G. Ville, after 20 years experimenting on his farm at
Vincennes, says: “ Potash ought to be the dominant constituent in
“ manures for growing potatoes, "With a normal complete manure the
“ crop is from 8 tons to 10 tons 16 cwt. per acre, but by suppressing the
“ potash it falls to 2 tons 16 cwt. Until lately I always thought that the
“leguminosae and the potato were the plants which showed a special
<£ preference for potash ; but the vine distances them in this respect in
“ a surprising manner. In the case of the potato the suppression of
“ potash manifests itself by a diminution of the crop; with the vine,
“ however, little or no fruit makes its appearance, and we virtually get no
‘ ‘ crop at all.
“ In the plot without potash the leaves first turn red and then black,
“ drying up and shrivelling like those of the potatoes which have received
“ the same treatment. The plot with complete manure gave 4 tons 15 cwt.
“of grapes, with 848 gallons of must, per acre; the plot manured without
“ potash gave no crop at all.”
American Experiences with Potash
Manure.
The total sum of the experiments of 47 Agricultural Colleges and
Experiment Stations of America may be aptly expressed in the words of
Dr. Dabney, Director of the North Carolina Experiment Station, who wrote
twelve years ago :
“ Kainit is a Godsend to the farmer.”
Gko. Murray & Co., Ltd., Printers, 91 Clarence Street, Sydney,


German Potash Salt.
THE CHEAPEST AND MOST WONDERFUL FERTILIZER
OF THE AOE.
INVALUABLE FOR WHEAT, BARLEY, OATS, MAIZE, PEAS,
BEANS, POTATOES, ASPARAGUS AND ALL ROOT CROPS;
ALSO FOE
Top-dressing of Grasses, Lucerne, Clover, Hemp & Fibrous Plants,
THE FARMERS’ & DAIRYMEN’S BEST FRIEND.
Enormous Increase of Carrying Power of Cow Pastures.
ALSO,
A WONDERFUL INSECT PEST DESTROYER.
»»»»»»»»»»»»»
HIGHLY CONCENTRATED
SULPHATE«OF*POTASH
(FREE FROM CHLORINE).
FOR FRUIT TREES, VINES, TOBACCO AND SUGAR CANE.
The Basis of all Good Manures.
AFA.LTSIS O-XJ.A.IR.j'LFrTIEiIEID.
For Descriptive Pamphlets and all particulars apply to—
JULES REN&RD & CO.,
SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE,
Sole Agents.


KAINIT
SULPHATE 1 POTASH
(96 PER CENT.)
ANALYSIS AND PURITY GUARANTEED.


RESULTS OBTAINED
♦ * BY
Hawkesbury Agricultural College, Richmond.
Manurial Experiments on Wheat —Practical Analysis of
the Soil.
le following
An experiment on ten plots of wheat cut for hay gave the
results
Manure.
Supplying.
Weight
per acre.
No manure
Kainit
Phosphates
Kainit and phosphates
Kainit, lime, and phosphates
Ammonium sulphate
Kainit, ammonium sulphate,
phosphates, and lime.
Kainit, sulphate of ammonia
and phosphates.
Kainit, sulphate of ammonia,
and lime.
Sulphate of ammonia, phos-
phates, and lime.
Potash
Phosphoric acid ...
Potash and phosphoric acid
Potash, phosphoric-acid, and lime
Nitrogen ...
Potash, phosphoric acid, nitro-
gen, and lime.
Potash, nitrogen, and phosphoric
acid.
Potash, nitrogen, and lime
Nitrogen, lime, and phosphoric
acid.
cwt. qr. lb.
11 1 20
16 3 4
25 2 24
33 3 20
33 0 24
14 2 26
50 3 16
45 1 12
19 1 14
35 0 0
This experiment forms a practical analysis of the soil, and shows it to
be deficient in all the more important elements of plant food. This is seen
by comparing the yield obtained from plot 7 (with complete manure) with
the other nine plots to which various ingredients had been applied, but to
none of which a complete cereal manure had been given. For example.
compare the plots 7 and 9. Plot 7, with complete manure, yielded 2 tons
10 cwt. 3 qr. 16T lb.; plot 9, without phosporic acid, yielded 19 cwt.
Manurial
Experiment
Variety of crop.
on Peas —Season 1893.
Fertilizer used.
Yield
per acre.
Partridge pea
None.
25 lb. sulphate of ammonia
(Nitrogenous only).
30 lb. Kainit.
bus. lb.
7 20
8 40
10 lb. phosphates.
10 lb. bonedust.
20 lb. lime
(Mineral only).
30 lb. Kainit.
9 20
10 lb. phosphates.
10 lb. bonedust.
25 lb. sulphate of
ammonia.
20 lb. lime.
(Mineral and nitrogenous.)
12 0
