

POTSDAM POISON
W. LEWIS
PRICE SIXPENCE
Any profit resulting from the sale of this booklet
will be handed to the Red Cross Fund
SYDNEY
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD.




POTSDAM POISON.
Five-and-thirty years ago, as a youngster in
Canada, my business took me thrice yearly through
the county of Waterloo, in the province of Ontario.
Practically the entire population was then German,
either by birth or descent; in many districts, save
among the business and professional classes, no
language but German was spoken. Berlin is the
county town, while other names of places, Heidel-
berg, New Hamburg, Breslau, clearly mark their
origin. The county enjoyed the distinction of
possessing the best roads and finest farms in the
province. At that time, represented in both the
provincial Parliament and Dominion House of Com-
mons by men of German birth or extraction, their
loyalty to the country and flag of their adoption had
never been questioned. I recall the people as gentle,
kindly, hospitable folk—the very last to associate
with war and its crimes. Their limit in dissipation
was a glass of beer and a game of dominoes. The
remembrance of one delightful Sunday afternoon,
spent with a German family in the orchard beneath
the cherry trees, will never fade from my memory.
Whence comes this subtle poison that has so
changed and warped the German character? The
change is to me as incredible as it is, at first glance,
inexplicable. The German of to-day, arrogant,
boastful, truculent and withal suspicious, conveys
no suggestion of his earlier Canadian prototype, as
I knew him. When these unpleasant traits, which
are now generally recognised as characteristic, are
apparently absent from certain exceptional person-


alities, we are yet conscious of an uneasy suspicion
that such men are possibly but playing a part. Per-
haps the strangest development in the character of
this new German, certainly the most difficult to
understand, has been his ill-disguised animosity to
England and the English. This, to most of us, has
been incomprehensible. England has been Ger-
many’s best customer, her greatest colony. Over
fifteen per cent, of her total exports have found a
ready and convenient market in the United King-
dom. For years past London has swarmed with
German agents, who have found no obstacle placed
in the way of their business enterprises. The Eng-
lish persistence in a policy of free trade has afforded
the German unbridled license to unload the surplus
products of his country on the English market at
prices which have too often resulted in closing Eng-
lish factories, depriving of the means of sustenance
the men who are to-day occupying the firing line,
opposing with rifle and bayonet those same enemies
who, prior to the war, were laxly permitted to elbow
them out of their own industrial field. England’s
oversea dominions, created and fostered by her,
have been equally open to Germany, except for cer-
tain tariff preferences the colonies thought fair to
establish in favour of England, but never through
any suggestion from her. Yet, such is the per-
versity bred of self-deception and boundless arro-
gance that Germany doubtless has held the belief
that England’s persistence in her policy of free
trade was in reality due to her fear of Germany —a
fear that the adoption of a bold and aggressive pro-
tective policy would have precipitated the conflict
England dreaded. Germany can gain nothing, but
— - . —— . —■
/:• , : • - • - ~ . ' ' \ -; : „


has everything to lose by this war. The German
was made welcome in any part of the British
Dominions he chose to make his home; the hand of
friendship and hospitality was extended to him.
Until quite recently we in Australia believed in him.
We regarded him as a good neighbour and desirable
citizen. V/e were generous enough to view his
prosperity without envy. He may not believe it,
but we can say, without reservation, that we re-
joiced in his success. And, what has he given us in
return? This cruel and brutal war his nation has
thrust on us is an all-sufficient answer. To say that
Germany must have colonies, even at the expense
of her neighbours, is a proposition she could never
have expected to be entertained. The promotion
by the German Government of a movement for the
peaceful emigration of her surplus population to the
established colonies of a friendly country, would
have been a policy of wise and far-seeing states-
manship and would certainly have been welcomed
and even assisted by the Governments of Canada,
Australia, and New Zealand. The consistent pur-
suance of such a policy would have resulted in the
influence of much that we have willingly recognised
as admirable in the German character being un-
consciously absorbed by us, while the name of Ger-
many throughout these lands would have grown to
be identified with industry, thrift and all-round good
citizenship, instead of, as to-day, being a synonym
for all that is detestable. That such emigrants
would have been lost to the Fatherland is but
partially true. No man can ever forget the country
that gave him birth; the ties of memory and affec-
tion may only be sentimental, but they are none the


less human and powerful, and none have been
quicker and more sympathetic than Australians in
recognising this. Transplantation of this German
element to Australian soil, there to take root and
thrive, would have been an irreparable loss only to
the German military party. And the Potsdam
cabal has unhappily succeeded in impressing their
savage ideals on the German people as being the
only goal worthy of a national ambition. From the
moment that a nation puts military ideals on a
pedestal and surrounds that pedestal on bowed and
servile knees, that nation is doomed. Just to this
extent is Germany doomed. The triumph of
such ideals might have served to give Germany
temporary sway and domination in the tenth cen-
tury; in the twentieth the progress of mankind has
rendered such a consummation alike impossible and
revolting. The baleful light this war has shed on
German so-called culture will shortly vanish into
night; a night through which deluded Germany will
painfully grope to a bitter and long-delayed dawn.
Potsdam, since 1870, has striven sedulously to
create the impression that Germany’s victory in
that year has been the impelling cause for the great-
ness of the Germany of to-day, and now preaches,
as a sequence, that another and greater war, with a
greater victory as its corollary, must result in send-
ing forward Germany on her career of world domi-
nation, with a resistless impetus that will sweep all
obstacles from her path. The real impelling cause
for the rapid growth and wonderful development of
Germany since 1870 has, of late years, been care-
fully obscured and belittled to serve the ends of the
military party. The welding into one homogeneous


nation of the petty principalities that once com-
prised the German people —that achievement which
forms the crowning triumph of Bismarck’s career—
there will be found the all-sufficient cause of that
greater Germany at which we all have marvelled.
It was the triumph of the principle of Union. It
was the same principle that had its final victory in
the United States at the close of the Civil War in
1865. In that year the American nation, as we now
know it, was given a new birth. And when a
number of petty, bickering Canadian provinces con-
cluded to sink their differences and form one United
Dominion; on that day of July Ist, 1867, a slumber-
ing people woke and assumed their position as a new
and vigorous nation on the North American conti-
nent without the striking of a blow.
Coming to our own land and times—on the first
day of January, 1901, the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia came into being, and in the few short years
that have elapsed we have grown mightily. The
spirit of nationhood is abroad. To-day we have but
a tolerant smile for the man who calls himself a
Victorian or a New South Welshman—we are all
Australians.
In each instance cited it was the happy consum-
mation of the principle of Union that made great
and prosperous the people embracing it. There we
find the fertile root of the material growth of the
German Empire. Unhappily, no sooner had the pro-
paganda of the national benefits to be derived from
union served the purpose of the Prussian military
party, than that aspect of Germany’s fateful year
was gradually but surely subordinated to a new
conception born of the Potsdam school, and that


ultimately was made to fill the German mind to the
exclusion of all other national ideals, the conception
of Germany Over All. With every succeeding year
of prosperous, yet military-ridden, hence burden-
some peace, the powerful oligarchy that rules Ger-
many from Potsdam has realised it must ultimately
be called on by the people to excuse and defend its
continued survival and consequent oppression. The
object of this war, which was confidently expected
to be as overwhelmingly successful as it must prove
brief, was to demonstrate to the German people
that the supremacy of the Prussian military party
has been and will continue to be of vital necessity
to the triumphant march of the empire. Through
the narrowed outlook of the Potsdam eyeglass the
civil population of Germany represents just so
much material for waging war, their value for this
purpose being computable on the same basis with
guns and powder. Bismarck, with his policy of
blood and iron, later Bernhardi with his cold in-
culcation of the hideous doctrine of “war as an in-
dispensable agency in policy and civilisation,” voice
none too vividly the mental attitude of the entire
German military caste as expressed in the privacy
of their clubs, over their wine and cigars. Men
trained from boyhood in an atmosphere of military
schools and barracks, from which they rarely
emerge, by a simple process of cohesion combine
themselves into a close and exclusive mutual ad-
miration society which cannot possibly have the
faintest comprehension of, much less consideration
for, the hopes and aspirations of the world outside
their self-hypnotised circle. All through Bern-
hardi’s book we find an undercurrent of ill-restrained


resentment against even the mildest criticism of the
burdensome and steadily growing demands of the
military party. In that now notorious book—“ Ge-
rmany and the Next War”—he tells us—
“The Government will never be able to count
upon a well-armed and self-sacrificing people
if it calmly looks on while the warlike spirit is
being systematically undermined by the Press,
and a feeble peace policy preached.”
“It (the Government) must control a strong
and national (sic) Press, through which it must
present its views and aims vigorously and
openly.”
“It must continually point to the significance
and necessity of war as an indispensable agency
in policy and civilization.”
Bernhardi evidently has not heard and certainly
would not heed the wise old proverb: “He who
preaches war is chaplain to the devil.”
Bismarck, with greater though characteristic
daring, in 1876 proposed to introduce into the
Criminal Code a clause making it an offence punish-
able with two years imprisonment to attack uni-
versal military service.
Before leaving Bernhardi and his book we may
note his fatuous endeavour to enlist those gentle
and loveable poets, Goethe and Schiller as advocates
of militarism. The scrappy quotations he scatters
through his book are simply words placed by the
authors in the mouths of their characters, no more
indicative of the writers’ real convictions than
would lines from one of lago’s venomous speeches
be a true reflex of the mind of Shakespeare.
g ;:


The world will hold responsible for this war the
criminal military organization that has warped and
well-nigh djestroyed the true German spirit, the
spirit that gave us the sweet old folk tales of the
brothers Grimm, the poetry of Goethe and Schiller,
the music of Mozart and Beethoven. The syste-
matic deliberate poisoning of the mind of the people
has been carefully planned from Potsdam. Teachers
and Professors have received and now hold their
appointments by virtue of their subservience to the
powerful oligarchy which surrounds the Emperor
and which directs every step in the education and
consequent militarizing of the entire nation. To
borrow Von der Goltz’ boastful phrase, it is, in-
deed, A Nation in Arms, the cockatrice of Europe
whose malign and unclean spirit must be crushed
and utterly destroyed before a war-torn and
tortured world can realize a lasting peace.
Could we but scan the primary school histories of
Germany, we would find them a queer fanfaronade,
a weird recital of the impossible and incredible per-
formance of their national heroes, an amazing story
of the victories of Germany, forming a lurid back-
ground for her great and wondrous future, wherein
are pictured the triumphs in store for the German
people, will they but submit to be guided by their
military leaders.
The reverse of the shield—a possible defeat —has
never been presented to the German schoolboy.
German history prepared for his assimilation, while
magnifying his country’s triumphs, has correspond-
ingly minimised her failures.
The sufferings of France in her year of trial con-
vey no warning to the youth of Germany. Nor has


he ever been allowed to pause and consider that
France despoiled and in the dust, yet bravely
smiling through her tears, nobly striving to forget
her humiliation and defeat, has shown herself far
greater than when at the opening of the nineteenth
century she was at the height of her military glory.
Historical narrative, from whatever source
derived, is of necessity coloured by the birthplace,
education and subsequent environment of the
narrator. When the extent of that colouring can
be measurably gauged, just to that extent must
history be regarded as unreliable by the reader who
sincerely desires to sit in impartial judgment on the
past. When, as is the case with Germany, the story
of the nation is dictated by a group of men who
have for their sole object the aggrandisement of
militarism, we may but dimly conceive the extent
to which the opening mind of the nation has been
poisoned. We may well believe that in Germany
at this moment the toddling babe at its mother’s
knee, with wondering eyes and lisping accents, is
being taught Lissauer’s Hymn of Hate. It will
need generations of a disillusionised and peaceful
Germany to undo the evil militaristic Germany has
wrought. To learn once more that the triumphs of
peace are greater far than those of war. That the
work of the student in the quiet of the laboratory
may achieve results that will ring down the cor-
ridors of time long after the thunders of Krupp’s
workshops are silenced and forgotten. War is said
to make heroes. So too does incendiarism—of the
firemen. Germany to-day stands revealed as the
World’s Incendiary. But the flames kindled by her
will yet be quenched while she may not escape her
full meed of punishment.


ONE AMERICAN VIEW OF “NEUTRALITY.”
Being the Preface to his book, “ With the Allies,”
by Richard Harding Davis, War Corres-
pondent with the Allies, of the Wheeler
Syndicate of Newspapers and the London
“Daily Chronicle.” Author of “The Bar
Sinister.”
I have not seen the letter addressed by Presi-
dent Wilson to the American people calling upon
them to preserve toward this war the mental atti-
tude of neutrals. But I have seen the war. And
I feel sure had President Wilson seen my war he
would not have written his letter.
This is not a war against Germans, as we know
Germans in America, where they are among our
sanest, most industrious, and most responsible
fellow countrymen. It is a war, as Winston
Churchill has pointed out, against the military
aristocracy of Germany, men who are six hundred
years behind the times; who, to preserve their class
against democracy, have perverted to the uses of
warfare, to the destruction of life, every invention
of modern times. These men are military mad.
To our ideal of representative government their
own idea is as far opposed as is martial law to the
free speech of our own town meetings.
One returning from the war is astonished to
find how little of the true horror of it crosses the
ocean. That this is so is due partly to the strict
censorship that suppresses the details of the war,


and partly to the fact that the mind is not accus-
tomed to consider misery on a scale so gigantic.
The loss of hundreds of thousands of lives, the
wrecking of cities, and the laying waste of half of
Europe cannot be brought home to people who
learn of it only through newspapers and moving
pictures and by sticking pins in a map. Were
they nearer to it, near enough to see the women
and children fleeing from the shells and to smell
the dead on the battle-fields, there would be no
talk of neutrality.
Such lack of understanding our remoteness from
the actual seat of war explains. But on the part
of many Americans one finds another attitude of
mind which is more difficult to explain. It is the
cupidity that in the misfortunes of others sees
only a chance for profit. In an offer made to its
readers a prominent American magazine best ex-
presses this attitude. It promises prizes for the
essays on “What the war means to me.”
To the American women Miss Ida M, Tarbell
writes: “This is her time to learn what her own
country’s industries can dio, and to rally with all
her influence to their support, urging them to make
the things she wants, and pledging them her
allegiance.”
This appeal is used in a periodical with a circu-
lation o£ ever a million, as an advertisement for
silk hose. Ido not agree with Miss Tarbell that
this is the time to rally to the support of home
industries. Ido not agree with the advertiser that
when in Belgium several million women and
children are homeless, starving, and naked that that


is the time to buy his silk hose. To urge that
charity begins at home is to repeat one of the most
selfish axioms ever uttered, and in this war to urge
civilized, thinking people to remain neutral is
equally selfish.
Were the conflict in Europe a fair fight, the duty
of every American would be to keep on the side-
lines and preserve an open mind. But it is not
a fair fight. To devastate a country you have
sworn to protect, to drop bombs upon unfortified
cities, to lay sunken minds, to levy blackmail by
threatening hostages with death, to destroy
cathedrals is not to fight fair.
That is the way Germany is fighting. She is
defying the rules of war and the rules of humanity.
And if public opinion is to help in preventing
further outrages, and in hastening this unspeak-
able conflict to an end, it should be directed
against the one who offends. If we are convinced
that one opponent is fighting honestly and that his
adversary is striking below the belt, then for us
to maintain a neutral attitude of mind is un-
worthy and the attitude of a coward.
When a mad dog runs amuck in a village it is
the duty of every farmer to get his gun and destroy
it, not to lock himself indoors and toward the dog
and the men who face him preserve a neutral mind.
RICHARD HARDING DAVIS,
W. C. Penfold & Co. I<td., Printers, Sydney,
