

SOUTH AUSTRALIAN RAILWAYS.
PRACTICAL QUESTIONS
FOR
ENGINEMEN and FIREMEN.
ADELAIDE: R. E. E. ROGERS. GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORTH TERRACE.
1913.
ADELAIDE, JANUARY, 1913.




SOUTH AUSTRALIAN RAILWAYS.
PRACTICAL QUESTIONS
FOR
ENGINEMEN and FIREMEN.
ADELAIDE: R. E. E. ROGERS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORTH TERRACE.
I9 X -
ADELAIDE, JANUARY, 1913.


PREFACE.
This Book has been printed with the object of giving
young Enginemen and Firemen such knowledge as will
assist them in successful working and economical manage-
ment of their engines.


PRACTICAL QUESTIONS FOR ENGINEMEN AND FIREMEN.
1. Q. —What are the first things an engineman should see to on taking charge of his engine in the shed
before going out for his train ?
A . —He should examine and work the water-gauge and test cocks to see that there is a proper quantity
of water in the boiler, and make sure that the gauge is working correctly, and not showing false water.
He should see what pressure of steam there is, and notice the state of the fire. He should also examine his
engine carefully, and assure himself that the air-pump and injectors are in good working order.
2. Q. —If he finds anything wrong with the water, or that the engine is likely to be late in steam, what
should he do 1
A. —After taking the necessary steps to ensure the safety of the boiler, he should call the attention
of the Foreman to the matter at once, as the responsibility of the Shed Staff ceases from the time the driver
takes charge of the engine.
3. Q. —Before leaving the shed, what else has a driver to do ?
A. —He has to consult the Running Daily Sheet, Notice Board, and Case, and note any changes
that have been made concerning him ; also take all Special Orders, Speed Notices, &0., concerning the line
over which he has to travel.


4. Q. —Describe how a driver should examine his engine ?
A. —He should begin at one particular place, and go round the whole engine systematically. If
he goes wandering about from one part to another, he is liable to forget what he has examined and what
he has missed.
5. Q. —Suppose he commences at the leading end of the engine on his own side, how should he proceed ?
A. —He should pass along from leading end of engine to trailing end of tender, then across the
back, then along the fireman’s side to the leading end, and then go under the engine, and should make it
a rule to let nothing escape his notice.
6. Q. —What is the best position in which to set the engine before examining underneath ?
A. —The engine should be set with both cranks down. The regulator must be shut, and the engine
placed in middle gear, with the hand-brakes on and the cylinder-cocks open.
7. Q. —What parts require special attention in examining an engine ?
A. —The glands and their nuts, all set screws, big-end and eccentric bolts, all cotters, split-pins,
springs, brake gear, &c.


8. Q. —What parts of the automatic brake fittings should the driver particularly examine 1
A. —He should see that the hose-pipe couplings are free from defects, and properly fixed to the
dummy couplings provided for the purpose ; he should also see that the air-pump is properly lubricated,
and all the joints tight, and that the water that accumulates in the main reservoir is regularly drained.
9. Q. —Is it necessary to go underneath the tender, as part of the regular examination, before leaving
the shed ?
H.—Yes ; the brake gear, the springs, pins and pillars, the couplings between engine and tender, &c.,
are liable to fail if neglected.
10. Q. —Mention some other points that a driver should see to before leaving the shed ?
A. —He should make sure that he has a proper supply of coal, water, and stores ; that the sand-
boxes on both engine and tender are full of dry sand and in good working order, the ash-pan raked out,
the smoke-box cleared of ashes, and the door properly shut, and that the ash-pan cages are in proper position
and the spark arresters in good order, also that the necessary tools-—discs, lamps, slides, &c.- -are provided.
He must also see that'the fireman is attending to his part of the work.
11. Q. —What are the fireman’s duties on joining his engine in the shed ?
A. —The fireman should try the water-gauge and test-cocks, and notice the pressure directly he
gets on the footplate, and if he finds anything wrong with the water or state of the fire, he should immediately
inform the driver, or act as described in answer to Question 2. He should then unlock the boxes and obtain
his shovel, oilcans, handbrush, &c., and proceed at once to make up his fire.


12. Q. —How do you make up a fire ?
A. —To make up a good fire, coal should be put on sufficiently long before train time as will allow
the fire to burn through, and it should be thickest under the door and in the back corners ; the fire should
be thinnest in the middle of the box.
13. Q. —In addition to giving proper attention to his fire, what other duties should a fireman perform ?
A. —He should clean up his footplate, see that all the sandboxes are full, that the sand valves work
properly, that the sand is not damp, that the ash-pan is clear of ashes, and do such oiling as the driver may
entrust him with.
14. Q. —What should a driver’s first thought be when running ?
A. —The safety of his train.
15. Q. —In what condition should the engine be before starting with a train ?
A. —The fire should be well burned through, the boiler moderately full of water, the steam pressure
near the blowing-ofi point, and all bearings oiled.
16. Q. —Do drivers sometimes fill up their boilers too high before starting ?
A. —Yes, some men do so ; but it is a great mistake, because when the regulator is opened the
engine works the first few strokes with hot water instead of steam, and this takes all the lubrication off
the valve-faces and from the cylinders, making the engine work stiffly, and preventing her from pulling
what she would do if properly handled.


17. Q. Is it good management to have the engine blowing off hard when waiting for a train ?
A. —No ; this can be altogether avoided if the driver takes care in the matter, and uses his dampers
and injectors with judgment. If the dampers do not fit tightly, it is generally the driver’s fault for not
booking them and getting them put right. All steam blown off through the safety-valves is so much coal
blown away for nothing, and should be avoided, whether standing or running.
18. Q. —When fairly started, should steam be shut off before pulling up the reversing-gear ?
A. —No : steam should not be completely shut off. If the screw or lever works stiffly, the regulator
should be eased. The practice of shutting off steam to pull up the reversing-gear, and then putting it on
again, is injurious to the engine, severe on the draw-gear, and causes discomfort to passengers.
19. Q. —Why is it advisable when commencing a trip to let the engine work in full gear for a short
distance ?
A. —ln order to make the cylinders, &c., thoroughly hot. If the valve-travel is reduced before
this is done the expanding steam is condensed, and not only is the engine disfigured by the dirty water
thrown from the chimney, but the engine commences its work with the disadvantage of having the lubrication
washed off its cylinders and valve-faces.
20. Q. —Is any care required about opening cylinder-cocks ?
A. —Yes. This should be done judiciously, so as not to obscure the view of the road in front, or
startle horses or passengers at crossings, or endanger the safety of employes. The cocks should be open
B


and the engine worked in full gear from the time it leaves the shed until it joins the train, and as far as
possible the cocks should not be open when starting from a station.
21. Q. —Do you know how to keep the steam-chest and cylinders warm when having to wait some time,
for a train ?
A.— Yes; this can be done by putting on the brakes and opening the cocks, then opening the
regulator very slightly, just sufficient to let a breath of steam blow through, but not enough to raise a cloud
of steam about the buffer plank ; the engine being reversed occasionally.
22. Q. —What should be the condition of the fire when running ?
A. —As a general rule the fire should be heaviest round the sides of the box, particularly in the
corners and under the door, and thin in the middle. It is, however, found that the various qualities of coal
used, combined with the different designs of fireboxes, call for variation in the method of making the fire ;
this can best be ascertained in practice.
23. Q. —Do different coals require different treatment in the method of firing ?
A. —Yes ; the northern coal of New South Wales, being generally of a more bituminous nature
than western, requires to be fired frequently, and the fire should be kept thin. In the case of the western
coal, different treatment is required, this coal being of a hard, semi-bituminous nature, and generally large ;
the best results are obtained from a moderately heavy fire ; frequent firing is not ap necessary, but in greater
quantity than with northern coal, as its combustion is slower. The South Coast coal requires different


treatment from either of the two above mentioned ; it is of a more bituminous nature than western, but
not equal in this respect to the northern coal ; the fire should be carried a little heavier than with northern
coal, and not so heavy as with western coal. To obtain the best results from any of these coals requires
careful study, as it is found that different coals, even from the same district, require different treatment.
Some contain a great deal of gas, and it is necessary to admit a greater quantity of air over the fire to
effectively burn it. A fireman who gives this subject proper study will not only save fuel but will save
his own labor.
24. Q. —Should a train engine be fired when standing at a station ?
A. —As far as possible train engines should only be fired when running, and with steam on.
25. Q. —When an engine is standing pilot, or in the case of a shunting engine, it is sometimes necessary
to fire while, the engine is standing. How do you manage then so as to prevent smoke ?
A ■ —By firing round the sides of the box and leaving a large part of the middle of the fire bright
and by not putting too much coal on at once.
26. Q. —How can the emission of smoke from the chimney be greatly reduced or prevented when
standing at stations ?
A. —By closing the dampers and admitting air at the fire-door ; also, by opening the jet moderately.


27. Q. —Is it necessary to prevent smoke when running ?
A. —Yes ; it is desirable to prevent the emission of smoke at all times, as it is the result of imperfect
combustion and indicates waste. This can be avoided by the admission of air at the fire-door, and the
proper maintenance of the brick arch and the baffle-plates. The emission of smoke in tunnels should
especially be avoided, by building up the fire in sufficient time before entering the tunnel to admit of the
heavy gases being burned off, and so avoid the necessity for putting a fresh supply of coal on in the tunnel.
28. Q. —How should the fire be managed towards the end of the run, or when finishing the day’s work ?
A. —The driver should be able to judge when there is enough fire on to finish with, and instruct
the fireman accordingly ; the fire should then be levelled and pushed into the corners as it burns down ;
if a little more steam is wanted, a shovelful or two of small coal can be scattered over the box.
29. Q. —Is it a good plan to rake the ashes off the top of the brick arch just before finishing ?
A. —Yes ; this should always be done where the construction of the arch will admit of it; if the
ashes are left on the arch it is liable to make the tubes leak, particularly when any of them are inclined
to do so. Great care should, however, be exercised in doing this, in order to avoid damage to the brick
arch or tube plate by rough use of the rake.
30. Q. —Is it necessary to oil the engine at every stopping-station ?
A. —No ; for an engine in good order, with the trimmings properly adjusted, frequent oiling is
not necessary. Every opportunity should, however, be taken advantage of to feel the different parts, to


see if they are running cool, and to notice that the oil is feeding properly. Frequent oiling indicates a
want of adjustment of the trimmings, and leads to waste of oil.
31. Q. —What is the best way to work an injector ?
A. —When adjustable it should be set to supply as much water as the engine is using, so as to be
kept almost constantly at work ; this is important on long runs. If an injector has been shut off, it should
not be put on just before firing, but the engine should be fired first, and the injector put on afterwards.
It is important also to keep the injector steam cock closed when the injectors are not in use, otherwise the
steam remains in contact with the injector, thus injuring the cones and increasing the risk of failure when
required. The injector on the fireman’s side should be used generally, but the one on the engineman’s
side should be used occasionally each journey to ensure both being kept in working order.
32. Q. —In working a stopping train (particularly if it is a light train) the injector cannot always be
kept on ; what is the best way to work then ?
A. —Arrange matters so as to have the injector on when steam is shut off to stop, and while at the
station ; shut it off just before starting, and fire between stations.
33. Q. —What are the principal causes of injector failures ?
A. — Failures are frequently due to the injector or feedpipe becoming hot, and sometimes through
the strainers becoming choked with foreign matter ; also, through the lapping on the injector spindles
failing, or drawing air at the joints of feedpipe. All of these defects can be detected and remedied by the
driver, if his examination has been a careful one. It is advisable to test the injectors before leaving the


shed ; and the strainers in the feedpipe should he examined frequently to see that they are free from any
obstruction. Should the water in the feedpipe become hot, and so prevent the working of the injector,
it must be allowed to escape, either by uncoupling the hosepipe or by opening the tap, where one is provided
for the purpose.
34. Q. —Are there any other causes which contribute to injector failures ?
A. —Yes ; they sometimes fail through the top clack-valve blowing back. This can, in most cases,
be remedied by pouring cold water over the clack, and tapping it gently with a lead hammer or piece of
wood. Care should be taken, however, not to disfigure the clackbox.
35. Q. —Is extra care required to keep up the supply of water in the boiler when working over steep
grades ?
A. - Yes ; it is of the utmost importance to see that the supply of water in the boiler is maintained
so as to cover the firebox crown-sheet and tubes sufficiently when working over steep inclines. If the
supply of water in the boiler is allowed to get low when ascending a grade, the front end of the tubes will
be exposed to the fire, and when the top of the grade is reached, or the engine commences to descend the
succeeding grade, the crown-sheet of firebox will not be sufficiently covered with water to protect it from
the fire. In this way boilers are sometimes damaged, and serious risk is involved. When difficulty is met
with for want of steam in ascending a grade, it is always better to stop for a few' minutes to raise steam than
to run risk by keeping up the pressure at the expense of water in the boiler. The accompanying diagrams
indicate the water levels to be maintained in the boilers of a few of the largest locomotives when working
under such conditions, and should be carefully studied.


Diagram water levels,
Engine class R *


Diagram showing wafer levels,
Engine cl ass S


Diagram sho wing wa ter leve ls,
Eng ine class Q.
c


Diagram showing wafer levels,
Engine class T,


Diagram Showing water levels.
Engine class Y * .


Diagram showing water levels.
Engine class Y.


Diagram showing wafer levels.
Engine class N.


Diagram showing wafer levels.
Engine clas s K.


Diagram showing water levels,
Engine c lass Z.


Diagram showing wafer levels.
Engine class.


36. Q. —What attention should be given to the Westinghouse brake ?
A. —Drivers and firemen should give this subject special attention, by carefully studying the
instructions contained in the Appendix to the Working Time Table and the Westinghouse pamphlet
descriptive of its use and management. When coupling the engine to the train it is most important to see
that the brake coupling on the engine is properly connected with that of the train, and that the cocks in
the brakepipe are open, except the one at the rear of the train. When working trains down long inclines
special care is required to see that the maximum air pressure obtains before commencing the descent; and
the brake should be worked in such a way as to avoid any waste of air. This can be done by applying the
brake with only sufficient force to control the speed of the train, and so avoid the necessity for frequent
application and release of the brake. When running or standing, however, the air brake should not be
kept continuously applied for more than 10 minutes, and when standing on a gradient the train should be
held as far as possible by means of the hand brakes.
37. Q. —Is it possible to notice any difference between drivers in the simple matter of putting an engine
on a turntable or stopping opposite a water column ?
A. —Yes ; a careful man knows exactly where to stop on the table or at the column, having
noticed what part of his engine comes opposite a certain part of the table or platform, as the case may be ;
he is thus able to stop quietly and easily, just at the right place. The turntable should always be held
down at the end from which the engine approaches, so as to avoid damage to the table. The fireman should
do this.


38. Q. —At the end of a day’s work, should a driver examine his engine ?
A. —Yes ; he should examine the engine and tender to see if any repairs are required, or bearings
inclined to heat.
39. Q.~-Yhat should the driver attend to after finishing his trip, before leaving the shed ?
A. —He should enter any repairs required to his engine or tender in the repair book, look at the
running notice case to see what other trains he is booked to run, or other duty for that or the following
day. If anything unusual has occurred on the journey, he should enter same on his daily report sheet
and leave it in the appointed place before going off duty.
40. Q. —What is meant in speaking of a right-hand crank engine or a left-hand crank engine ?
A. —A right-hand crank engine is one in which the right crank leads, and a left-hand crank engine
is one in which the left crank leads, when moving forward.
41. Q. —What do you mean by the right crank leading or the left crank leading, with reference to
forward gear ?
A. —When the engine is standing with one crank on the back centre (that is, pointing towards the
firebox), and the other on the top centre (that is, pointing towards the boiler), if the right crank is on the
top centre the right crank leads ; but if it is the left crank which is on the top centre, then the left crank
leads.


42. Q. —Explain how you would test the valves and pistons ?
A. —Place the engine with the right crank down at a right angle to the centre line of the piston
rod and cylinder. In this position the right piston head will be very near the centre of the cylinder ; and
it is evident that in full forward gear the right front port must be about full open to admit steam to the
front of the piston ; that in full back gear the back port must be about full open to admit steam to the
back of the piston ; and in middle gear the right valve must be about the centre of its travel or stroke, and
therefore overlapping both ports. Then put the brakes on hard, open the cylinder-cocks, place the lever
in middle gear, and apply steam, and if no steam issues from the right cylinder-cocks the valve on that side
may be considered tight. Put the lever in full forward gear, apply steam as before, and if no steam issues
from the back cylinder-cock the piston on that side is tight. By putting the lever in full back gear, applying
steam as before, and observing whether any steam issues from the front cylinder-cock, the piston will be
tested from the back, but this is scarcely necessary. Then move the engine until the left crank is down
in the same position as that described above for the right crank, and proceed to test the valve and piston
on the left side. In middle gear the left valve will be tested. In full forward gear the left piston will be
tested from the front, and in full back gear from the back.
43. Q. —What is the difference between a plug-trimming and a tail-trimming ?
A. —-A plug-trimming is one that only feeds when the engine is running, and is used for those parts
that have sufficient motion to shake the oil over the top of the syphon-pipe, such as big ends and outside
rods, eccentrics, &c. A tail-trimming is always feeding (so long as there is oil in the cup), and is used for
those parts of the engine which are steady, such as slide-bar oil cups, &c. A plug-trimming is made by


wrapping worsted over a piece of twisted wire in the usual way, and when in use the top of it should he a
little below the top of the syphon-pipe ; the lower end should be clear of the journal. A tail-trimming is
made by taking several strands of worsted and passing them through a loop at the end of a piece of wire,
then dropping the wire and worsted down the syphon-pipe, allowing the ends of the worsted to hang over
the top of the pipe into the oil. The wire ends should be spread at the top to prevent the trimming going
down too far, and the worsted covering should be of sufficient thickness in the pipe to avoid waste of oil.
All tail-trimmings that are accessible should be drawn after the day’s work, and so stop waste of oil. All
trimmings require to be removed and examined occasionally, as they are apt to become clogged by impurities
in the oil.
44. Q. —Describe how to repack a gland ?
A. —Set the engine so that the gland can be drawn clear of the stuffing-box, remove the nuts
(placing them out of the way, and yet so that they can be got at when wanted), and draw back the gland ;
then clean out all the old packing if necessary, using a tool for this purpose. All packing should be inserted
in single rings breaking the joints.
45. Q. —What are the two most important things to attend to in screwing up a gland ?
A. —To see that the gland stands square with the rod, and to have the nuts well locked.
46. Q. —Is it necessary to screw glands up as tight as they will go ?
A. —No ; so long as the packing is elastic and properly lubricated, screwing up with the fingers is
almost sufficient; and any screwing up beyond what is enough to prevent blowing makes the engine run
stiffly, and often results in the packing being destroyed, or the rod overheated.


46a. Q. — How should metallic packing be treated ?
A. —Care should be taken in screwing up glands packed with metallic packing, particularly when
cold, otherwise if screwed up tight, when the engine commences work there is no room for expansion, the
result being that owing to the expansion undue friction is caused by the piston rod, with the result that the
metal becomes heated and fuses, running into cylinder and cause damage.
47. Q. —When a boiler requires washing out, how should it be cooled down for the purpose '?
A. —The water should never be blown off until the brick arch has cooled down, so as to prevent
damage to the fire box. The wash-out plugs and mud-hole doors should then be removed ; dampers opened
and fire-door and smoke-box door closed, so as to admit of a current of air passing through the tubes and
up the chimney.
48. Q. —What special attention is required when washing out a boiler ?
A. —All wash-out plugs should be removed, and mud-hole doors taken off, and the boilers thoroughly
washed out, care being taken to remove all loose scale and sediment from the top of the crown-sheets, and
from the barrel of the boiler, also from the water spaces of the fire-box at the foundation ring. When
this is done the mud-hole door and plugs should be carefully replaced, care being taken to make the joints
good, and not to put the plugs in cross-threaded. Cold water should not be put in to any boiler within
eight hours after the fire is drawn. The plugs of the glass gauge columns and test cocks should be removed,
and all the passages into the boiler should be thoroughly cleared out.


49. Q. —One engine will steam well, and another of the same class, although, to all appearance, exactly
like it in every respect, will steam badly ; what is frequently the cause of this ?
A. —A slight difference in the set of the blast pipe with regard to the chimney will often account
for this. The blast should be directed fair up the middle of the chimney ; if at all on one side, the steaming
quality will be affected.
50. Q. —What is the best way to see if the blast pipe is right in this respect ?
A. —Get on the top of boiler and look into the chimney. If the soot inside top of chimney presents
the same appearance all round, the blast pipe is set fair ; but if the soot is denser on one side and scored
on the other, it shows that the blast pipe is directed to the side which looks the most scored.
51. Q. —Do engines fail in steam from other causes ?
A. —Engines frequently fail in steam owing to the tubes and spark arresters becoming dirty ; the
smoke box drawing air ; the deflector plate not being properly adjusted ; also the brick arch out of order.
52. Q. —If a driver wants to clean the inside of a gauge glass before putting it in should he use wire
for the purpose ?
A. —No ; a piece of wood should be used ; some gauge-glasses will break a few hours after being
rubbed inside with a metallic wire.
53. Q. —How would you cut a gauge-glass to the required length ?
A. —Mark it the required length, then file it well round on the outside, or take a small file and scratch
round on the inside of glass and break it off sharply.


54. Q. —Is any care required in taking out or replacing the plugs of gauge cocks, blow-off cocks, wash-
out plugs, &c. ?
A. —Yes ; care should be taken not to disfigure the brass or to bend or strain any part. If a driver
finds that any of the fittings cannot be moved with reasonable force, he should get one of the shed fitters
to assist him, rather than put a piece of pipe on the spanner, and pull or hammer it till he breaks some-
thing. Nothing looks worse than battered brasswork about the boiler front. Care should be taken to use
spanners of the proper size, so that the corners of the nuts or plugs are not injured.
55. Q. —Is it a sign of a good driver when his tool boxes are dirty and full of rusty spanners, old nuts,
bits of iron, and other rubbish ?
A.— No ;on the contrary. The tool boxes should be regularly overhauled and kept clear of all
rubbish. A driver should always insist on his fireman keeping the boxes clean and neat.
56. Q. —May a clean footplate and boiler front be considered as indicating a driver and fireman who
take a pride in their work ?
A. —Yes ; the footplate or boiler front will be more or less dirty after a hard trip ; but when an
engine has a dirty boiler front and untidy footplate it is generally a sign of a negligent driver and fireman.
57. Q. —When washing out a boiler, is it a good plan to leave the hose-pipe nozzle in the plug hole and
the water running ?
A. —No ; running water through a boiler does no good, unless the wash-out rods are worked at the
same time—to say nothing of the waste of water.


58. Q. —Should a wash-out hose-pipe be thrown down off the footplate, or dragged along the shed
floor, or propped up with the sharp edge of a hydrant-pan or fire bar ?
A. — No ; throwing a hose pipe off the footplate damages the nozzle ; dragging it along the shed
floor cuts off the rivet heads, and propping up with the edge of a hydrant cover or firebar cuts the hose.
They are expensive appliances, and every care should be taken of them. When done with they should
be rolled up, with the rivets on the outside, and taken to the place appointed for that purpose.
59. Q. —If an engine breaks down from any cause, while running, what should the driver do ?
A. —He should stop at once, and, having ascertained what is wrong, take proper steps to see that
his train or engine is protected ; then get the engine into working order, so as to take the train forward
with as little delay as possible, or if the failure is of such a character as to disable the engine completely,
or such as would involve more time in effecting repairs than would be occupied in getting assistance, in
either such case, advice should be sent to the nearest station from which assistance can be obtained.
60. Q. —When an engine or tender has been got on after having been off the road, what things should
a driver be specially careful about ?
A.— He should in all cases, when possible, have the wheels gauged, no matter whether the derail-
ment has been an easy one or not ; he should see that his springs and pins and hangers are all right, and
that no bits of iron packing have been left about the axle-boxes. Where his tender-boxes are lubricated
from below, he should take off the axle-box front cover and ascertain that the brasses are right, and that
the packing or pad has not been flattened down by the journal dropping in the box when the wheel was
off the rail.


61. Q. —When a driver has to wire for assistance in consequence of a breakdown, or from any other
cause, what should he bear in mind in writing his telegram ?
A. —He should remember that the man to whom he is telegraphing knows nothing about the case,
and that, therefore, he should make the telegram as clear as possible. If his enigne is off the rails he should
say how many wheels are off, and give the position of the engine, whether foul of either main line, &c., and
generally give full information which will be of use to those sending assistance. Five minutes spent in
writing an explicit telegram may be the means of saving five hours afterwards. If his engine fails within
easy reach of a depot, he should wire for a fitter or the foreman.
62. Q. —Mention a few of the principal causes of engine failures on the road ?
A. —Burst tube ; broken connecting, coupling, eccentric, or piston rod ; cotters working out of big
end, little end, or valve spindle ; motion pins working out; big or little end running hot; broken slide
valve tyre, crank axle, or crank pin ; broken spring links ; injector failures, &c.
63. Q. —When a tube bursts, what is the right thing to do %
A. —Put on both injectors, so as to keep the boiler well supplied with water, and at the same time
reduce the pressure, and if you can manage to get under the protection of signals before you stop, so much
the better. The burst tube should be plugged as quickly as possible at the fire-box end first. The water
will generally' damp the fire sufficiently ; but if the fracture is near the smoke box, the bulk of the water
may go that way, and the driver must be prepared to pull the fire back and damp it if necessary.


64. Q. —If a tube plug blows under full steam pressure, is it advisable to try and tighten it ?
A. —No ; the boiler pressure should be reduced. Remember that when the full pressure is at the
back of the plug, the hammer may cause it to start and blow out.
65. Q. —If no iron tube plugs are at hand, need a driver wait for assistance ?
A. —No ; a couple of wooden plugs cut to fit the tube, and well driven in, will enable the engine
to be worked home.
66. Q. —In the case of a broken coupling-rod, what should be done ?
A.— After taking down the pieces of the broken rod the corresponding rod on the other side of the
engine must also be removed ; if this is neglected the rod will be doubled up and broken before the engine
has run very far. With a six-wheel coupled engine, outside cylinders, special care is required to prevent
further damage through the leading crank pin striking the cross-head cotters. With four-wheel coupled
outside cylinder engines the connecting rod brasses should be replaced on the driving crank-pin, and secured
there with the spring clip or rope so as to prevent the big end from leaving its bearing. When about to
uncouple any part of the engine it is a good thing to take your bucket down ; this does to carry nuts, washers,
pins, or tools, instead of laying them about on the ballast. (See No. 67 and answer underneath.)
67. Q.-~ -Describe what to do when anything breaks between the piston and the crank, such as a piston-
rod, a connecting-rod, or little end strap ?
A. —When any of these break, the right thing to do is to uncouple and work one side. Tims,
suppose the right little-end strap to be broken, take down the connecting-rod and disconnect the right


valve. If there is an intermediate valve spindle or pulling link which can be got out, that is generally the
quickest and best way to disconnect the valve ; but if this cannot be done, the eccentric rods and straps
on right side must be taken down. Then set the valve in the middle of its travel (this will cover all ports),
and secure it there so as to prevent movement either way, by employing wood, and wire, or tarband between
the gland, the cross-head, or cotter. Having done this, pick up the parts of the motion and put them on
the tender, whistle for the guard (if he has gone back), and then start the train. For outside cylinder engines,
when the connecting-rod journal is on the outside of the crank pin, it is also necessary to replace the con-
necting-rod brasses, or fix blocks of wood, on the journal, and lash them in place with wire or rope, or fasten
them with a spring clip, so as to prevent the coupling rod on the disconnected side leaving its bearing.
68. Q. —Is it necessary to secure the piston in a case such as described above ?
A. —Yes ; this should always be done, excepting in cases where the piston has plunged forward
through the front cylinder head, and fastened itself in that position.
69. Q. —How do you secure the piston ?
A. —Push it up to one end of the cylinder, and then put a piece of wood between the slide blocks and
end of the slide bars, and lash it there, so as to secure the cross head and piston. It is generally better to
pull the cross head out as far as it will come, and then put the blocking in between the cylinder cover
and front of slide blocks, A suitable piece of hardwood, cut to the proper length, should always be
carried.


70. Q. —How can you tell whether the valve is properly set so as to cover all three ports ?
A. —By opening the cylinder cocks and then putting on a little steam. If it blows through, the
valve is not right, and should be shifted either forward or back, as indicated by the escape of steam. A
thoughtful driver will always have in his tool box a small piece of iron or wood cut to the right length, so
that by putting it against the steam chest and noticing where the front of the valve spindle cross-head
comes when in the middle of its stroke, he will be able to set the valve right at once on the darkest night.
It does not take long to prepare such a gauge for any engine when the valves are being examined, and no
driver should be without one.
71. Q. —Is there any reason why an engine should not be run at full speed when working only one side ?
A. —No ; an engine working one side is only half as powerful as it was before ; but there is no
reason why, with special care, it should not be put well into gear and made to work hard. In estimating
the load that can be taken under these conditions, consideration should be given to the weight of the engine
and tender as forming part of the load.
72. Q. —If a valve spindle gets bent or doubled up so that the valve cannot be shifted, what is to be
done then ?
A.— Uncouple that side of the engine (as described before) and notice whether the valve spindle
stands in or out, then secure the piston with the rod either in or out, the same as the valve spindle stands.
Thus, if the valve spindle is out, the front port is uncovered ; then pull the cross head out and back as far
towards the motion plate as it will go, and secure the piston there by lashing a piece of wood between the
cylinder cover and the slide blocks.


73. Q. —If an eccentric rod breaks, what can be done ?
A. —The connecting-rod, and both eccentric-rods with their straps, on the disabled side, should
be taken off, and the piston should be made secure ; also the valve on the disabled side should be placed
over the ports, and made secure, as previously described. If, however, the distance to be run is short, it may
be possible to go on without damage to the piston, and without taking the connecting-rod off; but care
should be taken to lubricate the piston where provision exists.
74. Q. —If an eccentric-strap bolt breaks, or the nuts work off and it is lost, what should be done ?
A. —The spare bolt, which should always be at hand, should be used to replace the missing one. If
however, the spare bolt is not available, the bottom bolt can be taken from one of the backward gear straps,
and used as a temporary measure ; and, with the reversing screw in full forward gear, the engine can then
be moved cautiously to the next station or siding, where repairs of a more permanent character can be
effected. If the engine is working tender first, the same rule can be followed by taking a bolt from one of
the forward gear straps. In this way any serious block to traffic may be avoided.
75. Q. —What should be done in the event of a slide-valve breaking ?
A. —lf the breakage of the valve is such as not to prevent the steam and exhaust ports being covered
by the broken valve, the disabled side of the engine should be disconnected, the ports closed by the valve,
and the engine worked with one side only.
If a flange is broken off completely or nearly so, so that all the steam and exhaust ports cannot be
covered, the valve should be disconnected and pulled right back if it is a front flange that has broken off,
and the piston also pulled back, and both the and piston secured. If it is a back flange that has


broken off, the valve should be pushed full forward, the piston also being pushed full forward, and both
valve and piston carefully secured. The connecting and eccentric rods on the disabled side of the engine
being taken down, the engine can then be worked with one side only.
If the valve breaks across so that the exhaust port cannot be covered, the engine will be disabled
and assistance must be sent for.
76. Q. —If the regulator becomes uncoupled, so that steam cannot be shut off, is it necessary to stop
and give up the train ?
A. —No ; the engine can be worked with the reversing gear by putting it into middle gear, or partly
into back gear, when about to stop. But under such conditions it will be well to reduce the boiler pressure
and wire for immediate assistance.
77. Q. —What is the best thing to do in the case of a broken tyre ?
A. —lf it is a clip tyre, and only cracked across, the engine may be run cautiously till another engine
can be got to take on the train. If cracked across, but not a clip tyre, the engine can be run very slowly
to the nearest station, but care must be taken to see that the tyre does not get any worse. Drivers should
examine their tyres frequently.
78. Q. —What is to be done with a broken crank-axle or driving-axle ?
A. —This generally disables the engine altogether ; but the driver can always save time by beginning
to uncouple at once, and by getting as much done as he can by the time assistance arrives.


79. What can be done in the case of an engine spring or spring-link breaking ?
A. —ln the case of a broken spring the weight should be taken off the particular wheel affected.
This can be done by running the other wheels of the side affected on to wedges so as to lift the framing
above the wheel, or it can be done by lifting the engine in the usual way with a jack. A piece of iron packing
of proper size should then be placed on the top of the axle-box between it and the framing. The broken
spring should then be removed, placed on the tender, and the engine worked cautiously. In the case of a
broken spring-link the same course should be adopted, unless a spare link is available.
80. Q. —Are these all the cases of breakdowns that can happen to an engine ?
A. —No ; but they are the most important; but a driver should be prepared for every emergency
as far as possible. He should ask himself—What should Ido if such and such a thing were to happen to
the engine ? Have I got the right tools for uncoupling ? Are my spare gauge-glasses and washers all
right and handy ? and questions of that sort. By doing this, he will be better prepared to face the break-
downs and difficulties which may happen to all; for no driver can say what will occur on his next trip.
81. Q. —How do you secure the most economical results in the working of the engine ?
A- —This can only be secured by the most careful study and attention to every detail connected
with a locomotive. Generally speaking, steam should be maintained as near the maximum pressure as
possible without blowing off through the safety-valves , and used as expansively as possible, by fully opening
the regulator, and with the reversing gear as near the centre as is practicable, having regard to keeping
good time.






