

11-'fos. '~'’ = V«
L nrtSR
* 1 V
fi
\//
m
■Mk m **
fe:
3
,a
/jw/® a ‘y
t4Mv^
| i, 'imd 1
VIKMI
HOWARD FOffW
H.A. James.
SYDNEY.
TURNER SHENOERSUH.


216 4 218 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.


advertisements.
£gto*K Mtofe.
SPECIAL
UNTMENT TO
HIS EXCELLENCY
LORD CARRINGTON
,w Seeds for the Farm.
Kcto Seetis for tfje Itttcben CDartirn.
NE W SEEDS KOH 6WEN-
,-scrr>^=7a <
VLL SEEDS GUARANTEED, IF FAIRLY TREATED.
. matpur s’ Guide and Catalogue, containing
al f i°Ga°rdening Information, and Latest Novelties
; cs ’ a^a.,;, 3 T-k T~ A,s ’ ®^ ir >3* s - or > J <•»
(sjetrelar) F^ecjuisiles.
FLORAL. WORK f% a SPECIALTY.
tidal, Hand, and other Uw* “ d D9SIB ”
packed for any distance.
Buttonholes and Ladies’ Sprays sent per post, dai y.
dears rvishing to secure a Model Garden and grand d.splay
should send stamps for our
3s. Vegetable Seeds Collection.
2s. 6d. Flower Seeds Collection.
Post free on receipt of stamps or money order.
Svdney Arcade (King
e Sydney Yioe-Begal J outh Wales.
Sureet entrance). Sydney, anew l.
inJBSBBIBSi BAHDWICK.


CALL SPECIAL ATTENTION TO THEIR STOCK OF
nursmuiuni. florists, anb J^ecbsmcn,
Of SYDNEY,
VEGETABLE § FLOWER JSEEDJS
Tor the forthcoming Season, among which are offered numerous
NOVELTIES from the most reliable sources.
Of FLOWER SEEDS they recommend chiefly their superior
strains of Aster, Begonias, Balsams, Calceolarias, Carnations,
Cinerarias, Dahlias, Marigold, Pansy, Poppies, Primulas, Stock, and
Zinnias, magnificent flowers of which can be seen at their City Depot
in season.
Of GLADIOLA and NARCISSUS they have a very large and
choice collection, the blooms of which have attracted thousands to
their exhibition in King Street.
Of CHRYSANTHEMUMS and ROSES they have all the
newest and choicest varieties in cultivation. 300 distinct varieties of
Roses and 400 distinct Chrysanthemums are now catalogued.
Through the convenience of the PARCEL POST, some
scores of Plants are sent daily, packed neatly and carefully in special
boxes, and most favorable reports reach them of their excellent
arrival.
BOUQUETS, WREATHS, and CROSSES, made of Fresh Flowers,
FORWARDED ALL OVER THE COLONIES.
faw f lants, anb C&xriw swbs anb impair annually.
CATALOGUES FREE ON APPLICATION.
<3c SONS,
©HE RELIABLE SEEDSMEN AND FIiO^ISHIS
Of SYDNEY.


/•fgs-st£. .si/, _\i/. „\i/. .si'. .si'. -sis. .si/. .ste. -si'. ..si'. r^s
# Iktiutiljil Ido |
(£l> -Trv -7W •VD' -viv -7JV -?|V -TiS* Tivttv -7|v -/w -Tiv '?(*• / ( \ -/iv -?iv -?|V ->rs* -tiv-tiv -viv -/w tjv vQ
HWjLESSRS. SEARL& SONS take this opportunity
- f)(r^/T ' of thanking their kind patrons for the liberal
patronage bestowed on them during the past eighteen
years, and wish to inform them that, to maintain the
high position they have attained, they are sparing no
expense for the production (both under glass and
otherwise) of the CHOICEST AMD MOST BEAUTIFUL
FLOWERS in cultivation to keep their Floral work up
to the high state of perfection it has arrived at.
An interesting account of our Nurseries is given
on page 85 of this book.
Sewl §■ Sotfc,
NURSERYMEN, SEEDSMEN & FLORISTS,
109 Street, Sydney.


IV ADVERTISEMENTS.
RELIABLE
Hitter*
QB^ID3 a
s*.
MmSIISL
-Sr
JOHN I}. T^EDEI^
prawg mvb JSwteraati,
19 ROYAL ARCADE, SYDNEY
SEND FOR CATALOGUE.
Attention is respectfully invited to the article extracted
from the Sydney Morning Herald, page No, 100, descriptive of his
extensive Horticultural Nurseries, which are situated at Ashfield.


PRACTICAL
HORTICULTURE
For Australian Readers.
H. A. JAMES.
Reprinted, by permission, from the '■'Sydney Morning Herald .”
SjjblUJJ:
TURNER AND HENDERSON.


THE NEW MANURE.
A A
POUDRETTE,”
IS NOW BEING USED BY
Orchardists, Nurserymen, Farmers, Market Gardeners, k,
It contains all the ingredients of Plant Food in a form readily
taken up, and gives better results than are obtained from bone
dust or superphosphates.
It is inoffensive, it mixes readily, and gives vigour to the plant
and brightness to the blossom.
The supply is regular, and an order for any quantity up to
ten tons can be executed at a day’s notice.
PRICE, £5 PER TON,
Bagged and delivered at Redfern Railway Station, or
at any Sydney Wharf.
For Copies of Testimonials and further particulars apply to the Secretary.
MANUFACTURED BY THE
New Sooth Wales Poudrette and Ammonia
MANUFACTURING COMPANY, LIMITED,
At the Works, RICKETTY STREET, NORTH BOTANY.
OFFICE: No. 12 O’CONNELL STREET.
JOHN BRADLEY, Secretary.


PREFACE.
piyipOST of the papers in the following pages have been published
in the Sydney Morning Herald , and the writer is indebted to
vSy* the courtesy of the proprietors of that journal for permission
to publish them in their present form. He has reason to
believe that, on their appearance in the Herald , the articles were
widely read, and it is in response to the wishes of many who followed
them in the newspaper, from Saturday to Saturday, that they are
now republished. The papers are what they profess to be; not a
treatise on the science of horticulture, but a series of simple direc-
tions in regard to its practice. Although it is believed that they
contain much that will prove interesting to readers of all classes
they are written specially for learners, not for professional gardeners,
or for experienced amateurs. By some the details given may be
deemed unnecessary, but it is hoped that others will 'find them of
daily utility. Opinions may differ as to many of the counsels
offered, and the author does not pretend to be wiser than his fellows.
He has, however, devoted much time and thought to the subjects
discussed, and what he has offered is less the result of his reading
than of his experience.
Most of the works on Practical Horticulture deal with generalities,
but the author has deemed it advisable to descend to particulars.
For the most part, also, books on horticulture are written for other
climates, but the treatment here adopted is intended for the climate
of Australia.
Owing partly to the excellent exhibitions which have been held,
but chiefly to the spread of intelligence and to the increasing love of
nature, the interest in horticulture has been growing during the last


few years. As the result of this, there is a larger demand for
information and a keener attention to horticultural subjects in the
newspapers and magazines, and in general literature. As there are
various references to the season in which they appeared, it may be
mentioned that these papers were published last year, between
July 13th and August 24th.
The work has been issued at a nominal price and with a view of
simply paying the expenses of printing, and, should it be favorably
received, other volumes may follow. The author desires to express
his indebtedness to the Editor of the Herald (Mr. W. Curnow), at
whose instance the papers were first published, and who, for the
purposes of the present issue, has kindly revised the proof-sheets, as
well as offered suggestions for the making of the little work more
attractive and useful to horticultural readers.
H. A. JAMES.
January 14th, iBgo.


I SEEDS
Reliable j PLANTS
| FRUIT TREES
E. HORTON,
BACK OF ANTHONY HORDERN & SONS.
Send for my Collection off Vegetable and
Flower Seeds, in Pictorial Packets, with
printed directions on back.
SEUT POST PEEE.
Flower Seeds, Choice Varieties, Is. 6d, dozen packets.
Vegetable do ~ ~ 2s. 6d. ~ ~
All Seeds sold by me are thoroughly Tested, and guaranteed to grow.
Price Lists & Catalogues forwarded on application.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
WHITE ANTS. WHITE ANTS. WHITE ANTS.
TJ.TX.OB: afe 00.,
SOLE PROPRIETORS AND PATENTEES OF INFALLABLE
WHITE ANT EXTERMINATOR,
COCKROACH & VERMIN DESTROYER, NOXIOUS WEED
AND GRASS ERADICATOR.
To Architects, Builders , and Property Owners.
Death to White Ants & all other Wood Vermin.
I'ii.TriE.OSt. & CO.’S
WHITE ANT EXTERMINATOR
(PROTECTED BY ROYAL LETTERS PATENT).
Approved by Government Departments, and acknowledged by the trade to be
UNRIVALLED AND UNFAILING,
As it has given unqualified satisfaction wherever used, and is strongly recom-
mended in Architect’s specifications.
SIMPLE IN APPLICATION AND NOT INFLAMMABLE.
Supplied in 1,3, and 5 Gallon Packages, at greatly
reduced prices.
One application of the Solution guaranteed to eradicate from property infested,
and if applied when building will ensure against attack.
Used in all Queensland Government Departments, as it is stipulated in each
specification that Taylor & Co.’s White Ant Exterminator shall be employed.
Prevention is better than Cure.
Do not delay, if you contemplate building; have all the lower timbers or founda-
tions treated with this preparation.
Householders Beware of this Terrible (because unseen) Invader
of your Homes,
And have your houses examined by a practical man, and, if infected,
Taylor’s Exterminator will Speedily Prevent Further Injury.
Thousands upon thousands of pounds sterling are wasted annually through the
operations of this little mite.
Union is Strength,
And nowhere is it better exemplified than in the operations of their hordes. We
have no hesitation in declaring that
The White Ant is a Foe
Of whom all property owners cannot be too watchful, as they are to be met with
where least expected. Those connected with the building trade can truthfully
state that the
Ravages of the White Ants yearly are Incalculable,
Therefore, the benefits to be derived by the use of Taylor & Co.’s time-proven,
invention should be
Known the Colonies over,
As from hosts of patrons, from the
Government to the Artisan,
Taylor & Co. have received unsolicited testimonials, and as time proves all things,,
it can be distinctly claimed that it has amply proven their
Death Dealing Dose
Will cure all complaints of the visits of these pests.
Pamphlets and Testimonials can be seen at, and had from, Taylor & Co.’s,
6 Bond Street, Sydney. G.P.O. Box, 924.


CONTENTS.
I.—FERNS.
PAGE..
Preparation of the Soil ... ... ... ... ... ... 1
Sowing the Seed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3^
Propagation by Division ... ... ... ... ... ... 3
The Most Suitable Kinds... ... ... ... ... ... 4
The Farleyensi ... ... .. ... ... ... ... 5
Other Varieties ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6
Small Choice Growing Ferns ... ... ... ... ... 9
Constructing Green-houses ... ... ... ... ... 10
Baskets ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11
lI.—ROSES.
Trenching ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
Drainage ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... IT
Watering ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15
Selection of Plants ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Dark Coloured Roses ... ... ... ... ... ... IT
Moss Roses... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... IS
The General List ... ... ... ... ... ... ... IS
Climbing Roses ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20
Planting ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21
General Pruning ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22
Pruning of Hybrid Perpetuals ... ... ... ... ... 22
The Training of Roses ... ... ... ... ... ... 23
Propagation of Roses ... ... ... ... ... ... 24


lII.—CHOICE FLOWERING GARDEN SHRUBS
PAGE.
Absence of Taste ... ... .., ... ... ... ... 25
Perseverance Necessary ... ... ... ... ... ... 25
Aspect to be Studied ... .. ... ... ... ... 26
Plants or Trees ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27
Various Shrubs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27
Remedy for Pests ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28
Gardenias and Jasmines ... ... ... ... ... ... 29
Additional Shrubs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29
Azaleas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31
Superior Flowering Shrubs ... ... ... ... ... 32
IV.—CAMELLIAS.
Treatment of the Camellia ... ... ... ... ... 36
Soil and Aspect ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 35
Planting ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 37
Selection of Plants ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 39
Mulching, etc. ... ... ... ... ... ... 40
Varieties ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 41
V.—BOUVARDIAS.
Value of the Bouvardia ... ... ... ... ... ... 44
Cultivation of the Bouvardia 45
Preparation of the Soil ... ... ... ... ... ... 46
Planting 46
Training the Plants ... 47
Insects ... ... ... ... ... ... ... _ 43
Pruning ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 49
Propagation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 59
Varieties ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 59
Double Varieties ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 52


CONTENTS.
VT.—SOME GREENHOUSE PLANTS.
PAGE.
Caution required ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 53-
Dracsenas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 54?
Palms "■ ... 56
The Pandanus ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 56
Begonias ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 57
Crotons ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 58
Shade ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... 59
The Snow Plant and the Clerodendron ... ... ... ... 59'
Gloxinias ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 60
Eust, etc. ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 61
The Eucharis Amazonica... ... .. ... ... ... 62
VII.—PELARGONIUMS.
Improvement in Pelargonium Culture ... ... ... ... 66
Securing the Plants ... ... ... ... ... ... 66
Planting, Stakingand Pruning ... ... ... ... ... 67
Green-house and Garden Treatment ... ... ... ... 69
Propagation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 70
Varieties ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 71
Fancy and Other Pelargoniums ... ... ... ... ... 73-
Ivy-leaved Pelargoniums ... ... ... ... ... ... 74
VIII.—CHRYSANTHEMUMS.
Perfume of the Chrysanthemum ... ... ... ... ... 76-
Varieties of the Chrysanthemum... ... ... ... ... 76
Hardy Plant ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 76-
Mulching ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 78
Insects ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 79
Single Flowers and Stems ... ... ... ... ... 79
Methods of Propagating ... ... ..• ... ... ... 79’


Chrysanthemums— Continued.
PAGE.
■Growing without Division... ... ... ... ... ... 80
■Growing in Pots ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 81
The Finest Show Flowers... ... ... ... ... ... 88
APPENDIX.
Manures for Horticulture ... ... ... ... ... ... 104
Test Plots 107
AMONG THE FLOWER NURSERIES.
I. —Searl & Sons ... ... ... ... ... ... 85
II. —Pearce Brothers ... ... ... ... ... ... 93
lII.—J. G. Treseder’s Nursery ... ... ... ... 100
INDEX TO ADVERTISEMENTS.
Anderson & Co, ... ... ... ... ... ... (cover)
Australian Gas-Light Co. ... ... ... ... (colored leaf)
Colonial Sugar Refining Co ... ... ... ... ... (cover)
Decorative Tile Co ... ... ... ... ... ... xvi
Horton, E. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ix
McLean Bros, and Rigg ... ... ... ... ... xx
New South Wales Nursery and Orchard C 0... ... ... xvii
New South Wales Poudrette and Ammonia Co ... ... vi
Pearce Bros. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... i
■ Searle, Arthur S (colored leaf)
.Searl and Sons ... ... ... ... ... ii. Hi and cover
Shepherd and Co ... ... ... ... ... ... xv
Taylor and Co ... ... ... ... ... ... ... x
Treseder, John G. ... ... ... ... ... ... iv
Yates, A. and Co ... ... ... ' ... ... xviii, xix


Established 62 Years,
DARLING NURSERY, SYDNEY.
-I c «=?«=4®<»
For many years it has been an undisputed fact that
we have held the foremost position as raisers and
growers of all kinds of Nursery Stocks. Being engaged
in the Business for upwards of 60 years, our extensive
knowledge of the trade enables us to execute with
the utmost despatch all orders —Colonial and Foreign—
with the certainty of reaching their various destinations
in proper condition.
Our extensive Nurseries are well worth a visit,
being replete with all that is requisite for the Garden
and Orchard. We possess the finest and most com-
plete collection of Plants in the southern hemisphere.
Fresh and reliable Garden and Farm Seeds always
in stock.
We still continue to receive many unsolicited testi-
monials, which only tend to show how fully our efforts
to give satisfaction are appreciated.
Catalogues FREE on application.
SHEPHERD & CO.,
DARLING NURSERY, BOURKE ST., SYDNEY.
Wo other City Address.


fliistsllv® stlo
i. We are the largest Importers and Fixers of Tiles in
Australia, as also the oldest established.
2. Our supplies are drawn from the leading makers—
Maw and Co., Minton, Hollins and Co., Minton’s China
Works, etc.—unquestionable quality, and latest patterns.
3. We keep a permanent staff of skilled Tile layers, and
guarantee our work as unsurpassed.
4. We keep the largest stock of Tiles in Australia in
Floor, Wall, Hearth, Furniture, and Decorative Tiles
generally, and import to order, in four months, any special
designs at a small advance on manufacturers prices.
5. Our prices are on the lowest remunerative scale, based
upon prompt cash payment only.
ALSO,
Patent Folding Portable Trellis, all sizes, from two feet
to twelve feet high.
I Decorative Tile 60, ■
Retail Store: LITTLE GEORGE STREET.
Sample Room: 14 HUNTER STREET*
Wext Turner and Henderson’s


PRACTICAL HORTICULTURE.
FERNS.
THE fern is one of the most beautiful and
interesting class of plants, yet how few
succeed in raising really good specimens. Women
especially know how to appreciate a basket of
adiantum, or maiden hair fern, as they love to call
it; and long to know how to grow, or preserve in
health that which they have purchased fresh from
the nurseryman. This is not so difficult a matter as
is generally supposed, and if the simple instruction
herein given is closely followed, it will be seen that
many of the most beautiful and delicate ferns can
be brought to perfection at a very little cost of
either labour or money. These papers are written
especially for amateurs; we therefore propose to
describe, in as simple language as possible, the best
known methods to use in raising and growing ferns.
PREPARATION OF THE SOIL.
But before the seed can be sown, the soil must be
prepared, and a glass frame provided. A small frame
will answer our purpose, say 4ft. long by 3ft. wide
by iBin. deep, the sides and ends to be glazed, in
addition to the lid. The glass should be frosted with


white paint, and the frame placed in a sunny place,
and shaded with scrim, or coarse canvas. An excellent
soil of compost can be made from the following—
which will not only do for ferns, but for most other
kinds of pot plants—well-rotted dairy-yard manure,
peat, or sandy loam, wood ash, and clean sharp sand
in about equal proportions. This may be well mixed
together, and put through a sieve of not too fine a
mesh, say quarter of an inch, and allowed to stand in
a sunny place for several months, and during that
time turned over once a week. The sand need not
be added until the compost is ready for use. Of
course this compost may be improved by the addition
of some well-rotted leaf mould and cocoanut fibre;
but the above is a simple and effective soil, obtainable
by everyone. To attempt to grow ferns in pots, etc.,
in ordinary garden soil is only to court disaster ; at
the same time many successful growers pretend to
possess a knowledge of making a complicated compost,
which experience has shown us to be unnecessary.
Pots 6 inches across will be the most convenient for our
purpose. Over the hole in the bottom place a piece
of broken pot, upon which put a layer of about
2in. of wood cinders, charcoal, coke, or pieces of
brick, to form a drainage, and upon this the compost
may be placed up to within half an inch of the rim.
A few pieces of brick, sandstone, or partly decayed
staghorn may be inserted into the soil, and allowed to
just project above the surface. The result will be
more successful if the compost is put into an oven or
other vessel, and subjected to sufficient heat to
destroy all Worms, grubs, and other insects, or seeds
of weeds, etc. The pots may now be put into saucers
of water, and placed in the glass frame previously
described, having a piece of glass over each of
them ; but they should be first watered with a fine
rose.


SOWING THE SEED.
The seed, which can be obtained from any
seedsman or nurseryman, can now be sown, but
some caution is necessary (the seed, or spores, being
very light) so as to prevent their getting mixed.
Raise the piece of glass from one pot at a
time, sprinkle on the seed, replace the glass, and
so on with the rest. In about five or six weeks
(sometimes much longer) the first signs of vegetation
may be looked for, and this will appear in the shape
of specks of moss; but as soon as the tiny fronds are
put forth, raise the glass a little by inserting a piece
of stone between the rim of the pot and the glass, to
admit a moderate amount of air, and as the fronds
increase in strength remove the piece of glass
altogether. About this time the pots may be lifted
from the saucers of water, and the young ferns
watered overhead carefully with a fine rose. A sharp
lookout must be kept for slugs, wood-lice, or grubs,
which, in a single night, would demolish the lot. When
the seedlings are strong enough to be handled they
should be pricked out and potted into very small pots,
called thumb pots, but be careful not to bury their
crowns; and when they have filled these pots with
roots, re-pot into large sizes, or four-inch pots, and so
on to any size required. I might add that the early
autumn is the best time to sow the seed, and that it is
best to sow but one kind in a pot, because the stronger
growing varieties germinate first, grow up, and crowd
out the weaker.
PROPAGATING BY DIVISION.
Ferns may also be propagated by division ; but this
is a practice that cannot be commended with such kinds
as can be raised from seed, for a clump broken or cut off
never produces so fine a plant. Ferns that do not seed


of course must be increased by this means, and this
should be done in the spring. With a sharp knife
cut into as many pieces as desired, and put them into
as small pots as the clumps will fit, provide ample
drainage, water well, and for a few weeks place
under glass and keep in a very shady place, when new
growth begins gradually remove the glass as described
for seedlings. Davallias, or haresfoot ferns, can be
propagated from either seed or rhizomes ; if the latter
form is desired peg down the ends of the rhizomes or
creeping stems, and partially cover with light soil,
and when well rooted divide with a sharp knife and
pot in early spring. Ferns of the viviparous class
that produce clusters of minature plants on the fronds
may be increased by pegging down such fronds to the
soil in the pot, or in small pots placed sufficiently
close for that purpose, and when well rooted they
should be divided. Several kinds may be at once
removed from the fronds, or a piece of frond carrying
several of these buds can be cut off and placed on the
surface of a pot of soil, sprinkling on a little more
soil, taking care not to bury these tiny crowns.
Asplenium viviparum, A. bulbiferum, and Pteris
palmata, etc., may be treated in this way.
THE MOST SUITABLE KINDS.
Having described the methods of production, and
how to make good potting soil, it will be necessary
to give some advice regarding the most suitable
kinds to obtain, how to grow them and to keep
them in health. In the climate about Sydney
nearly all the most beautiful ferns will grow well
in a cool greenhouse, properly constructed. We
have, therefore, an extensive list to select from,
but as the scope of this paper will only admit of a
limited selection, attention will be given more


particularly to those general favourites, the adiantums,
and we strongly recommend the following :
Adiantum farleyensi, A. gracillimum, A. tenerum, A.
decorum, A. flemingi, A. amabile, A. capillus veneris
major, A. diaphanum, A. concinnum, A. concinnum
latum, A. cuneatum, A. bellum, A. nobile, A.
williamsi, A. scutum (ghiesbreghtii), A. victoria, A.
luddemannianum, A. Assimile, A. macrophyllum, A.
trapeziforme, A. cardiochlaena, and A. curvatum.
There are many others, but this may be considered a
good selection.
THE FARLEYENSI.
A. farleyensi, the Queen of all ferns, found
in the islands of the Barbadoes by a Mrs. Farley,
is not known to seed, but forms crowns, which
continue to increase in size and number yearly.
This is perhaps the most difficult of all adiantums to
grow to perfection, many mistakes being made by
amateurs in the treatment they bestow upon it. The
soil for this fern should be made very light, by adding
to the compost described above, a small quantity of
powdered charcoal, well-rotted cocoanut fibre, and
leaf mould. Small pots should be used to start them
in, having a good drainage of pieces of charcoal,
and a glass frame, placed in a sunny position,
but shaded, and in which they may be kept all
through the winter, when they may be transferred
to the greenhouse. Healthy growing plants that have
filled their pots with roots, can be carefully planted
in a basket (the construction of which is described
below), in which they flourish splendidly. A well-
grown basket of A. farleyensi is undoubtedly the
prideof any greenhouse, the fronds develop magnificent
foliage, too heavy for the tender stems to sustain, and
which gradually depend in a graceful weeping form
until the stems find a resting on the rim of the basket.


In pots they must be staked up. The basket should
be hung near the glass, for this fern loves the light,
which is absolutely necessary to bring out the golden
tints it is so famous for ; at the same time it cannot
suffer the full glare of the sun ; while growing it
should be freely watered, but during winter, or when
at rest, kept moderately dry. It is a mistake to
suppose this fern cannot be grown without artificial
heat in the neighbourhood of Sydney, for we have
seen basket specimens grown in a cool house
unequalled for their beauty and healthy appearance ;
in fact, artificial heat, unless skilfully attended to, will
only do much harm, not only to this fern, but to most
other ferns and plants. A. farleyensi requires a long
rest, which a hot-house denies it, and can become
accustomed to a cool house, as can most other ferns,
and be all the more hardy in consequence. Besides
other advantages a cool house possesses, insect pests
are not so troublesome. A hot-house, unless incessantly
attended to, soon swarms with insects which find a
ready prey in the weak succulent plants grown
therein. We therefore strongly advise amateurs to
adopt a cool green-house.
OTHER VARIETIES.
A. gracillimum (most graceful), of green-house
origin, is indeed a most graceful little fern, as its
name implies, unrivalled for bouquet purposes, and
only next in beauty to A. farleyensi; it is the smallest
leaved variety known, and grows admirably in a
basket. A. tenerum (tender), found in Mexico, etc.,
a most useful and hardy fern, which by judicious
trimming may be kept growing nearly all through the
year. A. decorum (decorous) comes from Peru, a
hardy fern of compact habit, seeds freely, and remains
green throughout the year. The young fronds are of
a beautiful carmine colour, deepening to a rich olive.


A. flemingii, of garden origin, raised by a Mr. Fleming,
of England, a great improvement on tenerum as
regards beauty, but not quite so hardy or prolific.
Its foliage is dense and plumy and low-growing ; no
green-house should be without it, though being a rare
variety here, it is seldom seen. A. amabile (lovely)
comes from the Andes and Peru. This is a lovely
fern indeed, and specially suited for basket growing,
on account of underground driving habit and graceful
weeping fronds, which envelop
and is fit companion for Af farleyensi in magnificence.
It is easily propagated by the
formed in a single year, is very hardy, and of
deciduous habit, but lasts in vigour and freshness from
spring to late autumn, during which time it requires to
be watered freely, and very sparingly when at rest.
Its foliage gradually turns brown, and finally dries up.
From want of knowledge many persons have thrown
out their plants, thinking them dead, whereas in spring
they would have burst forth more gloriously than ever.
A. capillus veneris major (Venus’s hair), indigenous
to Great Britain, etc., is very hardy, seeds well —and
these germinate freely, the spores attaching themselves
to adjacent pots and baskets, and springing up in
numbers —puts forth its fronds freely in the depth
of winter, and on this account it is a most
desirable plant to grow. It makes a capital basket in
a single year by seeding and throwing out rhizomes,
foliage ot a rich dark green and low habit. A.
diaphanum (transparent), New Zealand, etc., like
amabile as regards its driving habit, and also by
being deciduous, is therefore very suitable for basket
growth, being also very hardy, a free grower, and in
its young state exceedingly pretty. It requires to be
pruned at the end of winter, removing all the old
fronds with a pair of scissors. A. concinnum (neat),
tropical America, is a most elegant species for baskets


and the rockery, of a weeping habit, but not a strong
grower. A. concinnum latum, a strong erect-growing
variety of the above; a noble fern, the foliage
spreading, and from 2ft. to 3ft. high ; nearly deciduous
in a cool house. A. cuneatum (wedge-shaped)
resembles A. tenerum, but of a taller and stronger
growth; very useful for cutting purposes ; comes from
Brazil. A. bellum (handsome), a very distinct and
pretty dwarf-growing species, fairly hardy, and
largely grown for bouquet purposes. A. nobile
(noble), a most excellent fern, fronds long and
weeping, the foliage spreading, and very dark olive
colour, retains its freshness until the new fronds
appear. A. williamsi, of greenhouse origin, raised by
a Mr, Williams, of England, rightly called the golden
Adiantum, being the only Adiantum known that has
its stipes and young fronds densely powdered with
gold coloured dust; it is a very beautiful species, and
has many advantages, being strong and hardy of habit,
and may be freely cut throughout the year. Cutting
it only appears to stimulate the plant to greater vigour ;
the foliage is of a bright peagreen, quite in contrast
to all other Adiantums. In watering, take care you
do not wash off the powder. A. ghiesbreghti (scutum),
raised by Williams, evidently a variety of tenerum,
much resembles A. farleyensi in habit, but of quite a
different colour—in that respect more like A. nobile—
is of slow growth and tender, and must be grown in
the shade. A. victoria, a great improvement on A.
ghiesbreghti, is of much hardier and freer growth ;
in this respect it is an improvement on A.
farleyensi, and may fairly claim to be a
dark-coloured variety of that lovely fern. A.
victoria has only recently been introduced to the
colony by Messrs. Pearce Bros., florists, of the Sydney
Arcade. It is a most beautiful variety, though doubtful
as to surpassing A. farleyensi. A. luddemanianum


(Luddeman’s), a most remarkable species ; the fronds,
from five to eight inches in length, rise from a tufted
rhizome ; the stipes are dark brown, and the pinnules
are peculiarly cristated or curled. A cardiochlaena, is
a noble-growing species, from Caraccas, with large,
bright-green fronds, three or four times divided,
usually about 12 or 18 inches in length, but will grow
to a height of 3ft. ; a fine fern for exhibition, as it is
one of the finest of the tribe ; it is considered a stove
fern, but we have seen it growing in great perfection
in a basket in a cool house. A curvatum (curved),
tropical America, an elegant variety, but tender, should
be grown in the shade.
SMALL CHOICE GROWING FERNS.
A few of the choice small-growing ferns of various
species that are suitable for a moderate size greenhouse
may be mentioned, and perhaps one of the most useful
and finest is Microlepia, hirta cristata, a fern unrivalled
for the basket or rockery, of strong, hardy, weeping
habit, and remarkable for the ends of its fronds
dividing into numerous tassels. Nephrodium,
Richardii multifida, is also remarkable for its tasselled
fronds, but more difficult to grow than the first named.
It requires a warm situation, and should be kept
moderately dry through the winter. Lastrea aristata
variegata is a very choice little fern, of a dark olive
green, with a golden band up the middle of the fronds,
a hardy fern, but of slow growth. Asplenium viviparum
(plant-bearing), Mauritius, is a handsome and
interesting fern ; the fronds are covered with miniature
ferns; should be grown in a shady place, and freely
supplied with water. Blechnum braziliensis, Brazil
and Peru, a truly noble fern ; the young fronds are a
rosy pink colour, changing to bright green ; requires
abundance of water. A rare and handsome fern is
Nephrolepis bridgesii; should be given a warm


position and kept moderately dry in winter. Asplenium
diversifolium (diverse leaved), one of the handsomest
greenhouse species known, and quite hardy about
Sydney.
CONSTRUCTING GREENHOUSES.
So many mistakes are made by amateurs in
constructing a greenhouse that a few simple direc-
tions may be of use. Make the roof low ; a lofty
roof induces the plants to grow weak and stalky.
Consider more the requirements of the plants
than the appearance of the house. Introduce as much
glass in the structure as possible, and provide free
ventilation in the roof and the sides and ends of
the house. These latter should be arranged below
the level of the benches, and the benches constructed
of hardwood battens, spaced about an inch and a half
apart, to allow the air coming in through the ventilators
to pass freely through the foliage of the plants. This
system is much to be preferred to that of swinging
the side lights and allowing the wind to blow strongly
on to the foliage. This will be more readily
seen when it is understood that the organic part
of a plant is obtained from the atmosphere
breathed in through the numerous openings or mouths
named stomata, with which the leaves of plants (other
than aquatic) on the undersides are furnished, and
which may be described as their lungs. Carbon,
combined with oxygen, exists in the atmosphere as
carbonic acid gas, and in this form is drawn through
these mouths into the cells which contain the
chlorophyll, or green colouring matter of leaves. In
these cells, under the influence of sunlight, and
especially of the yellow and orange rays, the carbonic
acid gas is decomposed into its elements, carbon and
oxygen. The carbon is retained by the plant,
combines with the substances obtained from the soil


through the roots, aud these build up the structure.
The oxygen is expelled into the atmosphere. This
action is reversed at night, or in the dark ; the plant
then absorbs oxygen and expels carbon. This short
explanation may serve to show how very necessary it
is to wash plants clean, and keep them so, and also give
them plenty of light and air. If the little openings or
mouths on the leaves become stuffed with dust, the
plant will soon sicken and waste away —hence it is
that plants carried into the domestic house and kept
there, without frequently being taken outside, and
washed and aired for a while, soon waste away, much
to the surprise ol the owners. The wall ventilators
should be of glass, for the reason that more light will
be obtained from beneath; and if you have the water
laid on and a hose, with a fine rose every evening
before sundown water freely about the house, and the
foliage of the plants, especially on the underside.
This is the best of all specifics for insect pests,
especially “ thrips,’’ the cause of so much injury and
annoyance. After watering, the house should be
shut up close, to keep in the warmth that is generated
by it.
BASKETS.
After what we have seen accomplished in the
way of fern-growing in baskets, we strongly advise
amateurs to adopt that method, the drainage is
so perfect, the air is so freely admitted into the
soil, and when well-watered retains the moisture for
a considerable time; and more important than all, for
beauty a well-grown basket of adiantum far outrivals
that grown in a pot. To make cheap and useful
baskets —for those that can be purchased are by no
means satisfactory—procure some galvanised wire
netting, not too stout, of i-inch gauge, a yard wide;
cutthisinto 10-inchstrips; bring the ends together, and


fasten with wire; pinch in the mesh with the fingers
gradually to form the bottom, which can easily be done,
and fasten with wire. Then take a piece of galvanised
telegraph wire of the requisite length, and bend to a
circle to form the rim, over which turn with a pair
of pincers the ends of the mesh wire, three lengths of
strong copper wire, and a ring to suspend it by, and
the basket is finished. We have now to line it, and
to do that thoroughly procure some sphagnum moss,
lay plenty on ; then some cocoanut fibre or broken-up
flax, a few handfuls of small charcoal or wood cinders,
and complete with the compost, packing the rim well
with the sphagnum, and laying a little on the surface.
A few baskets may be planted with a variety of ferns,
but that is not a good practice ; the strong varieties
overgrow the weak, and a much finer effect is
obtained from growing a single specimen in a basket.
We strongly advise amateurs not to plant in baskets
•of ferns any of the lycopods, especially Lycopodium
denticulatum, or L. caesum, whoever may advise them
to the contrary; they may look pretty for a little
time, but it will result in eventually destroying the
adiantums, or at least preventing a healthy growth.
Finally, do not be tempted to apply any liquid
manures ; abundance of pure water when the ferns
are growing is all that is required. We have seen
baskets of ferns in luxuriant growth, eight years old,
that had never received a drop of liquid manure.


ROSES.
IN sunny New South Wales the queen of flowers-
may be grown by everyone, and with simple
culture it will continue to flourish and bloom for a
great many years. So much has been written
regarding the best methods of growing this flower to-
perfection, that many amateurs are afraid to attempt
its cultivation, and others who do so attempt (after
endeavouring to follow the various conflicting
directions laid down for their guidance) are much
disappointed with the poor quality of the blooms that
reward them for so much care and labour. We
therefore propose to describe, not only how to grow
roses successfully, but the various kinds to select that
buds may be gathered continuously throughout the
year. Many houses in the suburbs possess a piece oi
garden ground of some dimensions, much of which is
unfortunately allowed to remain uncultivated, and a
great part of that which is planted exhibits poor taste
and but little knowledge.
TRENCHING.
In the first place the ground must be well
dug to a depth of twenty-four inches. This is
called trenching, and may be performed in several
ways. Some advise removing the surface soil to a
depth of about a foot, and then merely breaking up
the subsoil to a depth of another foot, and replacing
the top-soil; others, again (and this is the practice


more generally followed), declare that the better way
is to remove the top-soil to the depth of a foot, then
dig out the subsoil to the depth of another foot, and
throw it forward, then casting into the bottom the
next spit of surface soil, thus practically bringing the
subsoil to the surface, and vice versa. It is difficult
to lay down a hard and fast rule, for soils vary so
much in different localities ; but we strongly advise
that neither of the above practices be followed, but
that the two soils be generally mixed as far as
possible in the process of digging, and be allowed to
remain in fallow for a few months before planting.
Should the first-mentioned method be adopted, the
subsoil will probably remain what is called sour for a
long period, and the roots of plants will not be
encouraged to go down into it for either food or
moisture ; if the second system Is practised, young
and tender plants brought from the nurseryman’s rich,
well-aired soil make but slow headway in a soil just
brought to the surface from a depth of two feet.
That practice, however, has the advantage of destroy-
ing all weeds and grasses; even couch grass will
perish if carefully buried twenty-four inches below the
surface. If the soils are mixed, take care to remove
and destroy all weeds and couch grass and others,
otherwise you will be incessantly troubled with
them ; the first labour will be found to be the most
economical.
DRAINAGE
Should the land lie low it must be drained.
For this purpose two-inch porous pipes, laid from
twenty-four inches to thirty inches below the surface,
and about eight feet apart, leading to a point where
the waters can escape, will serve the requirements
of a flower garden ; and if the plants are to flourish
the garden must be situated in the open, where the sun


can shine upon it for the greater part of the day,
especially during the forenoon. The ground must also
be well worked with a garden fork deeply at least once
a year, towards the end of winter, when plants are at
rest, but be careful not to work deeply close to the
rosebush especially, for roses cannot suffer their roots
to be much disturbed, but do better when they
remain impacted in the soil. Farmyard manure
may be worked in, for the soil cannot supply for ever
the foods plants are constantly extracting from it.
These must be artificially supplied. Of course no
manure is needed for the first year, or even the
second; indeed, much harm may be done by adding
manure to a soil already sour. I know of no manure
that can be so safely applied as that of the farmyard,
and perhaps the best way to secure all its properties
is to obtain it very fresh, and spread it at once in the
spring, thus forming an excellent mulch against the
heat of the sun in the summer, and a fertiliser at the
same time. At the end of the following winter this
may be dug in. Hitherto it has been thought that
much valuable plant food is lost by applying manure
in that manner, but quite recently some of the most
eminent agricultural chemists of England have
demonstrated that nothing is lost by spreading the
fresh manure on the worked soil, even though it be
subjected to a scorching sun or dry sweeping winds.
As many amateurs will be inclined to doubt this
statement, we refer them to the works of Sir John
Lawes, Boussingault, Drs. Gilbert and Voelcher.
WATERING.
Now that water is plentiful, and connected to
most of the suburban residences, an additional
inducement is offered to make gardens. There
are several ways of applying the water to the
plants. If the mulching, as above advised, is carried


out, the garden may be generally watered in the
evening, by the means of stand-pipes and hose with
a rose; the water will then freely pass through,
without subsequently causing the soil to cake and
harden ; another course is to mulch round the plants,
and apply the open hose direct to the roots. An
excellent method is to plunge at an angle into the
soil short lengths of drain pipes at different points,
selecting the highest spots, and insert the end of the
hose into these, allowing it to run for some time ; by
this means the subsoils are moistened, and if this is
well done two or three times during dry weather, it
will be found much more effective than daily applica-
tions of small quantities. It is a mistake too often
made to suppose that in dry weather the best way to
keep in the moisture in the soil is not to disturb the
surface ; on the contrary, if the soil is very dry, by all
means fork up the surface (taking care to keep away
from the roots of the plants), and let in the air, which
will carry moisture with it.
SELECTION OF PLANTS.
The soil being prepared for planting, let us
now determine upon a selection of roses, how
to plant, grow, keep them in health, and propagate
them. Of course every amateur has his favourite
rose or roses ; we therefore merely propose to
name a limited number of the very best of each
variety, and which our long experience has proved to
be famous for their all-round good qualities. The
different catalogues sent out yearly by the nurserymen
unfortunately convey very wrong impressions regard-
ing the colours, habits, and qualities of the plants and
flowers. Many roses of but indifferent character are
referred to as excellent, and many of the very choicest
sorts merely mentioned, although we find these latter
just as easy to propagate as the former. We therefore


strongly recommend the following, and see that
you get them true, although in that you may have
some difficulty : La France, Lady Mary Fitzwilliam,
Duke of Connaught, Comtesse de Nadaillac, Marie
Van Houtte, Sunset, The Bride, Souvenir de la
Malmaison, Niphetos, Perle des Jadins, Madame de
Watteville, Catherine Mermet, Madame Camille,
Madame Hippolyte Jamain, Paul Nabonnand, Perle
de Lyon, Madame Lambard, Princess Beatrice, W. F.
Bennett, Grace Darling, Michael Saunders, Countess
of Pembroke, Ye Primrose Dame, Anna Olivier, Alba
Rosea, Jean Ducher, Madame Falcot, Souvenir
d'E’lise (Vardon), and Souvenir de Paul Neyron.
These are tea-roses and their hybrids, of a dwarf-
growing habit. Of course there are some other
good tea varieties, but the above selection embraces
only those known to be thoroughly good. For tea-
scented climbers and their hybrids select Marechal
Niel, Belle Lyonnaise, Devoniensis, Glorie de Dijon,
Madame Trifle, Rheine Marie Henriette, Madame
Berard, Cloth of Gold, Lamarque, Cheshunt Hybrid,
William Allen Richardson, Madame Eugene Verdier,
Madame Massot, Rev. T. C. Cole, Bouquet d’Or, and
Clothilde Soupert. This may appear an extensive
list of the tea-scented varieties, but for that reason
we strongly advise those only possessing small
gardens to grow more largely those varieties if
they desire flowers all the year, especially as the
colours and substance to be obtained in some of
those mentioned equal in several respects the hybrid
perpetuals. For those who have large gardens it
would be much the better plan to duplicate some of
the names above given than extend the list of that
class.
DARK COLOURED ROSES.
In choosing names from among the extensive
list of hybrid perpetuals, particular attention will


be given to the dark coloured roses, because
most of the other colours will be found among
the teas. The following are some of the best :
The Grand Mogul, Jean Liaubaud, Louis Van
Houtte, Prince Camille de Rohan, Paul Dupuy, Dr.
Sewell, Xavier Olibo, Pierre Netting, Abbe Bramerel,
Dr. Hogg, Charles Lefebvre, Alfred K. Williams,
Baron de Bonstettin, Dr. Andry, Alfred Colomb,
Marie Baumann, Countess of Rosebery, Duke of
Edinburgh, John Bright, Victor Hugo, Lord Macaulay,
Reynolds Hole, Beauty of Waltham, Victor Verdier,
Madame Gabriel Luizet, Magna Charta, Miss Hassard,
Sir Garnet Wolseley, Captain Christy, Paul Verdier,
The Puritan, Her Majesty, Lady Hellen Stewart, Earl
of Dufferin, John Hopper, WTite Baroness, Queen of
Queens, and Senateur Vaisse. A great many more
could be named, but these will be found to be some
of the best. A few, Polyantha and other varieties,
may be named to conclude the list: Polyantha, Anne
Marie De Montravel, Mademoiselle Cecile Brunner,
and Perle D’or, Bourbon Queen, Comtesse de La
Bath, Austrian Copper, and Lutea.
MOSS ROSES.
Moss roses, unfortunately, do not flourish in the
neighbourhood of Sydney ; but they will do well in
the colder parts of the colony, especially on the Blue
Mountains. A few of the best are therefore given,
namely, Crested, Soupert et Netting, White Bath,
Lanei.
THE GENERAL LIST.
The first mentioned rose in the general list,
La France, is justly called the Queen of Roses,
possessing, as it does, in combination, nearly
all the good points of other roses. It grows well on


it? own roots, is hardy of constitution, free flowering,
and easily propagated from cuttings, and the blooms
are not only exquisite in form, but of a beautiful
lilac-rose colour, and the perfume is delicious. Lady
Mary Fitzwilliam is a£ fine a rose as anyone may
desire, but requires liberal nourishment to obtain free
growth. Duke of Connaught h. t. is, without doubt,
one of the most valuable dwarf hybrid teas yet
introduced into this colony, of a deep crimson colour,
and very free flowering, producing its brilliant buds
even in the depth of winter. Comtesse de Nadaillac,
a pure tea, and perhaps the best of that class, very
sweet-scented, is of exquisite form and colour,
possessing a combination of those lovely tints in roses
—rosy-flesh, copper, and apricot. Marie Van Houtte,
also a pure tea; and Souvenir de la Malmaison, a
Bourbon, are perhaps of all others the two roses
to select for a small garden ; it has been said
that they flower “ thirteen months in the year.”
They seem to never want a rest, and have lovely
blooms ; the colours of the first-named are
indescribable ; they change every month of the year,
embrace all the shades of tints known in that variety,
and, in addition, are most vigorous growers. The Bride
and Niphetos are two lovely pure white teas, and
without doubt are the very best of that colour. The
buds are long-pointed, and of whilk-shape form, and
although the first-named may be considered the finest
exhibition rose of the two, the latter is the most graceful
and floriferous. Perle des Jadins is not generally
known here, if one may judge by the fact of its being
seldom seen, but to our thinking it is the queen of all
dwarf-growing yellow roses, of great substance,
strong growth, and is free flowering ; in autumn it
approaches the rich coppery tints to be seen in
sunset. Madame de Watteville in England rightly
called the “ Beautiful Madame de Watteville,” is of a


most attractive colour, and of a creamy white, edged
with clear rose, like a tulip. W. F. Bennett, a hybrid
tea, should be grown by everyone. There is no other
rose known that will supply us with such an abundance
of brilliant crimson, long-pointed buds during the late
autumn and winter as this rose, and of such a
delightful perfume. If growers will only have
patience to wait, even its substance will be found to
increase as the plant ages. The Countess of
Pembroke, a hybrid tea, should perhaps be rated next
to La France. It is a lovely rose, even rivalling that
famous rose (La France) in its sweet perfume, is of a
soft satiny rose colour, deepening to the centre, and
always opens perfectly.
CLIMBING ROSES.
If we were asked to select the four best climbing
sorts, we should unhesitatingly name Marechal
Neil, Climbing Devoniensis, Reine Marie Henriette,
and Belle Lyonnaise. The first named may be
considered the king of roses, requires but little
pruning, and flowers throughout the year, but
buyers should see that they obtain it budded on
the American Noisette. There has been, and is still,
much controversy regarding the best stock to use for
this rose. It may be that in open sandy soil it will
do well on its own roots, if plentifully supplied with
water and sheltered ; but we are convinced that it
does not generally do well on its own roots in stiff
soils, and is liable to suddenly drop off after doing
well for several years. Therefore it will be much safer
to obtain only those budded on the above stock, for
that stock will grow well in any soil. The other
climbers mentioned are such hardy, powerful growers,
that you cannot do better than obtain them on their
own roots. This advice may be generally applied to
all roses of strong-growing habit. Of course such


weak-growing kinds as Niphetos, Lady May
Fitzwilliam, Duke of Connaught, h. t., Louis Van
Houtte, Ye Primose, Dame, etc., should always be
budded, and the best stock to use for that purpose
is undoubtedly the American Noisette.
PLANTING.
Having secured so famous a collection of roses,
we may now proceed to plant them, and although
this may seem a simple matter, there is a right
and a wrong way, and unfortunately the inex-
perienced generally take the wrong one. The best
position for a rosery is an easterly or north-easterly
aspect, and if you have a fence with a trellis, plant
the climbers about three feet distant from it, and from
four feet to five feet apart. When the powerful canes
grow out, bend and tie them back towards the trellis,
for the flower spurs will rise from the top side of
these canes. Next to these plant, at a distance of
about five feet, a row of standard roses, and at a
similar distance from these a row of dwarfs or bushes
for the border, using some taste in adjusting the
colours to obtain the best effect by contrast. By this
means a magnificent bank of flowers will be exposed
to view from the sidewalk. In planting, take out the
soil sufficiently deep and wide to spread out the roots,
mix in some thoroughly rotted manure, and tread
down firmly. Upon this place the roots of the
plant, keeping the collar, or beginning of the shaft,
just under the surface. Now fill in about three parts
of the soil, tread very firmly, and stake. Give a good
watering, and when that has subsided fill in the re-
mainder of the soil loosely. No more watering will
now be needed; only harm would result from fre-
quent applications, for it is to be presumed that the
planting took place about June, when the ground is
moist.


GENERAL PRUNING.
In regard to the time for pruning, over which so much
difference of opinion exists, some stating it should be
done in June, others are as certain that May is the proper
month, we contend that neither of these months is
the best, and although it would be injudicious to name
any week, on account of the uncertainty of the
weather, we cannot advise that general pruning
should commence earlier than the first week in
August, and for the following reasons : —Should the
weather have been dry and warm for some time before
June or July, and rain follow, the sap will suddenly
rise, causing the plants to break into fresh leaf ; if
pruning is now performed, a still further growth is
induced, while there is every probability that before the
end of July there may be sharp frosts, and thus will be
destroyed the prospects of a fine display of spring
blossoms. The tender shoots that have come out too
early also become an easy prey to the swarms of
aphis or green flies that always attack them ; whereas,
if the pruning had been postponed until August, or
until such time as the spring weather had fairly set
in, the shoots would then have come away rapidly,
and, continuing to grow in strength, cause the aphis
to disappear, thus obviating the necessity of applying
washes to destroy them, which is a practice much to
be condemned, for it generally ends in destroying the
tender shoots, without doing much harm to the
insects. Amateurs and gardeners are no doubt
anxious to clean up their gardens and make them
look neat after the winter, and this is probably the
cause of so much early pruning.
PRUNING OF HYBRID PERPETUALS.
These remarks in regard to pruning refer more par-
ticularly to the hybrid perpetuals, a class of roses that
must be cut hard back to about a foot from the ground,


and all weak and dry or yellow-looking wood cut out to
obtain first-class blooms for exhibition. The tea-
scented varieties, on the contrary, may be carefully
pruned (that is, to remove very weak or unhealthy
wood) any month of the year; indeed, that is the
better method to adopt, and about once in three years
prune them hard back, in the same manner and at the
same time as the hybrid perpetuals. Climbers need
but little pruning; any thin, dry, or yellow-looking
stems should be removed ; the ends of runners
should be shortened a little, and all non-flower-
bearing wood that is overgrown cut out. It should be
understood that a sharp pruning knife is much to be
preferred for that work to the sicateurs.
THE TRAINING OF ROSES
Many methods for the training and forming of roses
into different shapes have been tried, such as coiling the
longcanes round a pillar, or bending their extremities to
the ground ; but more success will be obtained if all
weak canes are cut clean out, and not more than three
or four, at most, are allowed to remain on a single
straight shaft or stem of about six inches in height
(shaped similarly to an apple-tree), and these pruned
hard back to within two or three eyes, very late in the
spring, say the beginning or middle of August, when
the chances of mildew" attack, to which roses
are very subject, will be considerably lessened.
Not more than three shoots should be allow r ed to
sprout from each limb ; any others that show should
be rubbed off on appearance, and where two sprouts
put forth from one eye, always remove one of them.
If mildew should appear, a little sulphur may be
sprinkled on the young foliage in the early dewy
morning. If the single short stem system is adopted,
it will be found much easier to prune roses, destroy
all suckers, and confine the bush to a few stout limbs,


and the result will be much finer roses. Amateurs
should study this aspect of the question thoroughly ;
if they desire handsome shapely blooms they must be
content with fewer of them. Should all the buds
that sprout in spring be allowed to grow, it may
result in not a single bloom coming to perfection.
PROPAGATION OF ROSES.
Roses may be propagated in several ways —by
cuttings, layers, grafting, and budding. The simplest
and surest way for the amateur is by layering ; this
should be done by scooping out the earth a little and
bending down a ripe cane. With a sharp knife cut just
below a bud, partly through, then slit it up about an inch
and lay it in the hollow scooped out, cover with earth,
and place on a brick to keep it down. If this is done in
the early autumn, and watering attended to, the layers
will be furnished with roots by the end of winter, and
may then be planted out. Cuttings should be taken
from ripe wood. Wood formed during the spring
will be ripe in the following autumn), and should
be about a foot long, and taken when the plant
is dormant. The best position in which to plant these
is on the east side of a fence or other shelter, in a
trench opened in well-worked ground. Plant them
deeply, allowing only two buds projecting above the
surface, and space them about six inches apart. The
earth about them should be trodden down firmly and
watered, as described for rose planting. In about
twelve months from the time of planting, those that
have taken may be planted out.


CHOICE FLOWERING GARDEN SHRUBS.
SiNCE many choice flowering shrubs suitable for
a small garden, can now be obtained from our Sydney
nurserymen at a reasonable price, it is surprising that
amateurs do not more freely attempt their cultivation.
ABSENCE OF TASTE.
If one takes a stroll through our various suburbs,
and notes the many gardens under cultivation,
the first thing to strike the experienced eye
is the inferior quality of plants, shrubs, and
trees generally met with. There is also little
variation in the style of ornamentation adopted.
One garden may fairly be taken as a representative
of many. Why is it so ? Surely it cannot be for
want of taste, for many of the proprietors of these
gardens are intelligent and cultivated persons, and
patrons of the fine arts, who readily appreciate the
superior qualities of a higher class of plants than
those they are growing when brought under their
notice. And in many cases it cannot be from want of
means. It is probably from a want of knowledge of
the names and habits of many most desirable varieties
of plants, and the absence of a little more care in
their cultivation.
PERSEVERANCE NECESSARY.
Suburban lands are so very expensive that but few can
enjoy the luxury of an extensive garden; there is, there-
fore,the more reason,when makinga selection of plants,


to obtain the best varieties of a suitable character. It
is in this respect that our Horticultural Societies can do
so much good; they bring under the notice of the public
the many new and rare plants, and give evidence of
what cultivation can produce. The man who says,
“ I am so very fond of flowers,” and straightway
makes a garden, and in a little while neglects it
because it demands so much attention and care, or
because some disappointment is met with, is only
deceiving himself; he is no true gardener. To
encounter and overcome the many difficulties and
losses, and a host of other troubles that beset the
path of the amateur gardener ere he can become
experienced or be successful, requires a great deal of
patience and perseverance, grounded on a real love
for the beautiful living things he is endeavouring to
understand —things which know by unerring instinct
the proper treatment to receive, and to which they
respond most gratefully by unfolding their varied
beauties in recognition of the master hand who truly
loves and carefully attends them, as the horse or the
dog instinctively distinguishes the master who loves
it for its sake alone. We therefore propose to offer
some advice to amateurs in regard to selecting,
planting, and cultivating a few of the choicest kinds
of flowering shrubs suitable to a climate similar to that
of the neighbourhood of Sydney.
ASPECT TO BE STUDIED.
In the first place, it must be borne in mind that
only a very few plants will flourish if planted on the
south side of a close paling fence, under the
shadow' of trees, or even in close proximity. They
may do so for a time, but eventually they will
cease growing, and fall an easy prey to the numerous
insect pests ever on the watch to attack the sick and
the weak.


PLANTS OR TREES.
When an amateur is pondering over the method
in which he shall lay out his garden, it would
save him much later vexation were he to deter-
mine at once whether his house is to be surrounded
by flowers or by trees, because the two classes
cannot exist together in a small area. The trees
usually selected for even small gardens, for planting
in front of a fence, are Schinus molle (pepper
tree), Camphor officinalis (camphor tree), Pittosporum
undulatum, Pinus insignus, and others of a robust
nature, and between these, or a few feet in front, are to
be seen various small flowering plants. Now, what
chance have tender flowers to grow in the neighbour-
hood of robbers of the soil, whose roots will extend
from fifty to a hundred feet, and gobble up all water
and nourishment, however frequently applied to the
more delicate growing plants, the proprietor the while
feeling much puzzled as to the cause of his flowers
failing to succeed after such liberal treatment ? It
must be thoroughly understood that the majority of
the plants mentioned below stand no chance of
succeeding if planted in the vicinity of such trees as
the above.
VARIOUS SHRUBS.
The Brunsfelsias (Francisias), if better known,
would surely be freely planted. Some of them-
are fairly hardy, very sweetly scented, and
produce abundance of flowers of soft, blue and
lavender colour during the warm part of the year.
They require a warm sheltered situation and very
little pruning, which should be done at the end of
winter. The most suitable kinds are B. confertiflora,
B. uniflora, and B. macrantha. We have also seen
plants of B. calycina major and B. violacea


grandiflora growing excellently in the border, but
these latter require some care until fairly established.
The Berberis Darwinii is a hardy little shrub that will
grow almost anywhere, but will berry only in a cold
climate ; it is handsome for its foliage alone, and will
flower several times in a year, even in June and July,
•covering the bush with a dense mass of tiny orange-
yellow blossoms. The Murraya exotica is another
dwarf compact shrub, with flowers of exquisite
fragrance, resembling orange blossoms, is evergreen,
very hardy, and requires no pruning. The Alamander
nerifolio, although classed as a stove plant and
frequently grown as such, will do well in unexposed
situations ; the flowers are of an orange-yellow and
bell-shaped, are produced in clusters freely through
the summer ; and, like the Brunsfelsias, these plants
are deciduous. The Gardenia tribe, of which there
are several varieties, are much valued for their strong-
scented, large white flowers. Unfortunately, the
choicest kinds are somewhat tender and difficult to
manage, being subject to frequent injury from black
scale.
REMEDY FOR PESTS.
The best remedy for this is a good washing with
warm water and soft soap, and a liberal application of
well-rotted manure and wood-ash to encourage free
growth, which, with good cultivation and irrigation,
will be found to be the best remedy against recurrences
of the attacks of this pest. For those who prefer to
apply some other wash, the following will be found
very effective : —Kerosene and milk : “ Heat milk
nearly to boiling point, and mix with double the
quantity of kerosene ; churn briskly for ten minutes
to half-an-hour ; dilute this with ten limes the quantity
of water, which must be kept stirring. This may
be applied to the leaves in the form of a fine spray,


and the branches and trunk brushed. The object
of the milk is to assist in a more complete mixture
of the kerosene and water.” Several other mixtures-
could be given, but perhaps this is as good as any.
GARDENIAS AND JASMINES.
The superior kinds of gardenias are G. fortunii
major, G. magnifica, and G. globosa. This latter
is quite distinct from all other gardenias, is not
affected with scale or other insects, and develops
into a handsome-shaped bush; the flowers are
creamy-white and bell-shaped. There are several
very beautiful dwarf-growing jasmines, richly scented,
not known to the public generally, that are deserv-
ing of a place in every garden; one of these,
a semi-climber, is a perfect little gem, slow-growing,,
but fairly hardy and wonderfully floriferous. The
flowers are snow-white, about an inch in diameter,
deeply scolloped, and star-shaped; its specific name
has been lost, and it is merely sent out as Jasminum
(species). The other variety, nearly as valuable,
named J. pubescens, is a small growing shrub, with
flowers of thick substance, pure white and richly
scented.
ADDITIONAL SHRUBS.
Olea fragrans is a small shrub, demanding some
care in its cultivation, for unless kept healthily
growing it is frequently attacked by a small
yellow scale peculiar to the orange. We strongly
recommend it for the delicious fragrance of the
flower which, at early morning or evening,
distributes its perfume throughout the garden. A
very useful plant is the Mackaya-bella, with its dark
green glossy foliage and pale lavender bell-shaped
flowers, hardy enough to grow anywhere. Erythrina


compacta may be called a gorgeous-flowering plant,
with its long spikes of crimson pea-shaped flowers.
All the Erythrinas are deciduous. A handsome,
hardy evergreen little shrub, the Veronica decussata,
the best of the type, is deserving of special mention ;
it is quite distinct from all other varieties and valuable
for its foliage alone. In early spring the plant may
be seen covered with a dense mass of pale lilac
flowers. Diosma ericoides : A compact, neat-growing
shrub, very hardy, and evergreen, and should be
included in every collection. The sweet-smelling
Daphnes should not be overlooked, especially those
named D. indica rubra and D. odora. The first
named, the better of the two, is exceedingly floriferous
and fragrant; the flowers are carmine and pale peach,
and, what is of great importance, the plant flowers
in the depth of winter. The Daphnes are badly
treated by the Inexperienced, particularly in regard to
pruning, which should be performed immediately
after flowering. Opportunity should be taken at this
time to shape the plants that otherwise are inclined to
grow stalky, and the new wood that is formed should
not be molested in the winter following the one in
which the flowers are produced. Abutilon Darwini
tasselatum; Another so-called stove plant, which will
grow well in the border with ordinary care. The
flowers, which are lantern-shaped and of an orange
colour, are very attractive looking, but the plant is
more valued for the beautiful variegated leaves.
Cantua buxifolia (dependens), the sacred flower' of
the Incas : A slender growing plant, and worth all
the care bestowed upon it for the lovely apricot-rose-
coloured flowers, which are of a slender trumpet
shape. It should be well understood that this is a
plant requiring some patience and coaxing before it
can be induced even to put forth a solitary flower.
Perhaps the best means to accomplish this is to


select a warm position, fairly sheltered from the strong
winds, and immediately after the flowering season
(early spring) prune it hard back, work into the soil
around it a liberal supply of well-rotted manure, and
do ndl attempt any further pruning until after the
next flowering. Several plants that are coddled in
greenhouses, in addition to those already mentioned,
such as Hibiscus Cooperii and Phylanthus-rosea picta,
we have seen doing excellently in the border; in fact,
the rich bronzy-rose colours for which the foliage is so
famous appeared to be more brilliant than any we had
seen come from the greenhouse, and certainly the
plants looked much healthier and in better form.
These two little shrubs have but to be seen growing
thus in the summer to be generally admired. The
first-named plant, in addition to its gay foliage, puts
forth an abundance of rich, rose-coloured flowers in
form and size like the azalea. The ground for plants
of this nature merely requires to be prepared as
described in the paper on roses, and to be thoroughly
cultivated or worked.
AZALEAS.
Perhaps there are ho more brilliant flowering
shrubs known than azaleas; yet how few are grown
by the ordinary amateur, and still fewer really
fine specimens are to be seen. There may be
some excuse for this, for they are a class of plant that
demand exceptional treatment; but what a wealth of
flowers to reward the grower for any labour expended.
Then select an easterly aspect, as far as possible
protected from the blustering winds, cultivate the soil
freely, and if it should be of a stiff character introduce
some sand and any light substance. In purchasing
young plants be sure to reject any that are pot-bound,
preferring those that have not been potted very long
and show fresh brown wood and new fibrous roots.


Azaleas are only surface feeders, and for that reason
should not be planted deep. A good time to plant
is when the flowering season is nearly over. Should
that insect pest —thrip —attack them, and you have a
hose with a rose attached, play it freely on the
underside of the foliage in the evening. A few of the
best are Alba magna, large white; Charles Encke,
rosy salmon, edged with white; Charmer, amaranth,
a large handsome flower ; Coloris nova, deep magenta ;
Mortii, double white ; Madame Dominique Varvaene,
rose, mottled with white ; Flag of Truce, pure white,
a splendid flower ; Roi de Holland, dark red spotted
with black; Souvenir de Prince Albert, blush striped
with peach, white margin; Stella, orange scarlet; Duke
of Nassau, carmine rose; and Sinensis, golden yellow.
This latter is a lovely thing, and yet so seldom grown ;
unlike the other varieties, it is deciduous. A good
specimen when in flower is worth going a long journey
to see. A plant we had the pleasure of seeing in flower
presented a most dazzling appearance ; but like most
good things of the kind it is tender in habit and must
be well cared for. Ceanothus veitchianus : pale blue,
winter-flowering and quick growing. The flowers of
all the ceanothus are very pretty, and if frequently
pruned will flower for a considerable time.
SUPERIOR FLOWERING SHRUBS.
A few superior flowering shrubs of a larger growth,
and that are not injurious to small plants if arranged
at some little distance and fairly spaced, are Ligustrum
chinensis, to be seen in early spring, a sheet of white
flower, as if covered with snow. The Magnolia
anonaefolia (port wine magnolia), so named from its
delicious perfume, which resembles fine old port wine,
and in every respect is a valuable shrub. Tecoma
velutina is a grand shrub, the gem of that class,
producing immense trusses of gorgeous lemon-coloured


flowers in great profusion. Unfortunately, many of our
nurserymen send out too frequently Tecoma stans, an
inferior sort, perhaps because it is more easily
propagated, being raised from seed; the other must
be layered. Durante' plumierii, blue, is compact
growing and hardy, but subject to black scale, which
must be got rid of as explained above. The
Dombeyas are splendid winter-flowering shrubs, very
sweet scented, and of pretty foliage. Philadelphus
Mexicana (mock orange) is a charming flowering
plant, very sweet-scented and hardy, grows into a
very neat bush, resembling spiraea. Pittosporum
Tobira and Tobira variegata, two most desirable
plants, very hardy, compact, and the flowers have a
delightful perfume. Spiraea floraplena is a well-known
shrub, but not sufficiently valued, perhaps owing to
the fact of its being easily grown ; many mistakes are
made in its treatment by vigorous pruning in the
winter, which only results in forcing a free growth of
foliage in the spring instead of flowers, whereas, had
this pruning been done immediately after flowering,
the plant would have formed ample wood to display
magnificent wreaths of flowers in the early spring.
Lasiandra macrantha, blue or purple, a free and
beautiful flowering shrub, should be severely pruned
when at rest, to secure a compact growth. There are
but few plants that will supply us with flowers of
such lovely shades of blue as this. The Deutzias
should not be overlooked, especially crenata floraplena,
and even little gracillis ; they should be treated
similarly to the spiraea. Arbutus canariensis : Very
hardy and evergreen, valuable for the exquisite little
sprays of white flowers tinged with pink that so much
resemble lily of the valley in form. Burchellia
capensis : A very choice shrub with crimson flowers,
of hardy habit. The above shrubs, all the best of the
different flowering varieties mentioned, may be


considered a very good selection, and if the collection of
roses recommended and fully described in a former
number be added, together with a variety of camellias,
herbaceous and other plants which will form the
subjects of future papers, we venture to think that
the proprietor will have no cause to regret having
acted upon the advice tendered in these columns.


CAMELLIAS.
JAPONICA, to which the many
beautiful varieties we now possess principally
owe their origin, is a native of Japan, to which country
we are also indebted for so many lovely flowers and
charming ferns, which are as much at home in a
climate similar to that in the neighbourhood of Sydney
as in their mother-land. Lovers of this queen of
winter and early spring flowering plants have expended
much time and skill with a view to improve the original
varieties, and we now enjoy the fruits of their labours;
but in regard to the best selection to make from a list
of names, numbering several hundreds, considerable
difficulty is experienced even by the well informed on
this subject. New South Wales is happy in possessing
at least one enthusiastic and successful camellia
grower, in the person of Mr. Sheather, of Parramatta,
to whom we are indebted for several varieties of the
very highest merit; it is doubtful, in fact, whether
there is any variety known to excel Prince Frederick
William, taking its many qualities into consideration.
Even the magnificent Hovey’s must give place to
Sheather’s finest, and Prince Frederick William is
not the only flower of merit raised and distributed by
that famous grower. Harriet Beecher Sheather is
another of almost equal beauty. The first-named is


of perfect shape, and in colour soft satiny rose; the
other is also of splendid shape ; colour, rosy salmon ;
and, what is of considerable importance, they are both
very hardy, quick, and compact growers.
TREATMENT OF THE CAMELLIA.
Unfortunately, the camellia receives but poor treat-
ment from the average growers about Sydney. It is
planted with about as much care as one would plant a
gum tree, with the result that the greater number perish.
A portion of those that live present but a wretched and
unhealthy appearance ; and as fine, healthy young
plants, with the right “ stuff ” in them to make good
bushes, cannot be purchased from the nurserymen
under 2s. 6d. to 3s. 6d. each, it becomes a costly
matter, this planting and replanting. We shall
therefore endeavour to assist lovers of this truly noble
flower in the way of selecting, planting, and growing
it, by some of the best methods known.
SOIL AND ASPECT.
The ground should first be trenched and prepared
in the manner described in the article on roses.
And it may be as well to take this opportunity
to further explain, in regard to the difficult
question of trenching, that no hard-and-fast rule
can be laid down, owing to the variable nature of
soils in different localities. For instance, land having
natural drainage, or which can be drained, and a
surface loam of from nine to twelve inches deep, the
remainder of the soil to a depth of twenty-four inches
from the surface consisting of a mixture of loam, clay,
or gravelly clay, should be dug up to a depth of
eighteen inches only, and well mixed, and the
remainder, about six inches, broken up with a pick or
fork and left at the bottom. But where soils are


of a light, porus, or sandy character of a depth of
twenty-four inches, or more, it would be unnecessary
to dig deeper than about twelve inches, and soils
of this nature can be much improved by working in
plenty of short, stiff manures. In every case where
the subsoil is of a worthless character, no good can
result from bringing it to the surface ; indeed, only
harm will ensue. The next thing for consideration is
aspect; and this is a matter of some importance, for
the camellia will not thrive anywhere ; choose
an easterly aspect, and provide some shelter, such
as a fence, a trellis, or some evergreen shrubs, as
a protection against the fierce rays of the afternoon
summer sun.
PLANTING.
In planting, camellias should be spaced about
ten feet apart ; between these other plants may
be grown, such as roses, &c.. which can be easily
removed when the camellias require more room. A
space several feet in diameter should first be thoroughly
mixed up with some old rotted manure, wood ash, and
well-aired loam. In the middle of this space dig a
hole to the depth of a foot, and tread down firmly.
The plant may now be taken from the pot, which may
be done by passing the stem of the plant between the
fingers, and resting the palm of the hand on the
surface of the ball of earth ; then invert the pot, and
tap the rim gently on a fence or other convenient
object; but unlike the method advised for planting the
roses by spreading its roots, etc. With the exception
of removing the crocks with a small portion of the
soil forming the bottom of the ball, and a portion of
that at the top, the roots should not be disturbed, and
should only be planted an inch or two deeper than it
existed in the pot, around which the earth should be
pressed firmly, and watered, and the plant tied firmly


to a stake. Some shelter will be necessary to protect
the young plants from the strong winds and a scorching
sun, and for this purpose nothing is so serviceable as
ti-tree bushes stuck around each plant at a little
distance, with the tops brought almost together. The
ti-tree should not be removed until the plants are
established, which, in some instances, may take twelve
months. The addition .of a good mulching about the
plants during summer, consisting of rotted or fresh
manure, or grass sods, will be found very beneficial,
for it is during the first year or so that every care
must be taken. When the plants have made new
roots and foliage and adapted themselves to
their new home, it is found that they will withstand
a moderate amount of neglect. During their
growing periods they should be liberally supplied
with water, and, if many flower buds form whilst the
plants are very young, most of them should be
carefully screwed off without injuring the wood spurs.
Perhaps the best of all the methods to adopt in
planting this shrub is to select a suitable place in the
open garden and erect a strong hardwood structure
about 12ft. high, and sparingly cover with ti-tree, the
walls also of the same material, and, under the shelter
of this, plant in the manner above described, arranging
the plants with some taste in regard to the colours of
the flowers. It has been found that they do admirably,
treated in this way ; the flowers expand mere slowly,
are much finer and richer in colour, and last for long
periods fresh upon the bush. If desirable, some choice
small-growing plants, such as the pretty bouvardias,
carnations, and others, may be planted between the
camellias until those shrubs require more room ; but
this would not be for several years. Whatever method
is adopted, there is but one season in which camellias
can be safely planted, and that is the early autumn.
Amateurs should commit this fact well to memory ;it


is also 'the best time to plant out most other plants
of a tender nature, for the ground is then warm, while
the sun is not so fierce, and the plants have all the
autumn, winter, and spring before them to become
well established before the approaching summer.
This appears a hard lesson to learn if one may judge
from the fact that most intending growers wait until
they see the plants in flower and then make a selection,
which postpones the planting until the end of winter,
whereas a careful selection of the names of some of
the best flowers should have been made the previous
year with a view to future planting.
SELECTION OF PLANTS.
When purchasing camellias from the nursery-
man, it is most important to know how to identity
a young healthy plant, one that has the right
kind of material in it to grow into a handsome
bush. Failing this, even though all the above
instruction be carried out, it will be but a waste
of labour. It should be borne in mind, then,
that the majority of camellias are propagated by
layering, and that only a limited number of the plants
that are obtained from a bush by layering are what
are known as leaders. It is the leaders that make
the best plants. Now, the nurseryman, who is subject
to the same rules of business as other tradesmen,
studies his best customers, to whom he supplies the
best plants, and for which he receives a higher price
than for the inferior ones. It is therefore very
necessary that the casual buyer should know how to
select a good plant. This should be straight and tall,
the young shoots smooth, long, and of a nut brown
colour, and the foliage free from scale and very glossy.
The nurseryman should be asked to lift the plant from
the pot, and if numerous fresh white roots are to be
seen, that plant may be accepted, but do not expect to


obtain such a plant for a shilling, or for double that
amount, 3s. 6d. is a fair price to pay for it. To buy
plants with black, short-jointed wood, because they
are cheap, is a very foolish policy. Alba plena,
Fimbrieta, and others of a weak habit, should be
grafted on some strong growing stock, such as aspasia,
for they do not succeed on their own roots. And
never be induced to take large plants that have been
potted for many years. Any plants presenting a
sickly appearance, which may be known by the leaves
losing their gloss, and in some instances producing a
great many flower buds of a brownish colour, the
majority of which fall off undeveloped, should be
immediately attended to.
MULCHING, ETC.
Apply a good mulching of well-rotted manure, and a
liberal watering in the evening several times a week
until they begin to sprout, ft has been noticed that
duringa very dry summer camellias, instead of making
fresh wood, become studded with flower buds, a sure
sign of drought. In regard to pruning, very little of that
is required ; merely cut out all decayed wood, and also
any weak non-flowering wood from the centre of the
bush, and when removing developed blooms, carefully
separate them from the stem without injury to the
dormant wood-spurs that are situated at the back of
the flowers, because it is from these spurs especially
that the plant developes. It is not advisable to
remove camellias from place to place when once
planted, particularly when they have grown to any
size, they seldom entirely recover from the shock
received; but if it must be attempted, more than
ordinary care should be taken against disturbing the
roots. The removal should take place in the autumn
and the plants be protected with ti-tree bushes for a
considerable time.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
AGENT AND IMPORTER,
INDIA RUBBER GOODS
WATERPROOF CLOTHING
STEAM & DELIVERY HOSE—o—
SPECIAL HOSE FOR ROCK AND
I. R. and CANVAS BELTING
FIRE BRIGADE HOSE—o—
BRASS FITTINGS FOR /
HOSE PIPES, etc.-o
SHEET RUBBER, IN- .
SERTION, WASHERS, /
CYLINDER OILS
MACHINERY


ADVERTISEMENTS.
AS A MANURE.
To the Farmers, Orchardists, Nurserymen,
Market-Gardeners, and Florists of New
South Wales.
If you find your soil less productive than in former
years, try a small plot with Sulphate of Ammonia,
1 cwt. of which contains as much Nitrogen as 36 cwt.
of average stable manure.
See for yourselves if the increased produce in Hay,
Grain, Fruit, Vegetables, or Flowers, amply repays the
expenditure.
To enable the smallest grower to make small
experiments for himself, the Gas Company will sell
i cwt. of this valuable fertilizer for 135., delivered at the
Railway Station, or as small a parcel as 61bs. for Is.,
delivered at the Gas Company’s Office, Kent Street, or
their branch in Bathurst Street. Sydney. Orders
must be accompanied by a remittance.
AUSTRALIAN GAS-LIGHT COMPANY’S
SULPHATE I OF I AMMONIA,
GUARANTEED TO CONTAIN NOT LESS THAN
24 per cent, of Ammonia, or
20 per cent, of Nitrogen.
Pamphlets showing “How” and “When” to use the Sulphate,
may be had FREE on application to the above Company.


VARIETIES.
We may now proceed to make a selection that
may be relied upon as containing some of the
-very finest of flowers, fit for any exhibition stand.
Prince Frederick William has already been men-
tioned, and so has Harriet Beecher Sheather.
William Bull (synonymous with Wrightii), beautiful
bright clear rose, very large and cupped. Lady
St. Clair—delicate pale peach, a lovely flower, of
■perfect form, but requires shade to open freely.
Myrtifolia—dark rose, shaded to silvery pink, of
exquisite form, rather a slow grower. Rafais—rich
•carmine red, of excellent form, and free flowering, the
best of that colour. Henri Favre—salmon rose, a
•splendid flower, of perfect shape. Lavina Maggi rosea
—vivid rose, sometimes mottled with white, a beautiful
flower, and a hardy growing plant. Mathotiana—
brilliant crimson, a superb flower. C. H. Hovey—a
dark variety of novel colour, the deep velvety crimson
petals being peculiarly and darkly shaded. The
flowers are very large, and of a beautiful shape, the
petals symmetrical and handsomely imbricated.
C. M. Hovey —bright crimson, of exquisite imbricated
form, the petals exceedingly smooth, and without the
serrature common to most camellias. These two
camellias are of American origin, and without doubt
are noble flowers, being of great size. Storyii—rosy
pink, one of the best old varieties. Countess of
Ellesmere—pale lilac rose, a novel colour in camellias,
of excellent form. L’Avenir —pale rose, striped and
■edged with deep rose, splendid form. Jouvans —rose,
shaded crimson, a large bold flower, in the way of
Venus de Medicis. Lefevreana —rich pale rose, of
exquisite satin texture and form. Lowii —rich crimson,
3. magnificent flower. Helenor—large carnation,
striped, a general favourite, a strong grower, Lavinia
maggi—white, striped with crimson, a very fine flower,


the best of the class, and the plant is a very robust
grower. Metallica—dark metalic purple, of excellent
form ; the flowers are produced in great abundance,
and the plant is a very rapid grower. Mons. d’Offoy
a splendid large flower of beautiful shape. Bicolor
de La Reine—light rose, margined with white.
Stella Polare—carnation, striped. Endymion—pale
rose, flaked with white, a very pretty bloom of
handsome shape. Imbricata—deep rose, blotched
with white, very attractive. Venus de Medicis—
crimson, veined with rose, a large handsome flower,
in the way of C. M. Hovey. The last six named
camellias are some of the best coloured varieties that
were staged at the late Horticultural Society’s
exhibition, which was evidently held nearly a month
too soon. Some of the very best white varieties
are himbriata, a lovely flower of exquisite shape,
not so stiff in appearance as most camellias,
and delicately fringed; Alba plena, a fine large
flower, pure white, and fully double, one of the best;
Mathotiana alba, a splendid flower, pure white,
imbricated to the centre; Bonomiana, creamy white,
sometimes flaked with crimson, a large, handsomely-
formed flower, with petals of great substance;
Comtesse Call in i, pure white, a pretty flower of fine
form, and a robust grower; on this account it is
much to be preferred to Alba plena and many other
whites, and the blooms always fully expand ; Pauline
Maggi, a pure white, finely imbricated with numerous
petals, a charming variety ; and Isabella, pure white,
a splendid flower, and a most desirable camellia in
many ways, being very hardy, develops into a compact
bush, and is a very late bloomer, which is of much
value in itself, for while Fimbriata is perhaps the
earliest to burst into flower, Isabella is about the last.
Thus, by a judicious selection, blooms may be had for
at least five months of the year. The above varieties


can be obtained from any of our Sydney nurserymen,,
with the exception of perhaps the Hoveys, which can
be obtained in Melbourne ; and perhaps this is an
opportune time to ask why do our nurserymen persist
in propagating such very inferior varieties as old
Aspasia, Waratah, and others of that class, and that
monstrosity ‘‘Great Eastern,” and dispose of the
same to the inexperienced, when there are several
hundred beautiful varieties to choose from. May we
suggest that, although those varieties are easily
propagated, it is certainly not the best means to
adopt for the purpose of cultivating a public love for
the camellia.


BOUVARDIAS.
THE many charming varieties of this superior and
most useful little flower have but to be more
generally known among all lovers of gardening,
to be more extensively cultivated than they are at
present. Many amateurs are under the impression
that only two or three named varieties are in cultivation
about Sydney, whereas upwards of twenty of the very
choicest varieties alone can now be obtained from our
Sydney nurserymen, and at very reasonable prices.
VALUE OF THE BOUVARDIA.
The Bouvardia, so named in honour of Dr.
Bouvard, of the Jardin du Roi, Paris, is indigenous
to Mexico, and it has fairly established its claim
to a place in every garden where judgment and
good taste prevail, for not only are its flowers
famous for their exquisite delicacy and perfume,
they are produced in such abundance that to
gather them even daily from the bushes only seems
to result in greater floriferousness, and in stimulating
the plant to a more rapid growth. A bouquet
of selected bouvardias, veiled with that graceful little
Adiantum gracillimum, is fit companion for one
even composed of roses ; and if bouvardias, rosebuds,
and Adiantum gracillimum be gracefully combined to


form a bouquet, there remains but little in floriculture
that is its equal. There are very few garden flowers
the rose will admit to its queenly company, but the
bouvardia is sufficiently exquisite to share such
an honour, and may even be said to adorn the rose by
its presence. The nurseryman knows full well its
value, and cultivates it very largely, for he finds it
unequalled for button-hole and bouquet decoration ;
in fact, but for this flower during the late autumn and
winter, he would have been much puzzled to obtain the
wherewithal to comply with the numerous demands
for wedding and other bouquets. This paper is
therefore written with a view to popularising the
‘‘pretty bouvardia” and making plain the method of
its cultivation to the amateur.
CULTIVATION OF THE BOUVARDIA.
The bouvardia cannot be called a hardy plant,
although it flourishes in colder climates than that about
Sydney. Several of the varieties may be considered
fairly hardy, such as Jacquinae flora, but the majority of
them require careful culture, particularly during the dry
summer weather Sydney is so often subject to. To
grow bouvardias to perfection, a light, rich, peety soil
is most necessary. It should be thoroughly drained r
especially during winter, and through the summer the
plants must be liberally supplied with water and
mulched. Beware of liquid manures with this plant,
unless in a very diluted form. The bouvardia is not a
gross feeder, and if any sour or salt liquid find its way
to its roots, it will have an effect similar to that to be
expected from an application of scalding water to its
foliage. It can be further improved if a ti-tree shelter
is set up as a break-wind, and protection from the
westering summer sun. This extra method of
cultivation has merely been touched upon to indicate


what kind of treatment bouvardias require, in order to
obtain flowers of an exceptional beauty, and throughout
the year.
PREPARATION OF THE SOIL.
But we propose to explain how bouvardias can
be grown in ordinary garden soil (even stiff soil)
if the plants are carefully attended to and the
soil properly cultivated. What is meant by properly
cultivating the soil is to have it trenched, in
the first place, twenty-four inches, and then
thoroughly mixed with a long garden fork. It
will be all the better if the ground is prepared thus
several months before planting. For a further
explanation in regard to trenching, see the article on
“ Camellias.” Those about to make gardens should
thoroughly understand that it is not of the slightest
use merely digging the ground one spit deep in a
climate such as we have about Sydney, for in the
course of time most of the plants will fall victims to
the hot-dry summers. Of course, these remarks are
not intended to apply to deep, rich, porous soils, but
such soils as generally prevail in the western suburbs,
and which consist of from nine to twelve inches of
surface, and beneath that loam and clay mixed, and
finally clay at the bottom.
PLANTING.
If the ground then is prepared for planting,
select the most sheltered positions from the cold
westerly winds, and an easterly aspect, if the
situation of the land will admit of it, and plant into
the ground exactly in the same manner as described
for camellias, by carefully removing the plant from
the pot, and a small portion of the earth forming
the top and the bottom of the ball. Take care not to


plant too deep —about an inch below the pot mark
will be sufficient; press the earth firmly about the
roots and stem, water well, and tie securely to a small
stake. A space two or three feet across, where the
bouvardia is to be planted, should first be thoroughly
mixed up with some light well-aired soil, and old
rotted manure, should the general character of the
garden soil be stiff, and a few pieces of ti-tree, or
bits of paling stuck in the ground, around each plant,
until they are fairly established. There is only one
season of the year in which bouvardias can with safety
be planted out, and that is the early autumn, failing
which early spring is the next best time. Those who
plant in the depth of winter run much risk of losing a
considerable proportion of the plants from frost.
Moreover, if the autumn is missed, no advantage is
obtained by winter-planting, because it has been
observed that during the period the ground is very
cold no fresh rooting takes place.
TRAINING THE PLANTS.
When the young plants begin to grow, some
attention ought to be given to their form, par-
ticularly to varieties which have a tendency to
grow straggling and stalky. That habit can be
corrected by pinching out the top of the shoots before
they have made much growth. This induces side
shoots, and as these grow out they also should be
stopped in like manner. The stopping process mav
be continued until the plants have made a fair-
sized head, when they should be allowed to form
flower-buds, and as these bloom and fall the flowerless
stalks should be cut off, which serves the purpose of
stimulating fresh growth and keeping the bush neat
and tidy. Many of the flower-heads form seed-vessels,
which not only impart to the plant an untidy
appearance, but impoverish it.


INSECTS.
Some of the weaker varieties, especially B,
Oriflamme, are victims to the attacks of several
insects, such as black scale, and aphis (green fly).
The sweet-scented Bouvardia Humboldtii Corymbiflora
also suffers from these pests, and the anxious amateur
cons book after book in his search for some remedy,
with the result that he is considerably puzzled to know
which to choose from among so many ; but finally
deciding upon one, described as a certain cure,
applies it. The insects are killed, and so also are the
tender plants. Experience has taught that a remedy
for most of the causes of insect and other pests that
attack plants can be applied more effectively to the
roots than the branches. If any of the washes pre-
scribed are successful in ridding the plants of the
insects named, it will be only of a temporary
character ; in a little time they will again return to
the attack. Should the human system fall into an
unhealthy state, it would be of but little use applying
a wash to the skin as a complete remedy; so it
is with the plant. Perhaps the best plan is to
thoroughly clean the stems and foliage with the aid
of soft soap, warm water, a piece of sponge, and a
common nailbrush, and then fork up the soil freely
about the plant. t the same time mix in some old
rotted manure, and if the soil looks dry, water w r ell ;
should this treatment not restore the plant to health,
dig it up, wash the soil carefully from its roots, prune
with a sharp knife both these and the branches,
especially removing all dead or injured roots, and
re-plant in another position. In some cases it has
been found that bad drainage has been the cause of
the plant’s sickly condition. Bad drainage may be
known by the soil having a sticky consistency, and in
winter looking greenish on the surface. Well-drained
soil should crumble freely when lifted by a garden


fork. A good drainage is cheaply and easily made
with 2in. porous drain-pipes, laid from 24m. to 30m.
below the surface of the soil and about Bft. apart,
leading to the lowest point of the garden, where the
water can escape. But it more frequently happens
that the roots of some adjacent tree or large shrub or
climber is the robber, causing all the mischief to these
tender growing plants ; and if this should be the case,
which may be known by making a search for the
roots of the stranger, the best remedy is to remove
the plant to some other position in the garden, or
else take out the tree. From whatever cause plants
may suffer, it has been observed that immediately
they exhibit signs of failing health the various insect
plagues appear, and in such swarms that the plant,
becoming less and less able to resist, soon falls a prey
to their continuous attack.
PRUNING.
In regard to pruning, the bouvardia requires
exceptional treatment; in fact, should be subjected
to a careful pruning throughout the year; but
in early spring, just as the plants show signs of
again bursting into life they may be freely cut down
and shaped. Of course, it is impossible to state
exactly how to prune each variety ; the intelligent
amateur will soon discover that for himself. B.
jacquinaeflora, for instance, should be cut down to
within a foot of the ground, so also may B. Van
Houtte ; but B. elegans may possess only one or two
stems from which the head has been formed ; in that
case prune the branches back only. There are several
methods of propagating in practice, but perhaps only
two that can be safely recommended—namely, root
division and cuttings. The former is by far the best
for the amateur, because it entails less trouble ; it is
the surest, and quickest in result.


PROPAGATION.
As soon as the plants to be divided show signs
of renewed life, in early spring, dig them up, and
with a sharp knife divide the stems, taking care
to cut so that each stem has a piece of root
attached. They should then be potted separately in
four-inch pots, put into a glass-frame, and shaded for
a few weeks, after which gradually give more air and
light. When the pots have become filled with new
roots plant out as above described. To propagate by
cuttings, take the young tops just before the flower
buds are formed and insert half-a-dozen round the
edge of each pot, which should be partly filled with a
light compost, and completed to within a quarter of
an inch of the rim with clean sharp sand; then water,
and put into a glass-frame, with bottom heat, but do
not keep them very wet, or they may damp off. It will
have been noticed that very little can be done in the
way of successful propagation, without the aid of a
glass-frame; every amateur should provide himself
with one even of ever so crude a character, which can
be made out of any rough materials. Bouvardias can
also be raised from seed if it is gathered ripe and
planted under glass; in fact the seed of some of the
hardy kinds will spring up near the plants, in the
garden, if the soil is left undisturbed for a season.
VARIETIES.
We recommend amateurs to obtain the following
varieties, which are some of the best in cultiva-
tion to be obtained in the colonies;—Bouvardia
elegans—brilliant crimson, producing large compact
racemes of handsome flowers that last for a long
time when cut; this is probably the richest coloured
and best variety we have, but some nurserymen have
a habit of substituting for it B. brilliant, which in


some respects it resembles. Maiden’s blush—bright-
peach, very free grower, and hardy ; the flowers are
produced in large corymbs in the freest manner, an
excellent variety. Vreelandii—a robust grower,
producing large clusters of white flowers, shaded with
a delicate pink tinge, especially so in the autumn,
Candidissima —one of the finest of the white flowering
varieties, displaying its pure white trumpet-shaped
flowers to great advantage, and which are delightfully
fragrant; this variety has also the advantage of being
one of the most hardy, and has a neat bushy habit.
Brilliant—vermilion scarlet, very hardy, and floriferous,
one of the best. Priory Beauty —of a beautiful shade
of pale satin rose, flowers freely, produced in elegant
and compact trusses, a very distinct variety. Dazzler
—a splendid variety of vigorous growth, producing
fine clusters of rich scarlet flowers. Longiflora
flammea —a very beautiful variety ; the flowers are
very large, of a clear rose colour, extremely floriferous,
and slightly fragrant; the only bright-coloured variety
we have with a fragrance, but the plant is not robust.
Umbellata carnea —delicate rosy-blush, a lovely
variety ; the flowers are very large, freely produced,
and deliciously fragrant; should be included in every
collection. Laura —deep pink, a pretty little flower,
very hardy, and wonderfully floriferous; will flower
all through the year. Van Route—scarlet, very pretty,
and quite hardy. Jacquinaeflora—bright red, a most
useful variety, flowers in the depth of winter,
Conspicua —bright blood-red colour, whitish tube, the
pistil extending beyond the flowers like a white star
lying on the ground colour. Oriflame—rich vermilion
scarlet. Humboldtii corymbiflora—very free flowering,
flowers pure white and richly fragrant ; this is a
charming variety, unrivalled for bouquet purposes ; the
largest and most richly-scented bouvardia known, but
requires more than ordinary care to cultivate it.


DOUBLE VARIETIES.
Afewof the best double varieties are President Garfield
—a handsome variety of a delicate pale peach; the
flowers are produced in fine large trusses, especially
during the autumn. Alfred Neuner—white, occasionally
shaded with light rose; this beautiful variety is invaluable
for all decorative purposes ; it is of excellent habit, and a
profuse bloomer. Sang Lorrain—a very fine flowering
variety, producing fine corymbs of large double
flowers of a brilliant vermilion colour. Triomphe de
Nancy—a vigorous and floriferous variety, with large
compact corymbs of well-formed double flowers, of a
beautiful orange-salmon colour. Victor Lemoine—
the fine imbricated double flowers of this variety are
of a fiery scarlet colour, produced in large corymbs,
in the freest manner. Etna—a new variety, producing
freely fine round umbels of large double flowers, of a
reddish vermilion colour. Hogarthi floraplena—a
beautiful double-flowered form, of the useful and
well-known B. Hogarthi, having the same vigour and
free flowering qualities as the type; the flowers
are of a very bright-red colour, double, and prettily
imbricated, a new variety. And lastly, Bouvardia
flavescens —clear, bright, lemon-yellow ; this is a
true yellow single variety, quite unlike that worthless
bouvardia, Oriana, which is not a yellow, but a pale
buff or salmon, and in other respects not worth
growing. Cultivators of the bouvardia have for
a long time endeavoured to produce a true yellow
variety, and now we have it here in Sydney, and
a very pretty variety it is. It should be added
that the plant is quite hardy and vigorous, but
that the flowers soon fade from a bright yellow
after first opening to almost white. There are
many other varieties obtainable, but the above
mentioned would make a very choice collection, and
reward the careful cultivator with a daily and abundant
supply of their exquisite blossoms.


SOME GREENHOUSE PLANTS.
DURING the months of August and September
greenhouse plants demand more care and
attention than at any other period of the year ; more
time, in fact, than the average amateur can bestow.
To some extent the difficulty can be met by gradually
making every preparation against this busy season
for several months before by carefully examining and
taking note of the various plants requiring to be
shifted. By this means, also, the size and number of
pots to wash clean and get ready will be knowm, and
the probable amount of drainage material and compost
required. All necessary repairs, alterations, etc.,
should be completed. To undertake much of this
work in comfort a small shed where all the potting
requisites can be kept is necessary, and a bench
should be arranged in order, so that the congenial
work may be carried on in the evening by the aid of
a lamp.
CAUTION REQUIRED.
The practice too frequently followed by enthusiastic
amateurs, who become devotedly attached to their
plants, of remaining for long periods of time in the
greenhouse after sundown, is liable to be attended with
much harm to their systems. In the article on “ Ferns ”
it was explained how plants breathed in during light
(sunlight particularly) atmospheric air, and retaining


the carbonic acid gas, exhaled the oxygen, this
action being reversed in the dark; carbonic acid gas
is then exhaled. If this action of plants is thoroughly
understood, the injury likely to result from breathing
a large proportion of carbonic gas will be apparent to
the simplest person. Those who follow the above
custom have frequently complained of suffering from
what resembles prickly heat. The hands, face, and
arms, if uncovered, turn red, then itch severely, and
finally tingle, and perhaps other and internal injury
may have been caused but not noticed at the time ;
therefore remain no longer than is absolutely
necessary in a green-house after dark, although the
inducement to view the plants by moonlight or
gas-light is very great, every flower and plant and
living thing being clothed in a beauty not all its own.
Moreover, slugs and wood-lice are then to be caught
in the very act of partaking their evening supper, a
meal of so much destruction to tender growth.
DRACAENAS.
Dracaenas and palms are two handsome classes
of plants that are very necessary to decorate
any green-house, and both are of comparatively
easy culture. The first-named should be obtained
in a young state, or from cuttings or pieces of the
stems of old plants. Those grown from the tops of
old plants, after they have grown too tall to be any
longer beautiful, never make such good plants.
Although these plants may be grown by almost
anyone, some care is necessary to enable them to
retain all their lower leaves in health and colour,
while producing ample top foliage. Those who
possess old dracaenas with long stems should cut off
the top, with a few inches of ripe stem, remove all
ill-looking leaves from its base, and plant into a


small, well-drained pot, filled with a light compost
then cut the remaining stem into short pieces,
containing at least one joint or ring, and plant just
below the surface of the soil, round the edge of a pan
or pot, of similar compost. In both cases some
bottom heat should be given, although they will root
and vegetate without it. The young plants should be
kept growing in winter and summer, by being placed
near the glass in the warmest part of the house, and
watered carefully throughout the year. Four-inch
pots will be large enough to start them in, and when
well rooted shift into six-inch pots; larger pots than usual
are advisable for the dracaena, in order to assist in the
production of broad foliage. The soil specially
preferred is real peat, cut into pieces about one inch
square, and mixed with some light rich compost,
which should be pressed down firmly. It will not be
necessary to re-pot these plants annually if during
the summer they are liberally watered, and if the pots
are quite filled with roots a weak liquid manure is
given them. The dracaena belongs to a class of plants
much injured by thrip a tiny insect to be found on the
underside of the leaves. It is so very small, that
unless searched for will be overlooked ; but its
ravages may be seen in the russetty patches on the
leaves. A safe and sure remedy is an occasional
washing with soft soap and water and a piece of
sponge, but an unfailing preventive is found in
syringing with clean water from beneath the foliage,
particularly in the evening when the house is closed
for the night, the moisture will then remain on the
leaves all night, much to the discomfiture of this
insect. This treatment should be applied to all plants
subject to injury from that pest. A few of the best
and hardiest varieties, and mostuseful for a greenhouse,
are Dracaena Baptistii, D. Youngii, D. Victoria, D.
Belmoreana, and D. Hendersonii.


PALMS.
Those beautiful palms from Lord Howe Island—
Kentia Canterburyana, K. Belmoreana. K. Fosteriana
or Thatchpalm, and K. Materia Mooreii —should
not be missed ; unfortunately these are attacked
incessantly by a very small hard brown scale, that
is very difficult to dislodge, but they are not so
attacked if grown in a bushhouse, where more air is
available. Another palm, Latania Barbonica, is
admirably adapted for the greenhouse, and is a very
hardy and handsome table decorative plant, and one
that is quite free from the ravages of any insect. The
cabbage-tree palm, in its young state, is another highly
useful and ornamental plant; so also is the Seaforthia
elegans, but the last named must be watched for thrip.
The slender-growing Areca lutesens cannot be
successfully grown, unfortunately, in a cool house,
but it is a most graceful and beautiful variety.
THE PANDANUS.
Pandanus Veitchii, and P. Javanacus are two
very showy and attractive plants, having bright
green leaves, prettily marked with stripes and
bands of pure white ; but requires more than
ordinary care to grow in a cool house, and a
compost of an exceptional character, which should
consist of ordinary light potting soil, mixed with half
its quantity of pieces of charcoal, brick, and wood
cinders of about the size of beans (broad). During
its growing period (summer) water may be freely
supplied, but during its resting period water should
almost be entirely withheld, or just sufficient allowed
to prevent the soil from becoming dust dry, and be
careful at this time to apply the water to the soil
only, for, should any find its way to the axils of the
leaves, or the hollows in their leaves at their junction


■with the stem, it will be retained there for a long
time, and may cause the base of the leaves and stem
to rot. Plants of this kind should be arranged during
their period of rest, high up near the glass, for
warmth, light, and out of the reach of the water spray.
Should any of these plants lose the green bands
in their leaves and turn ivory white, it is an unfailing
sign of sickness and merely a matter of time for its
■complete decay. The only remedy in such a case is
to lift the plant from the pot, shake out the soil, wash
the roots, cut away all decayed parts, and re-pot into
as small a pot as it can be got into, with the above
compost, and apply bottom heat, by this means its
life might be saved.
BEGONIAS.
Begonias of the variegated leaved variety, like
most other plants, will be showing signs of renewed
life, and in most cases will need a shift, or
re-potting with fresh soil, which should be of a light
character, and would be much improved by a mixture
of old rotted cocoanut fibre or tanbark. It will
be a mistake to grow on year after year the
same begonias, for they soon fall out of form, it is
much better to commence again with young plants
the second or third year at most. A stock of these
may be always on hand by cutting off some of the
ripest and strongest leaves during the summer or
autumn ; cut the stems to within an inch of the base
of the leaves and insert into the rotted tan beneath
the benches, sprinkling a little of the tan on the crown
of the leaves, and then water. In two or three
months they will root and put forth young leaves, and
may then be potted off, using the smallest pots they
can be pressed into, taking care not to bury the
crowns, or to soak them too much with water, or they
will quickly damp off. There are many very beautiful


varieties of this type alone that add so much to the
attractiveness of a greenhouse, and are also useful for
indoor decoration, but, like most plants, they require
to be removed at short intervals to the greenhouse or
bushhouse. The practice pursued by some amateurs
of shifting these plants into pot after pot of greater
size until they become enormous specimens, cannot
be commended ; such a practice entails much labour,
the plants occupy a great deal of room and grow
weak in habit, and certainly do not look nearly so
pretty as a neat, compact plant of medium size grown
in an eight-inch pot with all imperfect leaves removed.
A few of the very best of this variety are Duchess,
Count Alfred Leminge, Diadem, Daedalia, Rex,
Tam O’Shanter, Aurea, Acaulti, Due de Brabant, and
Imperialis. This latter is a little gem, of a rich
emerald green colour, should never be overpotted,
and delights in a very light peaty compost and
shade.
CROTONS.
Crotons are very handsome foliage plants, but
it is simply useless to attempt their cultivation
in a cool house. Much heat is required to bring
out all their brilliant markings, and, moreover, they
are shocking victims to the thrip pest. Amateurs
who have only a limited time at their disposal should
select only such plants as are adapted to a cool house,
and in a warm climate such as Sydney's a great many
of the most beautiful kinds of plants will flourish
without artificial heat if properly treated. As we have
stated elsewhere, unless the artificial heat supplied
to a greenhouse is skilfully and unremittingly
attended to, the plants therein suffer more than if
heat had never been applied ; and how often amateurs
are suddenly called away from their homes, which
may happen in the coldest part of winter, and during


their absence the fires may not be lighted from
neglect or other cause. But much good would result
from the application of a moderate temperature of
heat from July to September only, which period may
be considered the most critical time in a plant’s life,,
when, in fact, an effort is being made by the approaching
spring to arouse them from their winter sleep, but
from which, alas, many never awake.
SHADE.
In connection with this subject, the matter of
shade might be mentioned, for but few amateurs can
be at home during any part of the day; something,,
therefore, is wanted that does not require hourly
adjusting to the sun’s rays, and for the purpose the
following will be found admirably suited for the
average class of plants usually grown in a glass house.
Frost the inside of the glass thinly with white paint,-
which will be sufficient protection against the sun
during the period between May and October; and
from October to May put on a permanent covering of
open, coarse packing canvas.
THE SNOW PLANT AND THE CLERODENDRON,.
An exceedingly pretty little foliage plant is the
Phylanthus nivosus, or snow plant, the leaves are
blotched with pale peach and white. This plant
should be pruned to keep it shapely, when showing
signs of again putting forth its foliage; and it
delights in plenty of water. Perhaps one of the most
attractive and beautiful flowering plants in cultivation
is the Clerodendron balfourii, with its brilliant crimson
flowers, enclosed in a large white calyx, which, to be
seen to advantage, should be trained over a balloon
shape frame, constructed of cane. In the spring, just
before the new shoots appear, it should be carefully


pruned, re-potted with a light rich compost, and
arranged and tied securely to its frame. It is at such
a time that the application of a moderate heat can do
so much good by giving the plants a start; when in
full foliage water should be given freely.
GLOXINIAS.
The gloxinias, as greenhouse flowering plants,
cannot be surpassed. Many of the varieties
recently introduced are marvellous in their shades of
-soft, rich colouring that would defy any painter’s
brush to reproduce on paper or canvas; and the
throats of some kinds, especially the "Benares strain,”
are exquisitely spotted in varying shades of colour.
Fortunately gloxinias are easily managed and
propagated ; but like most plants may be well or
badly grown. As good seed of some of the finest
strains, such as Grandiflora crassifolia erecta and
Benares, can now be obtained from some of the city
■seedsmen (but not at 3d. per packet), the most
economical way to obtain a number of these beautiful
plants will be from that source. Sprinkle the seeds
sparingly on the surface of pots or pans filled with a
very light fibrous loam, mixed with half its quantity
of rotted cocoanut fibre and sharp sand, water through
,a fine rose, then cover the pots with a sheet of glass,
and place in a warm, shaded corner of the greenhouse.
As soon as the seedlings appear, gradually remove the
glass, and give more air and light. When large
enough to handle, prick them off separately into very
small thumb pots, or replant them, with more room,
into one larger pan, which, after the lapse of a
week or so, place near to the glass, where they may
be allowed to grow until the following season, when
they should be potted singly, using four or five
inch pots, and a compost similar to that they were
raised in, with the addition of some old rotted


dairy-yard manure; and as soon as new growth
begins, place very close to the glass, water, and give
plenty of air. A frame is the best to grow gloxinias
in, at least until their foliage is developed. The
above treatment must be carried out, if strong, sturdy
plants are desired. The leaves by this means will
clasp the pots, almost enveloping them, and the flowers
will be thrown up on strong stems and in great
numbers ; whereas if the plants are grown in a shady
part of the greenhouse, away from the glass, they will
grow up weak, succulent and gawky, and be liable
to disease, such as rust, thrips, etc., and will also
require staking. In regard to watering gloxinias, an old
and stupid custom exists of avoiding to water the leaves
for fear of injury. On the contrary, amateurs may rest
assured that muchbenefit will result fromfreely syringing
the foliage several times a week ; attack from rust and
thrips is often prevented by it. Of course the flowers
should not be syringed, for that would spoil them.
RUST, ETC.
Should rust appear on the leaves of any plant
—which may be known by the leaves curling,
up, and showing rusty patches or spots —and the
plant at the same time look generally sick, at once
turn it out from the greenhouse, for it may convey
the disease to all the others ; put it aside, and save
the bulb until next year, when it may not be again
attacked. Never stand the pots of these plants in
water, however much persuaded —rather provide free
drainage; nor stand pots of any plants in saucers
filled with water. Perhaps several exceptions to
this rule might be made, such as in the case of the
Kentias (palms) ; when these have quite filled their
pots with roots, and are growing strongly, they will
flourish all the better if so treated. The simplest and
best way to increase the stock of any variety of


■sterling merit is by cutting off a few of the strongest
and healthiest ripe leaves, while the plant is in full
growth, and insert their stems into a pan of light,
very porous compost; peg down the leaves on the
surface and water. They will succeed better if placed
in a close frame, but a fair percentage will form bulbs
if merely inserted in the tan beneath the benches, and
treated similarly to begonia leaves. The young bulbs
will form at the end of the stems, and the leaves will
wither away. As soon as the young leaves come
forth, pot off the bulbs, and treat as above described
for bulbs produced from seed. Leaves can be
treated so as to produce many bulbs, but, like begonia
leaves, only one strong plant can be obtained from a
single leaf.
THE EUCHARIS AMAZONICA.
A plant that has given, and is still giving,
enthusiastic flower-growers a deal of trouble, is the
lovely Eucharis amazonica, a flower more exquisite
than many of the beautiful and expensive orchids.
No enthusiast looks upon this chaste flower without
making a mental determination to obtain a plant and
grow it; but will he succeed in inducing it to flower?
The probability is he will not. The stubborn thing
cannot even be coaxed to put forth a single blossom,
and so it passes into neglect; but that it can be
flowered is very evident, for we have seen some
magnificent spikes of flowers. The treatment that
should be followed is to secure in the first place
strong, ripe, flowering bulbs, free from disease. The
disease peculiar to this plant first attacks the bulb in
the form of red spots, after which the leaves show
yellow patches. If plants already in possession are
affected in this manner, turn them out, wash the roots,
trim them, and also those parts of the bulbs having
red spot. Several healthy bulbs, large and small, may


be planted, deep or shallow, in an eight-inch pot, care-
fully drained, with first a piece of crock over the hole
raised up a little, then two or three inches of charcoal
mixed with burnt bones cracked up to about the size
of beans (French), and filled to within half an inch of
the rim of compost, consisting of three parts leaf-mould,
or, what is better, small pieces of fibrous peat, and
one part old manure and clean sharp sand. After a
first watering, the plants should merely be syringed
overhead until they begin to make some growth.
They should be carefully protected from the sun’s
rays, and the temperature of the house or frame
raised to about 70' at night and about 90* by day.
As soon as the new white, dracaena-like roots have
extended to the sides of the pot, water should be
supplied liberally —rain water is the best; and if this
treatment should result in producing large healthy
foliage of a dark-green colour, without spots, they
may be permitted to rest awhile by withholding water
from both foliage and roots, except sufficient to
prevent the soil becoming dust-dry, and the temperature
may also be reduced a few degrees. The rest the
plants are now enjoying may be continued for a
month or six weeks, when probably the flower spikes
will make their appearance; but should they still
remain stubborn, suddenly raise the temperature and
give a little more water. If this should have the
desired result, and several noble spikes push up, a
little weak liquid manure (dairy-yard) may be given.
It may be added that this plant can be induced, with
skilful treatment, to flower several times in a year,
and that it delights in shade, heat, and a moist
atmosphere. This latter can be produced by keeping
the floors well watered, and syringing freely about.
The foregoing may appear a lengthy description, and


the treatment may seem to require much care, but aIH
the labour bestowed is forgotten if only a single spike
of this chaste and beautiful flower is seen to come
forth to gladden the heart of the patient enthusiast.


PELARGONIUMS.
“'ITT'E shall have a glorious spring, sir,” are the
VV cheery words sung out in greeting when a
gardener meets a friend who is congenial, and these
hopeful words are heard approvingly by many who
take no thought about our garden treasures. That
we shall have a glorious and an early spring is
evident, for vegetation has been comparatively at rest
for the past 12 months, and now may be expected
to make some amends to the almost disheartened
gardener. The time is also rapidly approaching when
the busy merchant or the overworked literary man
may seek refreshment to both mind and body in a
ramble among the quick-budding plants in the early
spring mornings. Then may be seen vegetation at
its best. The sun newly risen, glittering through the
dewy young foliage of the rose, with its varied and
brilliant tints, and the pale rich greens of the tender
leaves of oak and beach and other deciduous plants,
are beauties soothing to every cultured sense. But
how shall be described the ever-changing shades
of colour to be seen in the expanding rosebud, all
glistening with nature’s tears of liquid pearl ? Is there
any pleasure so softening in its influences, so effective
in breaking down the harder thoughts of man and
binding him in friendship to his fellows, as the
cultivation of beautiful plants and flowers ? How


often have we —but stay ! pelargoniums are our theme,
and the editorial injunction, “ Practical instruction,
howto cultivate, etc., shorn of all technical and learned
quotations.” We had better, therefore, begin.
IMPROVEMENT IN PELARGONIUM CULTURE.
Pelargoniums, or geraniums, as women gardeners
delight to term them—though the former is the name
under which the numerous varieties are known —have
now been brought to a stage of such perfection that
almost every gardener cultivates a few of each class,
and numerous are the enquiries made concerning the
best method to obtain such lovely trusses of bloom
as are frequently to be seen in the florists’ windows,
and also the best kinds to obtain. Almost anyone
can grow a pelargonium of some kind in a rough and
ready way, but few can bring to a state of such
perfection those beautiful varieties known as Show
and Regal. The latter variety, though not coming
up to the ideal standard, or possessing the requisite
blotching and regularity of petal demanded by the
connoisseur, is the most beautiful and attractive of the
two from a popular point of view, but some varieties
of this type are more successfully cultivated under
glass than in the open garden. We propose, however,
to show how, with a little extra care, all the varieties,
even the most delicate, can be grown in the border,
and also the methods to adopt in their green-house
culture.
SECURING THE PLANTS.
We shall suppose that an amateur gardener
wishes to commence their cultivation : he must
therefore go to one of our nurserymen to obtain
a collection ; this he had best do in the very early
spring, and if he can obtain all or any he wants


from among the pot-plants that are plunged in
ash beds in the open so much the better, and
if they have been in that position for several
months, such plants can be at once transferred from
the pots to his garden—supposing they are required
for garden cultivation, that being the object now under
consideration ; but should he be unable to obtain them
anywhere, unless from the greenhouse direct, he must
treat them to a system of hardening off before planting
out, otherwise the greater proportion will soon perish.
It must be understood we are now dealing with the
superior varieties of pelargoniums. To harden off,
begin by filling a shallow wooden frame with sand or
ashes, into which plunge the pots nearly to the rim,
and place them where they will receive the morning
sun only, and protection from strong winds. See that
they have enough water, and gradually remove them
more into the sun. In the course of a few months
they may be planted out. Should you purchase in
the summer, keep them in the pots and treat as
directed until the early autumn. Of course nurseryman
should not dispose of these plants fresh from the
greenhouse to a customer, knowing they were required
for planting out. It is his business to first harden
them off for such a purpose, especially such delicate
but magnificent varieties as Captain Raikes, Prince
of Wales, Queen Victoria, etc.
PLANTING, STAKING, AND PRUNING.
When planting out take the plant carefully from the
pot; do not disturb the ball of earth, only remove the
crocks from the bottom, and plant no deeper than the
pot mark. Firm the soil about the stem and stake. Be
sure to remember that all pelargoniums must be grown
in the sun to give satisfaction, and that a few of the
tender regals should be protected from the scorching
afternoon summer sun and strong blustering winds.


They will grow in almost any well-cultivated soil, but
a thoroughly worked loamy soil is to be preferred.
During our dry summers they should be mulched, and
freely supplied with water in the evenings. As the
plants expand in growth, on no account neglect to
stake, and to securely tie each branch, for should a
strong wind find them unsecured, the probability is
that one or more branches will be torn off, from which
shock many never recover. In staking, the object
should be to train the branches on to the ground, never
lift them up; the ground is their best possible support,
and the foilage in the summer affords grateful
protection to the roots. The majority of these plants
are lost through the manner in which they are pruned ;
and here a difficulty presents itself to every beginner
in horticulture in this colony —namely, the want of a
practical and useful work on gardening adapted to our
climates. At present amateurs, with their experience
to acquire, subscribe to such excellent journals
as the Gardener's Chronicle which are written for
the English climate, and in applying their teaching
frequently destroy their plants. Pelargoniums,
for instance, in England after flowering and when
at rest, are cut hard back, that is to say, nearly
shorn of all their branches, whereas, in this climate,
the pelargonium hardly rests at all, and if treated
in such a drastic manner, especially the tender
varieties that are planted out, would never put forth
another leaf. Hence it is that many first-class English
professional gardeners who come among us have to
begin their education afresh, for they invariably
commence by cuttingdown rigorously our pelargoniums
and killing them. the safest manner of pruning is by
a gradual process, removing one or two branches at a
time, which should be commenced just after the
flowering is over, and before removing the remaining
branches wait until the new growth appears on those


already pruned. With but little variation the foregoing
treatment should be practised with nearly all the
varieties.
GREENHOUSE AND GARDEN TREATMENT.
In regard to greenhouse treatment for the pelargonium
(and it is only under glass that most of the famous
kinds can be brought to great perfection), one of the
most essential requirements is a suitable glass-house
or, better still, a large frame, because it is useless
to attempt their cultivation under the same glass
as other plants, for they demand separate and
distinct treatment. Therefore, those who desire to
grow them under glass had better construct a large
glass frame or frames, with glass in both ends and
sides in addition to the lid (the glass to be frosted
with white paint), and battens for the bottom, spaced
about an inch apart, to admit the air from beneath, so
that if the lid is kept sufficiently open a stream of fresh
air will be constantly circulating through the foliage,
for it must be borne well in mind that unless plenty of
fresh air, sun, and light are allowed, the plants will be
drawn up weak and sickly, and altogether fail to give
satisfaction. For both green house and garden culture,
be sure to select only plants having a strong short
stem and a short-jointed, branching head. Have
nothing to do with lanky, ill-shaped plants, that are so
weak and succulent as to require staking up in the
pots, even before the flower buds have formed. The
soil best suited for pot growth should be of a rather
strong, loamy character, with the addition of some
sharp sand (not sand from the sea beach), old manure,
and wood ash, and a good drainage of wood cinders
or charcoal. For potting soils, dairy-yard manure is
much to be preferred to that from the stables. Until
the flower buds begin to form, plunge the pots up to
the rim in ash (this material will keep cutworms) in an


open wood frame, six inches high, situated where the
benefit of all the morning sun can be obtained. No
shelter is needed, except from very violent storms of
hail or wind, and while they are growing never neglect
to water them every evening overhead, using a water
pot wdth a rose. In very dry weather they may also
want watering every morning. As they develop their
foliage, give more room, leaving a clear space around
each plant, and as each shoot grows out an inch or
two, pinch out the tops, for by this means the head is
shaped and kept shrubby. This may be much assisted
by encircling each pot with a wire or strong string,
and with strands of raffia fibre or soft hayband cordage
tie down each branch in the form desired. As soon
as the flower buds are showing, remove them to the
glass frames or greenhouse, and then all that is
necessary is a little weak liquid manure, and plenty of
air, water, and sunlight; but take care not to water
the expanded blooms.
PROPAGATION.
Any of the varieties can easily be propagated
from cuttings ; and at several times in the year,
principally just before the flower buds have formed,
and after the flowering season, when the new wood
formed has had time to ripen or become brown,
select short-jointed sturdy tops from the healthiest
growing plants, cut off with a sharp knife just below
a joint, pieces about four inches long, and insert
several into a four or five inch pot, placing them close
to the sides. The pot should be filled up, first with
ample drainage, then a little ordinary light compost,
and complete with washed sharp sand ; water well for
a first watering, and stand in a glass frame, which
must be completely shaded for a few weeks and
watered very sparingly, lest the cuttings damp off.
When the new growth commences, more air and light


should be gradually admitted, finally throwing up the
lid entirely. When the cuttings have thoroughly
rooted and made some foliage, they may be potted
off into four inch sizes, using the compost already
described, which should be pressed firmly into the
pots and around the stem. They should then be
returned to the shaded glass frames, and treated as
the cuttings were for a few weeks, and'when growing
transferred to the ash beds in the open, as above
explained, where they may be allowed to remain until
safely established for garden planting, or sufficiently
developed and shaped for green-house culture. It
should be remembered that pelargoniums are generally
but short-lived, and ought to be renewed every
alternate year, because old plants grow scraggy, and
have an awkward habit of suddenly dropping off,
while young ones look neat and bushy, and produce
the finest blooms, consequently a supply of struck
cuttings should be kept always on hand.
VARIETIES.
The following few are selected from among a
great many of the Regal variety, and may be
relied upon as being some of the best: —Queen
Victoria : Rich vermilion colour, all the petals
distinctly margined with pure white. Captain Raikes ;
Fiery crimson, flaked with purplish black, and bordered
with carmine, a really grand flower. Duchess of
Bedford : Pure white and prettily fringed, the upper
petals splashed with spots of delicate rose, habit
dwarf and compact. Her Majesty: Pure white,
flowers beautifully fringed, trusses of immense size.
Madame Thibaut: White, blotched, and marked with
rose, upper petals splashed with crimson maroon, a
lovely variety. Prince of Wales: Bright vermilion,
the upper petals darkly blotched. Royalty: Pure
white, with crimson spot on each petal, and beautifully


fringed; a very beautiful variety. Regalia: Bright
rose, upper petals delicately spotted with maroon.
Tromphe de St. Mande: Deep crimson, with large
trusses; very free flowering. Edward Perkins :
Brilliant orange carmine, the upper petals blotched.
Marie Augis : Beautiful light rose, the upper petals
spotted with scarlet and maroon. Duke of Con-
naught : Dark purplish maroon, with light centre, the
petals prettily fringed; a large, handsome flower.
Perhaps the best pelargonium of all the above is
Duchess of Bedford; in fact it may be considered
the finest pelargonium grown on account of its
combined qualities. It is very hardy, shrubby, and a
fast grower, wonderfully floriferous, and easily
propagated ; and notwithstanding that such magnifi-
cent varieties as Her Majesty and Royalty have come
into competition, in our opinion the Duchess still
holds the palm for delicacy of colouring and
form. Trusses of that variety, Captain Raikes,
Queen Victoria, Prince of Wales, and a few others,
sold for 2s 6d each at an exhibition held in
Melbourne some few years back, when these semi-
double and fringed varieties first came into notice,
and created such a furore. Of course, very large
and handsome trusses can only be produced
under glass. To our thinking, some of the
following show and spotted varieties are even more
beautiful than the above Regals, especially such as
Mabel (Hoyle’s), an almost perfect flower, of a rich
silky maroon colour, the upper petals heavily painted
black, with a centre almost white : —Mary Hoyle :
Warm orange rose, white centre, and darkly blotched.
Mrs. John Hayes : Soft delicate peach. Kingston
Beauty : Pure white, darkly blotched on upper petals.
Lady of the Lake : Lower petals orange rose, painted
with crimson, top petals maroon, edged with
crimson and white centre. Diplomatist: Rosy


purple lower petals, maroon top, white eye, and of
good habit. Conductor : Bright carmine, the upper
petals blotched with maroon, a light centre. Brilliant;
Crimson upper petals nearly black, Ambassador ;
Deep pink, clear white eye. Rameau: Bright crimson,
very hardy. Ihe above show and spotted varieties
are of a much more robust habit than most of the
Regals, and are therefore more suited for garden
culture. A new variety, Emperor of Russia, the
darkest known, is a grand flower, so also is Volunte
Nationale alba, which will sure to become a great
favourite.
FANCY AND OTHER PELARGONIUMS.
A variety known as fancy pelargoniums is not
much grown here, and need not be mentioned, the
show variety being much superior; but a very
useful and pretty class, known as variegated bicolor
and tricolor leaved pelargoniums, should be largely
grown; they make such handsome border plants,
and are much to be preferred to many of those weak,
succulent plants now commonly used for that purpose,
and which afford such excellent and incessant occupa-
tion to the professional gardener. Some of the most
attractive are ; —A Happy Thought : The centre
of each leaf blotched with white. Mrs. Pollock :
Green ground, bronze-red and crimson zone, with
yellow margin, very pretty. Princess Beatrice :
Silver tricolour. Sunset : Golden tricolor, green
ground, carmine-red zone, with rich yellow margin.
Chelsea Gem : Leaves bright green, margined with
white. White Lady: Flowers white, leaves edged
with silvery white. Glen Eyre Beauty: Green ground,
red zone, and white margin. Sophia Dumaresque:
Leaves green, margined with gold, scarlet zone.
Moonbeam: Silver tricolor. These require judicious
pruning to keep them neat and compact, and are well


worthy of all the care bestowed. The single and
double zonal varieties are also extremely useful, on
account of their hardy habit, and by careful pruning a
succession of their gay and attractive flowers may be
obtained every month of the year. A few of the
prettiest are: —Rev. F. Atkinson : Brilliant scarlet,
immense truss, of perfect form. Sultana : Splendid
truss. Niphetos; White,splendid. Candidissimaplena:
White. I’ve Got It; Pure white, a very beautiful
variety. Black Knight. Gold-finder. Emily Layton :
Rich scarlet, large truss. Montesquin : Pale flesh,
splendid truss. Helen Lindsay : Pale rose, immense
truss. New Guinea: Orange-yellow. Santley:
Orange scarlet, white eye. New Life : Dazzling
scarlet, striped, and flaked with white. This latter is
an exceedingly pretty and attractive pelargoniu m, and
much admired by everyone.
IVY-LEAVED PELARGONIUMS
Another most useful, and, indeed, most charming
variety of this popular flower, are those known as
single and double ivy-leaved pelargoniums, highly
suitable for covering fences, training on tripods,
being fast growers, and nearly always in flower.
Some of the trusses are very beautiful, and produced
in great abundance, the colours varying through all
the shades of lilac to pink, magenta, bright salmon,
scarlet, and vermilion. Perhaps the double kind are
the most beautiful, a few names are here given : —Abel
Carrieree, Gloire de Nancy, Gloire D’Orleans, Jeanne
D’Arc, l.ucy Lemoine, Marguerite Jacquot, Madame
Crousse, and La Rosiere. The above varieties are
so great an improvement on those formerly to be
obtained here, that they are now coming into favour
with a rush, for they are found to be specially adapted
to our climate.


VIII.
CHRYSANTHEMUMS.
The chrysanthemum—so named from chrusos, gold,.
anthemion, a flower or blossom—is deserving of the
attention and cultivation even of the dainty rosarian.
Previous to its being taken In hand by our New South
Wales Horticultural Society, the great flower-growing
public had no knowledge of the existence of so
many varieties of this plant, nor of the magnifi-
cence of its blooms. The gratitude of the
horticultural community is therefore due to the above
society for the generous manner in which its members
have worked with a view of popularising the
chrysanthemum. This work has been done in the
best possible way, namely, by holding annual
exhibitions, and bestowing honours upon the most
successful competitors. The last chrysanthemum
show, held at the Town Hall, was a surprise to most
of us, and afforded undoubted evidence of the
perfection to which this flower may be brought. The
chrysanthemum has been singled out for royal favour
by the sovereign of Japan, and established as the
national flower of that country, as the rose is of
England. If the Japanese produce such lovely
blooms as those exhibited last year, there is no
need for further wonder. And notwithstanding
what has been accomplished by the most perfect
gardeners, there is still scope for improvement, and


we hope to see before long blooms that will eclipse
■even those lately exhibited. More attention should
be given to the habit of the plants, with a view of
obtaining a strong shrubby growth, producing the
"beautiful show flowers, and there is every reason to
believe that a judicious system of grafting would
accomplish much in that way.
PERFUME OF THE CHRYSANTHEMUM.
Another and a most important advance can be made
in regard to the perfume of the chrysanthemum. In the
•case of mostofthe varieties this is notthe mostexquisite.
We notice that some of the leading horticultural
societies of England are offering handsome prizes for
chrysanthemums possessing the sweetest fragrance.
This matter may be commended to the notice of our
horticultural societies, and others, generally assisting
to cultivate the public taste for this flower.
VARIETIES OF THE CHRYSANTHEMUM.
Thereisa number of species arranged u.nder the genus
■chrysanthemum, such as C. Frutescens, indigenous to
Madeira, from which have been obtained the several
varieties of Marguerites, or Paris daisies, the flower much
beloved by the poet Chaucer ; they are general
favourites, highly prized for their full-blooming qualities.
But the varieties commonly known as chrysanthemums
are Chinese, or large flowering, incurved and reflexed.
Hybrid Japanese, or tasselled-flowered ; anemone, or
aster-flowered; pompones and hybrid pompones, or
daisy flowered and single-flowered.
HARDY PLANT.
There is probably no flower known that will
grow under such adverse circumstances as the
chrysanthemum. In any back yard, in the broiling sun,


or shade, or even under the foliage of large trees, this-
plant will hold its own against all competitors,,
and will bloom in the worst of seasons. But to
produce blooms fit for an exhibition stand is quite
another matter. For that purpose the soil must be
carefully prepared, and the soil best suited is
a strong, rich loam, that has been thoroughly
cultivated and drained. A position should be selected
in the open, in order that the plants, which are inclined
to grow stalky, may receive the benefit of the sun and
air; but some protection will be necessary against strong
winds, especially when the flower buds form. As
chrysanthemums are such gross feeders, some well-
rotted manure that will be immediately available
for plant food should be worked into the soil. In
purchasing young plants, see that you obtain those of
one short, stout stem, a few inches only in height,
with no side shoots, and examine the roots to see
whether they have grown from cuttings, for these make
the best plants. In planting out, choose favourable
weather, and space them three feet apart each way,
and no deeper than the pot mark. After the plants
have made two or three inches of growth from time of
planting, it must then be determined whether you are
prepared to sacrifice a whole plant for the sake of one
very large bloom, or desire to see a few moderate
sized flowers on each. If the latter is wished, now is
the time to pinch out the top, this will cause the plant
to break into three shoots, which may be permitted to
grow six inches long, when they also should be
pinched , but the more flowers each plant is called
upon to produce, the less will be their size and
quality. It is best therefore to confine the plant to
three shoots, and when these have extended about a
foot, secure each of them to a separate stake, so fixed
that the air and sunlight may be freely admitted to all
parts of the plants. Of course all suckers must be at


once cut out on appearance. After this, attention
must be paid to the formation of the flower buds, for
as soon as they are large enough to cut out, they
should be removed with a sharp pair of scissors, with
the exception of course of the central or crown bud.
MULCHING.
From the time of planting up to this point, the plants
should have been kept growing freely by a good mulching
of manure, and frequent applications of water and weak
liquid manure, which may be made by putting a few
buckets of manure into a cask of water, or soap-suds,
and using a quart to a bucket of clean water, always
remembering that frequent doses of weak liquid
manure are much better than occasional strong doses.
This is the only way to preserve all the lower leaves
on the stem in a green and healthy condition, and
should they under this treatment turn yellow, and fall
off, or be attacked with mildew, in all probability it
will be due to bad drainage, or too much shade. It is
absolutely necessary to maintain all the foliage of the
plant in health, from the bottom of the stem to the
top, if you wish to have show blooms, for, as was fully
explained in the article on “ Ferns,” the leaves are
the plant’s lungs. Considerable care is necessary
from the moment the flower buds are seen, for if at
this time strong stimulants are applied to the roots,
the plants may again rush into foliage, and thus cause
the flower buds to become blind. It is best to withhold
all liquid manure until the buds are well set, and then
begin by applying very weak doses, gradually increasing
the strength, which will have a most decided effect
in the development of the blooms. It is surprising
the strength and quantity the plants will absorb when
so applied. But as soon as the flowers begin to show
colour, give clean water only.


INSECTS.
The chrysanthemum, being of a very robust nature,
is not much troubled with insects. There is, however,
one—a small green caterpillar —frequently to be found
rolled up with the leaves, where the young flower buds
have formed, and if not quickly turned out, it may
destroy every bud on the plant.
SINGLE FLOWERS AND STEMS.
If very large blooms are desired for competition,
the plants must be confined to one stem, staked
securely, and all buds but one, or three at most,
removed. The treatment otherwise should be the
same as that above described. But this single flower
to a plant system cannot be commended as good
gardening, we should much prefer to see the Exhibition
prize committees and judges determine that trusses
of three blooms be shown of each variety. Cuttings,
which, as before stated, supply the best method of
increasing any particular variety, should be taken
early in September from plants of sturdy growth,
selecting those 'stems possessing the shortest joints,
and cutting with a sharp knife just below a joint,
about four inches from the top. Strip off a few of the
lower leaves, and insert one only, in a small pot of
light compost well drained, that is, if the intention is
to grow for pot culture or exhibition, because when
the cuttings have rooted, they can be shifted into larger
pots, or planted out without suffering from the effects
of the change that would happen were many planted
in a larger pot or box, The best pots to use for this
purpose are about three inches deep by two inches
across.
METHODS OF PROPAGATING.
If the plants are merely intended for the border then
put in each four or five inch pot three or four cuttings


placing them to the sides, and fill up to within half an
inch of the rim with a light compost. They should
then be well watered, placed in a glass frame, and
shaded for a week or two, and when rooted, given
plenty of light and air to thoroughly harden them
before planting out, which should be done in favourable
weather. For those who do not desire to grow
chrysanthemums for exhibition blooms, a quick and
simple way of propagating is by division of the stools,
which can be done when the garden is being dug up
at the end of winter. Then select healthy looking
clumps, having two or three strong shoots, and plant
out at once where they are to grow, and treat as above
described. Any other suckers that appear from the
stool should be pinched out. Staking should not be
overlooked In any case, for should a strong wind come
upon them when the branches have developed, several
will probably be torn off and the plants will seriously
suffer.
GROWING WITHOUT DIVISION.
The common practice of growing year after year
the same stool without division, until it becomes a
mass of roots and stems, which not only impoverishes
the soil, but prevents that free circulation of the air
through the foliage, which issonecessary totheirhealth,
cannot be too strongly condemned. Cultivators of
this flower should thoroughly understand that whatever
their object may be in regard to the blooms, the plants
should be dug up annually, and a fresh start made
with young plants, obtained from either root division,
which is easiest, or cuttings, which is best. At the
last Horticultural Society’s Chrysanthemum Show, a
number of these plants were exhibited, grown in pots,
and many enquiries were made regarding the treatment
they required. The task of describing this is by no
means congenial, for if one may judge by the


specimens shown at that exhibition, it is not likely to
be a success. It is true that some of them afforded
every evidence of care and skill ; but the fact is,
chrysanthemums are not well adapted for pot culture,
especially the large flowering varieties. The Pompones
do much better, being of a shrubby habit, and until
cultivators have succeeded in raising a variety,
possessing in combination the large flowers and dwarl
shrubby plant, they are not likely to produce handsome
compact specimens, at least without a great deal of
trouble. Moreover, where is the need for this trouble
in pot culture, when the plants flower so splendidly
in the border. As some amateurs will strive to grow
them in pots, the following hints may be useful.
GROWING IN POTS.
Take the cuttings, as above described, in September,
and remember that it is very important to select strong
short-jointed tops, of healthy fresh growth, and as our
care in this case will be to produce a shapely, compact,
dwarf-looking plant, possessing ample foliage and
numerous flowers, more than ordinary attention must be
given them from the start. It has already been stated
how to strike the cuttings separately, in small pots,
and from that time forth they must not be neglected.
After the cuttings have made about two or three
inches of growth, pinch out the crowns, and remove
the plants from the frame to abed of ashes previously
prepared, and plunge the pots nearly to the rims.
The position selected should be a sheltered one, where
the full benefit of the morning sun will be obtained,
no covering will be needed ; but should violent
weather set in, it would be best to remove them to a
place of safety, such as a bush-house. From the first
pinching the plant will probably break into three
leaders, and when these have grown three or four


inches in length, pinch out their crowns likewise;
these will put forth shoots which in their turn must
be also pinched. It should not be forgotten that the
plants will require several shifts as they develop,
which must be considered in regard to the size of the
specimen desired; but an 8-inch or 10-inch pot will
answer the requirements of a fair size plant. To
encourage a symmetry of growth, turn the plants
frequently round to the sun, and ao not fail to water
liberally, for the soil should never be allowed to
become dry. Some weak liquid manure will be
beneficial at certain stages, not immediately after a
shift, but when the roots have extended to the sides
of the pots, and the soil used should be of the richest,
but sweet. The stopping process must be continued
on every shoot that has grown a few inches, until the
plants assume the balloon shape described below, and
exhibit signs of forming flower buds, when of course it
must cease, and all the buds formed in this case should
be allowed to develop, our object being to obtain a
compact plant covered with blooms. The two evils
to be prevented in order to attain that object, are
•straggling growth and loss of foliage, especially that
on the lower portions of the stems. A most effective
means of arresting upward growth, is to frequently
lift the plant from the pot a little, or loosen and turn
it round in the pot; this action also induces side
shoots, a practice much followed in fuschia culture in
pots. The best form to adopt for pot specimens is
that known as the balloon, and this must be kept in
view when stopping the shoots, thus—the bottom side
shoots should be stopped shorter than the next set,
the middle set extended the farthest, and the others
towards the apex proportionately diminish. When
the buds are fully set, the plants may be freely
supplied with liquid manure, to assist in the
of the bJooms.


THE FINEST SHOW FLOWERS.
The following names of the several varieties may
be relied upon as containing some of the very finest
show flowers to be obtained in the colony ; —Chinese,
or large-flowering (incurved) varieties; Aimee Ferriere,
silvery white, tipped with rosy pink ; Alfred Salter,
delicate lilac ; Bronze Jardine des Plantes, bronze-
orange, with yellow centre; Jardine des Plantes,
bright golden-yellow, very beautiful ; Enamel Eve,
sulphur-yellow, splendid shape; Gloria Mundi, brilliant
golden-yellow, beautifully incurved, a splendid show
flower, plant dwarf habit; Golden Beverley, golden-
canary, a grand flower; Hetty Barker; Hero of
Magdalla; Jeanne d’Arc; Lord Alcester, pale primrose,
very pretty; Mable Ward; Mrs. G. Randle, pure
white, prettily incurved ; Nio Nono; Princess of Tec;
Undine, large white, splendid ; Rifleman, dark ruby ;
Reflexed varieties—crimson velvet; cullingfordi,
bright crimson red (one of the best); Dr. Sharpe;
Emperor of China, very fine ; Flocou de Neige;
Felicity, white, yellow centre; La Meige; King of
Crimsons ; Progne ; Golden Christine ; Golden-buff,
large, splendid show flower; Chevalier Domage,
golden - striped. Hybrid Japanese varieties :
Admiration ; Beaute des Jardins ; Bend d’Or, much
twisted, bright sulphur, splendid show flower; the
Comtesse de Beauregard, pale-rose handsome b’oom;
Comte de Germiny ; Le Chinais (or Chinaman), a
large flower, with long florets of a violet-purple color,
marked with a central line of silvery white, a noble
show flower; the. Daimia, pale pink, changing to
rosy-lilac ; Diamond ; Elaine ; Elise ; Ceres, a
magnificent flower of a beautiful pink colour, a
general favourite; Beaumont; Coquette de Castille,
violet rose, creamy ground; Fair Maid of Germany,
pure white, quite distinct, the flowers are very large
and composed of long strap-shaped petals ; Frou Frou;


Fanny Benchartel; Grandiflorum, bright yellow,
tasselled; Gaillardi; Golden Dragon, long curled
florets, very attractive; Illustration, golden-yellow,
shaded, a grand bloom; Le Niger; Agrements de
la Nature ; L’lncomparable, petals of spiral form,
yellow and reddish-brown, base bright crimson, quite
distinct; La Purete, an immense flower, with long
quilled curled florets, pure white, a magnificent
exhibition bloom ; Mons. Brunet, long florets, lilac,
tipped with white ; Madame Clemence Audigeur a
magnificent variety, with broad florets of a soft rosy-
lilac, shaded with mauve ; Madame de Seiru ; Mons.
Raoux, a superb variety, with lacinated florets, dark
crimson, with white centre; Parasol, golden-buff,
shaded with salmon; Purpureum Album, purple,
motted with white ; Roseum Superbeum, lilac-rose,
tipped buff; the Sultun; Thunberg; Tokio, rich
deep crimson, reverse of florets gold ; White
Swan; Jupiter; Criterion, and Moonlight. Anemone
flowered varieties—Emperor ; Fleur de Marie ;
White Self, late Madam Chote; Madame Therese
Clos, white with pale rose tint, large flower;
Madame Cabrol, silvery white, rose centre Pompone
and Hybrid Pompone varieties—Mons. Host; Model
of Perfection, rich lilac, edged pure white ; Madame
Vatry, deep lilac; Mdlle. Marthe, pure white, perfect
form; Perfection; Snowflake, small flower rosy-white;
Souvenir de Jersey ; Fremy Pomponum, deep yellow.
Considering that there are several thousand varieties
catalogued, all noted as first-class, the above selection
will save the intending grower much trouble.


AMONG THE FLOWER NURSERIES.
[Published in Sydney Morning Herald Sept.
7th, 1889.]
SEARL AND SONS.
So much interest is now being taken in the cultivation
of improved varieties of plants and flowers, that we
thought we could not do the gardening public a
greater service than to visit some of the leading
Sydney nurseries, and see exactly what is being done
with a view to supply the growing wants of a people
daily becoming more critical and exacting in regard to
the plants they desire to cultivate. For this purpose
we give the first results of a visit to one of the most
enterprising of our nursery firms. Who has not often
paused in front of a window in King-street, attracted
by the display of many beautiful decorative plants ?
Here it was, under invitation from the proprietors
(Searl and Sons), that, on a fine spring morning, we
found ourselves. Here also w r ere gathered a group of
discriminating flower-lovers, deep in admiration of
some of the choicest of Flora’s gifts, culled from
many climes, and discussing the means by which


it was possible to grow to such perfection, in a climate
like Sydney, exquisite specimens of boronias,
rhododendrons, ericas, hyacinths, tulips, &c. The
truth is that most of the above, and others, are grown
in some of the colder districts of the colony,
in Victoria, Tasmania, and other localities, and
ingeniously packed, posted, and otherwise conveyed
from those places. That our Sydney nurserymen
should be compelled to send out of the colony annually
large sums of money for cut flowers, does seem to us
a very great absurdity, and for which there would be
no need were the residents on the Blue Mountains
and other suitable localities to sharpen up their wits a
little. The foregoing, and more, we learned from a
chat with the genial and courteous junior member of
the firm (Mr. F. H. Searl) as we sped on towards one
of the most important of the several nurseries
belonging to this company. 'The first nursery visited
is situated at Ashfield, close to the railway line. It is
appropriately named the “ Home of Flowers," and is
under the management of a trusty English gardener.
The principal feature at this nursery is the rosary,
which consists of about 2,000 strong plants from three
to seven years old, embracing most of ail the favourite
and famous varieties, from which the lovely blooms
are daily gathered for bouquet purposes, and the
young plants for sale are propagated. Among those in
pots we noticed extensive batches of Souvenir de la
Malmaison, La France, Marechal Niel, Niphetos, Marie
Van Houtte, and others of equal fame. Perhaps the
general public are not aware of the fact that healthy
young pot plants may now be planted out with much
advantage, and also in the early autumn. Next in
importance to roses, chrysanthemums claim attention,
and these appear to be receiving very skilful treatment
at the hands of an able expert. Now that the
chrysanthemum has established itself in public favour,


it may interest the growers of this flower to hear that
this firm have determined upon making what are
known as large and choice flowering kinds a leading
line of their business. They also inform us that they
have offered a ten-guinea trophy for the best 72
varieties, consisting of 36 Japanese and 36 other
varieties, exhibited at the forthcoming exhibitions,
and which must be won twice, but not necessarily
consecutively, and open to all growers other than
nurserymen. Searl and Sons have orders booked
already for 3,000 young plants, and if other nursery-
men are also booking large numbers, we may expect
to see shortly some beautiful blooms, and much
spirited competition. Of other plants cultivated
largely we noticed that the “ pretty bouvardias ”
received careful and skilful treatment, and that all the
new varieties mentioned in the article on bouvardias,
published in the Sydney Morning Herald of the 10th
August, had been added to an otherwise extensive
collection. Amateurs who have had any difficulty in
following the advice tendered in these columns should
occasionally visit this and other nurseries, where they
may often acquire much useful information from
personal observation. Some 30 or 40 strong, healthy
azaleas, growing in the border, and just breaking into
bloom, looked very tempting, for among them could
be seen those beautiful snow-white varieties, Flag of
Truce and Mortii. Also, in vigorous growth, were
some large beds of winter-flowering or tree carnations,
and Marguerites of various colours, chrysanthemums,
and other flowering plants, but as time would not
permit, nor space allow a notice of all the pretty
things seen at the “ Home of Flowers,” a move was
made in the direction of Botany, where branch No, 2
is located. There are but few evergreen scrubs in the
early spring to surpass the Pittosporum undulatum for
beauty of foliage, and in another month it will be


densely covered with sweet-scented white blossom ;
complete hedges of these were passed, a sight sufficient
alone to cheer up the much-depressed gardener to
renewed efforts to replace his garden pets he loved so
dearly, and which were so ruthlessly destroyed by the
late drought. But here we are at “ Banks’ Meadows,”
Botany, where everything is going briskly forward,
and vast preparations being made to meet what no
doubt will be a very busy season with nurserymen.
“ Banks’ Meadows” consists of about 10 acres, almost
all of which is under cultivation. We could not help
feeling struckat theenormous number of miscellaneous
plants being cultivated, and when it is considered that
this is only one branch nursery of several, and that
there are a great many extensive nurseries conducted
by other firms, we think the people of this colony are
no longer deserving of the criticism they have in the
past been subjected to at the hands of our friends
over the border, in regard to their lack of appreciation
of the beautiful. It is very questionable whether
cottage gardening is not more extensively cultivated
here than in Victoria, but as regards exhibitions, and
exhibition flowers, there can be no doubt that we have
much to learn from the sister colony, and if our flower-
lovers would only band together and support our
horticultural societies more than they do at present,
there is every probability that even in those matters
we may soon show our “ neighbours” the way to
grow flowers. But to return to the nursery. Here
are to be seen whole fields of snowflakes, resembling
fields of barley, and beds after beds of tube-roses,
numbering many thousands of bulbs ; also of daffodils,
narcissus, and johnquils, among which many recently
introduced varieties of merit were noticed. In addition
to the above, many beds are planted with the lovely
Liliums candidum, rubrum, and others, which are just
starting into growth ; and no less than 12,000


hyacinths, all named varieties, are under cultivation.
Bulbs are not the only class of plants cultivated at
u Banks’ Meadows,” although the proprietors have very
wisely made them the most important, on account of
the character of the soil. Carnations and azaleas also
luxuriate here, in the light, rich, peaty soil and
abundance of moisture, for clear, fresh water is
streaming through this nursery all through the year.
The stock of the first-named is very extensive, and
embraces all the improved varieties, one bed alone
containing 800 White Clipper, which is by far the best
of all white carnations. Of other famed varieties
noticed were —Pride of Penshurst, clear sulphur
yellow, the best of the class ; Perpetual Clove, purple,
prettily fringed; Robert Henderson, striped carnation,
a splendid flower, of good form; red Robert Henderson,
of similar merit; Sir W. J. Clarke, and ethers, all of
the winter-flowering or tree type —a variety much to
be preferred to those that bloom in summer only.
We noted the excellent condition in which a large
number of freshly potted azaleas were —not the least
sign of thrip to be seen, and the young brown wood
coming away quite freely. Intending purchasers of
azaleas should beware of pot-bound, short, black-
wooded plants that, if planted out, rarely come to
anything. Those pretty little plants, Ardisiacrenulata,
thrive here to perfection, one bush-house alone
containing no less than 20,000 in the pink of health,
the leaves all glossy, on which not a scale could be
seen. This plant is prettily adapted for table
decoration when in such health, and laden with such
massesofholly-likeberries. Palms,Kentiasparticularly,
also appear to do splendidly out here, judging by
what we saw of them—about 3,000 prime young
plants, just the size for the table, and looking as if
they had just had a coat of oil. Time warns us to
direct our course towards Petersham, where the central


nursery, “ Blair Athol,” is situated. At this place every-
thing is undergoing a complete change, the proprietors
having determined to make Blair Athol a garden
worthy of their reputation. An advanced and well-
ordered flower nursery, we contend, is an impoitant
institution, doing a public service, and perhaps one of
the most necessary branches-of our education. Blair
Athol cannot be departed from without mentioning
some of the beautiful things seen, especially those in
the greenhouses ; and the first flower to attract the
eye is a noble spike of the chaste and beautiful
Eucharis amazonica, worthy of a visit alone to see.
It is a lovely thing; but, so shy of flowering, as if
nature, fearful lest so sweet an offering, made prodigal,
should meet with desecration at our hands, merely
grants her patient students, at long intervals, a
momentary feast. Another thing of beauty demanding
notice, is Anthurium warrocquianum, a most rare and
beautiful species, with leaves over three feet long,
elegantly marked with silvery crystal bands from end
to end —an improvement even on A. chrystalinum. A
plant of equal merit is Alocassia thibautianum,
undoubtedly the finest Alocassia we have ever seen,
much surpassing A. metallica —a variety hitherto
unrivalled for beauty. Orchids, too, are here largely
represented, but just now none are in flower, though
all appear to be doing well. Of other plants, a fine
batch of young glossy-leaved Pandanus veitchii,
presented a most attractive appearance. A few palms
are seen, notably Pritchardia grandis and Pacifica,
two graceful specimens of the umbrageous tribe,
refreshing to look upon, and affording grateful shade
to the tender plants beneath. Palms are unequalled
for table, indoor, and sward decoration, especially in
such a climate as this; and Kentias particularly will
submit to indoor treatment for several months at a
time, merely requiring an occasional airing and


washing. Messrs. Searle are the happy possessors of
perhaps the finest collection of caladiums in the
colonies, numbering as it does, upward of 1000 plants,
and embracing most of the famed varieties under
cultivation in England, these, in about a month’s time,,
will be in full leaf, and will then present to the visitor
combinations of colours marvellous for their brilliancy
and eccentric blotching, unsurpassed for greenhouse
and table decoration. The gem of the collection, to
our thinking, is the “ dear little argyrites,” and here it
is by the thousand, being in much requisition for
choice sprays and bouquets. Only a passing glance
can be given to the thousands of tine shrubby young
plants of regal and show pelargoniums, fuchsias-,
chrysanthemums, and no end of other miscellaneous
plants; but it is only just to this firm to mention that
they were the original introducers of the above
magnificent type of pelargoniums into this colony,
and that they also first showed us how to raise them
under glass in order to produce such immense blooms
‘of rich colours. Our leave of Blair Athol and its
many charming flowers must now be taken; but here,
even at our feet, lies a simple flower beseeching
notice, dear to old England’s heart—the daisy,, which
Burns so exquisitely describes :
“Wee, modest, crimson-tipp’d flow’r."
* * * * ♦
There, in thy scanty mantle clad,
Thy snawy bosom sunward spread,
Thou lifts thy unassuming head
In humble guise.
The cut-flower trade has now reached such large
dimensions, that the firm under notice are in receipt,
per every mail, through their London agents,, of the
very latest designs in all floral decorative work, and
we were shown some shallow, light, card boxes of


many sizes, imported for the purpose of posting to
their numerous customers in the country, wreaths,
designs, and delicate flowers, secure from injury.
Perhaps some idea may be gathered of the extent of
the bouquet and seed business from the fact that eight
ladies are constantly engaged in this branch at the
King Street premises, and in regard to the nurseries,
no less than thirty-two hands are always employed.
H. A. J.


MESSRS. PEARCE BROTHERS PLANT
NURSERY.
[Published in Sydney Morning Herald, September 14,
1889.]
There appears to be a tendency on the part of some
of our nurserymen to take a departure from the old
system of keeping a general miscellaneous stock of
plants, and to make particular classes of plants a
speciality ; some are taking up ferns, others roses,
others again palms and ornamental plants, and so on,
as is- the case in European countries where certain
firms are known far and wide to deal with special
classes of plants. Of course, in a young country
where there is only a limited demand this would not
pay ; but now that our population is increasing so
rapidly, the people are improving so greatly in taste,
are learning to appreciate the beautiful, and are
beginning to have some knowledge of what really
good things are in horticultural matters —there is a
growing demand for the very best varieties of plants
and flowers, and, what is more, people are finding out
the difference between properly-grown plants and
pot-bound rubbish ; and are beginning to insist on
having plants true to name. This desire for information
is very apparent from the extraordinary interest that
has lately been taken in the series of articles on
practical gardening that have been published in the


Sydney Morning Herald from week to week. Until
within the very last few years (in fact it is the case even
now to some extent) it has been found necessary to
send to the adjoining colonies, especially to Victoria,
for new fruits, roses, pelargoniums, and what not; but
new energy seems to be forthcoming at last; and a
visit to the proprietors of the above establishment
gives one the impression that if the young energetic
proprietors keep on as they have begun, we shall soon
be able to obtain all we can desire, as other nurserymen
will find it absolutely necessary to keep up to the
mark, or else take a back seat.
Messrs. Pearce Brothers started in this business
about three or four years ago, and during this short
period have made great strides. About twelve
months ago they purchased the business of seedsmen
and florists in the Sydney Arcade from Messrs,
Tresseder and Bartlett. Their nursery and flower
garden is situated at Randwick, not far from the
back of the Randwick Asylum, and here, in a warm
sheltered undulation, protected by numbers of old
large pines, willows, and other trees, they cultivate
an area of about 12 acres, and produce not only plants
for sale, but enormous quantities of beautiful flowers
to supply the large and increasing demand in Sydney.
As evidence of what can be accomplished by
determination and good business principles it may be
mentioned that since they purchased from Messrs.
Tresseder and Bartlett, the Arcade business has been
more than doubled. Theysend tothe Arcade, throughout
the year, every morning an average of from eight to
ten large clothes-baskets full of cut flowers. They
grow an enormous quantity of violets; rows and rows
are to be seen everywhere, about fourteen different
varieties are grown, but the best variety for sale is
the dark-coloured Czar. Some days six men are
employed the whole day picking these violets, and the


•next day the flowers are apparently as thick as ever.
More violets are probably grown here than at any
other place in the colonies. There are two gardens,
distant about 200 yards from one another; at one
most of the flowers are grown for cutting, and at the
other the chief business is carried on. Here are the
bush-houses, glass-houses, frames, potting shed, and
all things necessary for a nursery. The present is
about the worst possible time to visit a plant nursery,
for the plants are in about their worst condition.
Everything is “ heels up,” as one might say, and
repotting, cleaning up, etc., etc., is the order of the
day ; but a visitor used to all these matters from
infancy can form perhaps a better opinion of things
generally than at a more favourable time of year.
The brothers have six large glass-houses, three of
them about 40ft. long by 12ft. wide; one large
hot-house, about 50ft. by 12ft. ; two others somewhat
smaller ; and several large bush-houses or plant sheds,
It can be easily imagined that it is no child’s play to
keep things healthy and clean here ; but the plants
looked exceedingly well. The particular classes of
plants that Messrs. Pearce are making a speciality of
are —roses, petunias, and especially ferns. Probably
there is no nursery in the colonies where one could
see such a magnificent collection of healthy young
ferns in thousands. Of course, all these are not
grown as specimens ; but they are good healthy plants,
a little more than a year old, with fine strong crowns,
and just putting forth one or two tender leaves, after
their winter rest and trimming up. In another month
or two these houses will be a picture to make a
pterodologist’s mouth water. Nearly every one of
these ferns has been raised from seed. Of Adiantum
gracillimum alone there are about 3,000 pots, and most
of these are grown for their fronds for ornamenting
bouquets, etc. This fern, which is of garden origin, is


remarkably beautiful, and there is always an
immense demand for its graceful fronds. Here are
numbers of Adiantum tenerum (tender), A. decorum
(decorous), from Peru ; A. tinctum (tinted), a
most charming variety from tropical America; A.
concinnum and A. pedatum ; altogether, of these
varieties there are about 5,000 plants. Here also are
to be seen Pteris argyroea (silvery), a variety of P.
quadriaurita from the tropics; Pteris sulcata (furrowed),,
another variety of quadriaurita (four-eared) ; P. Alba
lineata (white lined), a form of P. cretica; P. umbrosa.
In one house are great numbers of a beautiful new
Adiantum somewhat like a farleyense—Adiantum
Victories (Victorias): “ this is supposed to be a hybrid
between A. ghiesbreighti and A decorum, but it
appears more like a dwarf form of A. tenerum
Farleyense; ” this is worthy of a place in all fern
collections. There are numbers of young Adiantum
Farleyense (the proper name is A. tenerum Farleyense*
being a variety of tenerum); this is a native of
Barbadoes, and is perhaps the most beautiful fern in
cultivation when properly grown. In one house is
a specimen of Adiantum dolabriforme (axe shaped)
from Hongkong, a very pretty and distinct variety.
This is furnished with terminal buds on its fronds by
which it can easily be increased. Amongst the many
fernsareAspleniumVeitchii ; from the Malay peninsula;
Doryopteris (or Pteris) palmata, from tropical America,
a very beautiful and remarkable fern, of this there
must be hundreds ; the magnificent Microlepia hirta
cristata (now classed as Davallia) in hundreds; eight
or nine hundred Lomaria gibba ; the beautiful Davallia
Novse Zelandiae ; the pretty creeping Lygodium
scandens ; Asplenium diversifolium ; and Nephrolepis
molle cristata. In the hot-house are thousands of
young lerns just ready for potting, and in pots are
about thirty varieties just germinating. In the


hothouse are about 500 varieties of orchids, 300 of
these have lately been received from India; the flowers
from these will probably be used for bouquets; a
specimen of the beautiful Dracaena goldeana, a native
of west tropical Africa ; a number of caladiums ; some
young specimens of the lovely palm Cocos Weddeliana,
the most graceful palm in cultivation (synonymous
with Leopoldinia pulchra) ; a good number of Eucharis
amazonica ; some varieties of gardenias, and many
other varieties of plants too numerous to mention. In
one of the bushhouses are about 4,000 pots, containing
a fine, clean, healthy-looking lot of cinerarias just
coming into bloom—the one or two in flower gave
indications of great excellence ; and here are also
about 1000 dracaenas of many varieties in pots.
Outside are thousands of petunias in pots —few
of these have flowered yet, but they promise to be
good, for Messrs. Pearce have spared no trouble or
expense to obtain seed from Europe of the very best
strains that could be procured; also numbers of various
plants in pots, such as pelargoniums, jacarandas,
pittosporums of varieties, chiefly Eugenoides (about 2000
plants), Pinus insignis, Agathaea coelestis, camphor
laurels, thousands of seedling Norfolk Island pine,
bouvardias, about 5000 roses in pots, of good varieties;
also camellias, ardesias, and a vast number of other
kinds of plants. In one of the bushhouses are numbers
of specimen plants, palms, ferns, &c., for decorative
purposes ; these are hired out to various clubs and
hotels, and sometimes to one of the theatres, and
changed from time to time. The varieties of palms
found to be most desirable for this purpose are the
Kentias from Lord Howe Island, K. belmoreana, K.
fosteriana, and K. canterburyana. There is a large
kind of bushhouse built of scrim, full of ornamental
plants, chiefly ferns, which are recovering from their
knocking about.


There are several trellises near the bushhouse
covered by some fine specimens of Marechal Neil
roses, and other climbers and creepers, and between
these trellises a number of the choicest varieties of
bouvardias has been planted to furnish cut flowers.
These useful plants are most valuable for this purpose,
for they are almost constantly in bloom, and stand no
end of cutting. Amongst these is the new yellow
variety, B. flavescens, a very beautiful and distinct
kind, a true yellow, and a very great acquisition to
this class of plants. It is worth noting that some of
the Marechal Neil roses growing over the trellises are
on their own roots, and are most vigorous and healthy.
It is generally thought that this rose will not succeed
■on its own roots, but here is evidence to the contrary.
There are many good varieties of camellias here and
there, and a great number of miscellanous plants ; and
one remarkable deciduous daphne, the specific name
■of which is not known.
The flower garden is alone worth a visit in the spring.
It is rather too early at present, but the roses are coming
on splendidly. Many of the Teas and Souvenir de la
malmaison are making a good show of bloom already.
The roses grow exceeding well here, and produce an
immense number of flowers throughout the year. Here
are rows and rows of bouvardias again, of many
varieties which have been blooming all through the
winter; about 20,000 plants of beautiful pansies now
■coming into full bloom, and thousands of seedling
ready to plant out. One of the prettiest of the
flowers now in full bloom is the Fresia refracta (bent
back), white, with an orange blotch. This bulb comes
from the Cape of Good Hope, and has a most delightful
fragrance; a free bloomer, and the flowers are most
valuable for cutting, as they last a very long time in
water. These are growing in thousands, and, like all
other kinds of bulbs, succeed admirably to this rich


sandy soil. There are also numbers of the belladonia
lily, Lilium candidum, Lilium auratum, the golden-
rayed lily of Japan (one already in bloom), 1,200 or
1,500 for cut flowers, thousands of hyacinths and
narcissus, and daffodil. Messrs. Pearce are importing
an immense number of varieties of narcissus and other
bulbs, and will probably have a magnificent show next
year. Here are daisies, ageratum, snapdragons, Mar-
guerites. canas in profusion, and no end of the useful
winter flowering carnations, Robert Henderson, and
the beautiful white clipper. Rows of Daphne, indica,
alba, and Rosea, fine healthy young plants, and
immense numbers of the white aster dahlia have been
planted out, and various other flowering plants ; and
away from these is a large bed containing thousands
of bulbs of tuberose, not at present in flower. These
are invaluable for cut flowers in their season. To give
adetailed description of all the beautiful things grown in
this garden would occupy so much space that a mere
mention of some only has been attempted. Lately Mr. C.
Pearce took a trip to England and Europe, and is strongly
impressed with the importance of bringing before
the public of this colony some of the good things he
had the good fortune to see. Anyone interested in
fine specimen plants should have a look at those exhi-
bited by the firm in the Sydney Arcade. They will
see there two beautiful palms, Rhapis flabelliformis,
and Kentia fosteriana; a magnificent plant of Aspidistra
lurida variegata, some beautiful Aspleniums, Microlepia
hirta cristata, Davallia dissecta, some Adiantums, a
variegated yucca, and several other very beautiful
plants.


MR. JOHN G. TRESEDER’S NURSERY.
[Extract from the Sydney Morning Herald of
12th October, 1889.]
THERE can be no doubt that considerable attention
will be given in the near future to seaside planting
along our extensive and, generally, rather bare coast,
especially in the vicinity of the cities and towns.
What a vast difference might be effected in the ap-
pearance of the present barren-looking places—for
instance, to the miserable looking country between
Botany Bay and Port Jackson —if the sea-shore was
clothed with a dense forest of ornamental timber.
And this might be effected, as we shall presently see.
Mr. J. G. Treseder is giving particular attention to
the subject of suitable trees and shrubs for planting
near the seashore, not only from a business point of
view, but from a love of the picturesque and the
beautiful. He was born and brought up in Cornwall,
the narrow peninsula forming the south-westernmost
county in England, which is exposed to the full blast
of the heavy gales which tear over the Atlantic Ocean.
In this breezy country he served his time under his
father, a landscape gardener and nurseryman, and
here he was engaged with his father in most extensive
sea-side planting, which proved to be most successful,
in the face of many difficulties they had to contend
against drift sand, but which they completely


conquered by planting suitable shrubs and trees ; for
these in time formed dense walls, as it were, against
the drifts and sea-spray, and delightful sheltered spots
were formed, where it was a pleasure to live, but once
uninhabitable. It is worth mentioning here that sea-
side planting is not only of great importance for
shelter and ornamental purposes, but for many kinds
of timber, which might be raised on waste places.
Many valuable plantations have been formed in most
unlikely and inhospitable places on the English and
French coasts, especially on the coast of Gascony, and
between Bayonne and Bordeaux, on miserable sand-
drifts, where the inhabitants now gain their livelihood
from preparing resin, tar, &c., from the forests of
Pinus pinaster of varieties, where formerly there was
nothing but thousands of acres of white sand. This
is a lesson well worth remembering. We have in this
colony at the present time about six million acres of
land set apart as timber and forest reserves ; but this
huge area will be gradually eaten away, although
every inch should be religiously retained, by land
grabbers or selectors, who complete their time on
their first selection, and just make sufficient
improvements to comply with the requirements of
the land Acts, and then kick up a hullabaloo and
agitate for these 'reserves to be thrown open for the
settlement of the “ poor man.” These reserves are
bound to go, almost for a dead certainty, and bye-and-
bye we shall be “ hauled up by a round turn,” and
find that we have no more timber. Magnificent
timber is cut down and burnt off as a nuisance by
selectors, on their own land, every year. In time it
will all go.
Mr. T reseder’s plant nursery is situated at Ashfield,
on the Parramatta-road, about half-a-mile north of
the Ashfield railway station. Some years ago the
property belonged to, and the garden was made by, a


Mr. Underwood, who was an enthusiastic amateur
gardener, and here are to be seen a number of
different kinds of fine old camellias, which produce
great quantities of flowers, and these are of great
value to Mr. Treseder, who carries on a very large
seed business in the Royal Arcade, Sydney, in
connection with his nursery. Here also are some
fine specimens of ornamental trees and shrubs which
were planted many years ago. The plants that Mr.
Treseder is making a special feature of are looking
splendid. These plants are the Araucaria excelsa,
Pinus insignis.Cupressus Lawsoniana, several varieties
of palms and dracaenas. There are hundreds of
thousands of Norfolk Island pines, and palms, in all
stages of growth, inside the large houses, and outside,
in the open, and in every nook and corner imaginable
these plants come popping into view. The Norfolk
Island Pine is of immense value for seaside planting,
as it seems to delight in the salt sea-spray and defy the
howling gales which tear round its native island, where
it grows on apparently bare rocks, with its roots
washed by the sea. Massed together these trees
would form a magnificent breakwind. What a change
in the appearance of the bare Heads at the entrance
to Port Jackson a forest of these trees would effect !
A row or two are growing well, exposed to the ocean,
at Manly Beach, and there is a fine clump at Watson’s
Bay. If these could only be extended on to the hills,
the landscape would be entirely changed, and the
bare, hot-looking rocks hidden.
The palms grown are chiefly the beautiful Kentia
Fosteriana, K. Belmoreana, from Lord Howe Island,
the Seaforthia elegans, and Areca Baueri (now
called Kentia Baueri, but which should properly be
called Rhopalostylis Baueri). Those from Lord
Howe Island, known locally as the “ thatch ” and the
“ curldy ” palms, are exceedingly beautiful, and are


most useful for ornamental purposes, especially for
indoor decoration, for they will stand knocking about
better, perhaps, than any other kinds of palms.
Mr. Treseder is paying considerable attention to
ivies, of which there are many beautiful varieties;
and ornamental-leaved plants, such as the scarlet-
leaved oak, of which he has a stock ; the beautiful
maples, the golden elder (Sambucus nigra aurea), an
exceedingly ornamental shrub, a very great favourite
of the late Sir James Martin, who brought it under
Mr. Treseder’s notice. Roses, too, are a special
subject, and there are many new varieties of the
useful teas and hybrid teas. The bush houses are
very large, and contain a large and varied stock of
generally useful trees, shrubs, and flowering plants in
pots. Here are also many varieties of ferns, one in
particular, the beautiful Alsophila excelsa, is in con-
siderable quantity. This variety Mr. Treseder con-
siders to be the best to plant in the open garden, as it
grows very fast and stands the heat well. In the
garden, seeds of all kinds are tested, samples from
both bulk and packages. This is a very proper thing
to do, as nothing can be more unsatisfactory to a
vendor of seeds than being uncertain as to their
quality.
Mr. Treseder has just concluded arrangements to
enlarge his outdoor business very greatly, in
anticipation of an increased demand for ornamental
trees and shrubs for use, chiefly in seaside gardening.


APPENDIX.
MANURES FOR HORTICULTURE.
ENQUIRIES are now being made so frequently in
regard to manures suitable for the requirements of a
general flower garden, that it is thought a service
would be rendered to many if some information were
afforded as to the most suitable kinds to employ.
It is not intended in this work to go fully into the
question of soils, manures, and climates, but merely to
assist, in a general way, the amateur gardener with
some advice on the best classes of chemical and other
manures ; when and how to apply them, and in what
quantities. It should be well understood, that where
farm-yard manure can be obtained in abundance
and cheaply, it is to be preferred to all others, and it
should be applied to the worked soil as fresh as
possible, and the more urea it contains the better, for
unless this class of manure is properly prepared, in
the process of decompo’sition, the greater part of its
value will be lost. It may be allowed to remain on
the surface for a time as a mulch, and afterwards dug
in, or it may be dug in at once. Loose soils are made
more retentive of moisture, and stiff clay soils are
broken up by its introduction. Many eminent agri-
cultural chemists fail to notice the value of farm-yard
manure in respect of the bulk and humus it adds to
soils, and the service it renders in freeing the soil,
and preparing it for plant life, and also in unlocking


plant food already stored up in it. But farm-yard
manure has some disadvantages, it cannot always be
obtained, it is cumbersome to employ, and produces
luxuriant crops of weeds. Of other manures that can
be recommended, and are known to be quick and
powerful in their effect, are the COLONIAL SUGAR
Company’s Prepared Chemical Manures, the
Gas Company’s Sulphate of Ammonia, the New
South Wales Poudrette and Ammonia Company’s
POUDRETTE, and dried blood, and bone dust. The
Colonial Sugar Company is doing for New South
Wales that which the Agricultural Department of
Victoria is doing for that colony, namely, preparing
special, and mixed chemical manures in proper propor-
tions, ready for application to the soil. The Company
advertise five different classes of manures, of these
their No. 5 is the best, containing as it does, the three
great essentials necessary for plant life : 7iitrogen,
phosphoric acid, and potash ; and as the general
gardener will not go to the trouble of testing the
quality of his soil, in order to ascertain what plant con-
stituents it is most in need of, which could very easily
be done as described below, it would be much the safer
•course for him to purchase the best quality, which may
be called a complete manure. The Gas COMPANY is
also selling a very valuable chemical manure, namely:
Sulphate of A7nmonia, this manure contains about
twenty per cent, of nitrogen, which is one of the most
necessary constituents of plants, and of which the
majority of soils are deficient. It is a most powerful
fertilizer, quick in its action, being in a form readily
•assimilated by plants, on that account it should be
used sparingly, and is best mixed with dry soil,
superphosphate of lime, or bone dust, and sprinkled
•evenly over the land in small quantities, which should
be raked in. The best time to apply it is in the
■early spring and autumn, but it should never be used


in combination with lime, nor soon after the application-
of lime, or its value will be lost. Artificial manures
are of but little use in dry soils, failing rain therefore,
water must be applied to the land. Sulphate of
Ammonia also makes an excellent liquid manure for
robust growing pot plants, especially if mixed with
superphosphate of lime, and sulphate of potash in
the proportion of 3oz. of sulphate of ammonia, loz.
superphosphate, and loz. sulphate of potash to about
ten gallons of water. Pot plants coming into flower
may be watered with it, but it is not advised for
delicate ferns. PoUDRETTE is a valuable and useful
manure, and like bone dust may be used as a safe
fertilizer up to almost any quantity. POUDRETTE,
hone dust, and dried blood are manures that can be used
by any gardener without fear of injury resulting to
any plants grown in the open ; ,they are not so readily
available for plant food as the superphosphate, or
sulphate of ammonia, etc., but are all useful and
convenient fertilizers, and are best used, mixed
separately, or together with soil or farm-yard manure.
Bone dust should always be so mixed, because its
decomposition is thereby assisted. Dried blood is
very rich in nitrogen, and good bone dust contains a
large percentage of phosphoric acid, and a little-
nitrogen, consequently, if these are mixed together, an
excellent fertilizer will be obtained, that would be
serviceable for any garden. Bone dust to be good,
should not have had all its gluten previously boiled or
burnt out, as practiced by some manufacturers, thus
depriving it of all nitrogen, one of its most valuable
constituents. Gardeners should not forget that lime
is of great value to the soil, and where soils are
known not to possess it in abundance, it most
certainly should be applied. Heavy clay soils are
made light and friable by lime, it destroys many
insects, and sweetens sour land.


„ , n , Cost per Where
Cwt. Cwt. Cw £ obtained .
No. 5. —Complete Fertilizer,
from 5 to 10 ... 8/0 Sugar Company.
Sulphate of Ammonia
„ 1 „ 2 ... 13/0 Gas Company.
Poudrette ...
,, 8 „ 10 ... 5/0 N.S.W. Poudrette
and Ammonia Co.
Bone Dust ...
» 7 „ 10 ... 5/6
Dried Blood
„ 4 ,, 5 ... 7/0 Glebe I. Abattoirs
Superphosphate of Lime ...
„ 7 „ 10 ... 4/6 Sugar Company.
Sulphate of Potash
„ 1 „ 2 ...18/0 „ „
Lime ... ... ... ■
r .. 10 „ 15 ]
(_ every 5 years )
TEST PLOTS.
Test plots, with the object of discovering what
minerals any particular land is deficient in, are easily
experimented with. Several small plots of convenient
size may be laid out, adjacent to each other, and the
different manures applied separately and together on
similar crops, and the result noted. Thus, separate
plots could receive a light, medium, and heavy dressing
of a complete manure respectively, other plots be
treated with sulphate of ammonia only, and super-
phosphate of lime, one without any manure, and
another with lime only. It should of course be
remembered, that some plants require different foods
in different proportions. Cereals require nitrogen
most; peas, beans, and other leguminous plants
require no nitrogen; whereas potatoes and other
root crops require phosphoric acid in most abundance;
and cabbages, potash and lime.
The manures above-mentioned may be applied in
the following quantities, at the rate of per acre :
A complete fertilizer consists of proportions of
nitrogen (sulphate of ammonia), phosphoric acid
(superphosphate of lime), potash (sulphate, or nitrate
of potash), and lime ; there is, perhaps, no need to
add lime where superphosphate is used. The pro-
portions in which these chemical manures should be


mixed depends largely upon the kind of crops intended
to be grown, as explained above ; but the following
may be considered a reasonable mixture for a general
garden ;
Cost.
Lbs. £ s. d.
Sulphate of Ammonia... 350 256 Should be spread
Superphosphate ...500 I 1 2 6 in two lots, half
-Sulphate of Potash ...200 S- per acre 1 16 o in the Spring,
\ and half in the
1,050 j £$ 4 0 Autumn.


HLJSkIS. Sc (®«|adr Co., §^tb
\IoLT) Escape QetpJerjers,
Head Offices. 161 Pitt Street.
City Fruit and. Plant Depot, 377 George St,,
Near A.J.S. Bank.
CITY SHOW GROUNDS AT PFAHLERT’S HOTEL,
MARGARET STREET.
Nurseries, Orchards, and Vineyards, at Ermington,
near Hyde.
Estimates given for Clearing, Ploughing, supplying Stakes
and Plants, and Laying out Orchards, Gardens. Parks, etc.
'h in Ornamental Trees and Plants of every description. fjTTjf
Ply FRUIT TREES A SPECIALITY U I
Catalogues on Application.
®iir A Visit to our
and Vineyards,
Nurseries, Orchards,
respectfully invited.
Orders for Plants and Trees are received
by the Gardener in charge of Show Grounds,
and at the Depot, or by the Manager, at
Ermington.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
SEEDS
FARM Am GARDE^^
Are of uniformly good quality, and may be procured
from the leading Country Storekeepers and Merchants
throughout the Australian Colonies and New Zealand,
or direct from their Colonial Branches.
Price Lists and all information will be forwarded
on application.
Nothing is so necessary for successful gardening as
good and well-selected Seeds. To secure good results,
growers should see that they have Yates’ Reliable
Seeds. The reasons for their superiority are given
on the following page.
MWW YTffEg § CO.,
237 SUSSEX STREET, SYDNEY,
QUEEN STREET, AUCKLAND,
AND
75 SHUDEHILL, MANCHESTER.
Established 1826.
as- SEE ALSO FOLLOWING PAGE.


YATES’ RELIABLE SEEDS.
... .
to the large quantities or seeds required by our extensive
SHIP English trade, and our long experience (60 years), we are able
Tto buy all our seeds first hand, each variety from a grower who
makes it a speciality, and from a climate and district best
suited to bring them to the highest perfection, all the leading sorts
being grown from stock seed supplied by us. It may seem almost
incredible, but we have over one hundred growers in England, the
Continent, America, and the Colonies, yearly growing our supplies.
All seeds that do not stand the sea voyage we have grown specially
for our colonial branches by the leading Australian and New Zealand
growers.
The germinating powers of all seeds are thoroughly tested both
before they leave England and also after their arrival in the colonies,
anything not growing a good percentage being at once rejected. We
have also had recently erected, at our Manchester establishment, the
most perfect seed-cleaning machinery obtainable, with which we
thoroughly dress all our seeds, and remove all light and imperfect
ones.
We have a trial ground over four acres in extent, where we
annually test every variety we sell, and also try the so-called novelties
and specialities of other firms. We are by this means able to keep
our own seeds as perfect as possible, and are also able to adopt other
new varieties worthy of being introduced.
We allow storekeepers to destroy at our own expense each year
the dead seeds left on hand, so that there is no chance of seeds being
old and not growing.
Lastly, we devote all our attention to supplying RELIABLE
VEGETABLE, FLOWER, and ROOT SEEDS, and so excel in them.
simn i4iii 4 m,
(Merchants.
SYDNEY, AUCKLAND, AND MANCHESTER.
Established 1826.
■S3T SEE ALSO PRECEDING PAGE.


ADVERTISE MENTS. •
To Horticulturists
THE BEST MANURE
FOR GARDEN USE IS THE
It is manufactured from Nightsoil and Bone Meal.
The Fertilizing qualities are chemically fixed.
It is absolutely free from smell.
It is Perfectly Clean, and will not soil the hands or anything
with which it may come in contact.
It goes much farther than any manure in the market.
For Pot Plants it is unequalled.
For Tennis Courts and Lawns it has no rival, and does not
disfigure the Lawn, but can be used while the court is
being constantly played upon.
To be obtained from any Seedsman Retail, at
1s 6d. Per Bag, Containing 30 lbs.
WHOLESALE FROM
M'LEAN BROS. & RIGG,
LIMITED,
IRONMONGERS,
GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY,
OR
The Eurta j&nitaraj Co., Newcastle.
LAWN MOWERS AND SPRINKLERS.
GARDEN ROLLERS & TOOLS OF ALL KINDS.


SUPERIOR m
Gardes Fertilizer I
MANUFACTURED BY
THE GOIML SUGAR REPINING GO,
LIMITED
O’CONNELL STREET, SYDNEY.
FOR GRASS, VEGETABLES, OR FLOWERS
Containing Potash, Lime, Nitrogen, and Phosphoric
Acid in the proportions best suited to the soils of the
colony. Ground to a fine powder, clean and free
from smell.
To be obtained in 71b. tins, with full directions for
use. from
ANDERSON & CO.,
SEEDSMEN.
216 & 218 PITT ST, SYDNEY.


HIGH-CLASS FLORAL WORK,
' / \wx ■ ■..jmmw,
*s-, m iiaßy l . ‘-5 • ■.*
fIWP' jf . \
rlKr Jiif i
W*mMi g i \c./:m
\ Q % tHHB^A
n CB hto - Wm* \
' *»%* wmMM
e<%c
i. SKMS, if
f*f MASTS, fi
H AND '•i F**P
Jfcuutlful JI.o «.»?»„ / \
- -v? - r- -—» —r »-=- v I / V
Searl and. Sons,
>EJJB ART KIiORIST,S,
f/109 KING STREET, SYDNEY,
