

PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS
INSTRUCTION IN FARMING
1
V
T*’
S*
CANADA,
AND THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
*
%
•¥
•I*
&
TASMANIA
A Self-Supporting Occupation and Opening in Life for Gentlemen's
Sons, and a prudent way of starting for any who desire to
engage in Agriculture in America and the Colonies.
EIGHTEENTH EDITION—REVISED OCTC3ER, 1887.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
POST FREE—SIXPENCE.
r^,
%
v • -I
FORD, EATHBONE AND
21, Finsiiury Pavement, London, E.C.
[entered at stationers’ hall.]


CONTENTS.
♦
References (PERSONAL) ... ... ... ... 1 to 3
References to SYSTEM 27 and 29
Bankers ... ... 3
Solicitors 3
Object and Scope of System 7
Prospects 9
Nature of Work ... ... ... ... ... 10
Minnesota 12
lowa ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
Wisconsin 12
Ontario 12
Nova Scotia .' 12
Virginia... ... ... ... ... ... 13
Tasmania 13
Period of Instruction ... ... ... ... ... 15
Outlay 16
Premium 16, 17
Journey ... ... ... ... ... 17
Month’s Trial 17
Outfit ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
Responsibility... ... ... ... 18
Qualification for Success... ... ... ... 21 and 22
... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22
Our Address ... ... ... ... ... ... 24
Appendix (Commencement of) ... ... ... ... 29
Comparative Temperatures ... ... ... ... 69
Analysis of Farms and Tenure 71
Wards in Chancery 26
Insurance ... ... ... 17
Foreign Drafts 72


MESSRS. FORD, RATHBONE & CO,,
21, FINSBURY PAVEMENT, LONDON, E.C.,
Are permitted to refer to the following Gentlemen, to whom one or
more Members of the Firm are personally known
For references to success of System see pages 27 to 67, and special
local references will be sent on application.
JOHN AMPHLETT, Esq., dent, Stourbridge.
JOSIAH AUSTEN, Esq., Retired Stafl-Surgeon R.N., Ramsgate.
STEPHEN B. BARLOW, Esq., Cabalva, Reigate.
The Rev. ADDISON BRAMWELL, Barrow Hills, Chertsey.
J. R. BULWER, Esq,, Q. 0., 2, Temple Gardens, Temple, E.O.
The Rev. JOHN HUGH BURGESS, Blewbury, Didcot, Berks.
E. W. M. CORBETT, Esq., High Street, Cardiff.
The Rev. Canon CROMWELL, Stisted, Braintree, Essex.
The Rev. THOS. DARLING, 10, Mecklenburg Square, London, W.C.
FREDERICK WM. DISNEY, Esq., The Woodlands, Surbiton.
The Right Rev. The BISHOP OF DOVER, The Precincts, Canterbury
T. W. DUNN, Esq., Headmaster of The College, Bath.
The Rev. Dr. DYNE, Rogate, Petersfleld,
General CHARLES CHESTER EKINS, 10, Montague Road, Rich,
mond, Surre} 7 .
THOMAS ABDY FELLOWES, Esq., Donnington Priory, Newbury.
The Rev. ROBERT FISHER, Sewerby Vicarage, Bridlington.
The Rev. HENRY THOMAS FLETCHER, J.P., Bicker, Spalding.
The Rev. C. H. FORD, J. P., Bishopton Vicarage, Stockton-on-Tees.
THOS. MUSGRAVE FRANCIS, Esq., Quy Hall, Cambridge.
General CHARLES B. FULLER, R.A., Hawkstone, Fareham, Hants.
HENRY A. GIFPARD, Esq., Q. 0., 1, Southwell Gardens, Queen’s Gate,
S.W.
Tile Rev. HERBERT N. GRAY, Warden of St. Andrew’s College,
Bradfield, Reading.


H. W. HARTLEY, Esq., J.P., Fencegate, Burnley.
ALFRED HARVEY, Esq., M.D., The Oaks, Hollington, St.
Leonards-on-Sea.
LLEWELYN F. HEATON, Esq., Bryn Polyn, St. Asaph.
Messrs. HOARE, Bankers, Fleet Street, E.C.
The Rev. 0. ALLISON HOLMES, Greetham Vicarage, Oakham.
JAMES INSKIP, Esq., Clifton Park House, Olitton, Bristol.
P. 0. JERVIS, Esq., Uttoxeter.
J. H. JOSSELYN, Esq., Ipswich.
THEODORE KENSINGTON, Esq., Winchester.
E. KEY, Esq., R.N., Teston, Kent.
Major KNOX, Gloucester.
Capt. BROWNLOW EDWARD LAYARD Walton Lodge, Torquay.
S. R. LEWIN, Esq., Widford, Herts.
The Rev. W. H. LUCAS, Sopley, Ring wood.
The Hon. and Rev. ARTHUR TEMPLE LYTTLETON Master oi
Selwyn College, Cambridge.
The Rev. Dr. MACLEAR, St. Augustine’s College, Canterbury.
The Rev. PELHAM MAITLAND, Birohfield Vicarage, Birmingham.
GILBERT G. MAITLAND, Esq., SionHill Place, Bath.
CHARLES MALLAM, Esq., Sandgate.
The Rev. Dr. MoDOWALL, The School House, Highgate.
GEORGE MILLER, Esq., Ashstead, Epsom.
RICHARD COOMBE MILLER, Esq., J.P., Oakfield, Dartford.
Colonel R. T. G. G. MONYPENNY, Maytham Hall, Rolvenden,
Ashford.
Captain W. D. C. G. MONYPENNY, Bellevue House, Bathwiok Hill,
Bath.
E N. P. MOOR, Esq., 2, Albert Road, Clifton, Bristol
The Rev. G. MOOR, Clifton Road, Worthing.
The Rev. HENRY LLOYD OSWELL, The Parsonage, Harewood
End, Ross, Herefordshire.
The Rev. W. H. OSWELL, Saxby Rectory, Lincolnshire.
0. GILBERT PEACOCK, Esq., Greatford Hall, Stamford.
J. E. PEARSON, Esq., Glenthorne Villa, Clifton Park Road, Clifton,
Bristol.
EDWARD A. PHILLIPS, Esq., North Shields.
H. S. PHILLIPS, Esq., 39, Kenilworth Road, St. Leonards.
Rev. THOS POWELL, Bisham Vicarage, Marlow.
ALEXANDER PYM, Esq., J.P., The Firs, Ampthill.
R. RUTHVEN PYM, Esq., 35, Devonshire Place, Portland Place, W.


General ROBERT P. RADCLIFPE, Caversham, Reading.
General GEORGE TRAVIS RADCLIFFE, Leamside, Leamington.
W. F. RAWLINS, Esq., Limington House, Hohester, Somerset.
W. F. RAWNSLEY, Esq., Park Hill, Lyndhurst.
J. P. SLINGSBY ROBERTS, Esq., 3, Powis Villas, Brighton.
The Rev. Canon ROOKE, Rampisham Rectory, Dorchester.
Admiral of the Fleet Sir ALFRED RYDER, K.C.8., Wellswood,
Torquay.
Major SALE, 0.M.G., Woolwich.
Rev. Canon SCARTH, The Rectory, Wrington, Somerset
The Rev. JOHN SHEPHARD, Vicarage, Eton, Bucks.
CHARLES JOHN SHUBRICK, Esq. 93, Onslow Gardens, S.W.
General RICHARD SHUBRICK, 7, Cornwall Mansions, B.W.
The Rev. E. S. TALBOT, Warden of Keble College, Oxford.
The Rev. F. ST. JOHN THACKERAY, The Vicarage, Mapledurham,
Reading.
JOHN TURNBULL, Esq., 58, Frederick Street, Edinburgh.
General Sir F. TURNER, R.A., K.C.8., 12, Cromwell Houses, Night-
ingale Road, Southsea.
The Rev. H. W. TWEED, Bridstow Vicarage, Ross, Herefordshire.
Colonel W. LARKINS WALKER, 13, Albany Villas, West Brighton.
J. D. WHYTE, Esq., Haileybury College, Herts.
The Rev. CHARLES WYNNE, Wargrave, Henley-on-Thames.
Major WYNNE, R.A., Staff College, Camberley, Famboro’.
H. B. WYNTER, Esq., M.D., Brynhir, Tenby.
SOLICITORS.
Messrs. FORD, RANKEN FORD & FORD, 4, South Square,
Gray’s Inn. London, W.C.
FRANK BROWN, Esq., 33, Upper Pitzwilliara Street, Dublin.
Messrs. ALEXANDER &. GREEN, 120, Broadway, New York, U.S.A.
BANKERS:
Messrs. HOARE * 00., 37, Fleet Street, E.O.
Messrs. MELVILLE, EVANS & 00., 75, Lombard Street, E.O.
THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL BANK, Washington Building,
1, Broadway, New York.
THE UNION BANK OF AUSTRALIA, Launceston, Tasmania.
THE BANK OF BRITISH NORTH AMERICA, Halifax, N.S.


NOTICE
We find it necessary, in defence of
the copyright of our work, to make it
widely known that the infringement of
our rights has twice been restrained by
orders of the High Court of Justice
obtained in actions in which we were
the Plaintiffs.
In each case the Defendants were
ordered to pay heavy costs,
We shall be indebted to any one
who calls our attention to any further
infringement.
FORD, RATHBONE & CO.


PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS
INSTRUCTION IN FARMING-
CANADA
AND THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
TASMANIA.
“ Angustam amice pauperiem pati
Robustua aori militia puer
Oondiscat.”— Horace. Oarm. ii. 2.
EIGHTEENTH EDITION , REVISED.
WILLIAM WILBEAHAM FORD
JOHN EATHBONE,
21, Finsbury Pavement, London, EC.


PREFACE.
'Messrs. Ford, Eathbone & Co. are a private Firm,
independent of all land companies and agents, and they
have a complete organisation on both sides of the Atlantic,
which ensures a thorough fulfilment abroad of every
engagement entered into here. The Firm commenced
operations at this office in 1880. Its success to this date
is attested by the clients themselves and their constant
letters, some of which are quoted below.
It is very desirable that all communications intended for us
should he addressed to us bv name, as
Messrs. FORD, RATER ONE Sr CO.
The following form of Eeoeipt is given for the
Premium:— *
N.B.—The Practical nature of the duties and routine of the Farm have
been thoroughly explained to the Pupil or to his friends•
21, Finsbury Pavement, London, E,C,
£
RECEIVED froi
the sum of
the same being a Premium for
which we undertake to place
who is now.
years of age, as a Farm pupil, in
with a good Parmer there, where he will be treated as one of the
family, and have as comfortable a home as Farmers in that district
usually have, and be practically taught American Farming, receiving
also his board and lodging, with bed and bedroom to himself, and
in addition thereto pay at the rate of Dollars
per month for the first twelve months.
It is expected that he will remain with the Parmer upon the
above terms for twelve months, but this arrangement is entirely
based upon the reciprocal promise that said
is to conduct himself properly, and diligently aid in the work of the
Farm, the same as the Farmer’s sons are accustomed to do there.
Of the above Premium
Dollars are to be paid
as a bonus to the Farmer.
It is clearly understood that this Agency will not be responsible
for any consequences which may arise from intemperance or mis-
conduct on the part of the pupil, or physical incapacity.


PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS
INSTRUCTION IN FARMING
Canada and the United States of America,
and Tasmania.
A Self-supporting Occupation and Opening in Life for
Gentlemen's Sons, and a prudent way of starting for
any who desire to engage in Agriculture in
America and the Colonies.
Young gentlemen desiring to learn agriculture and stock
raising thoroughly, with the view, when they have gained
sufficient experience, of commencing work on farms of their
own, can be placed with carefully-chosen farmers in the best
districts either of Canada, the United States, or Tasmania,
where they will receive board and residence in addition to
monthly pay, so that from the commencement they can be
self-supporting and start successfully.
The system requires on the part of the pupil the same
attention to the farm and actual labour as the owner of the
farm and his sons are accustomed to bestow upon it, and
almost any one who has thus learned farming can engage in
it profitably on his own account; (1) by the purchase of
land for cash ; (2) on time payments extending over a term
of years ; (8) by joining the farmer he is placed with, or some
of his English companions; (4) by taking a farm on the
share system, a plan commonly adopted in the States, and
explained in the Appendix ; (5) by acquiring 160 acres free-
b 2


hold, and free of cost, under the Homestead* Act. In either
of the last two methods he can, if necessary, commence with
little or no capital beyond that which he may save out of his
earnings ; and though the progress then will be much slower
at first, it is the way in which many, and in some districts
the majority, of American farmers begin.
The leading principle of the system we have originated is
to make the young men self-supporting from the first, and in
this way the self-reliance so necessary to success in a new
country can best be acquired. To send them out without
the imposed obligation to work and to earn honest payment
for their services would not lead to habits of industry, and
to that practical acquaintance with every part of the business
without which they could not safely be hereafter trusted
with farms of their own; and the farmer himself would not
have such control over them as would ensure his being able
to teach them properly.
f The farmers selected to receive young men are chiefly
those cultivating from 160 to 600 acres as mixed grain and
stock farms, which are the size and description most general
in the States ; f and as it would probably be on farms of this
acreage that the majority of those going out would commence
for themselves, it is unquestionably better for them to gain
their experience in this manner than on larger farms; those,
however, who desire to learn on larger farms, and can after-
wards command the capital necessary to start and carry
them on, can be suitably placed for that purpose, though the
advice in all cases is that they should commence in the
smaller way.
We quote the following from the tenth Census of the
United States for 1880, Yol. 111., xxviii. :
“The actual cultivators of the soil here have been the same
kind of men precisely as those who filled the professions, or were
engaged in commercial and mechanical pursuits.
♦ The fees on entering a homestead amount to about £3, and absolute title is
given after proof of five years’ residence and cultivation each year of some por-
tion. A capital of £lOO would be sufficient to enable a young Englishman to
commence in a small way for himself. It may be observed, however, that many
Americans start successfully with even smaller amounts.
f See statement in the Appendix, p. 71,


“ Of two sons of the same mother, one became a lawyer, perhaps
a judge, or went down to the city and became a merchant, or gave
himself to political affairs and became a governor, or a member of
Congress; the other stayed upon the ancestral homestead, or
made a new one for himself and his children out of the public
domain farther west, remaining through life a plain, hard-working
farmer.”
From “Log-Cabin to White House.” Life of James
Garfield, President, U.S.A.;
“ James might have called the farm his teacher. It taught him
many excellent lessons.
"He extracted the most valuable knowledge from its soil. He
evoked inspiring thoughts from its labour. His manhood
developed under its rigid discipline. His mind enlarged its
mental grasp. The season spent in the log sohoolhouse could
not have pushed him higher up than did his experience on the
farm. It was positive proof that work is discipline as much as
study, and that it can do for boys often more than study to
qualify them for the stem duties of life. James was more of a
man at the close of that season than he was at the beginning of it.”
N.B.—James was twelve years old at this time, when he ran a
farm of fifty acres alone for his mother.
Lord Coleridge said (“Pall Mall,” 11th September, 1883);
"England and America are one in blood, in language, in law,
one in hatred of oppression and love of liberty. We are bound
together by God Himself in golden chains of mutual affection and
mutual respect, and two nations so joined I am firmly convinced
man will never put asunder.”
To those who prefer an active out-of-door life to the Prospects,
sedentary occupation of an office, or who seek, but are unable
to find, an opening in England which will permit them to
earn an income and maintain themselves, this occupation
must specially commend itself; for the life is a manly,
honest, self-reliant, and healthy one, and a substantial living
can be the result.
But whilst it offers an assured future to those who will
acquire habits of industry, and are content to live soberly
and economically, it is not desired to suggest change to such as
have already settled occupations here, or to cause the slightest
feeling of disappointment to those who go out through any
highly-coloured representations of the life.
Experience has shown that the best and proper way to ® ow t 0


start farming is by learning the business thoroughly at the
outset in the manner here suggested, and without the aid of
capital. Capital is of little or no use without experience,
or, at any rate, a fair knowledge of farming. Of course,
where capital is wanting, progress will be much slower at first;
but whilst on the one hand there are many who have started
without money and are yet prosperous, there are many more,
especially among the English, who, after beginning farming
with considerable capital, have lost it for lack of industry
and experience.
The course here recommended is, that the learner should
go out with a* view to live and work precisely as the farmers
themselves, their sons, and their men do, because the proper
plan for any one who intends to engage in farming is first to
acquire this practical knowledge and experience, even if he
have, or should hereafter have, the command of capital; and
it is the only way in which those starting without capital, or
with only a moderate amount, can become successful.
As to the work to be learned, it is the custom for farmers,
especially in Canada and the Western States, to do the
work themselves with but little hired help, and to rely on
themselves and their sons in the winter months ; and it is
necessary, therefore, for a pupil not to be above learning
to use his hands. Personal labour is not considered in the
least derogatory in America, but is regarded as a title to
social respect; and as hired labour is generally expensive,
especially at busy seasons of the year, such as harvest, it is
customary for a farmer to exchange work with his neigh-
bour ; the new settler, therefore, stands at a disadvantage
if, through being unable or unwilling to work, he is com-
pelled to hire labour, or if his two days’ time are only worth
his neighbour’s one day.
Those, therefore, who do not propose to learn farming
by actively helping with the daily work, but wish to idle
about towns, or only to ride about and overlook others, are
not recommended to go under this system ; for, though they
might honestly believe they were doing all that was necessary
for their future success, they would eventually find they had
been acquiring only habits of idleness, never becoming


thoroughly independent, but making constant demands for
money on their friends at home, and permanently prejudicing
thiir prospects.
This plain view of the matter is expressed in the interest Practice
only of the pupil and his friends. We are far from painting
a success to be acquired without labour, or advocating a
system under which we could easily, if so desired, place
young men with farmers or other residents, who would be
willing to receive them on moderate annual payments without
expecting their help or exertions.
Nor can a residence with English gentlemen in America not
be recommended to those who go out to really learn farming, t 0 do lt-
for, though there are English families settled in various dis-
tricts in comfortable homes, they are usually officers or other
gentlemen who, having but recently gone out, are only them-
selves learning American farming, and are, therefore, not
qualified to teach it; these gentlemen, moreover, usually re-
quire high terms as payment for board and residence, how-
ever long the pupil may remain (often as much as £lOO
a year), and usually give no pay; so that young men
neither become self-supporting nor are taught as an Ameri-
can farmer who has begun without money and made his own
way woilld be able to teach them ; and unless they have
acquired the knowledge of detail and habits of work and
steadiness which a practical training gives, they will not be
likely to succeed in the management of land or farms of their
own ; it is not only knowing how to do the work, but the
habit of actually doing it, which is so necessary for their
success when they start for themselves.
As to the country or district to be selected, there is no Selection
doubt that North America has an advantage on the score of Country,
distance over most of the English colonies. Not only are
Australia and New Zealand far distant, and the cost of the
journey very great, but it now requires considerable capital
to succeed in these colonies ; the Cape has few advan-
tages, and the constant difficulties with the natives form a
serious obstacle to settlement there. North America is
provided with perfect railway communication ; Quebec and
New York, its principal ports, are within ten days of Liver-
pool, and the mails are dispatched nearly every day.


In reference to the most desirable parts for settlement, the
“ Standard,” in commenting upon recent emigration statistics,
says :
“ When we glance at the direction taken by the human flood which
in June poured out of the Mersey, we find as usual that the great Re-
public obtained the greatest share of the fertilising overflow of the
Old Continent. Of these 26,688 people, 22,565 were bound for the
United States, 3,837 for Canada, 40 for Australia, 173 for South
America, and 31 for Africa, by which may be understood the Cape
and Natal. . . It may be, therefore, said in general terms that
last month’s emigrants went entirely to the United States and
Canada. . ~ The great distances of the South African and
Australian colonies are a drawback to their settlement. With the
exception of New Zealand, and of Tasmania in a less degree, they
present but small attractions to the tiller of the soil.”
Selection The district at first selected by the founders of this
District a g enc y was that of Southern Minnesota and Upper lowa,
a country exceptionally healthy. The climate is hotter in
summer and colder in winter than in England, but the
Minnesota seasons are very enjoyable, the atmosphere is clear, dry,
and lowa. an( j bracing, and rain seldom falls during the winter
months, which are much more healthy than in England.
Wisconsin The same characteristics of temperature, soil, and cli-
mate are also found in Southern Wisconsin, to which State
we are still sending pupils, and the farmhouses and ap-
pointments are usually better than in the first-named dis-
tricts. The best parts of Canada also offer an excellent field
for learning farming, probably better than any of the Prairie
States, though the prairies give better opportunities for
buying land at low prices or starting a farm. We have
selected, therefore, the provinces of Ontario and Nova
andH°' S cotaa ' as containing within their boundaries some of
Scotia the best districts in the Dominion, and quarters emi-
nently suited to those who desire to gain a thorough know-
ledge of farm and country, and yet wish to settle under
English laws. The soil of Ontario is extremely rich,
though the best fields are by no means equally dis-
tributed. Cereals and fruits abound, and are largely ex-
ported. The grasses are luxuriant. Horses and the best
Nova breeds of cattle are encouraged and reared. Nova Scotia
Scotia. possesses a vast deal of excellent land, capable of giving


most satisfactory returns for labour and capital, and enjoys
a most healthy climate, without either the extreme rigour of
the western winters or the excessive heat of the summers
in Upper Canada. Nova Scotia offers very cheap land;
a good farming climate, more humid in summer than in
Upper Canada, and very advantageous for vegetation,
especially pasture, and, above all, a geographical position of
inestimable value, between three markets—viz., the United
States, Great Britain, and Newfoundland. Many prefer
the milder winter climate and more equal seasons of
some of the Southern States, and these we are able to
place in the beautiful Piedmont section of Vir-
ginia, where the farms are large, and the homes often
more attractive than in the North. In Virginia there are Virginia,
great natural advantages for the successful growing of
fruits, flowers, and vegetables. The culture of the vine
has been attended with such success as to bring Virginia
into competition with the best known markets. Indian
com ripens well. The climate is mild, the scenery beauti-
ful. The Times, describing “ The South of To-day,”
December 22nd, 1884, remarks: “ One or two of the best
peopled counties of Virginia have in the last ten years
covered their hill sides thick with vineyards, to the great
advantage of their local prosperity,” and, as in these
counties a good system of mixed farming, including fruit
growing, prevails, we can confidently recommend this
part of Virginia. The small expense of the journey from
New York to Virginia, about sl3, or £2 155., is another
element in the settler’s favour.
A training at any of the stations provided by
us for pupils qualifies them for settling in any part
of the United States, Canada, Manitoba, or the
Colonies, where free lands are to be had; and
their judgment in selecting a favourable locality for
operations will be much assisted by the experience gained
in their course of tuition.
We have introduced the same system into Tasmania Tasmania,
for the benefit of those who are not fitted to stand the


severity of the American winter, and who are able to bear
the greater expenses of the journey.
The following, was written by Major-General the Hon.
W.Fielding, in “Nineteenth Century,” July, 1883:
“The smallest of the Australian Colonies is that island for-
merly known under the name of Van Diemen’s Land, hut now
called Tasmania. Here the climate more nearly resembles that of
the best parts of England, the soil is rich, there is plenty of it to
be bought on easy terms of payment from the Government, and
were it not for the difficulty of obtaining a reliable supply of
good labour at reasonable wages, Tasmania would be a paradise
for energetic" young men with some small means of their own.
There is considerable scope just now for the well-directed and
energetic inauguration of a statesmanlike policy, and an educated
and capable young English gentleman would find here a good
field for a successful and useful Parliamentary career. The popu-
lation consists for the most part of yeomen farming their own
lands.”
G. A. Sala, in “ Illustrated London News,” 26tb June,
1886, writes —
“ Tasmania may be likened to the Isle of Wight, seen through a
very big magnifying glass.' 1
The farmhouses, except in the special cases, of Vir-
ginia, Minnesota, and Nova Scotia, are usually smaller
than in England, and not adorned with gardens; the
living also is generally plainer than that which young
men well brought up here have been accustomed to, espe-
cially in the mode of cooking, which is indifferent, but the
diet is plentiful and there is everywhere what may be
termed a rough abundance. A description of the farm is
submitted to every pupil before embarkation.
The people are orderly, sober, honest, energetic, and
steady ; and the farmers, who have been carefully selected
to receive the pupils, are among the best and most re-
spected in the community, and often fill posts in the local
Government or administration. They will in each case do
all in their power to make those they receive comfortable,
provided the latter are industrious, steady, and docile.
Usually only one pupil will be placed on a farm, never
more than two; and in every instance a separate bedroom


is stipulated for, unless expressly stated to the contrary;
some of the farmers -wish to take two pupils, but though
the companionship of another young Englishman might
be very agreeable, it is not considered to their ultimate
advantage to be together. They will he more under the
influence of the farmer, and more interested in their work,
when on separate farms.
The cost of clothes and necessary expenditure need not Expendi-
exceed £lO a year, and can be provided out of their pay.
Young men going out inexperienced would not at first be nc ° '
worth more than their board, but in the agreement made
on their behalf with the farmers it is stipulated that they
shall receive from £1 to £2 a month, in addition to board
and residence, for the first twelve months or more ; after
that time they are worth more, and can in some cases earn
as much as £4 a month throughout the year, if they are
strong, capable, and industrious ; but having by this time
acquired self-reliance and experience in the business, they
would be able, and probably prefer, to bargain on their
own account, until they are ready to take land or farms of
their own.
A probation of from one to three years is sufficient to Period of
confer such a thorough knowledge of farming as will s^ truc ‘
qualify them to start on their own account, with a good
prospect of success.
In corroboration of the views advanced in the present OSSy 0 SS y
and previous editions of this pamphlet, respecting the gu CC g S g re
necessity for some such probationary time being spent on
an American farm before any investment of capital is
made, the following extract is given from a speech by
"Mr. J. Walter, M.P. for Berkshire, and of the “ Times ”
newspaper, who, in saying that he—
“ Had some experience of the emigration of English farmers
to America .... believed it would be greatly to their
advantage, and would materially advance their object, if they
would serve a very few years of apprenticeship before they entered
upon their career as farmers To succeed as an emi-
grant farmer there should be at first, on one side or other of the
Atlantic, an so to say, to the business.”


In a subsequent speech Mr. W alter says :
"1 am firmly persuaded that America will become more a
field of enterprise to thousands of English gentlemen, farmers,
and other classes of people Before the close of next
century there will be a population of 200 millions in the United
States, and what I wish is that more Englishmen would go- out
there.”
Th e wotk required is hard , and a sound constitution is
essential, but the health and physical capacity are improved
by the regular exercise, and there is time for recreation;
for at certain seasons of the year, especially in Canada or
the West, there is not so much to be done on the farm,
and time is then pleasantly spent in social enjoyments;
sport also is plentiful in some districts.
As to the profits to be derived from farming, the occu-
pation should afford an income comparatively free from
anxiety for the maintenance of a family and a provision
for the future ; and further, it may be stated that there
are some cases in which farmers in some of the States
referred to commenced without capital and have realised
from £lO,OOO to £20,000, or more, from farming; this
result is exceptional; it is, however, by no means excep-
tional to see farmers who came into the country originally
without any money at all now well-to-do and thriving.
The advantages of superior education which most young
Englishmen have received will, if they show equal indus-
try with their American neighbours, ensure their becoming
influential and respected members of the community,
progress being much more rapid, and openings for ad-
vancement, both in agricultural and commercial life, much
more numerous in America than in England. The author
of “ To-Day in America” says : ,
« Life in America must have special charms for young English-
men who have to make their way in the world.”
* The total outlay necessary for entering on a farm for
12 months, in the manner here indicated, is : —For lowa,
• • The premium covers all charges for 12 months for board
lodging, necessary washing, and a separate room; and it entitles the
pupil to receive monthly pay, averaging from 21 to 83 shillings for that
period. For the agreement, see page 6.


Nova Scotia
Premium.
. .£100
First Class
Ocean and Railway Para
.£13 0 0
Ontario (Province of)
.. 70
.. 13 0 0
Iowa
50
.. 17," 0 0
Wisconsin
.. 70
.. 17 0 0
Virginia ..
.. 110
.. 13 0 0
Minnesota
.£60 & .£115
17 10 0
Tasmania..
1 150 First class 54 15 0
»y • •
J 80 Second class 39 0 0
£5O; Minnesota, £6O and £ll5 ; Canada, £7O and £lOO ;
Wisconsin, £7O; Nova Scotia, £100; Virginia, £110;
and Tasmania, £BO and £150; beyond which there is
no charge whatever, either annual or otherwise, and the
only further expense is the cost of the journey, and such
outfit as may be taken. A detail of the outfit will be given
to pupils.*
Parents or friends who send out pupils may possibly Insurance,
borrow the necessary funds from their solicitors or bankers
on the security of a policy of insurance on their own lives,
or on that of the pupil. We are agents for the Sun Life
Office, and can supply the necessary forms of proposal.
The sum paid to us covers the amount paid to the Premium,
farmer as well as the agency here, and also the payment to
the local agents who receive and place the pupils on suit-
able farms, and who continue, from time to time, to advise
them and see to their welfare ; the proportion paid to the
farmer is in each case specified in the agreement and
receipt, and this amount is in each case remitted by us,
and paid to the farmer when his contract is signed, after
a month’s trial has elapsed, and the pupil has signified his
satisfaction with the way he is placed; this precaution
being taken so that if any change of farm is necessary it
can be the more readily made.
The entire cost of the journey to the States or Canada Expense of
will be covered by from £2O to £3O, according to distance Journey,
and locality selected; it includes first-class cabin on the
* Approximate Bates.
About £4 may be deducted if the pupil prefers to travel
at “ Intermediate Rate” across the Atlantic.


steamship, first-class railway fares in America, berth in
sleeping car, and the whole of the living expenses from
the time of leaving Liverpool until the pupil is settled on
the farm. Detailed particulars of these expenses, and the
fullest instructions as to the journey, are supplied before
departure, also letters of introduction to our agents, both
en route and at their destination, who are advised in advance
of each sailing. At New York they meet the vessel on
arrival, assist in passing baggage through the Custom-
house, and see the pupils off by train ; the arrangements
throughout being so complete that no difficulty or mistake
can arise at any stage of the journey.
The only addition to the premium and cost of the jour-
ney is the outfit, which need not be large or expensive,
but should consist of a supply of winter underclothing,
and, in addition to the suits in ordinary wear, such worn
clothes as may be hardly suitable for use here, but quite
good enough for rough wear. Other clothing can be
bought, as and when required, out of monthly pay. Pupils
learn thus to take care of their money. It is a mistaken
kindness on the part of parents or friends here to send out
large additional amounts, for it only tends to promote a
feeling of dependence upon home, instead of one of self-
reliance.
The question may arise in the reader’s mind, Why
should any charge be paid ? It is undoubtedly true that
young men can seek, and probably obtain, temporary
employment for themselves without paying any premium
for being properly directed where to go, and for being
provided with a settled home on their arrival; but the
attempt has been found dangerous unless they have friends
to whom they can apply at all times, and then of course
the services of a respectable agent are not so necessary. It
is very difficult for a young man without advice, in the
States, to ascertain the best spot for his purposes; he
would probably hang about large cities, where employment
is as difficult to find as it is in England, or if he should
settle upon some country district he must lodge in hotels,
and when successful in finding employment, it might only
be of a temporary nature, or with undesirable comrades or


acquaintances; and even if the consequences were not
demoralising, the difficulties and expense would he very
considerable. Of course, when experienced in colonial farm
life, it would be easy enough to find suitable places, but it
is at the commencement that help and guidance are of so
much value ; and experience shews that parents are safer
in paying a charge which ensures a suitable position, for a
certain term, on the arrival of their sons, than in sending
them out in a haphazard manner to seek homes for them-
selves. A strong confirmation of this view is to be found
in the fact that parents who have sent their sons out under
our care have, after a fair trial, sent other sons also
through our agency.
Mr. W. Y. Craig, late M.P., writes, 28th December,
1883
“ When I arranged with you fifteen months ago to send my son
to a respectable farmer in Kentucky, to be employed in such a way
as would secure his becoming acquainted with American farming,
and enjoying the privileges of a comfortable and respectable home,
I did not doubt that you would discharge faithfully the duties for
which I paid the premium.
“ I had, of course, made very careful inquiry into your position,
and ascertained pretty fully the connections you had in America,
so that at our interview I felt assured that I might safely entrust
my son with you to arrange for his being properly attended to.
“ I feel it only due to yourselves to state that 1 have never paid
money for the education of any one of my sons which has been pro-
ductive of more satisfactory results than that paid to you. There
has been everything done for him that it was possible for a parent to
do possessing an intimate knowledge of the country, and after the
expiration of the twelve months, when you were in no way bound
to give further assistance, he was furnished with such helps by
your agents as will, I believe, ensure his future progress.
All I can say is, that if I had other sons desirous of follow-
ing the same pursuit, I should have no hesitation in placing
them as you might direct, and pay the premium, subject to the
conditions and regulations which have proved so satisfactory in
the case referred to.
“ What is really required by those desirous of going to America
or Canada is employment with some farmer of respectability, and
I know of no better method than that pursued by your firm, who
stake their reputation upon the faithfulness with which they
discharge their obligations.


“ I may say in conclusion that I feel very grateful to you for
what you have done for my son, at a cost which I deem moderate,
and should you refer any one to me I shall be pleased to state my
experience to the effect herein expressed.
“Yours faithfully,
“ (Signed) W. T. CEAIG.”
“Messrs. Ford, Eathbone and Co.”
“ To Messrs. Ford, Eathbone and Co.
“ Kew, January 4, 1884.
“ Dear Sirs, —After the very satisfactory way you have arranged
matters for my son in Minnesota, U.S.A., I can do no less than
write and thank you. In every way you have acted up to your
engagements, and how satisfactory the result has been may be
judged of by the fact that for a total outlay of about £l2O, which
included his passage and outfit, he is now earning his own liveli-
hood, and is well and happy.
“ I was much struck by the kindness of Mr. Eathbone of your
firm, who, during his recent sojourn in America, went to see the
lad. This he was in no way bound to do, and it shewed- how
anxious you are for good results in every case you undertake.
“My sou seems to like the life, but he is not afraid of work,
and as you say in your prospectus, those who are should not go.
With best wishes,
“ I remain. Dear Sirs,
“ Yours faithfully,
“E. MONEY, Lt.-Colonel.”
The fanners vary in style and education; they are
generally freeholders and independent of criticism. Terms
of employment on W estem farms are made the subject of
a close bargain, in which the most experienced parties fare
the best. Our experience of farmers, whether native or
naturalised, proves the need of intervention and of super-
vision on behalf of young Englishmen.
The best farmers can only he ascertained by careful
inquiry, which involves inspection and an expense of time
and money. In undertaking this selection we aim at
saving the pupil delay and expense.
Direct intercourse with both farmers and pupils, and
personal examination of quarters, enable us to speak with
effect to all parties. The pupils are placed on the best
farms in permanent quarters on the same basis as the
farmers’ sons, and are rendered independent of the changes


which affect labourers, by special agreements entered into
in all cases by the farmer to give board as well as monthly
pay and a separate room.
Such an inspection could not be made with discrimina-
tion, and superintendence could not be maintained in many
different districts, were we merely commissioned by the
farmers to engage and interview the pupils.
The charge paid by the pupil is intended to cover the
expense of obtaining authentic information on all points
and executing the engagement set out on page 6 (supra),
and it is an insurance against risk.
It should be understood also that the interest taken Interest
in our pupils does not cease upon their settlement on taken '
suitable farms; we are kept informed of, and report
on, their progress, and endeavour to afford the pupils
every advice and assistance. The first few months on
a farm is probably the most trying time of all, and pupils
are requested, as soon as possible after arrival, to write
their views, fully and freely, about the living and the
work, to assist our judgment, and to shew whether the best
arrangements under the circumstances have been made: so
that if for any reason a change seems necessary (as will some- change of
times happen even where the greatest care has been taken Farm,
in selection), it may be made without delay, under proper
instructions, and before the contract is closed with the
farmer. In any case of doubt or difficulty, the pupil should
at once seek and follow the advice of our local representative,
and should also write immediately to this office. Where any
change is made without consulting with the resident agent
or ourselves, we cannot undertake to be responsible for the
result, although at all times, and under all circumstances
the best thing possible in the interest of the pupil will be
done. Our interest in his welfare is identical with his own ;
we take every precaution against dissatisfaction or failure
that knowledge and long experience can suggest, and any
further modification which appears necessary will at once
be adopted.
It is desirable that all who propose to settle in America Qualifica-
should thoroughly understand what the life is like. A


proper and early understanding of what they may expect
has much to do with their ultimate success. Some are
sure to say the hardships and difference in living are
greater than they anticipated, and others similarly circum-
stanced will declare that the life is by no means so rough as
they expected; all will not meet with the same success, all
will not be equally contented. Some, after a thorough trial,
may not like the occupation or be fitted for it; and to these
openings in commercial life may present themselves, but
such opportunities are not much more numerous there than
in England. Others may not do well, from circumstances
over which the agent who places them can have no control;
and some few would be of a class who would not succeed
anywhere. For the last, the kindest thing their friends
can do is to leave them fairly started, entirely dependent
on their own exertions, and not to be continually sending
them money from home ; for no one need suffer want who
has ordinary bodily health; and the steadiness which this
mode of life will sooner or later beget is an excellent
course of training. The moral drawn from Robinson
Crusoe, from his experience, will still apply, that “ the
diligent lived well and comfortably, and the slothful lived
hard and beggarly, and so I believe, generally speaking, it
is all over the world.” We cannot he responsible for the
consequences of irregular conduct; the system here recom-
mended as a safe training and a valuable opening in life is
based upon sobriety, steadiness, self-control, good health and
proper physical capacity.
We believe that a young man when fairly started
should depend for success mainly on his own exertions, and
agree with a recent writer in “ Scribner ” that—
“ The young man who is saved from the effort of making his
own way in the world, and the necessity of establishing his own
position, is denied the most powerful stimulus to labour and
development. The young men who are coming every year out of
the colleges and the professional schools of the country, and
starting into active life, will win success or sink into failure,
mainly in accordance with the amount of stimulus under which
their education has been acquired. If they have been obliged to
labour until they have learned the value of money; if they have
been forced into close economies, and learned also how difficult it


is to keep it; if they have grown np with the consciousness upon
them that everything they hope for in the world must be won hy
their own unaided force and industry; if they have acquired thrifty
habits and self-helpfulness and self-trust, —they enter life with
great and most assuring advantages.”
It is precisely this training which can be found in the
occupation we offer; but though we can carry out what we
undertake, we cannot always ensure a successful result, nor
provide the pupil with a lucrative employment. We can,
as Emerson says, “ but accompany the youth to the gate of
the arena, for it is certain that, not by any strength of ours,
but only by the strength of his own, must he stand or fall.”
Unquestionably in some cases, notwithstanding all the care
of ourselves and our agents, signal failure has been more or
less the result—-less when the pupil has simply been dis-
inclined for steady application, more in that of those of
dissolute and intemperate habits. But even in these latter
and disheartening cases, success is not absolutely hopeless, if
friends will be persuaded not to commit the fatal error of
continually helping with money young men whom it would
be truer kindness to leave to help themselves. The late
lamented President Garfield, who rose by his own exertions
from the humblest to the highest station in his native
country, once observed with homely triteness :
“In nine times out of ten, the best thing that can happen to a
young man is to be tossed overboard and compelled to sink or
swim for himself. In all my acquaintances, I never knew a man
to be drowned who was worth saving.”
Proper contracts are entered into by us both with the kgree-
farmers and the friends of the pupils, and the fullest parti- mentB-
- will be given on all points upon which further infor-
mation is desired. Whenever it is possible, a personal
interview is most satisfactory, for the numerous questions
which naturally occur can then be more fully answered and
explained than by letter.
Reference will be given to parents whose sons have Kefer-
gone out (many among the number being the sons of clergy- ences.
men, officers, and members of county families), so soon as it
has been decided that this proposed occupation and opening
meet the views of the enquirer; and we strongly advise all


who wish to send out their sons to make full inquiry, as we
give numerous references both as to our own responsibility
and as to the success of our system.
Cheques on London Bankers should be crossed Messrs.
Hoare and Co., 37, Fleet Street, London, E. 0.; cheques on
Country Bankers should be crossed Messrs. Melville, Evans
and Co., 75, Lombard Street, E.C. Solicitors inquiring on
behalf of clients are referred to Messrs. Ford, Ranken Ford
and Ford, Solicitors, 4, South Square, Gray’s Inn, London,
w.c.
The method of some of our competitors differs from our
own in advocating that sailings should take place in large
parties, a plan we abandoned some years ago as being in
no respect so desirable as frequent sailings in fewer num-
bers; for it invariably happens that when large parties go
together there will be some whose influence would not be for
the good of the rest. Nor are personally conducted sailings
necessary, for the arrangements we make for the journey are
so complete that the youngest may accomplish it without
mistake or inconvenience, and we take every care necessary
to ensure the safe conduct of pupils from the time they leave
England until they arrive at their destination.
In more or less adopting our system, competitors have
adopted our terms, although unable to offer the advantages
either in choice of locality or arrangements for settlement
which experience has enabled us to do; while some indeed
fix a lower charge, expressly stating that they cannot assume
any responsibility whatever as to the settlement or future of
the pupils; a system which obviously affords no guarantee or
security to parents. All communications therefore intended
for us should be addressed to us by name, as Messrs. Ford,
Rathbone & Co., 21, Finsbury Pavement, E.C.
Some systems differ from our own in recommending
young men to learn from English gentlemen who have
recently settled abroad, and have, therefore, little know-
ledge of farming; this plan, which we have referred to on
page 11, has a certain attractiveness; but whilst it offers,
possibly, pleasant homes, it could scarcely turn out good
farmers.
A residence in a so-called agricultural college (really only


aprivate establishment) is anotherplanproposed,as offering
the best preparation for American farm-life. There may
be something to say in favour of such a training for farming
in England, where the system' of agriculture is highly
artificial, and a knowledge of chemistry, rotation of crops,
etc., is essential; but in America, where agriculture is of
a more simple character, the time and money so spent, even
if the tuition is good, would be more or less thrown away,
and at the end of twelve months less would be known
about the real work of the farm than if a pupil had com-
menced to plough, and plant, and attend to stock under the
watchful eye of an experienced practical farmer. If this
course be gone through at all, it should follow a practical
training on a farm, and then it should rather be at one of
the numerous agricultural colleges founded by the respec-
tive States or Provinces in which they are situated, and
which are usually ably conducted by efficient professors,
than at private establishments started as mere speculations.
Both of the above plans, however, entail a heavy annual
outlay for board and other serious items incidental to living
in town, whilst the pupil’s labour is in the meantime un-
productive, and he neither acquires habits of self-reliance
nor becomes self-supporting ; nor is it, we believe, desirable
that young men should associate in large numbers either
on farms or in the so-called colleges of those whose chief
income is derived from taking pupils ; they would be under
a more healthy influence and better control when placed
singly under the care of a practical farmer whose income
was derived from the profits of his farm, and where the
best opportunities are afforded for practical instruction and
future advancement, with the imposed obligation to work,
which would ensure regular habits of industry.
We believe that the preliminary training we recommend
is based upon right principles, and would prove of real and
lasting benefit to the pupil, making him self-reliant and
independent, and enabling him to do well in any depart-
ment of agriculture, and in any State in which he may
settle. We propose, therefore, to follow in the future the
system we have adopted in the past. It would be easy,
perhaps, for us to send oat more young men than we do, if


we felt at liberty to offer a less laborious life to sons, even
though at a greater cost to their parents ; but this, we are
sure, would ultimately result in disappointment and failure.
Those we have hitherto sent out have included the sons or
relatives of noblemen, officers, clergymen, solicitors, and
country and other gentlemen, and wards in Chancery, and
we are happy to believe that in the case of many for whom
no suitable position could be found at home, we have been
instrumental in laying the foundation of a manly, honour-
able, and prosperous future.
The system we have initiated has been very generally
commended, and our pamphlets describing it have been
prepared with a desire to place the matter candidly before
inquirers. In evidence that this object has been attained,
quotations may be given from a few of the numerous
letters received from correspondents. A clergyman, in
writing on this subject, says :
" I thank you for abstaining from inducing my sou to go by
any highly-coloured representations of the life there.”
Another writer says of this publication :
“ It makes a most candid statement of the facts, dealing fairly
with both sides of the question. There is nothing in it to lead me
to expect too much without activity.”
A barrister says of the pamphlet:
“ So far as I can judge from its contents, the system you are
working upon is the only true one to command success.”
As to the desirability of the life, a gentleman writes;
“ A friend has placed in my hands a pamphlet containing your
prospectus (if I may so term it) of an ’ occupation and business for
gentlemen’s sons.’ He did so knowing the great interest I had in
things American, acquired during a period of sixteen years’ resi-
dence in the States, and also for the purpose of asking my advice
in the matter, in the interest of a friend of his.
“ I have perused the various documents with much interest,
and the scheme has my entire approval .... and if any-
thing I can say or write will induce any enterprising young man
to go out, I shall consider that I am conferring upon him a great
favour.
“ Your great difficulty, it strikes me, speaking from an English
standpoint, is to make them understand how the dignity of labour
is respected in the States . . . .”


General Rich writes, January Ist, 1884, from Twyford,
Winchester:
“ If you refer anyone to me I will unhesitatingly state to them
all I have experienced in your assistance to myself and to my son.
I have written to you on this point before, and have felt very
angry with the correspondence I have read in the newspapers
regarding the agencies of which yours is one. lam fully satisfied
that the arrangements you have made, and the assistance you in
conjunction with your agents abroad have given my son, are all
and everything that a father could expect. You have never
wearied in trying to help him, and he has received the greatest
kindness throughout, and I have observed that you have always
been most desirous to secure his success. I have just heard from
my son. He seems very well and writes cheerfully,” etc.
“A. RICH, Lt.-General.”
" Messrs. Ford, Eathbone and Co.”
P. K. 8., also quoted below, writes to us, Nov. 11th,
1883, after an experience of one year on a farm in Canada :
“ My year with Mr. W expires, as you are doubtless aware,
on the 17th inst. From your letters to Mr. W I feel sure you
will like to know my plans. Mr. W has taken two farms,
which adjoin each other, and one of which he and I are going to
work together, the other being managed by his two sons.
“ Now, gentlemen, I think the mere fact of my electing to
enter into partnership with Mr. W , living for at least the
next two or three years with him and his wife, will be sufficient to
shew you how well we have got on together.
“Accept my best thanks for the trouble you have taken,on my
behalf.”
" To Messrs. Ford, Eathbone and Go.”
Mrs. 8., mother of P. K. 8., writes, Dec. 14th, 1883:
“I beg to acknowledge with many and sincere thanks your
kind letter, with the quotations you were good enough to make
from others for my perusal. It gives me indeed heartfelt pleasure
to find my son continues well and happy in Canada, and that Mr.
and Mrs. W and he seem so much pleased with each other. I
think it is a great advantage for my sou to remain with such kind
friends as they have proved, and to be allowed a share in their
new farm, instead of making a separate venture on his own
account. Both my sou and myself will, I am sure, always feel
grateful to you for your valuable assistance in furtherance of
his first start in life, and I never fail to mention my cause for most
complete satisfaction whenever occasion offers or friends inquire.”


28
The Key. Dr. J. B. D. writes, January 14th, 1884 :
“ I have had many letters from strangers to me with inquiries.
I have always answered that I am sure you will fulfil your engage-
ments and do all that you can for young men sent out through
you. Of course there are some who will never do anything for
themselves whatever is done for them, but I am convinced that
going to a well-selected farmer through you is the best chance a
young man can have in emigration.”


APPENDIX.
OPINIONS OF THOSE WHO HAVE GONE AND OF
THEIR FRIENDS.
It has been' suggested by several correspondents that a
few of the written opinions of the friends of those who
have gone out under our care should be appended, so that
inquirers may be able at once to form an opinion upon the
testimony of those having actual experience of the life as
to the advantage of the openings here proposed. We avail
ourselves of this suggestion, which will serve at once to
place before applicants some idea of the young men’s
opinion of the life, without requiring at an early stage of
the negotiation an actual reference to parents, which we
do not always feel at liberty to give unrestrictedly in the
first instance, solely because it would be trespassing unduly
on their kindness by asking them to engage in such an
extensive correspondence as an immediate reference to
them would involve.
For the sake of brevity in this edition we omit several hundred
letters quoted in former editions. We shall be happy to
show the originals of the following extracts, which, with
others too numerous to set out, cover the years 1880, 1881.
1882, 1883, 1884, 1885, 1886 and 1887. They relate to
Canada, Tasmania, and the United States.
Mrs. J. H., Nov. 9th, 1881:
“ I cannot express the gratitude I feel to your agents in Minneseta
America for their trouble with my son, and I am exceedingly
rejoiced to find he has listened to them and been induced to go to
work again, and I trust he has made up his mind to be contented.”
Again, Dec. 12th, 1881, about her son :
“ He is quite comfortable where he is, and likes his work, par-
ticularly that which concerns the animals.”
This lady has now sent out another son under our care,
and two of her nephews have also gone out.
J. J. H., Nov. 26th, 1882:
<< jly s on is quite happy and writes in very good spirits. The


place and work must agree with him, as he has gained eleven
pounds in weight, so I am satisfied the right thing has been done
for him in sending him to a farm. My other son has left Mr. P ,
and has been earning 1 dollar 25 cents a day threshing, and when
he wrote had got a fortnight’s work at threshing corn for 1 dollar
a day ; when that was over he should get into winter quarters.
He had 75 cents left of the money he took from home last year,
so it is quite evident the lads do not need much money out in the
States when they first go.
“ Thanking you for your trouble.”
Mrs. H., alluded to above, who has sent out two sons to
Wisconsin and Minnesota, writes, April 12th, 1883 :
“ Johnny wrote that he had written to his brother to ask if
there was an opening for him in Minnesota, and what Jim was
going to do. Jim wrote to me a short time ago and said he should
get $2O a month, for he was able to do all sorts of work and was
as strong as the run of men. He liked the farm work, so had
declined the offer of a place in a store. Johnny has always spoken
in the highest terms of Major M ’s kindness when he had seen
him, and also that he has frequently received newspapers from him,
which is an exceeding great kindness. It is an inestimable boon
that some one will care for the young lads in a strange land.”
And again, April 13th, 1887 :
“ One of my sons has taken a claim in Dakota, the other has
been acting bailiff to a gentleman near M for some mouths.”
Mrs. G. 8., Nov. 17th, 1881, states that her son
“ Is very happy and comfortable, and that he is very kindly
treated by Mr. G , and he hopes, if he suits, that he will be
kept on the same farm. He appears to like the work, though he
says it is hard. He was in very good health when he wrote at
the beginning of the month.”
Again, on the 4th January, 1882 :
“ I am glad to be able to tell you that I continue to receive
very satisfactory accounts from my sou in Minnesota. He likes
Mr. G and his family more and more every day. I must
thank you for having placed him in such a comfortable home.”
And on March 22nd, 1882 :
“ I enclose a letter for your perusal which I have received
from Mr. B. G ,in which he writes so nicely and kindly of my
sqn, I have also received another very nice kind letter from
Mrs. G -. lam much indebted to you for having interested
yourselves so much in my son's behalf. He is so happy, and all
the family are very fond of him. My son writes me that hq
would do anything for them.”


The Rev. G. F. writes, Aug. 18th, 1881
“ I have received a short letter from my son telling me of his Minnesota
safe arrival at the farm. He speaks very highly of Mr. C and
his family, and expresses a hope that as soon as he is settled he
shall be very happy indeed.”
Again, January 12th, 1882 :
“ I had a very nice cheery letter from my boy yesterday. He Minnesota
seems now very happy, and much enjoyed his visit to Mr. T .
I quite agree with what Mr. T ; says about what young men
who go out to America must do and be in order to succeed.
“ 1 have received a letter concerning your system from Messrs.
M and W . You may depend upon my speaking (as lam
glad to be able to do) in the highest terms of gratitude for what
you have done for me.”
Again, on April 17th, 1882, and 3rd August, 1883 :
“ I am glad to say that I had a happy, cheerful letter from my
boy a week ago. He speaks very highly of the kind treatment he
receives.”—“ My boy writes cheerily.”
Again, February 6th, 1884 :
“ I had a letter from my son to-day. . . . He says he is in
wonderfully good health and very happy.”
Mrs. S. C., March 28th, 1882 :
“ I have just heard from my son ... he asked me to let Wisconsin
you know that he is very comfortable ; likes Mr. B —— and his
wife very much; they are both kind to him, and though the work
is hard and plenty of it, he likes it.”
Again, April 14th, 1882 :
“ I am very glad my son is going to stay at the same farm ; he
likes Mr. B so much, and is getting into the work. Will you
kindly send one of your pamphlets and particulars to the enclosed
address ? ”
Again, June 21&t, 1882 :
“I often hear from my son, and he seems well content with
his life, and speaks highly of the kindness of Mr. and Mrs. B .”
Lt.-Col. J. E. K., April 29th, 1882 :
“ Each successive step has given us more and more cause for Wisconsin
satisfaction with the completeness of your arrangements.”
Again, May 22nd, 1882:
“ I am happy to say that from no one have I heard a word


against your institution, except from those who are engaged in a
similar occupation. The experience of every one I have seen or
heard of seems to be most favourable ; I have therefore an easy as
well as pleasant task in giving the results of my inquiries to those
who ask for them.”
Again, June 9th, 1882 :
“ There could be no better recommendation of your scheme
than is afforded by the tone and contents of your correspondence.”
Again, June 14th, 1882:
“ I have had a very nice letter from my son ; the farmer and
his wife are most kind to him, and the boy is thoroughly happy
and very well.”
Again, July 10th, 1882 :
“ I have had a most delightful letter from my son this morning
. . . . he says he is very busy, very happy, and very comforts
able.”
Again, Oct. 11th, 1884:
“If I can help you at any time I shall be very glad. The
interest you have always taken in my son, and the ready help you
have afforded, have been uniform in my two and a half years’
experience.”
H. J. C., July Bth, 1882, refers to F. G. H. B. below:
“ B says they are all very kind to him at Mr. A ’s, and
likes the life very much. He speaks of the people he meets as
being much better educated than he expected to find them.”
H. T. M. K., August 30th, 1882 :
“ I have heard frequently from my son in Ontario. He writes
in good spirits, and enjoys the life he is leading. He says; ‘The
work at this time of the year is hard j ’ but then he does more
than Mr. P expects from him, and is determined that he will
make himself thoroughly useful, and not be outdone by any one
on the farm. He also says : ‘ Mr. P is now giving me twenty
dollars a month, which is to continue through the summer, and
has promised me ten dollars a month through the winter.’ In
another letter, received about a fortnight ago, he says; ‘ I wish I
had brought out a gun or rifle and some fishing-tackle, as P
always goes out for a hunting excursion in the fall for a fortnight
or three weeks, and he is going to take me with him to shoot deer
and to fish, so I must get a rifle somehow. P also hopes to
give me a chance of meeting with bears and a few wolves after


the harvest.’ My son likes the country very much, and, being
near a lake, he enjoys the opportunity, which he occasionally has,
of boating and swimming, in both of which exercises he is an
expert. He further says; ‘I have been here just two months, and
I do no|; think that any other life would really have suited me so
well, except the army.’ ”
Again, March 4th, 1883 :
“My son has now had nearly ten months’ experience on the Ontario,
farm in Ontario, on which you placed him. You will be glad to
hear that he is getting on famously, and thoroughly enjoys the
life he is leading. He can turn his hand to anything. He seems
to excel in ploughing and threshing, and he has the care of the
horses, cows, sheep, and pigs, so I think he is learning the busi-
ness of a Canadian farmer well. He speaks with gratitude of the
kindness of Mr. and Mrs. P , and the good care they take of
him. The life agrees with him remarkably well, and exactly suits
him, so much so that he says he would not exchange it for any
other.”
Mrs. 8., mother of F. K. 8., quoted above, January
12th, 1883 :
“ I am glad to tell you that my son writes quite cheerfully and Ontario,
contentedly, appearing fully satisfied with all the arrangements
yon and your agents made for him. Mr. and Mrs. W seem
nice, kind people, with whom he anticipates getting on famously.”
C. P. T., Feb., 1883 :
“ I get up at five in the morning, and, as a rule, go to bed at lowa,
about eight. The work, of course, is hard to one at first, but I
shall soon get over that j the food I get here is excellent, far from
what I expected, and my bed is just as good as I had at home.
I have now been here long enough to know that every young fellow
who comes over here, and has made up his mind to work, can get
on, but he must equal himself with every one. lam afraid I have
no more to say, except I must thank you for having placed me in
such a comfortable home.”
M. T., Feb. 2nd, 1883, respecting the same pupil :
“ He sends long and amusing accounts of his new life, and is
most thoroughly happy and contented. He quite appreciates the
advantage of being with so nice a family, and speaks of the I ’s
with affection and respect.”
W. T. 0., also quoted above, Feb. 20th, 1883 :
“ I only came to town a few days ago, and as soon as I could Kentucky,
spare an hour I had intended calling upon you to thank you for
the very satisfactory arrangements you made for my son in
Kentucky.


“ My son writes in excellent spirits, and likes the work exceed-
ingly. He is very happy, and speaks of Mr. and Mrs. in the
highest terms.
“ He is a very clever and talented lad, full of romance, and
nothing will more conduce to his future prosperity and well-being
than plenty of good hard and useful work. He seems very deter-
mined to learn the work and become a first-class farmer,”
The following was received from Mrs. S. C., quoted
above, on being informed that her son bad formed an
engagement with a farmer for bis second year on improved
terms ; dated 9tb April, 1883 :
“ Thanks for your letter received yesterday telling me of the
engagement made by my sou with Mr E . I had heard from
him that it was likely to be. He writes cheerfully, likes his work,
and speaks very highly of the kindness and attention of your agent.
Major M
“ Thanking you very much for the satisfactory manner in
which you have carried out all you undertook to do for my boy,
and wishing you success with other clients,” etc.
S. M., lOtb May, 1883:
“ I have to thank you for the good selection of farmers you
have made for me and B . lam very happy here indeed, and
like the work and my new life very much. Mr. Q is very kind
to me and we get on very well together.”
Professor M. (father of above), May 14fcb, 1884:
“ You may rely on my being at all times ready to do what little I
can by way of showing my sense of your kindness to my two boys.”
H. J. writes from Nebraska, June, 1883:
“Just a line to say I am very pleased with the farm Mr. H
has selected for me. I think it is the best for some miles, Mr. and
Mrs. B being particularly kind, making me as comfortable as I
could wish. I often see Mr. H , who is very kind in arranging
and seeing to things I require. I am not at all sorry I came out
here.”
R. P. H. writes, Aug. 23rd, 1883:
“My son has always spoken in high terms of Mr. F , and,
though ho has had a year of hard work, he feels that he has
acquired a good practical knowledge of farming operations, which
I hope he will turn to good account.”


W. H. 0. writes, May 14th, 1884, from Iowa:
“ I have been asked by various people again and again why we lowa
don't come out here ‘ on our own hook,’ and save a certain amount
of money by hiring ourselves to some farmer P My answer always
has been that the experience we gain repays tenfold any expense.
“ To begin with, if an Englishman comes out here to hire
himself on a farm, he probably will have to wait about a month or
more if there is no one he knows to go to; then supposing he does
hire himself to a farmer, his pay for the first few months will cer-
tainly be no more than he gets by means of this Agency, and
probably not so much, and the farmer is certain to make him act
as the errand-boy for all the hands.
“ But the chief argument, it seems to me, in favour of this
Agency is that the farmer, whose farm he has not had the trouble
and delay of finding for himself, will always treat him with a
certain amount of respect—in fact, on all the farms where I’ve seen
English boys, and certainly on my own, we have been treated as
members of the family.
“ The monthly pay I’ve found to be ample for everything, pro-
vided everything sufficient for winter is brought from home, and
his experience is worth three or four bonuses.
“ And, lastly, let me add that Englishmen coming here could
not find kinder people than your agents, or more careful over our
interests; and, for myself, I shall never forget their kindness and
hospitality to me.”
F. G. H. B. writes, Nov. 17th, 1883, after two years’,
experience as a pupil in Wisconsin :
“ I arrived home safely on the 29th of October, after a very Wisconsin
pleasant though rather long voyage. I expect to be in town either
next week or the week after, and will then call on you. I can
only say now, after nearly two years’ experience, that I have
never regretted going under your system, and only wish I had
gone sooner.”
J. J. W., after a year in Wisconsin, Dec, 4th, 1883:
“ Just a line to you to say how lam getting on. My year Wisconsin
with Mr. C—— was up on September 30th, but I made arrange-
ments with Mr. C to stay with him for two months longer for
18 dollars per month. I have great pleasure in writing you that
since I have been in the States I have met with nothing but kind-
ness, and the people I am with have treated me with nothing but
kindness, in fact as well as one of their own children; and though
American manners and Western customs are very different to
ours in England, still I am getting used to them now. Before I
came out here I was in Otago, New Zealand, and I must say that


I prefer the States to any one of the Australian Colonies. lam
sure that if the other fellows have had as good a place as I have
had that they can have nothing to complain of. I intend to stay
here the greater part of the winter, and in the beginning of next
year to go through the northern part of this State to Minnesota,
and I hope, if all is well, to be able to pay a short visit to England
next winter, and then I expect my mother to return to the States
with me. I cannot close without saying a word for your agent,
who I and everybody I have seen say ' he is the right man in the
right place/ I don’t think any one could treat us better or more
kindly.”
Mrs. T. refers to her son in Nebraska, May 2nd, 1884 :
“We have received two letters from my son since he arrived at
G . In both of them he speaks most highly of the kindness of
Mr. A and family. He says they are all very anxious to assist
him in learning his work. The farm and farmhouse are the best
anywhere about, with good cattle and horses.
“ I must thank you for your kind courtesy in letting us know of
my son’s arrival and for the very satisfactory manner in which all
the arrangements made by your firm have been carried out, and
wish you all success in the future.”
Lieut-Col. C. -writes, May 21st, 1884:
“ I must thank you for the trouble you have taken in selecting
such a good farm for the lad; he speaks highly in a letter to me of
the kindness shown him both by Mr. and Mrs. B .
“ I think you have very accurately described the work, the kind
of food, and the life generally a boy has to lead who selects
American farming as a means of livelihood, and it is his own fault
if he does not succeed.
“ I shall be happy to recommend your firm to any parents who
may be desirous of sending a son to learn farming in America or
the Colonies.”
Mrs. P,, June 16th, 1884:
“ Three letters have been received from them; the last arrived
so lately as the 16th inst., and in all they expressed themselves
quite satisfied with the arrangements made, and appear in all
respects to be happy and contented."
Mr. A. C. 8., refers to an old pupil, June 16th, 1884 :
“ I am glad to say my brother is doing very well, and has now
bought a farm of his own, and working it with great success.”
A. C. A. -writes from Tasmania, June 17th, 1884:
“ I am very pleased with the work and with the treatment I
have received.”


Mr. W. H. 0., June 18th, 1884:
“ It occurs to me, whilst writing to you, to say that in every letter Ontario,
from my son he expresses nought but entire satisfaction with every-
thing at Mr. H ’s farm. No complaint of any sort has reached
me.”
Mrs. A., Nov. 12th, 1884, refers to A. C. A., above:
" My son always writes that he is quite satisfied with his work, Tasmania.
Mr. C ," etc.
Miss S., Nov. 19th, 1884, respecting her nephew in
lowa, who went out in July, 1883:
“I am thankful to say I have good accounts from him. He lowa,
is still with Mr. D .”
Mrs. W., Oct. 6th, 1884:
“ I have read through all the letters I have received from my Ontario
sons since they arrived in America, and there is not a single com- and
plaint of any kind in one of them; on the contrary, they both Virginia,
speak most highly of their comfortable homes and the great kind-
ness of their employers. I only hope they are as well satisfied with
them. I have just heard from Lionel—he says he hopes Mrs. C
will return, she is such a charming person. It is a great comfort
to me to hear he keeps his health so well. He strongly urges my
going out and settling there by-and-by.
“ Thanking you for your kind letter and interest in my sons.”
H. C. F. writes from Tasmania, Oct., 1884 :
“ Your agent has asked me to state a few of my opinions Tasmania,
regarding Tasmania, its climate, the prospects for young men
coming out from England to start for themselves, etc., etc.
“ 1 have now been nearly 12 months here, and have endea-
voured to make myself acquainted with all the details of bush
farming. The climate suits me exactly, and I have enjoyed the
best of health. If a man is not frightened of hard work, a rough
but bappy life, and a moderate return for the capital invested,
I think he cannot do better than try his fortune here.
“ The soil is very rich, abundance of water, and suitable for
growing almost anything. lam about starting for myself with a
small capital, and have every hope by perseverance and with God’s
blessing to do well. Of course everybody meets with a few
reverses at first, but let them not be cast down, for all about here
have gone through a great deal, but ha ve triumphed in the end, as
their land will show. In conclusion, I may say I have met with
every assistance, great kindness and good advice from your agent.”


E. L. R., Oct. Ist, 1884, regarding his position in
Tasmania:
“ I do not suppose that anyone .can complain of lack of hos-
pitality in Tasmania. The more I see of this colony the more I
like it, and the only thing I cannot understand is that so few
young fellows like myself come out here. To say anything about
Tasmania is a mere fallacy, as one cannot say too much about it,
but there appears to be a great deal of ignorance at home in
reference to its position. The people about here are very kind ; in
fact their homes are as good as my own, for I walk in when I
please.’ ’
And Mrs. O’N., Jan Ist, 1885, refers to E. L. R.:
“ He writes saying that he likes Mr. D very much, and is
very comfortable altogether.”
W. J. P., Virginia, Nov. 17th, 1884 :
“ We, i.e. Frank and I, have to be down at the farm at 6 a.m.
when it is perfectly dark ; we have breakfast at 8, and dinner at 1;
supper at 6. We have meat at every meal and are fed very well
indeed, though a bit roughly, which I like. Old Mr. D is a
thoroughly nice man, and I am very happy here. You might tell
Mr. Eathbone that I like it very much.”
And again, April 6th, 1885:
“ I have been at Mr. D ’s now nearly six months; while
here I have been treated with every kindness, and been made very
comfortable indeed. I like the life here, and have not had an
hour’s illness since I have been here, and as a doctor (P S )
said before I came out that I had a slight palpitation of the heart,
it will say something for the climate.
Thanks for the trouble you have taken about me.”
Mrs. A., May 15th, 1885 :
"I am glad to confirm the good news you sent me. My sou
writes cheerfully, and seems quite at home; both Mr. B and
Mr. G received him most kindly.”
And her son writes, May 81st, 1885 :
" Everything you said you would do you have fulfilled to the
letter, lam very comfortable, and the people are most kind, it is
not a quarter as rough as I pictured it to be, in fact after your
work is over you have all the enjoyment of home life.”


And Mrs. A. again, June 16th., 1835 :
“ My son has written most cheerfully to me since his arrival in Nova
Nova Scotia. The B ’s are most kind to him, and make him Scotia.
feel quite at home with them.”
C. H. H., from Florida, May 24th, 1885:
“ I am very pleased with all the arrangements, and like the Florida,
place very much. We are just getting into the hot weather now.
With many thanks for all your kindness.”
W. J. D. refers to son in Ontario, 26th March, 1885 :
“I, too, have had very satisfactory letters from him. It is of Ontario,
course a great comfort to us to feel that he is with nice people,
and that they make him comfortable and happy. lam also very
pleased to find that they mutually appear to get on very well and
to like one another.
“ His letters to us are very interesting.”
And again, 10th June, 1885 ;
“ I have been thinking of writing to you for some time, as I
think it only just to you to let you know that my son’s letters are
still very satisfactory. He seems to be very comfortable in his
new home. I hope he is getting on, and he likes Mr. D , with
whom he is, very much. I again thank you for the trouble you
have taken on his behalf.”
Colonel A. D., Jan. 7th, 1885 :
“We are much pleased to hearthat my son expressed himself to Ontario,
your agent as being so thoroughly satisfied with all his surround-
ings, though it simply confirms what his letters have told us, and
we thank you sincerely for all you have done for him, and for your
kind wishes on his behalf.”
And Mrs. D., Ist Jan., 1885, in the same case :
“We heard from our son this morning. He seems more pleased Ontario,
with Canada each letter we have.”
And again, June 16th, 1885 :
“ I heard yesterday from Canada, in which letter my son said
how exceedingly happy he was, and most thoroughly enjoying his
work, which seems rather heavy at present.”
The Rev. J. G. L., June 11th, 1885, regarding Nova
Scotia:
“He likes the place, and says that although it is too soon to Nova
give an opinion, he thinks he shall be as comfortable as anyone Scotia,
possibly could be.”


And again, July 17th, 1885 :
" My brother seems very comfortable and enjoys the life there
very much. He haS received much kindness from your agent,
and I think we have every reason to be satisfied that he went
out under your Agency.”
Mrs. C., 9th June, 1884:
“My son has got on very well with Mr. P . He has worked
the farm chiefly himself, and feels quite capable of starting for
himself at the end of the year.
“He is in very good health and spirits, has thrown himself
entirely into his work, and is now eagerly looking forward to the
time when he can begin work for himself.”
And again, October Ist, 1884 :
“ He is fairly embarked now, under the guiding hand and advice
of Mr. B , whom he consults on all points of business.”
And again, 12th February, 1885 :
“My boy there is getting on capitally. He has his farm and
stock now, and Mr. B writes that he will make a fine farmer.”
And again, 26th March, 1885 :
“We get excellent accounts from my son, who is farming in
earnest, and very cheerful over it all.”
And again, 29th July, 1885, respecting her son in Ontario:
“ Charlie is getting on very well, and he and his brother are
doing all the work of the farm now themselves. In September
(when he comes of age) we hope to complete the purchase, and
give him full possession.”
And again, August sth, 1885 :
“ Charlie is continuing to do remarkably well; his crops are
all most promising. At present the two brothers are doing
everything for themselves, indoors and out, and enjoy the life
immensely.”
Mrs. T., April 9th, 1885 :
“ I am more than delighted with the news I have had from my
boy N this morning. I quote his own words. He says ' Mr. and
Mrs. G are awfully jolly people,’ and that he is ‘as comfort-
able as the day is long.’ It is a very nice house and he has a
‘ lovely bedroom,’ with everything he could wish for in it.


" The ground is covered with three feet of snow, but he does
not mind the cold a hit, and feels as well as possible. At present
the only work is to attend to the stock, which keeps them busy up
to one o’clock dinner. In the afternoon they sleigh into T for
shopping. Mr. 6 is a great sportsman, and belongs to a
cricket club at T , which greatly rejoices N-—-’s heart. They
were both going out for a night to a place on the Bay of Fundy
for some wild goose shooting.
“ I could not possibly have had more satisfactory news, and I
feel indeed most grateful to you for introducing him to such a
comfortable home and pleasant family.”
H. B. E., 2nd May, 1885, refers to F. E. in Virginia:
“I have much pleasure in informing you that I have heard Virginia,
from my brother, who expresses himself very pleased with Mr.
A ’s farm. He says he thinks he shall learn as much farming
there as anywhere, and Mr. A makes him very comfortable.”
And the Eev. V. E., his father, July 20th, 1885 :
“My son’s letters to us evidence nothing but entire satis-
faction with the kindness and attention of Mr. A and all the
members of his family. He speaks also of the opportunities which
are given him of learning farming, and of Mr. A——’s readiness
to explain to and teach him, and of his own liking for the work in
which he is engaged.”
And again, 15th Sept., 1885 :
“ Thank you for your report as to my son F , which is Virginia.
highly satisfactory.”
Mrs. M. J. H., Sept. 25th, 1885, refers to her son
in Quebec:
“ I received a letter from him this week, written in good Quebec,
spirits, and saying he was comfortably settled on a farm. He
says the agents were very kind and explained everything ; he had
no trouble on the journey.”
General P., Nov. 27th, 1884:
“ I continue to receive happy letters from my son Gerald; he Virginia,
is delighted with his home; likes Mr. and Mrs. M very much.”
And again, Jan. 6th, 1885 :
“We constantly hear from Gerald (who is in Virginia) ; his Virginia
letters are very satisfactory, and he seems happy. and
“Arthuralso writes cheerfully from Nebraska, but his life Nebraska,
seems a hard one However, he does not complain.”


And again, 17th March, 1885 :
“My son seems very happy; he went to stay a couple of days
with Captain and Mrs. H for a ball. He rode over.’’
And again, 29th Sept., 1885 :
“ I had a nice letter from Gerald, from Virginia ; he is all right
again and happy to remain on another year with Mr. M
Lady T. writes, Nov. 9th, 1884, regarding her sou
in Virginia :
“ I heard to-day from my son ; he is extremely pleased with
B H , and says Mr. C is most kind and nice to him ;
he is very happy altogether."
And again, April 25th, 1885 :
“ When last I heard, thirteen days ago, Mr. T was well and
happy, and continues much pleased with his home.”
And again, Oct. 2nd, 1885 :
“He is in good health and spirits, and writes happily of the
prospects of his new venture and the coming year.”
H. G., Sept. 29th, 1885, as to a brother in Nova Scotia:
“ He seems to be perfectly happy there, and says that both Mr.
and Mrs. G—— are very nice, and he also says T is a very
jolly fellow, and altogether we are delighted with his letter and
report of everything.”
And again, Nov. 7 th, 1885:
“We continue to hear most satisfactory accounts of my
brother, who seems perfectly happy and to thoroughly like the
life they lead out in Nova Scotia.”
Miss H., 11th Nov., 1885, refers to her nephew in
Quebec :
“He writes contentedly and happily to his family, so that
Miss H can decidedly recommend any friend to apply to
Messrs. Ford and Co.”
Mrs. E., May sth, 1885, after sending out a son;
“ I have another son, who is anxious to follow in the footsteps
of his brother and go out to the States. lam glad to be able to
tell you that his brother has done well with the farmer under
whose care you placed him. He remained with him one year and
nine months, and only left him for higher wages elsewhere.”


And again, 18th Nov., 1885, refers to the second son,
S. R.:
“He himself is greatly pleased with the people, the locality
and his work, and I think he is sure to get on well and in time
become a successful farmer.”
S. M., who went to Minnesota in March, 1883, writes
on the 16th of Nov., 1885 :
“ I am still at the same original place of Mr. S. G , where I Minnesota
am going to stay this winter. lam very well contented with the
life and work here, and seem to like it better every day.”
A. W. N. T., from Virginia, November 14th, 1885:
“As my year as a farm pupil was up with Mr. M on the Virginia.
25th of last month, I must thank you for the trouble you took in
putting me in such a comfortable home.”
Lady T. refers to her son, A. W. N. T., in Virginia,
December 2nd, 1885 :
" I am glad my son has written such a courteous letter to you, Virginia,
as he was in duty bound, for he has certainly had a very good and
happy home.”
A. C. refers, Nov. 27th, 1885, to his son in Virginia:
“ I have to-day received a letter from my son, who writes from Virginia.
Mr. P ’s. His letter is very satisfactory. He did not suffer
from the voyage, and seems to have enjoyed himself. He says he
will like his life amazingly, and is very comfortable.”
Mrs. H. refers, Nov. 30th, 1885, to her son in Quebec
“ I am glad to say that I get very good accounts from my son. Quebec,
He likes the work extremely, and feels quite settled at the farm,
and the people he is with are most kind.”
Admiral R. P. refers to his son in Ontario, December
2nd, 1885 :
“ I have just heard from my sou, who expresses himself well Ontario,
pleased with the attentions of your agents in New York and
Ontario, in forwarding him to his destination. He is also well
satisfied, so far, with the family he has entered, and with the
accommodation provided for him, and writes altogether in good
spirits of the prospect before him. lam greatly obliged to you
for the thorough way in which your agreement was carried out.”


W. J. D., sth Dec., 1885, refers to his son in Ontario :
“You will, I know, be glad to hear that we continue to
get very satisfactory letters from my son. He likes his work
and writes very cheerfully.”
V. K, October 17th, 1885:
“ I wish to say 1 am perfectly comfortable, and have no objection to
raise.”
E. 8., December 26th, 1885, regarding W. H. B.:
“ At any time I shall be most happy to answer any enquiries in your
favour, or in any way to render you any services I can.”
The Eev. E. H. writes, December 29th, 1885 :
“ I thank you for your letter of the 23rd inst., giving satisfactory
news of Mr. B. D. G . We, too, heard a few weeks ago, and he gave
a happy account of himself.”
Mrs. C., December 30th, 1885 :
“I am thankful to have such goo 1 accounts from my son. He seems
perfectly contented and happy, and thinks he could not have gone to a
nicer place, or where he would receive more kindness and attention.”
T. G. writes, December 31st, 1885:
«I have to return to England on important business. I have been
very happy and comfortable with Mr. B , and 1 strongly recommend
you to locate pupils with him.”
J. A. R., Jan. sth, 1886 :
“A letter reached us from my son at Christmas, in which he
expressed himseli as quite happy and contented, and in proof of how
the life and climate suited him, lie stated he had increased 13£ lbs. (! !)
in weight in the two mouths, or rather since he had been there. He
said the work was hard, but he fell much stronger.”
Mrs. S., Jan. 13th, 1886 :
“ He writes in high spirits, and seems delighted with his new home
and surroundings. 1 have to thank you for placing him in such a
comfortable place.”


Mrs. 8., Jan. 16th, 1886 :
“I have just received a long and most satisfactory letter from my Wisconsin
son, in which he seems very happy and contented, and likes the farm
life and Mr. C very much. To quote his own words, he fays:—• I
am quite content with the place, and old C is quite content with me,
so I shall stay on here after the end of the month’s trial.’ ”
Lady T., Jan. 17th, 1886, respecting A. W. N. T.
“Very many thanks for your letter and the information it contained Virginia.
of Mr. T ’s health ; he is perfectly happy with Mr. M , and they
both appear mutually pleased with each other. He has joined the
Farmer’s Club, and attends all its meetings, and this fgnall venture is at
present successful. One or two people have applied to us as reference
for your firm, and we have always spoken most favourably of what you
have done for us.”
T. S. H., 22nd Jan., 1886 :
“ I write, as requested, to let you know how I like the farm life in Quebec.
Canada. I like the work very much, and am getting on very well.
The country is beautiful and the people are very kind. As tor Mrs.
H , she is very good to me, and does all in her power to make me
happy. I cannot say too much about this farm life.”
L. K, 11th Feb., 1886:
*• I told them that I felt sure you would give every satisfaction, as Virginia
you had done in A ’s case, in fact that I could give you the fullest
measure of praise for the way in which everything had been arranged
in A ’s case. 1 think your agency is a great want supplied.”
Lieut.-Gol. W., Feb. 22nd, 1886 ;
“ Many thanks for the extract from my son’s letter, i have now lowa,
heard from both of them, and they seem to be getting quite settled and
well satisfied.”
Mrs. T., 24tb Feb., 1886, respecting N.T.:
“ I had great pleasure in answering some enquiries from a Colonel Nova
M the other day, and expressed my thorough satisfaction botli with Scotia.
your arrangements and Mr. and Mrs. G ’s kindness to my son.”
E. V. G., from Tasmania, Feb. 7th, 1886 :
“ I am getting on very well out here, and am very comfortable with Tasmania
Mr. P . 1 find it a remarkably healthy existence, it being a case
of early to bed and early to rise. Not being accustomed to manual
labour at first, I used to teel very tired in the evenings, but have got
quite accustomed to it now.”


And A. O. S., 16th March, 1886, respecting E. V. Gr. :
“We have weekly letters from E , and he seems well and
happy. At first he found the work a little hard, but now writes he is
getting more accustomed to it.”
H. N. R., from Nebraska, March 24th, 1886 (see
page 57) : ‘
“We are beginning to see signs of spring, the past winter seems to
have flown, and I can assure you 1 have had no time to be dull; I have
been getting out logs, poles and posts for building and fencing; I hope
to fence both my claims this year, build some sheds and another stable,
with sundry other buildings, if time will allow.
“ I ought to tell you before dosing that I have lately been elected
Treasurer and (ex-officio) Member of the Board for this School District.”
J. H. N., from Virginia, February 18th, 1886:
“ It was very remiss in me not to have told you of my safe arrival
here before, but lam a bad correspondent. I find everything here most
comfortable, and deem myself most fortunate. lam sure 1 shall be most
happy here.”
Mrs. N., respecting J. H. N., April 6th, 1886 :
“ My son has also written very satisfactory accounts to me, and I
trust that the place will agree with him. Your agent was fortunate in
being able, at once, to place him in another suitable family."
W. E. P., from Virginia, April 3rd, 1886 :
“ Hike Mr. and Mrs. H . The neighbours seem pleasant, and
altogether 1 like the place very well, and think 1 shall get on here.”
And Mrs. P., April 13th, 1886, respecting W. B. P.:
“ I have much pleasure in informing you that, in the two letters I
have received from my son since he reached G. V., about March Xsth,
he speaks with the utmost satisfaction of Mr. and Mrs. H , his
occupation, and the country, which he describes as beautiful. The
society, he says, is very good, and English families are numerous, and all
most hospitable. I think he has reason to be very happy, and I thank
you very much for being the means of procuring him healthy occupation
with home comforts and, I trust, kindly guidance.”
And again, 25th May, 1886 :
“1 have had constant and very comfortable reports from my son,
JVIr. W. E. P.”


The Rev. R. E. P., April 12th, 1886 :
“ The last time he wrote he expressed himself pleased with*his new lowa,
quarters.”
Mrs. M. writes, March 22nd, 1886, respecting her son
in Virginia:
“ I have had letters from my son. He is delighted with Mr. A , Virginia.
who is, he says, like a father; he is well fed, and very happy and com-
fortable so far . . and is, he says, already feeling the benefit of
the fine climate.”
And again, April 18th, 1886 :
“ My son continues very happy and satisfied.”
•
W. S., from Nova Scotia, April 22nd, 1886 :
“ I like the people I am with very much; they do all in their Nova
power to make me feel at home, and they succeed verv well. The life Scotia,
is not nearly so rough as I had expected, and it would be a very milk-
and-watery sort of a fellow who could not get along here.
“ From a farming point of view, Mr. M is out-and-out the
best man round these parts. He has the largest farm (about 450 acres,
and over 200 cleared), and his stock is the show of the county, people
coming from miles round to see it. His eldest son has just returned
from Ontario with a batch of thoroughbred Clydesdale horses. ”
Gr. F. B„ 27th April, 1886:
“We have to-day received a letter from my brother. He writes Minnesota
from S ’s farm, and expresses himself as well satisfied with the place
and the people. He also seems to like the work, and thinks it is the
right thing for him. 1 have little doubt he will get on well, as he is
strong and healthy, and of a sociable turn.”
Mrs. P., April 29th, 1886:
“ Mrs. P is much obliged for the information sent She has Tasmania.
also heard good accounts from Tasmania
General P., 22nd March, 1886 (see below):
“ A. P the industrious young man from Great Britain, is build- Nebraska.
inf? a good house, a stable, a granary and two corn cribs on his place
near V .
“ Arthur seems well in health; determined to make his way He
writes hopefully, in good spirits. As soon as the house is finished he
will be joined by G from Virginia.”


And again, 27th April, 1886 :
“ My son G left Mr. M yesterday to join his brother A
in Nebraska. He has experienced so much kindness at the hands of
Mr. and Mrs. M , that my sister is anxious to send Mrs. M some
little souvenir.”
Mrs. H., April 25th, 1886:
“I receive good news from my eon, and I think he will like the
life. He has alwavs said he is comfortable with Mr. S for which I
am very thankful.”
And H. J., regarding the same pupil, May sth, 1886 :
“ I was much obliged for your letter of the 21th ulto. I had
received shortly before a letter from E. P , saying lie liked Mr S
and his family, and the work ; and I* understand he has written to his
sisters in praise of the country and his work.
*• 1 beg to express my satisfaction with, perhaps I should say
gratitude for, your very complete arrangements for sending out a lad of
his age.”
E. M. R. P., Jan. 9th, 1886:
“ It gives me great pleasure in writing to tell you how exceedingly
pleased lam with my new occupation. You are aware. I presume, that
I am on Mr. W ’s farm, and not Mr. S ’a, as previously arranged.
The more I get accustomed to the work the more 1 like it. I send you
a day’s work for this time of year. Rise at 6 a.m., milk cows, &c.;
breakfast at 7, feed stock and attend to stables, &c.; dinner at 12 : stock
duty again ; milk at 5, supper at 6; at 7 bed down all stock and feed for the
night, and when the stock is all looked after, I go to the bush for wood,
or, with a load of hay or straw, to town, which is three miles distant,
The farmer and his wife are excessively nice people, and I think X could
not be more contented or comfortable than I am. The climate is
certainly splendid, and 1 find I can stand the cold very well so far, but
the weather seems hardly settled for real winter. 1 enjoy sleighing
immensely, and get plenty of skating some days. There is a good
amount of stock on the farm, over 30 head of cattle alone, and there are
also some very good horses. The journey arrangements were perfect in
every respect, and I can only thank you again for your kindness in
starting me on such a splendid occupation. I often see Mr. B , and
have also made the acquaintance of some other of your pupils. I will
let you know later on how I continue to like my calling. So, wishing
your firm every success.”
Admiral R. P., Dec. 19tli, 1885, respecting B. M.
R. P.:
“We are very thankful to say that our son’s reports from Ontario
are in every way most satisfactory.”


And again, May 11th, 1886
“ My son is still well contented with his life there, and I want to Ontario,
encourage him all I can.”
J. A. 0., Dec. 28th, 1885, respecting A. W. S. 0. (see
page 56) :
“ The boy is very happy and comfortable there; he was most for- Virginia,
tunate to meet with such nice people as Dr. and Mrs. Met! .”
And again, April 4th, 1886 :
“ 1 am very pleased to say that I have the most satisfactory letters
from my son in Virginia.”
And again, May 23rd, 1886 :
“ I shall be pleased to renew the agreement with C for one
more year. C! has treated my son with great kindness and con-
sideration during the time he has been there, and 1 hope to make his
personal acquaintance this summer.”
J. W, May 27th, 1886 :
“ It affords me great pleasure to read the copy letter which Quebec,
yon received, and sent me. I had one to the same effect, stating
that his time would be up on the 3rd prox., and expressing his
regret about it. He appears to have been exceedingly comfort-
able during the time that he was with Mr. B , except that for
the two accidents which he met, either through his own rashness
or carelessness.”
J. F. M., June 2nd, 1886 :
‘‘ I have heard twice from my son since he has been at Nova
work, and he appears to be quite comfortable. In his last he Scotia,
says, ‘ This is a splendid life. I found the Vork very hard when
I began, but now it comes quite natural. I guess it is nothing
when you are accustomed to it.’ So I hope and think that he will
do well.”
E. J. writes from lowa, May 30th, 1886 :
“ I now write as you wished, to tell you I am quite satisfied lowa,
with the home you have found for me, and am as happy and com-
fortable as could be expected. I think your system a very good
one, and a great help to those that are able to make use of it. It
is a great thing to be sure of a good and comfortable place as soon
as you reach your journey’s end.”


And again, Dec. 2nd, 1886 :
“ I am getting on very well, and I think I am making great
progress in all farming matters. The good opinion I formed at
once of the S ’s and their entire menage is unchanged. Not a
shadow of any unpleasantness has so far transpired, and I am
thoroughly satisfied in all respects.”
L. A. H. writes, 4th June, 1886 :
“ I have also very good accounts from my son, he says he is
very comfortable, and that Mr. and Mrs. H are very kind to
him, and that he likes the life very much. This is most satisfac-
tory to Mrs. H and myself, and we are much obliged to you
for having found such a good place for him.”
F. H, H. P. writes from lowa, June 13th, 1886 :
“ I get on very well with these people, they treat me very
well. I shall soon have quite shaken down to the life.”
And again, Dec. 3rd, 1886 :
“ I am very well satisfied with Mr. S in every respect,
and am well pleased to remain with him for my year. I get on
with him very well, and he takes great pains to show me every-
thing.”
J. F. M. writes, June 17th, 1886:
“I also heard from my son by the same mail, and he writes in
great spirits, says he is very comfortable, likes the life immensely,
and is as ‘ happy as a sand boy,’ so I think he will do well, and
I thank you much for getting him such pleasant quarters.”
Mrs. T., June 21st, 1886:
“We have letters regularly every fortnight. He has excellent
health, and is very comfortable with his friends, the Messrs.
J .”
Mrs. P., July 12th, 1886 :
“ Ton will be glad to hear that my two dear nephews, Charles
and William P , are well, and prosperous ; they always tell me
that they have never regretted being sent out there (in 1884).”
Mrs. P., July 14th, 1886 :
“My son continues very pleased with his new home, and with
the gentleman and lady he is living with ; and the climate, though
very hot, agrees with him perfectly. He seems to have fallen
into a nice, sociable neighbourhood.”


P. W., from lowa, July 15th, 1886:
“ I am getting on splendidly, and altogether, thoroughly lowa,
enjoying myself in spite of the work. I feel quite determined to
stick to farming, and I suppose with a little perseverance, I shall,
in a few years’ time, have a farm and land of my own. I believe
that every day I learn something, even very trifling things
sometimes, but every little helps. lam just as happy and well
taken care of as I would be in my own home.”
T. J. S. G„ Aug. 4th, 1886:
“ I have just received a letter from my son, and he writes in Virginia,
the very best of spirits, and describes himself as being perfectly
contented and happy. I will take this opportunity for once more
thanking you for all your kind attention, and to express to you
how more than satisfied I feel.”
A. P. Aug. 22nd, 1886 :
“ I enclose you a photo of my place. I have a very good crop Nebraska
this year, and like this country very much. My stock has all
done well, also. I have no >v twelve brood sows, three heifers,
one cow six years old, and calf; two mares which had colts, but
died a very short time after being born. We are having lovely
weather out here now ; every one is making hay, and consequently
are very busy.”
General P., Sept. 13th, 1886:
‘‘We are daily expecting some photographs from Arthur of Nebraska
his farm, &o. He seems to be doing very well.”
A. 0. 0. : Aug. 24th, 1886:
‘‘l received yours dated 21st, yesterday evening. lam quite lowa,
content to remain on Mr. McC’s farm for the year. I like Mr.
McC. and his family very much indeed. He seems to be a very
kind and considerate man, and I am very much pleased both with
the people, and also the place. We have been having very hot
and dry weather here since I came, but it has not in any way
affected me.”
Captain L., 10th Sept., 1886 :
I am deeply anxious that that young lad L should do lowa.
well, all that we hear of him sounds most satisfactory. I had
alerter from him not long ago He answers many of my questions,
and repeats that he and Mr. C- —- gets on exceedingly well
together, and he hopes to continue with him after the expiration
of his first year’s probation.”


C. W., Nov. 24th, 1886 :
“ I am much obliged to you for your letter to band, in which
you give so satisfactory account of my son Charles, now out in
Canada on one of your farms. It is exceedingly pleasing to us to
see you take so much interest in his welfare His letters home
to us are all bright and happy ones; he speaks very highly of
Mr. A and family; he likes his farm-work well, and will not
be content until he gets a farm of his own.”
And his son C. W. W., in a letter received Ist Octo-
ber, 1886, writes :
“I may tell you that I like it immensely, and have done so
from the first. I signed the agreement to stay the twelve months
with Mr. A , the farmer. I have got quite used to the work
and people, and have learned a great deal about practical farming
since I first commenced.
J. A.E., 17th Sept., 1886, as to second year :
“lam also much obliged to your agent in Ontario for his kind
interest on bphalf of my son. I quite think the latter will do
well in continuing where he is, provided he can arrange satisfac-
tory terms with the farmer.”
8. G. H., Sept. 19th, 1886 :
“ The climate of this country is extremely healthy, as the air
is very dry and bracing I will also tell you that lam extremely
well satisfied with the people lam placed with ; they feed and
treat me extremely well. '
Eev. C. E. H., Sept. 20th, 1886 :
“ I wish also to express to you my high appreciation of the
thoughtful care and kindness that your agent has shewn towards
my nephew in suggesting and starting him in a new line of work
when he became incapacitated for the farming through his
accident, and in providing him with a situation corresponding,
where he may get on sufficiently well by his own exertions.
" I have myself written to thank him, but I am glad to say
this to you, and I shall be willing to be referred to for testimony
that your agents will give every help in their power to the young
men sent out, even under very exceptional circumstances.”
Lady T., Sept. 28rd, 1886 :
“ Mr. T. has finally left the M ’s, who have been most
kind to him; he has had a good home there, we feel indebted to
you for so good an introduction.”


H. W. L., July 29th, 1886 :
“ I am in receipt of your favour of the 27th inst., and am very Tasmania
glad that I can inform you that X am perfectly satisfied with my
place at Mr. P 's, who is very kind to me indeed. I like the
work here, and feel quite happy. The Tasmanian climate is even
better than I thought it would be, and the winter here is almost
equal to summer in England.”
And his father, J. H. H. L., Sept. 28rd, 1886 :
“ Answering your letter of the 15th inst., we are glad to com- Tasmania
municate to you that the letters we received from our son Henry
were all very satisfactory.
“ The climate seems to suit him well, and the work he likes
very much.”
J. G. 0., Oct.. 1886 :
“ I have to thank you and the firm for the way in which you Wisconsin
have always treated me, and must say I have on the whole, met
with kindness and consideration everywhere.”
Mrs. G., Oct. 7th, 1886 :
“ Before I conclude, let me say how much I am indebted to Nova
you for all you have done for myself and my son, and how pleased Scotia.
I shall he to be of any service to you, should it be in my power.”
T. C., Oct. 9th, 1886 :
“I am perfectly satisfied with every one and everything on the Tasmania.
farm. I like Mr. 0 very much, he is very kind to me, I should
like to stay here.”
And again, Nov. 2nd., 1886 :
“I am writing to you as the month is up. I like the life I lead Tasmania,
here very well and I should like to stay. To day we went sheep
gathering preparatory to lamb marking, we are going to mark the
lambs to morrow.”
And his father, T. N. 0., Deo. 21st, 1886:
“ I am much obliged to you for the copy letter from my son, Tasmania,
which is very satisfactory.”
Lt.-General 8., Sept. 13th, 1886 ;
“ I consider that you have fully carried out your engagements Virginia,
as to my grandson.”


C. E. W., Oct. 26th, 1886:
“ Having been with Mr. S a month I have only to say I
am perfectly satisfied with everything, and have received from
Mr. and Mrs. S and family every kindness and consideration.”
A nd his father, Mr. W., Nov. 13th, 1886:
“ I am obliged by your favour respecting my son; the com-
munication is very satisfactory.”
B. D. G., Oct. 27th, 1886 :
“ Just a line to let you know what lam doing. I have pur-
chased a block of land near the township, about 2| miles from the
station. It is only 150 acres, but is good land, and on account of
the locality is of more value than a larger amount elsewhere. I
am camped on the ground now, and want to make good headway
with the scrub this year, and have very little time for writing
or anything else at present. I hope you are all well.”
The Rev. E, H., regarding B. D. G., Dec. 27th, 1886 :
“ I thank you for forwarding me a copy of Mr. B. Gr ’s letter
from Tasmania —it is, as you say, very satisfactory.”
W. H. 0., Oct. 30th, 1886:
“ He speaks so highly of Mr. H that I cannot but give you
his own words. He says ;
“ ‘ I can safely say that if anybody in the world could take the
place of a father in my thoughts Mr. H could. He has always
been kindness itself, and I have never noticed any schendng for
his own ends in him.'
“Now I am most glad to hear this, and to be able to report it
to you.”
L. C. S., Nov. Ist, 1886 :
“Many thanks for extract from your Nova Scotia agent’s
letter respecting my son, which is very satisfactory. It quite
accords with his own letter to me.”
E. F. T., Nov. 10th, 1886 :
“ I am writing to say that you have placed me on a farm, which I
am very well satisfied with, and to thank you for doing so. I like
Mr. N and Mrs N , and the farm and work.”
Mrs. T., his mother, Nov. 2nd, 1886 :
“ Yesterday I received a very happy letter from my son. He
likes where he is very much, and says Mr. N is very kind.”


And again, Nov. 27th, 1886, referring to Mr. Ford’s
recent visit to the farm :
“ It was most gratifying to me to get your letter enclosing the lowa,
extract from Mr. Ford’s letter about my son. It was very kind of
him to go and see him, and I feel very grateful for all the kindness
shewn to my son. He likes the life very much, and seems very
happy.”
The Eev. J. G. L., Nov. 2nd, 1886 :
I thank you very much for your kindness in sending me the Nova
extract from your Nova Scotia agent’s letter. lam very glad to Scotia,
hear that my brother is going on so satisfactorily. We hear from
him every week, and judging from his letters he certainly seems
to be doing well.”
W. T., Nov. 7th, 1886 :
“ You will be pleased to hear we are receiving satisfactory Nova
letters from my nephew, 0. E. B . I think we have pitched Scotia.
upon the right place for the young fellow.”
E. B. father of 0. E. 8., Nov. 12th, 1886 :
“ He also speaks most highly of Mrs. McD , and the rest Nova
of the family. We are delighted with his letters, and feel the Scotia,
step he has taken a very right one. Feeling sure you will be glad
of such a satisfactory account.”
The Eev. E. E. P., Nov. 11th, 1886 :
“We heard from our son a day or two ago, he wrote very lowa.
cheerfully, and seems to like Mr. li- , and gets on well with
him.”
Mrs. E., Nov. 16, 1886 :
“ We were much gratified to hear from you that our son S lowa.
is giving satisfaction on the farm, and are much indebted to you
for placing him under the care of such nice people. He was not
very happy while the other young man was on the farm, but now
that he is gone, he writes that he is “ as happy as a bee.’ ”
Admiral R. P., father of E. M. R. P., (see page 48),
Nov. 19th, 1886:
“It is very kind indeed of you to give me such prompt news Ontario,
of my son in Canada, and I thank you very sincerely. The par-
ticulars are very encournging, and with his prospective pecuniary
advantages, lam getting confident he will do well; some of his
brothers seem disposed to follow in his steps.”


A. W. S. C., Nov. 7th, 1886 :
" I have been at this place now for 18 months, and could wish
to be at no better place, and my father, who was out here this
summer, was, I think, very much pleased with the place, people,
and all the general surroundings. We have been having lovely
fall weather lately, only it turned somewhat cooler last night, and
there is a good deal of snow on the mountains this morning.
Before saying good-bye, I must thank you for putting me in such
a good house, and in a place that one cannot help from being
comfortable and knowing all the necessary things about farming.”
The following letter from Mr. C to our repre-
sentative in Virginia, gave him much pleasure, and the
opinions expressed in it met with his distinct approval.
They contain an answer to many questions sent to him
regarding the future of English gentlemen in Virginia,
and their prospects after they have had sufficient ex-
perience in the practical methods of the country :
J. A. C., Nov. 21st, 1886 :
“ I was much pleased with my trip to Virginia. I found my
son with some of the nicest people I ever met. C comes from
an old Virginian family, and is a highly educated polished gentle-
man. I consider that I was most fortunate to get my son under
his care. With regard to the capabilities of the land an ener-
getic man can easily live out of it, bnt not make money. Where
I was I am sure it was excellent sheep land, but from want of
capital it was not half utilized for that purpose. The growth and cul-
tivation of vines seem a good source of profit, as there is a good
market for the grapes near. Altogether I was charmed with the
country and the kindness I received from every one.”
Miss E. A. E. H„ Nov. 21st, 1886:
“Your taking the trouble to arrive at authentic informa-
tion about young men when started out in Canada, even for so
long a time as Mr. L , gives me still greater confidence in
recommending your firm.”
W. J. D., Nov. 23rd, 1886 :
“ I thank you very much for your letter of this morning rela-
tive to my son out in Ontario. The letters we receive from him
are very satisfactory, and we are very glad you can confirm from
a personal interview that he is well, happy, and apparently getting
on all right.”


And again Dec. 9tb, 1886 :
“As far as we have been able to find out he has been very Ontario.
happy and comfortable with Mr. McD , and the engagement
seems to have been mutually satisfactory to both parties, and we
hope that whatever he next undertakes will be equally so.”
Mrs. H., Nov. 23rd, 1886 :
“ I am extremely pleased to hear such a good account of my Minnesota
son from Mr. C ■ I have very good letters from him ; in his
last he said Mr. 0 and a party of friends were at the farm
for some shooting, and that he got on with thep very well. He
is still much hoping for a companion, otherwise he seems quite
happy.”
And again, Dec. 14th, 1886 :
” I am very pleased to hear such a good account of my son,
and am glad to say he also writes cheerfully; he finds it very
cold and bleak, but he seems to be treated with consideration.”
Mrs. R., Nov. 24th, 1886 ;
“ I am very pleased to hear Mr. Ford has seen my son in Ontario
Ontario, and found him so well and comfortably settled ; he writes
to us most happily, and seems to like his life out there very much,
and speaks well of Mr. H and his family.”
Colonel 0., Nov. 29th, 1886, respecting his son, who
went out in the autumn of 1883 :
“ I have heard from my son within the last month ; he was lowa.
looking forward to his return to C. B . I shall at all times be
pleased to give my testimony as to the efficacy of your agency.”
J. E. P„ Nov. 30th, 1886 :
“ All the accounts I hear of him so far are satisfactory, and I Tasmania,
believe he is very happy. I hope he will be able, when his year
is up, to earn his own living easily."
H. N. R., who went to Wisconsin in April, 1883, writes
Bth Dec., 1886 :
“ All my cattle are in good condition; I shall soon have quite Wisconsin
a herd of them if I continue to be as fortunate as I have been. I Nebraska,
had twenty-two calves this year, and have altogether now only a
few short of seventy head of cows, yearlings, &o.”


The Eev. Canon S., Dec. 11th, 1886 :
“ The country he chose is a very picturesque one, and some-
what, he says, like this one. He has now about 400 acres his own,
and great shooting and fishing privileges—to the amount of feed-
ing the whole family if need be—has shot two bears ; fortunately,
he kept out of the way of their claws. The great point in
emigration is natural fitness, as, unquestionably, the beginnings
are hard.”
General E., Dec. 14th, 1886 :
“ I write to tell you that I have lately heard sundry times
from my son, A. L. E- , who went to the United States
(November, 1882) under your auspices, and to inform you that
he has now settled in Kansas, having taken 160 acres of laud,
which he has been farming, and contemplates taking another 160
acres shortly. He has built his shandy, and is now putting up
stables for his cattle; and from all I hear, believe he will be
very instrumental in the establishment of a township close by. He,
with a partner, has established a store, and I feel satisfied that he
will now get on well. In his last letters he states he has been very
busy, and that the store has already done well. It is a great
satifaction to me to know he is doing so well, and I shall never
regret having sent him out through you. I think the way in which
he was cared for in the first year by your agent was everything,
and I shall always have great pleasure in stating my experiences
of your efforts for him.”
J. F. M., Dec. 18th, 1886, referring to Mr. W. W.
Ford’s recent visit:
“ I also heard from my son that ho had had the pleasure of
seeing Mr Ford, and he has also expressed a wish to purchase a
farm next year on his own account. He seems very happy and
comfortable from the letters he writes home.”
A. C. R., Dec. 26th, 1886:
“ I thank you for your letter of the 24th instant. I have received
several letters from my son, the last dated 12th inst. He seems
very well satisfied and so am I.”
H. G., Dec. 2?th 1886 :
“ I must not omit to,thank you for your great care and attention
to both of my boys since they were first introduced to your firm.”


The Rev. V. R., Dec. 28fch, 1886, referring to Mr. W.
W. Ford’s recent visit:
“ Thank you much for your letter containing extract from Virginia.
Mr. Ford’s letter relating to my son Fred. lam much gratified by
your continued kind interest in him. My son, I know, thinks very
highly of Mr. A , and his family, and has always been very
happy there, and treated with the greatest kindness.”
J. P., (Received Dec. 1886) :
“ It is an awfully jolly place out here, I ani charmed with it. Mr. Tasmania
N has two grown-up daughters and two grown-up sons. He
seems a very gentlemanly man, amd is very kind.”
C. R. B. 8., Dec. 22nd, 1886 :
“ In answer to yours of the 16th inst. , I have great pleasure in Nova
stating that I am very comfortable, and kindly treated both by Mr. Scotia,
and Mrs McD. ,whom I like very much. I have a good bedroom to
myself (upstairs), and get my five dollars regularly every month.
I like the life far above office life. It suits me, and I feel stronger
and better in every way, Mr. and Mrs. D. have introduced me to
some nice people.
“ I often think how many of the fellows 1 have left at office
work would like to be out here if they knew how jolly the life was.”
A. S„ Jan., 1887 :
“ I have very much pleasure in informing you that I am very lowa,
well satisfied on the farm on which you have placed me, and am
quite ready to remain here the 12 months. Mr. and Mrs. P——
are very kind, and do all in their power to make me comfortable.”
And again, May 7th, 1887 :
“ I am very pleased to be able to inform you that I am getting
on very well on the farm which you have placed me. I like
farming very much. Mr. P—,— is very kind, shewing me very
carefully how to manage every new machine that comes to he
used. I can plough, harrow, dray, and plant pretty well. I
learned to milk after I had been on the farm a week, and have
gone on regularly ever since, milking four cows every day, night
and morning. lam generally first up in the mornings, rising
at a quarter to five. I have no fault to find anywhere, and am
very much obliged to you for the able manner in which you have
arranged matters.”


E. C. G., Jan. 3rd, 1887:
“ I write to thank you for the trouble you and your agents
have taken to place me on a good farm. I can’t say more than
that everything is highly satisfactory. Anyone wHh ordinary
energy can succeed. The climate in this section is beautiful,
and the water cannot be surpassed. I can do with less money
than in England.”
Mrs 8., Jan 16th, 1887 ;
“Now he writes to say, since he has bought felt boots, &c.,
he feels the cold less, and he is perfectly happy, and Mr. and Mrs.
B are most kind to him ; he also says he has plenty to do all
day long, and wishes his brother to come out later on.”
And again, Feb. 20th, 1887 :
" I had a very bright letter from my son about 10 days since.
He writes in such good spirits, and would not return for anything,
and loves the life he has chosen. He has also made some good
friends, and would like his brother to come out to him.”
Captain 8., April 4th, 1887, regarding same pupil;
“I fancy my youngster would like to be with or near his elder
stepbrother H , from whom we continue to receive v ery favour-
able accounts.”
And again, April 30th, 1887;
“We heard very satisfactory news from H this morning;
he is delighted with the life.”
And his son, W. T. H., May 11th, 1887:
“I get on well with Mr. B He takes great pains
in showing me how to manage things, and I am well pleased with
the place.”
A. C. S. and A. S., Jan. 22nd, 1887 :
“lam pleased to tell you we are very well situated indeed.
We do not think you could have placed us on a better farm. We
both like the life very much indeed, as well as the people. They
are very kind, and I think we shall get along very well together.
Please thank Messrs. Ford, Eathbone & Co. for getting us such a
nice farm.”
And Miss W., regarding the same pupils, Oct. 10th,
1887 :
“ I am glad to hear they are getting on, and are well. I have
also just now had good news from them.”


J. A., Jan. 24th, 1887, respecting a second son sent
to Tasmania:
“ I have a son, aged 16, who is desirous to emigrate, and would Tasmania,
like to go to Tasmania, as his elder brother did, through you
over a year ago. His brother has been well satisfied with his
quarters, and in all respects.”
Mrs, G., Feb. 9th, 1887
" I will not fail to mention that my son is satisfied with all lowa,
your arrangements for him.”
And S. G., her son, Feb. 28th, 1887
“ Mr. and Mrs. B. have grown still kinder as time wears on,
and I cannot be too thankful for the consideration you have
shown in placing me here. Any pupils my relatives hear of,
they will be sure to advise lowa, where they are sure from my
accounts, of being well looked after by you.
And again, May 28th, 1887 :
“ I am most satisfactorily placed, with very nice kind people.
Again I can add my testimony to the prompt business way in which
you, as agent, fulfil their orders. It gives me very much pleasure to
know that in you I have always one who will thoroughly look
after my interests, and I shall always be indebted to you for
placing me here.”
A. G. G., Feb. 9th, 1887:
“With regard to board, I may say that the food is moderately Nova
plain and wholesome. I have been exceedingly comfortable here, Scotia.
having a very nice bedroom, and Mrs. G 1 am sure has done her
utmost to make Mr. L and myself comfortable, and is very
English in her ways. There are also some instructive farm
books, and Mr.. G takes in a few of the leading farm papers.
This is an exceedingly healthy climate, and I never regret coming
out here, and have had no attacks of what is commonly called
‘home sickness’ or‘the blues.’ ”
General P., Feb. 23rd, 1887 :
“ You will be glad to hear that A and G are doing Virginia
very well, happy, in good health, their neighbours kind to them, and
This spring they will make plantations of trees about their place.” Nebraska.
And again May 21st, 1887 :
“ I heard yesterday from my son, Arthur; they write in very
good spirits, all going on well. They have just finished the
planting of 5,000 trees, and are increasing their stock of cattle,
chickens, &c.”


A. C. R„ Feb. 27th, 1887 :
“ I continue to hear regularly from my son—alihost every
week. He seems to he quite contented and happy ih his new
home-”
L. P. C., March 7th, 1887 :
“ As I promised, I just send you a line to say that I reached
my new destination quite safely, and that I have been here some
weeks now, and am getting accustomed to the new style of living.
Of 'course I find the work hard, but it agrees with me, and I
never felt better in my life. I have arranged to stay here for
the twelve months, and we signed the agreement the other day.”
W. W. A., March Bth, 1887 ;
“I have this morning a letter from my nephew, written on his
arrival at Mr. M ——. I must sincerely thank you and your
agents for the care taken of my nephew on the journey; from his
letters X can see he is quite hap;
T. N. C., March 11th, 1887
“We have heard from my son ‘o-day very satisfactorily. I
trust Mr. C- is pleased with hin ’ ’
W. G. 0., April, 1887 ;
“ I get on very well with S -, and have agreed to stay the year
with him ; he is a very pleasant man and a good farmer and is
very generally respected. I should prefer this place to any other
I know of in the neighbourhood. I have seen Mr. H , who
has recently come out, and he appears to like his quarters.
Mr! P—— I have found very civil and obliging”
C. H. K., April 11th, 1887 :
“ He writes in ti e best of spirits, and although only a week at
work, seemed pleased with everything. The journey to W-—
was most successful, nothing’ could have been better than the way
you managed things for him. Ido not think it possible that any
young fellow going out to Canada to learn farming, as my son
has done, could do better than place himself under your guidance.”
And again, April 16th, 1887 :
“It is very satisfactory to find he has so soon got settled
comfortably and writes home so cheerfully. I think great credit
is due to your firm.”


And again, Aug. 3rd, 1887 :
“We constantly hear from him, and he says he is working very Ontario,
hard, and says the harder the work and the more he has to do,
the more he likes it. He seems to have taken a great fancy to
Canada and the life out there.”
W. G. 0., April 16th, 1887 :
“ I am perfectly satisfied with the arrangements which have lowa.
been made on my behalf. Mr. S is everything that I could
wish He is very kind and considerate, and is I think a first-rate
farmer. From Mr. P have experienced every civility.”
J. H., April 22nd, 1887 :
“ I think this farm is in every way a desirable one, as it em- Minnesota
braces both stock and grain farming. The house is very com-
fortable, and considerably larger than the farmhouses around, and
X must say I have had many comforts which I certainly did not
expect to meet with when 1 left England. Both Mr, and Mrs.
H have been very kind to me, and have done everything to
make me at home. Mr. H is a first-rate practical farmer,
and I consider it would do anyone good who intends to farm to
spend a year on this farm. I should certainly have stayed longer,
only I have land in Nebraska, and am anxious to look after it.”
Mrs. H., his mother, June 24th, 1887:
“ I am much obliged for the extract from Mr. O.’s letter
referring to my sou. It is a very great pleasure to me to find
matters have gone on so satisfactorily at the farm. My son
is leaving next month, as I wish him to go to Nebraska for a time
before he returns home for the winter, which I trust he will do in
September.”
E. H., May 7th, 1887:
“ I am pleased with the place and also with the farmer. I lowa,
intend to stay here the year.”
J. L. F., May 22nd, 1887 :
“ I am most comfortable and happy here, and have not the Virginia
slightest wish to change.”
Mrs. D., May 25th, 1887, on visiting her son who
went to Ontario in 1884 :
“ I found my son very well, he likes his work arid is doing a very Ontario
good business. He lives with a very nice family, Mr. C ’s wife’s
people, and every one speaks loudly in his praise; he is much
respected and liked. We have met with a very warm reception
here indeed.”


Mrs. Y., July Bth, 1887 :
‘‘l have heard very regularly from my son since he left England.
His last letter is dated 20th June; his account of Nova Scotia and
of his present home are quite satisfactory.”
L. G. M., July 1887:
“ I am getting on very well, and I think I am learning all that
can be learnt on a farm of this kind. I like the farmer lam with
very much, and have no doubt that we shall agree perfectly
during the year I am with him, and am quite willing that the
contract should be made.”
And Mrs. M., his mother, July 22nd :
“We have had one or two cheerful letters from my son.”
»
E. S. J., 23rd July, 1887, referring to his son in
Virginia:
“He speaks in the highest terms of Mr. S , and is happy
and much improved in health.”
The Eev. H. 8., July 29th, 1887, referring to his son ;
“We hear from him now about once a fortnight. He writes in
good spirits, and does not appear to object to the work.”
And again, Sept. 10th, 1887:
“We continue to receive very satisfactory letters from our son;
hard as the life is he appears to enjoy it, and writes in a very
contented frame of mind.”
The Eev. W. W., Aug. Ist, 1887 :
“I am much obliged for your letter respecting my son. We
heard from him about a week ago, and he also tells us that he is
much pleased with his place, and speaks very highly of the kind-
ness of the people he is with. ”
Colonel W., Aug. 7th, 1887 :
“Thanks for yours of the sth. I have received interesting and
favourable letters from my son. The work is hard, but he likes it;
and also says Mr. and Mrs. S are pleasant people.”
W. S., Aug. 17th, 1887 :
“ I can conscientiously recommend this farm as being a first-
rate one for anyone who wishes to learn farming to go on. I have
been here six months now, and have just concluded an arrange-
ment with Mr. G to stay here for another year.”


H. G. 0., Aug. 18th, 1887:
“ For my own part I like my place very much, as it is a good
farm and I am very comfortable in it.”
J. A. R., Aug. 23rd, 1887:
“My son writes home most happily and contentedly ; says he
works very hard, but likes it, and will get another berth when his
second year is up shortly.”
Mrs. 8., Aug. 81st, 1887:
“Mrs. B, thinks Messrs. Ford & Rathbone would be glad to
hear that she continues to have excellent accounts of her son,
who writes home regularly and seems quite well and happy, and
to like his farming life very much.”
Mrs. T., Sept. 6th, 1887:
“ The boy’s lines seem to have fallen in pleasant places. He
is having a very different beginning, at all events, from what his
brother had in the way of amusement His love of riding is
standing him in good stead. Please when writing to M
express my thanks to him for having looked out such good
quarters for the lad.”


GENERAL OPINIONS AS TO SYSTEM.
Minnesota The following is from the Episcopal clergyman in one
of the districts in Minnesota where pupils have been
placed. This gentleman, who is highly respected in the
State, has shown much interest in their welfare, and his
letter is in response to a request from us for criticisms or
suggestions on the system. The concluding paragraph
refers to one or two isolated cases in which much trouble
and annoyance have been caused to the agency by the
young men having been addicted to habits of intemperance,
which they could not be induced to abandon :
“ I quite agree with your letter of December 10th. Since my
writing I have given thought to particular cases, and I do not see
how any better arrangement can be made. As I see more of the
young men I fully agree with what you say on page 8. There
are some fine fellows; others of a different character. The friends
of some of them ought not to send them money to use at their
discretion, for they thereby defeat the very end of their coming
here. As you say, they can become self-supporting from the first.
“ Every young man who comes to America, and will be
industrious, economical and sober, can succeed, but their friends
must not interfere with their habits of self-reliance. I have given
the young men good counsel as to our customs, and can be of great
service to them if they will allow me to be so by being worthy
of it.
“ Many of the young men in this county are well spoken of.
As County Superintendent, I have the best of opportunities to
see them, and many of them come in often to Church. We had a
good number at Christmas at Holy Communion.
“ I feel quite sure your agent has done his duty faithfully in
locating these lads. Some of them will date their manhood from
this point of life.
“ As to those who come to America because their friends desire
to be rid of them, I fear little can be done for them, but no one
is to blame for this but themselves."
And February 16tb, 1882, writes :
“ Your pamphlet was duly received some weeks since. I do
not see how it could be changed for the better. I would think
you had taken every precaution possible to protect the young men
sent out under your auspices, and those who will succeed else-
where are doing well. I mean those who are persevering. An
industrious young man of energy and a fair education can do well
in America."


In a further letter, dated Sept. 4th, 1882, he says :
“ So far as I have been able to observe, your agents have
selected good places for the young men. In the long sickness of
B , no one could have taken better care of him than Mrs.
and her family. I might also mention other instances. The
influences surrounding the young men have been good, and every
effort has been used to direct and assist them.”
And May Ist, 1883 :
" I have received a copy of your pamphlet. I have watched
the boys who have come over here with much interest. Most of
them have done well. Of those sent to S County it would be
difficult to find a more manly body, and you may rest assured they
will succeed, I have taken a very deep interest in their welfare,
in advising them, etc. Some of them have taken land, free home-
steads, and some of them have gone into business, for which their
education peculiarly fits them. They have learned self-reliance,
and where there has been willingness to learn there have been the
happiest results. In America no boy of good habits and industry
and energy can possibly fail.”
And again, July 17th, 1883 :
“ I am glad to say, in regard to the young men, that they have
found some good friends, and those who have been prudent have
every prospect of success.”
The Acting Commissioner of the Department of Agricul-
ture at Washington, U.S.A., Mr. E. A. Cannan, writes as
follows :
“ May 21st, 1883.
“ Gentlemen,
“ I have to acknowledge the receipt of your favour of
the Bth inst., enclosing a copy of ‘ Practical Suggestions as to
Instruction in Farming in Canada and the North-West, and the
United States of America,’ and I take this opportunity to express
my appreciation of the methods you have adopted for putting
young Englishmen in the way of acquiring American farms after
they have learned to manage them profitably. The statements
made in your pamphlet regarding American farmers and farms are
moderate, and should command the confidence of the young men
to whom they are especially addressed.
: ' To Messrs. Ford, Eathbone and Co.,
“ London, E.C.”


The Treasurer of Virginia writes to us, under date June
19th, 1885:
“Commonwealth or Virginia,
"Treasurer’s Office,
“Richmond, Va., June \Sth, 1886.
“ Messrs. Ford, Rathbone & Co.
“ Gentlemen,
“ I have much pleasure in expressing my approval of your
plan of sending young Englishmen to Virginia as Farm Pupils
for 12 months, that they may have a chance of learning the ways of
the country before settling down. I think if every intending
settler would follow this plan, the country would soon be filled up
with a happy and contented people. The climate of Virginia I
consider more suitable to the English constitution than States
either further West or South, the thermometer rarely falling
below zero of Fahrenheit in winter, and the summers are no
warmer than most of the Western States, —of course they are
longer.
“Most.of the English in Virginia are to be found in the
Piedmont section, and I believe it to be the most desirable. The
mean temperature for Staunton in Augusta, the adjoining county
to Albemarle, from which I date this, for 1870-71—Spring 51.5°,
Summer 73.1°, Autumn 54.7°, and Winter 33.6°, or a yearly mean
of 53.7°. The yearly mean temperature of London is, I believe,
51° or 52°.
‘‘ The Piedmont section of Virginia should also prove decidedly
attractive to English gentlemen on account of its varied pro-
ductions, as besides all the ordinary farm produce, fruit raising
and grape growing for making wine is being largely taken up and
proving highly profitable. Horses from Albemarle are now trying
their racing qualities on the best English race courses, and the
raising of all kinds of fine stock is rapidly increasing.
“In conclusion, I will add that English gentlemen may rest
assured of a kindly welcome at all times from Virginians.
“ Respectfully,
(Signed) “J. R. BARKSDALE,
Treasurer of Virginia.”


TABLE OF MEAN TEMPERATURES. THE
DOMINION.
Toronto, 1 Bt. Paul, Winnipeg, I Battleford
Ontario. ! U.S.A. Manitoba. I N.W. Trritry.
England.
66-38 I
58-18
August .
Septr. ...
October .
Novmbr.
Decmbr..
Jany. ...
Feby. ...
March ...
April ...
May ... j
Jnlv
l 44-04
Means j |
45-61 i 36-67 36-46
Tasmania.
Mean Temp.—January 63"17
July 46-44
TABLE OP MEAN
TEMPERATURES.
STATES.
Autumn.
Florida
New York.,
Kentucky.
Wisconsin.,
Minnesota.
lowa
Missouri
Nebraska
Virginia...
Illinois ...


1850
1,449,073
1860
2,044,077
1870
2,659,985
1880
The increase in number * of farms in decennial periods
in the States, as shewn by the national census, is as fol-
lows :
It is the distinctive peculiarity of American farm occu-
pancy that the tillers of the soil are the owners of the land.
Foreigners come here not to become tenants, but pro-
prietors. They move directly onward toward the free
Government lands, which furnish a vital inducement to
immigration. They go west rather than south —first,
because they can obtain the best lands in fee simple, and
not as renters ; and a second consideration is the fact that
prairie lands can be selected, which can be opened and
made productive the first year. Therefore we find that
2,984,306, or about three-fourths of all in number, and a
far greater proportion of the total value, are occupied by
the owner. Then there are persons, temporary occupants
of holdings for various reasons, in the north, and in the
south a large number of freedmen, who are averse to
working for wages, and unable to own and stock a farm,
who are compelled to work the land for others. Preferring
semi-proprietorship, or a sort of partnership in the produce
of the farm, there are 702,244 who occupy land on shares
in various proportions, according to the fertility of the
soil and the conditions of the partnership as to furnishing
and feeding of farm animals, the use of implements, etc.
The following figures will shew how much smaller are
these farms, which are usually fragments of original farms
of greater area. The number rented at a fixed rental in
money is very small—only 322,357. The following state-
ment gives the classification by size and also by tenure: —
* This is quoted from the United States ot America Report of the Department
of Agriculture for 1881 and 1«82, page 646.


Number of Acres.
Whole
Number.
Under 3 acres
3 acres and under 10
10 „ „ 20
20 „ „ 50
50 „ „ 100
100 „ „ 500
500 „ „ 1,000
1,000 ,, and over
4,352
134,889
254,749
781,474
1,032,910
1,695,983
75,972
28,578
Total
4,008,907
We quote the following frc
United States, 1880, Yol. Ill,, £
u The yield per acre on small far
greater than on large ones. Greate
NUMBER OF FARMS.
Rented
for Money.
22,904
41,522
97,399
69,663
84,645
322,357
following from the 10th Census of the
0, Yol. 111., 622
“ The yield per acre on small farms pursuing mixed farming is
greater than on large ones. Greater care can be, and usually is,
taken in the selection of seed, in the cultivation of the crop, in
manuring, and in harvesting, and on lands of the same value the
interest account of such farms is lessened as the production is
increased, and all this induces thrift. Small and large farmers
are more nearly on the same footing than small and large operators
in any other industry.”
Visitors may see at an interview any of the letters
quoted in this pamphlet, as well as numerous others on
the same subject; the fullest inquiry is invited into the
working of the system and the nature of the organisation.
Messrs. Ford, Rathbone and Co. are a private firm,
having a complete organisation on both sides of the
Atlantic, enabling them to offer a thorough fulfilment
abroad of every contract entered into here.
Solicitors may refer to Messrs. Ford, Ranken Ford and
Ford, No. 4, South Square, Gray’s Inn, London, and
Frank Brown, Esq., 33, Upper Fitzwilliam Street, Dublin;
and Bankers to Messrs. Hoare and Co., 37, Fleet Street,
London, E. 0., and to Messrs. Melville, Evans and Co., 75,
Lombard Street, E.C.


We issue Foreign Drafts for remittances for pupils, &c.
We think it well to mention that in a recent communi-
cation from the State Board of Immigration of Minnesota,
the Secretary wrote, under date 12th July, 1883: “ This
State has no Agent or Commissioner of Immigration in
England or elsewhere outside of the State; nor is there
any law in existence authorising such appointment.”
It is very desirable that all communications intended for
us should be addressed to us by name, as Messrs. Ford,
Rathbone and Co.
Eighteenth Edition, Revised, — October, 1887.
FOED, EATHBONE & CO.,
21, FINSBURY PAVEMENT,
LONDON, E.C.
(Close to the Moorgate Street Station of the Metropolitan
Railway.)
AGEITTS
SUN FIRE OFFICE
AND
SUN LIFE OFFICE.
Adams Bros., Printers, 25, Bury Street, London, E.C




