

Prayers
Adapted to these times of
National and Domestic
Sorrow, from those written
bg R. L. Steuenson in Samoa




For Fortitud e and Serenity
Q-RANT us, oh God! that we may be set free from
the fear of viseissitu.de and the fear of death;
may finish what remains to us of our course without
dishonour to ourselves or hurt to others, . and when
the day comes, may die in serenity and courage.
Deliver us from.fear and favour: from mean hopes
and cheap pleasures. Have mercy on each in his
deficiency; let him .not be cast down; support the
stumbling on the way, and give at last rest to the
weary.
A Morning Prayer to Line Well
Throughout the Dag
OUR FATHER! the day returns and brings us the
petty round of irritating concerns and duties. Help
us to play the man, help us to perform them with
laughter and kind faces, let cheerfulness abound with
industry. Give us to go blithely on our business all
the day, bring us to our resting beds weary and con-
tent and undishonoured, and grant us in the end the
gift of sleep.
For Self-Blame an d Courage
LORD! let us ever try to measure the short-comings
of one another with the false balances of love,
and be in our own eyes, and in all conjunctures, the
most guilty. Help us in these present troubles with
the grace of courage, that we be, none of us, east
down or sit long lamenting amid the ruins of our
happiness and worldly hopes. Touch us rather with
fire from no earthly altar, that we may be up and
doing to rebuild our city, and in this hope we bear
to be.


An Euening Pra yer
W E come before Thee, oh Lord! in the end of Thy
day 7 with thanksgiving. Our loved ones in the
far parts of the earth;, those who are now beginning
the labours and dangers of the day, what time we
end them, and those with whom the sun now stands
at the point of noon, bless, help, console, and protect
them. Our guard is relieved,, the. service of the day
i s ever, and the hour come to rest. We resign into
Thy hands our sleeping bodies, our cold hearths, and
we ask for happy dreams of those afar. Give us to
awake in cheerfulness, give us to labour smiling. As
the sun returns in the east, so let our patience be
renewed with dawn; as the sun lightens the world,
so let our spirits and kindness make bright the homes
in which we dwell
Another Prayer at Euening
TjOKD! receive our supplication for our country, our
people, and our family. Protect the innocent, re-
strain greedy and treacherous, and lead us out
of our tribulation into a quiet land. Give us peace
with honour. Look down upon ourselves and upon
our absent dear ones. Help us and them; prolong
our days if it be to our good, in quiet and honour.
Give us health, food, bright weather, and cheerful
hearts. In what we meditate of evil, frustrate our
will; in what of good, further our endeavours.
Cause injuries to be forgot, and benefits to be re-
membered. Let us lie down without fear, and arise
with hope and determination. Be with us always,
and make us ready at any hour to die, resigned and
full of courage-trusting to Thine unchanging jus-
tice, and satisfied to take a new garment of lifej or
an everlasting sleep, as Thou wiliest best.


For Brare and Equaninmity
LORD GOD! purge out of every heart the lurking
grudge. Give us grace and strength to forbear
and to persevere. Offenders, give us the grace to
accept and to forgive offenders. Forgetful ourselves,
help us to bear cheerfully the forgetfulness of others.
Give us courage and gaiety and the quiet mind.
Spare to us our friends,; soften us to our private
enemies. Bless us, if it may be, in all our innocent
endeavours. If it may not, give us the strength to
encounter that which is to come, that we be brave
in peril, constant in tribulation, temperate in wrath,
and in all changes of fortune, and down to the gates
of death, loyal and loving one to another.
For Self-Forgetfulness
GOD! the creatures of. Thy fashioning, Thy disin-
herited children, come before Thee with their pas-
sionate wishes and regrets. Children we are, child-
ren we shall be till our mother earth, the sea, or fire
has taken us home once more. Accept us, correct
us, guide us, Thy guilty innocents. Dry our vain
tears, wipe out our vain resentments, help our yet
vainer efforts. In the inner darkness of gloomy
thoughts, of unkindness, and of anger, make it
radiant day about us, so that we see ourselves clearly
and are ashamed. Make it Heaven around us, Lord,
by the only way to Heaven, by forgetfulness of self.


For All Whom We Hold Very Dear
(JOD OF OUR FATHERS! for our absent loved
ones we implore Thy stay; Thy comfort? and pro-
tection. Keep them in life, keep them in honour;
and for us?:. grant that we remain worthy of their
love. Oh God! let not our beloved blush for us? nor
we for them. Grant us but that? and grant us
courage to .endure lesser ills unshaken? and to accept
death? loss? disappointment? and loneliness? as' it
were straws upon the tide of life.
For those who do Battle, and those
for whom they Fight
W E beseech Thee? oh unknown God! to behold us
with favour? folk of many nations and families
gathered together for one common purpose—weak
men and women subsisting under the covert of Thy
patience. Be patient still; suffer us yet awhile
longer—with our broken purposes of good? with our
idle endeavours against evil? suffer us a while longer
to endure? and (if it may be) help us to do better.
Bless our united arms against the common aggres-
sor and oppressor of all. If evil fall upon us? brace
us..to play the man under affliction; if success? to ac-
cept it with modesty and, thankfulness. In the dis-
parted battlefields of continents? be with our country-
men and ‘ allies. To Thee? oh . God of Hosts! we pray
for victory-—teach us? oh King of Kings! to deserve
it—give those who fight Tor us courage? endurance?
and loyalty. Preserve them from sickness and
wounds? and give them? in pain? in danger? and in
death? that peace which only those possess who have
done their duty. Spare them to us? oh God!


In War Time during a Separation
L°RD! we bow beneath the stroke and go forth
separate for the sake of our country and our
family. Go with us, our guardian, guide, and angel.
Hold Thou before us, in our divided .and uncom-
panioned ways, the lamp of Thy light and encourage-
ment. Uplift us to be. true to what small best we
can attain to. Help us in that, oh Master and Dis-
penser of events! Thou, of the vast designs in which
we blindly labour, suffer us to be so far constant to
ourselves and our loved ones. Guide us, keep us, give
n.s fortitude to endure, and in the end, bring us to-
gether once more in health, in safety, and in honour.
A Prayer for a Family
{-"JOD OP OUR FATHERS! have mercy on our
country and our people. Help us who now con-
tend against the enemy of peace. Thou who* made
for us this home of ease and quietude accept our
gratitude for past happiness and affection. Help us
to repay in service one to another, and in duty to
our Empire, the debt of Thy merits and mercies, so
that when the period of our stewardship draws to
its conclusion,' when the windows begin to be dark-
ened, when the bond, of the family is to be loosed, as
we know, oh God! it surely must, there shall be no bit-
terness of remorse in our farewells. Help us to
look back on the long Way that Thou has brought us
through this most difficult world, on the long days
in which we have been served, not according to our
deserts, but our desires; on the pit and miry clay,
the blackness of gloom and evil thinking, from which
pur feet have so often been plucked. For our sins
forgiven or prevented, for our mean shames unpub-
lished, we bless and thank Thee, oh God! Help us


77-j£./£. l/ttusj /yy tjAh Uj-^2l- £*pffw Ac<i_
3 f fo-tt* ,/ij 4 _ I,
yet again and ever. So order events, so strengthen
our frailty, so teach m to live, and so to die, that
when that day comes whereon we shall stand before
Thee, we may, in the end, be dismissed with honour.
In their weakness and fear, the. creatures of Thy
handiwork, the feathers of circumstances, so pray tJ
Thee—oh hear their cry—Oh God!
In a Time of National Danger
For the Dalourous and the Unadventurous the Shirker, the Slarker,
the and the Hedonist
thank Thee, oh Almighty God! for the happi-
ness of the former days and the excellent face of
Thy sun. And now, when the clouds gather, and
sorrow and danger have fallen upon our country
and our dear ones, permit us not to be cast down;
let- us not lose the savour of past mercies and past
pleasures; but, like the voice of a bird singing in
the rain, let grateful memory survive in the hour of
darkness. If there be in front of us any painful
duty, strengthen us with the grace of courage; if
any act of mercy, teach us tenderness and patience.
Give valour in battle, justice in victory, and con-
stancy in misfortune to those who fight for us. Fire
the : hearts/oh God of Battles! of those who basely
stay at home, and forgetful of duty, seek only an
ignoble ■ safety. Stir their weak souls to better
things, teach them that, "if through pleasure and
ease they purchase shame, the pleasure vanisheth,
but the shame abideth for ever, y y Teach us all the
simple manly creed that "no one is worthy to live
at all, if for fear or danger of death he shunneth Ms
country's service and his own honour, seeing that
death is inevitable and the fame of virtue immor-
tal." Wherefore, on this behalf, oh God! arouse the
people of our land, protect and.guide us, and in the
end, give us a lasting and righteous peace.
