

PREACHING:
With Special Reference to
the Present Day.
AN ADDRESS
DELIVERED BEFORE THE
BALLARAT MINISTERIAL ASSOCIATION
MAY 29TH, 1894,
By
SAMUEL THORNTON, D.D.,
Bishop of Ballarat.
PRINTED BY SPECIAL REQUEST.
PRICE TWOPENCE.




PREACHING:
With Special Reference to
the Present Day.
AN ADDRESS
DELIVERED BEFORE THE
BALLARAT MINISTERIAL ASSOCIATION
MAY 29TH, 1894,
BY
SAMUEL THORNTON, D.D.,
Bishop of Ballarat.
PRINTED BY SPECIAL REQUEST.
PRICE TWOPENCE.


PREFATORY NOTE.
I offer an apology for publishing this Address, for I cannot
think its merits entitle it to publication: but none for delivering it.
I am not a member of the Ballarat Ministerial Association, which
includes (as a matter of fact, not of rule) no Clergy of the Church
of England; and of that Church and her principles—as indisputa-
bly a Branch of the One Catholic Church of Christ on earth—l am
myself an ardent champion, and could not personally approve separ-
ation from her. But she has taught me to accord precisely the
same liberty of conviction to my fellow-Christians that I claim for
myself; and when certain Christian Preachers, doing good work for
Religion outside her, lovingly invited me to speak to them, “ with-
out prejudice," on things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, I con-
sented without scruple or stipulation: and, solely in deference to their
unanimous request, have printed what I said to them (minus a
short opening and conclusion of merely personal and passing
interest), exactly as I said it.
SAMUEL BALLARAT.
Bishopscourt, Ballarat,
May 30, 1894.


PREACHING;
With Special Reference to the Present Day.
My topic is not Preaching, simply, which would be far
too wide, but Preaching with Special Reference to the
Present Day \ yet one s first thought about it is, that the
preaching fitted for this age must be, in its essence, just
the preaching fitted for every age, and none other , I mean
the preaching of Christ, and Him crucified. No other
<< preaching ” will deserve that title, in our esteem. Iso
other Name than This, whereby man must be saved,—none
other balsam than That for sin-plagued souls ! It is the clear,
unfaltering, proclamation of Christ crucified and risen, as the
Substitute and Friend of sinners ; the Fountain of all life and
joy and holiness; our great Means of Grace, and our one
Hope of glory,—it is this that not only is accompanied by,
but is, “the power of God unto men’s salvation.” It is this,
and this alone, to which our Lord referred in the last sen-
tences He ever uttered on earth, when He bound the solemn
charge upon His Church until time should end, —“ Go ye
into all the world and preach the gospel .” Christ crucified, it
has been beautifully said, is to be the diamond shining on the
bosom of all our sermons. es, and all else, such as style,
illustration, mode of expression, and fashion of delivery, are
but of subordinate and relative importance,—only the setting
of the precious jewel, after all.
But we are to leave this first principle, with all the profit-
able things that might be said about it, taking it for granted,
as an indispensable foundation stone, in all that may be
advanced; and to inquire in what ways this preaching of
Christ, as we all should understand that expression, may best
be adapted—not by way of compromise of one of its essential
principles, God forbid, but—in the mode of its presentation,
to the particular conditions, and the peculiar opportunities,
of the day in which our lot is cast. ,
That, within wide limits, such adaptation is wise and indis-
pensable, is most certain, No thinking man will maintain


that the outward forms of Christian worship should be rigid
and unalterable, albeit the blessed Object of our worship is
ever one and changeless; and no one present will contend, 1
apprehend, that the best mode of preaching of one age of our
era is necessarily the most suited to every other, though the
essential subject for preaching must remain for ever the same.
Take a few instances. Chrysostom’s sermons are wonder-
ful, —those on the Statues, for example, —but how would such
discourses answer their purpose now, if delivered in St.
Andrew’s Kirk or Westminster Abbey ? Wiclif was a most
vigorous and successful preacher, but, modernise them as you
will, you could not read any of his addresses, —those on the
Incarnation, for instance, —to any English congregation.
Fancy one of Isaac Barrow’s splendid discourses delivered in
place of one of Mr. Knight’s, were he prevented,—which I
hope he never will be, —by sudden illness, from occupying his
pulpit some Sunday morning! Barrow’s sermons always
exhaust their subject,—and would be thought to exhaust
their hearers too, methinks, if they were a present day
audience ! Latimer was a most effective homilist, but were
one to preach in his old cathedral at Worcester next Sunday
one of the sermons he preached there in 1535, one half of the
congregation would be in fits of laughter, and the other leave
in consternation and disgust. Honestly, can you enjoy his
sermons on The Card ? So with Bull, and Andrewes, and
Horsley—those giants of the pulpit. How King Charles sat
out Jeremy Taylor’s sermons, marvels of eloquence as they
are, is itself a marvel to us ; and the holy and spiritually-
minded Baxter would preach Kidderminster Church bare to
the sexton in a fortnight in these days, with his three hours’
discourses, and their thirty heads, and immense and involved
sentences. Might not the same be said of Owen and Howe,
of Hooker and Hall, of Leighton and Ussher, and a score of
the most successful preachers of a day gone by ? Should we
stand for an hour in the cold outside a chapel in Zoar St.,
Southwark, at 6 a.m., as people used to do, to hear sermons
such as John Bunyan preached, and Mr. Offor has preserved
to us ? And, candidly, what would be the popular verdict on
sermons like John Wesley’s, and Richard Cecil’s, and Robert
Hall’s, and William Romaine’s, and Charles Simeon’s, if
preached in 1894 ?
There is something, then, —not the essential doctrines, but
something,—in Christian preaching, which does need to be
conformed to the zeit-gcist, —modified and made appropriate
to the audiences that hear it, in accordance with the diversity
of times and men’s manners, as well as to that of countries
and circumstances, and the class of the hearers. If a clock
is going, the position of the hand will vary with the hour of


the day; and if a Church is alive and alert, she will in her
pulpit teaching bear a correspondence with the times: not
indeed, with Mr. By-ends, Mr. Hold-the-world, and Mr.
Anything, and with Aaron long ago at Sinai s foot, yiel mg
to the passing temper of a fickle multitude from dread °*
forfeiting its favour and support, but yet, as a true fisher o
souls, seeking, with Paul, to “ become all things to all
men,” aye, and “to please all men in all things, after such
sort that she “ may by all means save some.
The Christian pulpit does not want for advice in this
matter. The multitude of her counsellors should make her
safe, at any rate ; yet withal it is a trifle distracting, i at
preaching should correspond with the special needs of the
age,—should mark its faults and meet its particular require-
ments, —we are incessantly reminded, and freely admit . but
the question how? in what direction? elicits a Babe o
conflicting replies, not seldom mutually contradictory, but
generally concurring in the assumption that the ordinary run
of preaching is behind the age; that, in che march of progress,
it occupies the rear, and not the van. If science and its
utterances are in advance of the times; and the newspaper
abreast with them, a reflection of their present moods and
attainments; the preaching of the day, we are told, lags
wearily at the back of all. And thus, says a recent able
article in an English Review, “it is all but powerless,
instead of being, as in the Middle Ages, and even much later,
“ irresistible and unopposed in its sway over the national
mind, the inceptive animator of almost every large under-
taking, the dominant instigator of almost every important
public movement.” This alleged powerlessness the English
Reviewer declines to attribute to any desuetude in the office
of the pulpit in these days, or impotence of preaching as an
instrument, if rightly employed. He regards it as in itself
“ still - superior to all other modes of personal influence.
And, strong as such language is, I to a great extent agree
with it, and with a remark of the late Daniel Moore,—-a most
successful preacher in his time, —that the far wider cir-
culation of the Printed Book has only stimulated the craving
for the Living Voice. Taking first the style, and then the
matter, of the preaching of the day, the Reviewer charges
preachers, first, with “artificial intonation,” and “ lifelessness
or paralysis of manner and then, in the things uttere ,
with “Sahara-like barrenness,” and with discoursing on
precedents, and traditional dogmas, and Church convention
alities, instead of vital religion. We do not condemn, he
says, with any adequate energy, the real mistakes and vices
of the time, such as the uncurbed love of money, the laise
ambition for rising in the social scale, the superciliousness ct


office and position, the disregard of thoroughness of practice
in the workshop and the market. Again, the preaching of
the day, he complains, ignores doubt, or brands it as a sin ;
makes no proper allowance for scientific progress ; and dis-
regards religion in its human aspect, instead of teaching
manliness, self-respect, conscientiousness, and the loving of
what is right and true from its inherent loveliness and value.
It is also, he says, too polemical on points of denominational
difference, —too speculative on the evidences of Christianity:
and vague and abstract, instead of special, and personal,
and real.
Without admitting all these sweeping charges as lying
fairly against the average Australian sermon, there is some-
thing in these criticisms, bearing on the subject we are
considering ; and of lay criticism let us never be afraid, my
brethren, however scathing it may be! Depend upon it,
criticism on the part of our hearers is not our danger ! Our
true peril comes from an opposite direction, —from their
flattery ! The Lord deliver us from the pestilent mischiefs
arising from the praise of man !
At the recent Church Congress at Hobart, a very sturdy,
outspoken layman administered some strong meat to the
Clergy, in this connection, which he did not spare to season
with cayenne pepper of a very pungent sort ! Here are some
of the things he said, as given in a revised report of it, —■
in which, however, I fancy that several of the strongest
remarks he made are omitted. “ There is room for improve-
ment in much of the preaching of the day, and the pulpit
is not the power it ought to be and might be in the world . .
. . I will lay before you a few plain suggestions from a
plain layman who has listened to many sermons ... It
may do good to the Clergy to get a peep into a lay mind on
this important matter . . . (i) Give the congregation
credit for something ... If you wish to draw out the
better part of a man, you must assume that he has some
aspirations towards a better life . . . Talk to them always
as if they were what they were meant to be ; they will then
become so ” . . . “ (2) Do not assume that the congrega-
tion are void of understanding . . . Preachers seem
haunted with the fear of preaching over the heads of their
hearers, and, consequently, go to the opposite extreme, and
are often trivial and commonplace. Congregations resent
being treated in this fashion. I have listened to sermons that
were almost an insult to a grown-up assembly. It is far
better to preach above than below the intellectual capacity of
a congregation . . . Give them something to work out
for themselves . . . (3) Do not discourage the congrega-
tion . . , Often have I left the church at the close of a


sermon utterly depressed and disheartened! . . . The
preacher should bear in mind, that he has before him men
brain-weary with the toil of the week ; women harassed with
domestic cares. These people need to be helped and en-
couraged when they come to the House of God. Many of
them are beset with temptations of which the preacher knows
little or nothing . . . They are trying, however feebly,
to do their duty in life . . . they long to attain to some-
thing higher and nobler, if they only knew how . . . Don’t
set up an almost unattainable ideal, without any way of
getting there, and then bid them ascend. In the ladder
that reaches to heaven there should be steps leading down to
the weakest soul in the congregation ... (4) Be fair to
those who differ. The priest is an advocate . . . and if
he is not a man of uncommon fairness ... he will not
only attack his adversaries, but misrepresent them . . .
I would add, that he sometimes treats them and their opinions
with a real or assumed contemptuous indifference, that is
even harder,to bear than misrepresentation ... If
the preacher desires to win over adversaries, the first step
towards success is to be fair to them. Nothing conciliates
like this ... (5) Preach a cheerful religion ... It
is anything but a cheerful religion that we hear in some of
our churches . . . It is a difficult matter to get men to
come to church at all now-a-days ; if you want to drive them
away altogether, preach a gloomy religion. (6) Lastly, give
us practical sermons. We want less of dogmas and creeds
and Shibuoleths, and more of that which will help us in our
everyday life. You have heard of the man who remarked
that, although he had listened to many sermons on the faith
of Abraham, he had never heard one on the duty of honesty
to one’s neighbour. Give us something to carry away with
us, to help us in our work and recreation : in our home life,
our shops, our offices, our country houses. Teach us to be
holy men and women—Teach us how to make
‘ Life, Death, and that great For Ever
One grand, sweet song.’ ”
Well, there is need for us preachers to be told the plainest
truths about the matter before us, for it is of incalculable
moment. It is not too much to say that, in days gone by
often, and even in these days sometimes, immortal souls have
been bored, away from churches by unsuitable preaching; and
that to not a few of those that have remained the sermon
has been often a self-denying ordinance, only likely to profit
them by cultivating their powers of resignation ; —the repeti-
tion over and over again of that which produces merely
passive impressions, becoming ever weaker, by an inexorable
law of our nature, through their incessant recurrence. On


no other principle can we explain the extraordinary religious
ignorance and stagnation of soul traceable in many regular
sermon-hearers, after years of church attendance. And
among the causes which have combined to keep so large a
proportion of the “ Masses as one cannot bear but cannot
help calling them—on the wrong side of the church door,
has not this, at least, been one, in the past,—the unsuitableness
and unintelligibleness to them of many pulpit utterances?
Even in our Ballarat, not one tenth of the population is in
church on any given Sunday. O, can any pains be too
great to expend upon the enquiry,—How may we best
present the old, old story of Jesus Christ and His love, so
as to better arrest the attention and meet the special needs
of a new generation ?
Let me, then, pass on to mention a few of the particulars
in which, as far as my humble judgement goes, our stated
preaching demands careful adaptation to the conditions and
requirements of the day we live in. Among many others
that might be mentioned, I will speak only of four; and I
will avail myself, as an aid to the memory of my audience, of
“ apt alliteration’s artful aid.”
I. First, we must specially, in these days, make our sermons
interesting. How it comes about that people now-a-days are
more hopelessly impatient than they seem to have been in
days gone by of the dull, the dry, the abstract, I cannot fully
explain ; but there is no question about the fact. It may be
due to the alleged superficiality of the modern mind: or to the
more abundant supply of interesting talk to be met with in
periodicals and lecture halls, lowering further than ever the
market value of heavy utterances, however good; or to the
express-train speed at which we hurry through life in these
days, making it difficult for any neutral or inconspicuous
object to arrest observation as we pass ; or to the abundance
of the objects presented to men’s minds, necessitating, as in
wall advertisements, an ever brighter colour and more
unusual form to rivet the attention; or to the radicalism of
the age,—its tendency to repudiate authority, and its un-
readiness to listen to anything simply because it is expected
to listen to it. At all events the fact remains, that dull
preaching stands no chance whatever to-day of a constant
auditory. Something is wanted in preaching corresponding to
the change in the prevalent public taste from the abstract to
the objective in physical science; something concrete, posi-
tive, and tangible, on which the mind can fasten readily.
Men with mere command of language, which means, Whately
says, men whose language has command of them, “ wind-
bag ” preachers,—are getting altogether at a discount with


hearers worth talking to. Sleepiness, of matter as well as of
manner,, is not endured in our time. “In the name of God,
brethren,” said Baxter, between two and three centuries ago,
“ wake up your hearts before ye come into the pulpit, that
when ye be there ye may be fit to awake the hearts of
sinners!” After a recent sermon on the words, “Awake thou
that sleepest,” a hearer is said to have remarked, that the
text would have been more appropriate at the end of it than
at the beginning. It is astonishing how heavy some good
men can be ! “ What a Saint in the pulpit!” was remarked
on one of these: “ Yes,” was the response, “ and what
martyrs in the pews !” We must “arrest ” the people’s atten-
tion ; and it has been well remarked that this very expression
bears witness to the fact, that an audience’s attention is
perpetually tending to run away, like a pickpocket from a
policeman. We have got to “collar” it, to prevent this, and
get a hearing for what we want to teach : and no dull, heavy
talk will ever do that. People don’t go to sleep under such
teaching now-a-days ; but why ? They stay away instead.
In this connection I may remark, that the preacher’s
manner must be natural, but animated and earnest, not “like
a book,” as they say. The rhythmic, sedative cadence of
sermon utterances must be abandoned, and all starched and
formal conventionalities and dignities of the pulpit locked away
with our great grandfather’s powdered periwig and shoe
buckles. The preaching of Christ must never savour of official
dictation ; it must be warm with life : thrilling with definite
purpose : personal, and as free as can be managed from the
technical language of theology. I would not at all disparage
the value of established theological terms, or call them
“shibboleths” or “learned cant;” they were neither when
devised, and need be neither in their use : but in oft repeated
exhortations to mixed audiences it is important to avoid them,
and to select language in which to press salvation truths on
heart and conscience as closely as possible resembling that of
common life, in which we should warn men against imminent
physical danger, or incite them to some indispensable action
in their ordinary affairs: for thus alone will you convey
to their minds an intuitive sense of the urgency of your
message, and of your downright earnestness in pressing it
upon them. This can be done, if we deliberately aim at it,
to an extent quite surprising. I heard a successful mission
preacher every day for a week who did not, I am certain,
use six technical theological terms in the whole course of ten
addresses. This, no doubt, was the charm of Bunyan’s
preaching. Within the limits of reverence, use any language,
rather than not be understood. “I am pressed under you, as
a cart that is full of sheaves.” Think of God represented by


the prophet as saying that of Himself, to make Jewish
harvestmen understand His message to their conspiences !
Allusion to current events is commended to us by our Lord’s
example, and is valuable ground-bait for the spiritual fisher-
man. Is not God teaching us by passing events ? Is history
to grow ancient before the preacher may be allowed to point
its lessons, and utilise its illustrations of eternal truth ? How
interesting the Bible is ! What variety ! How much allu-
sion, how much biography and anecdote, picture and parable,
as well as doctrine. And we are to speak, not only “ the
oracles of God,” but “as the oracles of God.” Assuredly,
“ the foolishness of preaching ” does not mean dull preaching.
Paul did not use “ enticing words,” but he did use persuasive
words. Scholars present may remember the well-known lines
of Euripides ou this subject.
[Here the Greek was quoted.']
If thoroughly interesting, the length of the sermon would
not be complained of. I for one do not believe in the seven
minutes sermonette. Half-an-hour, as an outside maximum, has
St. Ambrose’s authority: “Ne nimium prolixus sit Sermo , ne
fastidium pariat: semi-horce tempus ne excedat." “Ne fastidium
pariat there it is ; the moment tedium begins, edification
ceases. The measure of the length of a sermon should be
the power of a somewhat less than average listener to attend
earnestly to it all; and it is a law as uniform as gravitation
that a congregation’s attention will be in inverse proportion
to the time they know they will have to keep it up. As an almost
universal rule, the City Hall chimes should sound only once
during our sermon. “Sir,” said Lord Halsbury to a preacher
who asked his opinion of his discourse, “ I heard that in the
course of it which I trust I shall never hear again.” “What-
ever was that ?” asked the preacher, alarmed lest he had
broached some startling heresy. “ I heard the church clock
strike twice.”
Interesting preaching, of course, will not convert or edify,
if it be nothing else. “You cannot lwe,” someone has said,
“on maccaroons.” Yet interest is, in some sense, the premier
requisite in sermons of the day, for, as we have seen,
interesting preaching, however sound, will not get hearers to
edify or convert. Women can bear much, and it takes a
great deal to drive the bonnets entirely away : but I always
like to see the heads of hair, —or the heads that have been
heads of hair, —wearing their fair proportion to them. But
men are fidgetty hearers, and their patience soon reaches its
limits : yet they will come to interesting preaching.
Especially will uninteresting preaching estrange the hearts
of the young,—far and away the most hopeful section of our


congregations. O how much may the wise preacher do with
the young mind and heart, —how little can he usually do
with the mature man or woman ! You may uproot a young
thistle with a twist of the hoe,— dynamite won’t destroy its
work when it has floweied and seeded. O, while we have a
preacher’s opportunity with them, let us interest th e. young !
11. Secondly, in the present day not only interest, but intelli-
gence, must mark our preaching. The spread of reading and
enquiry and, in measure, of knowledge, if not always of
wisdom, creates fresh dangers as well as fresh opportunities for
the preacher. Ministers are not now, as in the middle ages, the
educated class. Reckless geneialization on subjects not
adequately studied ; authenticated facts cynically disre-
garded ; presumption on the ignorance of hearers, or the
impossibility of remonstrance or reply, bring preaching into
disrepute, and forfeit confidence in the preacher s message.
We must be ready, on occasion, to grapple with the undoubted
difficulties of the Book we profess to expound ; not picking up
the pebbles and leaving the boulders, but bravely facing,
instead of shirking, when they lie in our path,, current Scrip-
tural problems. Nor must we preach from half the Bible,
and ignore the rest, keeping some texts and truths always so
close before our eyes, that they hide the remainder of God’s
Word. Don’t let us be fettered by canons such as these, —
Justification by Faith, or the Doctrine of the Trinity, should
be stated in every sermon. These will underlie and enter
into every discourse of the faithful preacher, as every soil has
beneath it the living rock of which it is the pulverised frag-
ments yet the bare stone does not everywhere crop up
above the surface. Paley says a sermon-hearer usually carries
away but one impression ; and we should never try to bring
every subject into a discourse, or try to say everything upon
any. Perfect sermons are never impressive. Christ spoke
the word to the people only “as they were able to bear it.”
But what we do say, should be said lucidly and well, as by
one who thoroughly understands what he means, and is not
trying to persuade others without having made up his mind
what he wants to persuade them of. Of course, this implies
reflective preparation,—more time in the study than some
preachers insist on securing for themselves. Sermons easily
prepared are as easily forgotten. As the Greek philosopher
says, “The good is hard” : all true success demands care and
pains. In labour there is profit; mere talk tendeth only to
penury: and these days, of ail days, are no time for ill-
informed, superficial ministers, however honest and earnest
they may be. And in these times, a preacher who does not
read and think daily will soon fall behind his flock, instead of


going before it, and be pumping out of a dry well, and
threshing out old straw, and giving his hearers exhausted air
to breathe, and weeding away the scalps and reducing his
congregation to that faithful, patient residuum of bonnet!
How much Scripture has on the intelligent service of God !
“ I will put my laws in their hearts, and in their minds will I
write them.” “ Love the Lord thy God with all thine heart
and with all thy mind." “My people will not consider .”
“ How is it that ye do not understand?" “ O foolish ones, and
slow of heart to believe,” exclaimed Christ to the two at
Emmaus ; and then He “ opened” to them the Scriptures,
and so soon as their minds ceased to be foolish, their hearts were
nimble to believe; as with the Bereans, who “searched the
Scriptures daily with all readiness of mind; therefore,” it goes
on, “ many of them believed ” with the heart. “ The peace
of God keep your minds ” (as well as your hearts), prays St.
Paul. Of course, under “ intelligence” I include spiritual
enlightenment,—religious insight,—acquaintance with God’s
ways with the human heart, such as mere study will never
yield, until the Holy Ghost illuminates the understanding,
making the spirit of the man not merely the opened eye, to
which St. Paul compares it, but “ a candle of the Lord,”
which, like Christ’s eye of flame, itself lights up and dis-
closes, as well as perceives and takes in, the things of the
Kingdom. For though spiritual truths may flit before our
minds like bright objects before a photographer’s lens, they
will leave no enduring mark till the plate in the dark
chamber within is sensitised. The voice even of God falls
dead upon the mental ear, until that ear is “ awakened to
hear as the learned.”
111. I pass to a third particular. Integrity is specially needed
in the preaching of our day. “ Surely of every day,” may be
your comment: and you are right; but if you recall to mind
how emphatically the present is an age of shams and false
pretensions, and therefore of a particularly keen scent for all
humbug and pretence, especially in religious teachers, you
will understand why I would emphasise the need in our times
of what has been needed in all times. By integrity I mean
thoroughness and downright honesty in the preacher of
Christ: honesty in his denominational convictions ; honesty
in rebuking all sin, without partiality to class or party;
honesty in his putting together his sermons for the pulpit;
honesty in his personal practice outside it. I have heard it
said by laymen, that there is significantly little recom-
mendation of the “ conscience void of offence ” towards man
as well as towards God—of exposition of the text “ hold faith
and a good conscience , which some having put away have made


shipwreck concerning faith.” We cannot have too much of
the Gospel, they say, but we may have too little of the Law.
Somehow there is an idea abroad in these days that preachers
do not expect to be taken always au sevicux: that the precepts
of pulpit oratory are intended to be very cautiously applied, and
that preachers themselves are content, as one has expressed it,
to “ preach cream and live skim milk. It is impossible to
over-rate the danger to precious souls arising, from such an
idea ; and the preacher who would meet the needs and perils
of a very practical age must let it be seen that he means in
full earnest every word he says on Sunday, by his life in the
week. The Temple Candlestick was of unalloyed gold, and
its ornaments were all wrought or engraved, not moulded or
stamped, for there was no sham or shoddy work of any kind
about it ; while the holy oil burnt in it it was death to
counterfeit. No, the preacher must not be just like most
men, —easy in the practice of the hard things he professes,—
if he is to win souls in 1894* The pulpit must not be behind
the times,—no, nor abreast of the times only,—nor even in
front of the times, anticipating the requirements of a more
advanced stage in general culture and apprehension,—-but
above the times! Above them! Higher up, in a holy
atmosphere of truth and reality, where the adulterations ot
the shop, and the “bulling and bearing of the share market,
and the cooking of balance-sheets, and the salting of claims,
find nothing to correspond to them ! The instant hearers
detect “humbug” in the preacher, his sway over their con-
sciences and hearts is gone, however toothsome they may
continue to find the spicemeat of his pulpit rhetoric. It is
only heart-deep words that pass through the ears to the
hearts of the people. .
I said preachers in these days must be rigidly honest in
putting together their sermons for the pulpit. What did I
mean? Of course I referred to plagiarism: so subtle an
offence, so difficult to define, —so liable in these days to detec-
tion, to the destruction of all holy influence in the preacher.
“ Behold, saith the Lord,” cries Jeremiah, “ I am against the
prophets that steal my words every man from his neighbour.
Yet the prophets of Israel quote from each other without
acknowledgment, and St. Jude certainly borrowed from St.
Peter, or else St. Peter from St. Jude! dhe sin of plagiar-
ism, then, lies very much in the motive and spirit of the
perpetrator : and between the intolerable bondage of scrupu-
lously mentioning in public the exact source of every idea
that may have fallen into and germinated in the soil of your
mind, on the one hand, and the secret seeking for and accep-
tance of admiration for eloquent passages, or fresh and
luminous conceptions, in your sermons, which you have


indolently appropriated from others, on the other, a safe path
can surely be found for honest souls to walk in, if resolved to
“ keep innocency, and take heed to the thing that is right,”
in this matter.
Of course, when another’s ideas on any scale are borrowed
in his own words, there should be inverted commas in MS.
or print : and in preaching, where this sign is unavailable,
some reference to the non-originality of what is quoted is
surely due from one honorable and modest man of God to
another. Such quotations should seldom be indulged in :
it cramps the mind to accustom it to force its thought into
another’s mould. David would not masquerade in Saul’s
armour, though he wielded Goliath’s sword so soon as he had
fairly made it his own. If we let our reading of other men’s
sermons manure and fertilize our own minds, and then
reproduce, with sweat of brain and toil of prayer, thoughts
which we may have owed in the first instance to their sugges-
tion, but have honestly re-coined (to change the metaphor) in
our own mint, and wrought up, not as “ purple patches ” on
a colourless fabric, but as a harmonious ingredient in the care-
fully constructed framework of a discourse of our own, we are
free of blame, and are only enriching our ministry by honour-
able importation and exchange, and a legitimate development
of the homiletic resources of the Church.
integrity ! Perhaps the most awful of all states of human
life is that of a hypocrite preacher,—the insincere religious
professional,—the false prophet, Satan’s subject, in the cos-
tume of an angel of light. Sooner or later, hearers are
certain to detect the fact, and the detection—or even the
suspicion—of it will be absolutely fatal to all ascendency over
them for holy ends. Living near to God, you will need less
and less to lean on commentaries and quotations, and will
receive direct from Him fresh and telling messages for His
people, that will impart a tone of reality to your work, as
nothing else can do : whereas the fig tree that yielded only
leaves when the Lord sought fruit was punished—how ?
“No man eat fruit of thee ! ” Spiritual barrenness is the
certain doom of the unspiritual and inconsistent preacher.
IV. Once more: Intensity, as well as interest, intelligence
and integrity, should mark the Preaching of the Day. All is
intense around us. The rivalries of business are intense : the
activities of inquiry and enterprise are intense ; the labour
of life, its whirl and worry, is intense and exhausting. No
flabby, uncoloured, languid influences have any place or
power in a day like this : everything that is to make its mark
must be instinct‘with energy, full of electricity, force and fire:
and the preaching of the day must be intense, too, to over-


come the intense evil of the age with greater intensity of
good. , _ .
Intense: not in its diction, —grandiloquent, or sensational,
or dramatic, or eccentric, or stentorian,—for God was not to
be seen in the Fire or Earthquake, but audible in the Still,
Small Voice.
Intense in what, then ? Intense in holy lovingness, inspired
by the Spirit of God. Some preachers do not seem quite to
know what spirit they are of. It is not sarcasm, or scoldings,
—it is not scathing denunciations of vice,—it is not high
orthodoxy or powerful polemics, —it is not the most masterly
sermons, —it is not the most eloquent appeals :itis a certain
sublime tenderness, it is fervent love, in the preacher, before
which a congregation is bowed like a cornfield before the
wind : it is the unction of the Holy One, the savour of a
devout earnestness that yearns passionately for souls, “ dying
a’ most,” as a Scotchwoman said of McCheyne, “ to have ye
converted,” —the glow of a holy ardour in the preacher’s heart,
kindled from the Altar before the Throne,—the sympathy
that casts itself upon the hearer’s sympathy,—the simple
eloquence of a strong sincerity that pleads with men for
Christ, —“ with tears in its voice,” as the French say,—from
knowing and feeling what it means for them if they make full
surrender to Him ; the importunate longing for men’s souls
that would give up anything to make men yield to Christ,
and will not let them go even if they refuse; that would cry
with Chrysostom, “ If ye reject my words, I will not shake
off the dust of my feet against you : not that herein I would
disobey my Master, but because the love He has put into my
heart for you forbids my doing so.” It is when such men are
preaching, that the reporter lays aside his fountain-pen,
as hearing something beyond his power to turn into “ copy ”
for the Press; and the stranger comes in and falls on his
face and worships, and reports that “God is in you of a
truth.”
And this intense lovingness in the preacher must be a holy
lovingness. Only holy preachers will persuade to holiness.
As soon expect an electric spark from an uncharged jar, as
for experimental preaching to profit when the experience is
to be all on one side. How can a tower clock that has
stopped set the time for people’s watches ? It was when
Peter had drawn up his empty net full well nigh to bursting,
that he beckoned others to come and share. “He that
entereth by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him
the porter openeth, and the sheep hear his voice.” The people
have no right to expect that the preacher shall be rich, or
handsome, or clever, or oratorical, but they have a right to
claim that he shall be holy; and the preacher who is not,, is


not only sinning against God by burning strange fire in His
temple, but against human society by taking money under
false pretences.
Interest —and Incisiveness
Intelligence—and Instruction
Integrity —and Inwardness
Intensity —and Inspiration :
These things, I think, among others, are specially fitted
to adapt Preaching to the Present Day.




