

ONE SHILLING.
conic OPERA,
IN TWO ACTS.
Predatoros,
or
The brigand's Bride.
Wrutten by FRANCIS HART.
Composed by SIR W. C. F. ROBINSON.
JAB. ARBUCKCE A CO..PRINTSRB. 480 BOURKE'BT., MELS.


11l COLLINS STREET.
298 BOURKE STREET.
H. PrancfS A Co.,
CHEMISTS—DISPENSING & MANUFACTURING,
DRUGGISTS—WHOLESALE & RETAIL,
iswnELBOURNE.
298 BOURKE STREET.
111 COLLINS STREET.


Hieks, Atkinson & Sons,
Late MOUBRAY, ROWAN &. HICKS.
Iblob* Class Xabies' Cailonno
A SPECIALITY
CHOICE MILLINERY.—French Models by
each Mail Steamer.
General Drapery, Furniture, Carpets, &e.
348 & 350 COLLINS STREET,
and 65 BASINGHALL STREET, LONDON, E.C.
RONALDS,
wrn
a
V V V
Specialite: Theatre Designs.
103 SWHNSTON STRSei
(Opposite Town Hall),
Telephone IS9I. MELBOURNE.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


BACCHUS MARSH
CONCENTRATED MILK
TRADE
COMPANY LIMITED.
telephone 1777
OFFICE-487 COLLINS ST
MELBOURNE.
Depot-RIALTO LANE,493
COLLINS STREET,
MELBOURNE.
DAIRY-BACCHUS MARSH.
HE BACCHUS MARSH CONCENTRATED MILK is manu-
factured from Milk collected in the finest Dairy District of
Victoria. BACCHUS MARSH is situated in the watershed of the
Blackwood Ranges, and is traversed by the Werribee and Lerderderg
Rivers, and its luxuriant pasturage provides the rich luscious Milk which
is the secret of this Company's unrivalled success.
CONCENTRATED MILK is Fresh Condensed Milk pre-
pared from pure unskimmed milk by evaporation to one-fourth of its
bulk. By adding three or four times the quantity of water, and stirring,
it resumes the original full-flavoured creamy Milk from which it was
derived, and when diluted, has the ordinary conditions of souring, so that
not more than a day’s supply should be mixed at a time.
It is THE BEST MILK FOR GENERAL USE. It is
THE BEST MILK FOR CHILDREN, and heavily diluted, for the
nourishing of infants and invalids, being easily digested, is recommended
by the Central Board of Health and Medical Faculty as free from germ
disease, and can be used diluted with pure water without further boiling.
THE BACCHUS MARSH CONCENTRATED MILK is
used by Hotels, Cafes, Clubs, and Public Institutions, and on the Ocean
and Intercolonial Steam Shipping, on account of its economy and
immunity from souring, while its value as a substitute for cream in salads
and for cooking purposes makes it indispensable to high-class cuisine.
FACTORY BUTTER and CREAM Fresh Daily.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


PREDATOROS;
OR
THE BRIGAND’S BRIDE.
COMIC OPERA,
IN TWO ACTS.
WRITTEN BY FRANCIS HART.
COMPOSED BY SIR W. C. F. ROBINSON.
Melbourne :
JAS. ARBUCKLE & CO., Printers, 420-30 Bourke Street.
1894.


zcyucztlncj' the-
extmaicm o| ijouz 'pateo'Hacjc
to NW EXTRA QUALITY
CHAMPAGNE.
VERY DRY.
H)e St Ibavceaux d Co.,
Reims.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


FIRST PERFORMED AT THE
PRINCESS’ THEATRE, MELBOURNE,
ON MONDAY, NOVEMBER 12, 1894.
Dramatis persons.
Predatoros {a Brigand Chief) . Mr. Wallace Brownlow
Burglaros ( his Lieutenant) Mr. Sydney Deane
Mr. Potts ( a British Tourist) . . . Mr. George Lauri
Algernon [his Son ) Mr. Joseph Tapley
Angelina ( his Daughter) .... Miss Nellie Stewart
Mrs. Potts Miss Elsie Cameron
Guida (a Decoy) Miss Florence Young
Chorus of Brigands and Peasants.
Scene : Sicily. Time : The Present.
Act I.—A Picturesque Mountain Pass.
Act ll.—lnterior of the Brigands’ Cave.
-—Ecclesiastical anb art Embroiberg.—
Miss WELCH,
40 ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE,
VESTMENTS, COPES, STOLES, &c„ &c., and ART WORK
of Every Description.
LESSONS GIVEN PRIVATELY AND IN CLASS. TERMS ON APPLICATION.


MOET & CHANDON’ 5
3>n> imperial
Champagne.
MANUEL GARCIA
HABANA
CIGARS,
Choicest (HuaUhe anh jflavouv.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


PREDATOROS;
OR.
THE BRIGAND’S BRIDE.
ACT I.
A Mountain Pass. — Curtain rises at the concluding bars of the overture,
discovering brigands picturesquely grouped, vith Burglaros more prominently
placed than the rest. Girls enter, and the brigands rise to receive and greet them.
No. i.—OPENING CHORUS.
Brigands — Clink your glasses and deeply drain
Rosy draughts of sparkling wine ;
Toast the lasses and chant a strain,
Brigands should never their lot repine.
Burglaros— Though we.have nought in our fobs to chink,
Give it no thought, let us laugh and drink,
With aha ! ha ! ha! and aho I ho! ho !
Till our bosoms with rapture, with rapture glow.
Brigands and Then clink your glasses and drink a cup,
Peasants — 'Tis the proper thing to do.
For we are told that bandits bold
Clink and drink till all is blue.
With aha ! ha ! ha I and aho I ho! ho I
Till our bosoms with rapture, with rapture glow.


Predatoros (entering and coming down stage, whilst brigands gather round
him) —That's right my fine fellows; drink, sing, keep up your spirits, be
rolicksome and frolicsome. It doesn’t cost anything. At any rate, we
don’t have to pay for it.
Burglaros —Ah, there you're wrong. Captain; we’ve been shouting
for ourselves—shouting the chorus.
Predatoros —l presume that was meant for a joke, Burglaros; but
you must excuse me if I decline to laugh. A man who would make a pun
would pick a pocket, and we brigands pride ourselves upon our absolute
honesty. We have never picked a pocket in our lives—we always make
the owners turn out the contents.
Burglaros —Well, that’s as it may be, and I don’t say that we’re
not as honest a lot of fellows as you’d meet in a day’s walk in Sicily.
But, hang it all, Captain, I’m getting sick of the whole business.
Omnes —Oh! oh !
Predatoros —Your remark pains me. it pains me very much. You
say that you are sick of the whole business, and, as you must be aware,
we haven’t done any for weeks.
Burglaros —That’s just it, Captain; I'm sick of doing nothing.
Predatoros —Dear me! Dear me! Still more unreasonable. First
you say that you are sick of the business, and then that you are sick of
doing nothing. Have I not often impressed upon you that a brigand
should always be contented with his lot, even when that lot is only a
little ?
Omnes —Burglaros, we are shocked at you!
Burglaros —Oh, yes ; you are a nice obedient lot of fellows, when
it suits you. However, I suppose I shall have to own that I was wrong,
for the sake of peace and quiet. Well, Captain, if we are to live on
singing songs, which seems to me much the same as living on air, tip us
another stave.
Predatoros —Tip you another stave, ominous expression. I hope
you don’t take me for a tip stave ?
Omnes —Ha ! ha! ha!
Burglaros— Ah, Captain, I have you there, for if that wasn’t a pun,
and a bad one too, I don't know what is.
Predatoros I admit my fault. However, to preserve our reputation
as merry bandits, I will sing you a ditty, a banditti, in fact.
Burglaros —There you are again!


No. 2.—BRIGAND'S SONG—PKEDATOROS.
Predatoros — A brigand's greatest glory,
Are his reputation gory,
And his habits predatory—
Are they not ?
Brigands —Yes, yes.
Predatoros — He revels in ferocity,
And deeds of deep atrocity,
Committeth with callosity—
Does he not ?
Brigands —Yes, yes.
Predatoros — 'Neath the sky so bright and sunny,
'Tis a life as sweet as honey,
If he’s in or out of money —
Am I right ?
Brigands —You are.
Predatoros — He is loved of all the lasses,
And he toasts them in his glasses,
It all other lots surpasses
In delight.
Brigands—By far.
Predatoros — Our occupation’s grand, it
Glorious is to be a bandit,
Though some mayn't understand it
Who hear me sing.
So here’s to the brigand.
The merry, merry brigand,
Who doesn’t care a fig, and
Is as happy as a king.
Chorus — So here’s to the brigand, &c.
Burglaros— Thanks, Captain, I couldn’t have sung it better myself,
and my high C would sink a ship. But you must own business has been
a bit slack of late.
Predatoros— Well, perhaps it has. But then, you know, the
tourist season is like Christmas, and comes but once a year. We shouldn’t
like three hundred and sixty-five Christmases per annum, with the
accompanying plum puddings and mince pies, and if we captured a
tourist or so every day the business would become monotonous, and lose
its charm. I pity the poor fellow who has to go to his work every day,
and knows that he will be paid as a matter of course on the Saturday. As
it is, we never know what a day may bring forth, and we are always
living in hope.
Burglaros— Ah 1 you can live in hope, but you cannot live on it.


Predatoros— However, you will be delighted to learn that I have
this morning received word that a party of tourists have arrived at the
village below (Brigands crowd round their Captain and leoh pleased), and the
kindly villagers, with a very proper desire to encourage one of the best
conducted bands of brigands in the neighbourhood, have directed them,
by means of Guida, to this our lair, in search of remarkable ruins in the
vicinity. They little think the ruin that is in store for them may be their
own, and that they will soon be rueing the day that brought them
hither. Poor misguided people, my heart bleeds for them ( produces hand-
kerchief and wipes his eyes and all the brigands do likewise). But, duty must
be done, and we must put our feelings in our pockets.
Burglaros— (weeping) —Yes, and their money also. But why should
we mourn, for, Captain, this is good news indeed. (Looks off R.) But
see, yonder comes Guida. Doubtless she brings important information.
Enter Guida (r) mysteriously.
No. 3.—GUIDA and CHORUS.
Brigands — Guida, good morning!
Guida — Hush that noisy shout,
Tourists are about!
Brigands — Heed her fair warning.
Guida (Song)— I left them on the slope below,
Of danger never dreaming,
I sloped away to let you know—
An artful piece of scheming.
Brigands — She left them on the slope below,
Of danger never dreaming,
She sloped away to let us know —
An artful piece of scheming.
Guida — With golden coin and silvern speech
The tourists have repaid me ;
The father and the son they each
With compliments delayed me.
I took their cash with grateful bow,
Their words with pleasant smile,
And when they're here, I hope as how
You’ll make it worth my while.
Brigands— We will!
Guida — Hush that noisy shout.
Brigands — We’re dumb !
Guida — Tourists are about.
Brigands — They come!
Thanks for this warning.
(They go off stealthily to music of melodrame, L., after which the music changes,
and Mr. and Mrs. Potts enter R.)


Pons (wiping his brow with his handkerchief)— Phew, it’s warm. In
fact it’s distinctly and emphatically torrid.
Mrs. Potts—Torrid ! I say it's 'orrid.
Potts— But she shouldn’t say so, should she, Algy ? ( Looks round.)
Why. where in the world has that boy got to ? Dreaming about that
handsome girl Guida, I suppose. But I don’t wonder at it. I haven't
been to sleep yet since I’ve seen her, but I’m sure when I do I shall have
visions of that beautiful girl. Ah, here he is !
(Symphony, during which Algy enters, and sings.)
No. 3A ARIA—ALGY.
She was fairer than the morning,
Bright and fresh the world adorning.
And my heart recalls the hour when first we met.
Should she come of brigands warning,
Well I knew, all danger scorning,
For her love and beauty I’ll the world forget.
Potts —What a boy to be sure. Why, Algy, you only saw the girl
for about five minutes, and yet you do nothing but dream and think
about her all day. Why, it took me years before I could make up my
mind about your mother, and nobody could have tried harder to
appreciate her than I did. Now, do be careful, my boy. Remember, it's
dangerous for some people to think.
Algy—Don’t chaff me Pater, though I don’t care a straw for it. But
what was it the Mater said that put you out just now ?
Potts —Oh, it was only a little slip. [To Mrs. P. —My dear, you
should say horrid—not 'orrid. It sounds horrid to say ’orrid ]
Mrs. Potts— Well, then, you should say horrid and not torrid, so
there (triumphantly).
Potts (sighs) —l only wish your mother's aitches were as good as her
eyes. But I can’t stop to discuss such a matter after climbing goodness
knows how far, and with the thermometer 90 degrees Fahrenheit.
Which reminds me that we have come sufficiently far in height to see
those ruins. The villagers said distinctly there were lots upon this
mountain —ancient temples, shrines, statues, altars, and goodness knows
what besides, but I haven’t seen as much as a brick. Guida said she
would go ahead to look for them, and I am sure she will succeed, for I
believe those villagers. There was truth written on their open,
unsophisticated countenances. They have never even learned to wash
themselves.
Mrs. Potts —No wonder you call them unsoapislicated.


Potts (shudders) —Shade of Pears! Correct your mother again,
Algy, she said unsoapisticated. I wash my hands of her.
Mrs. Potts —Well, what have I said now ? Your constant fault-
finding is quite undermining my cistern !
Algernon —Never mind, mother. I’m not ashamed of your conver-
sation. Good grammar and good behaviour do not always go together,
and if you do make a verbal slip sometimes, }ou might make a much
worse one.
Potts —Very true, Algy, so she might. I hope you will always
remember that yourself, and that your conduct will henceforth be as
irreproachable as your conversation. But lam tired and faint. I must
Eause and refresh by admiring the beautiful. Algy, open the luncheon
asket. (Seats himself on a rock, the others sit on the ground, and Algernon
takes things out of the basket.) I declare it's a lovely locality.
Mrs. Potts —lt’s my belief it’s a very low-cality. I wouldn’t trust
them pheasants farther than I could see them.
Algernon —We never do when we are out with our guns. But never
mind the pheasants, mother, take some partridge (helping her). Ido
wish that Angelina wouldn’t dawdle so. We shall have half finished
luncheon by the time she comes.
(Enter Angelina.)
Angelina— No you won’t, Algy, my boy. Here I am. and as hungry
as a hunter (seating herself and looking into basket). I suppose you
didn’t bring any fizz, did you ? Of course not, and I just love it! It's
my experience that when another girl’s brother asks you to have fizz, it’s
often a case of pop afterwards.
No. 4.—QUARTETTE,
Potts Family — A case of pop, of golden top
Seductive, sparkling, dry or fruity !
To gaily quaff, with joyous laugh,
Such nectar, is a pleasing duty.
With sturdy pliers you break the wires,
Out fly the corks, out foams the liquor.
With snowy top, they call it pop,
And as you drink the pulse beats quicker.
Angelina (Verse)— Oh, dry champagne, or sweet champagne,
Thrice welcome draught in joy or pain ;
Oh, dry champagne, or sweet champagne.
I long to quaff thee once again.
Quartette — Oh, dry champagne, &c.


Potts (with his mouth full of food) —What a beautiful view ! It’s a
regular feast. I declare I could live on it and nothing else. A little
more pate, please. I should be perfectly satisfied if we could find some
ruins, for I dote on antiquities.
Mrs. Potts —You dote on Ann who ?
Potts —Explain, one of you. Algy, tell her what an antiquary is.
Algernon— Well, let me think. An antiquary is said to be a
collector of valuables that are worth nothing, and a recollector of all
that time has been glad to forget. His choice specimens have only
become rarities because they were never worth preserving, and he
attaches present importance to them in exact proportion to their past
insignificance.
Potts— Oh. come ! come ! that’s not right. But there, the foolish
boy is so excessively modern in his ideas. Now then, clear away the
lunch and I’ll clear away in search of antiquities. I wonder where that
nice creature. Guida, is ?
Angelina —Do you call her an antiquity, dad ?
Potts —Well, scarcely, although there’s no telling any woman’s age,
or at least she won't tell you. But she reminds me of someone I met at
the Alhambra or the Trocadero.
Mrs. Potts —What? Who? Where?
Potts — I was referring to a recent tour through Spain, my dear.
Let us see what Baedeker says about Sicily. Sicily—Sicily—where is it ?
(searching in Guide Book.)
Algernon —Why. here it is! ( pointing round scene.)
Potts — Wonderful discovery !
Mrs. Potts—You shouldn’t be hard upon the boy, he’s so absent-
minded.
Angelina —Yes, I’ve always noticed his absence of mind.
Algernon— Oh, I’ve got it. (Reads from Guide Book.) "The Scilly
Islands.”
Potts —Ah, you’re quite at home there. No I here it is—(reads) —
" Sicily is an island principally noted for its active volcano. Tourists
should beware of the brigands, who make their homes in the mountains,”
Oh, Lord!
Angelina —How exciting. Fancy coming across a band of real live
brigands! I’ve only met them so far in plays and operas, and if they are
half as nice in real life they must be jolly. They have such taking ways.


Mrs. Potts—Yes, no doubt; they take what don't belong to them.
Potts—X flatter myself that no brigand would dare to interfere wit
me. lam known everywhere and by everybody. I am that pride of ra
country—a British tourist. My reputation as a traveller exceeds that of
Stanley himself, whom, socially and in other respects, I am said to con-
siderably resemble, as I am naturally modest and unaggressive, and my
accounts of my travels and exploits are strictly veracious.
Mrs. Potts ( sarcastically) —Yes, very voracious.
No. S—TOURIST'S SONG—Mr. POTTS.
Mr. Potts — I’ve seen many people, endured many climes,
Some frigid, some torrid, some murky.
I've travelled in Italy numberless times.
In Palestine, Egypt and Turkey.
I made the grand tour, when a very young man,
And a few of the spots, inter alia,
I've visited since, on a regular plan,
Are Africa, Asia, Australia.
Refrain — You can see by my cut I’m a tourist,
That I’ve travelled for many a mile,
If you gaze at me well, you can easily tell
I’ve a true cosmopolitan style.
My private museum would give you a start,
A fortune its contents have cost me,
The objects of " bigotry, virtue, and art,”
A life-time in seeking have lost me.
I've chips of the pyramids, scraps of the Sphinx,
Bits of statutes, and curios greater,
I’ve a splinter from off the North Pole, and methinks
I shall yet come across the Equator.
Refrain — You can see, &c.
(Dances.)
Angelina—lsn’t this simply delightful, picnicing on the mountains ?
There’s nothing I like better than a picnic as a rule. How I do wish,
though, that delightful Prince Predatoros were here, whom I told you
about when I was staying in Paris last year. He was godlike in his
beauty and manlike in his strength, and with such perfect manners (sighs).
I fear I shall never see him again, though he told me that his home is in
Sicily; but we should never be likely to meet him in such an out-of-the-
way spot as this.
Potts—Silly girl, why are you always raving about this foreign
friend of yours ? As for picnics, well, they have both their pleasures and
their pains. There are the pleasures of finding that the beer has burst all
over the bread, and that a toad has made a stool of the only pat of butter ;
and there are the pains of sitting on broken bottles—pains of glass in fact.


No, picnics are not in my line; I like taking my food at mine ease, not
on my knees.
Angelina —Food, who thinks of food. It’s the flirting, and the fizz !
No. 6.—SONG—ANGELINA.
Angelina— A bail some like, and so do I,
Few things indeed that can compare—
The dancing, flirting on the sly,
The tete-a-tete upon the stair.
The sweetmeats, ices and champagne,
The joyous jests, the noisy chatter.
The mirth, that never seems to wane.
The men, who never cease to flatter.
Refrain — Joys of the past I never can forget thee.
Too sweet to last but I can ne'er regret thee ;
Youth finds it pleasant to pause and compare.
Bright is the present, the future is fair.
But though I dearly love a ball,
A picnic gives me greater joy ;
AI fresco pleasures never pail,
Their memory has no alloy.
The merry groups who sit at ease,
The mirth, the melody, the madness ;
The stroll with one beneath the trees,
The hours of perfect joy and gladness.
Refrain — Joys of the past, &c.
Algernon (gazing through his glasses) —l declare I cannot see the fair
Guida anywhere. She is like those notices men put up outside their offices.
She said she would only be gone five minutes, and it is now nearly fifteen.
Potts —Pass the sherry, Algy, my boy, I'll wet my whistle. ( A shrill
whistle heard off stage.) Ah! what was that? A bird, I suppose. Some
sherry, Algy. ( Offering back the flask. Another and a louder whistle is heard.)
Algernon —That was no bird, although it may only be a lark.
Angelina—l see moving figures and the glint of steel through the
bushes. (Another whistle.)
Algernon— There is no doubt of it, we are entrapped, come, Mater,
Angy—let us fly 1
Mrs. Potts —Fly, why I can scarcely walk. Oh ! my heart’s in my
mouth.
Potts (snappishly) —ls it, well you had better swallow it again. Skin
as you value your hide 1 I mean, hide as you value your skin !
They are all rushing off 1., when they are confronted by the brigands with pointed
pistols and knives.)


Angelina {recognising Predatoros) —Tishe! 'tishe! my prince. What
is he doing here ?
Predatoros —Don’t flee, and don’t evince unnecessary fear!
No. 7.—CONCERTED PIECE.
Potts — I’m a British tourist, quite at home in foreign climes,
And if you dare molest me, I shall write and tell the Times.
Brigands — He will write and tell the Times. Ha! ha!
He will write and tell the Times.
Burglaros — Produce your jewels and your coin.
Obey at once the orders I enjoin.
Burglaros ( Recit .) —Your money or your lives.
Angelina — Oh, spare us pray.
Burglaros — Come, no more parleying, no more delay.
Potts (Verse) — Take my money, lake my watch,
Sadly from the last I sever,
It has never lost a minute,
Now ’tis lost to me for ever.
Mrs. Potts —Take ray bracelets, take my brooch.
Angelina — Take my chatelaine which dangles.
Mrs. Potts — Take my earrings, if you please.
Angelina — Spare, oh, spare, my precious bangles.
Potts’ Family —Gone is each beloved trinket,
Gone is all our petty cash,
Little, little did we think it,
Ere we made this journey rash.
Predatoros (aside to Angelina) —
Sweet English maiden, hear me while I swear,
My heart is laden with remorse and care,
Fate, cruel fate, may make me what I am,
Yet my heart tells me I am but a sham.
Angelina— He said a sham.
Predatoros — I am, a miserable sham !
Angelina — Sad is my heart and 'mazed at what you swear,
Ifet would I constant prove in doubt or care,
Fate, mystic fate, has placed me where I am,
So I must love you though you be a sham.
Potts’ Family — Gone is each beloved trinket, &c.


ENSEMBLE.
Brigands — Though the quantity is small, it is a tidy haul.
For it's only the beginning of the season ;
So we’ll pass the bottle round, and make the hills resound.
For mirth and jollity there’s ample reason.
Potts’ Family— We are British tourists. &c.
Potts —Why do you bar our way ?
Burglaros— To prevent you from bolting. (To Mrs. Potts) — I’ll
trouble you for that ring, ma’am.
Mrs. Potts —Why, that’s my wedding-ring, monster.
Burglaros —Very well. I will be its keeper (taking it). That bangle
please, Miss (going across to Angelina).
Angelina —Never 1 I like your cheek !
Burglaros —You flatter me; but think not to soften my heart by
praising my personal appearance. Again, I say—that bangle.
Predatoros (aside) —'Tis the bangle I gave her when we plighted our
troth in Paris.
Burglaros —Parley not. Give it to me. (Seizes her roughly by the
wrist.)
Predatoros —Unhand her dog. (Strikes him.)
Burglaros —Ah, the Captain is struck by the young lady, and I am
struck by the Captain. But I will be revenged on some one. (Turns
savagely on Algernon, who is smoking.) I saw a silver match box in your
possession just now ; hand it over. (Seizes him roughly .)
Algernon (coolly) — These matches strike only on the box, and I box
only on the strike. (Striking pugilistic attitude, and knocking Burglaros
down)
Burglaros— (rising to his feet, and drawing pistol) — Death and thunder,
but I will be revenged. (Predatoros knocks pistol out of his hand, he
stoops down to recover it, when Angelina quickly picks it up and levels it
at him.)
Angelina —Assault me, and I'll give you pepper.
Predatoros —Beautiful Amazon! Burglaros, you forget that lam
your Captain,'and that you must take your orders from me. Molest not
these ladies and gentlemen, and do nothing but what I tell you. [Aside j
Was ever brigand so perplexed ? Duty tells me to rob these people ot all
they have, and require a handsome ransom for their freedom, whilst love
bids me release them. My gallant fellows, leave me awhile with our
prisoners. Be sure I will protect your interests.


Omnes (going) —Aye, aye, Captain.
Burglaros —But, Captain, this isn’t fair. I shall strike ( turning to
Algernon, and shrinking). I don't mean you. It's the first decent bit of
business we have had for weeks, and now you are going to give it up for a
bit of a girl. I should like to see the girl who could wheedle me.
Guida ( advancing to his side L.) —Would you ? Well, here she is.
Burglaros —Now, Guida, go away. Girls should keep their places.
Guida —And is not my place by your side ? Burglaros, do as the
Captain wishes, and as I order you— (peremptorily).
(Guida — takes him by the arm and leads him away unwillingly. The
brigands laugh, and go off singing a strain ofi the opening chorus.)
Predatoros And now, sir, permit me to offer you a cordial welcome
to my country seat.
Potts —Your country seat, indeed ? I suppose your town residence
is the country gaol. Let us return.
Mrs. Potts ( coming down R .of Predatoros)— Yes, but first return
my wedding-ring and my brooch.
Predatoros —You broach a somewhat delicate subject, madam.
Still, I hope soon to be able to permit you to depart. Meanwhile, you
will be allowed as much liberty as is compatible with your safety. Guida
tells me that you are in search of ruins. There is an ancient temple in
the neighbourhood—the Temple of Baal [asidr] —so-called, because it is
there we keep our prisoners till they are bailed out.
Potts (mollified) —An ancient temple—the Temple of Baal. If I
could secure possession of it, ray fortune would be made. Even a brick
or a chip would be better than nothing. It sounds promising.
Mrs. Potts —Don't talk to me about temples. The one that I long
to see is the temple of home.
No. B.— SONG— Mrs. POTTS.
I
I shall love thee, Old England, for ever,
Though in far distant lands I may roam,
From my heart I will banish thee never,
Where thou art is my temple of home.
'Tis a shrine that will ever protect me,
Whereso'er I in danger may be;
What if fame or if fortune neglect me.
There is comfort in thinking of thee.


Should the days of a lonely hereafter,
Be ensaddened by tears of regret;
Should the song of the children and laughter
Be as music to those who forget.
In my dreams, or in joy, or in sorrow.
Thy bright image alone shall I see;
While I long for the brighter to-morrow,
That recalls me, dear homeland, to thee.
(During this song Guida re-enters, and Potts engages in animated conversation
with her up stage.)
Potts ( coming down) —Upon my word she is a charming girl. Come
along, my dear, and show me the ruins ( offering his left arm).
Mrs. Potts— Oh no, you don’t; not without me ( taking his right arm).
Algernon (taking Guida’s left arm) —Nor me (following his mother
and father Off stage R. Business.)
Angelina (coming down L.j —And now, tell me, at once, the meaning of
this. You said when we met in Paris last autumn that you were a prince,
whose estates were in Greece, and now you say that you are a sham.
Predatoros —With your knowledge of English History, fair one,
you should be aware that I am not the first instance of a prince being a
pretender. Believe me when I swear to you that this is but a disguise.
Angelina —Oh ! I see. When I met you in Paris you were a bandit
disguised as a gentleman, now you are a gentleman disguised as a bandit.
Predatoros ( bowing) —Exactly.
Angelina— When I first saw you I was certain that you were of
French extraction, because of your foreign accent.
Predatoros —That was probably because I had some teeth extracted
in Paris. My friends were never quite sure whether I was Italian,
French, or German, and I was once taken for broken English, but that
was when I was very hard up. But I did not deceive you. Ikm of
noble race. I was a prince in my own country. lam now a brigand in
someone else’s. Some of your English noblemen take to the turf for a
living. I have taken to the road, and surely one occupation is as honest
as the other. What, after all, is a bandit but an unlegalised soldier, who
is hanged for doing that which would gain him a commission and a
medal had he taken the king's money instead of travellers'!
Angelina —But what induced you to take to such a desperate means
of existence.


Predatoros —Desperate! Not at all. We are the jolliest fellows
under the sun. We are as free as the air, save when one of us happens
to be in gaol, and we never know what suspense is except when we are
hanged. You ask me what induced me to become a brigand. Listen, and
I will tell you -
No. 9.— SONG—PREDATOROS.
In days when but a little boy,
I scorned the hours to wile.
With marbles, top, or painted toy,
They were too juvenile.
For pistols, pop-guns, cannons, too,
I had a fierce desire,
A smouldering fuse would me amuse,
I revelled in Greek fire.
But thou hast fired the torch of love,
It burns within my breast,
And till you kind and constant prove,
I cannot hope for rest.
But still the flame I would not quench,
The wound 1 would not heal,
With burn and smart I would not part.
Then hear my fond appeal.
Angelina— r With such a partiality for explosives. I fear that if I
married you you would always be blowing me up. But I must admit the
costume is exceedingly becoming; it makes me long to be a brigand's
wife.
Predatoros —Yes; it is picturesque, and does not conceal the beauty
of the ankles. But I would not ask you to share ray lot for that reason.
I have long since determined, for your sake, to give up ray present some-
what precarious occupation, and resume my proper title—Prince Polu-
phloisboio Thalasses.
Angelina— Poluphloisboio 1 On no—my boy O ! I would rather be
a brigand queen than a mere Grecian princess, especially with such a name.
Predatoros —You would 1 generous self-sacrificing girl.
Angelina —But I should like to try on the clothes first.
Predatoros You shall. I will tell Guida to find you the
handsomest dress in our extensive wardrobe. Meanwhile, let us recall
the happy days we spent together in Paris.
Angelina —lnstead of recalling those happy days, would it not be
better to think only of the present ? We cannot recall a kiss, for instance,
t>uf —but—


Predatoros—Oh, I see! (kisses her).
No. io— DUET—ANGELINA and PREDATOROS.
Angelina — Yes, I think that you had better
Choose some southern maiden fair.
Predatoros — Nay, no matrimonial fetter
Save these hands I’ll ever bear.
Angelina — Northern maids they say are formal.
Sometimes very shy and cold.
Predatoros — Yet I love you, fair abnormal,
Do not think me very bold.
Angelina — When in Paris first I met you,
Little did I dream of this.
Predatoros — From that moment I adored you.
Oh ! fulfil my dream of bliss.
Angelina — Southern bandits are not shy men,
Neither are they very cold.
Predatoros — Let us seek the joys of Hymen,
Do not think me very bold.
(After the duet they go off R. Enter Potts, Mrs. Potts, and Algernon
followed by Guida. Potts looks excitedly in the direction Predatoros and
Angelina have gone off.)
Potts — I declare there’s that scoundrelly brigand chief with his arm
round my Angelina's waist. Hi! you. sir, Can I believe my eyes ?
Mrs. Potts —No! No! No!
Potts (snappishly) —l’d rather believe my eyes than your noes.
Mrs. Potts— Fancy Angelina demeaning herself by flirting and
carrying on with a low brigand !
Pqtts —Hi! you, sir, what are you doing ? Leave my daughter alone.
{Predatoros and Angelina enter.) Did you not hear you were called ?
Predatoros —No. But I see that you are bald ( pointing to his head).
Potts —This is adding insult to injury. Algernon, call the scoundrel
out.
Algernon —Oh, certainly. Where shall I call him to?


Potts —Nincompoop ! I mean challenge him. Obtain satisfaction
for this outrage.
Algernon —Oh ! yes, I see. Challenge him. Obtain satisfaction
from a man who has injured you by inviting him to shoot you through
the body ? No. thank you. Still, I suppose I ought to interfere, though,
I must confess, these brigands are rather nice, especially the girls
{looking at Guida). I must ask you, sir, to leave my sister alone.
Angelina —And I should advise you to leave other people's sisters
alone (looking at Gdida significantly).
Predatoros —Leave her, and alone, young sir ? We shall never be
parted.
Potts —What, do you mean to say, that not content with taking
everything in our possession, you are also going to take my daughter ?
Predatoros— l do not take her, sir ? She freely gives herself (proudly).
Potts —But, she is not her own to give ; she belongs to me. I’ve
owned her ever since she was a baby. I have fed and clothed her, and
had her expensively educated, and now, you impudent rascal, you steal
her from me. Angelina, you will never surely marry this marauding
fellow ? You would never consent to be saddled with such a bridal ?
Angelina —l swore to be his, whatever might betide, a year ago,
when we first met in Paris, and I will be true to my word, come what
may. Were I not, I should be untrue to ray own heart.
Mrs. Potts —Angelina, you are no daughter of mine (whimpering).
1 should like to cry, but those rascally brigands have even stolen my
pocket-hankerchief.
Potts — Well, do as you please. I wash my hands of her. I cut her
off with a shilling.
Predatoros—lndeed, the sum might be of use, humble as it is, pray
hand it over at once.
(Potts fumbles in his pockets, and looks confused.)
No. ii.—SESTETI'E AND CHORUS.
Potts — They have taken all my money, dash it, blow it I
I’m very sorry, I shall have to owe it.
Predatoros — He searches in his fob, but he cannot find a bob
So I quite expect that he will have to owe it.


Potts — You dare to jeer, you dare to sneer 1
Revenge I'll have, though, never fear.
Guida — Search again, and you may find one.
Alov — Do not jeer him, fair unkind one,
He’s my father, I’m his son.
Guida— It was only meant in fun.
Angelina and Chorus—
Do not jeer him, fair unkind one.
Though in vain he seeks to find one.
He's my father, I'm (she’s) his child ;
Do not make him fierce and wild.
Brigands — Oh, what a joke ; he's fairly broke !
An empty fob, without a bob.
Here in this trap, without a rap,
Completely done are Potts and Son.
(The Chorus are motioned off by Predatoros.)
Potts— And so you insist on taking my daughter ?
Predatoros —l could not refuse such a tempting prize. Be sensible,
signor, and resign yourself to the situation. I will take her as a ransom
for your liberty.
Angelina —Yes, Papa (coming down between them). I sacrifice myself
upon the altar of my young affections. ( Places her head first on her
father's and then on Predatoros' shoulder.)
Potts —Well, that alters the case, although it does not appear to be
such a very great sacrifice.
Mrs. Potts— What, give up your liberty to secure ours ? Never; I
would rather stay here with you for ever.
Predatoros —No. don’t do that. You shall come and see us every
six months. That will be quite enough. However, do not think I would
tie your beautiful daughter to a bandit's career. I have told her that I
am willing to give up my present business, despite its many charms, and
resume my former employment, in Greece, of a prince out of work.
Mrs. Potts— What, you a prince ? Well, I always thought you had
an extinguished air. Prince is written on his face.
Potts —Yes—now I look at him I can plainly see the mark of prints
upon his face.


Predatoros —Exactly. I was born in the purple, whilst, of course,
you are du peuple.
Potts —But, why did you take to your present occupation ?
Predatoros— The perfect freedom of the life, added to which it is as
profitable as it is pleasurable.
Potts ( impressed ) —It is. is it ? I must say it seems a rather free and
easy sort of existence, and with such remarkable antiquities in the neigh-
bourhood, I believe I could settle down to it myself. [Aside] —Besides
I want to get hold of that Temple of Baal, it’s invaluable if it’s the real
article. [Struck by the idea] —I say, if you are really thinking of giving
up the business, what would you be prepared to take for it as a going
concern ?
Predatoros —That would require a little consideration. I should
not be able to charge much for the goodwill, as owing to some unaccount-
able prejudice very little is entertained for brigands as a rule.
Potts —Well, suppose I offer to take it at a valuation.
Predatoros —I must think it over. I can, 1 repeat, strongly recom-
mend the business. There is a good deal in it in good times, and the
social consideration we receive from the authorities is extreme. I may,
say, that no one is more sought after than ourselves.
Potts —lt sounds attractive. I think I’ll do it. Guida, my dear,
come here. I think a good deal of your opinion. Do you think that I
should make a suitable leader of your band ?
Goida—Oh, charming ! You would cut a very pretty figure.
Potts —She’s a most discriminating girl. I’ll raise her wages if I take
charge. [To Predatoros] —Well, now, let us go into one or two details.
At what do you value your business premises ?
Predatoros —Well, you see, they are not exactly ours.
Potts —Oh ! I understand ; you have them on a lease ?
Predatoros— No. We are tenants-at-will—our own will. You will
find our suite of caves one of the largest and airiest in the district.
Potts— And the stock-in-trade, of what does it consist ?
Predatoros— l haven’t a stock list about me, but, roughly speaking,
it includes several able-bodied bandits, all selected on account of their
high moral characters—the flower of the district in fact.


Mrs. Potts—l suppose that accounts for the seedy appearance of
some of them.
Potts— Don’t interfere, Maria. (To Predatoros] And what besides ?
Predatoros— A varied assortment of arms and accoutrements. The
muskets occasionally miss fire, but they will be certain to go off at a sale.
Potts. —Well, I don’t like making up my mind in a hurry. Could I
take the business on trial, with the ultimate right of purchase ?
Predatoros —Certainly. He will find it a greater trial than he
imagines. [To Angelina] —Don't be alarmed, dearest, I am anxious to
cure him of this freak. We will leave this spot together and for good,
meanwhile, let us celebrate the occasion with song and dance. Come
hither, my merry men; come and listen to the glad news I have to tell.
(Enter brigands and girls.) Burglaros, you have long been of opinion, that
this business of ours has been languishing for lack of capital. Is it not so ?
Burglaros—lt is.
Predatoros —Well, then, I am negotiating with this gentleman for
its increase. To make myself clearer, he desires to buy into the business,
and I, myself, am also arranging a little private partnership concern (lead-
ing Angelina forward).
Omnes —Bravo ! long live our Captain 1
Predatoros —Thanks, my brave fellows. And now I ask you to join
me in a toast. Vive I'amore !
Omnes— Yes! yes! Vive I'amore!
No. 12.—FINALE.
Angelina and Chorus —
'Tis a peerless, priceless pleasure,
That the God of Love imparts,
’Tis a joy beyond all measure,
That is felt by loving hearts.
So unite in song inspiring,
In the cup of pleasure share.
Till you feel your bosom firing,
And your hearts are free from care.


Angelina — Mark that young beau, handsome I trow,
Pleading his suit in a voice soft and low :
See her eyes lighten, watch her face brighten,
Happy are they as they stroll to and iro.
Gdida — Mark that young belle, tripping along.
List to her merry and light-hearted song :
Soon shall I meet him, soon shall I greet him ;
True is my lover, so handsome and strong.
Angelina and Chorus — 'Tis a peerless. &c.
Chorus and Dance—
Vive V amort, 'tis the old story,
Oldest, and sweetest, and ever the best.
Join, while we sing, Love shall be king.
All the world over, till hearts are at rest.
(End Act I.)
No. 13—INTERMEZZO.


m
H OS i
DEP
10*
mi
m s
SB
Hi
is
Ss
M
wm
SSrSci^i:
It has come to this In most of the stores nowadays :
Miss Challoner —“ Ladies’ Sterling Stainless
Black Hosiery, with the Diamond Brand, please,
and no comments.”
EVERY
PAIR
GUARANTEED
FAST
COLOR.
*
ADVERTISEMENTS.


The delicate skin of Infants and Children
M'M, is particularly liable to injury from coarse and
MM unrefined Toilet Soap, which is commonly
[ adulterated with the most pernicious ingre-
dients; hence, frequently, the irritability, red-
W 9 ness, and blotchy appearance of the Skin from
(||lll which many Children suffer.
UHH The purity of Pears’ Soap is guaranteed
by the special recommendation of the late
li# SIR ERASMUS WILSON, F.R.8.,
mm President of the Hoyal College of Surgeons of England.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


ACT II.
Interior of the Brigands' Cave. — This scene must occupy the whole
dimensions of stage, and be built up so as to permit of the characters climbing over
jutting rocks, and taking elevated positions. The interior is brilliantly lighted
with torches, and the brigands and maidens are discovered, picturesquely arranged,
the latter in some cases waiting on the former.
No. 14.—CHORUS AND DANCE,
Brigands — Brigands gay, in hours of ease.
Should essay the girls to please.
Come, ye lasses, coy and shy,
Fill your glasses, raise them high.
Maidens— Brigands brave, and brigands bold.
We’ll behave as we are told,
We'll incite to dance and song,
We’ll unite in merry throng.
Tutti— Fill the cup and fill the can,
Every maid and every man,
Quaff a bumper, ripe and mellow,
Dance a lively saltarello.
Saltarello.
(After the Saltarello the brigands and girls go off, leaving only Guida on the
scene. Enter Algernon. The former hums a bar or two of " Vive
I'amore")
Algernon (coming down stage) —Ah! it’s all very well singing " Viva
I’amore," but who is there to love me ? Would that I could persuade this
artful—l mean artless—Sicilian maiden ; this decoy duck, I may call her,
to become mine. I would join the old man in the brigand business, and
share the risk, whatever it might be. Guida. my village beauty, come
hither.
Guida ( rising ) —Oh I sir, I am no beauty, that is plain upon the face.
Besides, beauty is all my eye.
Algernon —True enough, for it appeals only to the vision. Do not
blush, dearest.


Guida—Blush, sir! lam not blushing, why should I ?
Algernon—Ah! indeed, why should you ? Those people generally
blush the most who have the least reason to do so.
Guida —Oh ! sir, you compliment me.
Algernon—Compliment you, not at all. Compliments are, as a rule,
things paid by people who pay nothing else.
No. 15.—SONG—ALGERNON.
Algernon— Why beats my heart with wild delight ?
Why blue the skies above her ?
Why pale when near her roses bright ?
Because, because I love her.
I dream of her, and breathe once more
The perfume of the clover
That waved around her cottage door,
Because, because I love her.
Come weal or woe. come joy or pain,
Around me still will hover.
The incense of a sacred fane,
Because, because I love her.
Guida —Poor young man. He's evidently very far gone. But it's not
my fault. A girl can't help being attractive, and she wouldn’t if she
could. However, he must try and get over it, for he is not going to get
over me. I will never be untrue to Burglaros. (To Algernon) My young
Englishman, let me give you a word of advice.
Algernon—Oh, certainly. It is the only commodity which the
world is lavish in giving, and scrupulous in receiving. Go on.
Guida—The sooner you and your family leave this place the better.
Algernon —That’s exactly what struck us all, when we first made the
acquaintance of your brigand friends ; but as for me, I no longer wish to
depart, for I love you, Guida.
Guida —I thought as much, but then the difficulty is that I love
another, and that my love can never change. I will be constant to one,
and one only.
Algernon—Change, constant. Why change is the only thing that is
constant.


Guida —I know not your meaning. Signor ; but this Ido know—that
my heart has room for one, and one alone, and that no other can find a
place there.
No. 16.—SONG—GUIDA.
Oh, love of mine, I pray thee do not doubt me,
Our plighted vows I now can ne’er forget.
My heart is thine—come joy or grief about me—
And oft recalls the day that first we met.
No other face is with me when I sleep;
No other voice can thrill my soul by day ;
No other touch can make my pulses leap ;
No other lips can teach me how to pray.
I see thy face reflected in the river,
I hear thy voice, when all around is still;
Again thy touch makes all my senses quiver,
As when alone we sat beside the rill.
And if, perchance, no other self than thine
Could bid me suffer, fill my heart with pain,
No other love could soothe this heart of mine,
No other hope could bid me live again.
( During Guida’s song Burglaros has entered, and listens attentively
and in evident anger. At the close of the song, Algernon comes down and takes
her hand.)
Algernon —My suit is evidently a misfit. I mean it is misguided.
But must I abandon all hope ?
Guida —Why should you give up hoping ? That would be foolish.
Algernon —Ah 1 I see a glimmer of light.
Burglaros —Yes. my gay young spark, no doubt, and you will see
stars if you are not careful (coming down).
Algernon —l declare it's that rude brigand fellow again. He wants
another lesson.
No. 17.—TRIO—GUIDA, ALGERNON AND BURGLAROS.
Algernon — ’Tis absurd, on my word, to be made to adjourn
In the midst of a scene of emotion.
Guida— I declare, as you're there, 'tis a pretty return
For my constancy and my devotion.


Algernon — Who’s this troublesome fellow, with jealousy yellow ?
Borglaros — Don’t call me a fellow, I warn you.
You're nought but a poacher, a paltry encroacher.
Algernon — You very rude brigand, I scorn you.
Burglaros— You have stolen my girl.
Algernon — You have collared my cash.
Guida — I swear I am true, oh ! believe me.
Burglaros— Get away from ray sight.
Algernon— Do you want, sir, to fight ?
Burglaros —Do not think by this ruse to deceive me.
Guida — You are harsh and overbearing,
But for you my heart is caring,
To you I have been true since first we met.
Algernon— What a fellow overbearing,
But for him her heart is caring,
So he can storm until he's black as jet.
Burglaros — This is quite beyond all bearing.
For my wrath they both are daring,
I'll have his blood before the sun is set.
' Guida — Though so very fierce and heady,
I to marry you am ready,
On the first occasion that I get.
~ Burglaros —For my arm is strong and ready,
S J And my aim is very steady,
g With lead or steel I will repay the debt,
tq
Algernon —Though so very fierce and heady,
He will find that I am ready,
And quite prepared to pay the little debt.
Algernon —Mine, evidently, is a hopeless case. . I will leave this
spot as soon as the insinuating scoundrel who leads this band permits me.
I might have expected to lose my ears, or some portion of my anatomy
when I got into such company, but I certainly did not expect to lose my
heart. Farewell, Guida, I will seek admission to the nearest monastery.
Yes, I am resolved upon a life of celibacy. (Exit l.c. jostling against
Burglaros, who turns and scowls at him and then strides down stage.)


Burglaros— Celibacy. Yes, that’s what all fellows swear to who
can't induce a girl to have them. They make a virtue of necessity. False
girl, what means this secret conversation, these frequent tete-a-tetes with
this English fool ? Dare you face me, and declare that you are not untrue
to me ? Think not to deceive me. I know thy secret. But beware,
when I am aroused I am more terrible than death itself!
Guida —Why this outburst ? Think not to frighten me with such
silly vapourings. 'Tis a pretty return for my constancy.
Burglaros —l was but further trying thee ! Guida, I heard all your
conversation with that English swell, and I know that you are as true to
me as one of your peculiar disposition and decidedly immoral training can
be. Still I must own that I suspected you at first, when I saw you so
frequently in the company of that young Englishman.
Guida —Suspected me—could I help being civil to a young man who
paid me the compliment of admiring me ? When he was so very respect
ful, I was bound to treat him with some ceremony.
Burglaros—l do not mind the ceremony, for that is all that is con
sidered necessary, either in religion or friendship.
Guida— But not in love. In such case we do not stand on ceremony,
though we trample it beneath our feet. But, do you really love me,
Burglaros ?
Burglaros —Love you! You little know all you are to me.
No. 18.—SONG—BURGLAROS.
What the sun is to the rosebud,
What the azure to the sea,
What the rain is to the river,
That is what thou art to me.
What the dew is to the floweret.
What the sap is to the tree.
What is comfort to the weary,
That is what thou art to me.
Peace and rest around me hover,
When in dreams thy face I see.
Light in darkness, joy in sorrow.
That is what thou art to me.
(After song exeunt Burglaros and Guida 1., an 1 enter Mrs. Potts and
Algernon r.)


Mrs. Potts —You really must try and persuade your foolish old father
to give up his mad idea. Fancy his becoming a brigand. Why, I might
just as well take to short skirts, and start in business as a ballet girl!
No. iBa.— SONG— Mrs. POTTS.
It’s hard to conceive a respectable man.
So entirely bereft of propriety ;
He's going to ruin as fast as he can.
And fills me with gravest anxiety.
When I married him first I believed him a saint,
In the ways of the world a beginner,
I thought him devoid of nefarious taint.
But, alas, he's a wicked old sinner!
I’ll make him to rue it, of course !
I shall certainly sue for divorce.
Alas and alack that the man whom I wed.
Is unworthy of all my affection,
I wish I had never been born, or was dead,
And ray ashes were in his collection.
He has basely betrayed me, and led me astray.
From my home, and my friends, and relations ;
But if from this spot, I should e’er get away,
I’ll startle them with my narrations !
I’ll make him to rue it, of course
I’ll certainly sue for divorce.
Mrs. Potts— Here he comes, with all the brigands following after
him. and laughing fit to kill themselves. Did you ever see such an old
image, with his two swords, one in his hand, and the other in his belt ?
He reminds me of Madame Twosword’s Waxworks.
Algernon —He does look rather an old guy. (Enter Potts, extrava-
gantly dressed as a brigand, followed by the bandits, including Predatoros, all
with faces expressive of amusement.) Hallo, dad, got 'em all on. eh !
Potts —Yes. my boy. The chrysalis has expanded into a butterfly,
eh. my dear (to his wife).
Mrs. Potts —Don’t talk to me, you ought to be in a lunatic asylum.
You’ll want to be a clown in a circus next.
No. 19— DUET— Mr. and Mrs. POTTS.
Potts — A brigand's life for me, so frolicsome and free.
Mrs. Potts — It’s very clear that you have lost your senses.
Potts— Give me a brigand’s life.


Mrs. Potts—l'll never be the wife
Of a man who lives by crime and false pretences.
Potts — I feel that I shall shine
In my new romantic line,
The tourists to my lair 1 shall beguile 'em.
Mrs. Potts—You very bad old man, I’ll do what e'er I can
To lock you in a lunatic asylum.
Potts— Commissions de lunatico can’t stop a course erratic, Oh !
Mrs Potts — Wherever did you get your legal knowledge ?
Potts — Your warnings I disdain.
Mrs. Potts — And yet the case is plain,
Recall, I pray, the law you learnt at College.
You may think that it is funny, taking other people’s money,
Potts — Why don’t you say, " Who takes what isn’t his’n.”
Mrs. Potts— You very bad old man, you are doing all you can
To end your days and hang within a prison.
Potts— A brigand's life for me, &c.
Potts —l knew she’d be jealous. Never mind, my dear, I believe
there’s a dress in the wardrobe which will tit you, and if it doesn't, why
we can have it let out round the waist.
Mrs. Potts— l’m not going to stop here to be insulted. Come along.
Algy (going).
Potts— Oh, but you can't do that without my consent, you know.
Potts and Co., professional brigands, would never permit anything so
unbusinesslike.
Mrs. Potts —What! Do you mean to say that you are going to make
a prisoner of your own lawfully begotten wife. I'll not stand it. I declare
I'll apply for a judicious separation.
Potts—l hat would be very injudicious, my dear. Don’t be hasty,
and lose a good opportunity of joining a lucrative business as a sleeping
partner.
Predatoros —And now, my men. Mine, alas! no longer, a parting
word with you. Be true and loyal to your new chief. Be honest above
all things, and may good fortune attend you in all your expeditions.
Remember that virtue is its own reward, and that policy is the best
honesty.
Burglaros —We hail our new chief. Long may he reign.
Omnes —Hooray I


No. iqa —RECIT. AND CONCERTED PIECE.
Potts {nett.) — It’s difficult indeed to give expression
To all I feel, but let me make confession
Of all my imperfections. Hear me swear
Your interests shall be my constant care.
Verse — A brigand must bully and swagger and drink,
And I’m perfectly ready to do it;
He must flirt with the girls and must knowingly wink,
Mrs. Potts — If you do, Mr. Potts, you will rue it.
Potts — A brigand must dance, and a brigand must sing.
And I’m perfectly ready to try to;
A brigand must always indulge in his fling,
Mrs. Potts — And look like a regular guy too.
Chorus (repeat) — A brigand must bully, &c.
SOLO AND DANCE— Mr. POTTS.
I feel so elated, so joyous and glad,
I needs must indulge in a dance;
’Tis a step that was taught me when only a lad,
And I think 'twas imported from France.
These garments so festive, so airy and light,
Appear to be also clastic;
1 very much hope they are not over tight,
But permit me to trip the fantastic.
(Dances.)
Potts— Ahem ! Ladies and gentlemen. I am touched by my kind
reception. I freely admit my inexperience and my many disqualifications
for the high and honourable position which I have assumed, but I trust
with practice and perseverance, and by close attention to duty, to merit
your good opinion, and to soon get my hand in. (This speech may be
amplified.)
Mrs. Potts —Yes. in other people’s pockets. lam ashamed of you.
(Enter Angelina in a handsome Sicilian dress.) I don’t deny that Angelina
looks well in her stolen finery, but as for you ! ( Enter Predatoros,
who joins Angelina.) Think of the bad example you are setting your dear
family.
Potts (looking significantly at Angelina, who is by the side of Preda-
toros, whilst Algernon has his arm round one of the peasants) —lt seems that
my dear family do not need much example.


Predatoros (to Mrs. Potts) —Fear not, madam, all will yet be well.
(To Bcrglaros) As I told you before, it is but a passing fancy of the old
man, which I have decided to humour. As for yourself and the leader-
ship, leave that to me, all will yet be well.
Burglaros —Aye, aye, trust me, Captain.
Predatoros —l will, though few do. And now, let us celebrate the
occasion. Fill the wine cup, and toast your new commander whilst we
dance a measure.
No. 20—DANCE A LA GAVOTTE.
Potts —But this frivolity ill-befits a brigand, especially during
business hours. I forgot to tell you, my men. that the hours are from
9-104, with one hour’s intermission for luncheon. Anyone visiting his
club, save at luncheon time, will be liable to dismissal. I must try and
introduce industry and regular habits in the service, by which means I may
be able to effect some very necessary economies. ( Whistles off r) Ah!
what was that ?
Burglaros—lt was the call of the scouts. There are tourists in
sight.
Potts —You don't say so. You’re sure they're not the police ?
(A nxiously).
Predatoros —Oh, no ! and besides if they were, it would not matter,
as we have a little private arrangement with them. In consideration of a
percentage of the takings and the free run of the canteen, they have
agreed to wink the other eye.
Potts— Noble fellows. How they remind me of our own gallant
guardians of the peace. ( Another whistle.) Ah ! the scouts again, and
they are nearer at hand. This is getting serious. Lead on, my brave
fellows, and I will follow you. A brave commander should always be
ready to follow his men anywhere. (Brigands go off to music of melodrame,
followed by Potts, who looks alarmed.)
Predatoros (to Mrs. Potts) —There is no need to be alarmed, madam.
I have done this for all our sakes, I think that after his first expedition,
he will be anxious to return to respectability. Your husband is far too
good a business man to think of sticking to dishonest courses if they do
not pay. Should you like to see the end of the comedy, follow him down
the hill. If you hear firing do not be alarmed, as my instructions are to
aim at nothing, and to hit it,


Mrs. Potts —l don’t understand [what is going on, but if you will
only restore my husband to his right [mind and his proper garments, I
will for ever bless you. {Exit after Potts and Brigands with_ Algernon.)
Predatoros —And now you must resolve and quickly. Will you
stay here and be a brigand queen, or come with me and be my princess ?
Do not doubt my love, although my manner since you have met me in
these altered circumstances may have appeared strange.
No. 20A.— SONG—PREDATOROS.
I do not love thee less because when near thee,
My fervent love for thee may seem but cold,
I do not love thee less, nor less revere thee,
Though words I fain would speak remain untold.
For well I know that when I stand before thee.
There rushes from my inmost soul to thine.
As swift as thought the message " I adore thee,
“And if I might, oh love, would make thee mine.”
I do not love thee less because when near thee,
My love for thee may not in words be told,
I cannot love thee less, nor less revere thee.
Till heart and hand andthought and life are cold.
Angelina —Well, Ido believe that you love me. And the dress is
certainly pretty and picturesque, and I think it becomes me. But it
seems to me on reflection that you never change your fashions here, and
that I might grow tired of always wearing the same dress.
Predatoros —True, so you might: for here the fickle goddess Fashion
holds no sway. Here no one conforms to her ever-changing vagaries.
Here the idolent do not work for her and the parsimonious and needy do
not feel compelled to spend their money on her. Here the tradesman and
tax-gatherer do not go unpaid whilst people voluntarily tax themselves to
supply offerings at her shrine. Here whatever is fashionable is not right,
but what is right is fashionable.
Angelina —That may be very proper, but it sounds rather prosy.
However let me reflect on the situation ere I give a final answer.


No. 21.—SONG AND DANCE—ANGELINA.
J sometimes think it might be wise
To cast my lot in this bright scene;
For every one should try to rise,
And I should love to be a queen.
A brigand queen I freely own
Is scarce the goal I wish to gain ;
But oh! my love for him has grown
As verdure 'neath the summer rain.
Sweet is the life he offers,
Love to endure for aye,
Sunshine and well-filled coffers,
How can I say him nay ?
Then, too, I love him truly,
Spite of his calling queer,
If to the world unruly,
Gentle when I am near,
I scarce could bear to leave him now,
So stay I will; come joy or rue ;
Because he’s what he is, my vow
Was, none the less, a promise true,
And if, perchance, I cease to care
For life so wild and free as this,
I’ll go and don my crownlet where
Such things are counted perfect bliss.
Sweet is the life, &c.
(Dance.)
Predatoros —You do well to reflect ere you decide. For myself,
willingly will I abandon this life, and resume my proper rank and
Station,


Angelina—As you will. We will leave this spot without delay, and
return to dear delightful Paris. (Shouts off stage.) Ah 1 what was that ?
(Shot heard.) And that firing, what does it mean ?
Predatoros—My ruse succeeds (looking off l.) Poor old fellow !
He looks sadly discomfited. But it will do him good. Better a sham
defeat than a real one. (Enter Potts 1., looking very dishevelled and
crestfallen, followed by brigands alt laughing.) Well, sir, I hope you have
succeeded in your first expedition, and returned laden with the spoils of
victory.
Potts—l am overwhelmed. No more of this brigands’ business for
me. lam accustomed to safe investments.
Mrs. Potts —(who has entered with Algernon after the brigands) —
Why, whatever has happened ?
Potts ( gloomy) —A cataclysm.
Mrs. Potts—A catechism !
Potts—No, a thunderstorm.
Algernon—Yes, I saw the boll myself.
Potts (excitedly) —After I followed the band a short distance down
the hill, I heard someone behind me. Not wishing to be attacked in the
rear, which is undignified, I jumped over a rock like lightning, and split
a portion of my garments like thunder. I hailed the brigands, who
replied with a rain of bullets at my attackers. I was seized from behind,
and deprived of my arms. On losing my arms, I thought the best thing
to do was to take to my legs. No, a bandit’s life may have its charms
for some, but unlicensed robbery does not suit me. I shall return to
respectability and the Stock Exchange.
Predatoros—Where robbery is licensed ? Exactly. You will
return to society, which allows you to rob in a gentlemanly way and on a
sufficiently large scale.


Potts —Yes, I wish to sell out at once. Of course, I will allow for
depreciation in value and loss of clothing (looking mini at his torn
garments).
Predatoros —Well, we had better submit that little point to arbi-
tration. Meanwhile, I release you from your bargain, and your family at
the same time, on the one condition—that you give me your daughter as
a ransom for your liberty.
Potts—With all my heart, and a handsome ransom too.
No. 22— FINALE.
Mrs. Potts — Handsome the ransom as you must own,
Her figure and face are divine ;
If you gaze at her well, you can easily tell
Angelina's a daughter of mine.
Potts — Handsome the ransom as you must own.
Her figure and face are divine;
So we’ll dance in a ring, and the brigands shall sing,
And salute her in bright, sparkling wine.
Tom— Clink your glasses and deeply drain
Rosy draughts of sparkling wine,
Toast the lasses and chant a strain,
Brigands should never their lot repine.
Predatoros — Though we have nought in our fobs to chink,
Give it no thought, but laugh and drink.
With aha I ha 1 ha! and aho 1 ho! ho !
Till our bosoms with rapture, with rapture glow.
Tutti— Though we have nought, &c.
Then clink your glasses and drink a cup,
'Tis the proper thing to do,
For we’re told, that bandits bold
Clink and drink till all is blue.
With aha I ha I ha! and aho ! ho 1 bo !
Till our bosoms with rapture, with rapture glow.


Predatoros — My merry men, pray list to the condition
Imposed upon me by this English miss,
She says I must resign my high position
Ere she'll consent to life of wedded bliss.
Mere rank is nought to me, you understand,
I now resign as leader of your band.
Burglaros, I appoint you in my stead,
And now, my gallant fellows, all, salute your head.
(To Angelina) I captured you this morn, and now I prove
Your humble captive and the slave of love.
Tdtti — He captured, &c.
Viva I'amore! 'tis the old story,
Oldest, and sweetest, and ever the best.
Join, while we sing, Love shall be king,
All the world over, till hearts are at rest.
CURTAIN.


S^CUHTSOrI’SKd
Obebble * Spectacles.
SIGHT TESTED FREE OF CHARGE
BY SKILLED OPHTHALMIC OPTICIAN.
W. WATSON & SONS,
OPTICIANS TO
British and Victorian Governments,
78 Swanston St., Melbourne.
“CANADIAN
Distilled and Bottled by
CLUB”
HIRAM WALKER & SONS
WALKERVILLE, CANADA.
LIMITED,
WHISKY
The age and genuineness of this Whisky are guaranteed by the Excise
Department of the Canadian Government by certificate over the capsule
of every bottle. From the moment of manufacture until this certificate is
affixed the Whisky never leaves the custody of the Excise officers. No
other Government in the World provides for consumers this independent
and absolute guarantee of purity and ripeness. "Canadian Club”
Whisky is particularly adapted for medicinal use.
Agents : HARROLD BROTHERS,
MELBOURNE.
And at SYDNEY and ADELAIDE.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


Owing to the large increase in the number of applications made by ladies to test
this novel and peculiarly agreeable method of perpetuating their obarma, I have opened a
Face Massage, Steaming and Vaporising Salon over my Pharmacy, where ladies can undergo
the treatment by appointment. Full information respecting this new method of treatment
will be given to any lady calling, either personally or by the attendant. Terms on
application.
“ THE LANCET ” says :—“ This process of steaming the skin of the face is not
only very beneficial to the complexion itself, but speedily removes impurities and black
specks, such as are seen in acne comedone, and in the redness of acne rosacea. Its beneficial
action consists in its power to assist the functions of the pores, and to cleanse the skin of all
impurities, and is very similar to a Turkish bath in its effects on the skin generally, and
like It is delightfully refreshing to the skin.”
In referring to the subject of Vaporising the skin, which process is an important
part of my treatment.
“THE GENTLEWOMAN ” says:—“ Vaporising has dene more for the benefit
of the complexion than any ocher mode of treatment. The vaporisor clears the skin—is
invaluable for beautifying purposes—yields a clearness and brilliancy to the skin, unobtain-
able by other means.”
“ THE QUEEN ” says :—“ The application of medicated fluid in the form of
spray is to be highly recommended for obtaining and maintaining a clear complexion.”
“ THE LADY’S PICTORIAL ” says“ In reference to the steaming and
vaporising process, that it is undoubtedly the very best thing for curing blackheads.”
“THE EMPRESS” says:—‘‘The best means of obtaining a really good com-
plexion, free from freckles or pimples, without the resort to cosmetics. A boon in all
climates, patronised and recommended by the highest medical authorities.”
“MODERN SOCIETY** says:-”Will soften a withering complexion, and
prevent premature wrinkles.*’
“THE LADY” says:—“This treatment counteracts the injurious effects of
those cosmetics that clog the skin, and disperse those unsightly pimples and blackheads
which proceed from an unhealthy state of the skin.”
“THE COURT JOURNAL ” says :—“ Invaluable as a safe and effectual mean
of scouring a clear complexion.”
H. WESTALL GUEST,
Chemist to the Governor,
229 BOURKE ST., MELBOURNE.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


M-Ilwraith, IWEagharn & G-
LIMITED,
LINE OF STEAMERS
TO
WARRNAMBOOL and PORTLAND every Monday and Thursday.
Regular Sailings to NEWCASTLE (N.8.W.), UACDONELL
BAY, BEACHPORT, ROBE, KINGSTON, ADELAIDE, ALBANY,
FREMANTLE, and all WEST AUSTRALIAN PORTS, JA¥A,
SINGAPORE, and CALCUTTA.
FEDERAL ... 3500 Tons
NEW GUINEA 8500 Tons
NORKOOWA ... 2200 Tons
FLINDERS ... 1000 Tons
CLONCURRY ... 8500 Tons
TAGLIAFERRO ... 2200 Tons
BOTHWELL
CASTLE 3300 Tons
SCOTTISH LINE of Sailing Ships,
Coal Contractors
Hn£> Colliery iptroprietors.
AGENTS FOR
BELLAMBI COLLIERY, WOLLONGONG.
STOCKTON COLLIERY, NEWCASTLE.
Coal Supplied to Manufacturers and for Household purposes
upon the most favourable terms.
Steam to WEST AUSTRALIAN GOLD-FIELDS through to
nearest ports to Coolgardie and Murchison Fields.
M?ILWRAITH, M?EACHARN & Co. Ltd.,
467 Collins Street, Melbourne.


PD Manufactures Royales de Corsets. PD
PD FRENCH CORSETS
These celebrated Corsets
have been awarded
10 GOLD MEDALS AND
DIPLOMES D'HOKNEUR
In competition with the World’s
Corset Manufacturers, and have
obtained the Highest Honours
whenever exhibited.
Brussels, 1888: Hors Concours
Membres du Jury.
Farts International Exhibition, 1889:
HIGHEST POSSIBLE AWARD.
Amongst Corsets of Superior
make the
PD
Is without rival, and may justly
be called
; *, •
•s* A PERFECT CORSET FOR OUT-DOOR GAMES.
Purchasers are requested to see that
each Corset bears the Manufacturer's
Trade Mark on baud inside.
TRADE
MARK.
MARQUE
DEPOSES
Obtainable from all leading Drapers everywhere.
