

PRELIMINARY REPORT
ON THE
INTERNATIONAL CONTROL OF FISHERIES
ON THE HIGH SEAS WITH PARTICULAR
REFERENCE TO THE PACIFIC
BY
ROBERT A. McKAY
Professor of Political Science
Dalhousie University
Halifax, Canada
The Institute of Pacific Relations
Honolulu, 1929




CONTENTS
PAGE
Introduction 7
Fur Seal of the North Pacific 9
The Pacific Halibut 19
Conclusions 27
Appendices 29
Appendix A Extract from North Sea Convention, 1882 29
Appendix B The Fur Seal Quadripartite Treaty, 1911 31
Appendix C The Pacific Halibut Treaty, 1923 37
Appendix D Proposed Sockeye Salmon Treaty 39




INTRODUCTION
Fish, always an important item in man’s food, has assumed a new im-
portance with the progress of science and invention. New methods of can-
ning and refrigeration have combined with railway development to make
fish available to inland peoples as it has never before been. Extended mar-
kets have in turn stimulated the application of machinery and industrial
methods to the fishing industry itself, as for example, the steam trawler, and
these have added to man’s skill as a fisherman so greatly that certain species
have approached, or are approaching, exhaustion. Where fishing is prose-
cuted wholly within one country, as is the case with many fresh-water fish-
eries, the control of the industry and the conservation of the species in
question are relatively simple. A much more complex situation, however,
arises in the case of fisheries on the high seas.
The high sea, unlike the land, cannot be appropriated but remains the
common property of the family of nations. Similarly, the products of the
high sea are res nullius until captured by man. State ownership of the sea
and of its products in their natural state stops with the marginal belt around
the coasts. 1 While the ships of a state beyond territorial waters are still
within the jurisdiction of their own state, no state can in time of peace ex-
ercise jurisdiction over the ships of any other state on the high seas except
with the consent of the state concerned. Thus, while a state can control its
own fishermen and fishing vessels while on the high seas, it can exercise no
jurisdiction over foreign fishermen or foreign ships without the consent of
their own state or states. Nor has a state any property right to fish for sea
animals on the high seas, even though they from time to time resort to or live
in its territorial waters. Nor has it any right to exercise any protective
jurisdiction over such fish or sea animals when on the high seas. 2
It sometimes happens that a state may accidentally control fishing on
the high seas when, for example, a fishery is used only by its own nationals
or prosecuted only from its ports, in which case municipal regulations may
be adequate to protect or control the fishery in question; 3 but such control
is only accidental and gives the state no ownership or jurisdiction over the
fishery.
1 Oppenheim, International Law, Vol. I, p. 441, ff. The jurisdiction exercised by Great Britain
over the pearl fisheries as far as 20 miles off the coast' of Ceylon would appear to be an exception
established by prescription. Ibid.
2 Question 5, submitted to arbitrators in Behring Sea Arbitration. “Has the United States any
right, and if so, what right of protection or property in the fur seals frequenting the islands of the
United States in Behring Sea when such seals are found outside the ordinary three-mile limit?” v.
Argument of the United States, Moore, Arbitrations, p. 831. On both counts the arbitrators an-
swered in the negative. See Moore, Digest, Vol. I, p. 911 ff.; Arbitrations, p. 4761.
3 e.g., the pearl fisheries, covering about 700,000 sq. miles of high seas off the Australian coast
have, in fact, been controlled in this way. Bulletin, U. S. Bureau of Fisheries, XXVIII (1908),
p. 109.


Again, fishing for sea fish may occur exclusively within territorial waters
as in the case of the Pacific salmon, in which case the territorial power may
regulate the fishery as it sees fit. Certain difficulties may, of course, occur
where the fishery is distributed between the territorial waters of two or more
countries, in which case joint action may be necessary, but even here, municipal
regulations for territorial waters meet the case. 4 With these we are not
concerned since the paper is confined to control on the high seas.
Control on the high seas may be exercised for two purposes —protection
of the fish or of the fishermen. In the North Sea, for example, the fishing
grounds are the resort of fishermen from many nations, a factor which in
the past engendered much friction and sometimes even violence. In 1882 a
general convention was agreed to by the countries interested, providing for
police supervision and for the settlement of claims for damages between
fishermen of different countries. 5 Our concern is not, however, with such
measures but with those designed to protect the fishery.
Two instances of international action to protect and regulate fishing on
the high seas have occurred in the North Pacific Ocean. These—the protec-
tion of the fur seal, and of the halibut —the two outstanding examples of in-
ternational cooperation to conserve animal life on the high seas, are worthy
of careful study.
4 For an interesting example of joint action, see the Convention for the protection of the Sock-
eye Salmon proposed between Canada and the United States. Treaty printed in appendix to this
paper. See also a list of similar Conventions. Bulletin, ibid, p. 112.
8 See discussion of this and other police measures. Bulletin, ibid, pp. 116-24. Extract embodying
police supervision contained in Appendix A to this paper.


THE FUR SEAL OF THE NORTH PACIFIC 6
LIFE HISTORY 7
The fur seal of the Pacific Ocean ( Callorhinus ) is believed to come to
land only in summer for the purpose of breeding and rearing the young;
the rest of the year is spent entirely at sea. The breeding males are called
bulls, the females, cows, and the young, pups. Males just approaching full
maturity are termed half-bulls; the youngest males are called bachelors.
The breeding ground is called a rookery, while the place resorted to by the
bachelors is called a hauling ground. Each autumn the seals migrate south-
ward, returning the following spring to the Pribilof Islands and other rook-
eries to breed. The older animals return first and the youngest last. The
adult males begin to arrive at the Pribilof Islands around May Ist; the adult
females and older bachelors come mainly in June; the two-year-olds in July;
and the yearlings late in August and early in September.
When the old bulls have reached the islands they choose a place on the
rookery ground and await the arrival of the females. They stay in the same
place during the whole breeding season without eating. Seals are very poly-
gamous animals and a harem of as high as a hundred cows may be served
by one bull, but the harems vary from this number to two or three females.
After June Ist the females of three years and over begin to arrive, and
within a few days the pups are born, one pup to each pregnant female; the
majority of the pups are born between June 20th and July 20th. On arrival
the females at once land and join a bull and the harems grow rapidly.
Within a few days after the birth of her pup the female is impregnated, so
that the period of gestation is very little short of a year. After this the
cows take journeys to sea for the purpose of feeding, returning at intervals
to suckle the young pups. These journeys are kept up until November,
when all the seals leave the islands.
The male seal normally begins to breed at the age of six or seven years;
the female normally gives birth to her first pup at three years of age. Both
males and females live about twelve to fourteen years.
From these facts it will be apparent that there would normally be in the
herds a considerable surplus of bulls over the number required for the
propagation of the species. Indeed, it has been estimated that 90 per cent
of the males are unnecessary for this purpose.
6 For assistance in preparing this section of the paper I am indebted to Mr. George H. Crouse,
8.A., of Dalhousie Univ.
1 See in this connection Bulletin, U. S. Bureau of Fisheries, Vol. XXXIV (1914), pp. 17-105.
This account is confined to the Alaska Fur Seal (Callorhinus alascanus ) which frequents the Pribi-
lof Islands.


The fur seal of the Pacific Ocean has long been known as a valuable
fur-bearing mammal and extensive sealing operations have been carried on
since early in the last century. The habits of the seal in migrating yearly
during the breeding season to the same rookeries and in living on the rook-
eries during the season of bearing the young and breeding make its capture
comparatively easy. The first commercial method of capturing seals was to
take them on the rookeries during this season, a method so easy that the
seal was all but extinguished in the South Pacific. In the north its survival
has been due largely to the policy of conservation begun about 1840 by the
Russian Government, which prohibited indiscriminate slaughter on the rook-
eries on the Pribilof Islands and instituted a system of government control
of the industry. Under this females were protected, while a proportion of
the males from two to three years old were selected and driven off the
rookeries like sheep for slaughter. 8 Under this system the seal herd of the
North Pacific increased to the extent that when the Islands passed to the
United States on the purchase of Alaska the herd on the islands numbered
from 3,000,000 to 4,000,000 seals. 9 After Alaska passed to the United
States in 1867 a monopoly of the fishery on the Pribilof Islands was granted
to a private company which was limited, however, to a catch of 100,000
male seals annually under the system instituted by Russia. 10
From time immemorial the Indians had captured seals at sea on their
migrations to and from the rookeries or when they left the rookeries for
food. This method was not, however, particularly destructive until white
men conceived the idea of using the Indians with their canoes from large
vessels on the high seas to follow the migrating herds or to hover off-shore
from the rookeries where the seals could be captured when they left the
rookeries for food. The method of capturing seals at sea, known as “pelagic
sealing” now became very destructive. No discrimination was shown by the
fishermen between males and females. Mature females captured while
migrating to the rookeries were ordinarily pregnant and near to delivery;
if captured while feeding from the rookeries their young pups remained to
die of starvation; if captured on their migrations from the rookeries they
were ordinarily again pregnant. Further, in view of the fact that at the
same time the surplus males were being slaughtered on land, from sixty to
eighty per cent of the seals captured in pelagic sealing were females. In ad-
dition, it is estimated that from three to five seals were killed for every one
retrieved. Pelagic sealing became an important factor in Behring Sea about
1881, and by 1891, it is estimated, one hundred and fifteen vessels were en-
gaged in it, each with from five to twenty canoes. 11 The destructive nature
of the methods employed is seen in the dwindling of the land catch on the
islands. Prior to 1886 the company was able to obtain its allowance of 100,-
8 Stevenson: Bulletin, U. S. Bureau of Fisheries, vol. XXVIII (1908), Proceedings Fourth In-
ternational Fisheries Congress, p. 124.
8 Ibid.
10 Ibid, p. 125.
11 Ibid, p. 125.


000 male seals, but in 1891 it obtained only 12,040. 12 “In every season since
1890,” says the United States Bureau of Fisheries Bulletin for 1914, “the
recorded pelagic catch exceeded the land catch, so that during this period of
steady decline of the herd even the primary losses due to pelagic sealing
were greater than those of land killing.” 13 Under these circumstances the
company enjoying concessions to take seals on the islands lost all incentive to
preserve the herds and resorted also to indiscriminate slaughter. 14 The fur
seal of the North Pacific thus rapidly approached extinction.
EARLY ATTEMPTS AT CONSERVATION
The fur seal industry first assumed international importance in 1821
when Russia prohibited, except in case of distress, the landing of foreign
vessels on its mainland, or islands, or approach thereto within one hundred
miles. Great Britain and the United States immediately protested against
this assumption of jurisdiction beyond ordinary territorial limits, with the
result that Russia acceded to their protests and agreed by treaty to permit
to the nationals of both parties commerce with the natives and fishing, sub-
ject to restriction as regards inshore fisheries. 15
In 1867 Alaska was ceded to the United States. The growth in pelagic
sealing after 1880 seemed to presage the extinction of the herds on the
American islands, and accordingly in 1886 the government of the United
States proceeded to enforce its municipal regulations against pelagic sealing
throughout the whole water area of the territory ceded by Russia. In short, Beh-
ring Sea was declared a mare clausum for the purposes of seal fishing. In
the same and the following years several Canadian sealing vessels were taken
and condemned. 16 The British Government protested vigorously against these
seizures, with the result that in 1887 the President directed the release of
all vessels or persons held and the quashing of all pending proceedings re-
sulting from this application of American law beyond the three-mile limit.
This, however, did not prevent further seizure and the controversy with
Great Britain still continued.
On August 19, 1887, the American government instituted negotiations
for international cooperation “for the better protection of the fur seal
fisheries of Behring Sea.” All questions as to the legality of the measures
taken by the United States to protect the fishery were, however, expressly
excluded from the negotiations. The governments of France, Germany, Great
Britain, Japan, Russia, Norway and Sweden, were approached on the matter
and of these the governments most concerned in the protection of the fishery,
France, Great Britain, Japan and Russia, replied favorably. A convention
was virtually agreed upon when negotiations were broken off by Great
12 ibid.
13 Ibid, at p. 74.
u Ibid, p. 76.
15 Moore, Digest of International Law, vol. I, p. 890 ff.
16 Bulletin, U. S. Bureau of Fisheries, XXVIII (1908), p. 125. Moore, Digest, vol. I, p. 896.
B. & F. State Papers, vol. 79 (1887-8), p. 1240 ff. U. S. For. Relations, 1886-7.


Britain because of the opposition of Canada to restrictions on pelagic seal-
ing, Great Britain being unwilling to enforce the convention against Cana-
dian wishes. Since pelagic sealing was at the time largely a Canadian in-
dustry, any attempt at international control was now out of the question. 17
This attempt having failed, the United States in 1889 again began to en-
force its municipal regulations throughout Behring Sea, alleging among
other reasons, a property right in the seals even on the high seas, in view of
their remaining a part of the year on American coasts and being semi-
domesticated like the honey bee, and further that Russian jurisdiction had
extended over Behring Sea and that this jurisdiction had passed to the United
States with the purchase of Alaska. Great Britain vigorously protested and
offered to arbitrate the matter, to which the United States agreed. 18
With the arbitration award in general we are not directly concerned.
Suffice it to say, that on the questions both of jurisdiction in Behring Sea
and a property right in the fur seals beyond the three-mile limit, the Ameri-
can claims were denied. 19 Article VII of the treaty of arbitration provided,
however, that should the American claims fail the arbitrators should deter-
mine what concurrent regulations were needed for the preservation of the
fur seal outside the three-mile limit.
REGULATIONS PROVIDED UNDER THE ARBITRATION AWARD OF 1893 20
The principal methods of control provided by the Arbitration Award
were as follows: 21
1. A closed area of sixty miles around the Pribilof Islands in which
pelagic sealing should be forbidden to their nationals by both countries.
2. A closed season from May Ist to July 31st, in which pelagic sealing
on the high seas should be forbidden to their nationals by both countries in
the area north of the 35th parallel N. latitude and eastward of the 180th
degree of longitude north to the water boundary of the treaty between Russia
and the United States of 1867, following that line to Behring Straits.
3. Use of firearms, nets and explosives forbidden.
4. Only licensed sailing vessels and qualified seal-fishermen to be per-
mitted to fish for seals during the open season.
5. Statistics of sex of seals and places where captured to be kept by
masters of vessels engaged in the fishery.
The regulations were to remain in force until abolished by mutual agree-
ment, but were to be re-examined every five years in the light of experience.
lT Moore, Digest, vol. I, p. 897.
18 For a fuller account of the arguments on both sides see Moore, Digest, vol. I, pp. 897-904.
19 Moore, Digest, vol. I, p. 910 ff. gives a fairly complete account of the arbitration. Also
Moore, Hist. & Dig. Arbit., p. 755 ff.
20 Printed in full, ibid., pp. 914-16, also in Bulletin, U. S. Bureau of Fisheries, XXVIII (1908),
p. 173.
21 Indians, except when employed for seal fishing, or when fishing outside territorial waters under
contract, were excepted from the prohibitions.


The regulations were to be enforced jointly by appropriate legislation.
The enforcing legislation provided for the policing of the area by the
cruisers of both countries, and arrest of persons and vessels suspected of
violating the regulations by the public vessels of either country, suspects to
be handed over, however, to their own country for trial and punishment. 22
The regulations provided under the Arbitration Award of 1893 proved
disappointing. For example, in 1894, the year in which the regulations went
into force, the pelagic seal catch amounted to 61,838, exceeding that of any
previous year. 23 In the first place, due to insufficient knowledge of the life
history of the seal, the closed season and the closed area around the Pribilof
Islands were inadequate. The sixty-mile area around the islands had been
intended to protect the female while feeding from the islands, whereas the
female often went farther afield than this. The closed season, moreover,
was too short, and did not protect the seals migrating later to the islands nor
the migrations southward from the islands.
Secondly, nationals of countries other than Great Britain or the United
States were not affected by the regulations and the numbers of fishermen
from the countries engaged in pelagic sealing increased when the restrictions
were put on American and British vessels. Efforts to induce other coun-
tries to accept voluntarily the regulations provided by the Award proved
unavailing. Japan and Russia, the countries most interested, declined to
accept them unless similar protection should be given to their own seal
fisheries. 24 Under such conditions it was quite possible for nationals of
countries other than the United States and Great Britain to take seals outside
the three-mile limit at any season of the year and in whatever method they
pleased.
The restrictions as regards pelagic sealing in the eastern section of the
Pacific Ocean and Behring Sea tended also to encourage seal fishing off
Russian and Japanese coasts. As a result Russia attempted to prohibit seal
fishing within ten miles of her mainland and within thirty miles of the
Commander and Robbin Islands. Great Britain refused to concede such
right of extra-territorial jurisdiction but agreed to co-operate with Russia
to prohibit fishing by her nationals in this area and an order-in-council to
this effect was issued November 21, 1895. A similar agreement had already
been effected between Russia and the United States, Russia agreeing to limit
the land catch on her islands in return for the loss of fishing rights to the
United States. 26
The rapid decline of the seal herds, even under the regulations agreed to
by the three Powers, Russia, Great Britain and the United States, induced
22 U. S. St. L., 28, 52. G.B. For disputes as to U. S. Statute, v. U. S. For. Rel. 1896, p. 255
ff.; Br. F. State Papers, vol. 89 (1896-7). Neilson: Brit. Am. Claims Com. Report, 1922, “In the
matter of the Wanderer.”
23 Bulletin, U. S. Bureau of Fisheries, XXVIII (1908), p. 130; XXXIV, p. 22.
24 Moore, Digest, vol. I, 922.
25 Bulletin, U. S. Bureau of Fisheries, XXVIII, p. 130. British & Foreign State Papers, vol. 87
(1894-5), p. 1058. Moore, Digest, ibid.


Great Britain and the United States to appoint in 1896 a joint scientific
commission to study the question. This commission, known as the Jordan-
Thompson Commission, concluded that pelagic sealing was the cause and
recommended its abolition. In 1897 the United States, Russia, and Japan
signed a convention agreeing to abolition over the whole North Pacific for
the period of one year, the convention to take effect on acceptance by Great
Britain. Great Britain, at the instance of Canada, however, refused to accept
without compensation. 26 Again and again after 1897 negotiations for aboli-
tion of pelagic sealing were instituted by the United States, but until 1911
they bore no fruit owing to the conflicting interests of the different Powers.
The United States, Russia, and Japan were agreeable to abolition since it
would enhance the value of the herds on their rookeries. Great Britain, or
rather Canada, the only part of the Empire really interested in the matter,
with no rookeries of her own benefited by pelagic sealing, and would not
agree to abolition without adequate compensation. The United States con-
sented to handing over a share of the annual land catch. Canada, however,
demanded in addition pecuniary compensation for the loss of a vested right
in the fishery. To this the United States would not consent since it would
give grounds for similar claims from Russia and Japan and since the herds
were rapidly becoming of little commercial value in any case. 27
Ultimately in 1911 an agreement was reached between the four Powers
interested and two conventions were agreed to, one between the United
States and Great Britain, the other between the four Powers. Since the
latter superseded the former as regards the methods of international control,
it will be sufficient to analyze its terms.
CONTROL UNDER THE TREATIES OF 19H 28
The essential principles of the treaties were:
1. Absolute prohibition of pelagic sealing anywhere in the high seas
in the Pacific Ocean north of the 30th parallel of North latitude by the
nationals of the four contracting Powers, except by natives when not fishing
under contract or as employees. The public officers of all four parties were
given authority to arrest and hand over to their respective countries persons
or vessels suspected of violating the regulations on the high seas. Japan,
Russia, and the United States agreed to maintain patrols for police purposes.
Further all four Powers agreed to prohibit the use of their ports or terri-
tories for the purpose of pelagic sealing, and the importation of seal skins
26 Bulletin, U. S. Bureau of Fisheries, XXVIII, p. 131; XXIV, p. 22, v. also U. S. For. Rel.
1896, 1897, passim; State Papers, vol. 89 (1896-7), p. 786 ff. for correspondence. For the views of
the Canadian Government, see Canada, Sessional Papers, vol. XLVI (1912), No. 84, pp. 25-26. For
the Convention between U. S., Japan and Russia, v. Can. Sess. Pap. ibid, p. 12. The U. S. pro-
hibited pelagic sealing to its own nationals, Dec. 29, 1897. Canada and Japan were thus the only
important interested states after this date.
21 Can. Sess. Pap., ibid.
28 Text of the Treaties —“Treaties and Agreements Affecting Canada in force between His Majesty
and the United States of America, 1814-1925,” pp. 374, 391. Also U. S. Treaty Series.


taken illegally and of all seals of certain species taken under authority of
the Power owning the rookery.
2. Compensation, (a) The countries owning the rookeries were to give
compensation as follows: The United States fifteen per cent of the seals
taken annually on rookeries to Canada and Japan each; Russia, fifteen per
cent annually to Canada and Japan each; and Japan, ten per cent to the
United States and Russia each. Should the seals resort to British territory,
Great Britain should give ten per cent to each of the other three Powers,
(b) Pecuniary compensation. The United States should pay immediately
to Great Britain and Japan the sum of $200,000 each in lieu of seal skins
to that value to which they would be entitled under the treaty. Moreover,
Great Britain and Japan should receive a minimum of not less than 1,000
skins per annum whatever the total catch of the United States might be,
provided that the United States might in any year prohibit entirely the taking
of seals, but if so, Great Britain and Japan should each receive SIO,OOO for
each year the prohibition continued.
The convention was to go into effect on December 15, 1911, and to con-
tinue in force for fifteen years and thereafter until twelve months’ notice
given by any of the Parties. At any time after termination a conference to
consider modification or extension might be called by any of the parties. The
treaty is still in force.
As to the effectiveness of this convention in protecting the fur seal there
can be no question. The following diagram prepared on the figures of the
U. S. Bureau of Fisheries 29 shows how rapidly the seal herd of the Pribilof
Islands was rehabilitated. The count carried on by officials of the Bureau
is no doubt sufficiently accurate for practical purposes.
29 Pribilof Herd Count 1912-23. V. S. Bureau Fisheries. Alaska Fishery & Fur Seal Industries,
1923, and later issues. Totals only (itemized count given at p. 120).
1912 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919
215,738 268,305 294,687 363,872 417,281 468,692 496,432 524,235
1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927
552,718 581,443 604,962 653,008 697,158 761,281 808,870


DIAGRAM SHOWING THE NUMBERS OF THE PRIBILOF ISLANDS HERD OF SEALS, 1912 TO 1927.


Thus from 1912 to 1923 the herd increased from 215,738 to 653,008,
or was more than tripled. For this phenomenal increase two factors out-
weigh all others in importance —the careful control of land slaughter under
the system instituted by Russia almost ninety years ago and carried on under
direction of the officials of the Bureau themselves, and secondly, the virtual-
ly complete cessation of pelagic sealing. 30 This has been made possible only
by the treaty which has given the United States authority to police the
waters in question and has provided a means of punishment for offenders.
While the writer has obtained no figures as regards the Russian herds,
there is every reason to believe the same tendency towards a rapid increase
of the herd would be evident.
30 While Indians are still permitted to carry on pelagic sealing, their operations are relatively
insignificant. Statistics of captures by Indians indicate a much greater abundance of seals than for-
merly. See Statement of Fur Seal Skins taken and landed in British Columbia 1912-27, Ann. Rep.
Dept. Marine & Fisheries (Can.) Fisheries Branch, 1928, p. 97.




THE PACIFIC HALIBUT
The halibut ( Hippoglossus ) is a “bottom” or demersal variety of sea
fish, that is, it inhabits the bottom rather than the surface of the sea and
is not migratory but spends its life in general in the same locality. 31 It at-
tains to maturity slowly. Professor W. F. Thompson, a well-known authority
on the halibut, estimated some years ago that at twelve years only about
fifty per cent are mature. A recent investigation estimates that at six years
the halibut weighs only four pounds; at fourteen years, twenty-eight pounds,
while at forty years it weighs about eighty pounds. 32 At about twenty
pounds the female is sufficiently mature to begin reproduction. The size
to which the fish attains makes the halibut commercially profitable long before
it has reached maturity, a fact which has hastened the destruction of the
species, since many fish are caught before they reach the age of reproduction.
Like most fish of demersal or “bottom” variety, the halibut apparently
does not range far afield for food, but contents himself with the food he
finds on his own bank. This fact, coupled with the size of the fish, means
that in general halibut are spread thinly over the fishing grounds and do not
run in thick schools as do the migratory fishes. This in turn influences the
methods of the fishery; nets are of little use, the ordinary method of fishing
being by hook and line anchored and buoyed, several lines being attached
together in what is called a “skate.”
One important geographical factor must also be borne in mind. The
continental shelf on the Pacific side of the North American continent is
comparatively narrow, much narrower, indeed, than the shelf on the Atlantic.
The area of the shelf from Juan de Fuca Strait to the islands off the North-
west corner of Alaska has been estimated at only about 80,000 square miles,
or much less than the North Sea. Of this, only a small portion contains
fishing banks. Nor are the banks connected; on the other hand, they lie
scattered on the shelf along the coast, some near shore, some a considerable
distance out to sea. Further, the shelf is, for the most part, narrow and
can thus be “combed” for fish more easily than could a wider area. 33
Further, the isolation of the banks in the case of the halibut means that there
is little if any interchange of life between banks.
31 For the life history of the halibut see the Report of the International Fisheries Commission
appointed under the Northern Pacific Halibut Treaty 1923 between the United States and Canada
for 1927; also: J. P. MacMurrich in Trans. Roy. Soc. Can. 11l ser. (1913), vol. VII, sec. IV. W.
F. Thompson in Report of Commissioner of Fisheries, Sess. Pap. B. C., 1916.
32 Int. Commission on Halibut according to Can. Ann. Rev., 1927-8, p. 642.
33 For a brief description of the “shelf” see W. F. Thompson, Report Commissioner of Fishery,
Sess. Pap. B. C. 1916, p. 132.


THE FISHERY
The following sketch of the halibut industry and its history from the
report of the International Halibut Commission made to the governments
of the United States and Canada in 1927 explains admirably the progressive
decline which has taken place in the abundance of the halibut due to com-
mercial fishing. 34
Fisheries for halibut are prosecuted in the North Pacific and the North
Atlantic oceans, and yield about ninety millions of pounds annually. The Pacific
halibut fishery, which is covered by the terms of this convention (i.e., of 1923),
is the greatest in the world. The annual catch exceeds fifty millions of pounds,
which represents about sixty per cent of the world’s catch. Of the remainder
about thirty millions are credited to European countries and six millions to the
Atlantic coast of this continent. The value of the Pacific halibut catch to the
fishermen is about seven million dollars annually, and it is consequently one of
the most important fisheries in North American waters. The Pacific halibut is,
therefore, one of the most important species of food fishes indigenous to the
waters of the North American continent. . . .
The Pacific halibut fishery originated soon after the first railway communi-
cation was established between the two coasts of the United States. It is, there-
fore, comparatively young. It had its inception in 1888 near Cape Flattery, at
the entrance to Juan de Fuca Strait. The fishery expanded rapidly and by 1910
it had extended to grounds off Cape Ommaney, Baranof island, six hundred
miles to the north. Subsequent expansion has extended the fishery until it now
covers about 1,800 miles of coast. Formerly as many fish were taken from the
600 mile stretch as are now procured from the entire area of 1,800 miles. The
banks on the eastern side of the.gulf of Alaska, which yield spawning fish, were
first exploited in 1913. In 1926 the larger boats made by far the greater part of
their catches in the vicinity of Kodiak island, on the western side of the gulf
of Alaska, about 1,200 miles beyond the original fishery. The catch on the older
grounds south of Cape Ommaney has decreased from a total in excess of fifty
million pounds in 1910 to about twenty-one millions in 1926, and much greater
effort was exerted in making the catch in the latter year. It is evident that the
present level of production has been maintained by extending fishing operations
to new areas, as the catch on the older grounds decreased, and by increasing the
intensity of the fishing effort.
The amount of gear now used on the older banks is about two and one-half
times the quantity formerly used, yet the present catch is only about forty per
cent of the former yield from these grounds. Under the stress of this great in-
tensification of fishing effort the abundance of fish on the older banks has fallen
enormously, to sixteen per cent of the abundance in 1906. Where in 1906 the
catch per set of a unit of fishing gear was nearly 300 pounds, in 1926 it was
below 50 pounds. Expressed in another way it required six units of gear to
catch as many fish as one unit caught in 1906. The decline has gone on at an
even rate and shows no tendency to slacken. Accompanying this fall in abun-
dance there has been a decrease in the average size of the fish landed, and a
great increase in the percentage of undersized fish. For example between 1919
and 1926 the percentage of undersized fish from the older banks increased from
twenty to thirty per cent.
The more recently exploited banks to the westward show the same trend,
the catch having fallen from 160 pounds per unit of gear in 1923 to 100 pounds
34 Report of the International Fisheries Commission Appointed under the Northern Pacific Hali-
but Treaty of 1923. Ottawa, 1928. Cf. also Reports to Govt, of British Columbia by Professor W.
F. Thompson, Reports of Commissioner of Fisheries, Sess. Pap. B. C., 1915, 1916, 1917; and Report
of American-Canadian Fisheries Conference, 1918, Washington. 1920. In general, the Report of the
International Commission of 1927 merely confirms Professor Thompson’s earlier conclusions, though
supporting them with additional evidence.


in 1926, and was still lower in 1927, while at the same time there was an in-
crease in the number of fish under eleven and three-quarter pounds.
The rapidity of decline is regarded as especially serious because of the very
slow rate of growth of the halibut, an adult being from twelve to twenty-five
years, or over, in age. Hence the present decline has taken place within the life
span of one halibut of ordinarily large size. As nearly all. the fish which are
being caught now were spawned eight or ten years ago, the abundance of the
younger fish, which will annually be available for capture in the next ten years,
has already been established. If these are greatly reduced in numbers, and the
intensity of the fishery is maintained, the outlook for a future stock of spawn-
ing fish sufficient to maintain the supply, presents a hopeless picture. In fact
the commission’s investigations indicate that relatively few mature halibut are
now found on the older banks.


Catch per Skate in Pounds
PLATE VI.
DECLINE OF ABUNDANCE OF FISH, AS SHOWN BY THE CATCH IN POUNDS PER SET OF A STANDARD
UNIT OF YEAR, THE SKATE. FROM 1906 TO 1926. ON THE GROUNDS SOUTH OF CAPE OMMANEY


This situation obviously could not be dealt with by either government
acting alone. Most of the fish were being taken beyond territorial waters.
While either country might have laid restrictions on its own nationals or
vessels as regards fishing on the high seas, such restrictions could not be
applied to nationals or vessels of the other country. Restrictions by Canada,
for example, would only have driven fishing companies to register their ships
in the United States and to operate from American ports, thereby benefiting
the American side of the industry. Cooperation between the two govern-
ments was thus the only possible remedy.
The first attempt at cooperation occurred in 1918 when a conference on
fisheries was held between representatives of the two countries. It reported
in favor of a closed season of three months from November 15th to February
15th, and joint scientific investigation to obtain further data on the life his-
tory of the halibut. It drew up, in addition, a draft treaty dealing with the
halibut reciprocal port privileges and the tariff on fish. 35 The treaty, how-
ever, failed to pass the Senate, apparently because of its omnibus character.
In 1922 Canada suggested that the halibut be dealt with alone, 36 and a draft
convention dealing with the halibut fishery was submitted by the Govern-
ment of the United States. This, with minor changes, was ultimately agreed
to by both Governments.
THE treaty oe 1923
The Treaty of 1923 provides for the following methods of conservation:
1. An annual closed season from November 15th to February 15th in-
clusive, in which “the nationals, inhabitants and the fishing vessels and
boats” of both countries are prohibited from fishing in the territorial waters
of either, and the high seas off the western coasts of Canada and the United
States including Alaska. The closed season may be modified at the end of
the third season on the recommendation of the International Commission
provided in the treaty. Halibut caught incidentally while fishing bona fide
for other fish in this area may be used for food of the crew, and any ad-
ditional must be turned over to the properly constituted authorities of either
country on landing, the same to be sold and the proceeds thereof to be turned
into the public revenue of the country concerned.
2. “Every national, inhabitant, vessel, or boat” of either country violat-
ing the closed season may be seized by the public officers of either country
except within the territorial waters of the other, offenders to be turned over
to their own country for trial and punishment.
85 See Report of American-Canadian Fisheries Conference of 1918, Washington, 1920, Govt. Print-
ing Office. See also discussion of various proposed methods of conservation.. W. F. Thompson in
Sess. Pap. B. C., Report of Commissioner of Fisheries, 1917, p. 28 ff.
36 Can. Bureau of Statistics, 1927 — Fisheries Statistics, Canada, 1926, p. 9.


3. A scientific commission of four members, two from each country, is
provided for, to exist so long as the convention remains in force to study
the life history of the halibut and to make recommendations as to its preser-
vation and the development and control of the industry.
The convention was to remain in force five years and thereafter until two
years after notice of desire to terminate by either party. Both parties agreed
to implement the treaty by appropriate legislation. This legislation in both
instances provides for: 37 (a) Closing of ports of both countries for fishing
illegally, preparing to fish illegally, leaving or permitting a vessel to leave
port for illegal fishing, or landing halibut illegally caught, (b) Patrolling of
the fishing grounds, (c) Severe penalties for infractions.
The closed season provided in the Treaty of 1923 has not, it is clear,
proven an adequate means of preserving the fisheries. On the contrary, the
catch has increased, as is indicated by the following statistics as to landings : 38
Five years average, 1919 to 1923 51,595,000 pounds
1924 57,691,000 “
1925 53,170,000 “
1926 56,278,000 “
1927 56,899,000 “
The International Commission concluded that instead of restricting the
industry, the closed season has in fact stimulated it. The closed season,
November 16th to February 15, was formerly the least profitable season
for fishing owing to winter weather conditions. During this period much
gear was often destroyed, losses in the fishing fleet were more numerous, and
weather conditions often prevented continuous fishing. Further, the fish
taken during this season were frequently of poor quality. The closed season
has, therefore, been an economic benefit to the industry, making it more
profitable to fish during the remainder of the year. Fishing has, therefore,
increased not diminished. The closed season has protected the fishermen
but not the fish.
The treaty has, however, proved of great advantage in that it provided
for an international scientific commission as mentioned above. This com-
mission through careful and extended study both of the life history of the
halibut and of the industry has made the following recommendations as re-
gards international control : 39
1. A progressive limitation of the catch yearly by a predetermined per-
centage in certain areas where the fishery has become greatly depleted, until
the yield has become stable. This percentage reduction should be frequently
revised as occasion warranted.
ST U. S. Stat. at Large, 1923-25, pp. 648-50. R. S. C., c. 75.
38 Report of the International Fisheries Commission, 1928, p. 14.
39 Ibid, p. 9.


2. The establishment of two “nursery” areas in which fishing should be
prohibited, investigation showing that these two areas were populated ap-
parently permanently by immature fish. Such other grounds as found by the
commission to be similarly populated should also be closed.
3. The prohibition of gear found unduly destructive.
4. The extension of the closed season by two weeks at its beginning as
an aid to the industry. Future alteration in the closed season to be pro-
vided for.
5. Licensing of all vessels fishing for halibut in treaty waters under
conditions necessary for the purpose of the treaty.
These recommendations now await the action of the governments con-
cerned. If accepted, they will constitute a high point in the international
control of fishery. They would appear to entail some sort of international
administrative body with subordinate legislative power at least to regulate
the catch in different areas, to establish nurseries, to establish new areas,
and to regulate fishing gear, and alter the closed season. If so, this is a
tremendous step forward in international control, a step which would remove
much of the control of the fishery from the hands of national governments,
putting it in the hands of an international authority. 40 But this is mere
speculation in view of the lethargy of both governments in acting on the
report. Suffice it to say, that further international cooperation is clearly
necessary to protect the fishery.
These two instances illustrate certain general principles with respect to
the preservation of fisheries on the high seas.
1. Protective measures are effective only when based on adequate scien-
tific data, as regards (a) the life history of the fish or mammal to be pro-
tected, (b) the history of the fishing industry. The regulations of the Award
of 1894 for the protection of the fur seal appear to have failed because of
inadequate knowledge both as regards the life history of the seal and as
regards the pelagic sealing industry. The Halibut Treaty of 1923 has not
proven entirely satisfactory primarily because of inadequate knowledge of
the life history of the halibut. 41
Scientific knowledge and accurate statistics are thus the basis of success-
ful international regulation. As regards studies in the life history of com-
mercial fishes, great strides have been made in recent years by government
bureaus, private organizations, and scientists, notably by the fisheries bureaus
of the United States, Great Britain, Norway, and Canada, by such semi-
official bodies as the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea, 42
_ , 40 C C similar proposals for an international administrative authority in the nrooosed <Wlrw
Salmon Treaty between the United States and Canada, Appendix to this paper P P cockeye
1 That is, on the part of the framers of the treaty who seem to have largely ignored Professor
Thompson s excellent reports for the Government of British Columbia cited above
, 2 £? rn l e T d , at Copenhagen, 1902, by representatives from Great Britain, Germany, Russia Den-
mark, The Netherlands, Norway, Sweden. Its activities are practically confined to European waters


the North American Committee on Fisheries Investigations which is com-
posed of representatives of the United States, Canada, Newfoundland,
France, and Portugal, 43 and by such eminent scientists as Professor David
Starr Jordan and Professor W. F. Thompson. Great gaps remain, however,
in our knowledge of the fishing industry.
On this point a report of the United States Bureau of Fisheries for
1926 44 has the following to say:
Undoubtedly the most serious handicap to the proper development of effec-
tive fishery conservation in the United States is the almost uniform lack of
adequate statistics of the fisheries. While there has always been a more or less
general realization of the economic value of records of total annual yield, the
number of persons engaged, and the amount of investment in the fisheries, less
attention has been given to the need for determining the relative abundance of
the fisheries stock, year by year, as an indication of the state of the fisheries.
It has been announced repeatedly that the aim of the division of scientific en-
quiry is to study fluctuation in the fisheries and to determine their immediate
causes; but in nearly every case it has been impossible to attack the problem
from a quantitative standpoint, which is by far the most important aspect, be-
cause of the lack of suitable statistical data. The yield per unit oi effort, such
as the boat catch per day, has long been recognized as a useful index of abun-
dance of fish in the sea, but the present records cannot be analyzed on that
basis. Suitable statistics must contain these essential details: they must be uni-
form throughout the range of a fishery, continuous, free from bias, and stored
in central places in such a way that they may be preserved for subsequent an-
alysis by fishery investigations.
2. In view of the fact that fishing on the high seas is ordinarily carried
on by private rather than public enterprise, international regulation obviously
entails in most cases some form of international police for enforcement. So
far the police measures in the fur seal treaty and the halibut treaty seem
to be tolerably adequate. These, it will be remembered are: patrolling by
the public ships of the countries concerned, the right of visit, search and
seizure of ships of the parties to the respective treaties, but trial and punish-
ment by the flag state of vessels seized. Since 1882 this method has been in
vogue in the North Sea, and has proven satisfactory there as well. 45 The
same method was also used in the suppression of the slave trade at sea in
the nineteenth century. 46 Indeed, the convention for the suppression of the
slave trade and certain conventions for the protection of fisheries are the
only instances where states have consented to police action on the high seas
against their nationals by the public vessels of other countries.
« See their Report, Statistics of the catch of cod off the East Coast of North America, 1926.
44 No. 1029, entitled Progress in Biological Studies, 1926.
45 See Appendix for extract on police measures from North Sea Convention.
** e.g., General Act of Brussels, iB9O, v. Moore, Digest, Vol. 11, p. 948.


CONCLUSIONS
The high seas and their products are the heritage of all nations, though,
of course, most particularly of those nations advantageously located to har-
vest the sea most economically. As the supply of fresh agricultural land
diminishes, the sea is likely to become of increasing importance as a source
of man’s food supplies. It is probable that the sea may be tapped for food
far more abundantly than at present without endangering the continuity of
supply. It is indeed possible that Nature may be assisted (as she has long
been on land) to increase her supplies of the products for man’s growing
needs. 47 Possibly the application of industrial methods to fishing may en-
danger Nature’s powers of recuperation, as indeed it has in the case of the
fur seal and the halibut. The great need, in any case, is to see whither we
are tending, to discover whether the supply of any particular species is being
endangered, and if so to invent remedies for its conservation and, if need
be, its recovery. Some remedies may be scientific, others must be political
involving cooperative effort and the development of administrative
machinery, between states interested. Each case must be dealt with in-
dividually, according to the habits of the species involved, the methods and
location of the fishery, and other peculiar factors. As yet, no method of con-
servation or control appears to be of general application. The point of de-
parture in any case must be minute scientific enquiry into the branch of the
fishing industry involved. Only thus can we discover whether Nature needs
assistance in the preservation of such forms of marine life as are valuable
to man.
It is respectfully suggested that the Institute of Pacific Relations might
encourage scientific enquiry into the subjects noted below, and bring together
the results now being obtained by various governments of Pacific countries.
Governmental departments are likely to examine fisheries on the high seas
from the point of view of national interests; there is great need for an in-
ternational approach to the subject. Suggested subjects:
1. Life histories of the commercial fishes and sea mammals of the
Pacific Ocean.
2. Statistical studies of the fishing industries of the Pacific Ocean,
particularly with a view to discovering whether the supply in any case
is being menaced.
3. Methods of conservation applicable to fisheries on the high seas. In
this connection, the situation with regard to such sea mammals as seals,
walrus, manatus, sea otters, and whales, which are apparently approaching
extinction, is particularly worthy of study.
4T A notable instance of this already in vogue is the destruction of the sea lion being carried on
along the coasts of Alaska and British Columbia, because it preys upon the salmon and other com-
mercial fishes.




APPENDICES
A
EXTRACT PROM THE INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION (OF 1882 BETWEEN BEL-
GIUM, DENMARK, PRANCE, GERMANY, GREAT BRITAIN, AND THE
NETHERLANDS) FOR THE PURPOSE OF REGULATING THE PO-
LICE OF THE FISHERIES IN THE NORTH SEA
OUTSIDE TERRITORIAL WATERS
Article 26. The superintendence of the fisheries shall be exercised by
vessels belonging to the national navies of the high contracting parties. In
the case of Belgium, such vessels may be vessels belonging to the State, com-
manded by captains who hold commissions.
Article 27. The execution of the regulations respecting the document
establishing nationality, the marking and numbering of boats, etc., and of
fishing implements, as well as the presence on board of instruments which
are forbidden (Articles 6,7, 8,9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 23, Section 2), is placed
under the exclusive superintendence of the cruisers of the nation of each
fishing boat.
Nevertheless, the commanders of cruisers shall acquaint each other with
any infractions of the above-mentioned regulations committed by the fisher-
men of another nation.
Article 28. The cruisers of all the high contracting parties shall be
competent to authenticate all infractions of the regulations prescribed by the
present Convention, other than those referred to in Article 27, and all of-
fences relating to fishing operations, whichever may be the nation to which
the fisherman guilty of such infractions may belong.
Article 29. When the commanders of cruisers have reason to believe
that an infraction of the provisions of the present convention has been com-
mitted, they may require the master of the boat inculpated to exhibit the
official document establishing her nationality. The fact of such document
having been exhibited shall then be indorsed upon it immediately.
The commanders of cruisers shall not pursue further their visit or search
on board a fishing boat which is not of their own nationality, unless it should
be necessary for the purpose of obtaining proof of an offense or of a con-
travention of regulations respecting the police of the fisheries.
Article 30. The commanders of the cruisers of the signatory powers
shall exercise their judgment as to the gravity of facts brought to their
knowledge, and of which they are empowered to take cognizance, and shall
verify the damage, from whatever cause arising, which may be sustained
by fishing boats of the nationalities of the high contracting parties.
They shall draw up, if there is occasion for it, a formal statement of the
verification of the facts as elicited both from the declarations of the parties
interested and from the testimony of those present.


The commander of the cruiser may, if the case appears to him sufficiently
serious to justify the step, take the offending boat into a port of the nation
to which the fisherman belongs. He may even take on board the cruiser a
part of the crew of the fishing boat in order to hand them over to the author-
ities of her nation.
Article; 31. The formal statement referred to in the preceding Article
shall be drawn up in the language of the commander of the cruiser, and ac-
cording to the forms in use in his country.
The accused and the witnesses shall be entitled to add, or to have added,
to such statement, in their own language, any observations or evidence which
they may think suitable. Such declarations must be duly signed.
Article 32. Resistance to the directions of commanders of cruisers
charged with the police of the fisheries, or of those who act under their
orders, shall, without taking into account the nationality of the cruiser, be
considered as resistance to the authority of the nation of the fishing boat.
Article 33. When the act alleged is not of a serious character, but has
nevertheless caused damage to any fisherman, the commanders of cruisers
shall be at liberty, should the parties concerned agree to it, to arbitrate at
sea between them, and to fix the compensation to be paid.
Where one of the parties is not in a position to settle the matter at once,
the commanders shall cause the parties concerned to sign in duplicate a
formal document specifying the compensation to be paid.
One copy of this document shall remain on board the cruiser and the
other shall be handed to the master of the boat to which the compensation
is due, in order that he may, if necessary, be able to make use of it before
the courts of the country to which the debtor belongs.
Where, on the contrary, the parties do not consent to arbitration, the
commanders shall act in accordance with the provisions of Article 30.
Article 34. The prosecutions for offenses against, or contraventions of,
the present convention shall be instituted by, or in the name of, the State.
Article 35. The high contracting parties engage to propose to their
respective Legislatures the necessary measures for ensuring the execution of
the present Convention, and particularly for the punishment by either fine
or imprisonment, or by both, of persons who may contravene the provisions
of Articles 6 to 23, inclusive.
Article 36. In all cases of assault committed, or of willful damage or
loss inflicted, by fishermen of one of the contracting countries upon fishermen
of another nationality, the courts of the country to which the boats of the
offenders belong shall be empowered to try them.
The same rule shall apply with regard to offenses against, and contra-
ventions of, the present Convention.
Article 37. The proceedings and trial in cases of infraction of the pro-
visions of the present convention shall take place as summarily as the laws
and regulations in force will permit.


B
CONVENTION BETWEEN HIS MAJESTY, THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
JAPAN AND RUSSIA, RESPECTING MEASURES FOR THE PRESERVATION AND
PROTECTION OF THE FUR SEALS IN THE NORTH PACIFIC OCEAN
His Majesty, the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland.
The President of the United States of America.
His Majesty, the Emperor of Japan.
His Majesty, the Emperor of all the Russias.
ArTiceE 1. The High Contracting Parties mutually and reciprocally
agree that their citizens and subjects respectively, and all persons subject to
their laws and treaties, and their vessels, shall be prohibited, while this Con-
vention remains in force, from engaging in pelagic sealing in the waters
of the North Pacific Ocean, north of the thirtieth parallel of north latitude
and including the Seas of Behring, Kamchatka, Okhotsk and Japan, and
that every such person and vessel offending against such prohibition may be
seized, except within the territorial jurisdiction of one of the other Powers,
and detained by the naval or other duly commissioned officers of any of
the parties to this Convention, to be delivered as soon as practicable to an
authorized official of their own nation at the nearest point to the place of
seizure, or elsewhere as may be mutually agreed upon; and that the authorities
of the nation to which such person or vessel belongs alone shall have jurisdic-
tion to try the offense and impose the penalties for the same; and that the
witnesses and proofs necessary to establish the offense, so far as they are
under the control of any of the parties to this Convention, shall also be
furnished with all reasonable promptitude to the proper authorities having
jurisdiction to try the offense.
ArticeE 2. Each of the High Contracting Parties further agrees that
no person or vessel shall be permitted to use any of its ports or harbors or
any part of its territory for any purposes whatsoever connected with the
operations of pelagic sealing in the waters within the protected area men-
tioned in Article 1.
Article 3. Each of the High Contracting Parties further agrees that
no sealskins taken in the waters of the North Pacific Ocean within the pro-
tected area mentioned in Article 1, and no sealskins identified as the species
known as Callorhinus alascanns, Callorhinus ursinus, and Callorhinus
kurilensis, and belonging to the American, Russian or Japanese herds, except
such as are taken under the authority of the respective Powers to which
the breeding grounds of such herds belong and have been officially marked
and certified as having been so taken, shall be permitted to be imported or
brought into the territory of any of the parties to this Convention.
Article 4. It is further agreed that the provisions of this Convention
shall not apply to Indians, Ainos, Aleuts, or other aborigines dwelling on the
coasts of the waters mentioned in Article 1, who carry on pelagic sealing in


canoes not transported by or used in connection with other vessels, and pro-
pelled entirely by oars, paddles, or sails, and manned by not more than five
persons each, in the way hitherto practised and without the use of firearms;
provided that such aborigines are not in the employment of other persons, or
under contract to deliver the skins to any person.
Article; 5. Each of the High Contracting Parties agrees that it will not
permit its citizens or subjects or their vessels to kill, capture or pursue be-
yond the distance of three miles from the shore line of its territories sea
otters in any part of the waters mentioned in Article 1 of this Convention.
Article: 6. Each of the High Contracting Parties agrees to enact and
enforce such legislation as may be necessary to make effective the foregoing
provisions with appropriate penalties for violations thereof.
Article: 7. It is agreed on the part of the United States, Japan, and
Russia that each repectively will maintain a guard or patrol in the waters
frequented by the seal herd in the protection of which it is especially in-
terested, so far as may be necessary for the enforcement of the foregoing
provisions.
Article 8. All of the High Contracting Parties agree to cooperate
with each other in taking such measures as may be appropriate and available
for the purpose of preventing pelagic sealing in the prohibited area men-
tioned in Article 1.
Article 9. The term pelagic sealing is hereby defined for the purposes
of this Convention as meaning the killing, capturing or pursuing in any
manner whatsoever of fur seals at sea.
Article 10. The United States agrees that of the total number of seal-
skins taken annually under the authority of the United States upon the
Pribilof Islands or any other islands or shores of the waters mentioned in
Article 1 subject to the jurisdiction of the United States to which any seal
herds hereafter resort, there shall be delivered at the Pribilof Islands at the
end of each season fifteen per cent (15 per cent) gross in number and value
thereof to an authorized agent of the Canadian Government and fifteen per
cent (15 per cent) gross in number and value thereof to an authorized agent
of the Japanese Government; provided, however, that nothing herein con-
tained shall restrict the right of the United States at any time and from
time to time to suspend altogether the taking of sealskins on such islands or
shores subject to its jurisdiction, and to impose such restrictions and regula-
tions upon the total number of skins to be taken in any season and the manner
and times and places of taking them as may seem necessary to protect and
preserve the seal herd or to increase its number.
Article 11. The United States further agrees to pay the sum of two
hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) to Great Britain and the sum of two
hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) to Japan when this Convention goes
into effect, as an advance payment in each case in lieu of such number of
fur-seal skins to which Great Britain and Japan respectively would be en-
titled under the provisions of this Convention as would be equivalent in each


case to two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) reckoned at their market
value at London at the date of their delivery before dressing and curing and
less cost of transportation from the Pribilof Islands, such market value in
case of dispute to be determined by an umpire to be agreed upon by the
United States and Great Britain, or by the United States and Japan, as the
case may be, which skins shall be retained by the United States in satisfaction
of such payments.
The United States further agrees that the British and Japanese share re-
spectively of the sealskins taken from the American herd under the terms of
this Convention shall be not less than one thousand (1,000) each in any year
even if such number is more than fifteen per cent (15 per cent) of the
number to which the authorized killing is restricted in such year, unless the
killing of seals in such year or years shall have been absolutely prohibited by
the United States for all purposes except to supply food, clothing, and boat
skins for the natives on the islands, in which case the United States agrees to
pay to Great Britain and to Japan each the sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000) annually in lieu of any share of skins during the years when no
killing is allowed; and Great Britain agrees, and Japan agrees, that after
deducting the skins of their respective shares, which are to be retained by
the United States as above provided to reimburse itself for the advance pay-
ment aforesaid, the United States shall be entitled to reimburse itself for any
annual payments made as herein required, by retaining an additional number
of sealskins from the British and Japanese shares respectively over and
above the specified minimum allowance of one thousand (1,000) skins in any
subsequent year or years when killing is again resumed, until the whole
number of skins retained shall equal, reckoned at their market value de-
termined as above provided for, the entire amount so paid, with interest at
the rate of four per cent (4 per cent) per annum.
If, however, the total number of seals frequenting the United States
islands in any year falls below one hundred thousand (100,000), enumerated
by official count, then all killing, excepting the inconsiderable supply neces-
sary for the support of the natives as above noted, may be suspended with-
out allowance of skins or payment of money equivalent until the number of
such seals again exceeds one hundred thousand (100,000), enumerated in
like manner.
Article 12. It is agreed on the part of Russia that of the total number
of sealskins taken annually upon the Commander Islands, or any other island
or shores of the waters defined in Article 1 subject to the jurisdiction of
Russia to which any seal herds hereafter resort, there shall be delivered at
the Commander Islands at the end of each season, fifteen per cent (15 per
cent) gross in number and value thereof to an authorized agent of the Cana-
dian Government, and fifteen per cent (15 per cent) gross in number and
value thereof to an authorized agent of the Japanese Government; provided,
however, that nothing herein contained shall restrict the right of Russia at
any time and from time to time during the first five years of the term of


this Convention to suspend altogether the taking of sealskins on such islands
or shores subject to its jurisdiction, and to impose during the term of this
Convention such restrictions and regulations upon the total number of skins
to be taken in any season, and the manner and times and places of taking
them as may seem necessary to preserve and protect the Russian seal herd,
or to increase its number; but it is agreed, nevertheless, on the part of Russia
that during the last ten years of the term of this Convention not less than
five per cent (5 per cent) of the total number of seals on the Russian rook-
eries and hauling grounds will be killed annually, provided that said five per
cent (5 per cent) does not exceed eighty-five per cent (85 per cent) of the
three-year-old male seals hauling in such year.
If, however, the total number of seals frequenting the Russian islands
in any year falls below eighteen thousand (18,000) enumerated by official
count, then the allowance of skins mentioned above and all killing of seals
except such as may be necessary for the support of the natives on the islands
may be suspended until the number of such seals again exceeds eighteen
thousand (18,000) enumerated in like manner.
Article; 13. It is agreed on the part of Japan that of the total number
of sealskins taken annually upon Robben Island, or any other islands or shores
of the waters defined in Article 1, subject to the jurisdiction of Japan to
which any seal herds hereafter resort, there shall be delivered at Robben
Island at the end of each season ten per cent (10 per cent) gross in number
and value thereof to an authorized agent of the United States Government,
ten per cent (10 per cent) gross in number and value thereof to an author-
ized agent of the Canadian Government, and ten per cent (10 per cent) gross
in number and value thereof to an authorized agent of the Russian Govern-
ment; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall restrict the
right of Japan at any time and from time to time during the first five years
of the term of this Convention to suspend altogether the taking of sealskins
on such islands or shores subject to its jurisdiction, and to impose during
the term of this Convention such restrictions and regulations upon the total
number of skins to be taken in any season, and the manner and times and
places of taking them as may seem necessary to preserve and protect the
Japanese herd, or to increase its number; but it is agreed, nevertheless, on
the part of Japan that during the last ten years of the term of this Conven-
tion not less than five per cent (5 per cent) of the total number of seals on
the Japanese rookeries and hauling grounds will be killed annually, provided
that said five per cent (5 per cent) does not exceed eighty-five per cent (85
per cent) of the three-year-old male seals hauling in such year.
If, however, the total number of seals frequenting the Japanese islands
in any year falls below six thousand five hundred (6,500) enumerated by
official count, then the allowance of skins mentioned above and all killing of
seals except such as may be necessary for the support of the natives on the
islands may be suspended until the number of such seals again exceeds six
thousand five hundred (6,500) enumerated in like manner.


Article 14. It is agreed on the part of Great Britain that in case any
seal herd hereafter resorts to any islands or shores of the waters defined in
Article 1 subject to the jurisdiction of Great Britain, there shall be delivered
at the end of each season during the term of this Convention ten per cent
(10 per cent) gross in number and value of the total number of sealskins
annually taken from such herd to an authorized agent of the United States
Government, ten per cent (10 per cent) gross in number and value of the
total number of sealskins annually taken from such herd to an authorized
agent of the Japanese Government, and ten per cent (10 per cent) gross in
number and value of the total number of sealskins annually taken from such
herd to an authorized agent of the Russian Government.
Article 15. It is further agreed between the United States and Great
Britain that the provisions of this Convention shall supersede, in so far as
they are inconsistent therewith or in duplication thereof, the provisions of
the treaty relative to the fur seals, entered into between the United States
and Great Britain on the 7th day of February, 1911.
Article 16. This Convention shall go into effect upon the 15th day of
December, 1911, and shall continue in force for a period of fifteen (15)
years from that date, and thereafter until terminated by twelve (12) months’
written notice given by one or more of the parties to all of the others, which
notice may be given at the expiration of fourteen years or at any time after-
wards, and it is agreed that at any time prior to the termination of this Con-
vention, upon the request of any one of the High Contracting Parties, a
conference shall be held forthwith between representatives of all the parties
hereto, to consider and if possible agree upon a further extension of this
Convention with such additions and modifications, if any, as may be found
desirable.
Article 17. This Convention shall be ratified by the President of the
United States, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, by
His Britannic Majesty, by His Majesty the Emperor of Japan, and by His
Majesty the Emperor of all the Russias; and ratifications shall be exchanged
at Washington as soon as practicable.
In faith whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed this Con-
vention in quadruplicate and have hereunto affixed their seals.
Done at Washington the seventh day of July, in the year one thousand
nine hundred and eleven.
(L.S.) Jambs Bryce
(L.S.) Joseph Pope
(L.S.) Charles Nagel
(L.S.) Chandler P. Anderson
(L.S.) Y. Uchida
(L.S.) H. Dauke
(L.S.) P. BotkinE
(L.S.) Nolde


PROTOCOL OP DEPOSIT OP RATIFICATIONS
The Convention for the Protection of Fur Seals, signed by the respective
Plenipotentiaries of Great Britain, the United States of America, Japan, and
Russia, at Washington on July 7, 1911, having been ratified by the four
governments, and the ratifications having been found to conform to one
another, the undersigned, the Ambassador of Great Britain, the Ambassador
of Japan, and the Ambassador of Russia, duly authorized thereto by their
respective governments, do hereby declare that, in conformity with the un-
derstanding that has been reached by the governments signatory of the said
Convention as to the form and manner in which the exchange of ratifications
provided for in Article 17 of the said Convention shall be effected, they have
delivered, and the undersigned Secretary of State of the United States of
America hereby declares that he has received, for deposit in the archives of
the Government of the United States of America, the respective instruments
of ratification by Great Britain, Japan, and Russia, of the said Convention
for the Protection of Fur Seals. And the Secretary of State further de-
clares that the instrument of ratification of the said Convention by the Presi-
dent of the United States of America has, in accordance with the understand-
ing above mentioned, been deposited in the archives of the Government of the
United States of America, together with the like instruments of ratification
of the Sovereigns of Great Britain, Japan and Russia.
In faith whereof the undersigned have prepared the present proces-verbal
in one original, of which a copy, duly certified, will be transmitted by the
Government of the United States, through the diplomatic channel, to each
of the signatory governments, together with a certified copy each of the in-
strument of ratification of the said Convention by His Britannic Majesty
the President of the United States of America, His Majesty the Emperor
of Japan, and His Majesty the Emperor of Russia.
Done at the city of Washington this twelfth day of December, nineteen
hundred and eleven.
(US.) James Bryce
.(US.) Philander C. Knox
(US.) M. Hanihara
(US.) G. Bakhmeteff.


C
CONVENTION BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND GREAT BRITAIN FOR THE
PRESERVATION OF THE HALIBUT FISHERY OF THE NORTHERN PACIFIC
OCEAN INCLUDING BEHRING SEA
The United States of America and His Majesty, the King of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and of the British Dominions beyond
the Seas, Emperor of India, being equally desirous of securing the preserva-
tion of the halibut fishery of the Northern Pacific Ocean have resolved to
conclude a Convention for this purpose, and have named as their pleni-
potentiaries :
The President of the United States of America: Charles Evans Hughes,
Secretary of State of the United States; and
His Britannic Majesty: The Honorable Ernest LaPointe, K.C., 8.A.,
LL.B., Minister of Marine and Fisheries of Canada:
Who, after having communicated to each other their respective full
powers, found in good and due form, have agreed upon the following
articles:
ArticeE 1. The nationals and inhabitants and the fishing vessels and
boats, of the United States and of the Dominion of Canada, respectively,
are hereby prohibited from fishing for halibut ( Hippoglossus ) both in the
territorial waters and in the high seas off the western coasts of the United
States, including Behring Sea, and of the Dominion of Canada, from the
16th day of November next after the date of the exchange of ratifications
of this Convention, to the 15th day of the following February, both days
inclusive, and within the same period yearly thereafter, provided that upon
the recommendation of the International Fisheries Commission hereinafter
described, this close season may be modified or suspended at any time after
the expiration of three such seasons, by a special agreement concluded and
duly ratified by the High Contracting Parties.
It is understood that nothing contained in this Article shall prohibit the
nationals or inhabitants and the fishing vessels or boats of the United States
and of the Dominion of Canada, from fishing in the waters hereinbefore
specified for other species of fish during the season when fishing for halibut
in such waters is prohibited by this article. Any halibut that may be taken
incidentally when fishing for other fish during the season when fishing, for
halibut is prohibited under the provisions of this article may be retained
and used for food for the crew of the vessel by which they are taken. Any
portion thereof not so used shall be landed and immediately turned over
to the duly authorized officers of the Department of Commerce of the United
States or of the Department of Marine and Fisheries of the Dominion of
Canada. Any fish turned over to such officers in pursuance of the provisions
of this Article shall be sold by them to the highest bidder and the proceeds
of such sale, exclusive of the necessary expenses in connection therewith,
shall be paid by them into the treasuries of their respective countries.


Article 2. Every national or inhabitant, vessel or boat of the United
States or of the Dominion of Canada engaged in halibut fishing in violation
of the preceding Article may be seized except within the jurisdiction of the
other party by the duly authorized officers of either High Contracting Party
and detained by the officers making such seizure and delivered as soon as
practicable to an authorized official of the country to which such person,
vessel or boat belongs, at the nearest point to the place of seizure, or else-
where, as may be mutually agreed upon. The authorities of the nation to
which such person, vessel or boat belongs alone shall have jurisdiction to con-
duct prosecutions for the violation of the provisions of the preceding Article
or of the laws or regulations which either High Contracting Party may
make to carry those provisions into effect, and to impose penalties for such
violations; and the witnesses and proofs necessary for such prosecutions,
so far as such witnesses or proofs are under the control of the other High
Contracting Party, shall be furnished with all reasonable promptitude to the
authorities having jurisdiction to conduct the prosecutions.
Article 3. The High Contracting Parties agree to appoint within two
months after the exchange of ratifications of this Convention, a Commission
to be known as the International Fisheries Commission, consisting of four
members, two to be appointed by each party. This Commission shall con-
tinue to exist so long as this Convention shall remain in force. Each party
shall pay the salaries and expenses of its own members, and joint expenses
incurred by the Commission shall be paid by the two High Contracting
Parties in equal moieties.
The Commission shall make a thorough investigation into the life history
of the Pacific halibut and such investigation shall be undertaken as soon as
practicable. The Commission shall report the results of its investigation to
the two Governments and shall make recommendations as to the regulation
of the halibut fishery of the North Pacific Ocean, including the Behring Sea,
which may seem to be desirable for its preservation and development.
Article 4. The High Contracting Parties agree to enact and enforce
such legislation as may be necessary to make effective the provisions of this
Convention with appropriate penalties for violations thereof.
Article 5. This Convention shall remain in force for a period of five
years and thereafter until two years from the date when either of the High
Contracting Parties shall give notice to the other of its desire to terminate
it. It shall be ratified in accordance with the constitutional methods of the
High Contracting Parties. The ratifications shall be exchanged in Washing-
ton as soon as practicable, and the Convention shall come into force on the
day of the exchange of ratifications.
In faith whereof, the respective plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Convention in duplicate, and have thereunto affixed their seals.
Done at the City of Washington, the second day of March, in the year
of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty-three.
rw 91 IQ9A\ Charles Evans Hughes (Seal)
(Ratified Oct. 21, 1924.) Ernest La Pointe (Seal)


D
CONVENTION BETWEEN CANADA AND THE UNITED STATES BOR THE PROTEC-
TION, PRESERVATION AND EXTENSION OB THE SOCKEYE SALMON PISHERIES IN
THE ERASER RIVER SYSTEM, SIGNED AT WASHINGTON ON THE
27TH DAY OE MARCH, 1929
His Majesty the King of Great Britain, Ireland and the British Dominions
beyond the Seas, Emperor of India, and the President of the United States
of America, recognizing that the protection, preservation and extension of
the sockeye salmon fisheries in the Fraser River system are of common con-
cern to the Dominion of Canada and the United States of America; that the
supply of this fish in recent years has been gravely depleted and that it is of
the utmost importance in the mutual interest of both countries that this
source of wealth should be restored and maintained, have resolved to con-
clude a convention and to that end have named as their respective pleni-
potentiaries :
His Majesty, for the Dominion of Canada: The Honourable Charles Vin-
cent Massey, P.C., His Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary
for Canada at Washington; and
The President of the United States of America: Mr. Frank B. Kellogg,
Secretary of State of the United States of America;
Who, after having communicated to each other their full powers, found
in good and due form, have agreed upon the following Articles:
Article 1. The provisions of this Convention and the regulations
issued pursuant thereto shall apply to the Fraser River and the streams and
lakes tributary thereto and to all waters frequented by sockeye salmon in-
cluded within the following boundaries:
Beginning at Carmanah Lighthouse on the southwest coast of Vancouver
Island, thence in a straight line to a point three marine miles due west astro-
nomic from Tatoosh Lighthouse, Washington, thence to said Tatoosh Light-
house, thence to the nearest point of Cape Flattery, thence following the south-
erly shore of Juan de Fuca Strait to Point Wilson, on Quimper Peninsula,
thence in a straight line to Point Partridge on Whidbey Island, thence follow-
ing the western shore of the said Whidbey Island, to the entrance to Deception
Pass, thence across said entrance to the southern side of Reservation Bay, on
Fidalgo Island, thence following the western and northern shore line of the said
Fidalgo Island to Swinomish Slough, crossing the said Swinomish Slough, in
line with the track of the Great Northern Railway, thence northerly following
the shore line of the mainland to Atkinson Point at the northerly entrance to
Burrard Inlet, British Columbia, thence in a straight line to the southern end
of Bowen Island, thence westerly following the southern shore of Bowen Island
to Cape Roger Curtis, thence in a straight line to Gower Point, thence westerly
following the shore line to Welcome Point on Seechelt Peninsula, thence in a
straight line to Point Young on Lasqueti Island, thence in a straight line to
Dorcas Point on Vancouver Island, thence following the eastern and southern
shores of the said Vancouver Island to the starting point at Carmanah Light-
house as shown on the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey Chart Number
6300, as corrected to October 20, 1924, and on the British Admiralty Chart
Number 579.


The High Contracting Parties engage to have prepared as soon as prac-
ticable charts of the waters described in this Article, with the above de-
scribed boundaries and the International boundary line indicated thereon.
They further agree to establish within the territory of the Dominion of
Canada and the territory of the United States such buoys and marks for the
purposes of this Convention as may be recommended by the Commission
hereinafter authorized to be established, and to refer such of these recom-
mendations as relate to points on the boundary to the International
Boundary Commission, United States-Alaska and Canada, for action pur-
suant to the provisions of the Treaty respecting the boundary between Canada
and the United States signed February 24, 1925.
Article 2. The High Contracting Parties agree to establish and main-
tain a Commission to be known as the International Pacific Salmon Fisheries
Commission, hereinafter called the Commission, consisting of six members,
three on the part of the Dominion of Canada, and three on the part of the
United States of America.
The Commissioners on the part of the Dominion of Canada shall be ap-
pointed by His Majesty on the recommendation of the Governor General in
Council. The Commissioners on the part of the United States shall be ap-
pointed by the President of the United States, and the Commissioner of Fish-
eries of the United States shall be one of them.
The Commission shall continue in existence so long as this Convention
shall continue in force, and each High Contracting Party shall have power
to fill and shall fill from time to time vacancies which may occur in its
representation on the Commission in the same manner as the original ap-
pointments are made. Each High Contracting Party shall pay the salaries
and expenses of its own Commissioners, and the joint expenses incurred by
the Commission shall be paid by the two High Contracting Parties in equal
moieties.
Article 3. The Commission shall make a thorough investigation into
the natural history of the Fraser River Sockeye Salmon, into hatchery
methods, spawning ground conditions and other related matters. It shall con-
duct the sockeye salmon fish cultural operations in the area described in
Article I, and to that end it shall have power to improve spawning grounds,
acquire, construct, and maintain hatcheries, rearing ponds and other such
facilities as it may determine to be necessary for the propagation of sockeye
salmon in the waters covered by this Convention, and to stock the waters with
sockeye salmon by such methods as it may determine to be most advisable.
The Commission shall also have authority to recommend to the two gov-
ernments the removal of obstructions to the ascent of sockeye salmon in the
waters covered by this Convention, that may now exist or may from time to
time occur, and to improve conditions for the ascent of sockeye salmon,
where investigation may show such to be desirable. The Commission shall


report annually to the two Governments what it has accomplished and the
results of its investigations.
The cost of all such work shall be borne equally by the two Governments,
and the said Governments agree to appropriate annually such money as each
may deem desirable for such work in the light of the reports of the Com-
mission.
Article 4. The International Salmon Fisheries Commission established
pursuant to Article 2 of this Convention is hereby empowered, between the
first day of June and the twentieth day of August in any year, for the whole
or any part of the aforesaid period, to limit or prohibit the taking of sock-
eye salmon in respect of all the waters described in Article 1 of this Con-
vention, or in respect of Canadian waters and waters of the United States
separately, provided, that when any order is adopted by the Commission
limiting or prohibiting the taking of sockeye salmon in regard to Canadian
waters or waters of the United States separately, it shall extend to all of the
Canadian waters or waters of the United States to which this Convention
applies, and Provided further, that no order limiting or prohibiting the tak-
ing of sockeye salmon adopted by the International Salmon Fisheries Com-
mission shall be construed to suspend or otherwise affect the requirements
of the laws of the Dominion of Canada or of the State of Washington as to
the procuring of a license to fish in the waters on their respective sides of
the boundary line. Any order adopted by the Commission limiting or
prohibiting the taking of sockeye salmon in said waters during said period,
or any part thereof, shall remain in full force and effect unless and until the
same be modified or set aside by the Commission. The taking of sockeye
salmon in said waters during said period in violation of the orders of the
Commission adopted from time to time is hereby prohibited.
Article 5. In order to secure a proper escapement of sockeye salmon
during the spring or chinook salmon fishing season, the International Salmon
Fisheries Commission may prescribe the size of the meshes in all fishing
gear and appliances operated in the waters described in Article 1 of this
Convention which are frequented by sockeye salmon.
Whenever the taking of sockeye salmon in said waters during said period
between the first of June and the twentieth of August in any year is per-
mitted under the orders adopted by the Commission in respect of Canadian
waters any fishing appliances authorized by the laws of the Dominion of
Canada may be used in such waters by any person thereunto legally author-
ized, and whenever the taking of sockeye salmon in said waters during said
period is permitted under the orders adopted by the Commission in respect
of waters of the United States, any fishing appliance legally authorized by
the State of Washington may be used in such waters by any person there-
unto authorized by that State.


Article 6. No action taken by the Commission under the authority of
Articles IV and V of this Convention shall be effective unless it is affirma-
tively voted for by at least two of the Commissioners from each country.
Article 7. Inasmuch as the purpose of this Convention is to establish
for the High Contracting Parties, by their joint effort and expense, a fishery
that is now largely non-existent, each of the High Contracting Parties
should share equally in the fishery. The Commission shall, consequently, in
regulating the fishery do so with the object of enabling, as nearly as they
can, an equal portion of the fish that is allowed to be caught each year to be
taken by the fishermen of each High Contracting Party.
Article 8. Each High Contracting Party shall be responsible for the
enforcement of the regulations provided by the Commission in the portion
of their respective waters covered by the Convention, and to this end they
agree to enact and enforce such legislation as may be necessary to make
effective the provisions of this Convention, with appropriate penalties for
violations thereof.
Article 9. The present Convention shall be ratified by His Majesty in
accordance with constitutional practice, and by the President of the United
States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof,
and it shall become effective upon the date of the exchange of ratifications
which shall take place at Washington as soon as possible and shall continue
in force for a period of sixteen years, and thereafter until one year from
the day on which either of the High Contracting Parties shall give notice
to the other of its desire to terminate it.
In witness whereof, the respective plenipotentiaries have signed the pre-
sent Convention, and have affixed their seals thereto.
Done in duplicate at Washington, the twenty-seventh day of March, one
thousand nine hundred and twenty-nine.
(L.S.) Vincent Massey
(L.S.) Frank B. Kellogg








