

BULLETIN
OF THE
NORTHERN
TERRITORY
July, m 3.
Bulletin No. 7.
—PRELIMINARY REPORT
On the Aboriginals of the Northern T erritory


BULLETIN No. 7
NORTHERN TERRITORY
PRELIMINARY REPORT
on the
ABORIGINALS OF THE
NORTHERN TERRITORY
by
PROFESSOR W . BALDWIN SPENCER, M.A., C.M.G.
Professor of Biology in
the Melbourne University
Br Authority : ALBERT J. MULLETT, Government Printer, Melbourne.
0.7959.
PUBLISHED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF
THE MINISTER OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS,
MELBOURNE, AUSTRALIA, JULY, 1913.




PRELIMINARY REPORT ON THE ABORIGINALS
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY.
BY PROFESSOR W. BALDWIN SPENCER, M.A., C.M.G. F.R.S.
PROFESSOR
OF BIOLOGY IN THE MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY.
To the Hon. the Minister for External Affairs.
Sir,
The preparation of my full Report including- scientific work connected with
investigations into the Customs, Habits and Beliefs of the Aboriginals of the Northern
Territory will occupy some considerable time. Meanwhile I have the honour to present
the following Preliminary Report dealing with the general question of the Aboriginals and
to make certain proposals in regard to the policy which it appears to me to be both most
just and advisable to adopt in regard to them,
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
W. BALDWIN SPENCER,
Special Commissioner and Chief Protector of Aboriginals.
20th May. 1913.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Page
Introduction ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7
General Considerations .. ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... 7
Morality and General Character of the Aboriginals ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
Present Condition and Treatment of the Aboriginals ... ... ... ... 14
(а) Aboriginals living in Towns ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15
(б) Aboriginals living on Lands such as those round the Daly and Roper Rivers ... ... 15
(c) Aboriginals living on large Pastoral Areas ... ... ... ... ... ... 16
(i d ) Aboriginals living on wild, unoccupied Land ... ... ... ... ... 16
Treatment of Aboriginal Women ... ... ... .. ... .. ... ... 16
Protectors, &c., and proposed Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17
Employment ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
Relation between Aboriginal and Employer ... ... ... ... ... ... .. 18
Issuing of Permits ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ~ 18
Supply of Opium and Spirituous Liquor to Aboriginals ... ... ... ... ... 18
Medical Officers, Hospitals, Treatment, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... 19
Provision for Treating Contagious Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... 19
Trial of Aboriginals ... .. ... .. ... ... ... . ... 19
Grimes committed by wild Aboriginals and the Punishment of Aboriginals. Necessity of
Establishing an Aboriginal Reformatory ... ... ... ... ... .. 20
Half-castes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . ... 21
Payment and Remuneration of Aboriginals ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21
General Policy in regard to Aboriginals ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23
{a) Aboriginals living in and about Townships .. ... .. ... ... ... 23
(6) Aboriginals living more or less in their wild state and leading a nomad life ... ... 24
Control and Equipment of Reserves ... ... ... ... . . .. 26
Training in the Schools and on Stations ... ... ... ... ... .. ... 27
Expenses of Reserves ... ... ••• •• ••• ... ... ... ... 27
Reserves and the Land Ordinance ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... 27
Proposed Amendment of the Aboriginals Act 1910 and the Aboriginals Ordinance 1911 ... .. 28


ILLUSTRATIONS.
Figure I.—Stringybark Shelters on Melville Island.
Figure 2.—Wet Season Hut.
Figure 3.—Boys carrying wands when sent out to summon members of distant Tribes to
Initiation Ceremonies.
Figure 4.—Aboriginal carrying message, or ‘‘Paper yabber.”
Figure s.—Sacred Ceremony associated with a Snake Totem.
Figure 6. —Natives performing a Kangaroo Ceremony.
Figure 7. —Magic Ceremony to injure a man by burning some of his excrement.
Figure B.—Medicine man extracting evil magic from a man.
Figure 9.—Typical Natives of the Kakadu Tribe.
Figure 10. —Group of Daly River women and young children.
Figure 11. —Bathurst Island Native.
Figure 12.—China Town, Darwin.
Figure 13. Aboriginals unloading Boat on the Daly River.
Figure 14 —Old Native Camp on Lamaru Beach, Darwin.
Figure 13. —Natives building their own houses on the Aboriginal Compound at Darwin
Figure 16.—Aboriginal Garden at Kalin Bench, Darwin.
Figure 17.—Lagoon at Oenpelli, the Central Station on the Alligator River Reserve.
Figure 18. —Bathurst Island Mission Station.
Map.


PRELIMINARY REPORT ON THE ABORIGINALS OF THE
NORTHERN TERRITORY
BY PROFESSOR W. BALDWIN SPENCER M.A. C.M.G. F.R.S.,
PROFESSOR OF BIOLOGY IN THE
MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY.
INTRODUCTION.
I left Melbourne on 25th December, 1911,
arrived at Darwin on 15th January and left again
on 25th December, 1912. There was a consider-
able amount of routine work that it was necessary
to transact in Darwin and owing to the almost
total lack of office accommodation, it was difficult
to carry this on. As it was then the wet season I
was unable at first to leave Darwin, except for a
visit to Pine Creek and the adjacent mining area,
but on the sth March I went across to Melville
Island to investigate the natives there returning on
26th March. An unfortunate accident made it im-
possible for me to walk for nearly two months, so
that instead of travelling up country under climatic
conditions which were then favorable. I was con-
fined to Darwin and could only transact routine
work. During May I paid a short visit to the
Daly River in company with His Excellency the
Administrator and also again visited Pine Creek.
On 16th June I proceeded in a motor launch to the
East Alligator River and spent the time until Bth
August investigating the native tribes in this por-
tion of the Territory in company with Mr. P.
Cahill. I was particularly anxious to see this part
of the country from the point of view of the estab-
lishment of a large native reserve.
On Bth August I came down the East Alligator,
up the South Alligator River and then across coun-
try to the railway line, traversing en route an un-
occupied aboriginal reserve that I wished to see
and reached Darwin on 18th August. On 2nd
September I left Darwin, accompanying the Ad-
ministrator on a lengthy motor trip covering more
than 1,200 miles of country. We proceeded south
to Newcastle Waters, to which point I had travelled
north on a previous expedition. Thence we went
east across the tableland or “downs” country via
Eva Downs, Anthony Lagoon and the McArthur
River to Borroloola. From the latter we took a
zig-zag course via the following cattle stations: -
Bauhenia Downs, Tanumbirini. O. T. Lagoon,
Nutwood Downs and Hodgson Downs to McMinn’s
Bar Station on the Roper River. During our visit
to the Territory last year I had previously seen the
lower part of the Roper River country from
McMinn’s Bar to the mouth but regretted my in-
ability not to be able again to visit the Mission
station on the Roper. We reached Katherine River
telegraph station on 23rd October. This trip gave
me the opportunity of visiting the stations men-
tioned and of observing the conditions under which
the natives live in a large area of the Territory.
I had previously arranged with Mr. P. Cahill to
meet me with horses and impedimenta at the Roper
River but owing to failure of petrol supply we
were unable to reach the latter with the motor car,
so I sent a messenger to him to return to the
Katherine, where I awaited his arrival. From the
Katherine we proceeded across country to the Flora
River to investigate the natives in this part and
made our way round to the head of the railwav line
at Pine Creek which we reached on 22nd November.
On 29th November I went across to Bathurst and
Melville Islands visiting the Mission station on the
former and returned to Darwin on 10th December.
I should much like to have been able to investigate
the southern half of the Territory but owing to
the long distances to be traversed, work in Darwin
and the accident which caused me to lose some two
months of valuable time, this was out of the ques-
tion. I have, however, traversed a considerable
part of this on previous occasions and am fairlv
well acquainted with the conditions obtaining there,
though in the region of the Macdonnell Ranges re-
cent years have witnessed a great demoralization of
the natives.
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS.
I propose under this heading to deal with certain
points of fundamental importance, chieflv in regard
to the mental and moral characteristics of the
aboriginals that must be understood and taken into
account in the formulating of am' scheme to deal
with them.
Perhaps the point of most importance in
regard to the aboriginal is that he is a
pure nomad with no fixed abode. There is
no such thing as any village or compound
in which the natives live permanently in as-
sociation with one another. At most they have
favorite camping grounds where, under ordinarv
circumstances, they build rough bark or bough


shelters. The latter are very fragile but it is
astonishing how cleverly, though simply, the native
will lean a few boughs up against one another in
such a way as to make them a shade against the
sun or a fairly efficient protection against wind and
rain. They seem to know instinctively the right
angle at which to slant the boughs so as to with-
stand the pressure of a strong wind. In many
parts during the summer months violent monsoonal
deluges have to be endured. On Melville and
Bathurst Islands great use is made of sheets of
stringybark which the natives strip from the trees
with their tomahawks iti lengths of from 6 to 10
feet by 2 or 3 feet in width. With these they build
sometimes dome-shaped, at others tent-shaped mia
mias, usually not more than at most 4 feet high.
I was much struck on Melville Island with their
very simple but effective contrivance of just picking
up and folding a sheet of bark in two and using
it as an umbrella, slanting the bark in such a way
as to keep off as much of the torrents of rain as
possible. I found this a very useful plan as a
protection for my cameras. If they are over-
taken with specially heavy rain out in the bush,
away from camp, they often huddle together closely,
side by side, in a line under the shelter of a few-
slanting sheets of bark and with a trench roughly-
scooped out by their hands in the best position to
lead the ground water away from them. As soon
as the rain ceases they pick up their belongings and
march away quite cheerfully. I once saw some
twenty natives quite dry under a shelter of this
kind, which was not more than 4 feet high and did
not subtend more than 2 feet of ground. In
parts where it is available paper-bark (the
bark of Melaleuca leucodendron) is used, and in
some respects is more efficient than stringybark,
because it is very strong and, at the same time,
pliable. In addition to this it is very warm, and
can easily be wrapped round their bodies as they
lie on the ground during the cold winter nights.
Over the greater part of the Territory there are, in
addition to the rains which do not seriously in-
convenience the aboriginals, two main sources of
discomfort. The first of these is the cold at night
during, at all events, three winter months. It is a
very remarkable thing that except for a small apron
or tassel both men and women are stark naked.
The only efficient covering of any kind is an apron
made of a fold of paper bark. This is worn only
on Bathurst and Melville Islands, so far as I have
seen, and is held in place by the arms which these
women always carry characteristically bent at the
elbows, so that the latter hold the apron close
against the side of the body just above the hips. It
is a remarkable fact that the native, though he feels
the w : nter cold keenlv. has never realized the fact
that the kangaroos and opossum that he catches and
eats in plenty would provide him with a warm
covering. This is due to the fact that he prefers
to cook his animals in the skin, so as to keep all
the juices inside and therefore the first thing he
does is to put the entire animal on the fire and
singe the hair off. As it is, at night time the whole
family huddles together, along with the dogs, under
its bough or bark shelter with sheets of paper bark
under and above and around them, if they can get
any, and with perhaps two or three small fires very
close to them. The native firmly believes in a
small fire that he can get near to, even perhaps
coil round and that can be easily replenished with
small sticks.
The second source of discomfort is the presence,
at most times and places, of a certain number and
at other times and at all places near water, of an
enormous number of flies by day and exceedingly
vicious mosquitoes by night. The flies do not
trouble the natives so much as they do the white
men ; in fact, you often see the former, especially
the children, with their eyes encircled with a mass
of crawling flies, apparently taking no notice of
them. The mosquitoes attack the natives with very
serious results, spreading malarial fever, &c.,
amongst them. The natives do not appear to be am
more immune to tropical diseases such as malarial
fever than the white settlers are. I have in my posses-
sion a stick marked with more than ninety notches
indicating so many deaths from what was supposed
to be malarial fever in the course of two
months amongst the natives of Melville Island.
In many parts they build special wet-sea-
son huts, each made of a framework of
branches very much like the ribs and keel of a
boat upside clown. These are covered all over closely
with paper or stringybark and only just a small
entrance left through which the natives crawl until
it can hold no more and there, almost hermetically
sealed, with perhaps also a smoke fire going, they
huddle together all night long in a more or less
hopeless attempt both to sleep and to evade the
mosquitoes. If they cannot get bark their only hope
is to make great smoke fires with green bushes and
grass but in the real mosquito season they have at
best very uncomfortable and disturbed nights and
have to make up for it by sleeping in the day.
To keep flies off, in some places as on the Alligator
Rivers, they use sometimes bird wings and some-
times whisks made of shredded bark. In hilly
districts they are a little more fortunate, because
if they can get up 200 or 300 feet they are re-
latively free from the pest. Near to Oenpelli, for
example, on the East Alligator River there is an
isolated hill about 300 feet high. Straight up this,
through the scrub, there runs a path that has been
used for long years as a track to some rock shelters
on the top. Every night, as soon as the sun sets,
a long procession of natives winds up the hill side


from the plains around the billabongs and river, the
women carrying their piccaninnies and pitchis con-
taining water and stores of lily roots, yams and
other food, the men carrying their spears and clubs.
The overhanging rucks form caves with low-
lying shelving roofs, blackened with the smoke of
years of fires and walls decorated with quaint, con-
ventional designs of the animals on which they feed,
all crudely drawn in red and yellow ochre, white
pipe clay and charcoal mixed with grease. Here
they camp, free from mosquitoes, i:a comparative
coolness, shifting from the northern to the southern
face, and vice versa, according to the direction
from which the monsoonal storms are blowing. It
is only in places such as this that there may be
said to be anything at all in the nature of a per-
manent camping place; for the most part the
natives wander about the country from one feeding
ground to another, according to the nature of the
season.
When the time comes for the turtle to lay its
eggs they go to the laying ground on some sandy
beach. When the lagoons and billabongs are alive
with young geese the natives are there camping close
by and catching them by the score; when birds
are scarce they go to the lily pools and feed on
roots and stems and seeds, and in the inland, drier,
parts they gather together on the larger and more
permanent waterholes where fish and shellfish and
birds and vegetable food can be secured longer
than elsewhere. The moment the rains fall, off
they scatter to take advantage of supplies that do
not exist during the dry season.
Equally characteristic with this nomadic habit,
in fact, intimately associated with it, is the
fact that the native has no idea whatever
of the cultivation of crops nor of the do-
mestication of animals. He has never realized
that, if he sowed some of the large quan-
tities of minute grass seed that the women patiently
winnow with the wind, and then grind into a
muddy paste on their flat stones, he could secure
a supply for the future and be. to a certain extent,
independent of the season and not forced to roam
about from place to place in search of food. In
this respect he is far lower than the Papuan, the
New Zealander or the usual African native, all
of whom have reached the agricultural stage and
live in villages or compounds surrounded by their
crops, with a more or less permanent food supply
and therefore also with time and thought to spare
for other branches of work. The fact that the
Australian aboriginal has never of his own initia-
tive cultivated a cereal or attempted to domesticate
any animal as a food supply is one of fundamental
importance and together with his nomadic instinct
makes him much more difficult to deal with than
die Papuan, African or New Zealander.
It must be said, however, that when once they
have been shown how to do it then they are quite
competent under supervision to undertake cultiva-
tion. Doubtless as time goes by they will be able
to do the work on their own initiative. There are
no finer vegetables anywhere than those grown at
Mr. Warrington Rogers’ station on the Roper, at
Hodgson Downs or at some of the telegraph
stations, such as Tennant’s Creek, and in each case
the actual manual work of watering, &c., is largely
done by the natives, of course, entirely under super-
vision, but still the little that the adults now do
indicates that the children if trained would prob-
ably be quite competent to do much more than their
wild parents and could certainly be made to
realize the importance of cultivation as they already
do in other parts where they have had the chance
of being trained. As it is, the aboriginal, except
those that are employed by whites, lives on such
wild animal and vegetable food as he can secure
from day to day, roaming about the country that
is regarded as being owned by the tribe of which
he is a member, camping where food is plentiful
and moving on to a better hunting ground when
he has temporarily depleted one.
One of the most striking features of the abo-
riginals is the way in which they are divided into
a large series of tribes, each of which speaks a
distinct dialect and occupies, or is regarded as
doing so. a tract of country the boundaries of
which are well known to the natives. The ex-
istence of these dialects is one of the most puzzling
and difficult things to understand amongst the
aboriginals. In the first place, it is not at all
easy in manv cases to ascertain the native name of
the tribe. As likely as not you will get a localitv
name, not the true tribal name, and when once a
mistake has been made in pronunciation, or even in
the actual word, and it has been repeated by white
men, the al>originals are so anxious to please and
also in some respects so indifferent, that the wrong
pronunciation or even word mav actually be adopted
by them and pass into circulation. For ex-
amnle the name Woolner, as it is commonly
spelt, is a white man’s name for a tribe that calls
itself Punuurlu. It mav be a native word but it
has been mistakenly applied by the whites as a
tribal name and has been tacitlv accepted by the
natives or by a large number of them.
What exactly constitutes an Australian tribe
is somewhat difficult to say and the term
has never, so far as I am aware, been
definitely defined. It may conveniently be de-
fined somewhat as follows:—A tribe is a
group of individuals speaking a common dialect,
differing in the nature of its words from that of
other groups and regarded as owning a definite
tract of countrv, the boundaries of which are known
to them, and recognised by the members of other


tribes. Each tribe may usually be divided into
sections and the real test of whether a native is
or is not a member of any particular tribe is whe-
ther, under normal conditions, he may wander
freely over the country owned bv that tribe. He
must not trespass on the land of any other tribe,
entering upon this only after he has received per-
mission of the owners to do so. In the case even
of natives belonging to different sections of a tribe
there is a recognition of local ownership within the
wider range of tribal ownership. No members of
any one local group enter a camp of natives be-
longing to another local group until thev have been
formally invited to do so
When important ceremonies are about to take place
messengers are always sent out often to distant
tribes and the etiquette observed illustrates well one
aspect of aboriginal character. Each messenger is
provided by some important member or recognised
leader of the group that sends him out with an
object, the possession of which at once indicates
to all whom he meets that he is a messenger.
In the southern parts of the Territory this will
take the form of a sacred stick called a churinga,
or popularly a bull roarer. The bearer of this is
absolutely safe anywhere. On approaching a
camp he sits down waiting until the local men
choose to take notice of him, which may not be
until after an hour or two. Thev all go on mean-
while quite unconcernedly as if he did not exist,
and then one or two of the older men will go over
to him ; be will show them his credentials and
deliver his message, after which he is brought into
camp, made free of the special men’s camp and
provided with food. This same thing goes on at
every camp that he visits and exactly the same
etiquette is observed when the visitors arrive at
the cami) from which the messenger was sent. In
the northern parts, as for example, in the Alligator
River district, when boys are to be initiated, thev
are scut out on a journey to distant camps amongst
strange tribes that often lasts for months. Each
of them carries a small wand and under the pro-
tection of this they travel in perfect safety. When
thev come to a strange camp they stand close to-
gether, leaning on their wands and singing a
special corrobboree song, which must be replied to
by the women in camp.
It is interesting to find that the natives have also
as it were extended this feeling of sacredness of
the persons of their own messengers to those of
aboriginals who are carrying messages for white
men. A letter is always spoken of as a “ paper
yabber ” and is carried in a cleft stick so that it
can be seen easily. Last year a native carried a
“paper yabber” for me 90 miles in this way and
they not infrequentlv traverse longer distances than
I his, the cleft stick acting as a safe passport. Thev
look upon the “ paper yabber ” as a mysterious
thing that is endowed with the capacity of seeing,
as is well instanced by an aboriginal who abstracted
a stick of tobacco from a parcel that he was carry-
ing and was highly indignant with the “ paper
yabber ” for telling the white man what he had
done, because he had hid it i'n a hollow log while
committing the theft, so that it should not be able
to see what he was doing.
A matter of very great importance in dealing
with the natives is the fact that every tribe has
certain definite places where important cere-
monies are performed. These ceremonies are
very often associated with their mythical an-
cestors, or they may be concerned with pro-
viding and regulating food supplies by magic.
In any case their right performance is a
matter of deep importance to the aboriginals and
to be shut off from the spots that are especially
associated with the memory of their ancestors and
where from time immemorial they have performed
these ceremonies, naturally causes a feeling of re-
sentment amongst the natives.
For example, there is one special rocky ledge in
a shallow cave in the Waterhouse Range, right in
the heart of the continent, which is associated with
ceremonies of the kangaroo totem. The face of
the ledge, which is about 30 feet long, is decorated
with broad bands of red ochre and white gypsum,
which are renewed yearly when the ceremony is
performed. The upper surface is black with con-
gealed blood; which has also run down the face
in great streaks and, judging by the appearance
of the rock, it must have been used for long years.
One of their ancestors, who was a great old kan-
garoo, was killed here and turned into the stone,
which also contains large numbers of young kan-
garoo spirits. The blood-letting and singing songs
connected with the spot cause the spirits to go out
and be born as kangaroos, which other natives eat.
Close by, also, an old native, who explained it all
to me, dug into the earth and showed me an
elongate rounded stone at least a foot in diameter
which is supposed to be part of the old kangaroo’s
tail. The kangaroo men must perform the ceremony
once every year at this spot, which is called Un-
diara, and there are very many places with similar
associations belonging to other groups of natives
scattered all over Central Australia.
It is difficult to understand, unless you have lived
amongst them, the large part that these ceremonies
play in their life. They are quite distinct from the
ordinary corrobborees that any one may see and
are only performed by men out of the sight of
women and young people. On one occasion, in the
Warramunga, one of the Northern Territory tribes,
the late Mr. Gillen and myself witnessed a con-
tinuous series lasting over three months. A remark-
able thing is that in many parts they have been
carried on year after year without the few white
people living in the district knowing anything about


them. It must be realized that their existence forms
a very serious practical difficulty in connexion with
any attempt, though it may be necessary to make
this, to remove the aboriginals from any particular
part of the country except in settled districts where
they have lost all their old beliefs and, to a large
extent, given up performing their old ceremonies.
Another great difficulty in dealing fairly with
the aboriginals is caused by their intensely com-
munistic habits. They have very little idea of
private property. If you give a man, say, a stick
of tobacco there are certain individuals, such as
men who might lawfully be his fathers-in-law, to
whom he is obliged by custom to give some; and
even if they are not on the spot, he will imme-
diately share it with others. Give a man a shirt
in return for work that he has done for you and
the chances are that you will find a friend of his,
who has done nothing except ask for it, wearing
it next day. On many stations and in many pri-
vate houses the work is done by a few natives;
but every one at hand shares in the proceeds,
whether these be clothes, food or tobacco; and it
never occurs to them that the lazy loafer is living
at the expense of his more industrious brother.
Still another point of very great importance
which must always be borne in mind in dealing
with the aboriginals, is their intense belief in evil
magic. In tribes inhabiting the country around the
Alligator Rivers a very favorite form of magic is
to get hold of some excrement, it does not matter
how small a piece, of a man or woman against
whom you may have a grudge, and whom you wish
to injure. All you have to do is to get two or three
friends to help you perform a rather elaborate
ceremony out in some quiet spot, where he cannot
see you, and you can easily encompass his death.
The belief has one beneficial result in that tne
camps of these natives are much better from a sani-
tary point of view than in most Australian tribes,
because everything ; s carefully buried, lest some
enemy should be lurking about.
The natives have no idea of disease or pain 01
any kind as being due to anything but evil magic,
except that which is caused by an actual accident
that they can see. If a man has a headache, it i
evil magic that has got inside him and he will
wear, in some tribes, his wife’s head rings, so that
the magic may pass into them and be thrown awa\
with them into the bush.
Anything that they do not understand they asso-
ciate with evil magic. One of the most striking
and characteristic examples of this that 1 know of
is the fact that when first they came across the
track of a cart they thought it was a path along
which evil magic was passing and if they were
obliged to cross it they jumped over it as high in
the air as they could lest the magic should enter
them.
Natives, also, are always most frightened of
magic of another tribe or distant part and will often
fix upon some man who lives 50 or 100 miles away
as guilty of causing the death by evil magic of a
member of their own group.
The result of all this is that there is always a
feeling of mutual suspicion and distrust between
members of different tribes, each of which has its
own peculiar forms of magic by means of which
it may encompass the death of strangers. Often
in our little camp associated with the departmental
office in Darwin, we had natives of various tribes
together for a few days at a time and it was very
noticeable not only how they kept apart from one
another but the mutual distrust with which they
viewed each other. You have only to tell a native
that he is the victim of evil magic and he suc-
cumbs at once and can only be cured by the exer-
cise of counter magic. The feeling is so strong
that on more than one occasion when a woman,
strong in magic power, had given it out that she
was using magic against some individual, it very
seriously interfered with the treatment of that native
under medical supervision in a hospital.
Even an aboriginal who has lived long with the
whites and has lost most of his old beliefs, will
still firmly retain his faith in evil magic, though
he might be ashamed to own it in public. It will
he readily understood, therefore, that this aspect
of the native character requires very careful con-
sideration in connexion with any attempt that miglv
be made to segregate members of different tribes
on one area.
The tribes, again, may be divided into groups,
the members of each group being allied to one
another in regard to their beliefs and also in the
performance of special ceremonies, more especiallv
those in regard to the initiation of the young men.
For example, the native trihes on Bathurst and Mel-
ville Islands are closely allied to one another in
these respects and differ markedly from all those
on the mainland. The tribes on the Coburg Penin-
sula and in the large area drained by the East,
West and South Alligator Rivers and away to
the west, as far, at all events, as Point Stuart,
form an allied group with marked features in com-
mon. Such, for example, as the absence of anv
definite class svstem. They differ radically both
in their organization and initiation ceremonies
from tribes to the south of them. So again, we
have groups of tribes along the Roper and Daly
and Victoria Rivers, all of which have the same
fundamental organization and common initiation
ceremonies, but differ radically in their class or-
ganization from groups of coastal tribes. Any
segregation of the tribes, to have any chance of
success, must be based upon this similarity or dis-
similarity in regard to organization, customs and
beliefs.


MORALITY AND GENERAL CHARACTER
OF THE ABORIGINALS.
It is not infrequently stated by white settlers
that the natives have no morality. This is, of
course, entirely untrue —that is, of aboriginals in
their normal state, before they have been degraded
by contact with a civilization that they do not
understand and from which they need protection.
Their moral code is a very different one from
ours and certainly permits of and sanctions, prac-
tices which, in some cases, are revolting to us, but
there are others, such as their strict law in regard
to what woman a particular man may or may not
marry, and vice versa, which it is a serious mistake
to interfere with until we can give them something
better and something that they can understand.
Of course in many cases where .the tribes, as in
the immediate neighbourhood of Darwin, are not
only demoralized but decimated, the old rules can-
not he enforced; but, except in these cases, the
natives should be encouraged to adhere to them.
It may also be said, speaking generally, that the
uncivilized native is honest, with probably not
more exceptions than amongst whites; but
that the so-called civilized aboriginal who
has given up his old habits and become
often a mere loafer, in many cases, is
not. It is, of course, necessary to make it quite
clear to natives working on the stations, &c., that
the white man’s property must not be interfered
with but when once he understands this and finds
himself well treated in regard to food and tobacco,
he rarely steals. A native left in charge of pro-
perty of any kind may generally be relied upon to
prevent any others from interfering with it and
in camp one is accustomed to leave such things as
tobacco about without fear of its being stolen.
During the whole of our expedition across Aus-
tralia in 1901, so far as Mr. Gillen and myself
were aware, we had nothing stolen, though the
opportunities for appropriating such prized things
as knives and tobacco were abundant. We sent
our two boys back overland from the mouth of the
Macarthnr River, on the Gulf of Carpentaria, to
Charlotte Waters—a journey that occupied them
four months—and at the end of that time they
handed over their horses and impedimenta in per-
fectly good order to the officer in charge of the
station.
On some stations there is undoubtedly difficulty
in regard to the aboriginals both harassing and killing
cattle and this is a matter that is very difficult to
deal with in a way that is fair to both whites and
aboriginals. In many parts there is practically
little trouble and it is only right to say that the
personality of the white man counts for a certain
amount. Some stations are, fortunately, practically
free from the trouble, others are constantly suffer-
ing and the nature of the country makes it ex-
tremely difficult, in most cases, to capture th*
offending natives. Even when this can be done, i*
means an altogether disproportionate expenditure
of time and money and the present system of
punishment is useless either as a preventive or a
corrective.
On the other hand, while it is true that, in some
parts, the aboriginal gives trouble, it is equally
true that, at the present day, practically all the
cattle stations depend on their labour and, in fact,
could not get on without it, any more than the
police constables could. They do work that it
would be very difficult to get white men to do and
do it not only cheerfully but for a remuneration
that, in many cases, makes all the difference at
the present time between working the station at a
profit or a loss. Out on the run the first thing
that one hears, often long before daybreak, is the
call to the boys to get up and go out in search
of the horses. They are up without a murmur or
anything to eat and off they go into the bush with
bridles in their hands, often shivering, through
grass and scrub heavy with dew, until, after any-
thing up to a two or three miles trudge, they find a
horse, mount him bare-back, track all the others
up and bring them into camp. Then, in intervals
of packing, they eat their breakfast and all day
long ride behind, seeing that the pack-horses with
their loads are kept on the track. When muster-
ing they are hard at work from early morn till late
evening, just as their masters are.
Some idea of how useful the natives may be
made under proper guidance is afforded by one or
two incidents during the recent strike in Darwin.
Under the control of the Chief Protector Mr. G.
W. Stretton twelve stalwart aboriginals assisted in
the unloading of steamers and on another occasion
when white men refused to work ten of them loaded
sixty-three tons of coal into trucks outside Darwin,
then came to the ship’s side and unloaded half of
it, the whole work being done after 3 p.m. It
was a dark night and they worked on till they could
work no longer, laughing and cheerful the whole
time.
Apart from their usefulness, many aboriginals
are possessed of qualities and perform actions that
would call for warm admiration and appreciation
if exhibited or done by whites. Two or three that
came under my personal notice will illustrate this.
When the Administrator and myself were trying to
get across from the overland telegraph line to
Borroloola in a motor car, the country was so rough
that our supply of petrol gave out and we simply
came to a standstill. Very fortunately we had
taken the precaution to have a “ boy ” with us.
In the first place his sense of locality, as usual
amongst the natives, was very wonderful. There
was no track and we were running across country
with the object of striking a solitary waterhole fifty


miles away. To us one clump of trees was very
much like every other clump standing out on the
open undulating plains. All that he did was to
point out the direction every now and then and,
without any hesitation, he brought us through and
we found ourselves on the edge of the water-hole,
which was below the level of the ground, so that
we could not see it until we were right on its
margin.
Next day we bumped on unceasingly, crossing
what is commonly known as “ debill-debill ” coun-
try, where the earth in dry seasons is hard and
seared with cracks big enough to hold a motor car
wheel and covered with a growth of coarse cane-
grass, often ten feet high. The surface of the ground
was thrown into an endless series of bumps,
over which the car made miserable progress, while
we rapidly used our supply of petrol. We had
another fifty miles of trackless country to the next
water-hole, but, two miles before we reached it, the
petrol ran out, and we came to a dead stop. We
walked on in the blazing heat to the water, which
was thick and foul and had it not been for the
boy the outlook would have been serious. Quite
cheerfully, just as if it were part of an ordinary
day’s work and nothing out of the common, he
took a small billy of water, just a little tea, sugar
and flour, and set off on a lonely walk of forty-six
miles to an outlying little station, where we hoped
he would find a solitary white man living. There
was no water on the track but the boy not only
went through and gave our note to the white man,
who immediately came to our assistance, but, with-
out wailing for a “ spell,” he got a horse and rode
on another fifty miles to our nearest supply of
petrol that had been previously sent up country.
The aboriginals often do this kind of thing without
receiving, or expecting to receive, any special
thanks, though, naturally, such a boy is well looked
after.
Then, again, about two years ago, a boy called
“Neighbour” was arrested for supposed cattle
killing. Along with another native he was being
brought overland to Darwin by a mounted con-
stable. Heavy rains had fallen and they came
to a swollen creek. The boys, who are perfectly
at home in the water, went in first with their
chains on, the constable following afterwards on
horseback. The horse slipped in the stream and
turned over, kicking the constable and rendering
him unconscious, or at least dazed, for a short
time. Neighbour, looking round, saw what had
happened and without a moment’s hesitat’on, went
to the constable’s assistance, winding his chains
in some manner round his neck and assisted the
former on to land. Nothing would have been simpler
than for him to have left the constable to his fate
and to have cleared away into the bush. For this
action the Albert medal has been bestowed by His
Majesty on Neighbour, and is now kept safely in
tne Aboriginal Department. Neighbour wears
proudly a little bit of the ribbon .on ordinary ano
the medal on official occasions. It would be use-
less to trust him with it; he is a wild native ana
could easily be persuaded to part with it if once
he took it away into the bush.
Quite as heroic an action was that performed by
a lubra now living at Katherine Creek, where she
is well looked alter by the post-office officials.
Years ago a party of white men went out to the
west of the telegraph line. It was a dry season
and word came in that they were perishing, it
relief party at once set out, amongst whom was
this lubra with her “ boy.” The original party
returned in safety, but of the search party all
perished of thirst except this lubra and one white
man. They had no water and the heat was fierce,
but, leaving the white man, who was then helpless,
under the shade of a bush, she walked on alone
for some twenty miles to a little water-hole, carried
back enough to save the white man’s life and then
guided him in to the water and the nearest station.
Two years ago, a little half-caste girl, only about
fifteen years of age, was walking on Darwin jetty
with her mistress who accidentally tripped and fell
headlong into the water between the jetty and a
steamer lying alongside. It was a dark night and
the Darwin jetty is very badly lighted, but without
a moment’s hesitation the little half-caste dived in,
caught hold of her mistress and swam with her to
one of the piers, where she held her until assistance
came. Not only does the tide, which rises twenty-
four feet in the harbor, run strongly, but there is
always the chance that a stray crocodile or shark
may be lurking around.
These areonly three examples out of very many that
could be recorded of this kind of behaviour on the
part of the natives. It is only also fair to add that
one could relate many equally heroic deeds done
by white men and women in the Northern Terri-
tory ; in fact, more heroic because such things mean
more to a white man than they do to an aboriginal,
but they serve to show that the latter is capable of
what we regard as truly unselfish action—of dis-
regarding his own interests, and even risking his own
life to help some one else.
That is one side of the picture, but there is quite
another. I have known a native who was desirous
of stealing a lubra from a friend, persuade the
latter, on some pretext, to climb a tree and then,
as he came down, hamstring him rapidlv with a
sharp stone knife on both legs. Then, leaving his
friend to crawl back to his camp as best he could,
he ran off with the lubra.
The aboriginal is. indeed, a verv curious mixture ;
mentally, about the level of a child who has little
control over his feelings and is liable to give way to
violent fits of temper, during which he mav very


likely behave with great cruelty. He has no sense
of responsibility and, except in rare cases, no
initiative. His memory in many cases is wonderful
so far as subjects are concerned that affect his life
and mode of conduct. When once he has seen any
place, or any particular natural object, he knows
it for all time. If once he has heard a corrobboree
he knows the words and music and his memory in
respect to native traditions is marvellous. It must
be understood, however, that in proportion to the
narrow sphere of their actions, there is as great a
mental difference amongst aboriginals as amongst
whites in their wider sphere. This is well recog-
nised amongst the natives themselves. For instance,
there is one man on the Alligator River whose man-
agement of the wooden trumpet used during their
ceremonies is wonderfully superior to that of any
one else and whose fame as a musician has spread
even beyond the limits of his own tribe. Whenever
he is in camp he is always requested to play. So
again in the making of all their various weapons and
utensils, there are always certain individuals who
are noted for their ability—some in making shields,
others in making knives. There was one man be-
longing to the Kakadu tribe, on the Alligator River,
who was extraordinarily able in regard to remem-
bering traditions and was recognised as a great
authority on the subject of the past history of the
tribe. He was relating to us a tradition of the
tribe, according to which an old ancestor sent out
different individuals to populate various parts of
the country. There were five groups of these in-
dividuals and he was able to tell us the names, so
tar as we could judge, of all of them. They in-
cluded those of one hundred and twenty
men and women and not only did he know
their names, but also the totemic group to
which each belonged and their intermarriages.
It was really a wonderful feat of memory and
the information was evidently correct, because it
fitted in with other traditions and we tested him
later and found him consistent. The possessor of
any particular capacity does not, except in very
rare cases, secure any very direct personal gain from
its exercise beyond the fact that he has a reputation
for ability. Everything is communistic and even
if a man is provided with an extra supply of food,
or, in recent years, tobacco, in return for something
he has made or done, it is usually not long before
it is divided amongst his friends. There is an
equal distribution of profits quite irrespective of
deserts.
Lastly, there is one feature that must not be
omitted and that is the aboriginal’s fondness for fun
and his sense of humour. Under normal conditions
they are always cheerful and are constantly either
corrobboreeing, or playing and laughing with one an-
other. Nothing amuses them more than an accident
that puts one of their number in an undignified or
uncomfortable position. If a friend tumbles over a
log and gives himself a good knock, they roar with
laughter at him and the chances are that he joins
in. If any one comes up who did not see it happen,
he will be requested to do it again for the benefit of
the new arrival and, as likely as not, will repeat
the performance. Years after the event happened
the recital of how two of the old men of the Kakadu
tribe had to run for their lives and just managed
to keep ahead of two charging buffaloes and an
imitation of how they ran, what they said and what
they looked like, were greeted with roars of laughter
and kept a camp cheerful for an hour or two. Thev
are wonderful at mimicking anything that they think
is funny and the acting of two natives, one ot
whom tried to show me how a former Government
Resident of the Territory had behaved when he
suddenly trod on a snake, and the other who, after
posing a few natives for the purpose, imitated
by means of three sticks for a tripod and a sheet
of paper bark for a focusing cloth, the actions of
a very excitable photographer whom he had watched,
was wonderfully realistic.
There are said to be 20,000 aboriginals in the
Territory, but on what authority this statement is
made 1 do not know, as it is quite impossible to
form any definite and reliable estimate, and the
above number is a mere guess. There are great
areas, as in Arafura Land, where practically no white
man has been—at all events there is no settlement—
and here there is any abundance of native food
and the tribes wander unhampered in their native
state. Judging by what I have seen and heard, I
think it probable that a census would show more
nearly 50,000 than 20,000. One thing is certain
and that is that in all parts where thev are in con-
tact with outsiders, especially with Asiatics, they
are dying out with great rapidity.
PRESENT CONDITIONS AND TREATMENT
OF THE ABORIGINALS.
At the present time, the aboriginals, so far as
their relationship to incoming races, European and
Asiatic, are concerned, may be divided roughly into
four groups
(a) Those living in and around towns (Darwin,
Pine Creek, &c.) and on mining fields.
(b) Those living on land, such as that around
the Daly and Roper Rivers, where they
have been to a certain extent in contact
with settlers, which land will shortly be
thrown open for more or less close settle-
ment.
(c) Those living on large pastoral areas.
(d) Those living on wild, unoccupied land, such
as the north-eastern part of the Terri-
tory, and much of the land bordering the
Gulf of Carpentaria.


(a) Aboriginals Living in Towns, &c.
These natives have long since become degenerate
and have lost all their old customs and beliefs.
Many of them are employed by white residents to
whom they are useful and by whom they are well
treated. Since the passing of the Aboriginals Act
1910, no permits to employ them have been granted
to Asiatics.
A petition, largely supported in Darwin, was
drawn up, asking that the section of the Act pro-
hibiting their employment by Asiatics should be
amended. In regard to this, 1 reported as fol-
lows :
r. There are a few Asiatic employers in Dar-
win and Pine Creek to whom it might
be possible to grant licences, but their
number is very small and they all live
in localities which, in consequence of
the facts referred to below, have been
declared “ prohibited areas under the
Act.
2. The supplying of aboriginals with opium
and spirits and a wholesale prostitution
of native women are common and con
slant practices amongst the great body of
Asiatics and form the most serious evil
that the Department has to contend with
in the settled and more especially the
mining districts.
3. The general policy of the Department in re-
gard to Asiatics is, and always must be,
that of preventing them, as far as pos-
sible, from coming into contact with the
aboriginals.
The Government declined to accede to the request
of the petitioners and I am more than ever con-
vinced of the justice and wisdom of the policy of
separating the aboriginals from all contact with
Asiatics, though it is one which at present is ex-
tremely difficult to carry out in its entirety.
Under the Aboriginals Ordinance 1911, power is
given to the Administrator to declare any place to
he a prohibited area, within which it shall not be
lawful for any aboriginal or half-caste to be or
remain without the express permission of a protector
or police officer.
The Chinese quarters in Darwin, Pine Creek and
the more important mining areas are now declared
“ prohibited areas ” and this restriction must be ex-
tended so as to apply to all other Chinese mining
fields and quarters. The natives have been for so
many years allowed to do exactly what they liked
in regard to frequenting all parts that, without a
much larger staff, and consequently more efficient
supervision, it is difficult to make sure that they
do not frequent any prohibited area. The Chinese
also are very astute and while undoubtedly there
are not many aboriginals who venture into China-
town in Darwin, there are amongst the lower
Chinese many who find means of supplying the
aboriginals with opium out in the bush. When,
however, the compound at Darwin, with its native
houses, which is now in course of formation, is
complete and under proper supervision, it will be
more easy to deal with the aboriginals and to pre-
vent the Asiatics from coming into contact with
them under cover of night.
In order to meet the cases of the few reputable-
white settlers who live in prohibited areas and to
prevent any hardship or inconvenience in business
matters, the plan has been adopted of issuing special
permits in the form of brass discs that are given to
employers of natives and enable the latter to enter
a prohibited area when sent on business by their
employers, who are responsible for the proper use
of the disc.
(b) Aboriginals Living on Lands such as Those
Around the Daly and Roper Rivers, &c.
The question of what to do with this class of
natives forms a serious problem awaiting immediate
solution. Up to the present time, they have been
accustomed to wander freely over their old hunting
grounds, where, along the banks of the rivers and
in the billabongs, they can secure an ample food
supply. On one or two stations, such as that of
Messrs. Thomas and Roberts, on the Daly River,
a certain number of them are employed and all of
them have, more or less, come into contact with
white men, though the great majority are still in
their wild state.
With the opening up of the land, conditions will
abruptly change, because it is in these parts that are
suitable for farming that the land will be cut up
into small blocks, each with access to water, &c.
This cutting up has already taken place on the
Daly, where twenty-six farms have already been
taken up. In the case of great pastoral areas, it is
possible for the al)originals to be allowed to roam
more or less freely, but when the land is sub-divided
into comparatively small farms, then it is out of the
question. The natives are being, of necessity, de-
prived of their natural food supply, and cannot
possibly camp on the water-holes, as they have been
accustomed to do. There are only two alternatives,
either to allow them to wander about as outcasts,
some of them doubtless working for the settlers
but all of them practically dependent for their
existence on promiscuous charity, or to establish a
reserve for them under proper control. To be of
any practical use, the reserve must be situated some-
where in their own district. To attempt to remove
them to some other part and place them amongst
strange natives would be futile.


(c) Aboriginals Living on Large Pastoral Areas.
These pastoral areas, such as the Victoria River
Downs, Willeroo, Messrs. Bradshaw’s station, and
Newcastle Waters, on the west of the telegraph line,
and others such as Brunette, Corella, Eva Downs,
the McArthur River' Station, Nutwood Downs,
Tanumbirini, Hodgson Downs, &c., on the east,
occupy great stretches of country over which the
natives roam more or less freely. A limited number
of them are employed on the stations, w'here they
are well treated, and do most useful work, for which
they receive food, clothes, tobacco, &c.
Though comparatively few- natives are employed
on any station—the numbers in constant employ-
ment varying from tw'o or three to thirty or forty—
yet there is always a native camp in the vicinity ot
every station, where a larger or smaller number of
aboriginals is gathered together, attracted by tne
chance of securing food from the station. It is
a constant occurrence on practically all stations
where cattle are killed to distribute the offal and
bones, often with plenty of meat attached to them,
amongst the natives, who gather round the killing
yard like crows round a dying sheep. Everything
is eaten and every bone pounded up to get at the
marrow . In addition to this, there are many odd
scraps distributed and the few natives who are per-
manently employed, unless special precautions are
taken, will share what they receive with the others.
It is the natives living on some of these large
pastoral areas who are troublesome in the way of
cattle killing, and yet on the other hand it is not
too much to say that, under present conditions, the
majority of the stations are largely dependent on
the work done by black “ boys. ”
(d) Aboriginals Living on Wild Unoccupied Land.
Of these, practically nothing is known. At the
present time, they carefully avoid coming into con-
tact with any white man traversing the country that
they occupy, such as Arafura Land, but as settle-
ment proceeds they will gradually be drawn in to
civilization.
Many of the wild tribes that live on the coast
line come into contact, much to their detriment,
with pearl anu trepang fishers. The area of country
is so great that a complete and effective patrol is
at present impossible. The Department has now
a small auxiliary motor boat which will be of ser-
vice for this, amongst other purposes, and w’hen the
Government steamer Stuart is in commission, it will
be possible to exercise some control over these pear 1
and trepang fishers who at present are free to do
what thev wish when they are out of sight of
Darwin.
TREATMENT OF ABORIGINAL WOMEN.
This question is a very serious one, and requires
careful, but, at the same time, firm, treatment.
The regulations framed to deal with it must, of
necessity, be definite in their nature, but they will
have to lie carried out witn great tact on the part
of the Protectors.
I have already referred to the question of the
Asiatics and their wide-spread habit of prostituting
the lubras. The aboriginal man’s code of morality
is different from that of the white man and he
sees no wrong in lending his lubra. If it be within
the limits of his own tribe he is ruled by definite
laws defining to whom he may —in fact, sometimes
must —lend her, and to whom he may not. Asiatics
and Europeans stand outside the pale of these laws,
and, therefore, the natives can and will lend
their lubras freely to them, more especially since,
in association with the Asiatics, the attraction of
opium is too strong to be resisted. Nothing is
more patent than the rapid degeneration of the
native in contact with Chinese. The lubra ceases
to bear children, abortion being undoubtedly prac-
tised in many cases, and becomes a physical wreck.
In regard to intercourse between the whites and
aboriginals, there is no such physical degradation
of the lubras. It must be said very frankly that
the absence of any women other than aboriginals
in outlying districts is the chief reason for so many
complaints in regard to the prostitution of abori-
ginal women, and so long as the absence of while
women is a feature of the Territory, so long will
it be extremely difficult, if not impossible, to put
an end to this serious evil.
The presence of married people and families
scattered over the country would have a wonderful
influence for good, and it would be of the greatest
advantage if preference were given to married
people amongst the settlers on the lands that will
soon lie thrown open and in the selection of all
such officials as police officers.
It is most important that all Protectors should
he married men and emphatically no one except a
married man should be the Superintendent of a re-
serve or native station or settlement.
With this preference tor married men must be
associated the providing of proper quarters for the
wives of officers such as do not exist at present.
The practice that now obtains only too often of
a white man, such as a drover or teamster, travel-
ling over the country in company with an aboriginal
woman w'hom he has, perhaps, taken out of a camp,
or who may have come of her own free will, to-
gether, probably, with a “ boy ” who is, or is
Supposed to be, her husband, must be stopped. At
present, so long as the lubra is not taken from her
own district into another, the law does not deal


directly with the matter, but the Act must be
amended so that this deplorable practice can be
carefully controlled without inflicting hardship on
either aboriginals or whites. The Protector must
have power, if he thinks it advisable, to refuse to
allow a lubra to accompany a white man, even n
her husband, nominal or real, is going also.
Apart from this aspect of the question, the abori-
ginals are, I believe, with exceptions here and there,
well treated by the settlers. This is certainly the
case in regard to those on the great majority of the
cattle runs, and also on the various police and tele-
graph stations.
Reference may be made here to the intermarriage
of aboriginal lubras with men of other races. In
past years there have been a considerable number of
cases in which Asiatics and Europeans have lived
with aboriginal women as their wives and though
not legally married have treated them as such and
have recognised their children. Under the Act no
one except an aboriginal man may marry an
aboriginal lubra except by special permis-
sion which should be and is only granted
under very exceptional circumstances. In the
cases referred to above it was an alternative
between granting permission or separating the man
and woman, the latter returning to the native camp
with her children. In these instances the woman
had become accustomed to the relative comfort of
the white man’s or Asiatic’s camp and after many
years absence had probably become quite unable
and certainly unfitted to live the ordinary life in the
native camp. To consign her to the latter would be
a cruel thing to do and therefore in such exceptional
cases permission to marry was given but, when
proper provision for the aboriginals is made, such
inter-racial marriages should not be permitted.
PROTECTORS, ETC.
At the present time the official staff of the De-
partment consists of a Chief Protector, a' Chief In-
spector, who is also a Protector, and two other Pro-
tectors, together with a clerk. In addition to these,
the officers in charge of the fourteen police stations
in the Territory act as Protectors. Needless to
say, the hearty co-operation of the Police Depart-
ment is essential for the efficient working of the
Aboriginals Act, and I am glad to have the oppor-
tunity of acknowledging the services rendered b
the police officers, and especially the cordial assist-
ance of Inspector Waters, the head of the depart-
ment.
The Territory is of such great extent, and means
of communication so hopelessly slow and inefficient,
that it would require a very large staff of official
protectors to carry on the patrolling duty which is
at present necessary to insure the satisfactory work-
ing of the Act.
Some idea of the difficulties attendant upon carry-
ing out the Act may be gathered from the fact
that, in order to arrest one man who was setting
it at defiance, a Protector and a police officer had
each of them to traverse, along different routes, up-
wards of 1,000 miles of wild country.
The Act contemplates the appointment of Pro
lectors for districts within which they shall carry-
out their duties. This would be a good system i,
it were practicable but as the Territory is only,
as yet, mapped in the most vague way, while sur-
veys are practically unknown, endless legal dim-
culties might ensue if each Protector were appointed
for a district, the boundaries of which were not
defined. For the sake of convenience the districts
under the Act have been declared to be co-terminous
with the Dog Districts, and each official Protector
has had all districts assigned to him. This is ap-
parently the only way out of the difficulty, but, as
surveys are carried out and the land becomes
settled, it will be possible to define accurately and
gazette certain districts from time to time and to
appoint Protectors for them.
The superintendents and officers in- charge of such
stations and reserves as are founded will act as
Protectors and, in order to make it more practic-
able to carry out the provisions of the Act in remote
and inaccessible parts of the Territory, I recom-
mend that a certain number of reliable and reput-
able settlers and officials be appointed Honorary
Protectors, with powers to be defined in the Regu-
lations.
Amongst these Honorary Protectors I think it
highly desirable to include women as well as men,
as there are circumstances under which the former
will be of great service, and the simple fact that
there are women Protectors will probably be an im-
portant factor in regard to one aspect of the abori-
ginal problem to which reference has already been
made. I also recommend that the official Pro-
tectors be made special constables and, with a view
to checking the opium traffic, officers under the
Customs Act.
I recommend that the staff of the Department
should consist of individuals with the following
titles :
(1) Chief Protector.
(2) Official Protectors.
(3) Superintendents of stations and reserves,
who will also be Official Protectors,
their wives to act as Matrons and to be
also Protectors.
(4) Ex-officio Protectors (Police officers in
charge of stations).
(5) Honorary Protectors.
C.795!*. B


Either before or after appointment, all Official
Protectors, Superintendents and Matrons should
have passed through a course of first aid to the
wounded.
All Protectors and Superintendents should be
married men, and, as far as possible, the Same
should apply in the case of the Ex-oficio Pro-
tectors.
EMPLOYMENT.
The Act makes constant reference to the subject
of employment, but the meaning of the term is no-
where defined, and requires to be made clear. It
should, for example, be stated that the fact that an
aboriginal is constantly on premises occupied by
any individual, or is constantly in his company,
shall be regarded as sufficient evidence that the
aboriginal is in his employ, whether he or she is
actually working for him or not.
RELATION BETWEEN ABORIGINAL AND
EMPLOYER.
The Act, as it stands at present, is very unsatis-
factory, in so far as, while it affords every protec-
tion to the aboriginal, it offers no remedy to the
white man if the aboriginal misbehaves himself.
The latter is usually under the impression that he
is not under any obligation to the white man who
employs him, and that, without a moment's warn-
ing, he may, for example, walk away from his post
and leave his employer helpless and without any
redress. Of course, in a great many cases, a native
who wishes to “go bush,” or gets tired of his em-
ployment, tells his employer and often provides a
substitute, but this is by no means always so and
you may wake up any morning to find yourself
either without a boy or with a new one, who has
been installed without your knowledge and will
some day, with equal suddenness, disappear in his
turn.
Whilst nothing like indenture would be advisable,
it is necessary to have some check on the behaviour
of the aboriginal and to make him feel, if pos-
sible, some little sense of responsibility. This can
only be accomplished by giving an Official Protector
power of summary punishment. It should be pro-
vided by regulation that any employer who has
reason to complain of the behaviour of an abori-
ginal may lay his complaint before a Protector.
If the latter, after hearing the evidence of both
sides, be satisfied that the employer has just cause
of complaint, he should be able to order the abori-
ginal to be locked up for a period not exceeding
twenty-four hours. Punishment of natives to be
salutary must be summary.
ISSUING OF PERMITS.
The actual issuing of permits to employ abori-
ginals should, I think, be left in the hands of the
Official Protectors. Police Officers and Honorary
Protectors should have the power to grant tem-
porary permits, which will remain in force until
either allowed or disallowed by an Official Protector.
When disallowed, due notice of the same must be
given, or otherwise, as distances are so great and
means of communication so poor, hardship might be
done to the employer. The Chief Protector should
not grant permits because under the Act he con-
stitutes a Court of Appeal.
Certain restrictions are necessary to safeguard
the issue of permits. In the first place, it would be
inadvisable for an Honorary Protector to grant a
permit to himself, or to any one whom he employs,
and, secondly, the Act must be amended so as to
provide that no person who has been refused a per-
mit by one Protector shall be able to secure one
from another without the authority of the Chief
Protector. Any infringement of this condition
should be made an offence against the Act.
It will not infrequently be the case that the Chief
Protector will be away from the office and out of
reach of communication and there may be duties
to perform which the Chief Protector alone may do.
To provide for this contingency, the Administrator
should have power to appoint any person to act as
deputy for the Chief Protector, who may exercise,
for the time being, similar functions to those of the
Chief Protector without affecting the discharge of
the same functions by the latter.
At the present time a permit allows the holder
of it to employ aboriginals without any discrimina-
tion. There have not infrequently arisen cases in
which it has been deemed advisable to grant per-
mission to employ men only. Such conditional per-
mits have been issued but are probably irregular.
The plan of conditional permit is an excellent one
and I recommend an amendment in the Act to deal
with this.
Under present conditions the difficulty of securing
labour in the Territory is so great that permits to
employ aboriginals in hotels have been issued; bur
there can be no doubt that the Western Australian
regulation of not issuing such is the right one and
must l>e adopted as soon as practicable.
SUPPLY OF OPIUM AND SPIRITUOUS
LIQUORS TO ABORIGINALS.
No reference to the question of supplying opium
and spirituous liquor to aboriginals is made in the
Act, but the matter is a serious one and requires
special legislation.
It is quite true that it is illegal to supply opium
to any one, but the fact remains that it is con-
stantly supplied to aboriginals and it is advisable
to include this as an offence against the Act with
a special punishment attached to it.


I therefore recommend the addition of a section
such as is now in force in Western Australia, and
that the police should have instructions to enforce
it rigidly.
A serious matter and one difficult to deal with
is the supply of spirit to natives in buffalo hunters’
camps. In some cases I have reason to believe
that methylated spirits are provided. The custom
of giving spirits to natives in buffalo camps
was most regrettably started some years ago
by one buffalo hunter, and in order to
secure “ boys ” it has been found neces-
sary that all should do the same, as they naturally
go to the camps where they can get spirits. If
none were given all camps would be on the same
footing and I recommend that a special condition
of being granted a licence to shoot buffaloes be
that the licensee undertakes not to supply spirits to
natives in his employ. The licence of any hunter
guilty of infringing this condition should be im-
mediately forfeited, as also his licence to employ
natives.
MEDICAL OFFICERS, HOSPITALS,
TREATMENT, ETC.
There were originally two medical officers asso-
ciated entirely with the Department. Experience
soon showed that this was inadvisable. The life
led by the aboriginals is such that it is useless to
attempt to treat them except in the very simplest
way in the bush; in fact, any layman with a
very slight knowledge and a few simple drugs
could do all that is possible to be done for them
in their camps. Any serious work can only be
carried on in a properly-equipped hospital, and in
many cases a native could only be detained for
treatment by main force. I therefore suggested
that the two medical men should be attached to
the general medical staff, which would enable their
services to be utilized for the benefit of whites as
well as aboriginals, but that it should be under-
stood that the services of one of them were to be
especially at the call of the Aboriginal Depart-
ment.
This suggestion has been adopted. I also sug-
gested that small medicine chests containing a
selected number of drugs, accompanied bv a
pamphlet describing as simply as possible their
use, should be distributed amongst Government offi-
cials and station-holders for the benefit of white
settlers and aboriginals alike.
As mentioned already, it is most advisable that,
wherever possible, all future appointees to offices
such as that of protector, superintendent, matron
or teacher on stations and missions should have
passed through a course of “first aid.” Such know-
ledge is often ve;y valuable in the back blocks.
In each hospital there should be special provi-
sion made for treating aboriginals apart from white
patients. The services of intelligent half-castes
could probably be secured as attendants. This pro-
vision need only be on a very simple scale, the
wards taking the form of tents or bush shelters.
The conditions in fact approximating as nearly as
possible to their own native camp and open air life
only under hygienic conditions.
PROVISION FOR TREATING CONTAGIOUS
DISEASES.
The question of how liest to cope with the ex-
istence of various forms of venereal disease is one
that must be seriously faced from the point of
view of the welfare of both the aboriginal and white
population. The native morality is such that the
disease, once contracted, is bound to be widely dis-
seminated amongst both aboriginals and white men
of low morality.
In the first place as complete an examination as
possible must be carried out (this is now in course
of progress in the mining districts). The matter
is a serious one, involving much expense, and, owing
to the nature of the natives, is surrounded with
great difficulties, but when it becomes practicable
and the country is opened up, there will be no other
course open but to follow the example of Western
Australia and establish lock-hospitals for men and
women to which, if necessary, they can be forcibly
removed and where they can be detained until
cured. The only possible situation for such hos-
pitals is on islands, and two suitable for the pur-
pose, one for men and one for women, could be
selected in such a position that they could be under
the charge of one medical officer. Special provi-
sion must be made in the Act in order to provide
for the examination and removal of aboriginals to
lock-hospitals.
TRIAL OF ABORIGINALS.
During the past year I have been present in
court whilst natives have been tried for various
offences and have been much impressed with the
unfair position occupied by aboriginal prisoners as
compared with white men.
A very serious difficulty arises in the case of
Australian aboriginals which is not met with
in dealing with other savages such as the
Maories. All the latter have a language
that varies but little, whereas in Australia
it is extraordinary how many entirely dif-
ferent dialects are met with. Each tribe has a
dialect of its own, with the result that no one can
attempt to master them all. So far as the words are
concerned there is just as much difference between
those in the language of two tribes such as the
I.arakia at Darwin and the Worgait at Point
Charles, only a few miles away across the harbor,


a.s there is between those in the French and Ger-
man languages. No ordinary person can attempt
to leam more than one or two and therefore for
the most part verbal communication must be carried
on, and evidence in court given in a kind of pidgin-
English, which is not altogether satisfactory, more
especially in the case of wild natives who are in the
position of either prisoners or witnesses.
It not infrequently happens that aboriginals are
convicted on their own admission which they make
without in the least realizing that such an admission,
which may or may not be the strict truth, will send
them to gaol. It is also little short of ludicrous to
go into a court the day before a trial and see the
farce being solemnly enacted of a barrister and con-
stable putting a witness through his facings in the
box preparatory to his appearing before the Judge
next day. lam not in the least imputing any
wrong motive to the constable or barrister, because
I know them to be or to wish to be quite fair and
I realize the difficulties of their position when they
have to deal with untutored savages who must be
'■ coached ” ; but there is, it must be confessed, an
element of danger in such legal proceedings. It is
also only right to say that in every case of an
aboriginal that I have seen tried in Darwin, whether
before a magistrate or a Judge and jury, justice
was most decidedly tempered with mercy, but as
a safeguard I would recommend that (i) no abo-
riginal lie allowed to plead guilty except with the
consent of an official protector, and (2) no native
should tie convicted on evidence other than such as
would serve to convict a white man accused of the
same offence.
CRIMES COMMITTED BY WILD
ABORIGINALS AND THE PUNISHMENT
OF ABORIGINALS.
NECESSITY OF ESTABLISHING AN
ABORIGINAL REFORMATORY.
At the present time there are, and probably for
many years to come there will be, tribes of wild
natives who are not in contact with civilization. In
their natural state the natives are governed by their
own customs, the carrying out of which is as
strictly insisted upon as is the observance of laws
amongst white men. Even amongst semi-civilized
natives on the outskirts of civilization their old cus-
toms carry much more weight than the laws of the
white men of which indeed, beyond the fact that
it is dangerous to touch the property of white men
or injure the latter, they have only a very vague
comprehension.
There are many deeds committed by wild natives
which are crimes, and often most serious ones under
our laws, blit are in strict accord with their own
customs and it is manifestly advisable not to in-
terfere with their customs so long as they are deal-
ing with, fellow tribesmen. In the case of semi-
civilized natives who have some knowledge, but
still a very imperfect one of our laws and are as
yet strongly influenced by their own customs, con-
siderable discretion should be exercised when a deeo
is committed which is a crime under our laws, but
is strictly in accord with their customs.
There are cases in which it may be just and at
the same time expedient, because it will act as an
object lesson to the natives who are coming under
the influence of civilization to deal with the offender
under our laws, but there are others in which it is
better to take no notice and to leave the mattei
in the hands of the natives themselves. In mam
cases a friendly consultation between a protector
and a police officer as to the wisest course to adop,
would be advantageous.
Within the bounds of civilization there can, of
course, be only one system of laws, but whilst this
is so it is imperative that an important change
should be made in regard to the manner of pun-
ishing natives.
The Aboriginals Act as it stands at present does
not provide for any definite punishment for abo-
riginals other than sending them to gaol in common
with other offenders. There is, fortunately, under
the Aboriginals Ordinance power given to the Chief
Protector to authorize a police officer to take into
his custody any aboriginal or half-caste and to
deal with him as he may direct. It is most ad-
visable for the Chief Protector to have some such
general power as this in order to deal with cases,
for example, where a man unlawfully takes a boy
or lubra away from camp. That boy or lubra can
be taken charge of by the officer and restored to
his camp. The power is also most useful, because
it allows a native who is guilty of some offence to
be held in restraint without being sent to gaol, to
which, of course, he cannot be committed
by the Protector but only on the order
of a magistrate after trial in Court. There
are many occasions on which it would be most in
advisable for a native to be committed to gaol; in
fact, experience has shown that in the first place
sending an aboriginal to gaol has no deterrent effect
so far as crime is concerned ; and, in the second,
he comes out worse than he went in. The average
aboriginal thinks it no degradation or hardship to
go to “Fanny Bay,” the local gaol; many of
them indeed regard it rather as a mark of distinc-
tion than otherwise and are proud to have been
there.
Then, again, there are certain natives who with-
out doing anything that actually renders them
liable to be brought before a Court of law behave
in such a way as to interfere seriously with the work
of the protectors. For example, within the past
few months one particular lubra who has consider-
able influence has been the means of decoying some


of the young girls from the Roper Mission Station.
This is not an offence against the law, as she did
not actually remove them from the station and no
prosecution could lie against her in a Court, and
yet the effect in the minds of the natives of such
successful defying of the authorities is very detri-
mental to the influence of the latter and to the wel-
fare of the young natives.
It is essential that there should be some special
reformatory institution to which aborginals con-
victed of crimes, except homicide, should be com-
mitted rather than to gaol. A reformatory of this
kind must be on an island in order to prevent easy
escape. Here the offenders could be detained, and
during their detention they should bo employed in
useful and profitable labour.
In addition to aboriginals committed to the re-
formatory on the warrant of a magistrate, the
Chief Protector on a report received from the
superintendent of a reserve or station, or of a
protector, should be able to commit an aboriginal
guilty of serious misconduct, which does not
actually constitute an offence against the Act, ro such
a reformatory. In this case the committal should
receive the approval of the Administrator, which
will be quite a sufficient safeguard against any
miscarriage of justice. Some such power as this
in the hands of the Chief Protector is absolutely
essential. I would suggest that either Field Island
off the mouth of the Alligator River, or Peron
Island off the mouth of the Daly be used for this
purpose.
HALF-CASTES.
The question of half-castes other than the children
of legally married men and women is a somewhat
difficult one to deal with. In the first place, the
Act requires to be amended so as to include a more
clear definition of a half-caste than it now does.
It is sincerely to be hoped that, as the country
becomes populated, the proportionate number will
become less. The first suggestion that naturally
arises is their segregation into one or two special
institutions designed for their training alone. lam
not, however, after much consideration, inclined to
favour this proposal so far as the northern part of
the Territory is concerned.
The half-castes are in a most unfortunate posi-
tion. There may possibly be 100-150 of them in
the northern and, approximately, the same number
in the southern part, where also there are quadroons
who may be regarded as belonging to the white
population.
I think it may be said that though the half-castes
belong neither to the aboriginal nor to the whites,
yet, on the whole, they have more leaning towards
the former; certainly this is the case in regard to
the females. One thing is certain and that is that
(he white population as a whole will never mix
with half-castes.
It must be remembered that they are also a very
mixed group. In practically all cases, the mother
is a full-blooded aboriginal, the father may be a
white man, a Chinese, a Japanese, a Malay or a
Filippino. The mother is of very low intellectual
grade, while ihe father most often belongs to the
coarser and more unrefined members of higher races.
The consequence of this is that the children of such
parents are not likely to be, in most cases, of much
greater intellectual calibre than the more intelligent
natives, though, of course, there are exceptions to
this.
No half-caste children should be allowed to re-
main in any native camp, but they should all be
withdrawn and placed on stations. So far as prac-
ticable, this plan is now being adopted. In some
cases, when the child is very young, it must of
necessity be accompanied by its mother, but in other
cases, even though it may seem cruel to separate
the mother and child, it is better to do so, when the
mother is living, as is usually the case, in a native
camp.
In a few instances, the fathers honorably recog-
nise their responsibility and make provision for
their half-caste children. In rare cases, they are
adopted and brought up by whites, but, especially
so far as the girls are concerned, this experiment
is fraught with danger, owing to the temperament
of the half-caste and to the fact that no white
men, if white women are available, will marry a
half-caste aboriginal.
I have, after consideration of all the facts, come
to the conclusion that, except in individual and ex-
ceptional cases, the best and kindest thing is to place
them on reserves along with the natives, train them
in the same schools and encourage them to marry
amongst themselves. Any special cases in which a
half-caste —a boy especially —shows any marked
ability, can be easily provided for and he can pass
on from a native to an ordinary school or to some
other institution.
On the reserves the services of the more intelli-
gent half-castes may be utilized in supervising the
work of the aboriginals.
Provision could be made whereby the Adminis-
trator on the recommendation of the Chief Pro-
tector might allot special areas not exceeding, say,
150 acres to any aboriginal or half-caste who had
proved himself capable of working the land for the
benefit of himself and his family.
PAYMENT AND REMUNERATION OF
ABORIGINALS.
This is by no means an easy matter to deal with
in the Territory, nor can any fixed rules be drawn up
which will apply equitably to all natives or be fair
to their employers.
There are two objects to be aimed at, first, the
just payment of every aboriginal for work done bv
him and second, the education of the aboriginal so
C. 7959. c


that he shall realize the importance of saving money
instead of spending it the moment he receives it.
An important factor in dealing with this ques-
tion at present is the intensely communistic atti-
tude of the aboriginal. No sooner is anything given
to him than he shares it with his friends; indeed,
under their normal conditions, there are certain
individuals to whom he is obliged to give a share
of everything that he has, and this feeling is very
difficult to eradicate, with the result that one native
will work hard, and others who do no work will
profit by his labour.
In the case of aboriginals working for white
people in settled districts, a definite wage should
be paid and a portion of this handed to a Protector
for investment in the aboriginal’s name. On re-
serves and in aboriginal institutions, conditions will
vary. During the early days of the reserve or in-
stitution when, for the most part, wild aboriginals
are being dealt with who have no idea of the value
of money and no means of spending it, the re-
muneration for labour will take the form of food,
clothes and tobacco. As the aboriginals become
civilized, a system of payment may be adopted, but
this will have to be gradually introduced.
On the large pastoral areas it is not expedient
at present to enforce payment. The holders of
these stations actually employ a number of abori-
ginals varying from three or four on smaller stations
to forty or fifty on large ones, the number also
varying at different times of the year, and these
they feed and provide with clothes and tobacco. It
is difficult to state exactly how much such an abori-
ginal costs to keep. In all cases, except very ex-
ceptional ones, these natives are away from settle-
ments, and have no knowledge of, or use for monev.
The managers of various typical stations on which
the aboriginals are well treated courteously told me
what they received. In one or two cases of men
who had been with them for many years and were
civilized, payment was made wholly or partly in
money, but in most cases the remuneration consisted
of two or three suits of clothes vearlv, two or three
pairs of boots, one or two blankets, one or two
mosquito nets, an ample supply of meat and flour,
tea, sugar, tobacco and pipes. If any “ boy ”
should be taken into a settlement he always receives
a supply of money. The estimates as to the cost of
keeping an aboriginal who is in regular employment
on a station varied from _£i to £2 per month.
There is one important point to be taken into ac-
count in connexion with this. The stations not only
feed the aboriginals actually employed, but the sup-
ply is such that both those dependent on the working
“ boys ” and a large number of hangers-on secure
food. Also the natives are, on most stations, liber-
ally dealt with when cattle are killed. It has been
suggested tnat certain station-holders should be em-
powered, periodically, to kill cattle for the
aboriginals at the expense of the Government. Dur-
ing ordinary seasons, in the northern part of the
Territory, the natives can secure an ample supply
of food and I think it both unnecessary and inad-
visable, in parts where they are at liberty to wander
over their hunting grounds and have access to water-
holes, to adopt this plan. The result would only be
to pauperize them and in these parts the best thing
to do, until such time as they can be withdrawn on
to reserves, is to encourage them to work for their
own living, as they have done in the past. It would
also inevitably lead to the Government providing
food for aboriginals working on the stations.
In times when, owing to unfavorable climatic
conditions, the native food supply may be pre-
carious; it is not perhaps too much to expect that
the station-holders will voluntarily, as indeed in
most cases they do, supplement this by the occasional
killing of cattle.
The enforcement of payment of money to abori-
ginals on pastoral areas would, I am convinced, be
a mistake at the present time and would result in
hardship to numbers who are now' indirectly main-
tained by the stations, but who, in the event of pay-
ment by station-holders being insisted upon, w'ould
become a tax on the Government.


GENERAL POLICY IN REGARD TO ABORIGINALS.
The care of the aboriginals of the Northern Ter-
ritory should be made a national responsibility and
any scheme devised for the purpose of preserving
and uplifting them should be under the control of
the Commonwealth Government. Subsidiary efforts
by various bodies will doubtless be of great assis-
tance, but in order that the work shall be con-
tinuously and adequately carried on in all parts of
the Territory, it is essential that it shall be national
in character and under national control.
I have already referred to the fact that the natives
so far as their present distribution is concerned, can
be divided roughly into four groups. From the
point of view of dealing with them, they may be
divided into two main groups— (a) aboriginals living
in and about townships, and employed in the latter;
(0) those living more or less in their wild state, and
leading a nomad existence.
(a) Aboriginals Living in and about Townships.
These are practically limited to those around Dar-
win and Pine Creek and form a very small part
of the aboriginal population.
These natives have so completely lost all their
old customs that there is no difficulty in gathering
them together into a village or compound, as is now
being done in Darwin, at a convenient distance
from the town. Up to the beginning of last year
there were two main native camps within the town
limits of Darwin, one on the top of a
cliff known as the King Camp, and the
other on the beach below known as the
Lamaru Camp. This division of the I.arakia
tribe into two such groups is of very old standing
and in the choice of a new site has been recognised.
There are to be two encampments one on the shore
and one on the cliff above. The old ramshackle,
dirty huts that the aboriginals made out of the
remnants of corrugated buildings that years ago
were scattered all over the township by a great
cyclone, are now replaced by neat huts with w-alls
of stringybark and roofs of iron.
In the compound there will be a school-house
with a house for a teacher and his wife. Each
native family will have its own house and there will
also be separate houses for unattached men, women
and visitors. The teacher will act as Superinten-
dent of the compound and his w r ife as Matron.
Associated wdth each compound, there should
be as at Darwin a garden on which em-
ployment can be found for a certain num-
ber of natives in the growing of fruit and
vegetables. The whole compound must be
fenced in and no one save aboriginals and officials
of the Department should have access to it, except
by order. Rations will be distributed to old and
indigent natives, but otherwise the inhabitants
should be self-supporting, as they will all be em-
ployed either in the garden or in business places or
private houses.
In regard to those in employment in the garden
a definite wage will be paid and the same is true
of those employed in business or private houses in
Darwin or Pine Creek, as the case may be. It will
be necessary to fix a minimum wage and at each
compound a register of aboriginals will be kept
bv the Superintendent and all applications to em-
ploy aboriginal labour should be made to him, and
to him also all complaints by employers against
aboriginals should be made.
A certain amount of the W’ages paid should be
withheld by the employer and paid at fixed times to
the Superintendent, who will place such sums to the
account of the individual aboriginals in the Savings
Bank.
In regard to those employed in private service in
Darwin or Pine Creek, they will either be housed
on their employer’s premises or resident in the com-
pound. In the former case, the accommodation pro-
vided must be approved by the Superintendent.
Ail aboriginals and half-castes should be either
in compound or in their employer’s quarters after
sunset. A regulation should be passed forbidding
them, except by special permit, to camp or wander
about within the prescribed limits of any township
between the hours of sunset and sunrise. Any
aboriginal or half-caste infringing this regulation
should be liable to be locked up by a police officer.
Any one, including all Government officials, bring-
ing aboriginals or half-castes, except prisoners, into
Darwin or Pine Creek, should immediately on ar-
lival, notify a Protector or the Superintendent and
should satisfy the Protector or Superintendent, as
the case may be, that the accommodation provided
tor them is satisfactory. If he deems it desirable,
ihe Superintendent or Protector may order them to
be housed in the compound.


No native should be allowed to leave Darwin
without the consent of the Superintendent or a Pro-
tector.
There is no doubt but that some of the natives,
none of whom have been under any restraint up
nil the beginning of last year will, at first, resent
any discipline, but with firm treatment this difficulty
will lie overcome. Natives should not be encour-
aged to come from outside parts into thor; com-
pounds, but in view of the scarcity of labour for
domestic purposes, it is probable that the numbers
will have to be replenished periodically.
In consequence of the fact that the extension of
the railway line from rine Creek to Katherine Creek
will soon be taken in hand, there is no need to make
provision for a compound and native school at the
former, which will probably become, when the line
goes beyond it, merely a wayside station. On the
other hand, for some time during the progress of the
work, a considerable number of men employed in
building the line will be located there and the
aboriginals who now frequent the town and mining
districts surrounding it must, as far as possible, be
withdrawn on to reserves.
(b) Aboriginals Living More or Less in Their Wild
State, and Leading a Nomad Existence.
The real problem is concerned with these who
form almost the whole aboriginal population of the
Territory- A considerable number of them, how-
ever, have been periodically in contact with settle-
ments, or with isolated whites and some with
Asiatics.
I have previously pointed out certain features in
regard to the habits, customs and beliefs of the
aboriginals that will render it a matter of some, in
fact, at first, great difficulty to segregate them on
reserves, but in view of the settlement of the country
for which provision is now being made, there is no
other practicable policy but that of the establishment
of large reserves, if the aboriginals are to be preserved,
and if any serious effort is to be made for their
betterment.
It will not, however, be either necessary
or wise to attempt to force them at present on
to reserves in those large areas occupied by pastoral
runs; but there are a large number, such as those in
the Daly River District, and all along the line of
mining townships, for whom the need of an adequate
reserve on to which to withdraw them is urgent.
Other reserves can be established as the need for
them arises, but it is important while vet there are
large areas of unoccupied land to have the fact
recognised that certain areas are to be allocated for
the use of the natives.
There are three essential requirements in regard
to these reserves, and unless all three are complied
with, they will be of little service.
(1) They must be of large size, so that different
parts, if necessary, can be occupied by the members
of different tribes, or groups of tribes.
(2) They must be or such a nature as to provide
sufficient water and abundant native food supplies
and be suitable for agricultural or pastoral work.
(3) They must be so located as to deal with
groups of tribes that are allied in their customs and
are more or less friendly.
A number of small reserves were created in 1892,
and. as a precautionary measure were, re-gazetted
during the year 1912. They are as follows;
Manassie Reserve, 366 miles; Woolher Reserve,
366 miles; Larakia Reserve, 20 miles;
Wangites Reserve, 388 miles; Wcolwonga
Reserve, 160 miles; Mallae Reserve, 100
miles; Mudburra Reserve, 579 square
miles; and Mission Permit Xo. 2, 100
miles; Bathurst Island, or Wongoak Re-
serve, 786 miles. In addition to these,
there is the Hermannsburg Reserve in the
Macdonnell Ranges.
These reserves appear to have been selected in a
somewhat haphazard manner and are neither, for
the most part, suitable in position nor adequate in
size. |
I recommend that under section 13 of the Abori-
ginals Act they be abolished, except the Bathurst
Island and Hermannsburg reserves, which are both
admirable ones, and others substituted for them.
The areas that I recommend for reservation have
been selected because they comply, as far as pos-
sible, with the three conditions above laid down
and because they will as time passes by
suffice in extent of area for the purposes of
the aboriginals. Their total approximate area, as
now suggested, is some 7,000 square miles, the total
area of the Territory being 523,620 square miles.
They are located as follows, though, until the land
is surveyed, it is impossible to do more than define
their boundaries in the most general terms and their
exact location and area must be matters for further
consideration when the country is better known and
opened up. Meanwhile they are intended to indi-
cate generally what is necessary if adequate pro-
vision is to be made for the aboriginals. They
represent the minimum area that will be necessary
for such adequate provision and include country of
various classes suitable for the requirements and
maintenance of the different tribes for whose occu-
pation they are respectively intended. Their posi-
tions are approximately indicated on the accom-
panying map.


(1) Alligator River Reserve. —This which has
already been constituted occupies an area of
approximately 2,300 square miles in the dis-
trict of the East and South Alligator Rivers.
It contains land useful for stock-raising and agri-
cultural work, as well as great stretches of lagoons
and swamp lands, where the aboriginals are accus-
tomed to secure rich supplies of game. It will
serve as a reserve for a large group of tribes as far
west as the Mary and Adelaide Rivers, as far south
as the head of the South Alligator River, as far
north as the Coburg Peninsula, and as far east as
the Liverpool River. On to this reserve should also
be removed, as far as possible, the aboriginals that
now, much to their degradation, frequent the mining
centres and Chinese camps on the east side of the
railway and telegraph line.
(2) Daly River Reserve. —There is a large num-
ber of natives along the course of the Daly River,
including its two chief branches, the Flora and the
Katherine. Preparations have been made to throw
open land around the Daly River for farm settle-
ments and before long the early settlers will be
there. This will absolutely necessitate driving the
aboriginals off the country, will prevent them having
access to water-holes and will effectually destroy
their natural food supplies. Under no other con-
ditions can the land be held and utilized bv white
settlers. Some of these aboriginals, all of whom
are practically in a wild state, belong to inland
tribes, others to coastal tribes, and unless a reserve
is founded for their occupation their position will
be hopeless. It is impossible to remove them far
from their own country, as this would mean exter-
mination by hostile tribes, even supposing, which
is practically impossible of accomplishment, they
could be detained elsewhere.
Under these conditions, I see only two alterna-
tives, either rapid degradation and extermination,
or the formation of a local reserve, which shall
be so situated as to accommodate both coastal and
inland tribes.
I recommend the reservation of an area of coun-
try bounded on the west and south-west by the sea
coast and the Daly River. To a certain extent it
will occunv the location of the old Wangite Reserve.
The two Peron Inlands should also be included in this
reserve, which should include approximately 700
square miles and will serve for the group of tribes
on the sea coast from Point Blaze south along the
coast to Port Keats, and the country inland drained
by the Dalv and its tributaries. On to this reserve
must also be taken the natives who frequent the
mining areas and Chinese quarters on the west of
the line —railwav and telegraph. These have, to
a large extent, lost their old beliefs and customs
and can be removed to the reserve without any at-
tendant hardships. The work on this reserve will
be mainly agricultural and it will have the great
advantage of being within easy distance of the
Government Experimental Farm.
(3) Roper River Reserve. —This reserve will be
associated with the group of tribes occupying tin
large extent of country drained by the Roper River
and its tributaries from McMinn’s Bar to the Gult
of Carpentaria by the Limmen and Wickam Rivers,
and practically the country as far south as the
McArthur River.
This reserve, which will deal with a large num-
ber of tribes, both coastal and inland, must be of
considerable extent, and, approximately, its boun-
daries should be as follow:—On the north, the
Roper River; on the west, approximately, the 135th
meridian, east longitude; on the east, the coast
line, and should extend as far south as to take in
the junction of the Limmen and Wickam Rivers.
Maria Island should also be included. It will
have an area of about 2,000 square miles
and will be associated with two groups of
tribes that differ considerably from one another
in their organization, but they are already accus-
tomed to meeting on the border-lands of their re-
spective territories and when the land becomes
settled there will not, I think, be any serious diffi-
culty i:n regard to their occupying different parts
of the same reserve.
There is at present the mission station under the
management of the Church of England, on the north
side of the Roper. The land is. apparentlv, not
in a very good position and it might, perhaps, be
advisable to transfer the location of the station.
(4) Bathurst Island or W'ongo ah Reserve. —This
has an area of approximately 786 square miles and
part of it is at present held under permit for the
purpose of a Roman Catholic mission station. The
station is already at work and has been admirably
planned and built under the superintendence of
Father Gsell, who, together with the brothers and
sisters with him, has already gained the confidence
of many of the hitherto wild natives on both
Bathurst and Melville Islands. It will serve for
the considerable number of natives inhabiting these
islands and. to a certam extent, at a later period,
for some of the adjacent mainland natives. At
present it would be futile to attempt to transfer
the latter to the island, because, unless they were
under the immediate personal protection of the mis-
sionaries, thev would be exterminated. The head
station lies at the south-east end of the island, on
Apslev Strait, but it is intended, when this is in
full wo r king order, to have a second station in the
north. It is highly desirable that the whole island
should be permanently reserved for the use of the
natives and that the missionary work should be in


the hands of the society now controlling the station.
With the aid of experts in agriculture and forestry
the station would probably soon become self-sup-
porting.
(5) Groote Eyelandt —This has approximately
the same area as Bathurst Island. At present it is
practically unknown and unoccupied, so far as
Europeans are concerned, but when the country in
the north-east of the Territory and along the west
side of the Gulf of Carpentaria becomes occupied,
it will form a most useful reserve, as the aboriginals
can easily be isolated on it.
(6) Lake Woods Reserve. —This will serve for a
number of tribes in the northern central area. It
should be situated in the region of Newcastle
Waters, in such a position that a large permanent
water-hole lies o.n its western boundary, in order to
allow it to carry stock for the benefit of the natives.
The exact position of the reserve will be a matter
for future determination, but it should contain at
least 200 square miles, and it may possibly entail
the resumption of country by the Government.
A reserve in this part of the Territory will be
essential and will serve as a gathering ground for
various central tribes in time of drought, when it
may be necessary to issue rations, and also its
officers will be able to exercise control over drovers
and others travelling from north to south along the
main route by the telegraph line.
(7) Hermanmburg Mission Station Reserve. —
This reserve is admirably situated in the heart of
the central ranges. I have previously recommended
that it be resumed by the Government and placed
under Government control. It is capable of lieing
transformed into a most useful and valuable institu-
tion for the welfare of the aboriginals, and will
serve as a reserve for the remnants of the southern
central tribes where they can, under proper and
competent control, be trained to habits of industry.
The Government is already in possession of reports
dealing with this station which indicate that at the
present time it is practically of little, if any. use
from the point of view of the industrial training
or social betterment of the natives.
Of the above seven stations the Hermannsburg
has been opened more than twenty years; the Roper
River station was started in 1909; the Wongoak
(Bathurst Island) was opened in 1911 ; the Alligator
River reserve was established in 1912 and the sta-
tion started under the management of Superinten-
dent Cahill; and there is now urgent need for the
Daly River reserve and station. At Darwin the
compound is being formed and already half the
natives are shifted from their old camp into it and,
close by, what should in the near future be a most
flourishing garden is in existence.
CONTROL AND EQUIPMENT OF
RESERVES.
Each reserve must be under the control of a
Superintendent; in every case it is absolutely essen-
tial that he be a married man, whose wife will act
as Matron and take a general oversight over the
aboriginal women and children.
The Superintendent will be in supreme charge
of the whole station and have the general
direction of the work carried out. Every
officer will be under his control. He must
be a man capable of taking a general
supervision over industrial work of various kinds
and should be himself either a competent agricul-
turist or pastoralist, accustomed to dealing with
stock, as the case may be, or experienced in some
branch of industry. Considerable experience of
aboriginals, though not essential, is highly desir-
able. On some stations, such as the Alligator,
agricultural work and stock breeding will be com-
bined ; on others, such as the Daly, agricultural
and industrial work will predominate; and on
others, such as the Newcastle Waters, stock breed-
ing will be the main work. Each station will have
to be stocked and equipped specially, according to
its needs. There must be at least two white men,
accustomed to the class of work required, to assist
the Superintendent, both in the actual work of the
station and, as far as possible, in taking part in
the industrial training of the natives, both adults
and boys; ami it is highly desirable that these
should be married men.
An important part of the station will be the
school. At first it is probable that one teacher,
assisted by the matron, will suffice; but if the sta-
tion be a success more will be required. It is pos-
sible that these may be recruited from amongst the
more intelligent scholars —half-castes, for example.
There will be two classes of scholars. First, a
small number who are the children of what may
be called the station natives —that is, those actually
and more or less permanently, engaged on the sta-
tion, living in their own houses; second, a larger
number, the children of outside natives, living in
camps on the reserve, but not employed at the cen-
tral station. Housing provision will have to be
made for these children and they will also have
to be maintained and kept away from the camps as
far as possible. When once the stations are in
working order, the cost of maintenance should be
small, except in one or two cases, such as the Lake
Woods station, where it may he difficult to grow
food supplies. Each station will have to be rationed
with the primary essentials, such as tea, flour,
tobacco, &c., and clothing for the natives, though
the latter should be as simple as possible.


TRAINING IN THE SCHOOLS AND ON
THE STATIONS.
The teaching in schools should lie of very simple
character; it should include reading, writing, the
elements of arithmetic and singing. The latter can
be made to lie of peculiar educational value in the
training of the aboriginals, owing to their universal
fondness for it. In course of time each station
should possess its own band.
Moral training should be given in the schools on
the simplest and broadest lines possible. It is, I
understand, the intention of the various churches
to undertake work in connexion with the aboriginals,
each church working in a certain part of the Terri-
tory. 1 would suggest that the efforts of the
churches could be best expended and would yield
most valuable results, if they were devoted to the
special training and subsequent maintenance of
teachers who, after passing through this training,
undertook the teaching work in thie schools on the
stations associated with the reserves. The salary
of these teachers should be the same in every school
and they should undertake both the mental and the
moral training of the aboriginals.
The primary object of all stations must be to
train the natives in industrial habits. Until such
time as they acquire these habits there is no chance
whatever of raising them from their present con-
dition.
Apart from the elementary teaching above re-
ferred to, the main training should be industrial,
simple agricultural work, carpentry, &c., and work
amongst stock for the boys, domestic work and
gardening for the girls.
Apart from a small number of men and women
who will be fairly constantly engaged on the sta-
tion, a number of the older men and women will
come into the stations and will be useful to a cer-
tain extent, in a spasmodic way; but to attempt to
train them systematically, or to influence them seri-
ously from a moral point of view, will be merely
wasting time and energy that could with great ad-
vantage be bestowed upon younger people, especially
the children.
The older natives must be kindly treated, rewarded
for any work that they may do, and looked after
in their old age; but it is absolutely essential that
all efforts should be directed towards the training
of the younger generation. The children must be
withdrawn from the native camps at an early age.
This will undoubtedly be a difficult matter to accom-
plish and will involve some amount of hardship, so
far as the parents are concerned; but if once the
children are allowed to reach a certain age and
have become accustomed to camp life, with its de-
grading environment and endless roaming about in
the bush, it is almost useless to try and reclaim
them. On the other hand, if they are once brought
at an early age into a station and become accus-
tomed, as they soon do, to station life —provided
this be made attractive —then they will gradually
lose the longing for a nomad life and will, in fact,
become 1 incapable of securing their living in the
bush.
The teaching and training of aboriginals requires
special capacity. A desire to uplift and help them,
though requisite in the teacher, is not in itself sut-
ficient qualification for the work. If the care ot
the aboriginals is made a national matter, the Go-
vernment providing land, equipment and either
means for carrying on the various stations or sub-
sidizing any of the latter as it does at the present
time, then it is important that no one in any capa-
city as teacher should be allowed to work upon the
stations except with the approval of the Govern-
ment. In practice I would recommend the appoint-
ment by the Government of a small committee,
which must be satisfied as to the qualifications or
the proposed teacher.
EXPENSES OF RESERVES, ETC.
This can only be stated very approximately. 1
have suggested that, at first, each reserve should
be staffed with a Superintendent, whose wife will
act as Matron, two white assistants and, at first, one
teacher, though possibly the expenses of the teach
ing staff may be defrayed from other sources. The
salaries, &c., may be roughly indicated as fol-
low, the officers ’ being supplied with ordinary
rations :
£>
Superintendent and Matron ... 350
Two assistants ... ... 400
Teacher ... ... ... 250
Contingencies (including rations)... 1,000
Total ... ... ... 2,000
This estimate represents the annual cost, and does
not include the initial cost of buildings, of equip
ping the reserves, or of the purchase of stock for
the same.
RESERVES AND THE LANDS
ORDINANCE
Under the Aboriginals Act 1910, section 13, the
Governor may—
(a) Declare any Crown lands to be a reserve
for aboriginals;
(b) Alter the boundaries of any reserve;
( c) Abolish any reserve;
and may (section 49 (k) ) make regulations autho-
rizing the entry upon such reserves by specified
persons or classes of persons for specified objects.
These conditions are radically altered in the
Lands Ordinance, No. 8 1912 in which no reference
is anywhere made to the aboriginals or their re-
lationship to the land. Un-‘er this Ordinance (Part


111., Division 5, Miscellaneous Leases, section 43)
the Administrator may, subject to the Ordinance
and the Regulations, grant to any person a lease
of any portion of Crown lands, or of any dedicated
or reserved lands, for any prescribed purpose, or
for any purpose approved by the Minister.
Such leases (section 44) may be granted for
twenty-one years, and (section 47) may be offerer!
for sale by public auction.
The Administrator may also (Part V., Licences,
section 49) grant licences to persons to graze stock
on any reserved or dedicated lands for such period
not exceeding one year, as is prescribed and may
(section 51) grant licences to go upon dedicated or
reserved lands and take therefrom timber, &c.
From the point of view of the Aboriginal De-
partment, it is of primary importance that the re-
serves should be retained for ti.e use of the natives,
with the idea of isolating them and preventing them
from coming into contact with other people. In this
respect it is significant to notice that amongst the
first applications for land in the Northern Terri-
tory, after the publication of the Lands Ordinance
No. 3, >912, was one for a lease of part of the
Woolner Aboriginal Reserve. This was not granted,
and though it is, of course, probable that the Ad-
ministrator for the time being would refuse most
applications, still the fact that the Ordinance now
in force practically invites such applications is a
serious matter and will always, unless the abori-
ginal reserves are especially safeguarded, be a source
of anxiety to those who are entrusted with the work
of the Aboriginal Department.
PROPOSED AMENDMENT OF THE
ABORIGINALS ACT 1910 AND THE
ABORIGINALS ORDINANCE 1911.
The suggestions made above require considerable
amendment of both the Aboriginals Act 1910 and
the Aboriginals Ordinance rqn and if they meet
with the approval of the Government I recommend
that a new Act be drafted and regulations drawn
up which will supersede the present Act, Ordinance
and Regulations.
W. BALDWIN SPENCER
Special Commissioner and Chief Protector of
Aboriginals.
20th May, 1913.
Authority: Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne.


Baldwin Spencer , Photo.
FIG. I.- STRINGY-BARK SHELTERS ON MELVILLE ISLAND DURING THE RAIN SEASON.


Baldwin Spencer, Photo.
FIG. 2.- WET SEASON HUT TO SERVE AS A PROTECTION AGAINST RAIN AND MOSQUITOES ON THE ROPER RIVER.


Baldwin Spencer, Photo.
FIG. 3. —BOYS CARRYING WANDS WHEN SEN! OUT TO SUMMON MEMBERS OF DISTANT TRIBES TO
INITIATION CEREMONIES.
Baldwin Spencer , Photo.
FIG. 4. —ABORIGINAL CARRYING MESSAGE OR “ PAPER YABBER.”


FIG. 5.- SACRED CEREMONY ASSOCIATED WITH A SNAKE TOTEM.


Baldwin Spencer, Photo.
FIG. 6.- NATIVES PERFORMING A KANGAROO CEREMONY ALLIGATOR RIVER.


Baldwin Spencer, Photo.
FIG. 7.- MAGIC CEREMONY TO INJURE A MAN BY BURNING SOME OF HIS EXCREMENT—ALLIGATOR RIVER.
Baldwin Spencer, Photo.
FIG. B.—MEDICINE MAN EXTRACTING EVIL MAGIC FROM A PATIENT—KANGAROO RIVER.


Baldiwin Spencer, Photo.
FIG. 9 .—TYPICAL NATIVES OF THE KAKADU TRIBE. ELDER AND YOUNGER MAN
Campbell, Photo.
FIG. 10.- GROUP OF DALY RIVER WOMEN AND YOUNG CHILDREN.


Baldwin Spencer, Photo.
FIG, 11. — BATHURST ISLAND NATIVE. HEAD DECORATED WITH LINES OF
RED AND YELLOW OCHRE.


Baldwin Spencer, Photo.
FIG, 12.- CHNA TOWN. DARWIN.
Baldwin Spencer, Photo.
FIG. 13.- ABORIGIN UNLOADING BOAT ON THE RIVER.


Campbell , Photo.
FIG. 14.- OLD NATIVE CAMP ON LAMARU BEACH, DARWIN.
Campbell, Photo.
FIG. 15.— NATIVES BUILDING THEIR OWN HOUSES ON THE ABORIGINAL COMPOUND AT
KALIN BEACH, OUTSIDE DARWIN.


Campbell, Photo.
FIG. 16.- ABORIGINAL GARDEN AT KALIN BEACH. OUTSIDE DARWIN.
The houses in the new compound are seen in the distance on the top of the small cliff, below which the Beach
can be seen on the left. The Lamaru camp is being shifted to the latter spot.
Baldwin Spencer, Photo.
FIG. 17.- LAGOON AT OENPLLI, THE CENTRAL STATION ON THE ALLIGATOR RIVER RESERVE.


Baldwin Spencer, Photo.
FIG. 18.-BATHURST ISLAND MISSION STATION.


MAP
OF
THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
SHOWING THE APPROXIMATE POSITION OF
PROPOSED ABORIGINAL RESERVES.
