

f *


SEE WONDERFUL DISPLAY OF CHOCOLATES
AND CONFECTIONERY—BRITISH EMPIRE EXHIBITION.
m
is
T OVERS of choice Chocolates and hue of the rainbow, with delicate sheens known in all parts of the world. The
I j Confectionery will be entranced at rivalling the lustre of the rarest Eastern bearer of the name is acknowledged as
Mac. Robertson’s magnificent dis- silks—each piece containing a choice being the most successful business man
H play in the Confectionery Section of the fruit Chocolate or nutty filling. in Australia, and his career reads like
British Empire Exhibition, Wembley. Chocolate shells, trinkets, Bijou cameos a romance from “The Arabian Nights.”
t) This exhibit clearly indicates the per- of every shape, size, and colour, with Possibly on account of the youthfuiness
fection to which Mac. Robertson, of Mel- mother-of-pearl effects. Chocolate por- of Australia, Australians look to the
bourne, has raised the Chocolate and traiture —an artistic novelty hitherto Older World to supply the giants and
| 'U Confectionery-making industry. unknown. creators of industries. Such men as
it It is difficult to realise that such And in the centre of all these master- Henry Ford, Andrew Carnegie, Gordon
Ui I exquisite productions can, in the hands P ie ces stands a unique model (built Selfridge Lord Leverhulme, are quoted
m of Australia’s supreme Chocolate genius, exactly to scale) of the magic factories as exemplifiymg the successful men of
(rC be created from unlovely bags of sugar from whence all these wonderful crea- the world—who have risen from com-
fe barrels of other ingredients? and sacks tioas originated. parative obscurity to the highest pin-
- of Cocoa Beans The Chocolatier’s magic Remember these are Australian sweets nacle of fame and wealth, but Australia
P wand transforms these unattractive raw produced by Australian labour, Austra- can also claim her industrial giants, and
| materials into S a rtist?c U Han brains, and Australian capital, in an Mac. Robertson, of Melbourne, is
sheer delight! Australian factory—constantly being another striking example. His success
DC • . A , , , , , , added to—and one of the largest in the should be an inspiration to the younger
; Chocolate baskets composed world> g generations of all countries.
the a Tn° nf In addition, all the artistic boxes, The pages following are devoted to
herdess? piled high Y with beautifully c ? rtons and labels, etc., are produced by newspaper extracts concerning this
tinfoiled Chocolate fiuits, such as might th ® Ba ™ firm in the w K % k , s at Melbourne. enterprising Australian manufacturer.
t have come from some fairy orchard. ®f 0V ?t ases are befitting the dehci- Up to date Mac. Robertson employs
h Magnificent boxes of Assorted Choco- 3 .._ and arß .2.000 men and women, and pays over
j iviagmnceni ooxes oi Assorted v « ri - pH A llQfT . n i: nr , wumeru ann pays over
lates artistically labelled and tinfoiled, Z„„ ± ‘t_ £400.000 yearly in wages, and as prin-
and every"ot l !a So™% P <^^ v St S cipal in other kindred industries, he is
paper 7 th tmt f tians P arent Chocolates and Confectionery. The dis- primarily responsible for a total of hiUf
. .... „ , _ play is a veritable fairyland of enchant- a million pounds sterling vearlv in wages.
F ascinating little Chocolate figures, ment U 7 7\
made from the choicest superfine Choco- You will find the name “Macßobertson” .. hdL cormec W] th any o her confec-
late, to enchant the eye aSd the palate. „„ Y °™table?and box“ how This “T I ''' estahl.ahment .n England A^s-
Delightful jewel-confections and satin name is a household word throughout the Dana, the Continent.
and silken finish sweets of every tint and Commonwealth of Australia, and is Australian from hair to heel!
ouivcu muon owcc to Di CVCI V Llll etna vuuiiuuu w caiUl Ui .n UOII ctilct j cUIU. lo nuouiauau XX will nau lu ucci;
P
p | *o^




“Melbourne Herald” ( Continued ).
A Young Man of 61. a 4 ft. 6 in. bar and has a round with a
B . ~ punch-ball for exercise. And in the fac-
The best way to appreciate the gigantic t he shows the same distressing
scale on which the business is carried vigour leading the way at an even five
on is to do what I have just done—make miles an hour and going ups t a irs two
a tour of the Fitzroy factory, with Mr. or ree a t a time.
Robertson as guide. And most remarkable of all, perhaps,
But it is only fair to warn you that is the enthusiasm, detailed knowledge,
you need to be fairly afhletic. Sixty-one and love of the business shown by that
years of age, and white of hair, Mr. young man of 61. He knows every
Roberston is one of the most surprisingly process, can take his turn with any of
energetic young men I have encountered. his men. And he not only keeps in
He stands as erect as a drill sergeant, touch with his business; he believes in
walks (when he is not running) with a keeping in touch with his staff as well,
springy step, and every morning jumps Mr. Robertson says he believes in run-
The following matter, which appeared in “The Confectioners’ Union,” London
(18/10/23), was reprinted from “The Australasian Confectioner,” Sydney:—
LEVEL WITH THE WORLD’S
Confectioners of long experience tion behind them, are no better—often
assure us that Australian sweets are not so good—as the best Australian,
equal to any produced in the world. The conception is so big that it need
Overseas confectioners are forced to ad- not be discussed in detail. It cannot
mit, with a certain amount of pained sur- come about for years; but if it is ever to
prise, that this young country has drawn come about, now is the time for the lay-
level with the world’s best. Why should ing of a sound foundation. Aggressive
not Australia get the reputation once action on the part of Australian manu-
held by France—for making the best facturers as a whole is needed now.
sweets in the world ? It is a bold vision, Travellers from the “East,” as it_ is
certainly; but why not? Australian wool called, say that the millions of native
has the reputation of being the world’s inhabitants spend their spare money on
best. Australian dried fruits are getting sweets. If the Australian confectioner
the same reputation. Australian canned cannot supply the demand, other confec-
fruits and jams would get it if they were tioners will. At the present time, Ame-
packed better. In the latter respect, the rican chocolates are being eaten in ever-
world cannot teach Australian confec- increasing quantities throughout the
tioners much The ambitious products East. A man from Java who was in this
of English, American and Continental office recently declared that most of the
makers, with a century or so of reputa- best American and Continental confec-
ning the establishment on thoroughly
democratic lines, and to this policy he
attributes the fact that he has never yet
had a strike. All his older hands he
knows by their nicknames. “This man
and I used to work at the same bench
in the old days,” he said, indicating one
old fellow. “Many a kick and cuff you
gave me, too, didn’t you?” he added.
And the veteran smiled and nodded.
For sheer unflagging industry and
grim devotion to a single cause Mac..
Robertson’s record is probably unique in
all the annals of commerce.
—G. C. D.
43EST
tionery was sold in that island, and sold
in big quantities. These are the markets
the Australian confectioner wants first.
Who will say that it is too big for reali-
sation? Vision made Mac. Robertson
perhaps the most remarkable manufac-
turer in the history of confectionery—a
sweet-maker whose achievements we do
not know to have been paralleled in the
world. Vision, combined with sound busi-
ness organisation, the outlay of capital,
and the readiness to make big decisions
in a big way (just as Mac. Robertson
did during the war) might make Austra-
lia’s name as notable in the East as
Mac. Robertson’s is in Australia. And
a big export trade would make confec-
tionery cheaper in Australia by keeping
all the existing plants fully occupied.
Why not?
Mi I


Reprinted from 66 Adelaide Observer” September 8, 1923.
c4N industrial
IT was in the year 1880 that a young
Australian of Scotch parentage, 19
years of age, surveyed the world
from his parents’ cottage at Fitzroy, a
suburb of Melbourne, and chose the high
road to Success.
Macpherson Robertson, known as Mac.
Robertson, is a native of Ballarat, Vic-
toria. As a boy of eight he went with
mother and brothers to Scotland, and
remained in Leith, the seaport town of
Edinburgh, for a period of six years. He
attended school for six months (at the
age of 10), but as a boy his whole
ambition was directed to work—even at
the sacrifice of schooling. He cajoled his
mother to let him go to work, and a
compromise was made to the effect that
if the boy would attend school daily he
could take a proffered situation. His
duty was to deliver early morning news-
papers. He had to rise at 3 o’clock in
the morning, and to walk from Leith to
Edinburgh to receive the papers, which
he delivered on the way back to Leith.
Mac. Robertson in recalling those early
days says:—“lt was no hardship for me
to have to rise at 3 o’clock in the morning
and tramp through the snow. Other boys
did comparatively the same. All this
seemed quite natural in industrious Scot-
land, where one was surrounded on every
hand by thrift and hard work.”
The man who engaged Mac. Robertson
kept a barber’s establishment, and after
From Newsboy to Millionaire.
the papers had been delivered the boy
acted as a latherer in the barber’s shop.
Two hours of this, then off to school.
This went on for some time, but the work
was not congenial to the lad, who then
became an assistant in a biscuit baker’s.
Subsequently he worked as a cork cutter,
then in a blacksmith’s shop, later in a
hatter’s, and then he tried a position in
a coalyard, shovelling coal. Shortly
afterwards he was employed by a printer
as a messenger boy, eventually working
in the printing shop. Subsequently he
took on another unattractive and very
cold job, that of cutting large Swedish
turnips to feed hungry cows! In this
occupation he cut up turnips from 4
o’clock in the morning until 6. He stayed
in this position, however, for only one
month. In all this lad tried 10 different
trades before he felt satisfied that one
suited him better than all the rest —
that of making sweets.
Two and Sixpence a week.
One day when in the company of two
or three of his companions he heard them
discussing their various avocations.
“Mac” asked one of the lads the nature
of his work. He replied, “I am working
at Miller’s, sitting down all day long
making ‘sweeties.’ ” This sounded most
alluring and captivating to Mac. Robert-
son. Next morning he obtained a situa-
tion at Miller’s. This entailed working
from 5 o’clock in the morning till 6 at
night, and the wage amounted to 2/6
per week.
With a view to bettering his position
in the confectionery trade he left Miller’s
and went to work with one Clarke, in
Leith, where he gained 6d. a week extra.
He worked here for 12 months. Ulti-
mately he left to return with his mother
and brothers to Australia.
Back to Australia.
The family landed at Port Melbourne.
They walked up to Emerald Hill. Pass-
ing up Buckhurst street, the young Mac,
Robertson saw a man standing in the
front doorway of his premises looking
at the new arrivals. “I wonder if he
wants a boy,” he thought, and within five
minutes he was busily engaged behind
the counter. Soon afterwards, however,
he decided to enter the confectionery
trade, and determined to take a situation
in a local establishment. The idea was
developing more and more in his mind
that some day he must start on his own
account. He felt certain that success
would result. He was diffident to speak
of the matter to his mother, fearing that
she would oppose, but when eventually
he approached her, he was delighted and
surprised when she agreed to his com-
mencing on his own account, notwith-
standing the fact that the resources of
the family were very meagre.
v . yyy ■/ .„, ...., /''


- 1 Z '''w'y, 7 /••*''
Becomes an Employer.
In 1880 Mr. Mac. Robertson began his
career as an employer. He began busi-
ness actually in the bathroom of his
mother’s house in Fitzroy. With a small
stock of sugar and by means of an old
pannikin, some plaster of Paris moulds,
and a few other modest accessories, he
began manufacturing sugar dolls, sugar
horses, and similar simple confections. He
melted his sugar syrups in the pannikin
over an old nail can, which he impro-
vised as a furnace. He manufactured
these primitive sweets on the Mondays,
Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays,
and carried them from shop to shop on
the Fridays and Saturdays. This went
on for month after month, and the slender
profits made were used for the purchase
of additional equipment. Then the youth-
ful confectioner was able to add to his
factory and his staff, and the tiny busi-
ness began to develop. His mother’s
house—the actual birthplace of his busi-
ness—soon formed part of a modest
factory.
From this most humble of beginnings,
Mac. Robertson’s business has grown into
the huge concern of to-day, employing
2,000 men and women, and manufacturing
every kind of sweetmeat—7oo varieties
in all. To view the immense works-
stretching from street to street in Fitz-
roy is to engender the greatest admira-
tion for a man who could, without the
benefits of a good education, capital, or
any other means conducive to success
(good parents excepted), create such a
marvellous industry all within the period
of 43 years.
“Adelaide Observer” [Continued).
A Unique Position.
Mac. Robertson’s position in the con-
fectionery world is exemplified in the
fact that a few years ago a proposition
was in hand for the amalgamation of
the large confectionery businesses of the
Commonwealth. The proposal was that
the entire trade should conduct business
under Mac. Robertson’s name, and that
he should be governing director in per-
petuity. Such confidence had his fellow-
manufacturers in him that they were
prepared in this way to entrust him with
the sole control of the trade.
Aids to Success.
To what does Mac. Robertson owe his
extraordinary success ? In the first
place, he considers that his early en-
vironment, the poverty of his childhood
in Scotland and in Australia, brought
him to realise the value of money. When
subsequently he acquired it he taught
himself to apply it to the best uses. Hard
work, long hours, and absence of pocket
money during his youth did not leave
any time for romancing or for indulging
in much pleasure. It seemed to be al-
ways work, work, work. This hard
“gruelling” drove him to concentrate,
and made him hardy physically and men-
tally. It brought out many qualities
which wmuld possibly have lain dormant
under happier and more affluent circum-
stances, or under the conditions of to-
day.
A solid foundation was made in Mac.
Robertson’s character by his acquain-
tance with the seriousness of life. There
were other qualities, however, which
made this boy spring from his humble
origin to the topmost rung of the ladder
as an Australian manufacturer, some of
the most important of these being per-
sistence and unlimited patience—always
striving to attain his objective, adhering
strictly to the principle that anything
worth doing should be done well, and be-
lieving that everything is to be gained
by the genuine trier. The man who annu-
ally converts thousands of tons of sugar,
corn syrup, cocoa, beans, gelatine, al-
monds, fruits of all kinds, and other in-
gredients into confectionery for the mil-
lion must be regarded as an energising
power in the land, as well as a valuable
asset to the country.
Patience and Self-Discipline.
Mr. Mac. Robertson considers that the
virtue of unlimited patience is of the
utmost importance for the development
of a successful business. It enters
modern business in many ways. Thou-
sands of men beginning under the inau-
spicous circumstances of Mac. Robert-
son would have given up soon after their
commencement. Patience made him stick
to his purpose. Others in the flush of
success might have been tempted to be-
come extravagant and starve their busi-
nesses. He realised that money is the
life-blood of any business, and, as a re-
sult of the hardships of his youth, curbed
any desire in this direction, applying his
profits for further extensions, and living
always simply but comfortably. Others
might have been tempted to float their
young businesses into companies, call-
ing in capital from outside. Mac.
Robertson to this day has not found it
necessary to bring in outside capital.
The present huge establishment at Fitz-
roy, and thousands of elaborate machines
have been bought from profits earned in
s''"*


ssasaggsziasiigs^giigiE3Sgi^^
j
“Adelaide Observer” [Continued].
''S
the business. By this patience and self- borate and ornate boxes of chocolates— wealth); secondly, the enterprise dis-
discipline he has kept the huge concern in all there are 700 lines of confectionery played at the parent business in Fitzroy
under his own personal control. He is and the range is constantly being added has made it possible for these industries
the master of his business, and nobody to. This business is one of the most self- to obtain their first foothold, and to wea-
can question his decisions. Such auto- contained establishments in Australia. ther their first financial storms. At the
cracy, when benevolent, as in the case of All the boxes, cartons, labels, and cases, commencement of operations the largest
i/l| Mac. Robertson, makes for greater mobi- are made in a special box factory adja- proportion of the output of the principal
lity. He is a born leader. He knows cent to the main works, and in the two factories was consumed by the Fitzroy
how to win the best qualities from a large engineers’ shops most of the ma- works for conversion into all kinds of
f/fa\ man. He can play on the feelings of his chinery, no matter how intricate, is de- confectionery. With such an immense
subordinates, and his immense enthu- signed and constructed. The staff in- factory as a ready market success was
siasm a,nd leadership bring out from those eludes electricians, boxmakers, case- assured from the outset. The profits
, h men the very virtues which assist in makers, carpenters, plumbers, chemists, earned by this group of industries re-
f4|; building up his business. Any display engineers, architects, and draughtsmen, main in Australia for the extension of
of impatience on the part of such a leader all doing their share. There arc other these concerns or for the creation of new
disturbs to a remarkable degree his industries also which can trace descent ones.
By exercising his quah- from the Mac. Robertson business, among During every generation nature pro-
fp ties m this direction, Mac. Robertson has them being:—The Maize Products Pro- vides leaders in art, in crafts, and in
A" grouped around him a loyal staff of ex- pnetary Limited, Footscray; the Federal industries; Mac. Robertson is one of
P ecuHves and workers, all eager to fur- Cask Proprietary Limited, Footscray; these. In any occupation which he might
thex the mteiosts of the house. the Federal Timber Proprietary Limited, have followed, he would have been a
j&j A dront ArhiWpmpnf Warburton; the Timber products Pro- leader. It was necessary for him to find
/I,J 1 * pnetary Limited, Warburton; the an outlet for his inexhaustible energy
Judged on a population basis, Mac. Primary Products Proprietary Limi- and unbounded enthusiasm. The medium
Robertson’s stands among the great in- ted, Manneum, Kingaroy District, which he selected to display his genius
dustrial achievements of the world. The Queensland. All _ these rapidly ex- was the confectionery making business,
employees at the parent business at tending and essentially Australian in- and the prestige and reputation attained
Fitzroy number 2,000, involving an an- dustries owe their success in the first by him throughout Australia, and the
nual wages bill of £400,000. Depots and instance to the Mac. Robertson Confec- huge white factories in Fitzroy form
agencies are maintained in every prim tionery business in Fitzroy. Firstly, bo- clear evidence of his amazing success,
cipal city of Australia, and the firm’s cause the main portion of the capital In the comparatively short space of a
' / products are to be found throughout the necessary for their establishment was ad- lifetime, ho has risen from a humble lad
Commonwealth. Every conceivable form vanced by Mac. Robertson (the remain- earning 2/6 a week to a millionaire, and
of sweetmeat is manufactured from the ing shareholders being other manufac- the highest taxpayer in the Common-
simple boiled confections to the most ela- turing confectioners of the Common- wealth of Australia.
fel i
Wa\ “ <Uhe Keen Spirit seizes the prompt occasion
Makes the thought start into instant action,
KVl' CAnd at once plans and performs,
te ; /| Resolves and executes ! ”
jj)|f(l I Hannah More
'vf/'h.
Mu | , A --yP


Reprinted from Sydney “Sunday News,” October 21, 1923.
THE DREAMER
to CAustralian C yV[a£nate
Nail Can became a Factory —Romance of Industry
The boy had a dream. It wasn’t a
fanciful chimera that subconsciously
flashed to his brain when his body
was at rest in sleep. It was a
dream that came to him while wide
awake. And it aroused a great in-
satiable longing in his little soul—
a longing that pained and hurt.
IN the height of Ballarat’s boom, an
Australian-born lad of eight was
taken by his mother from the then
mushroom city back to Scotland —the
land of her kin. The boy didn’t mind so
much leaving his playmates and the
happy romping grounds around the min-
ing dumps. The farewells meant noth-
ing to him. He was too young to feel
the grief that parting brings.
But the boy had had a dream, and
the great insatiable longing that it
had aroused in his little soul was
intensified, and seemed to him
farther from being appeased by the
going away.
The boy sold newspapers in the Scot-
tish town of Leith, but he is back in
Australia now. He doesn’t sell papers
<By G. BUTLER GYE
though. He sells the things he makes
and pays nearly half a million pounds a
year in wages to the two thousand men
and women who help him.
And the great insatiable longing
that the dream aroused in his
soul . . .
In Leith the boy made a compact with
his mother. He wanted to work—in some
way he divined that by working he
would be fulfilling what his dream had
pictured to his boyish fancy.
The tenor of the pact with his mother
was that he must attend school daily.
He did, but before slinging his bag of
books across his shoulder he had put in
five hours’ work—walking to and from
Edinburgh delivering newspapers and
assisting in the shop of his employer —
a barber as well as a newsagent—and
the youngster used to lather the early
customers.
Then he took a job with a biscuit
maker, but left it to cut corks for a
pittance wage. He didn’t stay long at
that. He tried a blacksmith’s shop for
a while. From there he went to a hat-
ter’s, then to a coalyard, a printing office
—kept it for a period, and chucked it
for a job cutting turnips for cowfeed.
He tried ten different kinds of work. . . .
But somehow, work as he did, he
could not satisfy the great insatiable
longing that the dream had aroused
in his soul.
Overhearing a boyish companion tell-
ing another of the easy sitting-down job
he had making “sweeties,” the Ballarat
boy decided to give it a trial. He got
a job at the same factory. His wages
were half-a-crown a week. He left it,
only to go to another lolly-maker’s at a
rise of sixpence.
In some way he could not define that
work in a measure seemed to satisfy
the great insatiable longing that
the dream had aroused in his soul.
He was there twelve months when his
mother decided to return to Australia.
They landed at Port Melbourne, and
while walking along Buckhurst Street
the family came to a shop at the door
of which the proprietor was standing.


: '//'"Z'/X''
W 4
K
Sydney “Sunday News” ( Continued).
“Do you want a boy?” the lad asked And then the great insatiable long- And all boys dream; but every boy is
as they were passing. ing that the dream had aroused in not a dreamer. . . . The dreamers
“Yes,” was the ready reply. his soul was appeased. mould the age.
Five minutes later the youngster was They read the signs and tokens that
working behind the counter of that shop. In the bathroom of his home, with an Destiny casts in tangled cypher in the
Somehow the great insatiable long- nail-can for a furnace, a pannikin crystal mirror of Chance; and, reading,
ing that the dream aroused in his for a boiler, some plaster of Paris moulds turn MIGHT-BE to MUST; for them
soul made him restless in his new which he made himself, and the factory there is no proven rule, no levelled path;
job. complete. no track blazed by those who went be-
Tj j + i i ,j, , l^- e ma de sugar dolls and horses four fore; no measure cut to hairbreadth pace,
He commenced to look around for an- days a week, and hawked them from or time to fractions set—they only have
other—a particular kind of job—and he shop to shop on the other two. What- the pluck to try and the heart to do
found it at a lolly-maker s. Then he ever profit he made he spent on new an( j dare.
worked for others in the same line till equipment—and the bathroom factory . , D .
he learned the trade. grew till to-day it stands the bunrest of , Aad y ° ung M acpherson Robertson, as
Then he got the idea of starting on its kind in the Southern Hemisphere, hif wadmm'Til
his own account. Something seemed to employing over 2,000 operatives. And visioned I JL hIS walvin& dream all
tell him that he would succeed, but he he owns it absolutely, just as he owned a 6 as ° y * ' ’ '
was afraid that his mother would offer the old nail-can and pannikin — Mac. tt T q tiR'P'AM r amtt trttpm
opposition. Eventually he approached Roberston has kept the realisation of his u •
her, and she readily agreed. . , . dream completely to himself.
produces over 700 lines of Chocolate and General Confectionery.
The following, big,b tribute was paid by “The Gordian ”
(the famous authoritative Continental Trade Journal) :
“Your ‘Dolly Varden’ Milk Chocolate large that in this milk chocolate milk is different from the European type that
is of quite a different sort than pro- by far the chief thing, a very important one would speak of it as quite a distinct
duced in Austria, Switzerland, Ger- feature. The ‘Gordian’ has been pointing production, and we would emphatically
many, or in other parts of Europe. It out to the Continental manufacturers of advise that Continental manufacturers
is especially noteworthy as regards the milk chocolate for years past the need should quickly get out of the dull mono-
large content of fresh sweetened con- of abundant milk in chocolate. Your tony and have more full-cream milk in
densed full-cream milk—a content so ‘Dolly Varden’ Milk Chocolate is so very their Milk Chocolate productions.”


"* /y/ '* 'S /// J / :T' 'i'yJ''
(W
Reprinted from Melbourne “Punch ” 'November 8, 1923.
OZVtC


'.a.':;/,,' '/ it
'dv
Melbourne “Punch” (Continued).
“Mac.’s” mind was planning as to how
soon he could start on his own. Begin-
mg plant, we could not get machines. spected, a return was made to the
We were accordingly forced to instal our office,
own workshop and employ a full staff
of engineers. Now we make all our His Book,
own.” He pointed with pride to a „ , , , ,
smoothly-running machine which bore • i[ aC i ,4 Sa Y concern-
the legend, “Pattern made and machine the , book he has recently published,
built by Mac. Robertson’s, Fitzroy, Tke v °i u ™ e ’ which tells in picture the
1916.” “That was the first,” he said story of the §; radua ! development of the
Passing on, he led the way into the concern over the period of the forty-three
finishing chambers. Hundreds of girls y ea^ s °| its existence, is undoubtedly a
were here busily occupied wrapping and work of a,rt The ™ a ny wrappers so
labelling sweets. “Mac.’s” eagle eye famil iar to Old Gold chocolate lovers
suddenly detected a caramel that had a xs ® xced ently reproduced in colours,
fallen from the table. Excusing himself ~ year ? t( ? compile,” said
he hurried back and placed it in the ~™ A ’ A „ and the order for the book cost
waste basket. £zU,UUU ; it only needs a perusal to con-
Tf wqc „-e tt • i tirm this. The volume is an artistic and
nothino- S y^ man - He missed finished piece of work.
nings are always hard, but they are
necessary. In the bathroom of his
mother’s house in Fitzroy, with the
assistance of an old pannikin and a small
stock of sugar he commenced manufac-
turing sugar dolls, sugar horses and
similar simple confections. He manufac-
tured these sweets on Mondays, Tues-
days, Wednesdays and Thursdays, and
hawked them round from shop to shop
jj || on Fridays and Saturdays,
Incredible as it may seem, the youth-
ful confectioner thus gradually com-
menced his climb up the ladder of suc-
cess. The small profits he obtained were
used to purchase additional equipment,
until, after many months, his mother’s
house began to develop—the bathroom
assumed the proportions of a factory.
“Mac.” to-day employs two thousand
men and women, and his salary bill
I j| passes £400,000 yearly.
“We have our troubles, of course,” he A Man of the Century,
replied in answer to a question. “Ow- AJ . ~
ing to the different trades we employ, , Adieux were said with a feeling that
we are under no less than thirty different aere was a really great man. Success
wages boards. It is somewhat perplex- h as _ no f roobed _ Mac. of interest m his
ing. For, you see, one hardly knows at business. He is as much the life and
times who should be at work, the men sc >ul of his big undertaking to-day as
work such different hours, start at dif- ]T hen ran the old tin can. He is still
ferent times, and vary in their hours of tke S^ ckf< - detai k J He kaows
service. However, we manage to get IS , , e Hungs that count, and his
along all right.” employees know that he knows it.
He showed the way into a newly-fitted To a man of his calibre nothing is im-
room in which the girls were employed possible. His life history is the tale of
wrapping caramel. “This is in the a man who dreamed, yet who made his
nature of an experiment,” he explained. dream come true. It is a story that in
“It is a model chamber we are construct- Hie years to come will be regarded almost
ing. The benches you note are lined with as a fail T tale, so great is the gulf be-
glass and nickel runners, and the light- tween its beginning and its end.
ing is reflected. You know, we try to When the history of Australia in the
™hi e „ our P eo P^ e as comfortable as pos- twentieth century ultimately comes to
81 ... be written, one of the outstanding figures
Around the Factory.
With an active step the head of the
firm led the way round the huge factory,
4~S i a small town in itself. “We are stick-
lers for cleanliness,” he went on as pro-
gress was made through show rooms and
workshops, “and the factory is self-con-
tained. We make our own boxes and do
our own printing.” He stopped in front
of a glass case in which stood the ori-
?v|| ginal tin can that had been his first tool.
Nearby it in another case stood a model
of the present works neatly executed in
sugar. The contrast was striking, and
told its own story.
“During the war,” he remarked, ex-
plaining the origin of a large engineer-
: j Ijp
II |
, , , # Ui 1/11C UUlOtCUlUlllg lig UICO
Other interesting sights there were, within its pages will undoubtedly be
and, after several of these had been in- Macpherson Robertson.
| y


YA
i
A k>
iJ
Following is copy of a letter received from:
Warden’s Office, StantKorpe, Queensland.
Dated 25th June, 1923
Mac. Robertson, pieces conjured out of sugar by a modern your wonderful works, and write my
Fitzroy, Vic. magician. My friends agree with me that impressions of them.
Dear Sir the man w ho as provided the people I shall lose no opportunity to dispel
T „ (trt . , n „ with such delicious confections is a any mist of ignorance about your
I purchased a tin of your Cinderella benefactor of his kind. romantic achievement.
Bon Bons. Please accept a little appre- T , . . , ... . T ~ ,
elation of these splendid confections. I deeply appreciate your kindness m In the number and beauty of your
Tkpsp Ron Rons nr? tho noetrv of con- sending me this memorable gift. productions, you have revealed the end-
fectionery, and they complete the educa- I ha Xe also received your booklet less possibilities in the transmutations
of tIJ tinman mlafp (describing your mammoth factories): of sugar, and, in raising the manufacture
If one of a nast Generation had ven- “A Young Man and a Nail Can.” It is of confectionery to the dignity of an art,
tuied to predict such a sweet, he would a revelation, and excites all the enthusi- you have shown to the world that the
have been derided as an extravagant astic exclamations and complimentary creations of the confectioner may be not
visionary superlatives of my vocabulary. I shall less wonderful than those of the poet
In their exquisite flavours and their PJp® this book, and wherever I go, it and painter,
artistic colouring, these Bon Bons seem shali S°- If you continue your triumphal march
to have been created by some great artist When you speak of making seven in the Confectionery world at the present
confectioner, from a secret celestial hundred varieties of confectionery, you rate, you will soon be weeping, like
recipe. remind me of that celebrity in Hindu Alexander the Great, because there are
Heine says there are some foods which mythology, who sent his ministering no more worlds to conquer,
should be taken kneeling, and these Bon spirits to collect honey from all the
Bons are amongst them. choicest flowers of the earth to be stored * * * *
v Qineerelv in one mighty comb of representative
\ oqpAambrosia (food for the gods). Such a
(bga.) ÜbtAK iviiiibiUiM. comb your factory appears to me. To eMac. Robertson
A<s a result of the above we sent a Few Australians have any conception
email ranp-e of our varied sweets to the °f the magnitude of your enterprise, “Within his brain the vision grew
small range Of our \anea sweets to Uie v I, Australians are familiar And > swift to plan, and swift to act,
gentleman in question and received this aitnougn an Australians a e ia lustre on his land he threw,
* | y . with your productions. As an Austin- who made his dream a splendid fact.
Mac Robertson lian, I feel _ immensely v, 10UC k JGt ° f all the tributes homage pays,
mac. nooeitson. colossal business, which has been built Q f all the eulogies that swell,
Dear Sir, up within our own gates. Your achieve- This is the crown of human praise:
The Art Gallery of Confectionery has ment fires my imagination, and if ever He builds for aye who builds so well,
arrived. It is a collection of master- I visit Melbourne, I should like to visit — Oscar Meston.


COPY OF LETTER
RECEIVED BY
FROM LORD LEVERHULME
Melbourne,
Ist February, 1924.
Mr. Mac. Robertson,
Argyle Street.
Fitzroy.
Dear Mr. Mac. Robertson,
I want to write and tell you how much myself and friends
enjoyed our visit to your wonderful works yesterday.
In my opinion, wonderful as your works are, and wonderful
as the organisation displayed therein is, the great attraction
to me was yourself and your personality. You seem to
radiate your force throughout the whole establishment like
a great human dynamo, and, as long as Australia produces
manufacturers actuated with the same attention to business
as yourself, then Australia need fear no competition, and,
as a Free-trader, I would like to add, could abolish all tariff.
The thousands of miles of ocean, the difficulty of transporting
goods of all kinds to Australia, will always give the oppor-
tunity to men of outstanding business ability as yourself
to manufacture in Australia, not only for the Australian
market, but, if Australia adopted Free-trade principles, my
own opinion would be you would be a very strong competitor
in over-seas markets. After all, the prosperity and influence
depends upon the ability and quality and character of its
citizens much more than on any policy a Government may
adopt or may refrain from adopting.
I g)
|
You are the right type of manufacturer for any country
in the world, and I am sure Australia must be proud of the
industry you have successfully established in Australia, and
still more of yourself.
With all good wishes,
Yours sincerely,
(Sgd ) LEVERHULME.
P-S.—Since writing above I have received your descriptive
book “A Young Man and a Nail Can,” and am proud to
possess it and have this souvenir of yourself and your works.
** (Sgd.) L.
|s£j I
i
//;;
v•"'»"s s/s's'/ '{-■ v
MEi . / / 'SA




StafF of Employees.
lyab 2,000 in number
\ ... The Wa?,es Bill is now £400,000 per annum.
2,000 in number
The Wa&es Bill is now £400,000 per annum.


Confectionery business in Austra-
lasia, and one of the largest in
the World!
Mr. R. SCOTT
(Worts Manager for 35 years )
Mr. J. A. von ALWYN
(Tasmanian Representative for 30 yec
Mr. B. SIBTHORPE
(Head Accountant)
Mr. L. G. ATKINSON
(Member of Council)
Mr. DAVID ROBERTSON Mr. G. J. ALLEN
(Second in Command) (Interstate Expert)
Mrs. S. BREWER Miss MORRISON
(Member of Council) {Confidential Stenographer)
Mr. F. DUTTON
(Man of 1000 duties —30 years service)
A COUNCIL MEETING
Printed by The Specialty Press Ply. Ltd., Melbourne, Australia, who also produced
dATaePobertson’s Commemorative Boole, “CA Young cATan and a c lCail Can."
's)
□


Reprinted from “Wimble's Reminder,” October, 1924.]
“A YOUNG MAN AND A NAIL CAN.”
A Splendidly-Printed Record of Industrial Endeavour.
T HE
name Mac. Robertson is known in every portion of Australia where there is a living soul
with a taste for the best there is in confectionery, and the mention of the name immediately
conveys a vision of a “ mouthful of melting deliciousness. Behind the Mac. Robertson confectionery
there is a history —or rather let it be said a romance —that is at once fascinating in its contemplation
and wonderful in its magnitude.
The story of the industry is that a young man in the year 1880 decided to start m business
as a confectionery manufacturer. His stock-in-trade was a nail can, a few pounds of sugar, a three-
penny pannikin, a small deal table, and twenty plaster-of-Paris moulds, together with energy, ambition,
patience, enterprise and foresight-qualities born into the man. His factory was his mother’s bathroom,
“ Perhaps,” runs the story, “he built air castles as he made his first sugar boilings; possibly he could
see huge white factories looming up in the future. But, anyhow, hard work does not leave much
time for romancing, especially when one has to manufacture on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays
and Thursdays, and then carry the sweets from shop to shop on Fridays and Saturdays.”
From this humblest of beginnings, and through the inexhaustible and untiring energy of its
founder, the business of Mac. Robertson’s has developed into what it is to-day the largest chocolate
and confectionery establishment in Australia, and possibly one of the greatest achievements, calculated
on a population basis, in any part of the world. T his vast organisation is not merely a place where
confectionery is made —not by a long sight —for included in the activities are staffs of electricians,
engineers, plumbers, tinsmiths, carpenters, builders, chemists, architects, saw-millers, box-makers and
printers. To-day the firm gives employment to over 2600 operatives, and the annual wage bill exceeds
£400,000.
The souvenir book telling of this big industry is a veritable feast of perfect printing. Ihe page
size is 1 1 inches by 8f inches, and there are 136 pages m the volume. The views on each page
are set in panels on tinted grounds, and about a dozen at the end of the book have reproductions m
colours and gold of the designs so familiar on chocolate boxes and wrappers which come from the
Mac. Robertson factory. Some statistics regarding the book are interesting : There were 23,000 copies
issued; each copy weighed, m paper cover, 1 libs., in cloth cover, 21bs. ; the total weight of the 23,000
copies was 20 tons ; there were consumed 460 reams of double medium art paper, 13 reams double
medium art cover paper, 32 reams medium cover paper for end papers, 140 reams tissue (medium),
3! tons 16oz. strawboard, H tons 320 z. strawboard, 21681b5. ink (almost a ton). Ihe 23,000
envelopes were made from light mamlla, weighed half-a-ton, and 50,000 eyelet catches were used in
making these envelopes. The total number of impressions was 2,200,000, and it would take one
machine nearly four years to print the entire edition. Ihe cost of the work was £20,000.
The printing was done by the Specialty Press Pty. Limited, of Melbourne, and it is safe to
say that a more perfect specimen of art printing than this souvenir has never been issued by any
printing concern in Australasia. It is doubtful, indeed, if any peer to it has been produced anywhere.
No. 61
