

Presbyterian.
Centenary
Thanksgiving
Fund.




1899
IQO2.
Presbyterian.
Centenary
Thanksgiving
Fund.




PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Executive Committee of the Centenary
Scheme.
Right Rev. The Moderator of Assembly
Rev. The Clerk of Assembly
Rev. John Walker (Convener)
Rev. James Cameron, M.A., D.D.
Rev. David Bruce, D.D.
Rev. James Cosh, M.A., D.D.
Rev. G. Maclnnes, M.A., D.D.
Rev. John Auld, M.A.
Rev. T. E. Clouston, B.A.
Rev. John Burgess, M.A.
Rev. John Ferguson
Rev. James Lamont, F.L.B.
Colonel John H. Goodlet
Mr. J. T. Walker
Mr. John Kirkland
Mr, John Cameron
Mr. Dugald Thomson, M.L.A.
Mr. James M. Allison
Mr. John Ross
Mr. J. Kenneth Mackay, Junk. (Gunnedah)
Mr. Walter G. Crane
Mr, Alexander Martin
Dr, John Hay
Dr. John Marden
Mr, William Wood
Mr. John Garland, LL.B., M.L.A.
Assembly’s Commissioner
Rev. John Walker.
Organising Secretary:
Mr. William W t ood.
General Treasurer:
Rev. James Cameron, D.D.,
Church Offices, Jamieson Street, Sydney.


■
■
'


Centenary Thanksgiving Fund.
THE close of what has been
fitly designated “the Won-
Century. (jgpfjji Century of our era is
now at hand. The opening of the next,
the Twentieth Century, will be an occasion of
momentous interest and significance, and
one well fitted to awaken throughout the
Christian Church earnest thoughts as to the
obligations resting on her and the work given
her to do. It is pleasing to find that the
Churches generally throughout the world,
recognising the importance of the occasion,
are bestirring themselves to turn it to the
best possible account, in the way of inaugurat-


ing a great Forward Movement for quickening
the spiritual life of the Church, for stimulating
her energies, and for strengthening her hands
for the better fulfilment of her high mission.
Thankful- The General Assembly of our
ness : own Church, at its recent meet-
Prayers : jng, having had this important
Progress. su bj ec ti brought under its notice,
deemed it a duty manifestly incumbent to
avail herself of so favourable an opportunity
for a fresh and vigorous start in
Church life and work. It was accordingly
unanimously resolved that an earnest endea-
vour should be made throughout the whole
Colony, and by such methods as might be
deemed best, to awaken in all our congrega-
tions and in the hearts of all our people a
feeling of profound thankfulness to God for
past mercies, and to stir them up to fervent
supplication for still greater tokens of the
Divine favour in the days to come. And
believing that, in answer to the united and
fervent prayers of the Church, God is willing
to pour out His Holy Spirit plentifully
upon us, we cannot doubt that the sure effect
would be—that the hearts of our people would
be so enlarged and their zeal stimulated into
such lively exercise, that the Church would feel
emboldened to launch out into a variety of


important enterprises, feeling assured that the
means for their accomplishment would not
fail to be forthcoming.
For the purpose of giving
Assembly's e£fect
to this resolution, the
Executive Q enera i Assembly unani-
mously appointed a large
and representative Executive
Committee to arrange for carrying out
the work. The Assembly at the same time
appointed Rev. John Walker, minister of
Woollahra, Assembly’s Commissioner and
Convener of Executive Committee, and Mr.
William Wood, of the Church Offices,
Organising Secretary, to advocate the scheme
throughout the colony, and give, as far as
possible, every Presbyterian an opportunity
of aiding in this important enterprise. It
was felt that no more competent men could
be found for this arduous undertaking, and
they are heartily commended to the warm
regards of the whole Church.
It is evident that the success of the work
will depend largely on the sympathy extended
to these brethren in their high mission, and
on the support they receive from the ministers
and office-bearers of the Church. We may
surely feel confidence in believing that those
who, with a laudable spirit of self-denial,


have agreed to take this work upon them,
will be everywhere received with cordiality,
and duly encouraged and helped in their
work. And we may well believe that their
intercourse with our people will, in more
ways than one, promote the best interests of
our Church.
While it is befitting that we
Centenary of meet the advent of a
b * an New Century with feelings of
.- . . devout gratitude, as well as
tenamsm. . ®
with high purposes ot heart,
it should serve to greatly enhance the
interest of the occasion when we call to re-
membrance that about the beginning of the
present century, Presbyterian services first
began to be held in this colony, so that when
our Church has completed the first century of
her history—a time close at hand—we shall
have in this an additional reason for profound
gratitude to God for all the way wherein, as a
Church, He has led us, and for the large
measure of prosperity wherewith, amid our
many shortcomings, it has pleased Him to
bless us.
Bearing in mind that of which Scripture
admonishes us : “ Except the Lord do
build the house, they labour in vain who


build it,” we feel how important
Prove Me and nee( jf a l it i s to impress
on the whole Church that the
herewith. g rea t primary object aimed at in
this entire movement is to draw down the bless-
ing of her living Head, that blessing which
truly maketh rich. Thus shall the Church be
awakened to a realising sense of the greatness
of her calling and of the grandeur of the
possibilities to which her great Head has
warranted her to aspire. In order to do this,
we need scarcely remind you how needful it
is that we should, one and all, give ourselves
to prayer systematic, sustained, earnest
wrestling with God—remembering that “ the
Kingdom of Heaven suffereth violence, and
that the violent take it by force,” and en-
couraged by that word which the Lord
Himself hath spoken, saying: “Prove Me
now herewith whether I will not he entreated
of you to do this great thing for you.’
As a practical expression of
Able, if our gratitude to God for His
Willing. ° .
great goodness to us and to
our Church, the General Assembly has
determined to ask our people to contribute
One Hundred Thousand Guineas, to be ex-
pended in accordance with the scheme of


distribution which appears at the end of this
pamphlet.
The sum asked for may seem a large one,
and staggering to the faith of some; but
when it is borne in mind that the Presbyterian
Church is reputed to be a wealthy Church,
that the contributions are to be extended over
three years, and further, that when the Church
was but about half her present size she set
herself to raise Fifty Thousand Pounds,
we may fairly maintain that the hope of
reaching the amount specified is a reasonable
hope. The gold and the silver are the Lord’s,
and if G-od should get His own, or anything
approaching it, the result would not only be
greater than we have asked for, but great
beyond all our thinking.
Power to no^ that, in
. „ . accordance with the scheme.
Allocate. 1
liberty is given to contributors
to allocate, if they should desire to do so,
their contributions to special objects, such as
Debt Extinction, Church Building, our Educa-
tional Institutions, or any other object or
objects on which they set special value.
It has also been suggested that many
might feel desirous of manifesting an affec-
tionate regard for the memory of departed


friends—godly fathers, pious
.. . mothers, beloved brothers, sis-
Memonam , , , , ~ A
ters, or children —and might
contribute In Memoriam gifts
for this purpose, thus expressing their venera-
tion for the “ God of their fathers,” as well as
practically avowing that the Church of their
childhood would be ever dear to them for
the fathers’ sake.
And we further believe that many Scots,
English and North of Ireland men and
women, not to speak of native-born Aus-
tralians, who have, from various causes,
done comparatively little hitherto for their
Church, will prove at this time that the
Church of their childhood and of honoured
and beloved parents, is still the Church of
their hearts.
It is intended to publish a
History History of the Presbyterian
toric Roll Church in this Colony in con-
nection with this Centenary
movement, and, as an Appendix to this His-
tory, an Historic Roll will be prepared,
containing the names and addresses of all
contributors to this Fund for the three years
of its currency, and in another Appendix
the names and donations of all In Memoriam
donors will be inscribed.


As soon as the Executive
Plan of Committee has completed the
Campaign. pj an Q £ cam p a ig nj and made
the necessary arrangements for starting the
work, the movement will be inaugurated by a
great Public Meeting in the Town Hall,
Sydney, when every endeavour will be made
to make the meeting such as will be worthy
of so great an occasion.
Meanwhile we ask that this
pamphlet be read and carefully
pondered, and the scheme for
the disposition of the contributed money,
studied. We also specially ask our people to
be prayerfully seeking the Divine blessing
upon this great effort, and seriously thinking
by what personal economies and self-denials
and efforts they can materially contribute to
its success.
“ There is that scattereth and yet increaseth,
and there is that withholdeth more than is
meet, hut it tendeth to poverty. The liberal
soul shall he made fat; and he that watereth
shall he watered also himself“ Bring ye all
the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be
meat in Mine House, and prove Me now here-
with,,saith the Lord of Hosts, if 1 will not
open you the windows of Heaven, and pour you


out a blessing, that there shall not he room
enough to receive it.”
W. M. DILL MACKY,
Modeeatoe of Assembly.
JAMES S. LAINGr, D.D.,
Cleek op Assembly.
NOTE. —For Statement of Scheme and
Address from Commissioner and Secretary
see following pages.


Note from the Assembly’s Commissioner
and the Organising Secretary.
In entering upon the work to which we have been
appointed by the General Assembly, we realise the
magnitude of the movement and the far-reaching
importance of the issues involved, and it is only after
much earnest prayer and careful thought that we
have resolved to accept the heavy responsibility of
organising (in conjunction with the Executive Com-
mittee ) and pushing forward the largest religious
movement which has yet been undertaken by our
Church in New South Wales.
In simple faith we go forward, looking to the Great
Head of the Church for wisdom and guidance in the
work, and all the minutest details of that work, in
city and country; believing that, by the power of the
Holy Spirit resting upon every Congregation of the
Church, the movement will be so blessed of God that
complete success shall crown the effort.
This great undertaking can only be made successful
by the earnest , prayerful, and hearty co-operation of
all the ministers, office-bearers, and people of our
Church, and in commencing a work which will tax
our strength to the utmost, we shall rely upon securing
ready, kindly sympathy and active assistance through-
out the whole Church.
Finally, we would ask the special and persistent
prayers of all God's people, that strength of body and
fulness of grace may be given for the carrying out of
the splendid enterprise to which, after prolonged and
careful consideration, the Church, by the unanimous
decision of the General Assembly, has set its hand
and seal.
JOHN WALKER,
General Assembly's Commissioner.
WILLIAM WOOD,
Organising Secretary


CENTENARY THANKSGIVING FUND
SCHEME.
The following Objects and Amounts are Included in the
Scheme pro rata, according to the decision of the General
Assembly, namely:—
£ S. d
1 Foreign Missions (Reserve) 5,000 0 0
2 Church Extension, including Cities,
Towns and Suburbs, and Expenses
of Importing Ministers (Reserve) ... 10,000 0 0
3 Religious Instruction in Public Schools
(Capital)
4 Aged and Infirm Ministers’ Fund
(Capital)
5.000 0 0
3.000 0 0
5 Widows and Orphans’ Fund (Capital) 3,000 0 0
6 Theological Professorships (Capital)... 13,000 0 0
7 General Capital Fund for General Ex-
penses of the Church (Capital) ... 13,000 0 0
8 Bursaries for Ministers’ Children—
Boys and Girls—Fatherless Children
to have the Preference (Capital) ... 5,000 0 0
9 Church and Manse Loan Building
Fund (Capital) ... 2,000 0 0
10 Purchase of Church and Manse Sites
in new districts —Purchase Money
to be refunded when possible ... 3,000 0 0
11 Debts on Churches and Manses ... 20,000 0 0
12 Ladies’ College, Croydon 8,000 0 0
13 Scots College, Double Bay 5,000 0 0
14 St, Andrew’s College, Sydney Uni-
versity ... ... ... ... ... 1,000 0 0
£96,000 0 0
The following to be a FIRST CHARGE on the amount
raised under the General Scheme, namely:—
15 The Debts on the General Funds of the £ s. d.
Church (say) ... 7,000 0 0
16 The Publication of a History of the
Church (say) 500 0 0
17 The Expense of carrying out the
Scheme (say) 1,500 0 0
Total Amount of First Charge ... £9,000 0 0
Grand Total ... ... £105,000 0 0


J/Kp
fclfcLlO
P 14*4*3
fC ce^
Websdale, Shoosmith & Co., Pointers, 117 Clarence-st., Sydney.




