

RETURNED SAILORS’ &
SOLDIERS’ IMPERIAL
LEAGUE OF AUSTRALIA,
W.A. BRANCH (INCORP.)
P resiclentia 1 Add ress
delivered to delegates at the
TWELFTH ANNUAL CONGRESS
OCTOBER 3rd, 1928
COLONEL H. B. COLLETT
C.M.G., D. 5.0., V.D.
President lU. A. Sranch R.S. & S.I.LA.


I '
m 'sjSy'oney GAZtrrf/BessV^^^JJ
r


RETURNED SAILORS' &
SOLDIERS’ IMPERIAL
LEAGUE OK AUSTRALIA,
W.A. BRANCH (INCORP.)
Presidential Address
delivered to delegates at the
TWELFTH ANNUAL CONGRESS
OCTOBER 3rd, 1928
COLONEL H. B. COLLETT
C.M.G.. D. 5.0., V.D.


R.S.S.I.L.A.
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN BRANCH (Inc.)
TWELFTH ANNUAL STATE CONGRESS
1928
President s Address
Your Excellency, Ladies, and Comrades:
In fulfilling my very pleasant duty of formally opening the 12th Annual Con-
gress of the W.A. Branch of the R.5.5.1.L.A., I sha'l once more ask you to bear
with me whilst I touch upon several matters that are of interest and, in some
instances, of considerable importance to us.
The Agenda Paper.contains the items, you are to discuss, and I know you will
give each one of them the same earnest consideration as you have done in your
deliberations on previous occasions. Whatever you may see there can only confirm
in your minds the conviction that in this State we are very much alive to our
needs and are pulling solidly together.
We have had a good year and every one of you has done something of value
for the common cause. As time passes our ranks will get thinner, but we must
always be closed up and present a united front whenever there is a claim upon our
sympathies or a call upon our patriotism. Having ourselves earned the title of
citizen, we can, by our example to those coming after us, create in them the
ambition to follow the same path of duty.
THE LATE GRAND PRESIDENT
Last year I had the privilege of quoting to you from an important speech made
by our then Grand President. Field-Marshal The Earl Haig. It was with the
profoundest regret that we received the news of his death in January last. It is
difficult to form an estimate of the value of this great man’s services to the
Empire and even to the civilised world. We need not go into his merits as a
general. We accepted him as an outstanding example of the British gentleman,
and as one who honoured his country and was loyal to those of the King’s subjects
which Providence had placed under his command. His work in founding the
British Empire Service League has had far-reaching consequences in re-establish-
ing the ex-service men in civil life and binding together in peace all that went so
far in safeguarding the nation in war. We need to be careful not to lose sight of
his high example and splendid ideals, which, we may feel sure, will be re-impressed
upon us by his very worthy successor in the League, Admiral-of-the-Fleet Earl
Jellicoe.
It is scarcely necessary for me to say that in this Branch we fully endorse the
action of our Federal President in despatching to the Countess Haig and her
children a message, on our behalf, assuring them of our deepest sympathy in their
great bereavement.
PEACE AND THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS
We are not hypocritical in our expressions of horror of war and the desire
for the maintenance of the world’s peace. To what extent we can help towards
securing the comity of nations is problematical, but we can individually, and col-
lectively, too, take an interest in the work of the League that meets at Geneva
and give every publicity to its principles. That phase of its activities which is
embraced by the International Labour Office will especially repay our study, as it


cannot fail but to have the most important and far-reaching effect upon the com-
fort and health of all those who are wage-earners.
But it seems to me—and yet I may be wrong—that we cannot hope to agree
satisfactorily with our neighbours if we are constantly disagreeing within our
own households. How far will our word be accepted abroad if it is repudiated
at home? How can we expect tolerance and reciprocity between us and other
nations when those qualities arc so markedly absent in our own internal political,
commercial and industrial relations? Something is fundamentally wrong, and the
reason is not far to seek. I suggest that our best guarantee of good faith abroad
is an obvious ability to establish harmonious conditions within our own borders.
Further we are well enough versed in history to know, and at the same time
to regret that neither Providence nor Nature—whichever be the governing tactor-
gives the world a new heart when that world is repentant; that treaties last,
perhaps, for a mere generation, and that fresh conflicts are, at some time or other,
inevitable. That being so, we must not neglect that plank m our policy which
demands an adequate defence system for Australia.
OFFICERS IN THE LEAGUE
I propose to touch upon a matter that might be considered delicate. On the
other hand, I think it were better dealt with frankly. ‘Quite recently I enquired,
in a quarter where I thought I could obtain authentic information, as to how the
presence of officers in office in the League was viewed by the general body of
members. I was informed that there was still a good deal of prejudice m
That reply surprised me. but I genuinely doubt its reliability. The reaction
against officers, as such, immediately after the war was, to a certain extent,
understandable by anyone having a smattering of psychology. As a class, officers
were emblematic of that authority which had kept m repression what we might
term the private individuality, and, to a degree, restricted the liberty of those
under their command. Such a course was necessary in the interests of the com-
mon cause We all know it was irksome. None of us can forget the fervency
thrown into the melody, “When I get my civvy clothes on which was occa-
sionally sung within our hearing. But the officer as an individual was quite a
different subject for consideration altogether. The great majority of them were
promoted from the ranks, not because of their social status or claims, but because
they were good soldiers and had survived the fray long enough to be present when
vacancies r( [ ) g tter men t j ian us we nt under—without even a single stripe on
their jackets—we all know. Those who lived, and by living bad gained experi-
ence. were necessary to those who came after them and looked to someone to
teach and to lead. Of those whose names are shown on the Officers Roll ot the
28th Battalion, ninety-one earned their promotions m that unit m the held, and
know of none of them who are alive to-day whose method of living can be
distinguished from that followed by the rest of us unfortunates.
Some people will wiPully misunderstand, and others are often intentionally
misled I remember a week-end newspaper seeking to show by quoting the
large number of them that wore the D.C.M. and M.M.. how the Australian officers
had grabbed all the decorations. . , . _ , , .
I say that without a doubt, there is room in this League for everyone who, dur-
ing the war, bv his service, conduct and display of the spirit of comradeship, earned
the respect and regard of those who came into contact with him. W hether a
man marched at the head of a division, or at the tail of a transport wagon, does
not matter. If he has character and knowledge, and experience of men and
things, he is the man to hold office in the League. This is not a theory—the proof
of it I have found in mv journeys around the various sub-branches. Ihe trouble
this League encountered in its early days was, in part, due to the intrusion of
loud-voiced demagogues who had none of the qualities I have mentioned, and
whose very presence kept many decent people away. . ,
I can’ aver, without hesitation, that we need the help of more leaders—
whether they be ex-privates or colonels. There are any numbers of them about,


sortie waiting to be asked, some shy, some lazy. I know most of them around
here, and I sometimes think they are asking me to do more than my fair share
in paying the debt that we all owe to our comrades and our country.
But here to-day we are encouraged by the presence of the five General Officers
who live amongst us. Three of them I have known most of my life. All of
them are distinguished in themselves, were good comrades, and are now strong
supporters of our work. Superimpose on them H.E. The Governor, who, I
venture to say, is a proud man this morning, and then tell me, if you can, where,
if at all, 1 am in error in my views.
Quite recently a member of the State Parliament, whom one would suppose
to be well-informed, stated in the Lower House that the R.S.L. is doing good
work for " the brass hats.” His meaning is a little obscure and he seems to
have overlooked the democratic nature of our organisation. Within it reigns
supreme the principle of one man one vote, and the members may, at their pleasure,
administer to the needs of any old brass hat and even, if necessary, entirely
renovate it.
The benefits I have personally derived from the League are, firstly, the
privilege of associating with tried comrades, and, secondly, the opportunity of
doing my duty to the survivors of some 4,000 men who looked directly towards me
for some guidance during the war.
FEDERAL EXECUTIVE
Our Constitution provides that the executive power of the League shall be
vested in a, Federal Executive composed of the President of the League and one
Councillor from each State Branch. On the grounds that the cost was more than
could be borne by the Branches distant from Melbourne, this Executive has
seldom functioned, and its power has virtually remained in the hands of the
Federal President, who has hitherto resided, as our rules require, in the city in
which the headquarters of the organisation are situated.
To me it seems that the position of the League to-day indicates that in placing
all the responsibility for our government and welfare upon the shoulders of one
man we are inflicting upon him too great a burden. Your Executive agrees with
this view, and is recommending that the Constitution be amended so as to make
a quarterly meeting of the Federal Executive mandatory. At the same time, it is
desired to remove the clause affecting the place of residence of the Federal
President.
A similar move is being made by the N.S.W. Branch. No doubt the cost of
these meetings will affect ourselves most of all, but undoubtedly some arrangement
can be come to whereby it may be lightened to some extent.
THE POSITION OF THE LEAGUE IN AUSTRALIA TO-DAY
If it were practicable for me to recite to you here a catalogue of the League’s
achievements since its foundation twelve years ago you would be astonished. An
enormous amount of ground has been covered in its endeavour to assist the ex-
sailor and ex-soldier in re-establishing himself in civil life, in supplying advice,
in extending relief to the needy, and in providing for the dependents of the
fallen.
All this has been done in collaboration with the Commonwealth and State
Governments, which, without exception, have treated the ex-service man and
woman on a generous scale. And one point in the League’s policy, to which I
have previously drawn attention, is that it does not discriminate between sub-
scribers and non-subscribers. Thousands have benefited materially and in other
ways—sometimes in ignorance of the source of their good fortune and, more
often, without any display of gratitude or any attempt to support the further
efforts of their, benefactors. It is a common experience.
We have been assiduous in pressing for that recognition which we thought
was rightfully due. In doing so we have made our voice heard on more than one
occasion, and, conscious as we are that we have not been unreasonable, I am satis-
fied that there has grown up around us the impression that we are an organisation
striving only for advantages for ourselves. Even the Prime Minister voiced the


popular misconception when he told us why he did not always wear his badge *
he did not think it quite fitting in his great appointment to be pleading “ the poor
returned soldier.” ... - , T
Nevertheless, we must pursue the course laid down by our founders. JNot
until the time arrives when there is no comrade needing our help, or no widow
or orphan requiring our protection, dare we relax our efforts. Ihe danget is a
materialism which, in this age, finds little room for gratitude and none for
sentiment. , . ,
But is it necessary, in order to deal with the individual cases that now come
along, or the few repatriation issues still at stake, to maintain a large organisation
and endeavour to enlist the sympathy and aid of the 200,000 ex-sei vice men and
women still living in Australia.'' I do not think so. We have established the
necessary machinery sufficient for the purpose, and we must look around for
somq other objective that wall hold our interest and absoih our surplus energy.
And we have not far to seek. Our founders were far-seeing people, and they
gave us a-Constitution which requires us “to set an example of public spirit,
“ to inculcate loyalty,” and “ to induce members as citizens to serve Australia with
that spirit of self-sacrifice . . . with which, as sailors and soldiers, they served
Australia and the Empire.” Can there be a finer objective for a body of men and
women already so highly tried and so rarely found wanting ?
It is well. But let us take stock of ourselves. I felt it my duty to take this
matter up some months ago with the Federal Picsident, and 1 have pointed out
to him how little was being done; our comparative failure to establish any claim
for consideration as an entity in the public life of Australia; how the greater
percentage of the surviving members of the A.1.1*, was outside the League; how
near we were approaching to stagnation and consequent retrogression; the ap-
parent precarious condition in one or more of the States; the absence of any
lead or creative effort from the Federal Executive, and the seeming friction
between the Head Office of the League and two of the State Branches.
I went further than complaining. 1 was intrepid enough to suggest a remedy
some course of action that would enable the League to fulfil its destined role
and secure, and retain, for it in the minds of the people of Australia the claim
of being an unselfish, sane, body of individuals capable and willing to assist m
the moulding of the future of the nation.
I drew attention to the need for the co-operation of more of those who really
counted in the R.A.N. and A.I.F. By that I did not mean mere officers, but, as
I have indicated in another part of this address, men whose services, conduct and
display-of the spirit of comradeship, commanded our confidence. There are
hundreds of them that will join us if told of the need —if pressed by those by
whom they can be influenced. , , ~,
And whose influence should be exerted in these cases, it not that of the very
men in whom thev themselves had confidence? I communicated this to Captain
Dyett I mentioned the names of three distinguished men, known throughout
Australia, whose aid he might seek by inviting them to personally interest them-
selves in bringing others into active partnership with us. By means of one or
two personal letters their influence would he disseminated throughout Australia.
I found that the Federal President did not altogether concur in my views He
was not responsive to the suggestion to enlist the help of the gentlemen I had
named He made no move for some months, and then apparently, fired by the
success of the last Anzac Day observances throughout the Commonwealth, ex-
pressed to me his intention of having a circular compiled for distribution, which
would contain messages of commendation of the work of the League from the
Countess Haig and all the A.I.F. leaders. .. . „ . ,
Well, here is October and we are still without the appeal. Next month Pecleral
Congress’ assembles, and we should meet it with some plan that will enable us
to hold the ground we have gained—let alone providing for the future.
Captain Dyett has been an excellent President of the League. To him may
be attributed very largely the success which has marked the first phase of our
work. His energy and sagacity in conducting negotiations with the C ommon-
wealth Governments have been greatly to our benefit. The dignity and acumen


with which he represented us at two B.E.S.L. Conferences were what we expected
of him and have enhanced our prestige. He has served us for nine years, and I
hope will be returned ago.in this year and so complete a decade. We have every
reason to be grateful to him.
But Captain Dyett is not known throughout Australia—nor even throughout
the A.l.F.—as we know him. There was an election for his office last year.
He was opposed by a gentleman whom, unfortunately, we over here were not
acquainted with. He is to go to the vote again this year, and once more, with
the knowledge we possess, we will vote for him. We do not desire to see this
great office looked upon lightly; we wish to disassociate it from anything of an
electioneering nature.
I think, in all sincerity, we have reached that stage in our history—as with
the British Legion and the late Earl Haig—in which we need renewed vigour,
fresh inspiration, and higher leadership.
The chief of the three distinguished men whose names I submitted to the
Federal President was Lieut.-General Sir John Monash, the commander of the
Australians in the great victories of the autumn of 1918. By reason of his fame
as a soldier, his attainments as a scholar, his standing in his profession as an
engineer, and his unquestionably great influence throughout the Commonwealth,
he is marked down as our natural leader in our contest with the problems of
peace.
My hopes are that when the Federal Congress deliberates in Sydney next
month it will, in its wisdom, unanimously invite Sir John to place himself at the
head of the League before the end of 1929. And if you Delegates agree with my
views on the solution of our difficulties, that you will pay me the compliment
of saying so before you finally dissolve.
THE LEAGUE BADGE
I would like to enter a plea for a more universal observance of the custom
of wearing the Badge of the League. Some of us are averse to adorning our-
selves with badges of any description, but ours is the mark of proved and ap-
proved service, and its appearance in public on all and every occasion is a constant
reminder of what we stand for and a material help in forwarding our work. I
know of no badge that is its equal in merit.
COUNTRY SUB-BRANCHES
Many of the country Sub-Branches in this State are a striking example of
what the League represents in the community. One learns of one hundred per
cent, membership—every eligible man in the district; of zeal and care in ameliora-
tion vyork; of harmonious and close relations with local governing bodies; of
participation in social organisations and movements for the support of local
hospitals; in fact, in all things where good citizenship finds scope, the members
have been putting in their weight with results that cannot fail to be beneficial.
In their functions—the most important of the year in some localities—
the programmes and conduct of the same are attaining an increasing dignity fully
in keeping with the service which originally claimed their interest.
During the last twelve months I have had several opportunities of going
abroad from Perth and visiting the man on the land. I am personally indebted
to all I met for the many courtesies and kindnesses meted out to me as your
President. If ever I were a pessimist as regards the future of Western Aus-
tralia, my conversion has been completed on coming into contact with its rural
population. It is the real wealth producer, the true aristocracy, and in its hands
our destinies are assured.
In one or two centres, through the absence of the required lead, the sub-
branch has become dormant. Such cases we shall give special attention to during
the next twelve months. In one important town I was greeted with the surprising
statement that the movement was absolutely dead. A few minutes’ consideration
supplied the answer, which was found in a president and secretary out of sym-
pathy with the qualified residents.
The State Secretary has told you of the close touch maintained with our


comrades in the country, but I think co-operation can, with advantage, be earned
even further if only by the prompt rendering of returns \V c are pledged to the
promotion of • Empire trade, and in that connection work hand-m-hand with the
BF S L In furtherance*of this object we sent out some months ago a simple
questionnaire, but, I regret to say, in very few instances did secrelanes' furnish the
information asked for. The matter is ot vital importance to us all, and i would
impress upon every sub-branch the good they may do by buying from our own
people first.
WOMEN’S AUXILIARIES
I am afraid that the potential value of Women’s Auxiliaries is not fully
appreciated In country districts, where social amenities arc few they can do
particularly good work in making the life of settlers and their families easier
Lid happier.' Their usefulness in the community can safely be gauged by their
position P in the family, and I would urge upon sub-branches to lose no time
availing themselves of such an important aid to their work.
To the existing Auxiliaries I would perhaps suggest that they should so
regulate their efforts as to be in perfect harmony with the policy and objectives
of the Sub-Branches with which they arc affiliated.
COMMUNITY-OF-INTEREST SUB-BRANCHES.
This subject is mentioned on the Agenda Paper. I hope it will be well
thrashed out and that at the end of the discussion we may have found some
method of adjusting the irregularities authorised by the retiring as well as
previous Executives. I will content myself by saying that the situation, as it
exists, is not without danger to the League.
REPATRIATION COMMISSION
I am glad to say that our relations with the Repatriation Commission continue
to be on more than a friendly footing. Its work is of the greatest importance
to us and I would like to give you some slight idea oi what has been done during
flip Deist twelve months. . . , . c«. , /-\r
On the 30th June last there were 27,495 current in this State,
that number, 7,551 were drawn by ex-members of the forces, and pei cent.
nf these were surgical cases. . . , ,
During the year 1,584 fresh applications,' involving ex-service men and de-
pendents, were lodged. 1.414 of these were approved and 41 others weie deferred
f ° r Appeals Lgaimf refusal of pension, and appeals against refusal of increase
in pension rates, were submitted in 515 instances. 309 of these were successful
an<l Aii Additional'*39o ex-members have had their pensions made permanent and
the average fortnightly payment in all instances shows, as compared with the
ex-n,.mber pensioners died during the
>eal Fcder;d Congress litis asked for a Board of Appeal in regard to pension
claims, and it looks as though that request is going to he granted by the Com-
monwealth Government. 1 am personally not quite sanguine that we shall be
anv the better off when we do get it. At present the whole question is connected
with the interpretation of the expression, used both by the Commission and our-
selves “giving the applicant for a pension the benefit ot any doubt.
But L that nut already done? The Commission decides as to the mans
eligibility under the Act and reviews his war service. If the information thus
gamed is inconclusive, then the assistance of the Medical Advisory Board is
sou°ht and that body, guided by the known facts, informed as to the applicant s
pathological condition, forms an opinion as to the possibilities and probabilities,
•md notifies the Commission as to its finding. . . , T
If then a doubt still remains, does the ex-soldier get the benefit of it. In
practice I think he does. We have, so far as I am aware, no grounds for saying


that the Commission is unsympathetic. It is composed of returned soldiers, one
of whom was nominated by us. It is possible that its powers are too limited, or
the volume of work too great for it to deal with. Then, rather, should we move
in the direction of securing the necessary amending legislation.
We have not expressed any marked lack of confidence in-the Repatriation
Commission, nor have we failed to appreciate the close personal attention given
in many instances by the Minister for Repatriation himself, but we have been
curious as to why specific cases rejected time and again by the Commission have
been finally approved when sent through some Parliamentary Representative.
We have reason to be dissatisfied, as well as curious.
And then, as regards the proposed Appeal Board, how is it to be constituted?
Is it to be a legal tribunal —without a soul—or a body of humanitarians who will
say “ Yes, poor fellow,” to everyone who comes along, and thus land the country
with millions more of expenditure? If we must have it, we would desire the
personnel to be carefully selected—men who will give the ex-service man his just
due without the cost, congestion and delay which characterise so many similar
bodies.
And, of course, in the nature of things its decision should be final. On that
point there seems to be some doubt, because in the Sydney Morning Herald of the
14th August, to Sir Neville Howse, the Minister for Repatriation, is attributed
the remark “he would fight very strongly to prevent the Appeal Board having
the final word on any appeal.” We might well ask, “What’s in a name? ”
SOLDIER SETTLEMENT
The State Secretary has given you some particulars concerning the operation
in this State of the Soldier Settlement Scheme. The magnitude and importance
of this scheme is hardly realised by the ordinary individual. Altogether there are
3,246 ex-service men in occupation of holdings, and the money advanced to date
is over five and three-quarter millions. Unfortunately, I have been unable to
secure figures disclosing the value of their production—which must have been
enormous last year—but that they are not unsuccessful may be suggested by the
fact that during that period they paid off £214,000 on the capital account and
£245,000 by way of interest.
One cannot say too much in commendation of the wisdom and sympathy with
which this scheme is now being administered by the responsible authorities. In
many instances the personal attention given to individual cases has made all the
difference between success and failure. Many men commencing under adverse
circumstances, or meeting ill fortune, have been given a new start under more
favourable conditions. Much of the credit for this can be attributed to the
careful work done by your Land Committee and the confidence reposed in its
recommendations by the Soldier Settlement Board and the Managing Trustee
of the Agricultural Bank.
UNEMPLOYMENT AND RELIEF
We are still fulfilling our duty of looking after our less fortunate com-
rades. During the past year the Employment Bureau has done excellently
in finding work for a large number and considerable sums have been expended
in relief. We should be glad to note that no discrimination has been shown
between men of the Australian Expenditionary Forces and those of the Imperial
Forces, nor between members ana non-members of the League.
It is with regret that I have again to comment on the few refunds that
have been reported. All moneys advanced are nominally loans, and those we
assist are asked to bear this in mind so that when they find themselves in
more affluent circumstances they can do a good turn to others by making some
amount available for re-distribution.
We must also deplore the fact that nothing has yet been done in the
direction of providing for the many who must fail as old age advances. The
matter is of some urgency and should be taken in hand without delay. It is
deserving of the fullest attention of the Federal Executive.


PREFERENCE
The matter of preference in employment has been carefully investigated by
a Committee appointed at the 1926 Congress, and its report will be presented
to you in due course. There is still the need for a rigid adherence to oui
policy of heretofore and Sub-branches should watch the issue closely within their
own districts. Of course, the expression “ all things being equal” is subject
to various interpretations, but in the spirit it means that, given the capacity
and the willingness to work, the preference, either in employment or promotion,
should be given to the ex-service man or woman.
ANZAC DAY
It must be a source of great satisfaction to all of us to note the increasing
attention and respect paid to the observance of Anzac Day. The true spirit
of the occasion is gradually becoming understood, and we are greatly indebted
to Their Graces Archbishop Riley and Archbishop Clune, and the heads of
the other Churches, for the very powerful assistance granted to us. It behoves
us however, to still guard against the encroachments of more material interests
which claim that the war has now been over ten years, and business should
be allowed to proceed as usual; or, again, the “ flannelled fools ” who think
that a game of tennis is of mure importance than the memory of the men
who gave their lives in making that game of tennis possible.
MONS DAY
Of almost equal importance to us should be the celebration of the anni-
versary of the operations around Mons in 1914. It is then that we can, by
out attendance, pay some tribute to those great men of the Old Army who
bore soi heroically the first impact of the great flood of the enemy and success-
fully stemmed the tide.- . :■ .
During the last two years a solemn service has been held m Perth during
the month of August. 1 hanks to the efforts of the British United Services
Association it appears that this celebration has come to stay. 1 commend it to
the notice of every Sub-Branch of the League, and every Unit Association,
as deserving of their fullest support.
UNIT ASSOCIATIONS
The encouragement and assistance given by your Executive in the founda-
tion of Unit Associations is bearing good fruit, and I am in a position to be able
to tell you that, with the initial gathering of members of the Australian Army
Service Corps, the list is practically complete. . ~. .
In these associations we are perpetuating the close and kindly ties of friend-
ship created by mutual service abroad, and also creating a powerful adjunct to
the League towards which they all, without exception, bear the greatest good
We are deeply indebted to the rank and file of the A.A.M.C. for their
unfailing devotion to us during active service, and we are equally grateful
to the officers for the skill with which they treated us, but we would like
to see the latter display a little more interest in their Association and its meetings.
It is pleasing to' be able to note a revival in the Artillery Comrades
Association, which should be one of the strongest and most useful of them all.
The gunners belonged to a corps with great traditions, and held in the highest
regard by the other arms. The fact that they did not serve under the same
CO. or even in the same Division, should not deter them from gathering
together under the same happy conditions as do regiments and battalions.
EX-IMPERIAL SERVICE MEN
It is a source of immense satisfaction to your Executive to note the manner
in which ex-imperial Service men are co-operating with us in the work of the
League. We value their very presence—let alone their help—and their occupation
of the offices of president or secretary in some of the Sub-Branches is proof
of the ties of comradeship and joint service so fully appreciated whilst abroad.


Some misguided individual has been endeavouring to establish for them in Aus-
tralia separate branches of the British Legion, but we maintain that such
are not required. By coming here to make their homes they become Australians
and share with us such opportunities as this new land affords.
'1 he problems incidental to, or the outcome of, their service we can, with
our powerful organisation and influence with the various Governments, ade-
quately cope with. In pension matters our Repatriation Commission is the
agent for the Ministry of Pensions, and deals with applications. Apart from
that we have, through the 8.E.5.L., been able to secure valuable concessions
in regard to certain types of cases.
Concerning the land settlement and housing schemes, and other benefits
conferred by special legislation upon members of the Australian services, they
cannot reasonably hope to participate in these because the country, with a
a national debt approximating per capita that of Great Britain, cannot stand
the burden. However, the opportunities I referred to are not mythical. There
are farms and homes and work to be obtained under such conditions as do not,
so far as I am aware, obtain anywhere else. Therefore, the heart that carried
a man through the campaigns of 1914-18 should stand him in good stead when
battling to re-establish himself amongst us.
But we would be loth to see him altogether sever his ties and affections
with and for the Old Country. We envy him in his knowledge of its beauties
and traditions, and join with him in gratitude to our forefathers whose wisdom
and courage gave us the liberty and institutions we enjoy to-day. That being
so we can hail with genuine pleasure the inauguration of the British United
Services Association, which has been recently formed, for social purposes,
on the lines of a unit association, and already reports a large membership.
We wish it every success.
Before I leave this subject I would like to emphasise our indebtedness to
Lieut.-Colonel C. H. E. Manning, D. 5.0., 0.8. E., Director of Migration at
Australia House, London. He has voluntarily aided us by acting as liaison
officer between ourselves and the 8.E.5.L., and various British governmental
activities, in regard to matters affecting the welfare of British migrants settling
here.
ALIEN IMMIGRATION
We are rightly very concerned in regard to the influx of aliens. I would,
however, ask that the subject be considered calmly and dispassionately, and divorced
altogether from the cant and humbug of party politics. The Commonwealth
Government has announced its intention of keeping our population 98% British.
We may accept that dictum whilst maintaining a watchful attitude in order
to ensure its observance.
But as regards the Southern European who is already in our midst, or who
may arrive in the future, I think we should realise the position we are in.
We pride ourselves on having assumed the dignity of a nation. But we must
not forget that a people who assume that dignity also acquire the responsibilities
attached thereto. Our immediate responsibility is to he courteous to other nations
and to see that fair treatment is meted out to a race to which we are greatly
indebted for help rendered during the war. Were the positions reversed it
is the least we would expect ourselves.
In my opinion the employment of foreigners in the mines is indefensible
without that for which legislation already provides, namely, the severest of
language tests. We should try to secure its rigid enforcement. In some of
the other industries the position is more complex. Such factors as the law
of supply and demand, the contract system, the regulation of hours of labour
and wages, the capacity for work, and the suggestion that the aliens are
exploited by their own countrymen, all obtrude and require close consideration
when endeavouring to arrive at a judgment.
In agriculture we are faced with even a greater difficulty if we desire
to be fair. The enormous amount of new country that is being opened up;
the fact that it is being developed on money borrowed by the State, and the
fact, also, that the average farmer has little or no capital when he commences


One of the most pleasing items I have to communicate to you is the fact
that as a result of a special appeal made last Anzac Day by His Grace the
Archbishop of Perth, sufficient money has now been subscribed by the public
tn make the completion of the State War Memorial practicable.
1 he Com-
mittee proposes, also, to inscribe within the Monument the name ot every Western
Australian who was killed, or has died as a result of his war service,
, and tor this
nurnnsp a further appeal has been launched and is being liberally supported.
Manv people who might have subscribed are still holding back,
but i would
like to put before you particulars of some of the donations which are on a
more generous scale : —
£546
The Freemasons of the Grand Lodge of W.A
West Australian Newspaper Co
£5uu
Associated Banks of W.A •
£25u
Associated Fire, Marine, and Accident Insurance Companies
£250
The Hon. Sir W. Lathlain, M.L.C
£200
Messrs. Boans Ltd
£200
operations, would seem to render imperative labour at reasonable prices —expedi-
tiously performed with some guarantee of thoroughness. If the farmer is to
meet his interest bills he cannot afford to let his land he idle —labour must
be within call and it must be dependable labour.
In my few journeys to the country I have learned of numerous financial
tragedies brought about through unfinished contracts and unpaid store bills. My
sympathy is with the farmer, and I am satisfied that he needs assistance, and,
sometimes, advice. The question is who he should look to ? He might get it
through his parliamentary representatives. Perhaps those members of the two
Houses who employ alien labour on their own farms will stand in then places
and give the public the benefit of their experience.
Aiter all, in this matter, as well as in many others, T am a mere theorist,
but my object in bringing forward the various points is to suggest lines
of thought that may be helpful and prevent hasty judgments m the debate that
is coming later.
STATE WAR MEMORIAL
Messrs. Foy & Gibson Prop’y Ltd •■•••• , ,
We are greatly indebted to Sir William Lathlain (chairman) and the
members of his Committee for the zeal tljey have exhibited in this project,
and also to Lieut.-General Sir Talbot Hobbs, who, besides subscribing liberally
to the fund, has officiated as architect in an honorary capacity.
We know why we desired this Memorial to be in monumental form 1 hose
who pleaded for something of a utilitarian nature overlooked the fact that
their ideas were already met in the form, unfortunately, of a complete modern
wing to the Perth Public Hospital, and a most up-to-date and permanent
mental hospital, which will ultimately come into the possession of the State
Now that our scheme for the perpetuation of the memory of our Comrades
approaches fruition, there are one or two phases in its history that I must
refer to again. The failure of the appeal by the former Government of the
State led to this League convening a meeting of representatives of all public
bodies and associations. As the outcome of that meeting of about sixty
delegates, the present State War Memorial Committee was formed, and to Mr.
E. S. Watt, of your Executive, must we look with gratitude for urging us to
take the initial step. . , , TT . iir i • o nr
At the meeting of representatives referred to was His Worship the Mayor
of Perth. That gentleman voiced his support of the scheme and promised that
“ w hen the time comes the City Council will do its share.” The Mayor was
elected to the Committee but has not attended any meetings. Fhe C ity Council,
aided by legal advice upon which it has not thought it necessary to obtain
counsel’s opinion, has decided that the clause in the Municipal Corporations Act
which authorises it to spend certain moneys, and which reads " for any purpose
connected with the municipality, and for the benefit or credit thereof, although
such purpose is not within the scope of this Act,” does not cover expenditure


in the erection of memorials to the citizens who gave their lives for the pre-
servation of the liberties of the city. .... ,
The willingness of the Councillors to refuge in this technicality is enhanced
when we glance through the War Memorial subscription lists. Out of 24 of
the ratepayers' representatives, the names of only the Mayor and four others
can be found. In debate some of the Councillors favoured a memorial in
a utilitarian form. After debate, the same Councillors, reinforced, refused to
sanction a resolution which sought to curtail an expenditure, from the same
fund, of £2O per fortnight on drink and tobacco, “ for their own entertain-
ment.”
Our local governing body was noted for its energy m promoting recruiting
during the war; it stood apart in that it failed to adequately welcome home
its surviving citizens: it has now gone a step further: it refuses to subscribe
to the construction of a national memorial and it has taken no action towards
the erection of one in the city.
This phase of the matter is most distasteful. I hope never to have to
mention it again. The attitude of the Corporation is unequalled elsewhere in
Australia, and in that, at least, is something to be thankful for.
Before I finally leave this subject I would like, on your behalf, to thank
Councillor H. E. Wells, of your Executive, for the strong stand he took in
putting forward our views. lam sure you are with me also in paying tribute
to the West Perth Sub-Branch for its work in connection with the King’s Park
Honour Avenue. It is an example ripe with suggestions for other Sub-Branches,
DISTINGUISHED VISITORS
Within recent months the Executive has, on your behalf, extended a warm
welcome to several distinguished visitors to the State, who were also comrades
in arms. Amongst these I may mention H.E. the Governor-General, the Prime
Minister of the Commonwealth, and those intrepid aviators, Squadron-Leaders
Hinkler and Kingsford Smith, and Might-Lieut. 1 Im, to all of whom, I am sute,
you would be delighted to do honour.
The Governor-General expressed his regret at not being able to meet you
all and particularly desired me to convey to every Sub-Branch his best wishes
for its success and the prosperity of its members.
The address given to us by the Prime Minister was of great educational
value, and taught much in reference to the duties, responsibilities, and advan-
tages attached to onr membership of the British Commonwealth of Nations.
To-day we have once again with' us His Majesty’s Representative in this
State —H.E. the Governor, who is really one of us, and has a deep personal
interest in our proceedings and our welfare. Io him you will, as you always
do, extend the most cordial of welcomes.
EXECUTIVE
You have again been fortunate in the choice of your Executive. It has
controlled your affairs with the wisdom at its command, and has been zealous
in guarding and furthering your interests. The committee work entailed has,
as usual, been rather exacting, but no one should accept office on your behalf
unless he is prepared to make the sacrifice. .
To the two Vice-Presidents, and the Immediate Past President, I am in-
debted for great assistance, particularly to the Rev. C. L. Riley, who, during
my absence, made that absence quite inconspicuous. All have loyally supported
your President, and have been generous in rendering invaluable advice.
STAFF
Praise oft repeated may lose its value. I must, however, again draw attention
to the service we have received during the past year from the State Secretary
and his staff. Nevertheless, it cannot be hoped that our officers will ever be
perfect. The volume of work to be contended with —and in a variety of things
such as suggested for conversation by the Walrus- —would necessitate at least
another head each and several other members besides. \\ ithal, the staff has


been successful and the absence of any complaint during the year is a fact that
speaks for itself.
“LISTENING POST”
I notice by the Congress Agenda that the Listening Post is coming in for
some criticism. Let mo say that it shares with one other the reputation of being
the best League organ in Australia, and it is an immense help to your Executive.
Occasionally it touches on politics, but we do the same, and that is quite within
our province so long as we avoid the party issues.
I wish we were able to devise some financial means by which it could be
enlarged and issued in an illustrated form. Occasionally it essays a block or two,
but as I have personally suffered through that action I have hitherto hesi-
tated to encourage a repetition of the experiment. There should be no lack
of material for an increased number of pages and it would serve also, in that
way, as a good advertisement for the State, as well as of our work. The
existing arrangement is that we pay a small subsidy to the proprietors but
take no financial responsibility. In that sense we are indebted to the producers
for their interest and enterprise.
ASSISTANCE RECEIVED
The sense of gratitude should always be strong within us, and I would
like to acknowledge the help we have received during the year from the
Commonwealth and State Governments, from the responsible government officials
concerned with soldiers’ interests, and from the Red Cross Society, the Soldiers’
Welcome Committee, the Soldiers’ Childrens’ Scholarship Trust, the newly-
formed Legacy Club, the Women’s Auxiliaries, and many other organisations
and individuals, including the not least important—the metropolitan and country
Press.
CONCLUSION
I hope I have not wearied you. When you elect a president you take
a collaborator, as in another phase of life, for better or for worse and you
cannot, in all decency, hinder him from talking if he wishes to. I have tried
to attach to my office that importance which it merits and I have given some
time to the study, with what intellect I possess, of the problems which concern
this League and its members as worthy British citizens. The results are not as
great as I would wish; nevertheless we have forged ahead and we are still
moving. I do hope that the momentum will not be lessened by anything that
I may have done or said. My reward 'for my humble efforts has been your
unfailing consideration. During my recent illness your enquiries and sympathy
on my behalf were generous and really greatly valued. Even my family began
to think that I was a person of some importance.
Outsiders may realise that a body of men, such as this, must have some-
thing very valuable in common if, after the lapse of ten years, it can still throw
heart and soul into a united effort. We were not the authors of our associa-
tion together, but thank God for the spirit which that association engendered.
It is our one priceless possession—it cannot be taken away from us—and the
pity it is that those beyond our ranks do not enjoy it, too.
In fitting conclusion let me quote to you from a friend of mine—a private
of dragoons:—
“We soldiers once thought that we had made the world a kindlier and
a happier place for those who shall come after us. But now we understand
how far was this from the truth, and perhaps we begin to know in our
hearts that it is better so. For a life of toil and struggle would seem to be
the only life which is worth living. Who, indeed, would wish to live in
a world wherein there are no wrongs to right, no dragons to slay, nor any
fair ladies to rescue? Yet the New Age will doubtless be one of transition
from the actual clash of arms and the struggle for mere physical existence,
to that greater epoch when nations will be held excellent according to the
measure of their real progress gauged by an absolute standard. We have
sought that absolute standard, and our quest has been rewarded to this


extent; that in war have we seen the vision of the sangraal, so that we
know that only through services comes love, and only through love
comes knowledge of the truth which makes men more than men.
To those who come after us we leave a world torn with war
and revolution, a world which seems filled with hatred and greed a
world apparently devoid of purpose or ideal, and overshadowed by an organ-
ised wickedness which must be utterly destroyed. We leave to them our own
sad record of faults and follies and failures, of noble aims abandoned
and opportunities which we have missed. But we leave to them also a
torn and blood-stained chart, which, if they follow it faithfully, will bring
them at last clear from the swamp in which we wandered and full in
sight of towering peaks we can never view. That is our legacy to those
who will be the men and women of to-morrow; and, if they think we have
done anything for them, they can repay us onlv by succeeding where we
have manifestly failed.
And what is left for us before we die, now when the new generation
strikes its tents and rides out from the bivouac of youth clad in its shining
armour r Some say our task is done, our usefulness exhausted, and our
advancing years a bar to fresh adventure. Yet for my part, 1 will not
think that comrades who toiled and fought with me through all’ those years
on sea and land will ever be content to rust in idleness. Our labours' and
our wounds give us at least a claim to yet another fight before the end.
Our experience has shown us glimpses of another world of strange experience!
and that untravelled universe we will explore till one by one we drop beside
the trail. Come, my friends, ’tis not too late to seek that newer world.
Put on the battered armour once again, close up our sadlv thinning ranks
and once again forward to meet whatever toil or gay adventure fate may
bring! ”
I have great pleasure in declaring the 12th Annual Congress open
