

PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS.
ANNUAL MEETING OF THE BRITISH ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION,
NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH.
18th October, 1898.
By G. H. KNIBBS, F.R.A.S.,
Lecturer in Surveying, University of Sydney.




Presidential Address.
.ANNUAL MEETING OF THE BRITISH ASTRONOMICAL
ASSOCIATION, NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH.
18th October, 1898.
By. G. H. KNIBBS, F.R.A.S.,
Le 3TURER IN SURVEYING, UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY.
SYDNEY
SAME. E. LEES, PRINTER AND STATIONER, SI CLARENCE STREET,
IHOB




!2'/C 'fa
PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS.
18th October, 1898.
UjkADIES AND GENTLEMEN,—The high honour which you have
conferred upon me, of presiding for the past two years over this
Branch of the British Astronomical Association, carries with it the duty
and privilege of addressing you on some topic of suitable character, at this
our annual meeting. The work of our Branch has already been reviewed
in the report of the Council; that of the parent Society appears from
time to time in the Journal which you all receive ; and you are more or
less familiar, from that and other sources of knowledge, with the main
features of astronomical progress during the past twelve months. I
may therefore perhaps be allowed to depart somewhat from the technical
type of presidential address, and in lieu to lead your thoughts into a
wider field, viz., that which which embraces astronomy as a factor in
man’s development. May I then claim your kind attention for a little
while, that I may speak to you on a subject which I feel sure you have all
often pondered, viz., “ The Place of Astronomy in a Liberal Education.”
In a Society like ours, such a theme may appear either trite, or, on TITe
other hand, to demand such dignity of treatment as might operate to
deter one in essaying to deal with it. On the latter point all I can say
is,—l would fain have relegated it to abler hands, to some one who com-
bined in his personality not only a consummate technical knowledge of
astronomy itself, but also the fullest acquaintance with its history, and
the part it has played in the evolution of the human mind; for such a
combination is essential to its adequate presentation. If, however, we
habitually postponed our activities until our qualifications were ideally
complete, would we act at all 1 I fear not: and therefore I must be
content to discharge my duty as best I may.
On the former point, I would beg for your kind indulgence while
I draw upon personal experience for a reason why we must not be.
too ready to assume, that it is unnecessary to claim for astronomy
some recognition for a place in any scheme of liberal education. In a
recent conversation with one of the ablest men, whom I have the honour
of knowing, the opinion was expressed that although it was considered
“ good form ” to take up the subject of astronomy in eminent English
Universities, that estimate of its legitimacy in a University was ill-
founded. It was a subject that might well be left to general reading
after one’s academic career was closed, and, as a matter of fact, was of
little practical utility outside its limited applications in navigation and
geodesy. In comparison with philosophy and letters, with mathematics,
physics, chemistry, geology, biology, &c., it was, indeed, unworthy of a
place in a liberal education.
Such a view expressed by one who stands in intelligence far above
the average, even of educated men, and whose wide experience lends
weight to his opinion, challenges our attention. Is that view justifiable^
MIZsZ/f/IZac


or not; has it a wide acceptance; does it operate for the public benefit;
does it wisely restrict the choice of the rising generation in their
academic activities, or, on the contrary, unduly limit it ? These are
questions that it behoves us to consider, and these questions clearly
indicate that the theme under consideration has a practical as well as
an aesthetic interest.
It may not be undesirable to explain in what sense the term
“liberal education” is used. That education is liberal which, while
recognising the prosaic necessities of life, recognises at the same time
that even those necessities may be compelled to administer to the higher
development, viz., that of mind and heart. A liberal education, how-
ever, aims at something more than adapting even the most severely
practical tasks so that they shall contribute to the exercise of the
higher functions; it aims at the broadening of our sympathies, the
extending of our area of knowledge, and the enlarging of our lives by
making us inheritors of the rich experience of the past. These things
are ends in themselves, because they are synonymous with fulness of
life; and the proper effect of a liberal education is to polarize, as it
were, our being, so that it shall vibrate in sympathy with everything
that ever profoundly stirred human life or human thought; so that it
will participate in every endeavour to direct the great forces of Nature,
to understand the mystery of existence, or to reach forward to the ideal.
“ The proper study of mankind is man,” sings Pope. True, but it is
man, with the Kosmos in which he lives and moves and has his being;
man, in his struggle from ignorance to knowledge, from animalism to
divinity. It is through liberal education that we have learned to
recognise that the desperate and unsympathetic struggle for existence and
for its lower satisfactions, is that which makes human nature detestable
and inhuman ; and that the two proper functions of the higher phase
of our being are to stimulate us to concern in the escape from the lower
phase, and in the development of knowledge; the former presenting a
.suitable sphere for the exercise mainly of the emotional centres, the
latter mainly for the intellectual. These two functions tend, however,
to interact. While it is true that we may be all mind and no heart, or
vice versa , neither state is alone ideal, because even the intellectual
struggle itself affords a broad basis of sympathy between man and
man, while the emotional sphere alone is wanting in dignity and com-
pleteness.
Now, among objects of intellectual interest none are so valuable
in a liberal education, as those which have in themselves, as it were,
the power of exalting us above the pettiness of the animal side of
our nature, and the power of shewing forth the natural dignity of
mind, as such. This dignity is evinced no less in the insatiate thirst-
after a knowledge of that world, in which our being has its play, and our
powers their arena; no less in the noble effort to see in the whirl of
incident the everlasting truths, to discover in the infinite complex of
phenomena the strands which reveal their connection, than in the
ambition to rise superior to those infirmities which have made only too
just the bitterest cynic’s impeachment of human nature.
The conventional classic conception of liberal education is narrow
and one-sided. That in some regions the classic is concerned rather
with the expression of thought than with thought itself, is shewn in the


fact that the whole realm of mathematics, pure and applied, is openly
despised. Since I put forward a claim for the inclusion of the wealth of
this realm, as essential in a really liberal education, I may perhaps be
pardoned for expanding my remarks in reference thereto.
The typical representative of the classic school imagines that his-
tory, philosophy, and letters constitute the whole world with which
liberal education need concern itself. The developments of mathematics,
of science, and of the thought therein inherent, are of course known to
the mere classic, but in a purely historical way. Nevertheless, I
venture to think that no one who has regarded such subjects for
example as mathematics, physics, or theoretical chemistry only from the
outside, has any adequate understanding of their meaning, or of their
position in that temple of thought, which all profess to recognize as the
place where man’s higher self may properly dwell. Tt is idle for the
mere classic to imagine that those infinite and infinitely wonderful
regions of unruffled and certain truth, whose glittering beauty, never
sullied by human baseness, has been revealed to the mathematician, or
to the votary of science, are equally open to him. That was not Plato’s
opinion, even when mathematic was poor of content, if at least we
are to believe that cultured apostle of culture expressed it when he
wrote over his academy “ ayswpsrprjT o; tlanu.” Nor more recently
was it the opinion of J. S. Mill, than whom, in view of his general
culture, of his early and extraordinary acquaintance with the Greek
and Latin classics, and of his mathematical knowledge, few were more
competent to judge.
I give the place of honour to pure mathematics, because its
method is incomparably rigorous and exact, because its truths are per-
fectly general and abstract, and because no discipline of thought is so
severe and tonic. We are told, however, that mathematic is cold and
formal, and that it lacks human interest. It is true that as one
penetrates more and more deeply into its mysteries, one feels less and
less concern as to whether it can be applied to the attainment of
material ends, or the satisfaction of the human will, for its intellectual
and aesthetic interest transcend all other. Mathematical truth justifies
itself not by material instruments or physical verifications, but within
the mind itself. It reaches results than which none are more certain,
and yet which pass all possibility of physical demonstration. It dis-
covers relations, the most profound and subtle, and in so far as any
method of thinking is exact, it is substantially mathematical in form.
Its truths are discoveries in those deeper recesses of consciousness, in
which the mystery of our being lies hid. It discloses forms of know-
ledge existing, as it were, latent within our souls, and since its truths,
when realised in conception cannot be withstood, they afford a startling
evidence of the unity of consciousness.
And after all, is it true that mathematics is wholly devoid of
human interest ? Who, "having touched even the fringe of the subject,
has not felt his heart glow with gratitude to his elder brethren ; or
w'ho, competent to judge, has not found himself constrained to accord
an ardent admiration to, or even worship of, the genius of its high
priests, especially when they have been the instruments through whom
its truth has been communicated to his consciousness, and his power to
appreciate has thus become possible? These feelings of gratitude and


-admiration mark the play of our emotional centres in response to mathe-
matical truth ; they indicate our intense respect for the content of that
region of knowledge ; and they also point out the reality of its human
interest, for strong feelings of respect and gratitude are not evoked
without cause.
I have said that the discipline of mathematical thinking is severe
and tonic. It accustoms the mind to demand crystalline clearness. It
makes us dissatisfied with half-proofs, and renders jugglery with words
well-nigh impossible. And while it never operates to annihilate the
subtle faculty of intuition, or to limit the play of imagination, it forces
us to justify our intuitions as far as possible by a formal and exact
statement of their content. These are the things that make mathe-
matics so necessary in the humanities, so essential in delivering us from
the undisciplined license of ordinary thinking, and from the tricks of
rhetoric. In history, philosophy, religion, or in the interpretations of
human thought, how much has popularly depended on the mere witch-
ery of words ! You will recollect that in the ever-memorable conver-
sation between Mephistopheles, personating Dr. Faust, and the scholar
who seeks his advice, the question of the connection of ideas and words
is adverted to, the latter tritely observing that an idea must be related
to the word. You will remember, too, how Mephistopheles replies :
“ One need not be over anxious in regard to that connection, because
by the apposite use of words we can contend, philosophise, and
believe.” *
Now the mathematical habit of mind operates as a corrective to this
state of things : it tends, by making thinking exact, and by supplying
practice in a region where inexact thinking betrays itself, to engender
rigorousness in our mental habits, and is moreover capable of affording
intellectual discipline of any degree of severity. And further, it is the
basis of all quantitative science. Without it, not only would scientific
chemistry—l do not speak of that side of it which is more properly re-
ferred to as an art—lose its deeper interest, and physics become little
more than the nomenclature of disjointed facts, even mental philosophy
itself would lose something of its intenser significance. One of the
most striking examples of the part which mathematical reasoning may
be made to play in philosophy, or rather in the philosophy of psychology,
which occurs to me at the present moment, is Herbart’s application of
the infinitesimal calculus to the problems of psychological mechanics ;
as, for example, in the discussion of the “sinking” of inhibited presenta-
tions below the threshold of consciousness ; or to the fact that a pre-
sentation delivered from inhibition, and arising into consciousness,
tends at the same time to raise other presentations with which it was
associated. It was a dream of G. H. Lewes that a calculus of thought
would some day be invented, which would enstxre precision of thinking
in those regions where our present methods are loose and empirical.
But I must not. wander into these by-paths. The three great sciences
Schiller; Doch ein Begriff muss bei dem Worte sein.
Mephistopheles: Schon gut! Nur muss man sich nicht allzu angstlich qualen ;
Denn eben wo Begriff e fehlen,
Da stellt ein Wort zur rechten Zeit sich ein,
Mit Worten lasst sich trefflich streiten,
Mit Worten ein System bereiten,
An Worte lasst sich trefflich glauben,
Von einem Wort lasst sich kein lota rauben.


which I have mentioned—mathematics, physics, and chemistry—their
.content and method, are undoubtedly proper objects of study for any-
•one who wishes to aspire to that balanced intellectual development
which I believe to be the object of any scheme of liberal education
worthy of the name.
I have referred to the mathematical sciences specially, but my
remarks apply no less- to any science which is more than mere nomen-
clature. Has it never occurred to the liberal classic that the exclusive
regard for a particular science, which he imagines is the gravamen of
the offence of its exponent, is really a testimony of the intense interest
•of that sphere of knowledge which has been vouchsafed to the man of
science 1 It is a vain idea for anyone to imagine that these things can
he judged from the outside. No one can justly appreciate the subject-
matter of a science but the ardent votary himself. ' The import of
Science is as truly hidden from him who scorns to tread its path as the
mysteries of Eleusis were sealed to the profane vulgar.
That I may not be misunderstood, let me say emphatically that I
do not fail to appreciate the other subjects of education. Metaphysics,
and its handmaid Psychology, must ever claim pre-eminence in the
studies of humanity, because they touch, as it were, the core of an
existence as thinking beings. Literature has a value it were hard to
•over-estimate, since not only does it help us to appreciate the importance
•of the mould in which Thought is cast, it acquaints us with Thought
itself. Both history itself, and the philosophy of history, have too not
only a practical value in politics, they yield also something like a revela-
tion of the interactions between man’s social state and the moral forces
of the universe. But in saying these things, I wish again to say, it is not
that the literary elements are lacking in nobility : it is that they fail to
sufficiently cover the ground proper to a liberal education, and that
excepting logic and mental philosophy, they not only contain in them-
selves no adequate corrective to loose thought, but in the absence of
that corrective, they even lend themselves to that “ fatal facility for
words” by means of which we cheat ourselves and others into the belief
that where we have words we have ideas. Is this impeachment too
incisive ? Let anyone examine those things that are thought to be
most tremendous in their influence, our philosophies and our religions.
We cast dogmas in verbal moulds; we cultivate their verbal reproduc-
tion from memory, so that the most splendid propositions can be
prattled by children. Let, however, their content of idea be examined,
let one ask himself how much definite thought lies behind all his fine
verbal propositions, and how quickly, if one be not wholly purblind, it
is seen that one has been cheated with words, aye, and that we are
■continually cheating not only others but ourselves. Let us then
demand that no education shall arrogate to itself the title of liberal
that does not place at least logic, mathematics, and the mathematical
sciences on a level with literature, and with the other subjects which the
classic so warmly approves.
I may, perhaps, have seemed unduly to have extended my remarks
in this direction. While the classic exponents of liberal education,
however, maintain their supercilious attitude toward the most brilliant
jgift which came with Minerva from the brain-pan of the almighty
.Jove, this is however necessary. When once it is admitted that mathe-


matics and the mathematical sciences are essential elements of a liberal'
education, of a dignity and importance not a whit less pronounced than
the study of classics, the adversary may be taken to have
and his citadel to be forsaken.
If it be conceded that science has a place in liberal education,
I venture to think that the claims of astronomy are so obvious as Ur
scarcely need advancing. How can they possibly fail of recognition ?
Yet I am again reminded of the opinion of my friend, viz., that this
science is unworthy of a formal place in seats of learning, that a sufficient
view of its subject-matter may be well left to be acquired in the desul-
tory reading of each individual! And therefore I must offer some
observations as to the merits of these claims. Were it not that I feel
that my cause can scarcely be damaged by any advocacy, however
imperfect, I should hesitate to hold a brief for it, and should content-
myself with the hope that an abler advocate would arise to do it justice.
First of all, it may be remarked that the subject-matter of
astronomy has become so specialised as to require something more than
desultory reading. I had the honour, at the annual meeting twelve
months ago, to offer you as the subject of my presidential address, an
historical sketch of the study of the motion of our system through
space, and some critical remarks upon the methods of investigation and
upon the results obtained. That one question is a mere item in astro-
nomical science, though incidentally a deeply interesting one. I think
it will be readily conceded, however, that even that item was not to be
obtained by merely desultory reading. It is, of course, at this late day
quite impossible to adequately present the subject of astronomy with-
out systematically sketching its features, bringing the whole of the
results of its many workers up to date, shewing the relations of the
elements of its subject-matter, the form in which the problems of the
science now present themselves for solution, the questions which press
for immediate answer, and so on. To expatiate on this side of the
matter, however, is surely unnecessary, for anything like a systematic
study of general astronomy will quickly eliminate the idea that a com-
prehensive view of it is easily acquired.
A question w'hich may fairly be asked in discussing the merits of
astronomy is, What in human thought is the most conspicuous result
which may be credited thereto ? In reply, I would say that it has so-
enlarged our conceptions of Time and Space by vividly presenting units
of appalling magnitude, that in many respects the tincture of our minds
has been completely changed. With these enlarged conceptions, we
can now read into the splendid thoughts of those whose intellectual
wealth is our inheritance, a significance of which they were probably
quite unconscious. One of the strangest mysteries of our being is, that
its import is measured by the consciousness which reflects it. The
world is small or great, simple or complex, superficial or profound,
according to the capacity of the mind which looks out upon it. And
thus it is that, every accession of knowledge, and every conception
created, instead of impoverishing the content of the yet unknown,
seems to enrich it. The promise and potency of existence so increase
with the deepening of experience, that we at last come to recognise that
the unknown is essentially without limit, and with this our impetuous
passion-to-know is chastened into the recognition of the fact that larger


conceptions, and more tremendous flights of the imagination, are neces’
sary if we would still further progress. What a change came o’er the
spirit of philosophy and religion, with their terms “almighty,” “infinite,”
“ eternal,” “ absolute,” etc., when our earth really ceased to be the hub of
the universe ! and how, too, even the material aspect altered, when the
immensities of time and space stood revealed in fuller measure ! Well
might the human soul, as in Richter’s dream, be represented, after its
flight on angel wings through the infinities of the universe, as craving
an oblivion in which it might hide itself from the overpowering and
awful persecution of the Illimitable.
It is impossible to escape the conviction that every increase in
what may be called the unit or scale of our conceptions adds to the
force and dignity of mind, and is therefore a factor of the highest
moment in education. The tremendous units required in astronomical
contemplations, with their inherent power of reforming the aspect of
things, and of our speculations concerning those majestic existences
which are none the less real because incorporeal, are therefore in them-
selves powerful factors in human development. Since all the signifi-
cance of phenomena lies in consciousness, necessarily appearing or dis
appearing therewith, consciousness in general may be itself regarded as
the foundation of their being. From this standpoint we are enabled to
realise how intrinsically magnificent is the impulse of the intellect to-
supply the fabric upon which the permanent elements of the ever
changing pictures may be fixed; or, to vary the metaphor, to supply the
thread upon which may be strung all typical facts, however disparate.
And thus we see that the overpowering grandeur of nature is matched
by that element in us, which compels us to subsume all phenomena
under the category of things subject to interpretation in
This, however, is a theme on which we cannot here enlarge, but whose
point is this, —the science that is capable of expanding the measure of
our thought, widens the circle of existence, and tends to raise us far
above the paltriness of things human.
I do not propose to defend the study of astronomy upon so-called
practical grounds. Outside its important applications in geodesy and
navigation, it must be confessed that there is little in the subject, of
immediate value in contributing to man’s satisfaction as an animal.
Its practical utility in that sense is restricted and formal ; it would
matter but little for such purposes whether the theory of astronomy
was empirical or rational, whether we regarded the sun or earth as the
centre of our system, or of the universe. Its defence must be made out
on an intellectual, or on an aesthetic, or spiritual basis. But here the
cause requires no defence, because that point is conceded by the “classic”
exponent of liberal education. No liberalist, even of merely literary
type, will ever take what may be fairly called the bread-and-butter view
of education. It is at least one of the fruits of higher education, that
the necessity for the subordination of the purely practical to the
aesthetic needs of man, is distinctly recognised. It is our misfortune
that perforce we must maintain our animal life by the sweat of our
brow; and that when this has been done the available leisure and
energy for supplying our subtler and higher needs is so small. Why
this is so, is a mystery which baffles our understanding, and in the
presence of which we must perhaps for ever remain silent. The early


-religions of Hindustan, and of Egypt, were conscious of the enigma
* even as we are to-day : but its solution now as then is afar off. Yet
would life be poor indeed were it wholly a struggle for animal existence,
irradiated by no gleams of a life intellectual and spiritual. And here
we are at one, even with the mere classic. May I therefore pass on to
remark how extended a field of study is opened up in astronomy, and
how diversified are the phases of intellectual interest and taste which
may find satisfaction therein ! It is not necessary to attempt to exhibit
the broad features of the science in a formal way. It will doubtless be
sufficient to refer to such elements as seem to be of more than ordinary
interest, or to those that afford characteristic evidences of the nature of
its questions and problems.
With respect to the mathematics of astronomy, little need be
; said. The structures of astronomical theory rest upon mathematics as
a foundation; and, in the problems that present themselves for solution,
what scope there is for effort, look whithersoever we may ! On the
side of its mechanics, we are reminded of such splendid monuments of
mathematical genius as the Mecanique Celeste of Laplace, of Resal, or
-of Tisserand, to say nothing of a host of solutions of minor questions,
.among which may be mentioned that of special cases of the classic
problem of “three bodies.” The study of the movements of the solar
system is itself an education in the faculty of abstract thinking.
Whether these movements be regarded from the standpoint of spherical
or general geometry, or whether in their purely kinematical aspect, the
.situations involved are exquisitely difficult. All the deeper problems
relating thereto have to be attacked, not directly and completely, but
in detail; reaching results expressible in a series of terms that shade off
into magnitudes inappreciably small. But even this method of escaping
difficulty is not wholly successful, for despite the effort expended on the
improvement of the lunar theory, it cannot yet be said to have been
developed in a form perfectly satisfying ideal requirements.
Astronomy is intrinsically a suggestive science; it is continually
offering problems which challenge attention by their dignity, or pro-
posing questions, the very hopelessness of answering which is the secret
of their stimulus. I may be allowed to illustrate this. Solutions of
problems concerning celestial changes of position, do not in their
primary forms take account of the dissipations of the energy in each
system. But this is strictly an element of the problem. The view that
all concentrations of energy tend to disappear, seems to rest on a sound
foundation, but the necessary condition for this disappearance is by no
means clearly understood. The prevailing opinion that bodies such as
the sun are radiating their heat into space at an enormous rate, and
indifferently in all directions, is at present a scientific faith, but it is
. one about which it is perhaps healthy to entertain some slight degree of
scepticism. It is doubtful whether the part played by the ether on one
hand, and say heat-receiving bodies on the other, is sufficiently under-
stood to establish this doctrine beyond all question ; and the complete
exposition of the fact undoubtedly involves the interpretation of the
functions of the ether and of its connection with matter. While touch-
ing upon the question of the dissipation of concentrations of energy, I
am reminded that the theory of reactions between plastic gravitating
bodies, in which also the dissipation function has to be regarded, is one


.on which any brilliantly equipped mathematician may well break a
lance. These two questions are intimately connected with speculations
as to the ultimate fate of the KOsmos, about which one may well be
guarded in opinion; since he is a bold man who will empirically sweep
out a curve into the infinities of the past or future, from the infinitely
small arc of the present. Such attempts are made, it is true, and they
iire valuable ; if only it be remembered how much the result depends
upon assumptions which cannot be scrutinised as rigorously as might be
wished j and how completely the result is shattered, if the assumptions
are vulnerable. But reluctantly we must pass on, contenting ourselves
with remarking that whatever may be one’s mathematical talent, it niay
find suitable and severe occupation in the mathematical exercises of
astronomy.
The problems in cosmical physics which have just been referred to,
remind us that astrophysics has recently been constituted a definite
branch of astronomy, requiring workers who will practically confine
themselves to its subject-matter alone. It has already yielded results
of great interest and promise, and may confidently be expected to elicit
truths having a far-reaching influence on present astronomical methods.
This dictum is confirmed by the importance of one of the problems
which fall to the astrophysicist, viz., the determination of the radial
component of velocity between the solar system and a star, by applying
the Doppler principle to the evidence of the spectroscope. Exceedingly
simple as is the principle, depending merely upon the displacements
of the lines in the spectrum, the actual determinations offer many
practical difficulties, demanding close investigation if they are to be
satisfactorily resolved. This problem of relative motion has an especial
interest, inasmuch as it will ultimately afford a solution of the quantity
and direction of motion of the sun in space, quite independent of the
proper-motion method. Apart from its general interest, the rigorous
establishment of the astronomical constants demand the determination
of the direction and quantity of this motion, as a necessary element : so
that the problem is also one of utility. Touching the proper-motion
method of solving the question mentioned, we are reminded that
the theory of the distances of stars, whose parallax is too small to
measure, requires revision. The analysis of this method shews that
when the stars are divided into classes according to magnitude, or
according to the quantity of motion, the theory which has attempted to
relate distance to magnitude does not receive the support which might
have been anticipated, and is therefore defective. The method itself too
is involved in difficulties, owing to the fact that there is evidence of
general drift in masses of stars. “ What is the significance of this drift,
and what- may we conclude therefrom?” are inquiries which thrust them-
selves upon us. And yet again, the whole theory of motion is compli-
cated with the nature of the functions of the ether. If the latter be
regarded as without motion, and all stellar movement be supposed to
take place therein, the calculation of apparent displacements through
the aberration of light is greatly simplified. But the evidence of physics
seems to negative the theory that matter and ether are thus inde-
pendent, and it appears therefore that before a rigorous and complete
solution of aberration can be presented, the nature of their mutual
relations will have to be made out. The splendid discussions on this


subject already extant, serve but to shew how fundamental and difficult
is the problem, and its solution may well exhaust the powers of the
most brilliant genius.
One of the most profoundly interesting results of astronomical
research, is that the material out of which suns and stars and milky-
ways are built, is material with which the chemist has already made us
familiar. Its fabric is the same as that of our earth, of our system.
The spectroscope has permitted us, as it were, to chemically analyse
these brilliant orbs, whose inconceivable distances from us might have
been supposed to have excluded all possibility of learning aught con-
cerning them. The systematic classification of the stars, according to
the spectroscopic character of their light, has already commenced, and
is proceeding apace. The differences between characteristic types is
very striking, but the significance of the existence of types has yet to
be explained. “Is there a protyle, a common fabric out of which the
molecules of all substances are formed; are molecules in some sense
systems in themselves are questions which are naturally suggested,
but which have so far eluded all answer. In regard to the identity of
the fabric of the universe, one is reminded that elements appearing in
the spectra of distant bodies, and supposed to be absent here, have
turned out after all to be in our midst, and recent discoveries of new
elements have strengthened the conviction, that we h«ve at hand
samples of every material, out of which the universe is built up. What
a stimulus is here to spectroscopic research ! But this research to be
completely rationalized, brings us back again to the old question of the
interdependence of matter and ether; and the complete explanation of
spectrum analysis, although the subject is fast clearing up, still lies in
the future. The discovery by Balmer of the regularity of distribution
of the lines in the first hydrogen spectrum, the systematic displace-
ments of the spectra of the alkali metals toward the red end with in-
creasing atomic weight, shewn to exist by Lecoq de Boisbaudran, and
the more elaborate researches of Kayser and Runge, and others, on the
principal and the first and second subordinate series of spectrum
lines, are all pregnant with physical significance, full of suggestion as
to the secret of the dynamic conditions of molecules or atoms ; and the
time is perhaps not far off, when despite their amazing distances, we
shall be able to speak very definitely concerning the physical consti-
tution of the stars.
Touching stellar light, what is the secret of its strange variability
which we so readily exhibit in its light-curve ? The solution of this
question is at the present time largely conjectural. More delicate
methods of light intensity measurements, by enabling the true forms of
the light curves to be ascertained, will do much to elucidate the ques-
tion, and to justify or otherwise the supposition of dark companions of
immense size, an explanation which, while plausible enough in some
respects, is involved in great difficulties in others, especially as regards
the evolution of stellar masses, and the dissipation of their energy.
More than any other science, astronomy is capable of impressing
upon us the physical insignificance of human beings—not of their con-
sciousness, but of the person, the mask behind which the mystery of
their being lies hid. “ When I consider Thy heavens, the work of Thy
fingers, the moon and the stars which Thou hast ordained, what is man


that Thou art mindful of him,” sang one of the sacred writers with an in-
spiration, which with developing knowledge is becoming increasingly
suggestive. The context of the passage clearly shows, however, the
• conceptual limitations of the writer, and mars the beauty of the thought,
in an attempt to expand it. Since then, however, the astronomer has
gone forth, borrowing the compasses of the mathematician, that he
might measure the heavens ; with what result ? That with few excep-
tions, the distances in the stellar universe are immeasurably great, and
the energies are beyond conception. How that re-enforces the feeling
•of our infinite littleness ! and recalls afresh, and with an intensity of
meaning that obviously never dawned upon the writer, “ What is man ? ”
From time immemorial star-gazing has played its part in elevating
man’s spirit above the pettiness of human affairs. There is something
. awe-inspiring in the glittering immensity, and in the contemplation of
the appalling energies of countless myriads of blazing suns. But the
stars that greet the eye, are as nought compared with those which the
. astronomical photographer has revealed to us. In those regions of the
sky which seem to have been forgotten in the distribution of cosmic
matter, we have learnt that, as elsewhere, the star-dust has been
sprinkled with a prodigality so amazing that the mind falls back
bewildered in the attempt to realise it. In photographic methods of
scanning the heavens, we learn the advantage of integrated as con-
trasted with instantaneous effects. The tiny pencil of light which fails
to make itself felt on the retina, at last makes its impression on the
sensitive plate of the photographer, and thus we have been able to
■ deepen our gaze into the illimitable abysses of the stellar universe.
Where is this to end 1 In what other directions are similar integrated
effects possible ? What other types of radiations shall we discover and
record 1 These and other similar possibilities, awake within us something
like a recognition of the potentialities of celestial science.
The conceptual wealth of astronomy has impelled us onward in
speculations whose daring is equalled only by their brilliancy. The
genius of a Laplace found fitting expression in the nebular hypothesis,
which will forever bear his name. That hypothesis may be wholly
false, but it is a splendid attempt to understand the genesis of a world-
system, to see the unfolding of a universe. What part do the great
masses of nebulous light with which so many stars are surrounded play
in the cosmic evolution; and what is the purpose, or, what will be the
future history of the vast regions of nebular matter distributed so
widely through the depths of space ? These are questions which force,
and will force, themselves on the human mind asking for answer. And
though no answer co ne, a splendid daring will make the essay, and we
shall gain correspondingly. For speculation is injurious only when it
assumes the attitude of demonstrated truth.
As a key to the wider interpretation of cosmic evolution, we are
compelled to study the system of which our mother earth forms a part,
and what a vast amount of labour has been concentrated on the study
of its elements. We scrutinize the delicate markings which powerful
telescopes reveal on the planets in order to ascertain whether those
features are mutable or permanent, whether they can be made to lend
any assistance to the theory of habitability or otherwise, by beings
like ourselves. “ Has the mystery of life appeared elsewhere ?Is there


any way which affords promises of an answer to this query, or must it
forever remain the wildest of conjectures V’ are questions which are'
reiterated in the human mind.
To those who find interest even in the purely positional aspect of
astronomy, there is a wide field for effort, and it is well to remember
that much of the aspects of deeper interest depend upon the arduous
efforts of those who take up this prosaic but exceedingly difficult side
of the subject. The applications of mere positional problems in geodesy
and nautical astronomy are by no means ideally perfect, and although
it is improbable that anything fundamental will be added to this branch
of knowledge, there is little doubt that any attempt at further refine-
ment of observation will severely tax our ingenuity. A higher degree
of precision involves too, a reviewal and perfecting of the whole theory
of refraction—no easy task—and of the theory of instruments. In
both these directions, however, much is even now being done. But we
must pass on, for time will not admit of details of this character being
further considered.
I have pointed out in, I fear, a somewhat unconsecutive and par-
tial manner, something of the scope of astronomy. Its field was too
wide to admit of my attempting a systematic sketch setting forth the
subject as a whole. What has been adduced will, it is hoped, at least
shew that its problems and subject-matter challenge the respect of
thoughtful people, and are worthy of serious study.
Is it, in the light of what has been indicated, one of those subjects
which may well be left to the opportunities of general reading, or would
the desultory reader be able to obtain such a conception of it as its
intrinsic dignity demands, or as might be secured by its systematic
presentation 'I I venture, knowing something of the subject, to think
not.
With regard to its comparative merits, no good purpose would be
served by measuring it with some or any of the subjects which the
“ classic ” exponent of liberal education approves. If it fail to commend
itself, no advocacy is likely to secure it a better hearing : the loss must
rest with the scorner. If a subject that has raised the whole thought
of man from geocentric littleness to the recognition of time and space
units, bewildering in their immensity; that has taught us that those
appalling exhibitions of terrestrial energy, before which we stand awe-
stricken, are a thousand-fold over-matched in every one of the fiercely-
flaming photospheres of the countless stars ; that has stimulated us to
attempt problems than which none ever appeared more hopeless, and
that has rewarded our essays with success ; —if, I say, such a subject
is unworthy a place in a liberal education, then the significance of the
word “ liberal ” has been misconceived.
The attractions of astronomy have won the life-long labours of men
of the highest genius. Let the “ classic” who fancies that his historical
knowledge of the subject qualifies him to judge, ask himself why a
brilliant and practical man like Bessel, on the threshold of manhood,
deliberately renounced the offer of a lucrative post, which would tie him
down to a commercial life, in order that he might accept the life of an
astronomer at a paltry pittance 1 What was it that Olbers saw in
astronomy that made him feel justified in tempting Bessel to renounce
the opportunity of almost certain wealth, that he might accept poverty


and the science to which Olbers was himself so devoted ? What is it'’
that has made everyone, who is capable of understanding and appreci- •
ating, however humbly, the work of the unrivalled Bessel, as Chauvenet
styles him, feel a glow of the warmest gratitude for the
wealth which he has bequeathed to the world ? Is there nothing in the •
science that made Bruno an apostle, when he rose to the conception of
a universe of suns and worlds, a truth for which he became a martyr,
less than three hundred years ago ?
The truth is that he who is incapable of appreciating the place of
astronomy in things human, has never had the vision of the astronomer-
vouchsafed to him. His eyes are closed : for all science is a mystery
sealed to those who do not yield to its claims. Pallas is a coy mistress,
and if when you look into her pale eyes, it be not with the gaze of an
ardent lover, there will be no response, and you will never know the
delight of her love—your historical knowledge is as nothing, is empty
and worthless.
I hope the time is not far distant when the place of astronomy in
a liberal education will be recognised here: when it will be possible for
any student to take that as one of the subjects to which he will devote -
himself. At the present time there is no systematic teaching of general
astronomy in this state. If there be a work that this Association may
well undertake, it is to bring about a change in the public estimation i
of our beloved science.
But after all, that is of secondary importance, or, rather, .it is a
goal that is best sought indirectly. The main object will have been!
achieved when we have been lifted above the trivial and sordid elements
of existence, and have been borne by the noble inspiration of a science
whose field is infinite and whose conceptions are majestic, into that
serene region of high intellectual contemplation where every thought is-
a delight. It is only in so far as we learn to vividly appreciate the
wealth which astronomy has conferred upon the world, that we shall
become sources of inspiration to others ; only in so far as we realise in
ourselves the splendid advantages of a wide knowledge of its noble truths,
that we shall feel the ardour of an apostle in endeavouring to communi-
cate to others that which we have ourselves received. As we gaze into the
measureless depths of space, life’s turmoil, its fume and fret, fade away.
The passionless immensity brings the sense of a deep peace, and lifted
on the wings of imagination we soar into that sublime realm, that eye *
hath not seen, nor ear heard, and where the words of earth are as
nought. In the infinite calm of silent contemplation, the veil of the-
mystery of being is lifted, and the pulses of the soul are those of the
Eternal Spirit. Alas ! that we must return to earth, that the veil should
again fall, and that the glory of it all should fade away.
One further duty remains for me to perform, and with it my office
as your President will determine, that is, to commit its responsibilities
to one whose zeal for astronomy is well known to us all, to one whose
interesting addresses here from time to time, we have listened with
unfeigned pleasure. I have now to ask your President-elect, the Rev.
Thomas Roseby, M.A., LL.D., to accept the chair which I now vacate.
Reverend and dear sir, in inducting you into the presidential chair,
may I be allowed to wish you every success in your term of office.
That you will have the zealous support of the officers and council of the-


inuo
'P ti<?£o
N cA&
S. E. Lees, Printer and Stationer, 81 Clarence Street, Sydney.
.Association, goes without saying. Their earnestness in work, for
- which we desire to warmly express our appreciation and gratitude, will,
under your able guidance, bid fair for the future of this Association.
I now commit its welfare to your charge.
NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA




