

PRESENT-DAY RESPONSIBILITIES.
A Sermon:
BY
CHAELES STRONG
Minister of the Scots’ Church, Melbourne.
PRINTED BY REQUEST.
Melbourne:
SAMUEL MULLEN, 55 & 57 COLLINS STREET EAST.
1877.
PRICE SIXPENCE




PRESENT-DAY RESPONSIBILITIES.
A Sermon:
BY
CHARLES STRONG
Minister of the Scots’ Church, Melbourne.
PRINTED BY REQUEST.
HWbcumu:
SAMUEL MULLEN, 55 & 57 COLLINS STREET EAST.
1877.




Choose you this day whom ye will serve, ... but as for me and
my house, we will serve the Lord.
JOSHUA XXIV. 15.
SUCH are the brave words in which an old Hebrew soldier
and leader is represented by the sacred historian as
addressing his fellow-countrymen. For himself, he had
resolved that the righteous God of Israel should be the
God whom he and his house would worship and obey in
the future, as they had done in the past. Many a battle
had he fought on Jehovah’s side, and to Jehovah’s army he
would still belong—to Jehovah’s government he would keep
his family and servants faithful. With the same soldierly
instinct of decision and honour, Joshua bids the Hebrews
once for all choose their leader, and abide by their resolu-
tion. They could not serve two masters. Either must
they be good soldiers of the God who had revealed Himself
by Moses, or sink back into the lower and often degrading
forms of religion which their fathers, before the time of
Abraham, had practised, and which their neighbours in the
land of Canaan still observed. Joshua thus seems to
have discovered, in some measure at least, that the stability
of national life is inseparably bound up with a nation’s
faith. He seems, also, to have felt that Israel’s election did
not mean that he was the favourite of a capricious god, but
that he had been called to be a witness for religious
truth. On the fulfilment of his Divine mission was
Israel’s future progress and greatness as “a peculiar
people ” dependent. Would the people accept their high
calling—would they choose to be God’s elect ? for they
could not be so without an exercise of choice. The true


God could not be served by slaves, but only by a nation of
freely-sacrificing’ priests. Would Israel consent to be
Jehovah’s priest ? Would he rise to the dignity to which
Providence was seeking to exalt him, or sell his birth-
right as Jehovah’s child for a lower, but perhaps easier,
and, from a sensuous point of view, happier life, in
common with his idolatrous neighbours and kinsmen and
their gods ? That was the question, on the answer to which
depended the welfare, the very existence, of Israel as a
separate people. “Choose you this day,” said Joshua,
“ whom ye will serve, . . . but as for me and my house,
we will serve Jehovah.”
Our notions, my brethren, of religion, of national and
of family life, are, no doubt, in many respects totally
different from those of Joshua and his times. Nevertheless
let us try if we can find in the words of our text, ideas
which are always true, struggling for expression through
the half barbarous life of Israel, and through the words of
this Hebrew captain.
In the first place, then, we take our text as suggestive of
the individual responsibility for our beliefs and practice
which rests upon us all at present —“Choose you whom
ye will serve ... as for me ... I will serve
Jehovah.” During the last three hundred years, I need
hardly say, the cry for freedom has been waxing louder and
louder in Europe, and in countries to which Europeans have
migrated. The wave of independence has been sweeping
onwards, sometimes with roar of heavy breakers, sometimes
calmly and noiselessly, but none the less surely and
irresistibly. The most despotic governments have become
republican. Serfdom has disappeared. The feudal system
is, where not altogether abolished, greatly modified, and
everywhere a new order of things has been established.
In new countries, such as this in which we live, the change


is more marked, though not, perhaps, on the whole,
more remarkable, than in the old world. The demand
everywhere is for freedom, for power to choose for
ourselves, to work for ourselves, to judge for ourselves.
Popular election, in the widest sense of the term, may be
taken as our motto and watchword. In this we glory
and boast, and the heart of the multitude throbs and
swells at the mention of Anglo-Saxon freedom and
independence. Now, notwithstanding the gross follies, the
vulgarity and coarse selfishness which have in many
cases been the unpleasant accompaniments of this world-
wide revolution, we cannot regard it as an evil, nor
denounce this wonderful change as not marking an impor-
tant and useful stage in God’s education of our race. It seems
to be a necessary stage, arising not merely out of individual
self-assertion, but out of the very condition of things—out
of the fresh life awakened by the discovery of America,
for instance, and other new countries, by the invention of
printing, the revival of letters, the growth of trades and
industries, together with the revolution in men’s ideas of the
Church and of religion generally, which was ushered in by
the Reformation, and which science and criticism are still
carrying on. Would not the wonder have been, had this
enlargement of human interests and ideas been able to take
place without bursting the old forms of human life ? More-
over, when we consider the many abuses and oppressions
which this rising tide of popular feeling has swept away, even
though the sweeping has been sometimes fierce and rough,
we cannot, however aristocratic and conservative our notions,
afford to despise this great popular movement, or deny that
in it may be traced the finger of a good and righteous
God. Wherein it is mere individual self-conceit, self-
assertion, and impudence, wherein it is mere licence and
selfishness, the Christian cannot too strongly denounce it as


the work of the devil \ hut where it is human nature
naturally developing itself, seeking air and room to live
and think, to work and speak in a manner becoming
true and noble-minded humanity, there must we hail
it as the work of God’s Spirit. But there is, I need
hardly say, a serious danger ol abuse and excess
springing out of this exultant sense of libei ty and
independence. We are in danger of forgetting that
freedom from unnatural restraints does not set men free from
the eternal laws of truth and goodness. W hat then, we ask,
is needed in order to prevent the whole tone of affairs in
matters political, social, and ecclesiastical from degenerating
into mere impudent selfishness and conceit ? The answer is,
a sense of responsibility for practice and belief on the part
of individuals. This is the only way in which this
popular election and independence can be saved from
becoming a curse to us. The great question is, can we
awaken a sense of moral responsibility corresponding to
our altered circumstances and relations ? There are some
who will reply that it is impossible to do so. It is our
duty, however, hopefully to try.
Brethren, we all clamour loudly for liberty to choose.
Do we reflect what a burden this liberty of choice lays
upon us ? Ah! it is easy when we are under the parental
roof to wish ourselves free, and dream of what great things
we should then do and say. But the good hand of father
and mother is withdrawn and we are sent adrift in the wide
world. Then do we feel pressing upon us cares and
anxieties which never before oppressed us, and sigh for the
careless and unfettered days which never come again. If
we do not know how to use our freedom it is little good to
us. We may then, sitting solitary and desolate, long for the
bread enough and to spare of hired servants in our father’s
home. It is easy enough to snatch the helm from the


steersman’s grasp and shout for freedom to guide our own
vessel, but it is not long until we feel how hard it is to steer
the ship to port, and that without wearisome watching and
patient study of our charts, the ship is like to come to grief.
Where you have popular election, popular government and
popular institutions of every kind, you need a sense of
responsibility on the part of the people. You maintain that
no one man should have a greater say than others in anything;
then must each man feel a share of the burden, or honour,
if you prefer to call it so, resting upon him, and deliberately
prepare himself to act his part faithfully and rationally.
If the whole crew insist on navigating the vessel, they must
all learn to feel their responsibility, and apply themselves to
the study of navigation. The danger at present is, that men
get into office, or have office thrust upon them, who feel
that they are accountable to no one, instead of feeling a
weight of duty resting upon them, making them thoughtful
and conscientious. What do we often see under the
present arrangement of things ? We see the officious,
bustling, self-important man rise into office in church
or state, become the member of some [philanthropic
society, or the ruling spirit on some committee. What
shadow of solemn duty rests upon him? Self-importance,
self-promotion and glory, these constitute the chief subjects
of his thoughts. See how he nurses his power and turns to
his own account the authority vested in him for the good
of others! See, too, how he can truckle to the multitude
and how the multitude, dead to their responsibilities, elect
and worship the man who takes their fancy and panders to
their tastes! On everything we are prepared to speak
and vote, often, alas! must it be confessed, without any
deep sense of duty or conscientious endeavour to make
ourselves masters of the questions under discussion, and to
form calm, rational judgments upon men and things. In


order to reap the good fruit which the popularising of our
institutions is capable of producing, men must have more
conscience; individuals must feel the responsibility which,
by demanding democratic institutions, they have taken
upon themselves. We cannot plead now, either in the old
world or in the new, that our rulers make laws for us and
look after the affairs of the country, and that all we have to
do is to be good and faithful subjects. We have laid claim
to be ourselves kings and rulers. Only, then, real, genuine
royalty of heart and mind can keep our State from going to
wreck. Each individual now must be a king indeed. Vox
populi must become vox Dei in a real and noble sense, if
we are to be a righteous, free, and prosperous people. We
have demanded and obtained liberty. What we need to
feel is, that the liberty bestowed upon us is that of
moral and rational beings—liberty not to do as we like, but
to give ourselves up in service and sacrifice to aims worthy
of us as men and women.
Now, what we have been saying of the popular tendencies
and demands of the present generally, holds good also of
the popular tendencies and demands as regards religion in
particular. Time was when the government of the Church
was strictly paternal, when a man accepted his form of
religion as he accepted his daily food, and never ventured
to question the wisdom of his spiritual superiors; but now
all this is changed. The democratic wave has invaded even
the sacred boundaries of the Church, and every man is
regarded as entitled to give his opinion and his vote —to
choose his Church, his Creed, his God.
There are some, brethren, who regard this change with
aversion and dread; and their feelings it is easy to under-
stand. We can understand some, for instance, unwilling to
tear themselves away from the ranks of an ancient Church
on whose muster-roll are inscribed the names of men and


■women distinguished for learning and for piety. We can
sympathise with such, in the wistful looks which they cast
back upon what are called “the good old times,” when,
through long aisles, there rose at early morning or at dusky
eve the solemn chant of white-robed priests—when into
human ears the penitent poured forth the tale of guilt, and
heard from human lips the voice of Divine forgiveness—
when the church doors were never closed, and, even amid
the din and bustle of the city streets, the weary and heavy-
laden might find rest in silent, solitary prayer —when, m
solemn feast days, in an impressive ritual, surrounded by
works of art, the devout heart found expression for its
feelings, and felt comfort and peace in the bosom of
Christ’s holy Church. We can understand men of taste
and refinement contrasting the past and the present, and
shrinking with instinctive dislike from the apparent
coldness of Protestantism, from its frequent vulgarity of tone
in pulpit and pew, from the often purely negative aspect
which the Protestant Church presents, from the absence
of taste and beauty and small provision made for the
expression of natural human feeling in worship. Above all
it is easy to understand how many should shrink back
with dread from the apparently revolutionary character of
.modern religion, which gives to the most ignorant and
unspiritual, as well as to wise and spiritual men and
women, a vote in the election of their religious teachers,
and a right to make themselves disagreeable, or how they
should regard with alarm and dismay the presence of those
great problems, which, in the Protestant Church, seem to
give rise to endless controversy, and on which there is no
infallible authority to set men’s minds at rest. Ah ! brethren,
we sometimes glory in being Protestants, without reflecting
upon that in which we glory. We sometimes boast of the
liberty and the conceded rights, as they are called, of the


Christian people, when we know not what we say. The
change which has come over the Church, the still greater
changes destined yet to take place as intellectual and
spiritual life increases and developes—changes which are
the natural and inevitable consequences of our democratic
tendencies, of our political and religious liberty, shall we say
of the Protestant Reformation ? —are all, we must strive to
feel, under the guiding hand of God, and, if met in a right
spirit, will lead us on to perfection. But what is wanted, in
order to keep such changes from becoming a curse to us, is
increased sense of responsibility on the part of each of us
for our beliefs and our practice. Liberty—popular election !
What are these worth, if they be not bestowed upon
Christian men and women ? What are these but senseless,
wicked words upon the lips of fools, if they are not the cry
of living souls, seeking wider room in which to live a larger
and a truer religious life ? Freedom is a heavy burden. It
brings with it grave responsibilities, and only when these
are borne in a noble spirit does freedom become a noble
gift. The democratic movement within the Church is good
only if, by concession of popular rights, the popular
conscience is aroused, and every man and woman made to
feel —I am answerable to God for the beliefs which I hold,
for the opinions which I form, for the vote which I give, for
the part in the religious world which I take. Sometimes
one has seen the apparently light-hearted and thought-
less youth become sedate and grave, sobered by the burden
of family cares or by elevation to some position of
trust and authority. So, too, must each individual be
rendered sober and thoughtful by the sense of the grave
trust committed to him in connection with religion, if our
liberty is to become a blessing to us. Our freedom will be
a glorious thing if it makes each individual more thoughtful,
more conscientious, more deeply alive to the meaning and


importance of religious truth. “ Choose you this day whom
you will serve ” is the awful word addressed to the men and
women of the present, in connection with religion. Oh L
that the Almighty may give us patience, unselfishness, and
strength of will to make the true choice, and that the heavy
burden laid upon us may only make us more earnest and
sincere 1 To whom much liberty in belief and practice is
given, of them shall much be required. “As for me, said
Joshua, “ I will serve Jehovah.”
There is a second thought, my friends, which the text
has suggested, and it is this —The responsibility of men for
the belief and practice of their families. It may seem to
some that this responsibility has been removed by the
altered conditions of the times, but this is not so. The
relation of households to their head is, no doubt, very
different to-day from what it was in the time of Joshua.
It is very different, I dare say, from what some of the older
people among us remember it to have been in their younger
days. Two causes may be assigned for the change. For
one thing, the wave of independence, to which we have
alluded, has reached even the family life. The relation
between parents and children is not altogether the same as
it used to be. The child is no longer at the mercy of the
parent, nor, as in ancient times, has the head of the house
the power of life and death over his household. The old
feudal relationship has disappeared between master and
servant, and an entirely new order of things has taken
its place. It would take a long time to discuss the
different causes which have led up to this result; but the
fact is patent to all. We need not struggle against it,
but should accept it as a stage in the leadings of Providence
of which we have to make the best. Another cause of the
change in the relation of households to their head is the
selfish, unkindly spirit which has crept into the family


life. The only bond which binds the head to the
members is too frequently, alas ! but the bond of selfish
interest or pleasure, and the tie between master and servant
is that merely of wages.
“ The constant service of the antique world,
When service sweat for duty, not for mead,”
we must, with regret, admit is
“ Not for the fashion of these times.”
The democratic tendency, the popular independence
of the day, has, at least, given scope and opportunity for
selfishness, which, under the old form of things, would,
perhaps, have remained undeveloped.
Now, there are some, as I have said, who think, because
the conditions are altered, that, therefore, they are absolved
from all responsibility in connection with their households.
Home-life and family-life they have come to look upon as
antiquated. Especially as regards religion do some entertain
this view. They cannot dictate a creed to their servants;
they cannot prevent their sons and daughters from thinking
and reading. They, perhaps, feel how difficult it is to
choose their own creed amid the number of conflicting
creeds, and so they leave their children to choose for them-
selves when they shall have reached maturer years. Thus
“ religion ” is a word scrupulously banished from the family-
circle, being regarded only as the signal of discord, instead
of as the symbol of the deepest social union. And, doubtless,
it is true that we cannot now T drive anyone, that we cannot,
like a feudal lord, find fault with our retainers for differing
from us in creed, and that liberty and toleration are the
watchwords of the day in relation to religious opinion. But
all this only goes to prove that one man cannot choose for
another in the old irrational and non-moral way, not that
a man is in no way responsible for the beliefs and practice


of his house. It does not follow, because we cannot teach
children in the old fashion, nor govern a country by the old
methods, that, therefore, teachers and governors are hence-
forth absolved from all responsibility. And so, though
it is true that non-moral restraints and motives are no
longer available to rule a household, does it, therefore,
follow that we are under no obligation to employ,
diligently and patiently, the modern moral restraints
and moral motives? Is the real influence of character
less now than in former days ? Are men and women
and children less sensible now to good influences than
they were in olden times ? Deduct the service and
obedience which were due merely to the force of custom,
to feudal despotism and priestly power?—Will you say that
the power of a man in authority, of a minister, teacher,
or householder, looked at from a spiritual point of view,
is less now than in the days of Joshua, or the times of our
Catholic ancestors ? Surely the power of true character is
not less, is, perhaps, much greater to-day than in days
bygone. But we require a new sense of responsibility
in wielding this power. A statesman, for instance,
cannot now send men to rack and tower, or compel
obedience by fire and sword; but if he be a principled
man, he feels how much he has to answer for, and how
responsible he is for the state of the people. And so, too,
the head of a household cannot rule his house in the way
in which we can imagine a Jew or a Roman ruling his
house; but, if he is a principled man, he nevertheless feels
the burden of responsibility resting upon him for the belief
and practice of his children, and even to a certain extent
of all under his roof. The remedy for many evils at present
i-s not to be sought in politics or public institutions, in
secular schools or Sunday-schools, but in a revived sense
of the duty which devolves upon every head of a


house to choose a religion for his family. I do not mean
merely that he should select a catechism, or a church,
or a dogmatic creed for them—that is a very easy, a very lazy,
and often a very bad way of choosing for others but that
he should make all under him feel the power of a living and
practical faith, which manifests itself in his own character,
in word, and look, and act. We must, no doubt, select
sometimes for others a form of faith, and a grave
responsibility rests upon all in authority to think and
examine and teach the young the very best form which
they can find. Happy are those who have such wise
teachers that, in after years, they shall not have to
undergo the painful process of unlearning much which
they were taught to believe in connection with God, the
Bible, and the Christian life. Happy are those whose
early training will bear the hard strain of after-thought and
experience ! But, important as this is, direct teaching is not
all. Is there none of us here who can still remember vr,ords
and looks, and pious acts, which, through the dimness of
vanished years, still speak to us, and remind us of the
holy choice which others made for us in early days—of an
atmosphere of thought and feeling which otlieis foimed for
us, and whose impression will never fade away ? Much
that we learned in catechisms and books —much that was
formally taught—has perished or is remembered with a
smile; but the choice of a virtuous Christian life which a
father or a mother made for us, and, by pure example and
wise discipline, at length made ours in truth, that is
imprinted in indelible letters on our souls. Are there not
some, too, who still bless the memory of a wise and virtuous
master or mistress, whose justice, unselfishness, and wisdom,
made them, also, even in days of democratic independence,
choose the better part ? Yes, even in these free-thinking
times we are, in a true sense, responsible for the souls of


our children, for the healthy training of heart and
conscience, as well as for the healthy training of mind and
body. And power is with every good man still to influence
his household in the choice of a pious, virtuous life.
Finally, my brethren, “ Choose you this day whom you
will serve”—the God who is revealed in light and love,
in Jesus Christ, in all that is noble and blessed, or the God
who is revealed in selfishness and folly, in all that is mean
and unworthy of men and women. Choose solemnly whom
you will serve. Choose your creed afterwards ; choose your
religion now, even the religion of Christian righteousness
and love. Go back also to your homes to-day with the
firmer resolution to make these homes the abodes of purity
and goodness, from which the man or woman of wealth and
fashion, but of immoral life, shall be carefully excluded, and
into which nothing shall enter that defileth or maketh a lie.
Air.id the difficulties and perplexities of your age and
circumstances seek earnestly and faithfully to discover and
follow the path of light and duty. Bear your burden of
responsibility patiently and manfully. Face boldly the
questions of the day, speculative or practical, on which
you feel that you are called to decide, ever hopefully
watching for the light as they that wait for
morning. Be it yours, with a deeper and more
spiritual meaning than the brave old Hebrew soldier could
put into the words, now and continually, with lip and life,
resolutely to decide —“ As for me and my house, we will
serve the Lord ” —the Lord the Spirit of Truth and Liberty,
of Light and Progress, and self-denying Love.
Fergusson and Moore, Printers, 48 Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.






Thoughts on Spiritual Religion.
SPECIALLY INTENDED FOR A COMMUNION CLASS.
In Foolscap Bvo. Price One Shilling.
BY THE
REY. CHARLES STRONG
Minister of Scots’ Church, Melbourne.
