

-S ~ ' "sv Z~"
0 ' ■■ I
■ If
lioohsellcrs anb Stationers’ Association |
OF VICTORIA.
| PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS,
| • LIST OF OFFICERS, AND RULES.
.
<s
8 (SMielUonvun ■. |(jj
U, EERGUSSON AND MOORE, PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE EAST. ;
V i 87- I |
.S??. . .QA y- , A*,» r-J,~S a*




At the First Annual Meeting of the Book-
sellers and Stationers’ Association of
Victoria, held in the Temperance Hall ,
Melbourne , on the evening of Thursday ,
27th March , 1879, the Minutes of the last
General Meeting having been read and confirmed
the President (Mr. S. Mullen,) delivered the
following
ADDRESS.
Gentlemen,
As you are all doubtless aware, this Associa-
tion owes its origin to the necessity that was felt for united
action on the part of the Booksellers and Stationers, to
counteract the injury that was being done to them by State
School-masters, who sold books and other school requisites
to the public at prices with which they could not compete.
It was then felt by the trade that not only this but other
matters required their joint action, and the readiness with
which the Association was formed proved that it supplied a
want much felt, and that results beneficial to all concerned
were likely to accrue from its formation. How far these
expectations have been realised during the past twelve
months it will be for me to show, and, if we cannot point
to any great success as yet, we have reason to hope that in
future our efforts will be more fruitful.
The question of Postal Reform in respect to Newspapers
and Periodicals demands our first attention, for I regard this
as one of the most important matters bearing on the
future welfare of the trade.
Your Board of Management have at various times had
interviews with the Postmaster-General, also with the Deputy
Postmaster-General, and they cheerfully acknowledge the
courtesy that has marked the bearing of these official


gentlemen towards them, and the evident desire that exists
on the part of the postal authorities to give the widest
possible interpretation to the Postal Act as it stands, and to
extend their influence and exertions to obtaining greater
facilities for the transmission of Newspapers and Magazines
when the time comes to introduce an Amending Postal Act to
the notice of our Parliament. Indeed, the Postmaster-General
went so far as to say that, if his wishes could be carried
out, all Newspapers and Periodicals should go free by
post; and it would well become any Government, and
especially a Government like that of Victoria, which points
with just pride to its liberal subsidies to Public Libraries,
Museums, and kindred institutions, to remove all hindrances
to the general diffusion of intelligence throughout the
length and breadth of the colony.
With regard to newspapers, if posted in Victoria,, there
is a charge of one halfpenny for each paper ; but, if you
post a paper to Albury, on the other side of the Murray,
one penny has to be paid, i.e., the same rate as is charged on
the transmission of a newspaper from here to the remotest
part of Great Britain. A friend in Sydney can send you his
morning paper free of any charge for postage; but if you
wish to return the compliment, you have to pay one penny,
i.e., in the case of the Argus, or per cent, of its
commercial value, and 100 per cent, in advance of the
value of our other daily papers. It should be noted that
in all the colonies, excepting Victoria and New Zealand,
newspapers published within each colony are posted free of
any charge whatever.
In our Postal Act, although letters are classified under
three heads, viz., Inland, Intercolonial, and Foreign, news-
papers have only two classifications, viz., Inland and Foreign,
as the word Foreign is made to apply to all places outside
the Colony of Victoria, it follows, then, that in postal
language, we have no intercolonial newspapers."
The aspiring Australian patriot who dreams of federation
might rise a step towards the realisation of his hopes by
making an effort to secure free interchange of intelligence
between all the colonies. Our neighbours send us their
newspapers free, and why do we not reciprocate ? Surely
here is room for reform.
* It surely tnust have been ah oversight on the part of our law-makers to
blare, in the Postal Act, our letters to Great Britain Under the heading of I oreign.
All colonists talk of the old country as “home’ in the most natural way, and the
Word “ Foreign ” is Very ill applied to “home” correspondence.


Now, as to periodicals, the postage on them is so excessive
as very much to hinder their circulation throughout the
country. We do not now allude to periodicals of the
very highest class, such as the “Quarterly Reviews,” “Black-
wood’s Magazine,” et hoc genus omne, for on these the charge
is not very much in excess of their cost, but upon the
more popular periodicals, though still of a very high
class, such as “ Chambers’s Journal,” “The Leisure Hour,”
“ The Quiver,” “ Good Words,” “ Cassell’s Magazine,” and
a host of similar publications, the charge for postage is so
excessive as seriously to prevent their circulation. Forinstance,
a monthly part of “ Chambers’s Journal,” which is published
at Bd., costs for postage in Victoria 4d., i.e., 50 per cent, on
its commercial value. Now, the periodicals we name are of
great educational importance, and would, if they could be more
freely circulated, prove of inestimable value in elevating and
refining the habits of the people, and it would be conferring
a lasting boon on the community if our Government would
transmit all such publications free of charge, or at only a
nominal rate of postage. Our Parliament expends large
sums on the education of the young, but people cannot be
too often reminded that instruction often begins only when
the youth is done school altogether. Nothing binds families
together more than the reciprocal enjoyment of wholesome
literature, and the growth of home life and gentle manners
may be wisely fostered among the people at a very small
cost to the State. Those living in towns can hardly realise
how eagerly the country resident looks for the receipt of his
monthly packet of periodicals, which are a source of great
amusement, and often the only source of instruction to those
who live in thinly-populated districts. I make bold to assert
that if the cheap and wholesome issues of the British press
were more freely circulated throughout the colony we should
hear less of those fearful crimes which have so recently and
so deeply stained the annals of Victoria.*
It was at first feared that the country booksellers would
regard this movement for postal reform with jealousy, as
tending to centralise the trade in periodicals, but nothing is
more groundless than those fears, for greater postal facilities
would materially aid booksellers in the country districts in
distributing periodicals throughout the minor post towns.
Periodicals posted to the neighbouring colonies have to
pay double those rates charged in Victoria, and this tariff is
* An allusion to the Kelly gang, a band of freebooters, four in number, who
murdered three mounted troopers in cold blood, looted two provincial banks in open
daylight, and kept the North-eastern province of Victoria in a state of terror for
months. They are still at large, although great rewards are offered for their capture.


of such a prohibitory nature as nearly to shut out the
Victorian bookseller from sending magazines to residents in
Riverina, who otherwise would naturally draw their supplies
from this colony. The monthly part of “ Chambers s
Journal ” costs Bd. when posted to the other colonies, t e.,
xoo per cent, on its commercial value. This one instance
is sufficient to show how high the rates are ; and it must be
borne in mind that the postal authorities of New South
Wales make no charge whatever for conveying these packets
to their destination.
I think our future Board of Management will do well to
agitate this question of postal reform during the next sitting
of the Legislature. The way is already insomemeasurepaved.
The retiring Board have had interviews with several Members
of Parliament, who, one and all, coincided with their views
that a considerable modification of the postal charges on
Newspapers and Periodicals is most desirable.
Sale of books at It is a matter of regret that all our endeavours to induce
State-schools. the Min i ste r of Education to prohibit the sale of books and
stationery by State schoolmasters have been in vain. Ihe
utmost that could be obtained was a promise that, in places
where booksellers sold the books at the same prices as the
schoolmaster, preference should be given to the former.
But even this promise has not been carried out, and if it
were carried out, it is not enough to satisfy the just demands
of the trader. Experience proves that the teacher undersells
the bookseller. Each buys at the same rate (for the whole-
sale price and the price to schools are one and the same in
this colony,) but the bookseller is very much overweighted
in the competition, for the schoolmaster, in distributing
books, employs the time for which he is paid by the State
to devote to teaching," and uses premises which are rent-free
to him, whereas the bookseller has his rent to pay, as well
as wages to his assistants. It is very trying for booksellers
thus to see their legitimate trade encroached upon, and they
feel naturally indignant at having to compete with opponents
who are thus subsidised by the Government, and who wrest
from them their means of living.
* In some of the large schools, where about one thousand children are in daily
attendance, the amount of time so taken up is very great, and as cash has to be
taken, the head-master, with a keen eye to business, prefers himself to be in the
receipt of custom. The writer was assured that in one suburban school of some magni-
tude the head-master does very little else than sell books and stationery during the
day. The right of private schoolmasters to obtain discounts and sell books is not
now impugned as they sell under much the same conditions as the booksellers. It is
thought, however, that in respect of terms, they should not be put on quite the same
footing with the trade as they are in Victoria,


The future Board of Management will have its work cut
out anent this question, and, doubtless, will take steps to
bring the grievance before the notice of the country through
the Legislature. Surely Parliament will not allow an
industrious and deserving class of citizens to suffer such wrong
at the hands of the Government as this very unfair com-
petition exposes them to.
The extreme injustice inflicted upon the trade by the
alterations made in the “ Royal Readers,” has been brought
under the notice of the Minister of Education, but no
redress whatever has been obtained.
The grievance may be stated in a few words. It is this.
When the “ Royal Readers ” were first adopted by the
Education department, a revised and secularised edition was
ordered to be prepared to meet the wants of the State-school
system of Victoria. Of this ample notice was given, and
the trade made provision accordingly. Recently, however,
a re-distribution of the series was made. The books were
so altered that a part of one book was put into another, and
matter which formerly appeared only in the original “ Royal
Reader” supplements was introduced, thereby rendering
some of the books larger. Of these important changes the
trade had no notice whatever, and was not aware of them
until a large supply of the “ Readers,” thus altered, was
received by the department. This supply is now being
rapidly taken up by the heads of schools, to the exclusion
of the first revised edition, which is now unsaleable, not
only in this, but in the other colonies, where our Victorian
editions will not even be looked at.
It is quite evident that the relations of the Board of
Education to the trade at large are not satisfactory. The
authorities in the Educational Department cannot but be
aware that any changes they make in the books in use in the
public schools must materially affect the booksellers’ stocks,
and it is only right that all changes should be publicly
announced in good time to enable the bookseller to reduce
his stock of books in present use and to order his supply of
the newly-approved ones. The council of our University
recognises the fairness of giving ample notice to all teachers,
students, and booksellers of any intended alteration in the
text books, and a regulation framed to this effect can be
seen in the University Calendar. The Minister of Education
has promised that in future all changes shall be dulyannounced
beforehand, but I think the trade should have some assurance
that this promise has been converted into a departmental
regulation to be strictly observed.


The Association has obtained the throwing open of the
contract for the supply of books to the State-schools to
public tender. This was a movement thought to be very
desirable by the trade, and when the Minister of Education
was appealed to he at once met the wishes of your deputation.
The action of the Board of Management in this matter was
disapproved of by your late President, and he took umbrage,
considering, as he said, that his interests were attacked, and
withdrawing, therefore, from the Association. The Board of
Management, in accepting the resignation, expressed regret
that that gentleman should have taken the view he did at
the time, and stated, what I believe is the feeling of every
member of the Association, namely, that they were actuated
by no personal motive whatever, but simply wished, at the
outset of the formation of the Association, to establish the
broad principle that all Government contracts of any
magnitude connected with the trades in which they are
engaged should be open to public tender.
A brisk trade has been done throughout the colony by
agents for American publishing houses, and the mode of
dealing of these canvassers is of such a character that this
Association cannot too strongly express its disapprobation
of it. A specious prospectus is shown to the unwary, who
are cajoled into subscribing for some book to be ordered
from America, and delivered in a few months’ time. When
the book arrives, it so far falls short of the promises made
that disappointment and vexation ensue, and the subscriber
is informed that if he does not pay the price of the book,
i.e., about three times its value, he will be summoned to the
court. In the majority of cases the threats prevail from the
unwillingness of parties to undergo the annoyance of appear-
ing before the bench. In proof of these statements I would
refer you to the correspondence that has been recently going
on in the Melbourne and Ballarat papers. This is bad enough,
but when the canvassers push a trade in pirated editions of
copyright books, they enter the lists with fearful odds in
their favour against the honest trader who cares not and
dares not to sell reprints of copyright works. A serious case
of this unlawful traffic was brought under the notice of the
Board of Management, and was by them thoroughly exposed
at the time. I allude to the “ Complete Domestic Bible,”
which contains pirated reproductions of Gustave Dore’s
pictures, and an abridgement of a copyright work, namely,
“ Dr. William Smith’s Dictionary of the Bible,” and which
has had a very large subscribers’ list in this colony. To
such an extent has this peculiar trade been carried oh,
that the honourable craft of bookselling h?? been brought


into disrepute, and people are disposed to hesitate ere they
subscribe to the most legitimate publishing ventures that
the respectable bookseller has to offer.
The Board of Management have put themselves into
communication with the leading British publishing houses uestlon '
in reference to these literary piracies, and, doubtless, such
steps will be taken by copyright-holders as will ultimately
lead to the summary confiscation of American reprints.
I think those of our Association who are more immediately R^j t s f e ‘° n of
interested in the stationery business, should endeavour, by
co-operation, to obtain a remission of those duties on
imports which are of no avail in encouraging local manu-
facture, and are, therefore, injuriously restrictive. I think
the customs duties on copy-books ought especially be marked
for being withdrawn. It seems most unreasonable that
while we are on the one hand expending large sums on
education, we should on the other be imposing duties on
articles of the greatest educational importance; and it is
well known, also, that owing to the fact that headline
copy-books are copyright, they cannot be manufactured in
the colony without contravening an Imperial Act of Parlia-
ment. Placing these articles, therefore, under a twenty
per cent, ad valorem tariff cannot be excused on the ground
of encouraging local industry. The same remarks apply to
wall maps, drawing-books, and many other articles in daily
use in our schools.
I think we may congratulate ourselves that our picnic was Picnic,
so well attended, and that it has afforded such enjoyment
to us and to our assistants. It has proved such a success
that I feel sure we all look forward to its repetition next
year, and I think you will agree with me that the giving up
of a day's business is a small sacrifice compared with the
ultimate good that must accrue to those who follow the
same craft, associating in a friendly spirit, and becoming
better acquainted with each other at the social board. It is
a matter of regret that so few of our country friends were
with us on that day, but we have reason to hope that in
future they will muster up for the occasion. You will be
glad to learn that the Sydney booksellers and stationers
have followed our good example, and held their first picnic
a fortnight ago. These reunions among the associated
trades must be beneficial. Rivals in business are too apt
to regard each other with a jaundiced eye, and any move-
ment that brings them more together in their leisure moments
must be of mutual advantage, and will tend to the ultimate
good of all.


I now conclude this address by expressing a hope that
the Association may go on and prosper, and that we shall all
meet at our next annual picnic with the same good feeling
that characterised our intercourse on the day of our first one.
The address having been approved of, and ordered to be
printed, the meeting proceeded to elect officers for the ensiling
year.
Fergusson and Moore, Printers, 48 Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.


BOOKSELLERS AND STATIONERS'
Association of Victoria.
—*►* **■> —
;PrtStomt:
Mr, S. MULLEN.
'Ftcc^it^iKcntsC
Mr. M. L. HUTCHINSON.
Mr. A. J. SMITH.
Cicaslum ;
Mr. F. W. NEEDHAM.
Boavtt of fHanaginunt
Mr. J. C. SCHILD.
Mr. DAVIS.
Mr. E. WHITEHEAD.
Mr. W. ROBERTSON.
Mr. A
BRUCE.
&cm. J^metavu:
Mr. F. G. DUNN, 117 Elizabeth Street.
RULES
OF THE
BOOKSELLERS AND STATIONERS’ ASSOCIATION
OF VICTORIA.
NAME.
x. The name of this Society shall he the “Booksellers and Stationers’
Association of Victoria.”
OBJECT.
2. The object of the Association shall be for the promotion of goodwill
and fellowship among its Members, and co-operation, when necessary, in
carrying out arrangements for the benefit of the trade generally.
MEMBERSHIP,
3. The membership shall consist of Booksellers and Stationers (Principals
only,) who shall pay the sum of Ten shillings per annum, half-yearly, in
advance; subscriptions payable on Ist April and Ist October of each year.
All Members shall be elected by ballot, at any General Meeting of the
Association or Board of Management, on receiving a majority of votes.’ ’


Members joining the Association at any intermediate time shall be charged
for the half-year during the currency of which they join.
Members whose subscriptions are in arrear, shall be informed thereof by
letter, and if not paid within three months after such notice being sent, their
names shall be struck off the Roll.
QUARTERLY AND ANNUAL MEETINGS.
4. That Quarterly Meetings of the Association be held on the first Monday
in June, September, and December, and that the Annual Meeting be held on
the first Monday in March of each year.
OFFICERS.
5. The Officers of this Association shall consist of a President, two
Presidents, a Treasurer, and Secretary, who shall be elected by ballot at each
Annual Meeting.
PRESIDING AT MEETINGS.
6. The President, or, in his absence, one of the Vice-Presidents shall
preside at all Meetings ; or, in the absence of such Officers, a Chairman shall
be elected from the Members present.
BOARD OF MANAGEMENT.
7. The Board of Management shall consist of the President, the Vice-
Presidents, the Treasurer, and Secretary, and five Members of the Association.
The Board shall meet at least once a month (five to form a quorum,) and
shall have power to act for the benefit of the whole, and shall submit a record
of its proceedings to each General Meeting of the Association.
MEETINGS.
8. The Board of Management shall have power to call a General Meeting
of the Members at any time, and if a requisition in writing be signed by at
least ten Members, calling for a General Meeting of the Association, and
stating the object thereof, the Secretary on receiving such requisition shall
summons a Meeting of the Members. Notice to be given in writing seven days
before the date on which such Meeting is to be held.
VACANCIES.
9. Any vacancies arising in the Board of Management shall be filled up at
the next ensuing General Meeting of the Association. Any Member absenting
himself from three consecutive Meetings, without sufficient cause, shall forfeit
Iris seat on the Board of Management.
JOURNAL OF PROCEEDINGS, AUDITORS, AND ELECTIONS.
10. At each Annual Meeting a report of the proceedings for the past year
shall be submitted, together with an audited statement of Receipts and
Expenditure, after which, the election of two Auditors, and of the Officers
and Members of the Board of Management shall take place.
BRANCH COMMITTEES.
11. It shall be competent for Members of the Association to form Country
Branch Committees, who shall appoint a corresponding Member, and any
business desired to be brought before the Association by such Committees, and
notified in writing to the Secretary, shall be duly considered as though brought
ijp by any of the Members present.
ALTERATION OF RULES.
12. The Rules of this Association shall not be altered, unless notice of
jiroposed alterations be given, signed by not less than ten Members of the
Association, nor unless such alterations are assented to by two-thirds of the
Members present at a General Meeting called to consider them, of which
Meeting one month’s notice shall have been given, instead of seven days as per
Rule 8.
