

PRESBYTERIAN UNION
rn 3v7
A Special Meeting of the Synod of New South Wales having
been held this day, in accordance with the recommendations and
decisions of a Select Committee of the Legislative Assembly, to
choose fit and proper persons to represent the said Synod in a Joint
Committee of Presbyterians for the establishment of a Presbyterian
College in connection with the University of Sydney, the occasion
was deemed, not only by the members present, but also by the
brethren at a distance, who could not attend personally but had
addressed letters to the Moderator on the subject, a peculiarly fit
opportunity for making some effort to heal the wounds of the
Presbyterian Church, by combining, if possible, into one united
body, certain at least of the now divided.portions of our communion.
The following paper, which was drawn up by the Rev. Dr. Lang,
was accordingly submitted to the Synod, and unanimously and
cordially approved of.
Sydney, sth October, 1858.
JOHN REID, Moderator
Of the Synod of New South Wales.
PRESBYTERIAN UNION.
The evils arising from the present divisions of the Presbyterian
communion are great and manifold, as well as highly detrimental to
the peace and prosperity of the Presbyterian Church. The following
are some of the more obvious of these evils.
1. They are a great scandal to the religious public, whether of the
Presbyterian or of other Evangelical communions ; and they afford
a handle to men of no religion, and more especially to the enemies
of all religion, to revile our primitive and apostolic system of
ecclesiastical polity, and to throw contempt upon the profession of
religion altogether.


a wasteful expenditure of moral power. For as each distinct orga-
nization naturally desires to be represented as largely as possible in
all the denser seats of population, the members and adherents of our
communion in these localities are broken up into the merest frac-
tions, and new congregations are formed in such circumstances as
almost to warrant the suspicion that they are formed, not so much
to supply any existing spiritual destitution, as to proselytize from
other congregations in which the same truths are proclaimed, and
the same.ecclesiastical system maintained, under a slightly different
name. The natural result of such a state of things is that a spirit
of sectarian rivalry, the very canker-worm of the professing Chris-
tian Church, is fostered and promoted in the towns, while extensive
tracts of thinly inhabited country in the interior are entirely lost
sight of and neglected.
3. The present divisions of the Presbyterian communion preclude
the possibility of any such vigorous and systematic efforts as the
extraordinary circumstances of the country require, to keep pace
with the rapid progress of colonization, by providing for the regular
dispensation of the ordinances of religion among our widely scat-
tered and rapidly increasing population. And as to anything like
missionary efforts among the heathen, whether of this continent
or of the neighbouring isles—such as are at present making
by other Protestant denominations, and such as ought unques-
tionably to be made by the Australian Presbyterian Church —
they are not to be thought of in such circumstances as those into
which our communion has unfortunately fallen. In short, the
divisions of Reuben are entailing the curse of barrenness upon the
Colonial Presbyterian Church ; she is neither lengthening her cords
and strengthening her stakes, as she ought to he doing, nor is she
bringing forth spiritual children to her husband and her Lord.
4. The existing divisions of our communion render it utterly
impracticable for the Presbyterian Church to avail itself of an
agency which can never be dispensed with, with any degree of
safety, by any large body of professing Christians in the present age
of general enlightenment—w-e mean the powerful agency of the
Press—whether for the dissemination of Christian knowledge and
right principles, among our own members and adherents, or for the


counteraction of the numerous and deadly forms of error that are
prevalent and rampant around us. Instead of marching, as the
Presbyterian Church of this colony ought unquestionably to do, in
close and formidable array, to encounter the hosts of Midian and
Ammon, its present condition rather resembles that of the children
of Israel in those days of national calamity, when their country
was in the hands of their enemies, and they had to take up their
abode wherever they could, to escape observation, in obscure
lurking-places—in dens and caves of the earth. In short, without a
press to advocate the cause of our Apostolic Church and our common
Christianity, our condition is like that of the ancient people of
God under the yoke of the Philistines, when there was no smith
found thioughout all the land of Israel; hut all the Israelites went
down to the Philistines, to sharpen every man his share, and his
coulter, and his axe, and his mattock. —l Samuel xiii, 19-20.
Finally—and this we consider a point of transcendant importance
—the present divisions of the Presbyterian Church render it abso-
lutely necessary, at least for the present, to forego the inestimable
advantage that might otherwise accrue to our communion from the
establishment of a Divinity Faculty for the training up of candidates,
either for the Christian Ministry, or for Christian missions to the
heathen, in connection with the proposed Presbyterian College.
For these reasons, as well as for others which will probably sug-
gest themselves, it appears to this Synod not only expedient and
necessary, but a matter of Christian duty of imperative obligation,
that a strenuous effort should be made at the present moment in the
way of Presbyterian union : and the present effort is made accord-
ingly that, in the event of its unfortunately proving unsuccessful, the
blame may not be imputed to the Synod of New South Wales.
The chief points of enquiry in the matter of Presbyterian union
are “ What portions of the Presbyterian Church should such union
embrace” ? and “ What should be the basis of such union.” ?
In regard to the former of these points, it is scarcely necessary to
observe that there is a broad line of distinction between that portion
of the Presbyterian Church which derives its main support from the
State, and those which depend entirely upon the sympathies and
contributions of the Christian people. With the two bodies of Pres-
byterians in Canada that are unconnected with the State, viz., the


Free Church and the United Presbyterians, we are strongly of
opinion that such a union as would combine in one body those who
receive State support with those who do not, is at present impracti-
cable ; and, with the prospect of a speedy and entire withdrawal of
all State support from all religious denominations in New South
Wales, we think it scarcely desirable. When that consummation,
so devoutly to be wished, is realized, these different portions of the
Presbyterian Church will stand upon the same level, which they can
never do under existing circumstances; and arrangements of indis-
pensable necessity for the future extension and edification of the
united body—such for instance as the future supply of ministers from
the mother-country—which would at present give rise to great differ-
ences of opinion, and suggest different and perhaps incompatible
courses of action, would then present no difficulty whatever.
The portions of the Presbyterian Church in this colony that are
unconnected with the State are, in the order of their colonial exist-
ence, the Synod of New South Wales; the Free Church, or Synod
of Eastern Australia; the Congregation of United Presbyterians
under the pastoral charge of the Rev. Hugh Darling, and the Pres-
byterian congregation at Balmain under the Rev. Thomas Gordon.
Of these the Free Church and the United Presbyterians merely
represent the religious bodies that bear these designations respec-
tively in the mother-country, and what may be styled the Time-
truths, or truths for the times, for which they were respectively called
into existence to contend; neither the one nor the other of these
bodies having anything of a peculiarly colonial character and aspect
connected with its origin and history in Australia, For example, the
Time-truth for which the different bodies that now form the United
Presbyterian Church were originally called to contend, was embodied
in their solemn protest against the system of patronage and the
monstrous abuses to which it had given rise in the National Church.
In process of time, indeed, if not rather in the progress of general
enlightenment, that body has gradually drifted into the position of
bearing testimony on behalf of what is styled the Voluntary prin-
ciple, or against any connection between Church and State. But
this, although its actual, was by no means its original position when
it first withdrew from the National Establishment. The Iree
Church on the other hand, which came into existence at a much


later period, was culled to contend, in the peculiar circumstances of
the mother-country at the time, for the spiritual independence of
the Church; this Time-truth, which it held forth from the first,
being embodied in its famous protest against all interference on the
part of the Civil Power in the internal government of the Church.
It is obvious, however, that both of these bodies having thus
originated in a state of things peculiar to Scotland, and with which
there is nothing in common in Australia, there can be no valid
reason for their continued separation in this country.
The Synod of New South Wales, however, had its origin in a
state of things altogether unknown in the mother-country, and
peculiar to Australia; the Time-truth which that body put forth
in its original manifesto, and in the maintenance of which (as will
appear from the accompanying copy of a recent petition to the
Legislature*), it has experienced in certain quarters a degree of per-
secution scarcely paralleled in its peculiar bitterness and malignity
in the ecclesiastical movements of the old world during the present
a ge_the Time-truth which the Synod of New South Wales put forth
in its original manifesto, being a protest against the anti-scriptural,
latitudinarian and infidel character and tendency of the existing
politico-ecclesiastical system of this colony, or the indiscriminate
support of all forms of religion from the Public Treasury. That
this peculiar Time-truth of Australia formed no part of the testi-
mony of the Free Church, whatever may be the sentiments and prac-
tice of individual members of that body, is evident from the two
following circumstances, viz.:—
1. That the founders of the Free Church in New South Wales
actually petitioned the Legislature, before they withdrew from the
Synod of Australia, for a separate endowment, which was refused.
2. That the question of State Aid is still an open question
in the Free Church in the neighbouring colony of Victoria; certain
ministers of that body receiving such aid while others decline it.
Were the Free Church in this colony to admit of the same
diversity of practice on this vital question, the Synod of New
South Wales could entertain no idea of an incorporating union with
* The petition of the writer to the Legislative Assembly, praying for a
Select Committee of Inquiry into the proceedings of the Synod of Australia
in 1842.


that Church, any more than it can with the Synod of Australia, so
long as the latter continues to receive State support on the present
system of the Australian colonies. But as there is a perfect coin-
cidence both of opinion and practice on this vital question on the
part of the Free Church, the United Presbyterians and the Synod of
New South Wales, there can be no obstacle in the way of an incor-
porating union of these bodies on that particular ground—all the
three being equally opposed to the present system of State support
in Australia.
As the Presbyterian Congregation of Balmain was formerly in
communion with the Independents, and maintains its present iso-
lated and unattached condition, not from anything distinctive or un-
conformable in the character of its Presbyterianism, but merely
from a laudable desire to see a union of certain at least of the other
Presbyterian bodies effected before it attaches itself to any one of
them in particular, its present separate existence may be considered
as a tacit protest against our present divisions, and an additional
argument for union, on the part of the Free Church, the United
Presbyterians, and the Synod of New South Wales, These bodies
are all agreed in doctrine, discipline and worship; they all receive
the Westminster Confession of Faith, with the Catechisms, Larger
and Shorter, as their standards, and they all profess to conform to
the Presbyterian Directory. And although they may differ in
opinion, as to whether there ought or ought not to be any connec-
tion between Church and State in any circumstances, they are all
agreed that there can be no such connection, with a safe conscience,
in this colony.
In these circumstances, the basis of union, recently adopted by
the Joint Committee of the Free Church and the United Presbyte-
rians in Canada, as reported in the News of the Churches for the
month of March last, would seem to be equally available as a basis
for the union of all Presbyterians unconnected with the State in
this colony. That basis is as follows :
“ After consideration, the Committees agreed to report to their
respective Synods in the following terms:—
I. “ That the brethren of the Presbyterian Church (that is the
Free Church) of Canada hold that there are circumstances in which
the State may lawfully offer endowments, and the Church may
lawfully accept of them ) and that the brethren of the I nitcd Pres-


byterian Church maintain that the acceptance of endowments is in
all oases inconsistent with the spiritual independence of the Church,
and the allegiance which she owes to Christ, her Head.”
2. “ That no specific declaration of opinion on the above question,
or its bearing, is demanded, as a term of communion, in either of
these churches.”
8. “ They, therefore, recommend that, in the event of the
churches being united, the same practice in reference to this ques-
tion should still be followed in the united body that is now followed
in the two branches in their separate state, and that the same for-
bearance should, therefore,continue to be exercised -Extracted from
the Minutes of the Joint Committee of the Presbyterian ( Free ) and
United Presbyterian Churches of Canada on Union, 21st Oct. 1857.
The Joint Committees of the two bodies of Presbyterians uncon-
nected with the State in Canada had subsequently held meetings on
the same subject on the 14th and 15th of April last, and had then
recommended to their respective Synods that “ the statements con-
tained in the minutes of the Joint Committees be adopted as a basis
of Union ” The two Synods met at Hamilton, Upper Canada, in
the month of June last, —the Synod of the United Presbyterians
on the first of June, and that of the Free Church on the fifteenth.
In the report of the proceedings of the former of these bodies, (con-
tained in The Neivs of the Churches for August, 1858) it is stated
that “ the question of union was largly discussed, and the following
series of resolutions adopted by a unanimous vote, viz, :
1. “ That this Synod is sincerely and earnestly desirous of union with the
Presbyterian Church of Canada, and is fully persuaded of the practicability
of such union on grounds that will compromise the principles of neither
church, and secure the harmonious action of both.
2. “ That this Synod regards the action of the joint-committees as having
served a most important purpose in preparing the way for the formation of
a basis on which the union, so much to be desired, may be speedily and
happily consummated.
3. “ That the Committee be instructed to draw up such a basis, and that
that basis shall consist of the great leading principles on which the two
churches are agreed, and shall provide that a full and unfettered forbearance
shall be exercised by both churches on the one point—the magistrate’s
power, viz., in matters of religion—on which there is confesredly a differ,
ence of opinion between the two churches, although, as the minutes of the
joint-committee show, not a difference so great as to require or warrant
their prolonged separation.


4. “That the basis of union, when prepared and agreed upon by the
joint-committee, shall be sent down for the consideration of presbyteries and
sessions of this church, with instructions to report on the same by the
month of October, when a special meeting of the Synod shall be held for
their consideration with a view to an immediate union.
5. “ That a deputation of this Synod, appointed to attend the approaching
meeting of Synod of the Presbyterian Church of Canada, in this city, be
instructed to express the fraternal regards of this Synod towards that
Church, to lay these resolutions before them, and to request the re-appoint-
ment of their committee to co-operate with ours in forming the basis of the
contemplated union.
In the report of the proceedings of the Free Church, or Presby-
terian Church of Canada, it is stated that “ a large proportion of
the time of the Synod was devoted to the subject of union with the
United Presbyterian Church. All were unanimous in the wish to
have the union consummated, but there were differences of opinion
as to the best mode of effecting it. The following resolution was
ultimately adopted, by a majority of 126 to 18;
“ The Synod approve of the articles drawn up by the joint-committee of
the two churches, as embodying the views on the important questions
therein treated of, which this church has always been anxious to uphold.”
And surely such a movement towards a union, which in all likelihood
has since been consummated, on the part of our brethren in British
America, should both incite and encourage us to follow their good
example in Australia. There are, doubtless, matters of detail that
would require to be adjusted before such a consummation could be
effected; but it does not appear that there are any obstacles in the
way that could not be easily surmounted. It is possible, indeed,
that some one of the four bodies which it is proposed should be
united might stand out in voluntary and persistent isolation ; but
that should surely be no reason why the other three should not
unite and form one body. A union even to such an extent would
unquestionably give increased vitality and vigour to the better por-
tion of the Colonial Presbyterian Church, and there is reason to
hope that, under its influence and auspices, the offering of- Judah
and Jerusalem would again he pleasant unto the Lord, as in the
days of old, and as in former years. (Malachi, iii. 4.)
syvM E Y :
PRINTED BY P. MASON AND CO., DISPATCH OFFICB, 105, YORK STREET.
