

n
Presbyterian Polity.
Why
I am
Presbyterian.
Rev. W. M. DILL-MACKY.
...
fat 2.




Presbyterian
Polity.
fiz o(?$




PRESBYTERIAN POLITY;
Why I am
a
Presbyterian.
ADDRESS
DELIVERED BY THE
I AO ws
Right Revd. the Moderator
(W. M. DILL-MACKY),
AT THE OPENING OF THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY,
May gtb, 1899.
Sydney:


NOTE.
IN publishing this Address, I wish again to acknowledge
my indebtedness to the late Professor Witherow,
of Magee College, Londonderry, under whom I sat as a
student of Divinity.
The six principles of Presbyterian polity herein set
forth are his, and will be found in all their entirety in
his booklet, “ The Apostolic Church—Which is it ? ’
As this Address, however, summarises these principles,
and can be read within an hour, I send it forth at the
request of many friends, in the hope that it may reach
every Presbyterian family in the Colony, and prove a
blessing to our Church in grounding and establishing
our young people in the principles of our Presbyterian
p° li4 y- ~
W. M. DILL-MACKY.
The Manse,
9 Jamieson Street,
Sydney.


/z>os
f-rr
Fathers and Brethren,-
In addressing you to-night, I have
selected as my subject “Our Church; Her
Ecclesiastical Polity, Apostolic and Divine.”
And I begin by saying: That our Presby-
terian Church is one of which all her ministers,
elders, members, and adherents may well feel
proud. We are not of yesterday. Neither do
we dale our existence from the Reformation.
For our principles, doctrines, constitution, and
government we go right back to the days of the
Apostles, and to the church founded by them.
We claim to be in line, not with Calvin and
Knox only, but with Paul and Peter and James
and John. The doctrines which they preached
we preach, and the ecclesiastical polity founded
by them is the polity we practise. Happily,
with regard to doctrine, there is a great deal of
harmony now-a-days among the Evangelical
Churches. We all hold the doctrines of the
Eternal Trinity, of the true Divinity and the
true Humanity of the Lord Jesus Christ, of His
vicarious life and death, of his resurrection,
ascension, and mediatorship, of man’s sin, and
misery and of redemption by divine grace. The
old conflict between Calvinism and Armenian-
ism no longer agitates men’s minds. The doc-
trine of the divine decrees is not now emphasised
as it once was. And yet Presbyterian doctrine
maintains, not in its system only, but in its
popular expression, a note —or shall I rather
say a tone —of its own. “ This it has reached


PRESBYTERIAN POLITY.
through centuries of hard thinking and of still
harder experience : the thinking of the most
theological church and the experience of the
most persecuted church in Christendom. Man’s
depravity, man’s helplessness to save himself,
and man’s total dependence on divine grace are
emphasised in the Presbyterian Church with a
special emphasis.”
But while a general agreement exists among
the Protestant Churches with regard to funda-
mental doctrines, there is no such agreement
with regard to ecclesiastical polity. On the
matter of Church Government we are widely
separated, and ” while,” as the late Pro-
fessor Witherow says in his ‘Apostolic Church’
(to which I would acknowledge in passing
my indebtedness for much of the substance of
this address), “ few would go so far as to
assert that correct views on church government
are essential to salvation, yet it is a subject
whose importance it were folly to attempt to
depreciate.” The Holy Spirit, speaking in the
scriptures, treats ©f this theme, and this being
so, every Christian should strive to find out
what is the mind of the Spirit. Truth is one,
and we cannot attach ourselves to any denomi-
nation of Christians without giving our influ-
ence either to truth or error on this point. A
Christian, of all men, is bound to be a lover of
truth, and, therefore, we are warranted in sup-
posing that if a conscientious man could only
see to what form of church government the
word of God bears witness he would support
that form with all his might, and seek to pro-
pagate it to the best of his ability. Now, the
New Testament scriptures furnish us with
peculiar facilities for forming such a judgment.
It tells us of a church which was originated in
the world nearly 1900 years ago. The founder
of that church was Christ, and the after
builders were the apostles—men inspired by
God’s Spirit and acting under His authority.
Every fact known with certainty regarding the
original constitution of that church is preserved
in the Bible. Everything preserved elsewhere


PRESBYTERIAN POLITY.
is only tradition. The most obvious method,
therefore, of arriving at a judgment in the
matter is to compare the modern systems of
church government with the model presented
in the New Testament, and, then, that system
which bears the closest resemblance to the
Divine original may surely claim to be the most
apostolic.
Fathers and Brethren,—ln directing your
attention to this theme to-night, I hope it
is needless to say that I am not seeking in any
sense to pose as your instructor. I know
that you are as well acquainted with the
principles which pertain to the constitu-
tion and government of our church as I
am. My words, therefore, are not so much
for you as for the members and adherents of
all our Congregations, many of whom, I am
afraid, could scarcely give an intelligent answer
to the question, Why am I a Presbyterian?
They are Presbyterians by birth or habit, and
not from conviction. For this state of affairs
we, ourselves, are much to blame. Our Gospel
trumpet, on this topic, “ gives not an uncertain
sound, but, too frequently, no sound at all.”
Such silence on our part is not merely unwise
and impolitic—it is criminal. We should, each
of us, be able to say with Paul, “I have not
shunned to declare unto you the whole counsel
of God.” „ , ,
Following the plan proposed, we find that
the various forms of Church government
existing in the Christian world at the present
day may be classed under one or other of these
heads, viz., Prelacy, Independency, and Pres-
bytery. Prelacy is that form of Church
government which is administered by Bishops,
Archbishops (and other ecclesiastical office-
bearers over these again, according to the
particular hierarchy considered), and is suchlas
we see exemplified in the Anglican Church, the
Greek Church, and the Church of Rome.
Independency, again, is that form of Church
government the distinctive feature of which is,
that each separate congregation is, under Christ,


PRESBYTERIAN POLITY.
subject to no external jurisdiction whatever,
but has within itself, in its own office-bearers
and members, all the material of self-govern-
ment, and is such as we see in practical
operation among the Congregationalists and
Baptists. Presbytery, on the other hand, is
that form of government which is dispensed
by Presbyters or Elders met in Session, Pres-
bytery, Synod, or Assembly, and is such as we
see exemplified in the Presbyterian Church all
the world over. These three systems include
all others, for, wherever any other system
exists it is a mixture or a modification of some
of these three. Now a very cursory examina-
tion of these systems enables us to see that
they differ very widely in their characteristic
features. “ Prelacy, in all its main features, is
opposed to Presbytery, and Independency is
opposed to both.” All three cannot be right,
and cannot, therefore, claim the attachment
and support of enlightened and conscientious
men. The question is, Which is the right one ?
—which is nearest in its principles to the
Church founded by Christ and His Apostles ?
To find this out we must carefully study the
Word which God has given ‘‘as a lamp
unto our feet and a light unto our path.” To
the law and to the testimony, what saith it ?
Well, here we find certain main principles
revealed which we shall endeavour to sum-
marise, We find, for example, that in the
primitive Church there were four kinds of
officers, viz., Apostles, Evangelists, Elders,
also called Bishops and deacons. The first of
these—the Apostles—were the only officers
directly chosen by the Lord Himslf— they held
their appointment immediately from Him—
they were called to the ministry by His own
voice, and received their commission at His
hands (Mark iii. 13-19). This is particularly
evident from the appointment of Paul when
a vacancy was left in the Apostleship by the fall
and death of Judas. Consider the scriptural
testimony in connection with this appoint-
ment. Our Lord, before His departure to HP-


PRESBYTERIAN POLITY.
mediatorial throne, commanded the disciples to
tarry in Jerusalem until they were endued with
power from on high. “ Behold,” He said, “ I
send the promise of My Father upon you, but
tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem until ye be
endued with power from on high.” Instead of
waiting, however, for the fulfilment of this
promise, they set to work in their own wisdom
to choose an Apostle to fill Judas’place, and
they chose Matthias. But was this act
approved of by the King and Head of the
Church ? I believe it was not. I believe they
made a mistake. This, to my mind, is evi-
denced by four circumstances (1) When they
chose Matthias they were not clothed with
Holy Ghost power, for the Spirit had not then
fallen upon them; (2) It is significant that
Matthias is never afterwards mentioned in the
Scriptures; (3) It is equally significant that
Our Lord himself, after this appointment of
Matthias, chose Paul to be an Apostle, appear-
ing unto him after His ascension for this very
purpose “to make him a minister and a
witness,” etc. (Acts xxvi., 16)', and, lastly,
in the description of the Great City—the
Holy Jerusalem—descending out of Heaven
from God. We read, in Rev. xxi. 14, “ And
the wall of the city had twelve foundations,
and in them the names of the twelve Apostles
ot the Lamb.” Of eleven of these we have no
doubt—we know who they were. But who is
the twelfth? Judas, Matthias, or Paul?
Surely on this point there can be no doubt.
We hold then that the Apostles were chosen
directly by Christ himself, and were chosen,
among other things, to be the special witnesses
of His Resurrection. Paul himself was such a
witness, even although he was not called until
alter our Lord’s Ascension. Thus, in I. Cor.,
15, when enumerating the appearances of the
risen Redeemer, he says (verses 7 and 8),
“ After that He was seen of James, then of all
the Apostles, and, last of all, He was seen by
me also, as of one born out of due time ” The
Apostles, moreover, were endowed with the


PRESBYTERIAN POLITY.
power of working miracles and of conferring
the Holy Ghost by the laying on of their hands.
They were the inspired expounders of the
Divine will, and the authorised founders of the
Christian Church, and, having served the pur-
pose for which they were sent, they have
disappeared out of the world, and, as Apostles,
have left no successors.
The Evangelists were missionaries who
travelled from place to place preaching the
Gospel, and who acted as delegates of the
apostles in founding and establishing churches.
Of these Phillip, Timothy, and Titus are
perhaps the most eminent examples.
The third class of officers, sometimes called
Presbuteroi and sometimes episkopoi , were
unlike the Evangelists in that they ivere
attached permanently to 'particular churches or
congregations. Their office was to attend to
the spiritual necessities of the people to whom
they ministered.
The fourth class, the deacons, were also
permanent officers to particular congregations ,
and to them was entrusted the temporal
concerns of the people, especially the duty of
ministering to the poor.
Now it is in connection with the two last
mentioned classes of office bearers —the Bishops
or Elders, and the Deacons—that we would
establish our first main principle of Apostolic
Church Government, namely, That the perman-
ent officebearers in the Primitive Church were
elected by the vote of the people. That the
presbuteroi or espishopoi the Elders or
Bishops —were so elected is proved from Acts
14. 23, where we read that Paul and Barnabas
ordained them Elders in every church. The
Greek word here translated, ordained is
Cheirotonesantes, which means literally to
elect by show of hands. That this is the exact
meaning of the word is freely admitted by the
highest authorities.
In the same way, i.e., election by popular
suffrage, the Deacons were chosen. In the
sixth chapter of the Aets we have an account


PRESBYTERIAN POLITY.
of the first appintment of these officers. Up
to this time the Apostles had themselves
attended to the material as well as the spiritual
wants of the disciples, but owing to the increas-
ing number of believers the burden at last grew
too heavy for them, and accordingly in the
second verse weread, “ Thatthe twelve called the
multitude of the disciples unto them and said;
«it Is not reason that we should leave the
word of God and serve tables. Wherefore look
ye out among you seven men of honest report,
full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we
may appoint over this business.’ And the
saying pleased the whole multitude, and they
chose {exelexanto, elected) Stephen, a man full
of faith and of the Holy Ghost, and Phillip a :d
Prochorus, etc., whom they set before the
Apostles, and when they had prayed they laid
their hands on them.”
Here then are two facts fully sufficient to he
the basis of a principle. The fourteenth
chapter of the Acts clearly shows that the
Elders or Bishops were chosen by popular
suffrage, while this chapter furnishes us with
an example of the whole multitude of the
disciples choosing (electing) seven men to be
deacons. The conclusion that follows from
this evidence it is impossible to evade, namely,
that in the Apostolic church the permanent
office-bearers to a particular chui eh were
chosen by the people.
The second principle which we would
establish is That in the Apostolic church the
office of Bishop and Elder was one and the
same— two appelations which distinguished the
same office and the same order. This is so
manifest in the New Testament Scriptures
that it can hardly be disputed. Thus in Titus
1, 5-7, the terms are synonymous, and are used
interchangeably. Paul writing to Titus says .
“ For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou
shouldest set in order the things that are
wanting, and ordain elders ( presbuterous ) in
every city as I had appointed thee.” If any be
blameless .... for a Bishop ( episkopos )


PRESBYTERIAN POLITY.
must be blameless as the stewart of God, etc.,
Here you observe the term Elder {presbuteroa)
used at the commencement of the passage is
exchanged for the term Bishop ( epishopos ) in
the conclusion. An Elder must have such and
such qualifications Why? Because a bishop
must be blameless.
Another passage of a similar kind is Acts
xx. 17, 28. Paul was travelling from Greece to
Jerusalem, and touching at Miletus, a seaport
of lonia, 35 miles from Ephesus, he sent
thither for the elders ( presbuterous ) of the
church to come and meet him.
When they came, among other things
he said unto them ; “ Take heed therefore
unto yourselves, and to all the flock over
which the Holy Ghost hath made you Over-
seers (Bishops— epishopous) to feed the Church
of God, which he hath purchased with His
own blood. Here again the term Elders used
at the beginning is exchanged for the term
Bishops at the close. No further evidence is
needed to show that the terms (presbuteroa)
and ( espishopos ) Elder and Bishop were
applied in the Apostolic Church to the same
order and the same office.
The third principle which we would establish
is, That in the Apostolic church every separate
congregation had a plurality of Elders or
Bishops. The fourteenth chapter of the
Acts describes a missionary journey of
Paul and Barnabas. They visited Derbe,
Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch, presenting
the Gospel and confirming the souls of the dis-
ciples, and exhorting them to continue in the
faith. And the Sacred Historian then informs
us of this important fact (verse 23): “ And when
they had ordained them elders in every church,
and had prayed with fasting, they commended
them to the Lord on Whom they believed.”
We have already seen that in the Church of
Ephesus there was a plurality of elders (Acts
xx. 17). Other passages bearing on this point
might be quoted, such as Paul’s salutation to
the church at Philippi (Philippians i, 1),


PRESBYTERIAN POLITY.
which he addressed not to any chief elder
or Bishop, but to the episkopois kai dia-
konois (“to the bishops and deacons”):
“Paul and Timotheus, the servants of
Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus
which are at Philippi with the bishops and
deacons.” With such evidence before us who
can resist the conclusion that in the primitive,
apostolic church there was to each congregation
a plurality of elders , or, if you prefer it, a
plurality of bishops.
The fourth principle which we would estab-
lish is, That the officers in the Apostolic
Church were ordained by the laying on of
the hands vf the Presbytery. The deacons
were so ordained. After their election by the
people, they were set before the Apostles, and
“ when they had prayed they laid their hands
on them ” (Acts vi. 6).
Paul and Barnabas were also thus set apart
to the work to which they were called by the
Holy Ghost (Acts xiii. 1-3) : “ Now there were
in the church which was at Antioch certain
prophets and teachers. • . . And as they
ministered unto the Lord and fasted the Holy
Ghost said, ‘ Separate me Paul and Barnabas
for the work whereunto I have called them.’
And when they had fasted and prayed and laid
their hands on them, they sent them away,”
In the same way Timothy was ordained, as
is evidenced by Paul’s admonition to him
(1 Tim. iv. 14); “ Neglect not the gift that is
in thee, which was given thee by prophecy with
the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery.”
These cases are surely sufficient to prove that
in the Apostolic Church the officers were set
apart to their work by an Act of Ordination,
with laying on of hands of the presbytery.
The fifth principle which we would establish
is, That in the Apostolic Church there existed
the privilege of appeal to an Assembly of
Elders and the right of government by these
in their corporate capacity. This is clearly
set forth in the 15th chapter of Acts, Here
we read that certain men came down to


PRESBYTERIAN POLITY.
Antioch from Judaea, and taught the church
there that circumcision was necessary to salva-
tion. Paul and Barnabas set themselves to
oppose these teachers, but in vain. It was
then agreed that certain of the churchy in
Antioch, including Paul and Barnabas, should
go up to Jerusalem and lay the case before the
Apostles and Elders. These delegates accord-
ingly came to Jerusalem, and were received
“by the Apostles and Elders.” And the
Apostles and Elders came together to consider
the matter. Discussion was engaged in, and
eventually a finding come to. This finding was
announced by the chairman, and the judgment
sent down to the church affected in an authori-
tative letter , and to this letter not only the
church at Antioch, but the churches of Syria
and Cilicia, yielded submission. These facts
are on the face ol the narrative. They cannot
be denied, and they establish beyond a doubt
the twofold principle which I have enunciated,
namely, that in the Apostolic Church there
existed the privilege of appeal to an Assembly
of Elders and the right of Government exer-
cised by them in their corporate capacity.
The sixth and last principle which we would
establish is, That in the Apostolic Church the
Lord Jesus Christ was recognised as the sole
King and Head of the Church. “In the New
Testament it is a distinctive feature that church
rulers did not render spiritual obedience to any
temporal potentate or to any ecclesiastical
chief. There is no provision made in the Gos-
pel for the supremacy of a Christian, much less
of a Heathen, king in the things pertaining to
God.” On this matter the law of Christ is
express (Mark xii. 17) : “ Render to Caesar the
things which are Caesar’s, and to God the
things which are God’s.” In all temporal
matters the members of the Apostolic Church
regarded it as their duty to yield obedience to
the civil rulers of the countries in which they
lived ; in ail spiritual matters they did homage
to a higher power. When Peter and John
were brought before the civil authorities, and


PRESBYTERIAN POLITY.
commanded “ not to speak at all nor teach in
the name of Jesus,” they answered and said,
“ Whether it be right in the sight of God to
hearken unto you more than unto God, judge
ye; for we cannot but speak the things which
we have seen and heard.”
Nor in the Apostolic Church was supreme
spiritual power invested in any office-bearer
however distinguished he might be by
his gifts, his sufferings, or his abundant
labours. We find no trace in the New Testa-
ment, for example, of a vicar of Christ
invested with supreme spiritual control, no
trace of even an incipient pope or
patriarch, no trace of even a cardinal or
an archbishop. The Apostles themselves
were 'pares inter pares —equals among equals.
How much more the Episkopoi or Presbuteroi,
the Bishops or Elders, to whom they entrusted
the government of the Churches founded by
them ? The private members of these churches
were enjoined to yield obedience to these
office-bearers (Heb. xiii., 17), “Obeythem that
have the rule over you and submit yourselves,
for they watch for your souls as they that must
give account, that they may do it with joy and
not with grief; for that is unprofitable for
youbut, on the other hand, these office-
bearers were enjoined not to act as lords over
God’s heritage, but to be examples of the flock
(I. Pet. v., 3), “ Feed the flock of God which is
among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by
constraint but willingly; not for filthy lucre but of
a ready mind; neither as being lords over
God’s heritage but being ensamples to the flock.
And, when the Chief Shepherd shall ap-
pear, ye shall receive a crown of glory,” etc.
Even the Apostles did not claim to have
dominion over the people’s faith, but only to
be helpers of their joy (11. Cor. i,, 24), “ Not
for that we have dominion over your faith, but
are helpers of your joy,” etc.
Not only, moreover, are such titles as Vicar
of Christ, Pope, Patriarch, Cardinal, and Arch-
bishop unknown in the New Testament, but


PRESBYTERIAN POLITY.
there is no truce of such spiritual ' authority
as these modern church 'potentates claim.
As I have already said, even the Apostles
themselves were pares inter pares —nay, more
than this, they humbly ranked themselves
fellow-elders with those whom they ordained.
Thus Peter, in his first epistle, sth chapter,
and Ist verse, says, “ The Elders which are
among you I exhort, who am also an Elder.”
The claim set up by the Papacy for the
supreme spiritual authority of Peter, because of
Christ’s words to him (Matt, xvi., 19), “ And I
will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven. And whatsoever thou shalt bind on
earth shall be bound in Heaven ; and what-
soever thou shalt loose on earth shalt be loosed
in Heaven ’’—gave him no special authority,
for what the Saviour here says to him, He said
afterwards, almost in the very same words, to
the whole body of the Disciples. While the
context shows in the latter passage (Matt,
xviii., 15), that the authority thus given
extended only to matters of discipline. “ More-
over, if thy brother shall trespass against thee,
go and tell him his fault between thee and him
alone; if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained
thy brother. But if he will not hear thee, then
take with thee one or two more, that in the
mouth of two or three witnesses every word may
be established. And if he shall neglect to hear
them, tell it unto the Church ; but if he neglect
to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an
heathen man and a publican.” And then follow
these words, “Verily I say unto you what-
soever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in
Heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on
earth shall be loosed in Heaven.” Thus the
very same authority which was delegated to
Peter in the first passage is delegated to the
whole body of believers, or, in other words, to
the Church in the second passage, while the
context shows, as I have already said, that this
authority extended only to matters of discipline.
And yet this is the basis on which the Pope
builds his claim to universal spiritual supremacy.


PRESBYTERIAN POLITY.
He claims to be the successor of Peter. Papists
who rely on this celebrated passage to prove the
spiritual supremacy of the Pope would do well
to read it to the close, and mark the words with
which Jesus immediately thereafter rebuked
Peter (Matthew xvi. 23) : “Get thee behind
Me, Satan; thou art an offence unto Me : for
thou savourest not the things that be of God,
but those that be of men.” In the New Testa-
ment, moreover, you cannot find a trace of
Peter claiming any such supremacy. Neither
is he ever represented as exercising any such
authority. Not once do we find him even
nominating an office-bearer to ecclesiastical
office, or exercising control over the inferior
office-bearers. On the contrary, we find Paul,
on one noted occasion, when he (Peter) ex-
hibited some of his old tergiversation repri-
manding him “ because he was to be blamed.”
The Scriptures, therefore, furnish us with no
evidence that supreme spiritual authority was
deposited in any ecclesiastical office-bearer any
more than in any temporal prince. What they
do teach is that Christ is the only Head of the
Church. Turn to the following passages:—
Eph. i. 20-23, “Which He (God) wrought in
Christ, when He raised Him from the dead,
and set Him at His own right hand in the
heavenly places, far above all principality, and
power, and might, and dominion, and every
name that is named, not only in this world,
but in that which is to come : and hath put all
things under His feet, and gave Him to he
Head over all things to the Church, which is
His Body, the fulness of Him that filleth all in
allEph, v. 23, “ For the husband is head of
the wife, even as Christ is the Head of the
Church ; ” Col. i. 18, “ And He (Christ) is the
Head of the Body, the Church : Who is the be-
ginning, the First-born from the dead ; that in
all things He might have the pre-eminence.”
These passages are plain enough. No man
can read them without understanding them,
and they certainly establish our sixth principle,
that in the Apostolic Church the only headship


PRESBYTERIAN POLITY.
acknowledged was that of Christ. Now, these
six principles, you will observe, “cever the
whole platform of church government, each
rising in importance in an ascending series
from popular election to the headship of Christ.”
Without doubt these principles are revealed in
the Scriptures, and the question now is: Which
of these existing forms of church government—
Prelacy, or Independency, or Presbytery—pos-
sesses them, or which embodies the greatest
number of them. To see this we must bring
these systems to the test; we must compare
them with the standard set up.
The first principle established is, that in the
Apostolic Church the office-bearers were chosen
by the people. Well, in the Presbyterian
Church they are so chosen. Among the Inde-
pendents also this principle is preserved in its
integrity; with them, as with us, every ecclesi-
astical office-bearer is chosen by the people.
In none of the prelatic churches, however, is
this so.
The second principle established is, that in
the Apostolic Church the office of elder and
bishop is identical. In the Presbyterian
Church this principle also obtains. Every
elder is a bishop, and every bishop is an elder.
In common parlance we do not speak of our-
selves as bishops, but as ministers. We do
claim, however, to be the representatives of
the primitive church bishops. It is true that
in our church there are two departments of the
office : that of teaching and that of ruling ; but
the'office itself is one. That such a division
existed in the Apostolic Church, moreover, is
made manifest in 1 Tim. v. 17: “ Let the
elders that rule well be counted worthy of
double honour, especially they who labour in
word and doctrine.”
Among the independents this principle is
also acknowledged and practised. Every one
of their pastors fills the office of bishop or elder,
as such office existed in the Apostolic Church,
and none of them claims any authority over
his brethren. In none of the prelatic churches,


PRESBYTERIAN POLITY.
however , is this principle observed. If the
rector or the parish priest be regarded as the
representative of the apostolic bishop, then
what becomes of the modern bishop or arch-
bishop ? Of the deans and canons and the
archdeacons ? Of the pope and the patriarch ?
None of these are parish ministers. Their
jurisdiction is over each other, and there is not
a single scrap of authority to warrant their
ecclesiastical existence.
The third principle established is, that in the
Apostolic Church there was a plurality of elders
or bishops to each congregation. And such is
the pra tice in every Presbyterian church at the
present day. Each of our congregations has a
session composed of men ordained to the office
of the eldership. It is at this point that Inde-
pendency first fails- Among them there is only
one bishop or elder or minister. A single
pastor with deacons under him is the promi-
nent feature that the independent system
everywhere presents. “An arrangement than
which none can be more opposed to the
plurality of elders that existed in each congre-
gation in primitive times.” In the prelatic
churches also, this principle is not acknow-
ledged. Each congregation is under the care
of one rector or priest. When another is called
in he is a mere curate, and is void of all
ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
The fourth principle established is, that in
the Apostolic Church ordination was the act of
the presbytery, that is, of a plurality of elders.
The Presbyterian Church acknowledges this
principle in its entirety, and invariably carries
it into practice. All her ministers and elders
are set apart by the laying on of the hand of
the elders. Among the Independents, how-
ever, the act of ordination is not considered
essential; frequently, it is considered unneces-
sary, and at best it is considered a matter of
option—left in each case to the individual
choice. In the prelatic churches again, ordina-
tion is the act of a single prelate. In the
Anglican establishment the prelate may ask


PRESBYTERIAN POLITY.
some of his clergy to unite with him, hut it is
his presence , not theirs, that is essential to the
act.
The fifth principle established is, that in the
Apostolic Church there existed the privilege of
appeal to an assembly of elders, and the right
of government exercised by them in their
associate capacity. In the Presbyterian
Church this two-fold principle is fully recog-
nised. It is indeed the main plank in our
system, and is the safeguard of our liberties.
Because of it an injustice to a congregation or
a brother is hardly possible. If any member
feels agrieved he can bring his trouble at once
before the session of his church—an assembly
of elders. If the finding of the session does
not satisfy him, he can then carry his appeal
to the Presbytery—a still larger assembly of
elders; and if the Presbytery’s decision be still
unsatisfactory, he can have recourse to the
General Assembly—to brethren, elders gathered
together from the most distant parts, and who,
being thus free from any local bias or preju-
dice, can calmly and dispassionately adjudicate
upon the matter in dispute with all fairness to
the parties concerned.
Among the Independents, however, nothing
of this kind can exist. The distinctive feature
of their system precludes all appeal. The
decision of the pastor and deacons and people,
assembled in a church meeting, is final in every
case : “no matter how partial or unjust their
decision is felt to be, there is no power of
bringing their sentence under the review of a
less prejudiced or a more enlightened tribunal.”
In the prelatic churches also there is no
power of appeal. In the Anglican Church, it
is true, an appeal may be made to the courts
of law, to the Queen’s Privy Council, or some
other such tribunal, but the practice is unknown
of bringing any matter, in dispute, for
consideration before the Assembly of Elders,
by way of appeal.
The sixth principle established is: that
in the Apostolic Church the only recognised


PRESBYTERIAN POLITY.
head of the Church was the Lord Jesus
Christ. This is a truth recognised in its
entirety by all Presbyterians. We rank
it as one of our most cherished as well as
one of our distinctive principles. We are glad
to say that it is so also with the Independents.
It is not so, however, in the Prelatic Churches.
In the Anglican Church the monarch is by act
of Parliament the recognised head of the
Church. No person can be received into the
ministry of this church until he has subscribed
this article ; “ That the King’s Majesty, under
God, is the only Supreme Governor of this
realm .... as well in all spiritual, or eccles-
iastical things or causes, as temporal.” In the
papacy, the Pope is head, and in the Greek
Church the Patriarch is head.
The result of the foregoing analysis, then, is
this. Of the six principles of Church Govern-
ment which existed in the primitive Apostolic
Church, not one is to be found in the Prelatic
Churches, not even in the Protestant Episcopal
Church. We hold, therefore, that while in the
matter of doctrine there is a general agreement
between Anglicans and ourselves, on the
matter of church government, their system is
a purely human organisation, without any
sanction or warrant in the word of God. In
the Independent church, again, we find three
of these principles, acknowledged and acted
upon, and the other three overloohed. We
conclude therefore that while the Independent
system approaches more closely to the pattern
of the Primitive times than that which exists in
the Prelatic system, still it is not entitled to
be regarded as Apostolic. In the Presby-
terian system on the other hand all the six
principles ar6 acknowledged and practised,
“and we know of no other denomination in the
world of which the same thing could be said
without departure from the truth,” We con-
clude, then, that in the matter of Church
government and discipline, our Presbyterian
system is apostolic and Divine. We believe,
also, as enlightenment advances, and mankind


PRESBYTERIAN POLITY.
become more free from the errors, supersti-
tions, and the trammels of the past, our system
will become universal . Democracy is the
tendency of the age, all the world over, and
our Presbyterian system is democratic, if it is
anything. Popular suffrage, the election
of their own officers by the people, equal
REPRESENTATION BY TEACHING AND RULING
ELDERS IN OUR CHURCH COURTS, THE RIGHT
OF APPEAL AFFORDED THE HUMBLEST MEMBER
OR ADHERENT, AND THE EXCLUSION OF ANY
SPIRITUAL DOMINION BY EITHER PRINCE
or prelate, are principles not only Scrip-
tural, but right in the line of the advan-
cing thought of the nations of the world. And
it is ours to help forward such a movement.
We should never forget that, as a Church, a
great trust has been committed to us, and this
will be best discharged by each minister striv-
ing, to the best of his ability, to cultivate that
portion of the vineyard which is committed to
his individual care. It is ours to mould the
opinions of our people, and especially of the
rising generation, and we should see to it that
they are Presbyterians, not only in name , hut
by Conviction. In this way we shall make our
Church strong, for just in proportion to the
strength of the conviction of the adherents and
members of our Church on this point will be
the strength of the Church. A man who can
be an Anglican to-day, a Congregationalist
to-morrow, and a Presbyterian the third day,
will never be of much value to any denomina-
tion with which he happens to connect him-
self. We want men in our Presbyterian
Church like our Covenanted forefathers, who
rather than sacrifice their principles on this
point, yielded up their lives—men who, with
the stars sailing overhead, as silent witnesses of
their devotion and their wrongs, and the night
winds sighing round the lonely mountain side,
or howling through the rugged glen, wafting
the echo of their praise in circling strains to
heaven, held communion with their God, and
defied the rage of men. And if we are to have


PRESBYTERIAN POLITY.
such men we must make them , and make
them by our teaching. We cannot expect
CONVICTION WHEN THERE IS NO INSTRUCTION.
Fathers and Brethren, —
I am far from saying that this teaching
should be substituted for the Gospel of Christ
—the glad tidings “ that Jesus came into the
world to save sinners.” No, no; this must
ever be the main theme of the pulpit. What-
ever else a minister may teach, if he teach not
this continually, habitually, faithfully, and
earnestly, he is not fulfilling the mission on
which he has been sent. When we who are
ministers shall die, and come before the Lord
to give an account of our stewardship, it will be
a sorry business for us if we can only say,
“ Lord, I have never failed to preach the
dogmas of the church to which I belonged, if
we cannot also add, “ And, Lord, I never
ceased to cry to the immortal souls committed
to my charge.” “ Behold the Lamb of God,
Who taketh away the sin of the world.” In-
deed, I can conceive of no doom so terrible as
that of the man who, while as Christ’s
ambassador to men, fails to hold up Christ before
the people; who feeds them with the stones of
polemics, while he should be breaking unto
them the bread of life. No ; let us, as minis-
ters continue to preach Christ and Him cruci-
fied fully and faithfully; let us continue to
exemplify in our lives and characters, the
Christlike life, the purity which we inculcate
upon others; let us redouble, if it be pos-
sible, our attention to the people, and
spare no pains and no self-denial to carry the
message of life to every hearth and home
throughout the colony; “ let us visit the sick,
instruct the ignorant, comfort them that mourn,
sympathise with the poor and the oppressed,
and lend a helping hand to every scheme that
has for its object the promotion of benevolence
and virtue,” the glory of God, and the good of
humanity. Let us in everything study to show
ourselves “ approved unto God —workmen that
need not to be ashamed.” But let us also be


PEE BYTERIAN POLITY.
assured of this, that we will neither serve
Christ nor the Church aright if we fail to
deeply engrave on the hearts and minds of our
people the principles of our Presbyterian
system—
“ His Testimony and His Law
In Israel He did place,
And charged our fathers it to show
To their succeeding race.
That so the race which was to come
Might well them learn and know,
And sons unborn who should arise
Might to their sons them show.”
May God bless and prosper our Church !
SUSUO




TELEPHONE 1522.
* k *
•
1508 00246572 7
MARC HA NT’S
