









PEESENT- DAY
SLAYEEY:
AN ENQUIRY
INTO THE PEESENT CONDITIONS OF THE WORKERS
OF TO-DAT;
WITH
PRACTICAL HINTS
AS TO HOW INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM IS TO BE
OBTAINED.
“ He that will not work, neither shall he eat.”
’Publishkd—January 21sI. 1883.




INDEX.
James Eussell Lowell on Slavery 5
Is Slavery Abolished ? 5
Are all Men Free ? 5
The Present State of Affairs 7
A Prophecy 9
How Present-day Slavery is caused 10
How Freedom is to be Obtained ... ... ... ... 11
The Five “ Alls” 12
Health, Freedom, and Happiness 13
Prosperity 12
Corollary ... 14
The Present System 15
A Perfect System •• ... 17
What Do Tow Say I 9
Our System ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• I 9
Examples ... 23
The Land 27
Valedictory ... 29
Special Note ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 32
|M336S/.f1437& fA.efr




Present Day Slavery
Slavery ain’t of nary colour;
’Taint the black hide makes it worse;
All as it cares for in a fellow
Is just to make him fill its purse.
Labouring man and labouring woman
Have one glory and one shame —
Everything that’s done inhuman,
Injures all of them the same.
—The Biglow Papers, by J. R. Lowell.
The English-speaking races are very fond of
pluming themselves on having abolished slavery.
Have they done it P
IS SLAVERY ABOLISHED?
We will venture to assert that it is merely the
name that is abolished : slavery itself still exists ;
is, in fact, more widespread and crushing than ever ;
only we do not now call it slavery.
Were slavery abolished, all men would be free.
ARE ALL MEN FREE ?
Can any intelligent man conscientiously answer
“ Yes ” to that question ?


Is the wage-earner a free man? Does not the
pressure of an over-crowded labour market subject
him to a slavery far more galling than ever the
negro suffered ?
The fear of loss of employment, with its attendant
poverty, and possible starvation for wife and children
as well as himself, has a far greater coercive power
than ever slave-driver’s whip had.
The negro working in the West Indian Islands,
or amongst the plantations of the Southern States of
America, was fed, clothed and housed sufficiently,
had medical attendance in sickness, and when too
old to work was still supplied with the necessaries of
life.
It is true that he had to work while able to work ;
that idleness was punished by the slave-driver’s
whip ; that insubordination was promptly suppressed.
But what of that ? In what way is the wage-
earner, the industrial slave of to-day, better off
than the negro, the chattel slave of the past ?
Does he not have to work while able to work ?
Is not idleness in him as promptly and severely
punished by loss of employment, poverty, destitu-
tion, and starvation, as in the chattel slave by the
slave-driver’s whip ? Is not any attempt at insub-
ordination immediately met by a threat of dismissal ?
And is not that as effectually repressive as chains
and fetters ?
We will venture to assert that the industrial slave
of to-day is not only no better off than the chattel
slave of the days gone by, but that he is far worse
off.


The chattel slave was always sure of the neces-
saries of life at the least. He was not starved to
death. He was never compelled to sleep in (he open
air for want of a roof to shelter him. He could
get food, clothing, shelter, and all the actual neces-
saries of life by working for them ; and he always
had the opportunity of working.
The industrial slave of to-day can obtain most of
the necessaries of life by working for them —when
he can get the chance to work ; but he is not always
sure of having that opportunity.
You will say, perhaps, that the wage-earner is a
free man, because he is free to sell his labour in the
best market he can find for it. But suppose there
is no market for it; how then ? Suppose the market
is already so over supplied with labour that, to sell
his at all, he must accept such a remuneration as
will barely keep him from starving. Is he then so
much better off than the chattel slave ?
THE PRESENT STATE OF AFFAIRS.
Look around the civilised world at the present
time ! "What do you see P
A restless, deadly struggle for the means of exist-
ence ; a growing impoverishment of the working
classes ; a constantly increasing number of unem-
ployed working-men; pauperism and crime daily
becoming more common, and yet more appalling;
commercial depression ; stagnation of trade ; gaols,
benevolent asylums, workhouses and lunatic asylums
overcrowded; men and women, willing to work, yet


dying of starvation through lack of opportunity to
employ their labour in producing the means of
subsistence ; one man slaving his health and
strength away in working at high pressure for
twelve, sixteen, or perhaps twenty hours out of
every twenty-four, while another man looks on and
envies this poor, overworked, industrial slave; for
Tie is slowly dying of starvation, through inability to
get work of any sort, and would much rather work
to death than starve to death: and all the while
immense fortunes are accumulating in the hands of
those who never do any work, either muscular or
mental, to earn the wealth which they enjoy or
hoard.
You see, too, a rapidly-growing discontent, and
a continually-strengthening conviction that the
present conditions of existence must be altered.
Socialism, Anarchism, Nihilism, and various other
similar organisations are the outward and visible
signs of this discontent; and the expression of a
stern determination to alter all these social, political,
and industrial conditions which are found to bear
eo heavily on the wealth-producing classes, and to
favour so unduly the wealthy idlers, butterflies,
and parasites of the social organism. It is to right
these wrongs that the Socialist, the Anarchist, the
Nihilist, and other reformers are working, thinking,
and suffering. They may differ, they do differ
amongst themselves, as to the means to be used to
attain their object; but the object itself is the same
with all, and that object is nothing less than the
total abolition of poverty and all unjust social con-
ditions, and the establishment of evenhanded justice
between man and man ; the giving to each man


exactly what he earns; the enforcement of the old
law that “He that will not work shall noteat;”
and the inauguration of an era of universal peace,
prosperity, and happiness.
A PROPHECY.
Call these people “ dreamers,” if you will; but,
as surely as the sun shines, as surely as men must
die, so surely will all this come to pass. It may be
that it will not be by the means advocated by these
earnest men and women that this great change will
be brought about; but it will come, nevertheless.
There will come a time when life shall not be a
mere hopeless, desperate, deadly struggle for exist-
ence ; when new inventions in machinery, instead
of still further impoverishing and crushing those
who gain their living by the work of their hands,
as now, shall give to all decrease of toil, leisure; the
means of comfortable subsistence, and opportunity
to develop and improve their intellectual and moral
faculties ; when war shall be unknown, for there
shall be no greed of territory or military glory to
incite to war; when there shall be no paupers or
criminals, for all shall be earning a sufficient sub-
sistence by the work of their own hands or brains ;
when, there being no privileged, pauperised, or
criminal classes to support, the worker will receive
the full fruits of his toil, and shall live in comfort
on the product of three or four hours per day of
moderate exertion, instead of, as now, having to
toil unremittingly for from eight to eighteen hours
out of every twenty-four for a mere starvation


wage; when there shall be no masters and servants,
but all shall be co-partners in the production and
distribution of the common stock of wealth; when,
all restrictions on the production of wealth being
removed, the whole community shall be immensely
enriched, so that those comforts and luxuries which
are now within reach of only the wealthy few, shall
be common to all.
HOW PRESENT DAY SLAVERY IS CAUSED.
The accumulation of land into large estates is one
of the main factors in the production of industrial
slavery.
Labour is the creator of wealth ; but labour is
impotent to create wealth if there is nothing for it
to operate upon. Labour is not creative, in the
sense of being competent to produce something from
nothing.
Land is the source of all wealth; but it yields
nothing that can properly be termed wealth, until
labour is exerted upon it. To produce wealth from
land, labour must be employed, and the more
intimately these two factors of wealth production
are brought into contact with each other, the greater
will be the production of wealth.
But the accumulation of land into large estates,
virtually has the effect of restricting cultivation,
and thereby decreasing the production of wealth.
But that is not all. The land being practically locked
up, by being withheld from cultivation—except
upon terms which leave to the cultivator so small a


portion of the just reward of his labour that he
cannot produce at a profit sufficient to fairly
remunerate him—a very large proportion of those
who ought to be engaged in the cultivation of the
soil is forced into the over-crowded labour markets
of the towns, and is brought into destructive com-
petition with the already overworked and underpaid
employees in factories, offices, shops, &c. The
mechanical trades are over supplied with labour ;
and so of all the various branches of industry con-
nected with town life.
Employers in these lines, having a large stock of
surplus labour at command, are rendered virtually
independent of their employees, and can therefore
dictate terms. They can compel their employees to
work any hours, and to accept any wages, which
they may choose to name.
Under these conditions, the employee becomes a
veritable slave in all but the mere name.
HOW FREEDOM IS TO BE OBTAINED.
We have shown that the accumulation of land into
large estates is the main cause of industrial slavery,
and of all the ills which accompany it. Did space
and time permit, it would be easy to show that the
same cause operates in the production of stagnation
in trade; that to it, also, are to be traced pauperism
and crime ; and that from it proceed, either directly
or indirectly, nearly all the evils which afflict the
civilisation of our day.
It follows, therefore, that the cure for these evils
must be the removal or suppression of the cause


which produces them. Remove the cause, and the
effect will cease. While causes continue to operate,
the effects will be constant.
Hence, to obtain freedom and prosperity, these
large estates must be broken up, and the land
brought under cultivation. Small freeholds must
be multiplied, and cultivation encouraged by every
legitimate means.
THE FIVE “ALLS.”
Many years ago, a painter produced a picture
which is highly instructive to those who study it.
At the top was a monarch, in robes of state, and
seated on a throne ; beneath this was inscribed, “ I
govern all.” To the left was a lawyer in wig and
gown, and the inscription below was, “ I plead for
all.” To the right was a parson, in surplice and
bands, and below him was written, “ I pray for all.”
In the centre stood a soldier, armed and accoutred
for war; below him the words, “ I fight for all.
At the foot was a farmer, guiding the plough, and
below this, “ I pay for all.”
That last is far away the most useful man to the
community. That picture is worth thinking over.
It is not necessary that every man should be a
farmer. It is well that some men should be
mechanics, that some should be storekeepers, clerks,
engineers, surveyors, literary men, and so on. But
the farmer —and under that generic name we
include dairymen, poultry farmers, fruit growers,
market gardeners, et hoc genus omne —is absolutely
essential to the community. He alone cannot be


donejwithout. We do not want every man to turn
farmer, 5 but it certainly is necessary that a much
larger proportion of our population than at present
should be engaged in making use of the soil; in the
direct production of wealth from the land.
HEALTH, FREEDOM, AND HAPPINESS,
These desiderata are all within the reach of the
man who devotes his labour to the cultivation of his
own freehold. Health, because no other occupation
is so healthy as those connected with the cultivation
of the soil. Freedom, because he who with his own
labour produces his own living from his own free-
hold is the only man on the face of this earth who
is really free, in the truest sense of the word ; he
has neither landlord nor employer to interfere with
him, baulk his will, or domineer over him; he is his
own master. Happiness, because being healthy,
free, able to make an honest living by his own
labour, secured against poverty, and conscious that
his work is of benefit to the world, and that he
fairly earns what he enjoys, he possesses at once all
the constituents of happiness—viz., health, inde-
pendence, a clear conscience, and freedom from all
exhausting care and worry.
PROSPERITY.
Taking even the financial point of view, the
farmer still comes out ahead of all competitors.
The mechanic or clerk who can average £3 per
week all the year round is exceptionally fortunate


Let a man put the same honest work and intelli-
gence into the cultivation of his own freehold land,
that he would have to put into the work of any
mechanical trade, to satisfy an employer, and he
can easily make from £250 to £lOOO a year.
Careful calculations from reliable data give the
following results as to the profits obtainable from
the use of land :
Per Acre,
roni per annum.
General Farming, including Grazing ... from =£3o to =£Bo
Tobacco Growing ... ... ... ••• » £6O to ,£ll2
Bee-Keeping ... ... ... ••• » £76 „ .£l2O
Poultry Farming ... ... ... ••• » £66 ~ .£l5O
Market Gardening » £l6O „ <£2oo
Fruit Growing ... ... ... ••• » £66 ~ £6OO
COROLLARY.
If men can do so much better for themselves by
working for themselves upon their own land, than
by working for an employer at any mechanical
trade, or by working on leased land for the benefit
of a landlord ; why do so many still suffer under the
system of industrial slavery ?
We have shown that a man can be healthier,
happier, more prosperous, and far more free by
working for himself on his own freehold, than ever
he can be if working for an employer or a landlord.
Why, then, should he remain a slave ?
We believe that the chief, if not the only, reason
lies in the fact that the great majority of working
men do not think for themselves. Brought up to
be clerks, mechanics, labourers, or shop-assistants,


their thoughts are directed exclusively to the
obtaining and keeping of situations in those par-
ticular lines, and to the solution of the, to them, ever
puzzling problem of “ how to make both ends
meetand they never pause to consider whether
some other way of making a living may not be open
to them. They are willing to work, but someone
else must do the most of their thinking for them.
Shops, warehouses, factories, offices, and all the
occupations connected with town life are over
supplied with labour. The soil, on the other hand,
is lying idle and unproductive for want of hands to
till it; and the over supply of labour in the towns,
and the consequent stagnation of trade, are both
caused by deficient use of the natural opportunity
of wealth production provided by the soil of the
country.
Let the over-worked and under-paid artisan
invest his small savings in land, and, as soon as
possible, devote his labour to the cultivation of that
land, and he immediately becomes a free man' and,
shortly after, a 'prosperous one. He does not need
to go in for hundreds of acres ; just two or three
acres, if intelligently cultivated, will yield him a far
larger income than ever he can earn at his trade.
He does not need a large capital either, for he can
buy on the deferred payment system, and, by being
content with small beginnings, a very few pounds
will give him a sufficient start in the using of his
land. But he objects, perhaps, to
THE PRESENT SYSTEM
of buying land by means of deferred payments.


Friends of his, it may be, have bought under that
system, have paid a considerable portion of the
purchase money, and then, through no fault of their
own, perhaps, have been behindhand in payment of
just one instalment; and have lost their land, and
forfeited every penny paid on it. He does not care
to run the risk of losing all his hard-earned savings
at one fell swoop like that, and we cannot blame
him.
The objections to the present system may be
summarised as follows :
I.—The practice of charging interest on the
balance owing. This is deceptive to all but those
whose occupations or studies have familiarised them
with the full meaning of interest. The average
man who buys under this system is surprised when
he finds what the accumulations of interest on the
constantly decreasing balance of his purchase
amount to, and he is generally inclined to think
that he has been swindled.
2.—Fines for being in arrears, A man may be
behindhand in payment of some of his instalments,
through mere carelessness or forgetfulness, or
through being ill, or out of work. In the latter
case, it comes rather hard on him to be fined for
not doing what he had no power to do. In any
case, the fines mean to him, at the very least, a
serious increase in the cost of his land.
3. —Forfeiture. This is the most objectionable
feature in the whole system. A man has paid, let
us say, £95 out of a total of £IOO, and is then
thrown out of work, or laid up by illness, and is
consequently unable to pay his next instalment


when it becomes due: he not only loses his land, but
his £9s—the savings, it may be, of years of toil
are forfeited. This is cruel; more, it is unjust.
Again. A man dies before he has finished paying
for his land. His widow has all that she can do to
provide food for herself and family. Yet she must
continue to pay the remaining instalments, or lose
the only property which her late husband left
behind him.
Let it not be supposed that we have taken the
trouble to point out all these evils without being
prepared to point out any remedy. That would be
merely a waste of time. We are about to submit to
you a greatly improved system of purchasing land
by means of deferred payments. But first let us
consider what should be the salient points of
A PERFECT SYSTEM
1, There should be no interest charged. The
purchaser would then know at once what liability
he was incurring, and would not be deluded into
paying more than the land was worth.
2. There should be no fines. Purchasers should
be encouraged to pay punctually, by the giving of
bonuses to those who did so. If a man knows that
he will receive, at the end of the year, a bonus of
say from £2 to £2O, for punctuality, he will never
be behindhand if he can help it. Encouragement
and help are better than coercion and punishment —
to say nothing of the injustice of punishing a man
for what is probably not his fault, but his mis-
fortune.


3. —There should be no forfeiture, unless for
wilful and deliberate default or fraud. If a man is
laid up by sickness, thrown out of work, or incapa-
citated from paying up by any cause which may
properly be termed misfortune, or “ bad luck,” he
should be allowed, say, three months’ grace, or any
reasonable extension of time which the circum-
stances of the case may require.
4. —There should also be provision made for
granting pecuniary assistance to any persons who
are temporarily distressed, so as to enable them to
avoid selling out to obtain bread,
5. —The principle of life insurance should be
incorporated into the system ; so as to provide for
the widow, or other inheritor, obtaining the land, or
its value, in the event of the death of the purchaser,
free from all further liability in regard to payment
of instalments. In other words, death of the pur-
chaser should cancel any debt then remaining, and
his widow or heir should be enabled to take full
legal possession of the land, without having any
further instalments to pay.
6. —Purchasers should be encouraged to make use
of their land, instead of merely holding for a specu-
lation. While no one makes any use of the land,
the value rises very slowly, and there is no produc-
tion of wealth to benefit either the community or
the individual. Directly a man starts to do some
work on his land, he benefits not only himself, but
all around him. To encourage him, bonuses should
be given for, say, the first ten houses erected.
7, —Purchasers should be given every facility to
enable them to view the land, without expense to


themselves, so that each one may be enabled to
choose the soil best suited to his requirements, and
so that each may be certain that he is not being
deluded into buying barren rocks or a bottomless
swamp, where he thought he was buying good,
fertile soil. It is not safe to buy simply “on the
plan.” You want to see the land itself.
8. —Every purchaser should be allowed to take
immediate possession of his land, and to start
cultivating, building, or otherwise improving it,
without having to wait until he has finished paying
for it. An industrious man could soon earn enough
out of the land to pay for it.
9. —The terms should be easy enough to bring
land within reach of all classes.
WHAT DO YOU SAY?
Is such a system good enough for you ?
Don’t say, “It is too good to be true,” or'“A
mere dream,” or “ Impracticable,” or “ There is no
one just enough or liberal enough to adopt such a
system.”
Such a system has been adopted, is now in opera-
tion, and is in every way a success. We are now
selling under that system.
OUE SYSTEM.
We offer you land enough to yield you a comfort-
able subsistence, if properly used, on terms which


are within the reach of the most poorly-paid
labourer. No interest is charged; no fines are
imposed; no forfeiture is possible, except by your
own deliberate default. We will summarise the
system as follows :
I.—The land is surveyed by competent surveyors,
and every lot is accurately pegged and numbered.
2. —Streets, roads, or avenues, fully sixty-six feet
in width, give access to every lot.
3. —All roads, avenues, or streets are cleared.
4. —The lots range in area from 2£ acres upward;
and every lot fronts a road sixty-six feet wide.
5. —The terms are equal monthly payments
extending over a period of five years, free of
interest.
6.—ln case of sickness, loss of employment, or
other reasonable cause, the purchaser can obtain
three months’ grace; that is, leave will be granted
him to discontinue his payments during that period :
but notice in writing, stating cause of discon-
tinuance, must be given. If sufficient cause be
shown, a further extension of time will be granted.
•—See Example 2.
7. —In the event of temporary financial pressure,
the purchaser will be granted a loan, free of
interest, of one-third of the amount paid in by him ;
provided that he has punctually paid not less than
six monthly instalments. —See Example 2.
8. —Should the purchaser die before he has com-
pleted payment, he can leave the land to his widow,
or whomsoever he may choose, and such person will
be entitled to that land without the payment of any


further instalments, or can receive in lieu thereof
a cheque for the full amount of purchase money.
No medical examination is required; the purchaser
merely has to sign a declaration as to general health
and age. In order to avoid extraordinary risks,
only persons between seven and fifty years of age
will be accepted as purchasers. In order to do
business on a thoroughly sound basis, it is necessary
to limit the risk attaching to any one life. The
maximum amount of assurance will therefore be
£3OO. Purchasers taking up more than £3OO worth
will be granted assurance within that limit, and will
receive discount, according to the area taken, on the
balance. —See Examples 1 and 3, and special note at
end of this book.
9. —No fines are imposed. Instead of fining those
who are in arrears, we give bonuses to those who
pay punctually. £3OOO will be distributed in
bonuses in the present case; £750 at the end of one
year from the date of issue of this pamphlet, £IOOO
at the end of the second year, and £1250 at the end
of the third year. In these distributions, each 2\
acre lot will count as one share, each 5-acre lot as
two shares, and so on; subject to the following
conditions; —Those who on every occasion through-
out the year pay their instalments within seven
days of the due date will be placed in Class 1; those
who invariably pay within fifteen days, but not
always within seven, will be placed in Class 2.
Being over fifteen days behind the due date in
payment of any one instalment during the year will
disqualify for that year, but the purchaser will be
eligible to compete in any subsequent distribution.
Being over seven days in arrears on any one occa-


If of the value
of £5t or over.
£
s.
d.
30
0
0
20
0
0
15
0
0
10
0
0
7
10
0
5
0
0
5
0
0
2
10
0
2
10
0
2
10
0
sion will disqualify for Class 1. Those in Class 1
will receive double as much per share as those in
Class 2, Unsold lots, if any, will participate as
first-class shares. Purchasers will be classed accord-
ing to the dates on which their instalments are
received by us. There is no lottery or art union
business about this. The distribution will be by
fair arithmetical division, and the amount of
dividend will depend upon the number of shares
entitled to participate.—See Example 4.
10. —Bonuses ranging from £2 10s. to £5O will be
awarded to those who within a certain period erect
houses on their land, in accordance with the follow-
ing table ; provided that the houses are completed
before June 30th, 1889, and that only the first ten
shall be entitled to any bonuses whatever.
BONUSES FOR BUILDING.
Order of Erection.
If <£loo or over.
If £l5O or over.
First house erected
Second „ ~
Third „ „
Fourth ~ ~
Fifth „
Sixth ~ ~
Seventh,, „
Eighth ~ ~
Ninth „ ~
Tenth ~ ~
£ s. d. £ s. d.
40 0 0 50 0 0
35 0 0 45 0 0
30 0 0
25 0 0
40 0 0
20 0 0
35 0 0
15 0 0
30 0 0
10 0 0
25 0 0
10 0 0
25 0 o
7 10 0
20 0 0
7 10 0
15 0 0
15 0 0
11.—-Tree railway ticket orders are issued to those
who wish to inspect the land with a view to buying.


Free vehicles are provided to take intending pur-
chasers over the ground ; and competent guides show
them the lots for sale.
12.—Should anyone purchase without first inspect-
ing the land, and, on inspection, be dissatisfied, his
money will be returned to him ; or, at his option, he
will be allowed to take any other lot then unsold in
lieu of that originally bought; subject, of course,
to payment of any difference in value ; provided
that inspection be made and the refund claimed
within one month from date of purchase.
13.—Country clients holding or representing not
less than twenty-five acres will have full travelling
expenses paid from any part of New South Wales
to the estate and back to their homes, if they desire
to inspect; half expenses will be allowed to anyone
holding or representing not less than fifteen acres.
Anyone holding or representing not less than thirty-
five acres will have travelling expenses from any
part of Australia allowed.
14.—Purchasers can take immediate possession of
their land, and can clear, fence, build, cultivate, let,
lease, or sell it, directly the contract is signed and
the first month’s instalment paid.
EXAMPLES.
I.—John Smith buys five acres under our system.
The price is £l2O, and the monthly instalment £2.
He signs the contract and pays his first instalment.
Before the second instalment is due, Smith dies,
leaving all his property to his widow. The widow


can claim either the land or a cheque for £l2O,
whichever she may prefer, without paying any
further instalments ; thus obtaining £l2O, or land
to that value, for one payment of £2.
2.— Thomas Jones buys 12£ acres ; price, £300;
monthly payment, £5. After punctually paying
all instalments during two years, Jones is thrown
out of work. Time passes on, he finds that another
instalment is due and he has no money to spare to
pay it. Had he bought under the ordinary system
he would lose his land and forfeit the £l2O already
paid ; but having bought under our new system, he
simply writes to us stating that he is out of work,
and claiming the three months’ grace, and he is
safe. Before the period of grace has expired, how-
ever, Jones finds his funds completely exhausted,
and applies for a loan. He is granted one-third of
the amount that he has paid in, £4O, and that gets
him out of his financial difficulty. He gets into
work again, repays the loan, and clears off all arrears
by degrees, and is thus not only saved from com-
plete ruin, but is enabled to lay the foundation of
future independence.
3. — Harry Brown buys one lot, the
monthly instalment on which is £l. After paying
regularly for a time, he is taken ill, obtains the three
months’ grace, but at the end of the second month
dies, leaving his property to his widow. Mrs.
Brown is an energetic woman, and has a notion that
she could make money by poultry-farming. She
therefore decides that the land would be more useful
to her than the £6O, the price of it, so she elects
to take the land. As Brown was two months in
arrears at the date of his death, she has to pay us


£2. If she cannot immediately spare the cash, any
reasonable time will be granted her.
4.— Charles Barry buys one five-acre lot, signs the
contract, pays his first month’s instalment, £2, and
immediately takes possession of his land. The lot
he has bought is already cleared, so he fences it in,
breaks up the soil, and puts in fruit trees. But he
has no notion of starving while his trees are growing,
so he plants vegetables and small fruits between his
trees. He puts up a house worth £SO, and, being
the first, obtains the £3O bonus. He is not the
sort of man that just sticks his plants in the ground
and goes to sleep while waiting for them to grow.
He takes a pride in cultivating properly. He pays
all his instalments on the due dates, and is conse-
quently entitled to participate in the bonus distri-
bution at the end of the year. The end of the year
comes, and Barry finds that his strawberries and
vegetables have yielded him £IOO over expenses;
that he has a £3O bonus for building, and a bonus for
punctuality of £2O, he holding two first-class shares.
The second, third, fourth and fifth years show similar
results. At the end of the fifth year, he balances
his accounts, and finds that he has paid £l2O for
his land, but has had in all £9O returned to him in
bonuses, besides having about £SOO as the profit
produced from cultivation after paying all expenses.
Having paid the last four years’ instalments out of
money received for produce, he has really made
nearly £6OO clear of all working expenses. Add
the bonuses, £9O, and he is worth nearly £7OO.
Considering that he and his son have done all the
work, and have supported Mrs. Barry and a couple
of younger children, as well as themselves, in


reasonable comfort, and that their working expenses
have included the purchase of a horse and cart, it
must be admitted that they have done very well.
But, after the fifth year, as the fruit trees come into
bearing, the profits become still larger.
The benefit of the bonus distributions is well
illustrated here, as, by means of these, Barry’s house
has cost him only £2O, instead of £5O, and his land
only £3O, instead of £l2O. The bonuses for
punctuality cannot, of course, be guaranteed to reach
the figures here given, as the amount of any one
dividend necessarily depends on the number partici-
pating in the distribution ; the actual amount might
therefore be either more or less —the one as likely
as the other.
We will suppose that at the end of the first year
there are only five shares entitled to rank as First
Class, and only fifteen in the Second Class. There
being £750 to divide, the First Class shares would
receive £6O each, and the Second Class £3O each,
as the following will show :
Five Ist Class shares at <£6o each ... <£3oo 0 0
Fifteen 2nd Class shares at .£3O each ... .£450 0 0
Total
<£7so 0 0
If the numbers happened to be twenty First
Class and sixty Second Class, the dividend would
be:—First Class, £l5 each; Second Class, £7 10s.
each. One five-acre lot on which all instalments
had been paid within seven days of the due date,
would therefore reckon as two First Class shares,
and the bonus would be £3O, while the whole
amount of instalments paid during the year would
be only £24.


Fifty 1st Class shares at .£12 10s. per share ...
£625
0
0
One hundred 2nd Class shares at £6 5s. per
share
£625
0
0
Total
£1250
0
0
It should be remembered that the total instal-
ments paid during the year on any one share
amount to only £l2, and that it depends entirely
upon the purchaser whether his share ranks as First
or Second Class.
In the third distribution, when £1250 will be
divided, he would receive as bonus more than the
total amount of instalments for the year, even if
there were 50 First Class and 100 Second Class shares
to participate in the distribution, provided his share
ranked as in the First Class.
Even supposing that every lot was sold, and that
the whole number ranked as First Class shares —a
highly improbable supposition —the bonus would
still be worth having. The dividends would be :
First year, £1; second year, £1 6s. 6d.; third year,
£1 13s. per share.
THE LAND.
Situation. —About twenty-six miles from Sydney,
in a direct line ; or, by rail and road, about thirty-
three or thirty-four. Kingswood Platform, on the
Great Western Railway, is within two and a half
miles of the Estate, and the road between the two is
fairly good, and is being improved. Penrith, which
is now a rapidly-improving town, is within four
miles of the land for sale. Sheltered from the cold


winds by the lofty heights of the Blue Mountains
and surrounded by a thriving, settled and evidently
prosperous district, this grand Estate, which is
named “Llandilo,” is in every respect a desirable
site for fruit-growing, poultry farming and similar
pursuits. The short distance from Sydney enables
fruit or other produce to be placed in the markets of
the metropolis at a minimum of expense, and in the
very best possible condition.
Soil. —Exceptionally fertile. Black humus ;
alluvial ; and a rich, chocolate-coloured loam : with
small patches of clay, gravel, or sand, here and
there. There is no part of it but is good for either
fruit or vegetables. In the gravelly patches, the
gravel is merely on the surface, with a good, sound,
reddish loam beneath. Similarly the sand is merely
on the surface, with a clayey loam below. Splendid
crops of fruit are now growing in the immediate
vicinity on soil immeasurably inferior to that of
Llandilo. See it, and judge for yourself.
Timber. —Mostly Box, Wattle and Apple-tree.
Water Supply. —South Creek, here broad and
deep enough to be termed a river, forms tho eastern
boundary of the estate. In addition, there are
numerous water-holes and springs ; in fact, appear-
ances indicate that a permanent well might be
obtained at a very moderate depth on almost any
portion of the land.
Improvements. —A considerable area is already
cleared and stumped. The entire Estate is inter-
sected by cleared roads of one chain in width. All
lots are accurately pegged and numbered. The
whole estate is enclosed by a substantial fence.


Size of Lots. —From 2\ to over 17 acres.
Terms. —Corner Lots and Water Frontages, £27
per acre; other lots, £24 per acre: payable in
sixty equal monthly instalments, of which the first
answers as deposit; no other deposit being required.
Thus a 2% acre Corner Lot would cost £1 2s. 6d.per
month ; total, £67 10s. A2\ acre Lot, not a corner
nor a water frontage, would cost £1 per month;
total, £6O.
Title. —Freehold : but it is being brought under
the Eeal Property Act, which will give what is
known as Torrens’ Title; which is the safest,
simplest, most inexpensive and most easily dealt with
of any.
Cost of Deeds. Deeds will be delivered,
stamped and registered complete, at a cost of £3 35.,
within thirty days of completion of purchase.
Discount.— For prompt cash in full within one
month of purchase, a discount of 10 per cent, will
be allowed, and the purchaser will have the right to
participate in the bonus distributions. Purchasers
who complete payment within three years from date
of purchase will receive 10 per cent, on amount paid
in advance ; and will be entitled to participate in
any subsequent distribution.
Purchasers who complete their payments before
the expiration of the term allowed for completion
will be allowed 10 per cent, on the amount paid in
advance.
VALEDICTORY.
We offer you every facility for achieving freedom


and fortune —good, fertile soil; protection from all
risk of loss; assurance in the event of death;
bonuses on a most liberal scale; pecuniary assistance
in the event of temporary financial pressure ; free
facilities for viewing the land, and terms which place
all these advantages within the reach of even the
poorest members of the community.
If, under these circumstances, you refuse or
neglect to avail yourself of the opportunity offered,
and continue to spend the best years of your life in
slavery and poverty; if you finally sink lower and
lower in the social scale, and, year by year, find the
struggle for existence more and more severe : the
fault is your own.
No such, opportunity as this was ever before
offered to the working man. Many have realised
that fact, and, having availed themselves of the
chance offered, are now on the high road to indepen-
dence and happiness.
There is a good time coming, we hope, and firmly
believe; but there are also bad times coming—worse
than we have ever yet known —and the bad times
will be here first. Consequently, he is not wise who
neglects to provide for his own future; to free
himself, while he yet has time, from the crushing,
impoverishing, degrading slavery of our present
industrial system ; to secure to himself, while he yet
has time, the full results of his own labour, and,
with them, freedom, independence, comfort, and
happiness.
The bad time is coming, and is much closer at
hand than many suppose, and he who rejects this
opportunity will find himself left hopelessly behind


in the race, crushed to the wall in the fierce struggle
for existence, and gradually sinking to a condition
of the most abject slavery.
In that bad time that is so rapidly coming, the
only man who will be really safe will be the man
who puts his own labour into his own land.
Those who can read the signs of the times can see
the storm coming, but no man knows when it will
break. When it does break, the whole civilised
world will feel it —high and low, rich and poor, will
suffer for a time ; and the only man who can depend
on being able to weather the storm is the man who,
by his own labour, produces his own living out of
his own land. He is safe, for the world cannot do
without him.
Free Passes, Plans, Pamphlets, and all information
required may be obtained at our offices.
PHILLIPS & CO.,
Cariugton Chambers,
30 & 32 Castlereagh St., Sydney.
NOTE,—Re Water-frontage Lots,
No water-frontage lot will he sold unless the purchaser
takes at least four other lots with it, such lots to he adjoining
the water-frontage lot and running hack from the creek.


SPECIAL NOTE.
In reference to the Assurance provisions of our
new system, the following letter will show the
promptitude with which claims are paid.
Ashton, Warerley Street,
Waverley, December 3, 1887.
Messrs. Phillips <%• Co.,
Gentlemen, —
I have to acknowledge the promptitude with which
you have settled my claim against your Hoxton Park Estate,
which became due on the 25 th ult., by the death of my daughter,
Valorie Mary Smyth, for whom I had purchased Lot 469 in
Hoxton Park; and for which I have just received your cheque
for sterling.
I am, yours faithfully,
SELWOOD SMYTH.
P.B.—You can make what use you like of this note. — 8.8,
The lot in question was bought on the 11th July,
1887. Death occurred on the 25th of November of
the same year. Notice of death was given a few
days later. Formal proof of death and interment
was furnished on the 2nd of December, and the
claim was paid on the following day.
Llandilo Estate has been visited by many well-
known gentlemen—practical gardeners, surveyors,
&c. —who have all been very favourably impressed,
and from whom we have received letters and reports,
which are open to inspection at our offices.
PHILLIPS & CO.,
Carington Chambers,
30 & 32 Castlereagh St., Sydney.
January 21st, 1888.


JA-fj
Bib'
-R437£
Nl






f > ’4%**. d'.i v» Vt/«tT V’ »*r«
