

PRESBYTERIAN COLLEGE.
From The Empire, June IZth.
ABSTRACT of the MIN UTES of the proceedings of the
public meeting and Provisional Committee for the es-
tablishment of a Presbyterian College in connection
with the University of Sydney :
At a public meeting of the Presbyterians of the colony,
held by advertisement in the Scots Church, Sydney, on
Monday, the 12th April, 1858, to take into consideration
the establishment of a Presbyterian College in connec-
tion with the University of Sydney, and the best means
of carrying out that important object, John Richardson,
Esq., M.P., in the chair, the following series of resolu-
tions, moved by the Rev. Dr. Lang, and seconded by John
Black, Esq., J.P., was carried unanimously.
1. That the object and design of a Presbyterian College,
in connection with the University of Sydney, is simply
to provide a suitable domicile, and the requisite moral
superintendence, for the youth of the Presbyterian com-,
munion, from all parts of the colony, while attending
the classes of the said University.
2. That the establishment of a Theological Faculty,
for training up candidates for the ministry in the Presby-
terian Church, although highly desirable in itself, and to
be looked forward to as an important appendage of the
proposed College, is, therefore, by no means necessary
to its existence, as part and parcel of the University
system, and would obviously be impracticable at present
in the divided condition of the Presbyterian Church.
3. That as the Affiliated Colleges' Act ensures the pro-
moters of the proposed undertaking the sum of Ten
thousand pounds from the Public Treasury for the es-
tablishment of the College, on condition of a similar
amount being first raised by themselves, it is of para-
mount importance for the welfare and prosperity of the
Presbyterian College, that that amount shall be raised
in such a way as to ensure and perpetuate a thoroughly
popular character for the Institution, and thereby pre-
vent its becoming a mere aiistocratic concern, uncared
for and unsupporied by the great body of the Pres-
byterian people. To guard against so fatal a mistake,
and to assimi ate the proposed Presbyterian College to
those noble, thoroughly popular, and essentially ple-
beian Academical Institutions, the Colleges and Uni-
versities of Scotland, that have mainly contributed, for
three centuries past, to raise the Scottish people as a
nation to the highest pitch of eminence among the na-
tions of Europe, it is expedient and necessary that a
l.»rge proportion—say three-fourths, or at least three-
fifths—of the whole amount required in the first in-
stance, to entitle the promoters of the undertaking to
the bonus of ten thousand pounds from the public trea-
sury, should be raised in comparatively small sums by
the middle and industrious classes of the Presbyterian
community throughout the territory; who will thus take
a deep interest in the institution which they have them-
selves contrib led to establish, and to which they will
look forward as the means of raising not a few of their
offspring to the highest places in the land.
4. That to ensure the accomplishment of this object of
paramount importance, every subscriber of five pounds
towards the College shall be deemed a proprietor of the
Institution, and be entitled to one vote at all meetings of
proprietors for the election of office-bearers, or for any
other purpose whatsoever; every subscriber of ten
pounds shall have two votes ; every subscriber of twenty
pounds shall have three votes; every subscriber of fifty
pounds shall have four votes; and every subscriber of
one hundred pounds or upwards shall have five votes
and no more; such votes, in the case of all proprietors
not residing either in Sydney or within twenty miles of it
to be given by proxy (agreeably to a form to be prepared
the purpose), and to be transmissable by post.
5. That one-hub of the who;e amount subscribed by
any proprietor shall be payable on subset iption, and the
remaining four-fifths by equal annual instalments,
at the end of one, two, three, and four years, respec-
tively, from the date fixed for general subscription;
for which deferred payments promissory notes shall be
given by each subscriber, agreeably to a form to be
prepared for the purpose.
6. That, in order to carry out these arrangements, and
to bring the proposed Presbyterian College into existence,
in accordance with the liberal and enlightened princi-
ples of the Affiliated Colleges' Act, a provisional com-
mittee shall be formed, to consist of one minister of
religion, one member of either House of Parliament,
and one other layman, on behalf of each distinct section
of the Presbyterian Church.
The meetiag was then adjourned till Monday, the 19th
April.
(Signed) JOHN RICHARDSON, Chairman.
ADJOURNED PUBLIC MEETING-
At the adjourned public meeting of the Presbyterians
of the colony, held by advertisement, in the Scots
Church, Sydney, on Monday, the 19th April, to
take into further consideration the establishment of a
Presbyterian College in connection with the University
of Sjdney, and the best means of carrying out that im-
portant obj ct, the Rev. James Co!tin®, of Grafton, in the
chair; the ohairman called upon tbe Rev. Dr. Lang to
state what had been done in pursuance of the resolution
cf tbe public meeting of the i2th instant, for the forma-
tion of a provisional committee, to consist of one min-
ister of religion, one member of either House of Parlia-
ment, and one other layman for each of the four distinct
eeetions of the Presbyterian Church.
Dr. Lang then stated that be had been in so far suc-
cessful in the applications be had made te ministers and
gentlemen of the different sections of the Presbyterian
Church, that a working committee of six members could
now be formed to carry out the objects of the meeting.
In the first place, the honorable John Robertson, Esq.,
M.P., the present minister for Lands and Public Works,
had very handsomely agreed, as a member of Parliament,
to represent the Synod of New South Wales. (Great
applause.) John Richardson, Esq., M.P., the Chairman
of the public meeting, of last Monday evening, had also
agreed to act in the same capacity on behalf of tke
United Pie>byterians. (Applause.) And his own brother,
Andrew Lang, Esq., M.P., now a member of the Upper
House, being one of the trustees of several of the
churches belonging to the Synod of Australia, in the
Maitland District, had agreed to represent that Synod in
Iho proposed committee. (Applause.) He had hoped
also to have got S. D. Gordon, Esq., M.P., on behalf
of the Free Church; but although that gentle-
man expressed his cordial approval of the plan
sketched out in the resolutions passed at their last
meeting and pledged himself to contribute for tho sup-
port of a college founded on such a basis, he would de-
cline being a member of their committee-till he saw how
they were likely to get on, especially as he had with-
drawn his name (as his relative, Mr. Dickson, had done
also) from the other committee, on which it had been
placed without his consent. There would, therefore,
b& a blank for the present in the Parliamentary repre-
sentation of the Free Church in the proposed committee,
but he had reason to believe that Mr. Gordon would
join them by and by. In regard to the proposed clerical
members of the committee, he had not been so fortu-
nate. Tho Rev.Mr.Dougall, of the Synod of Australia, on
whom he had called for the purpo e, and who, he was
happy to say, had given bim a very cordial reception,
expressed his approval of tbe plan sketched out in the
resolutions, and stated that he could co-operate in
carrying out such resolutions without any compromise;
but although be had stood aloof from certain of his
brethren of the Synod of Australia who were acting on
the other committee, his present position in the Synod
would preclude him from taking any further step in
connection with the Presbyterian College till tbe annual
meeting of Synod in October next. The Rev. Mr. Dar-
ling, of the United Presbyterian Church, would most
willingly have joined the proposed committee ; but as it
was stated in the preamble of the Affiliated Colleges'
Act that one of the objects of the Colleges was to supply
•' systematic religious instruction" to the students, it
appeared to hifa that these words reeognised it as the
right and duty of the State to support religion from the
public treasury, a principle which he repudiated and re-
jected, he would be precluded from doing so while these
words formed part of the Act. The Rev. Mr. Salmon,
of tbe Free Church, whom he had also seen on the sub-
ject, signified that as the same objectionable words ap-
peared to him to sanction the principle of " Indiscri-
minate Religious Endowments," which he repudiated,
he would also be precluded from taking part in
the proposed committee, F®r his own part he
was as much opposed to indiscriminate religious endow-
ments as Mr. Salmon and the Free Church could possi-
bly be, as it was on that very ground that he had hifnself
publicly renounced all conneciion with the State and tbe
State Church as a minister of religion sixteen years'
ago, before the Free Church had come into existence ;
hut concerned as he had been individually in the passing
of the Colleges Act, h j looked upon the words in ques-
tion in a somewhat different light from that in which
they were regarded both by Mr. Darling and Mr.
Salmon ; for looking forward as he did to the establish-
ment of a Theological Faculty in the College in due
time, all that was required on their part, till these ob-
jectionable words were expunged from the Act, was to
provide that that Faculty should not be supported by the
State, an object which it appeared to him would be of
very easy arrangement. For as it was not even neces-
sary that the Principal of the College, who wa3 to have
five .pundred a year from the State as head of the College,
should be a minister of religion at all, there was still
less necessity for his being a Professor of Divinity. He
would, therefore, as representing the Synod of New
South Wales, be the only minister of religion in the
committee in the first instance; but he was happy to
inform the meeting, that the other layman, besides the
Honorable Minister for Lands and Publio Works,
who would represent that Synod, was a gentleman,
in whom they had all the highest confidence,
and for whom he was quite sure they all entertained the
highest respect. The gentleman to whom he alluded
was John Black, Esq., J.P. (Much applause.) It was
deemed expedient, also, that as the United Presbyterians
were as yet but a small body, while there was a congre-
gation of Presbyterians at Balmain still unattached to
any particular body, that congregation should be repre-
sented in the proposed committee by a professional
gentleman of the highest standing in this community,
and one of the most eminent of its literary men. He
meant Nicol D. Stenhouse, Esq. (Renewed applause.)
The following additional resolutions were then passed
unanimously, viz.:—
7.—That the following be the members of the Pro-
visional Committee of the Presbyterian College, with
power to transact all necessary business in that capa-
city, and, especially, to fill up as speedily as practicable,
the blanks in their full complement, on the condition of
having not more than one minister of religion, one
member of either House of Parliament, and one other
layman for each of the four sections of the Presbyterian
Church
The Honorable John Robertson, Esq , M.P., &c.
The Honorable Andrew Lang, Esq., M.P.
John Richardson, Esq., M.P.
John Black, Esq., J.P.
Nicol D. Stenhouse, Esq., and
The Rev. Dr. Lang.
B.—That James Henderson, Esq., Manager of the
Bank of Australasia, be the Treasurer of the College ;
and that the committee be empowered to appoint a
Secretary.
9. —That while this meeting can, on no account, re-
cede from ihe fair and equitable principles embodied in
tbe resolutions already passed, or allow the Presbyterian
College to be established on a narrower or less liberal
basis than these principles imply, it is mo3t anxious—
seeing that there is a considerable portion of the Synod
of Australia, and a still larger portion of the Synod
of tbe Free Church, standing aloof from the other com-
mittee—to make common cause with Presbyterians of
all sections of the Presbyterian Church in the advance-
ment of academical education among the youth of their
communion, and will be most happy to co-operate with
all such parties on equal te t rms.
The meeting, which had commenced with prayer, was
then closed with the apostolic benediction.
(Signed) JAMES COLLINS,
.Chairman.
MINUTES OP THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE PROVISIONAL COM-
MITTEE OF THE PRESBYTERIAN COLLEGE.
* Sydney, 22ni April, 1858.
The Provisional Committee having this day met; pre-
sent, the Honorable John Robertson, Esq., M.P., &c., &c.,
Chairman; the Honorable Andrew Lang, Esq, M.P.;
John Richardson, Esq., M.P.; John Black, Esq., J. P.;
Nicol D. Stenhouse, Esq., and the Rev. Dr. Lang ; it was
resolved unanimously
That, in accordance with the recommendation of the
adjourned public meeting of the 19th instant, and with a
view to ensure the united action of the Presbyterians of
the colony generally, for the accomplishment of their
common object, a conference should be ieque®ted with
the Committee of Presbyterians appointed at the public
meeting in the Infant School-Room, Castlereagh-stred,
on Monday, tbe sth instant.
A letter to the following effect was accordingly written
and signed by all the members of the committee.
Sydney, 22nd April, 1858.
To tbe Members of tbe Committee appointed at the
Public Meeting of the sth instant.
GENTLEMEN —We, the undersigned, having been ap-
pointed to consider the best means for carrying out the
views of various sections of the Presbyterian com-
munity, desirous of effecting tbe establishment of a
Presbyterian College in connection with the University
of Sydney, but holding conscientious objections to some
of the principles embodied in tbe scheme adopted at the
public meeting held in the Infant School-Room, Castle-
reagh-street, on the sth instant, for that object, have the
honour to request a conference with the committee then
appointed ; as being, in our opinion, the most advisable
course for securing the united action of the whole Pres-
byterian people of the colony in so desirable an
undertaking.
We have the honour to be, Gentlemen, your most
obedient servants,
(Signed) JOHN ROBERTSON
ANDREW LANG
JOHN RICHARDSON
JOHN BLACK
NICOL D. fiTENHOUSE-
JOHN DUNMORE LANG.
Sydney, 12th May, 1 5 59.
The Provisional Committee having this day met ;
present, the Honorable John Robertson, Esq., M.P.,
Chairmau ; the Honorable Andrew Lang, Esq., M.P. ;
John Black, Esq., J.P.; Nicol D. Stenhouse, Esq., and
the Rev. Dr. Lang ; the following letter, addressed to
the honorable the Chairman, by Thomas Barker, Esq.,
on behalf of the other committee, having been read, it
was resolved to forward to that gentleman, for the infor-
mation of the committee with which he is acting, the
subjoined reply.
Sydney, 3rd May, 1858.
To the Honorable Joha Robertson. Esq., and others.
GENTLEMEN—I have the honour to be deputed by the
Committee of the Presbyterian College, to acknowledge
the receipt of your letter, addressed to the said com-
mittee, and in reply, to forward to you a copy of the
minutes of this day's proceedings referring thereto.-
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
(Signed) THOMAS BARKER, Chairman.
[Enclosure.]
Sydney, 3rd Mav, 1858.
At St. Andrew's Church, which day the College Com-
mittee met and was constitued with prayer, when, inter
alia, a letter was laid on the table from John Robertson,
Esq., M.P., and other gentlemen, requesting a conference
with the committee, on matters respecting the principles
on which it is propos d to establish a College. It was
agreed that the letter be received, and that the Chairman
be requested to communicate with Mr. Robertson, with
a view to ascertain what are " the conscientious objec-
tions to some of the principles embodied in the scheme
adopted at a public meeting, held on the sth ultimo, in
the Infant School Boom, Castlereagh-street, about
which, Mr. Robertson and the other gentlemen desire a
conference."
Extracted from the minutes of the College Committee
this 3rd dav of May, 1858.
(Signed) JOHN M'GIBBON,
WILLIAM LUMSDAINE.
Secretaries.
[Reply.]
Sydney, 12th May, 1858.
To Thomas Barker, Esq., Chairman of the Committee
of Presbyterians, formed at the Public Meeting of
the sth ultimo.
SIR—I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the 3rd instant, in reply to tbe communica-
tion addressed to your committee on the 22nd ultimo, by
myself and others, requesting us to state our objections to
your scheme. We do so accordingly, in the accompanying
statement signed on behalf of our committee, by our
honoi»-y secretary.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
(Signed) JOHN ROBERTSON, Chairman.
STATEMENT cf objections to the scheme propounded
at the public njeeting for the establishment r of a Presby-
terian College, held on the sth ultimo.
Our objections are twofold. We object in the first
place to the scheme propounded in the series of resolu-
tions passed at the public meeting in question, as em-
bodying in so far the principles of a constitution for the
proposed College ; and secondly, to the nature and com-
position of the committee created by that meeting, as
professing to represent the Presbyterians of the colony
generally.
Under the former of these heads, we object particu-
larly.
Ist. To the proposed establishment of a Theelogical
Faculty in the Presbyterian College from its very com-
mencement, as being not only unnecessary in the infancy
of the institution, but utterly impracticable in the pre-
sent divided state of the Presbyterian Church. For it
would obviously be quite hopeless, under existing cir-
cumstances, to get the different sections of the Church
to create such a faculty in concert; and any such faculty
as should emanate from any one section would, probably,
for that reason alone, be opposed by the others.
2nd. To the fixing of ten pounds as the lowest amount
requisite to qualify a proprietor or shareholder of the
College, as tending to exclude from its proprietary the
very class—that of industrious persons of the workfcig
classes—which it is of the utmost importance to its best
interests to conciliate and attract.
3rd. To granting an additional vote for every fifty
pounds subscribed for the College over and above the
first fifty, as tending to create a money power in tbe
institution of which the consequences to its best interests
must be exceedingly disastrous.
4th. To the proposed name of the College—St.
Andrew's —as being not a general but a sectarian designa-
tion, and one which, in the estimation of Presbyterians
generally, indicates exclusive connection with the Estab-
iished Church of Scotland.
Under the second of thelheads abovementioned, we object
to tbe nature and composition ef the committee created
by the meeting of the sth ultimo, for carrying out the
scheme propounded in the resolutions passed at that
meeting, inasmuch as it is not a fair representation of
the different sections of the Presbyterian Church, which
it ought unquestionably to have been. The committee
in question contains not fewer than four or five
ministers of the Synod of Australia, without having even
one to represent either the Synod of New South Wales
or the United Presbyterians. We are decidedly of opinion
that, in a properly constituted committee for the estab-
lishment of a Presbyterian College, there should, in
addition to a sufficient number of laymen, be one minis-
ter, and no more, to represent each section of the Pres-
byterian Church, and that that minister should be duly
appointed by the body he represents.
By order of the Committee,
(Signed) J. BLACK, Honorary Secretary.
Sydney, 12 th May, 1858.
Sydney, 4th June, 1858.
The Provisional Committee having this day met;
Present—Nicol D. Stenhouse, Esq., Chairman ; Honora-
ble Andrew Lang, Esq., M.P.; John Black, Esq., J.P.;
and the Rev. Dr. Lang. The following letter from
Thomas Barker, Esq., with its enclosure, was read-
Sydney, Ist June, 1856.
The Honorable John Robertson, Esq.
DEAR SIR, —I have the honour, in obedience to the
request of the Committee of the Presbyterian College,
to enclose a copy of the resolutions passed at their meet-
ing yesterday.
I beg also to enclose a printed copy of the prospectus
approved of at the public meeting.—l have the honour
to be, dear Sir, &c., &c.,
(Signed) THOMAS BARKER, Chairman.
[ENCLOSURE.]
St. Andrew's Church, May 31, 1858.
Which day the Presbyterian College Committee being
met and constituted, inter alia, a letter from the Honor-
able John Robertson, Esq., transmitting a statement of
objections to the scheme propounded at the public meet-
ing for the establishment of a Presbyterian College, held
on tbe sth ul'imo, having been read, the committee
eclined a conference anent the objections embodied in
this document, for the following reasons :
Ist. That the primary object of the originators of this
movement is the -establishment of a Theological Chair
in the College rendered necesseqy in oonsequence of the
peculiar constitution of the University, which makes no
provision for religious teaching.
2nd. That the prospectus has been approved by a pub-
lic meeting, and a considerable amount of money has
been already subscribed, in the expectation that the
principles set forth therein will be carried out.
It was agreed that an extract minute of the foregoing
be transmitted to the Honorable J. Robertson, Esq., by
Mr. Barker, as chairman of this meeting.
Extracted from the minutes of the Presbyterian Col-
lege Committee, by
(Signed) WILLIAM LUMSDAINE,
One of the Secretaries.
It was then resolved—
1. That, in consequence of the refusal of the other
committee either to hold a conference or to co-operate in
any way with this committee, in its efforts to ensure
the united action of the Presbyterians of the colony
generally, it is expedient and necessary that an abstract
of the proceedings of the public meeting of the 12th
and 19th April, together with the correspondence that
has taken place between the two committees, be sub-
mitted to the public through the press, and by means of
public meetings in Sydney and elsewhere.
2. That Mr. George Dunmore Lang be tbe Secretary
of this committee."
PUBLIC MEETING OF PRESBYTERIANS, IN
CONNECTION WITH THE PRESBYTERIAN
COLLEGE.
At a public meeting of the Presbyterians of the colony,
held by advertisement in the Scots Church, Sydney, on
Tuesday, the Bth of June, 1858, on the subject of the
Presbyterii.n College, John Black, Esq., J.P., in the
chair; after reading the advertisement calling the meet-
ing and imploring tke Divine ble .sing (through the
Rev. Mr. Reid), the CHAIRMAN addressed the following
observations to the meeting :
Before proceeding to the main business of the meet-
ing, I must take the opportunity of expressing my sense
of yeur kindness in placing nu in the chair, and of
offering you my grateful acknowledgments for the
honour you have thus conferred upon me. According to
the terms of the public notice a iling tho meeting, the
business we have in hand this ev ning is of a character
of unusual importance; and the . .icf siuLorneui of ibis
simple fact is of itself, I am sure, quite sufficient to
bespeak your patient and earnest attention to the
matter that i 3 to be submitted to your consideration. I
de ire for my own part to approach it in the spirit of
calm and candid deliberation ;and I trust that you, my
fellow-citizens, in exercising your judgment, and in
expressing your opinion upon it, may show to the com-
munity at large, that you are not altogether unworthy of
the onerous and tho honorable task you have undertaken
—the task of establishing a College and
promoting the great cause of Education
in this mighty land. " All political writers,"
says an eminent author, " all political writers are agreed
that upon the education of youth, depends the fate of
empires." According to the unquestionable truth
embodied in this remark, it is upon our seminaries and
seats of learning, upon our universities, our colleges,
and schools, that the future well-being of this the land of
our adoption must to a very great extent depend ; and
believing, as I firmly do, that this country, not only
from its geographical position, but also from the bound-
lessness of its resources and the vastness of its extent,
is destined and fitted by Providence to furnish happy
homes for untold millions of our fellow-men from the over-
crowded states of Europe; and that Australia has to play
a high and distinguished part in diffusing the know-
ledge both of secular and religious truth, not only
throughout tbe wide extent of her own vast area, but also
among the numerous and interesting islands of the seas
that wash her golden shores; believing all this,
I say, as I firmly do, it seems to me almost
impossible to exaggerate the importance or to over-es-
timate the value of educational establishments amongst
us, or to feel too deeply the obligation of seeing that
they are founded upen a durable and a just, on a wide
and popular basis. It was under the influence, I doubt
not, of sentiments such as these that a number
of the Presbyterian community, including most
if not the whole of yourselves, were led
to desire that, in the founding of a Presbyte-
rian College in this colony, a plan should be adopted
that might, as far as possible, include all the various sec-
tions of the Presbyterian communion, and one which,
by uniting them, for the particular work in view, into
one compact and harmonious body, might have tbe
highest hope and the fairest prospect of issuing in tho foun-
dation of an institution that might be at once an honour
and an ornament to our name and nation—an institution
from which the light of literature and science might
shine forth in days of cloudless splendour, alike
undimmed with the vapours of sectarian creeds and
undefiled by the miasma of sectarian contentions.
This, as I apprehend, was the general character of the
plan which you, in common, as I presume, with a
numerous and respectable body of your fellow-christians
throughout tbe colony, were desirous of seeing adopted ;
and it was mainly, as I understand, for the purpose of
endeavouring to effect that object, that the provisional
committee, consisting of the Bev. Dr. Lang, the honor-
able Mr. Robertsou, M.P., Mr. Richardson, M.P., Mr.
Andrew Lang, M.P., Mr. N. D. Stenhouse, and myself,
were appointed at the adjourned meeting held here on ■
the 19th April last. As to the steps which we, as a
committee, have since that date taken in the matter, the
documents which will presently be read. The minutes
of the proceedings of the previous public meeting,
with those of the Provisional Committee, will give you
every information, and it would, therefore, be an unpro-
fitable and unnecessary occupation of your time,
if I were now to enter into any very minute
or very lengthened narrative of details.
But it is right and proper for me at once to states-and
I state it with regret and disappointment—that, 'through
the spirit, a's it appears to me, of arrogant usurpation
and of exclusive and uncompromising sectarianism, on
the part of the committee representing the adherents
of that extraordinary meeting in Castlereagh-street,
which gave such great offence to every lover of the first
principles of British freedom, and to every admirer of
the first and truest of Australia's patriots and public
benefactors—(Dr. Lang)—through this spirit, I say,
on the part of that committee, and through their refusal
to recognise or ce-operate with you in any way in the
establishment of the Presbyterian College, the com-
mittee with which I have the honour to be associated
have entirely failed to effect any union or reconciliation
whatever with the Castleireagh-street gentlemen, and
all our expedients for that purpose having thus proved
fruitless, it will now be for this meeting to consider and
determine what is next to be done.
From the correspondence which will be read to you,
it will be seen that the first act of the committee ap-
pointed in this place was to ask a conference with the
other committee—that committee whom from this time
forward I shall, for the sake of brevity and perspicu ty,
take the liberty of designating as the Exclusioni-ts—
and the propriety of our endeavouring to obtain such
a conference I have no doubt every prudent and
charitable friend of the cause will fully and readily
admit. It has bBen truly said, that if men who have
had a difference could and would only meet each other
face to face for the mutual explanation of their views,
it might be the means of removing many a misunder-
standing and preventing many a quarrel. On
merely general grounds, therefore, it appeared
to us that a conference was highly desirable ; and when
we reflected on the special consideration that the parties
concerned all professed to be equally animated by the
spirit of that religion of which one grand duty is the
seeking of peace, and one grand badge the shewing of
charity to all men, we had every reason to suppose that
the Exclusionists would have received our overture
with a feeling of acquiescence, rejoicing in
the prospect of seeing such a door thrown open
for the possible accommodation of differences
which, so long as they were allowed to exist,
must obviously hinder the advancement of the
common cause cf education. In doing this—in making
this offer—it is true we felt that we were making to
the Exclusionists no inconsiderable concession, in-
asmuch as the character of the meeting of the sth of
April had clearly involved such a flagrant outrage upon
public freedom, and such a gross insult to personal feel-
ing, that it would have fully justified our refusal to co-
operate with them; but we thought that the object was
worthy of any sacrifice of feeling on our part, and we de-
termined to make it. Contrary, however, to all reason-
able expectation, and in disregard, as I conceive, of the
best interests of the cause they professed to serve, the
Exclusionists, as you will see, declined the conference
even after we had sent them a second communication on
the subject; in short, they gave us virtually to under-
stand that, if they possibly could, they would in all things
have their own way—that they would practically ignore you
and yours in the establishment of the College, and", in
one word, that they were bent upon setting up a hier-
archy equally opposed to the fundamental principle on
which the University of Sydney was originally based,
and also to the principle on which the Affiliated College
ought at least, in the first instance, to be placed. One
great point of difference between us and the Exclu-
sionists, as you may already be aware, is that whereas
they desire the immediate establishment of a Theologi-
cal Faculty within the affiliated Presbyterian College,
we say that such a Faculty i 3 not only unnecessary
in the infancy of the Institution, but that in the present
divided state of the Presbyterian Church, it is
obviously impracticable; and another giand point
of difference is, that whereas the Exclusionists, ac-
cording to their scheme, would—true to their exclusive
tenets—virtually shut out from all part and lot in the
control of the College the great body of the people, by
fixing a high sum for the minimum rate of subscription,
and would thu3 virtually place its management in the
hands of a monied oligarchy, by giving unlimited power
to wealthy subscribers, we propose to place some
share in the College within the reach of every man,
however small his means or however humble his sta-
tion ; and also to limit the voting power in
such a manner, that no subscriber, however
large his subscription, could exercise an
undue influence in the management of the College.
Between us and them there is thus a considerable differ-
ence of opinion on, at least, two important points. To
reconcile these differences, we, the committee—if I may
be allowed to interpret the feelings of my associates by
my own—feel that we can do no more than we have done,
in the way of compremise and concession. We have
done our duty so far; and it now remains for you and the
country to do yours. Occupying, as I presently do, a
position that imposes upon me the duty rather of hearing
than of speaking, it may perhaps be somewhat out of
place for me to say in what direction I conceive your
proper course now to lie. But perhaps
you wi 1 bear with me if I add that
in my humb'e opinion the only course now open for you
is one of independent, energetic, and united action and
agitation ; and although I neither profess to be a pro-
phet nor a prophet's son, yet I feel assured I might
be warranted in predicting that you will find the
sympathies of the country at large very strongly on
your side. Let the exclusionists by all means
do their best, and do you also do yours. You may, on
both sides succeed in raising the required sum of £lO,OOO
to enable you to app'y to the Government for their
stipulated quota of the like amount; but if you can
shew, as I have no doubt you will eventually be
able to do, at least two men for their one
on the roll of subscribers, it will, I think, be strange
indeed, if, in these days of manhood suffrage and popu-
lar rights of freedom and reform, the Legislature of the
country, ia deciding the question as to who should get
the grant, shall give the preference to the minority over
the majority. It will be strange indeed if, in defiance of
common sense, and common justice, they preferred the
smaller to tho greater number; common sense and even-
handed justice will keep them right. But, if higher
authority were required, I would remind them of that
declaration of Holy Writ, that" two are better than one,"
on which your senior pastor delivered so appropriate a
discourse when his esteemed coadjutor, Mr. Reid, was
inducted to his charge. But I will not trespass farther
on your time. Indeed, I fear, I have already done so to
too great an extent, but what you may not be disposed
to forgive in a chairman, let me hope that you will
readily pardon in one who is a member of your committee.
I have but one word to add, in reference to the
appointment of a Secretary by the Provisional Committee.
At our last meeting we saw that in conducting our
movements, a very considerable amount of writing would
be required, and having been led to believe that we
might obtain the assistance of Dr. Lang's son, Mr.
George Dunmore Lang, we very gladly took the oppor-
tunity of appointing him to the office of secretary of the
committee ; and considering that the young gentleman
is an alumnus of the University of Edinburgh, as well
as of the University of Glasgow, I have no doubt, you
will with ourselves consider that we have been very
fortunate in obtaining his services.
The CHAIRMAN, who was frequently and cordially
cheered in the course of his speech, then
called upon the Rev. Dr. Lang, another member of the
Provisional Committee, to move the series of resolutions
he had to submit to the meeting. Before doing so,
Dr. LANG spoke to the following effect :
Mr. Chairman and Christian friends—You have heard
from the report of the proceedings of the Provisional
Committee, which has just been read, as well as from
the observations of the worthy Chairman, that the pro-
posal which (in accordance with the resolution passed at
the public meeting of the 19th of April last) was made by
your Provisional Committee for a conference with the
Committee of Exclusionists (as they have been so hap-
pily designated by my esteemed friend the Chairman),
was declined, rather unhandsomely, I think, by that
Committee. This, I confess, was precisely the result I
had anticipated. I knew the men who have virtually ob-
tained the direction of that Committee too well to expect
any other result. The reason they have put forward for
declining a conference with us is a mere pretence.
The real reason was their extreme anxiety to exclude
me, if possible, from all connection with the Presbyterian
College. This anxiety was sufficiently evinced in the
first instance in their holding a whole series of prelim-
inary meetings, about the Presbyterian College, for nearly
a twelve month past, from all of which I was carefully
excluded, although no person in the colony could pos-
sibly have a better right to be asked to attend any
meeting for such a purpose than myself. Knowi g, as
they did, that so iniquitous an exclusion was system-
atically practised, what can one think of certain
prominent Free Church ministers and certain
laymen of high standing of other commu-
nions, who could, notwithstanding, identify them-
selves all along with such discreditable practises ?
I think it will be allowed by all candid persons, that in so
doing, these parties evinced just as little of the spirit
of Christianity as they did of the breeding of gentlemen.
This systematic effort to exclude me from all connection
with the Presbyterian College was followed up, in pre-
cisely the same spirit, with the artful manoeuvre
sucee?-sfully practised at the public meeting of the sth of
April, when, in defiance of the well-known usages of all
public meetings in the British empire, I was precluded
from offering the amendment I had previouslyannounced.
The refusal of the conference was, therefore, in per-
fect accordance with these premises, and it did not take
me by any means by surprise. Sb far indeed from feel-
ing disappointed or disconcerted at the result of our
proposal, I am persuaded it will turn out all in our
favour; for I have never seen any great public under-
taking with such an utter want of ability to conduct it
as there evidently is in the committee of the Exclu-
sionists. They, seem quite unablejto furnish either a head
oratongue. {Laughter.) Nodoubt it is discouraging to see
a noble undertaking mismanaged and endamaged in the
hands of incapables. But as I had occasion to observe,
when reviewing my own colonial experience
for the last thirty-five years, in a discourse
deliveied in this church a few weeks since,
" I shall always regard discouragement and opposition
in the outset of any undertaking, either for the glory of
God or the benefit of man, as the best earnest of suc-
cess and prosperity in the end. For he that goeth forth
and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come
again loith rejoicing, bringing his sheaves lo'th him." In
the circumstances in which we now stand, the
proposal of our provisional committee, as declared in
the resolution passed at its last meeting, is to appeal to
the Presbyterians of the colony, wljich, we think, we can
now do with entire confidence. Anticipating as I did some
such necessity six months ago, I was the more anxious
to get the arrangement which was then merely ill con-
templation—l mean the settlement of a co-pastor in
this church, to enable me individually to make such an
appeal, without prejudice to the interests of my congre-
gation—brought to a speedy and successful conclusion.
For I propose, after doing what may be found practi-
cable in our own more immediate neighbourhood, to
proceed to various central and important localities in
the interior, to hold public meetings, and to deliver
addresses on the subject of our College, In order, as far as
possible, to conciliate the countenance and support of
the members of our communion throughout the
interior. (Applause.) What then, it may
be asked, are our prospects, under existing
circumstances in connection with this great
undertakinghe founding of a Presbyterian Col-
lege ? And how does the matter stand now with two
separate and in some measure antagonistic committes
in existence ? Why, there are, doubtless, parties who
in such circumstances, will stand aloof from the move-
ment altogether, and make the faet of there being two
such committees an excuse for keeping their hands in
their pockets and'eontributing to neither. But this I
think will not be the case with many. What then will be
the result of the contemporaneous existence and efforts
of both committees ? Why, one of three things must hap-
pen. Ist. (And this is the most unfavorable view of the
case for us), the Exclusionists may raise the ten thou-
sand pounds, while we remain far behind them with our
gatherings. In that case, as soon as they apply for a
Constitution (to the Reformed Parliament, which will
doubtless be sitting before then), we shall petition Parlia-
ment for a Select Committee to enquire into the circum-
stances in which the formation of two distinct committees
for the same object originated ; protesting at the same time
against the scheme propounded in the prospectus of the
Exclusionists. It will not be quite so easy to put us
down in the Reformed Parliament as it was in the Infant
School Room, Castlereagh-street. (Cheers.) And we
may rest assured that a Parliament formed by manhood
suffrage will never sanction either a higher franchise
than the one we propose, or the existence of a money
power, snch as the Exclusionists contemplate, to swamp
the institution. Even in the worst case, therefore, that
can be supposed, we have nothing to fear, but everything
to hope for. 2ndly. It is possible, and I think by no
means improbable, that we shall raise the ten thousand
pounds first. They may have got a few more aristocratic
subscriptions to begin with than wemayobtain.havinghad
the start of ns these two months; but it will take a great
many such subscriptions to realise ten thousand pounds.
I am confident, however, that with the great body of the
liberal and intelligent Presbyterians of the colony,
whether in town or country, they will never be able to
cope with us; and " the Book of Numbers," as a zealous
friend of onr cause, whom I am happy to see present
this evening, observed in talking on the subject, a day
or two ago, " the Book of Numbers is better than the
Book of Kings" (Applause.) It is our policy, as de-
clared in our programme, to endeavour to raise by far
the larger proportion of the whole sum required, not by
a few aristocatic subscriptions, but by the comparatively
smaller contributions of the middle and industrious
classes—that is, in sums of five, ten, and twenty pounds,
respectively. Now, five hundred contributors of five
pounds each will give £2500, or one-fourth of the
whole amount required. Half that number contributing
ten pounds each will give another fourth. One hundred
at £2O will give £2OOO. Forty other subscribers of £5O
each, and ten more of £lOO each, will make up the
whole amount. And snrely it is not too much to expect
that we shall find a sufficient number of subscribers of
these amounts respectively among the liberal and en-
lightened Presbyterians of the colony, both in town and
country, from Albury to Wide Bay. lam willing, at all
events, if it should be necessary, to visit every consider-
able town between these two extremities of the colony,
to make the attempt. (Cheers.) In the event of our
succeeding in raising the required ameunt —as we are
no exclusionists,and would most willingly allow to others
all we ask for ourselves, the Parliament would have no
difficulty in deciding in the case. But if neither of the
two committees should raise the ten thousand pounds,
why, there will just have to be a conference and a com-
promise at the end of the chapter, as there ought to have
been at the beginning. But supposing the whole
ten thousand pounds raised and other ten
thousand obtainable from Government under the Act,
would it be proper do you think to expend that large
amount at once in buildings for a Presbyterian College ?
I think not. It would be folly in the extreme to do
anything of the kind till we have a body of students to
occupy the College buildings. And where are such stu-
dents to be found at present ? Every student in the
College must attend the University ; but the University
will not admit any student unless he has attained his
fifteenth or sixteenth year, and undergone a previous
course of training in classics and mathematics. And
where are there students of this description for a Presby-
terian College at present ? For my own part I know of
none. The very first step, therefore, that we ought to
take in the matter, is to found a Presbyterian Academy
for the training up of students for the College and
University. (Applause.) This is a matter which our
Exclusionist friends have never thought of. They seem
to think that all that is requisite is the building, and
that a number of raw lads from the country could be
pitchforked into it all at once. The fact is, such
young men would not be admitted either into
the University or the College till they had
got the requisite previous training ; and that
training is not to be got in the College but
out of it—that is in a preparatory academy. Now lam
happy to inform the meeting that this indispensable
requisite for a Presbyterian College, viz. a suitable pre-
paratory academy, is an object of comparaively easy
attainment. An institution long known, and highly
useful for a aeries of years, as an academical institution
in this city, but unfortunately in abeyance for years
past, I mean the Australian College,has a fund available
for this purpose, with a valuable allotment of ground,
and may very speedily, with comparatively moderate as-
sistance from the public, be revived as a Presbyterian
Academy for the education of youth generally, but es-
pecially for the training up of students for the College
and University. It is unnecessary, however, to enter
further into this particular subject at present. Before
moving the series of resolutions I have now to submit
to the meeting, I would offer only a single observation
on the transcendent importance of the object about
which we are engaged. The youth of the colony are the
hope of our adopted country," and everything under God
will depend on the nature and character of the institu-
tions to be provided for their intellectual and general
advancement. Divided as it still unfortunately is, the
Presbyterian Church has a high and right-noble mission
in this countty ; but its future for all succeeding gener-
ations will depend pre-eminently on the character to be
impressed in the outset on its Educational Institu-
tions. For my own part I look for nothing but intel-
lectual impotence and incapacity from the triumph of the
Exclusionists; but such a calamity I certainly do not
anticipate. I have only to add that Subscription Lists,
with a printed heading, will be placed in the hands of
various friends of the cause in the city and neighbour-
hood, as ston as a report of cur proceedings
Bhall have been published. I am happy to
state in conclusion that my si3ter-in-law, Mrs. Baillie,
whose husband, you are aware, left all bis property,
subject to the life-rent of his widow, for the endowment
of two Professorships in the Presbyterian Co lege, has
authori.td me to offer on her own account a subscrip-
tion of a hundred pounds for the College ; adding that
she would raise that subscription to five hundred, if
it should be needful to make up the amount required.
(Applause.) I shall now move the following series of
resolutions.
1. That the Committee appointed on the 19th of April last to carry
out tbe resolntions passed at the publio meeting of the 12th of
that month, for the establishment of a Presbyterian College, has
fully and faithfully discharged the duty imposed upon it, in
offering, however unsuccessfully, to eo-operate with all other
Presbyterians for the accomplishment of their common object,
on fair and equitable terms ; and that, in the opinion of thi3
meeting, that Committee can now ajjpeal with confidence to me
Presbyterians of the colony generally.
2. That as all students in the future Presbyterian College must
attend the classes of the University of Sydney, while no student
can he admitted into the University who has not attained
hi 3 fifteenth or sixteenth year, and undergone a previous train-
ing in classics and mathematics, it is indispensably necessary,
far the very existence of a Presbyterian College, that a Presby-
terian Academy should he established forthwith, for-the training
up of students for the College tod University.
3. That as the institution long known as the Australian College,
although in abeyance for several years past, has a fund and cer-
tain other advantages, which, with moderate assistance from tho
public, might enable its promoters to render it immediately
available as a Presbyterian Academy for thetraining up of students
for the College and University, this meeting cordially recom-
mends that object, as one of prime necessity for the successful
establishment of the Presbyterian College, to the consideration
and support of the Presbyterians of the colony.
The Rev. Mr. REID seconded tbe resolutions, making
a few appropriate and forcible remarks on the absolute
necessity for a preparatory Academy for the training up
of students, for the College and University. Ths
resolutions were then put to the meeting, and passed
unanimously.
A vote of thanks was then passed to the chairman, and
the meeting was closed with the Apostolic Benediction.
The Empire General Steam Printing_Office, Hunter-street,
Sydney.
