

PRESBYTERIAN UNION.
PLEA FOR UNITED PRAYER.
Last year, previous to the meeting of the Synods in November, much prayer
was offered throughout the Colony, by those who felt deep interest in the
Union of Presbyterians into one Church. Many agreed together to suppli-
cate the great Head of the Church on behalf of His cause in New South
Wales. • Few will doubt that the answer was given when the Synods met
and the Conference of the negotiating parties was held. There had been fears
of division, and there were grounds for fear. But in the mercy and good-
ness of Hod fears were dissipated. The Articles of the Basis and their
accompanying Resolutions were amended to the entire satisfaction of all,
and were unanimously approved by all the contracting parties. Union was
then resolved upon as tl soon as the necessary preliminary arrangements were
effected,” and on the terms as finally agreed upon. It was hoped that a
legal security for the transfer of property in connection with the United
Church would be speedily obtained, and that in November, 1804, if not
sooner, the Union would" be formally consummated. This hope has been
disappointed. There are still difficulties in the way. The expressions of the
terms of Union are not now satisfactory to all. Meanwhile, the period
is approaching when the Synods are to beheld. We venture, therefore, to
put forth another plea for prayer in behalf of the Union of Presbyterians into
one Church. The following are suggested as arguments grounded upon Scrip-
ture and suited to the exigencies of our cause.
1. The Lord Jesus Christ—the King and Head of the Church desires the visible
union of Bis people. John xvii.
‘‘ Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus.” Phil, ii, 5.
: 2. The Holy Ghost is the Spirit of Unity.
“Endeavouring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.’’ Ephes. iv, 3.
3. A special blessing on unity among brethren is promised by God. Ps. cxxxiii.
4. When Unity in tbe Truth is secured, separation is the sin of schism. 1 Cor. i. 10.
5. The spirit of brotherly courtesy, mutual respect, and Christian charity is par-
ticularly to be desired. Phil. ii. I—4 ; 1 Cor. xiii. 4—7 ; Prov. xvi. 24.
6. ' When common agreement in doctrine is obtained, conciliation in minor mat-
ters is becoming. Acts xv. 28.
“Ye that are the Lord’s remembrancers keep not silence, and give Him no rest till
He establish, and till He make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.” Isa. Ixii. 6, 7.
For the sake of our common standards of Truth, the strengthening and ex
tension of the Presbyterian Church in this land, the advancement of the Re-
deemer’s kingdom and the salvation of souls, let congregations, families, and
individuals agree to pray the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ to
bless the Meetings of Synods and Conference, and dispose them to unite to-
gether in one Church.
“Thus saith the Lord God, I will yet fob this be inquired of by the House
Israel to do it fob them.” — Ezek. xxxvi. 37.
Extracted from the Presbyterian Magazine for October 1864.
SHEREIFF & DOWNING-, Publishers, 256, George Street, Sydney


