

Presbyterian Ladies' College Albert St East Melbourne
Presbyterian Ladies' College Handbook 1894-1895




Magnificent Establishment takes rank with th[e best of the
Public Schools for Boys—a kind of provincial Eton or Harrow."
Presbyterian Ladies' College
Established 18 75.
HANDBOOK 1895-1896.
*jEast Melbourne.


CALENDAR POR 1895.
FIRST TEftM begins TUESDAY, 12th February. New
pupils enrolled on the nth.
Easter Holidays from 1 ith to 16th April (both inclusive).
SECOND TERM begins TUESDAY, 30th April.
Queen’s Birthday, Friday, 24th May.
Midwinter Holidays from Bth to 29th July (both inclusive).
THIRD TERM begins TUESDAY, 30th July.
Michaelmas Holidays, 4th and 7th October.
FOURTH TERM begins TUESDAY, Bth October.
Speech Day, Tuesday, 17th December.
TRUSTEES AND COUNCIL OF THE COLLEGE
William Taylor, Esq., of Keilor, Convener.
Hon. William Anderson, of Rosemount.
Hon. J. M. Davies, M.L.C.
Hon. S. Fraser, M.L.C.
Revs. Alexander Marshall, J. G. Mackie, John Steele,
and Alexander Stewart.
Messrs. John Cooke, M.W. Fergusson, Robert Gillespie,
Duncan Love, James Kininmonth, and James
Richmond.




INDEX. page
Accomplishments ... ... ... ... ... 16
Admission of Pupils ... ... 6
Boarders—Health and Comfort of 20
Order of the Day for 22
Recreation of ... ... ... 24
Requisites for 26
Calendar ... ... ... ... ... Inner Cover
Classics ... ... ... ... ... I 2
College Revisited... ... ... ... ... 36-42
Concerts ... ... ... jg
Drawing and Painting ... x 8
Educational Successes ... 10
English and History ... ... ... ...
Exhibitions and Honours Gained 14
Fees ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26, 27
Gymnasium ... ... ... ... ... 20
History of the College ... 4
Mathematics... .... ... ... I 2
Matriculation Examination, Honours at ... 10
Modern Languages ... ... I 2
Music and Singing x 6
Objects and Methods ... ... 8
Occasional Students ... ... j 8
“Patchwork’’ ... 32
Physical Education 2Q
Poems from “Patchwork” 32-34
References Required ... ... ... ... 6
Religious Instruction ... ... ... IO
Situation and Surroundings 6
Staff, The 28-31
PAGE.
Subjects Taught ... 9
Term Days and Holidays... ... 28
Visiting Teachers 16-18
PHOTOS. AND ILLUSTRATIONS.
Rev. G. Tait, M.A. ... ... 3
Professor Harper, M.A., B.D. ... ... ... 3
Miss Paterson ... ... ... ... ... 27
Rev. S. G. McLaren, M.A. ... ... ... 29
J. P. Wilson, Esq., M.A., LL.D. ... .. 30
G. B. Fentum, Esq. ... ... ... ... 31
Senhor Loureiro ... ... 31
Miss Barton ... ... ... ... ... 33
Miss Trickett ... ... ... 36
College, Front Entrance 3
South View from ... ... ... 7
South fagadc ... ... ... ... 45
Calisthenics Class ... ... ... ... 33
Drawing Room ... ... ... ... ... u
Drawing Class ... ... ... ... ... ig
Dining Hall ... ... ... ... ... 23
Gymnasium ... ... ... ... ... ... 21
Kindergarten Class ... ... ... ... 41
Lady Superintendent’s Room ... ... ... 33
Mathematical Class ... ... ... ... 13
Painting Class ... ... ... ... ... 13
Playground, in the ... ... ... ... 25
Tennis Court ... ... ...* 37
Tennis Group ... ... ... ... ... 39
Violin Class ... ... ... ... ... 17
Wyselaskie Hall, Interior ... ... ... 43


FRONT ENTRANCE.


fHE Presbyterian Church has always shown a genius and a passion for education. In every
country in the world where it exists, its educational establishments will be found to occupy
a commanding position. Victoria is no exception to the rule. The Scotch College, the Presbyterian
Ladies’ College, Ormond College, and Ormond Theological College have all been founded by
the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, and they are all institutions of which any Church or
community might be proud.
HISTORY OF THE LADIES' COLLEGE
The Ladies’ College was founded in the year 1875, so that it has now completed the
twentieth year of its existence. The Rev. George Tait, M.A., was appointed the first
Principal, and Professor Pearson, afterwards Minister of Education, the first Head
Master. In 1879, Professor Andrew Harper, M.A., 8.D., became Principal and Head
Master, and on his retirement in 1889 he was succeeded by the Rev. S. G. McLaren, M.A.,
as Principal, and J. P. Wilson, Esq., M.A., LL.D., as Head Master. The College has thus
had a number of eminent men at its head who have all laboured strenuously to fulfil
its ideal and build up its reputation. That they have been successful in a high degree,
the facts contained in this little handbook will abundantly testify. Indeed, it may truthfully
be said that, tried by the impartial test of the public examinations of the University of
Melbourne, the College occupies a position for scholarship far in advance of any girls’
school in Victoria, and has been a main factor in raising the standard of education
for girls throughout Australia.


Rev. George Tait, M.A.
First Principal of the College (1875-1878).
Clerk of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian
Church of Victoria.
Professor Andrew Harper, M.A., B.D.
Principal and Head Master (1879-1888).
Professor of Hebrew and Old Testament Exegesis,
Ormond Theological College.


SITUATION AND SURROUNDINGS.
f'HE College is splendidly situated on the highest part of East Melbourne. The frontispiece
shows the building as it will be when completed, though the left wing has not yet
been erected. The view from the windows is one of the finest in Melbourne,
embracing the Bay, the Botanical Gardens, Government House, and other objects
of interest. The site slopes rapidly down towards the Fitzroy Gardens, and thus
affords the great advantage of perfect drainage. The sanitary arrangements are
scientific and complete, and have lately been reviewed and perfected by an
eminent sanitary expert. The grounds are ample and well laid out, and
embrace several lawns, tree-shaded walks, &c., and a large and superior
asphalt tennis-court. The class rooms are numerous, large and well ventilated.
Experience has proved that the site, for health and convenience, cannot be
surpassed. In five minutes the centre of the town can be reached, and yet the
grounds are as private and secluded as if they were situated in the country.
ADMISSION OF PUPILS.
Admission to the College, either as a boarder or day
scholar, has never been a matter of course. With regard
to boarders especially, the greatest care has always been
exercised, the end aimed at being that no girl should be
found resident within the College with whom a careful and
prudent mother would not wish her daughter to associate.
References are therefore required. Cases sometimes occur
where the application of this rule has caused annoyance to
parents whose position and character in their own districts
are beyond question, but such parents are asked to reflect
that this rule, while causing no embarrassment to them,
will in turn be a safeguard to their own daughters. The
Principal will also require an assurance, express or implied,
that students entering have not been expelled from their
previous school, and have not been exposed to any
infectious disease within the two preceding months.


South View from the College Windows.


OBJECTS AND METHODS
/ \
The College was established for the purpose of providing for the daughters of Australians as high an
education as their sons are receiving at first-class boys’ schools, and for securing that this education should
be accompanied by religious instruction and imparted in a thoroughly religious atmosphere. In carrying
out these objects several leading principles have been kept in view. First of all, cheapness
has not been supremely aimed at. Parents may take it for granted that a cheap education,
unless where there are large endowments, is inevitably a limited and defective one,
for the simple reason that the employment of accomplished and well-paid teachers
is in that case impossible. At the same time to meet the circumstances of the
times the fees have lately been reduced all round to as low a figure as
can be expected in a first-class establishment. In the second place,
each teacher is, as far as possible, confined to one or two subjects,
which can thus be thoroughly mastered and taught with an ease
and efficiency which a general teacher, who teaches a little of nearly
everything, cannot possibly attain to. Junior pupils, moreover, have in
this way the great advantage of being taught by the same teachers as the
advanced classes. In the third place, the work done is regularly tested once a
fortnight by a written examination in each subject. By this means the teacher finds
out whether the teaching is being assimilated, and at what points it requires to be
supplemented, and the pupil is saved the strain of preparation extending over a long
period. This system, so laborious for the teacher, but so beneficial for the scholar, has
conduced perhaps more than anything else to raise the College to the high position which
it occupies among schools. Reports of these examinations are carried home by every scholar once
a fortnight, and parents are asked to affix their initials in the column set apart for that purpose.


SUBJECTS TAUGHT
T THE College is divided into two departments. In the Junior Department or School, which is
A L, intended for girls under twelve years of age, the course of instruction embraces English (Reading,
Spelling, apd Grammar), Writing, Mental and Common Arithmetic, Geography, History, Lessons
j (S) j _ s) j, , on Natural Objects, Needlework, and French. This department also embraces
a Kindergarten Class, in which the pupils receive instruction suited to their years, with viva voce
instruction in French. Great importance is attached to this department as a means of
preparation for the higher classes, and the Head Master gives it his constant and
careful supervision. In the Senior Department the ordinary course of instruction
includes English (Spelling, Grammar, and Composition), History, Geography, Latin,
French, Arithmetic, Class Singing, and Needlework. In the higher classes,
Algebra and Euclid, the History of the English Language and Literature, and
that of French Literature, together with Lessons on Botany, Physics, Astronomy, and
the Laws of Health are added. Greek is also taught, and is open to all without extra
fee. German is an extra, but, as it is thought desirable to encourage the study of it as
much as possible, the fee for the course has been reduced to one guinea per term. Italian
is taught when desired.
There are also classes in Singing, Instrumental Music, Theory of Music, Drawing and
Painting, Dancing and Calisthenics, Gymnastics and Elocution. These subjects are extras.
Pupils in Music receive lessons twice a week from a master or mistress. Classes for
Book-keeping, Shorthand, Ambulance work, &c., are formed as required.


MORAL AND RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION.
produce refined and well-educated Christian gentlewomen is the great end and aim,
\ the very raison d'etre of the College; and to attain this end it is felt that religion
must permeate and penetrate all its work. It is not considered enough to have a
“ good moral tone ” in the College. It is earnestly sought to make “ the fear
of God ” a controlling and regulating motive in the work and conduct of all. Religious
instruction is therefore made part of the regular work of the School, and is given by the Principal
himself, the classes being taken separately, and thoroughness secured in this as in other subjects
by oral and written examinations. As the instruction given is unsectarian, all pupils are required to
attend unless their parents have conscientious objections. Carefully selected portions of Scripture are
committed to memory in all the classes, and the proceedings of every day are opened with prayer
and the reading of a passage of Scripture.
I
EDUCATIONAL SUCCESSES.
The educational record of the College is of the most brilliant description. A few general
facts in proof of this are all that can here be given, for to enumerate all the distinctions
obtained by pupils of the College would of itself require a volume.
It will be admitted that a knowledge of our own language
and literature, and an intelligent acquaintance with
history, are of primary importance. At the Matriculation
Examinations of the Melbourne University, the first
place in English and History, and with it the
Exhibition for the year, has been won by pupils of
the College six times in nine years, in competition
with all the schools, boys’ and girls’, in the colony;
and in two of the remaining three years pupils of the
College occupied the second place. Besides a thorough
knowledge of English, the College aims at giving every
girl who passes through its curriculum an accurate
acquaintance with Sacred History, and the histories of
England, Rome, Greece, and Australia.


The College Drawingroom.


JN Modern Languages the Exhibition has been won seven times in twelve years.
In Classics several first-classes have been obtained, though in this department
the College is heavily handicapped in competition with boy’s schools, by the fact
that Greek is comparatively little studied in girls’ schools.
In Mathematics the College has an altogether unique record. In this subject
twenty first-classes in all have been awarded to girls, and of these , nineteen have been won
by pupils of the College. In the nineteen are included the second place five times, and
the first place, with the Exhibition, once. The winning of this Exhibition was made
the occasion of the following remarks in Woman, an English paper devoted to the interests
of women :—“ Although Australia has not yet produced an Agneta Ramsay, or a Philippa
Fawcett, it would seem as if their achievements had inspired Australian girlhood with a
noble desire of emulation. For the first time in the history of the Melbourne University,
the Mathematical Exhibition has been won by a girl. The young lady in question, Miss
Nellie Whyte, is very little over seventeen years of age, and her teachers at the Presbyterian
Ladies’ College, in East Melbourne, where she was educated, declare that she has quite a genius
for mathematics. English readers should bear in mind that this magnificent establishment
takes rank with the best of the public schools for boys—a kind of provincial Eton or Harrow.”
To sum up, within the last thirteen years 267 pupils of
the College have matriculated, and fifty-four first class honours,
• thirty-seven second class honours, and fourteen Exhibitions, with
a proximo accessit, have been gained. To non-academical readers the
significance of these figures may not be apparent, and we therefore
add a few words of explanation.


A Mathematical Class.


h IVURING the last thirteen years, that is to say, since the present system of examination
Jlggl was instituted, fifty-two Exhibitions in all have been awarded at the matriculation
examinations to those candidates, boys or girls, who have stood first in each of
the four groups of Classics, Mathematics, English and History, and Modern
I
Languages. Of these, fourteen, or more than one-fourth of the whole, have fallen to
pupils of the College. Moreover, nearly one-fourth of all the first class honours awarded
in the above groups were won by College girls. That is to say, of the Exhibitions
AND FIRST CLASS HONOURS AWARDED SINCE 1881, ABOUT ONE-FOURTH HAVE BEEN SECURED BY PUPILS OF
the Presbyterian Ladies’ College, leaving the remaining three-fourths to be distributed among
ALL THE OTHER GIRLS’ SCHOOLS, ALL THE BOYS’ SCHOOLS, AND ALL THE PRIVATE STUDENTS OF THE COLONY.
In this comparison we have not included the two groups of Physics and Chemistry, and Physiology and
Botany, which were added for the first time to the matriculation programme in 1891.
In what has just been said the matriculation examinations have alone been referred to,
but the success of the College at other public competitive examinations (such as those of
Ormond, Trinity, and the University) has been equally striking. These successes, it is
confidently affirmed, have not been attained by any system of cram, or by undue attention
to special pupils, but are the outcome of a careful system of thoughtful training,
which extends to the whole school and secures the progress of every pupil.


A Painting Class


ACCOMPLISHMENTS.
the remarkable success attained by the College in all public competitive examinations, many
i "rf parents are apt too hastily to conclude that the education which it gives is of a one-sided
J character, and that all pupils are, if possible, pressed into the matriculation groove. But
*3* this is not the case. It is not forgotten that many parents do not wish their daughters
to matriculate, but prefer them to receive a good general education, combined with a thorough knowledge
of all lady-like accomplishments. The views of such parents are not only recognised; they are sympathised
with, and ample provision made to meet them. The literary, aesthetic, and artistic side of a lady’s
education is carefully attended to. Music especially (including Singing) is sedulously cultivated.
Indeed, the College now justly claims to be an important School of Music, there being at this
moment upwards of a hundred pupils engaged in this study. This department is under the charge of a
highly qualified Musical Director, who is responsible for the other Music Teachers, and whose business
it is to give unity to this branch of our work, and to examine, classify, and supervise
all the music pupils. The present Director is Mr. G. B. Fentum, whose eminent musical
ability, and skill and conscientiousness as a teacher, are well known in Melbourne. Three Music
Scholarships are annually awarded, and concerts are periodically given both by the
students and their teachers. The musical education of the pupils is thus carried forward
by the stimulus of competition with other students, by public practice, and by the opportunities provided
of listening to the performances of the best masters. For these concerts our large and splendid hall
(the gift of the late Mr. Wyselaskie), capable of seating about 800 persons, affords ample
and convenient accommodation.


A Violin Class.


igl HE classes in Painting and Drawing are taught by Senhor Loureiro.
|(3 Of this department it is enough to say that Senhor Loureiro has
studied in the art schools of Lisbon, Paris, and Rome; that his
own works have been hung “on the line” in Paris; and that among the
artists and teachers of art in the southern hemisphere, public opinion
unhesitatingly assigns to him the foremost place. Every pupil enjoys his
personal instruction, and all work done is original. The youngest pupil
must work from the model, from nature, from life, for only in this way, it is believed, can the eye,
the hand, and the artistic taste be educated, and a good foundation laid for future progress and attainment.
The art work of the College embraces Portrait Painting, in which Senhor Loureiro
is an acknowledged Master.
ADVANCED AND OCCASIONAL STUDENTS.
For the convenience of ladies who have left school, but desire to carry
on their education, or of those who propose to go out as governesses, the
lectures and classes in the higher subjects are open to occasional students
on payment of a small fee. In this connection the English Literature class,
conducted by Professor Harper, deserves special mention. Professor Harper
possesses exceptional qualifications for conducting such a class, and in addition
to class work, will be happy to give advanced students hints for private
study, and to guide and supervise their reading.


A Drawing Class


PHYSICAL EDUCATION.
'HERE is a large and splendidly-equipped gymnasium attached to the College—the largest and best,
it is believed, attached to any school or college in Melbourne. This department is under the
charge of Misses Dick and McCormick, who have made a special study of the principles and
methods of this branch of education.
HEALTH AND COMFORT OF THE BOARDERS.
One of the principal objects which the Church had in view in establishing the
College was to provide a comfortable and Christian home for young ladies while
receiving their education in Melbourne, and this object is never lost sight of.
Among the advantages secured to boarders may be mentioned the following -
Their health is carefully looked after. The hours of work are
strictly limited, and abundant outdoor exercise is insisted upon. The house is moreover
provided with every appliance necessary for health and comfort. 1 here are two
baths on each floor with hot and cold water laid on to each bath. By special
arrangement a pupil may have a room to herself.
The discipline is strict, though not harsh. Miss Barton, the experienced Lady Superintendent,
is constantly with the boarders, and is unwearied in her attentions to them. She is assisted by
an adequate staff of governesses. Young children are carefully looked after, and
assistance given them with their lessons. There is a large reduction of fees
in the case of young children, and also in the case of sisters. No
girl is allowed to leave the College except under escort.


The Gymnasium.


fgpHE domestic arrangements are under the personal
2/ superintendence of Mrs. McLaren, who sees to every detail
? herself. The cuisine and table receive her daily attention. The
importance of this department is fully recognised, and constant vigilance
is exercised with regard to it. In the case of a boarder being laid
aside by illness, Mrs. McLaren invariably gives personal attention to her, and sees that she has
everything which her condition requires until she is again at work.
The number of boarders is limited. It is thus
possible to give to each that careful supervision and individual
attention which are so important in the training and education
of the young, and which in a much larger establishment would
be impossible.
The influence of religion is constantly appealed to.
Besides morning and evening prayers, a verse of Scripture is committed
to memory by the boarders every day, and special religious instruction is
given to them in the Sunday school conducted for their benefit every
Sunday afternoon. The Principal attaches great importance to this part
of his work, and never allows any other engagement to interfere with it.
Practical religion is not forgotten. Every alternate Saturday evening is
devoted to Dorcas work, and the large quantities of new clothing which by this
means are sent to the Melbourne Ladies’ Benevolent Society enable the Society to
add to the comfort of many a destitute home.


The Dining Hall.


Recreation of Boarders.
JTT GOOD deal of hard work is required in the College, and therefore it is necessary
LjJk that reasonable opportunities for change and recreation should be afforded to those who
A E are resident within its walls. This important matter is not neglected. Besides regular
walks for all the boarders, ample time is allowed every afternoon for tennis and
out door games. A portion of every evening is also set aside for amusement. Music
and song are encouraged, and materials and opportunities for indoor games, such as
bagatelle, table croquet, dominoes, draughts, &c., are provided. There is a large and
attractive library for the use of the boarders, and a supply of all the most interesting
magazines is regularly obtained. No work is permitted on Saturday after ten a.m., and
boarders are allowed to spend that day with relatives or friends, if they have such in
town, and if their parents wish it; otherwise they remain at the College. Once a
month, on the like conditions, they are allowed to go out from Saturday till Monday
morning. Variety and interest are also secured by entertainments of a special character.
What was actually done in this respect last year is shown by the following extract from
the Principal’s last Report: “ During the year a good deal has been done for the
entertainment of our boarders. Besides the usual opportunities for recreation, four
evening parties have been given, to which the friends of boarders and other ladies and
gentlemen well known in the Church and in the community were invited. There have been three picnics, three
regular concerts, and an elocutionary entertainment. Various places of interest have been visited, among
others the Melbourne Observatory, where the wonders disclosed by the big telescope were duly admired. I
have also to thank friends who, on Saturday afternoons, have opened their houses and grounds to our young
ladies and entertained them at afternoon tea ; and I would like to throw out a hint that the example of these
friends might be copied by others, who in this pleasant and kindly way might show an interest in the College.”
From what has been said it may seem that quite enough is being done in the way of amusement and
entertainment; at the same time lessons are never allowed to be interfered with.


In the Playground.


REQUISITES FOR BOARDERS.
4 Sheets.
4 Table Napkins.
1 Flannel Dressing Gown.
4 Pillow Cases.
6 Towels.
1 Waterproof.
ORDER OF THE DAY FOR BOARDERS.
6.30 to 8 Baths, Dressing, and Practice.
8 to g Prayers, Breakfast, and Walk.
9 to 12.30 Public Classes.
12.30 to 1.50 Dinner, &c.
I -5° t° 3’3° Public Classes.
3-3° t° 5-3° Out door Exercises, &c.
5.30 to 6 Tea.
6 to 8 Preparation of Lessons.
8 to 8.45 Indoor Amusements, Letter-writing, &c.
8.45 to 9.15 Supper and Prayers.
9.15 Retire to Rest.
In the case of young students the hours of work are shorter
FEES:
(payable in advance.)
JUNIOR DEPARTMENT.
(For Girls under Nine Years of Age — Kindergarten.)
PER TERM.
Forenoon Pupils (from 10 o’clock) - - 1 Guinea
All-Day Pupils 2 ~
(For Girls between Nine and Twelve Years of Age.)
Day Pupils (with French) 1 - 3 Guineas
Day Boarders 5 ~
Weekly Boarders - - - - -14 ~
Resident Boarders - - - - -15 ~
SENIOR DEPARTMENT.
PER TERM.
Day Pupils, Classes I. and 11. - 4 Guineas
Day Pupils, Classes 111., IV., V., VI. - 5 ~
Day Boarders 6 and 7 ~
Weekly Boarders (under 15) - - 17 ~
Resident Boarders (under 15) - - - 18 ~
Weekly Boarders ig ~
Resident Boarders - - - - - 20 ~
No separate fee is charged for French, Latin, and
Class Singing, as it is considered that they ought to form
part of the regular course of instruction. Greek is also
taught without extra fee. Laundry, one guinea per term.
A reduction of ten per cent, is made in the case of
sisters who are Resident Boarders.


FEES FOR SPECIAL INSTRUCTION.
PER TERM.
!4 Guineas
3 »
Solo Singing (from a Master) - - 4 ~
Solo Singing (from a Lady) - - 3 ~
Violin - 5 »
Harmony ------ jl
2 »>
Drawing in Perspective - 2 ~
Painting in Water Colours - - 3 ~
Oil Painting ------ 3 »
China Painting . ... t 3 »»
German x
Italian - 2
Dancing (under 12) 1 „
Dancing (above 12) - ii „
Gymnastics ------ 1
Elocution r
Bookkeeping ------ j
Shorthand x
English Literature - - - 1 ~
A charge of Five Shillings per quarter is made for
materials (including Pens, Ink, Copy Books, Blotting
3p er > Slates, Pencils, and Examination Paper). A
charge of Sixpence per term is also made for Patchwork
■ the College Magazine,
Miss Paterson, Teacher of English, appointed 1887.


Term Days and Holidays.
SHE Academical Year is divided into Four Terms.
The Term Days, on which names and fees are received, are the second
Tuesday of February, and about 30th April, 30th July, and Bth October.
The School breaks up for the Christmas Holidays about 17th December,
and as it is thought desirable to have as little work as possible during the
heat of summer, it does not meet again till the second Tuesday of February.
The Mid-winter Holidays are from about Bth July to 29th July. There is also
a break of four days at Easter. The Holidays and Term Days are so arranged that each Term
contains as nearly as possible ten working weeks. The first term is not shorter than the others; in point
of fact it is a little longer. It is a great disadvantage to a pupil to miss the first term. A term’s
NOTICE, OR HALF A TERM’S PAYMENT, IS REQUIRED BEFORE THE REMOVAL OF A STUDENT,
WHETHER BOARDER OR DAY PUPIL, AND WHETHER ATTENDING THE REGULAR COURSE OR ANY
special or extra course. A pupil entering during the term will be charged in proportion.
The Staff.
The College is fortunate in its general teaching staff. Most of the teachers have
been connected with it for many years, have helped to build up its reputation,
and are proud of their connection with it. The Principal and Head Master
both take a large share of the teaching, and are thus brought into contaCt
with every girl in the College. The visiting staff consists of the best teachers and
trained specialists to be found in Melbourne. The following are the names of the teachers with the
subjects taught by them ; —-


principal:
Rev. S. G. MeLAREN, M.A., Edin.
IfoeaD /Ifta6ter:
J. P. WILSON, Esq., M.A., LL.D.
(Exhibitioner and Scholar in Laws, Melbourne University.)
Cady Superir?tei?dei}t:
Miss BARTON.
fl\att?emati(;s:
The HEAD MASTER and Miss CROWTHER.
Ei^lish:
Miss PATERSON (Melbourne University).
glassies:
The PRINCIPAL and Miss CORNWALL, B.A.
/IpderQ lai7<suases:
The PRINCIPAL and Madame PRINCEP.
History ai}d Qeosrapl?y :
The HEAD MASTER and Miss TRICKETT.
literature: BoolcKsepP*? :
Prof. HARPER, M.A., B.D. The PRINCIPAL.
Heecileu/orlc: U/ritir?<s:
Miss BARTON. MR. J. R. NEEDHAM.
KiQdenjartei): /T\ u 5 Director:
Madame PRINCEP. MR. G. B. FENTUM.
Rev. S. G. McLaren, M.A.
Principal, appointed 1889.


(Mr. G. B. FENTUM
Ptanofoftf ) SIG. MALETT
Pianoforte ) Mrs. BROCKELBANIC
f Miss R. H. PURCELL
Violin - - - - Mr. G. WESTON
Harmony and Theory of (Mr. G. B. FENTUM
Music - \ Mrs. BROCKELBANK
c t HERR HARTUNG
ringing ’ } Mrs. RAMSDEN
Italian - Signor PORENA
Dancing - Mons. P. BIBRON.
Class Singing - - - Mr. G. B. FENTUM
~ (Mr. G. LUPTON
Elocution - - - | MissN ELLIE VEITCH
Gymnastics - - - Miss McCORMICK
paii}tii}<s ai}d Drau/iqs:
SENHOR LOUREIRO, Eleve de l’ecole des Beaux-
Arts, Paris. Prix de Rome de l’Academie
Royale de Lisbonne. Membre de l’Association
Artistique Internationale de Rome.
J. P. Wilson, Esq., M.A., LL.D.
Head Master. Joined Staff as Teacher of Mathematics 1878.
Appointed Vice-Principal 1885, and Head Master 1889.


G B. Fentum, Esq., Musical Director,
appointed 1887.
Senhor Loureiro, Teacher of Painting and Drawing,
appointed 1891.
Eleve de l’ecole des Beaux-Arts, Paris. Prix de Rome de
l’Academie Royale de Lisbonne. Membre de l’Association
Artistique Internationale de Rome.


“ PATCHWORK."
narne > a magazine has been published in the College almost since its foundation.
||j|| It not only forms a bond of union amongst the pupils, but serves as an outlet for budding
literary talent. Its pages are almost entirely filled by contributions from pupils, some of them
possessing a very promising degree of merit. The following contributions in verse are selected
almost at random from recent numbers of the magazine.
THE AUTOCRAT OF THE BREAKFAST TABLE.
i Once at a certain boarding-house,
The landlord’s daughter fair,
Brought in her hand a good-sized dish
Of hot-house peaches rare.
2 Now, this to those who boarded there
Was reckoned quite a treat,
Because their usual dinner was
Just pudding and some meat.
3 But we must notice two of these
(The boarders there, I mean),
One says—“ The times when we get fruit
Are few and far between.”
4 This was the man we shall call John,
And he was short and fat,
The other was (don’t mind his name)
The placid Autocrat.
5 He just had laid it down to John,
“ There is not one of you,
There’s John to you, and John to me,
And one and one make two.
6 “And then there’s John whom no one knows,
And he’s the best by far,
And he’s the third, and that one is
The John you really are.”
7 John listens to this sage remark,
And slowly drinks his tea,
And that he profits much by it,
He goes to let them see.
8 " Pass me the peaches,” cries friend John
In tones to be obeyed,
Though of the famous Autocrat
The rest are quite afraid.
9 The dish is passed, three rosy ones
Are all it now contains,
It comes to John, who in his hand
The blushing vase retains.
10 And emptying on his plate the while
Each one of those last three,
“ How nice,” he says, “ there’s just enough
Just one for each of me.”
SPRING.
1 The buttercups are rippling in the breeze,
Mellow and golden, 'neath the light green trees,
Laden with stores to enrich the humming bees,
Busy in Spring.
2 The heath’s long reign is o’er, the violets come,
Primrose and daffodil, wattle and broom,
The scents of flowers, the insects’ busy boom —
Tell us of Spring.
3 The bluebells make their tiny petals ring,
And everything in nature tries to sing,
And girlhood loves to rhyme upon the Spring
Fair days of Spring.


Lady Superintendent’s Room.


THE LEAF.
(Adapted from the French of Victor Hugo.)
x A leaf has fallen from its branch,
Though but a little one.
“ Where goest thou ?” “I do not know
’Tis not my will that’s done.
2 “ The wind with gentle breath me takes
Far over hill and dale ;
I’ve but one work—to be content
In that I shall not fail.
3 “ Where rose and myrtle leaf abound,
Why should not I be there ?
When these their burden bear so well,
What matters how I fare ? ”
RHYMES BY A LITTLE ONE
i What do we talk about
That makes us laugh and shout
About the school ?
Does grammar rule,
Or thought of sum
Make laughter come ?
2 Oh no ! we talk about
(With many a smile and pout)
What things we eat,
Our dresses neat,
To whom we spoke,
Our words or joke.
3 That’s what we talk about
Beyond all shade of doubt.
FORGET-ME-NOT.
1 “Why dost thou sorrow, little flower?”
The loving Father said.
Full tremulous the flower replied,
And raised its drooping head,
2 " Father, my.name that Thou hadst given,
I fear I have forgot.”
The Father bent, and gently said,
“ Fair one, forget-me-not.”
LIFE IN MARS.
1 How gladly and how faithfully
We do our lessons all,
And with what pure enjoyment
We hear the school-bell's call.
And how our eyes do sparkle,
As we learn our Latin verbs,
And what a joy our Euclid is,
And our “ historic words.”
2 How captivating are the sums
We do from morn to night;
And as for French translation—
’Tis endless, soft delight;
Our dates, too, are the sources pure
Of universal joy,
And English composition’s but
A pleasure-giving toy.
THE WILY MEMBER.
1 Freetrade and Protection and Johnson, M.P.,
Sat down to discuss whether duty on tea,
As Protection declared,
Could never be spared,
“ ’Tis our duty to keep up the tax, don’t you see? ”
While Freetrade maintained
The position was strained,
And Johnson kept saying “ With both I agree.”
2 Then Protection responded with innocent air,
That a Tariff is perfectly right and quite fair.
Beyond shadow of doubt
If it’s once pointed out
’Tis Protection that’s made this the place it’s become.
Then Freetrade with a smile
Full of meaning the while,
Said ’Tis true,” and Johnson, for once was struck dumb


A Calisthenics Class.


Patchwork is not usually opened to articles either criticising
or praising the College, but an exception was recently made
of the following paper from the pen of a young lady who
belongs to a family of scholars, who herself was a dis-
tinguished student at the College, and who has since made
for herself a name in literature. It is entitled :
The College Revisited.
By an Old College Girl.
OME time ago it was my good fortune to be present
fat an “At Home ” given by the Principal to the
Council of the College, the boarders, and other
friends interested in its welfare. The long dining-hall had
been transformed into an elegant and spacious reception
room; and one could not but feel glad that the girls
who meet there every day had surroundings so pleasant
to look upon.
Miss Trickett,
Teacher of Geography and History. Appointed 1878.


The Tennis Court.


j|p||F course, visitors could understand that the dainty tables, draperies, china and other adornments
gteAPj were part of its gala dress, and that a few hours earlier the tout ensemble was
somewhat different. Yet the background must still have been the same: there still
would be the lofty roof, the comfortable carpeting, the softly tinted walls, the
well-chosen engravings, the handsome window draperies, and the crimson
curtains which cover the book-case at the further end of the room. There can
be nothing bare nor barrack-like about it at any time ; it is a very cheerful
apartment, and quite suggestive of home. It was never our fortune to try College fare in the days
when we were on the pupils’ roll, but we do it this evening. The repast provided quite
deserved to be called sumptuous—and it was almost entirely the production of the College kitchen.
Like the decorations, the feast may have been a company meal; but the quality of the food and
the skill for its preparation are always the same: we feel sure that excellence and variety are
thoughtfully studied by the heads of the College, who recognise that the corpus sanum, a well-
nourished body, is as essential as the mens sana — a well-balanced mind. What we said of
the dining-room might be repeated for the study also, a large room where the boarders meet
to prepare their work at night. A time-table hangs in a prominent position, giving the
number of hours which the girls in the different classes are expected to spend upon their work.
But the place of honour above the mantelpiece is given to a framed copy of Kingsley’s advice to
school-girls, the lines we all know, beginning, “Be good, sweet maid, and let who will
be clever.”
Of the different class-rooms, music-rooms, and the noble Wyselaskie Hall,
it is scarcely necessary to speak. The last mentioned should be well known to most people who have
daughters, sisters or friends at the Presbyterian Ladies’ College.


A Tennis Group


IT is there that the school meets every morning for prayers; it is there that
the girls and their visitors gather for the concerts, lecturettes, and other
entertainments, which, at intervals throughout the year, are provided for their
amusement. There, too, the P.L.C. Guild has its annual social meeting; and
there is held that great function which brings to a close the months of hard work, and
is known as the Speech Day.
The boarders’ bedrooms are all upstairs, and occupy the greater part
of two stories. The stairs themselves are very comfortable, wide and easy and beautifully carpeted.
On one of the landings stands a large cupboard, in which the supply of bed and table linen is
neatly stored away. Every shelf is divided into compartments, and every compartment bears a girl’s
name, so there can be no possibility of confusion. There are several bathrooms, each provided
with hot water pipes, and each within easy distance of a group of rooms. There are long passages
and airy bedrooms, bright and fresh and thoroughly cheerful. When I saw them last, they were
flooded with sunshine, and the views from the open windows were so fine and so far-reaching, that
it was really difficult to tear oneself away. One set of rooms overlooks the Fitzroy Gardens
with Government House in the background, and away in the distance, a
glimpse of the sea. From another side of the house there is a good
view of the College grounds with their green lawns, tree-bordered
walks, swinging boats and tennis court, and, in the distance, the purple
hills of the Dividing Range. No newcomer who stands for a minute at one of these
windows need have any further fears that all work and no play is the future before her.


A Kindergarten Class.


BOR would she have any cause to be dissatisfied with her
bedroom either. The rooms are all distinctly comfortable,
and with their artistic dados and tinted walls are
/jl attractive to the eye. They are so furnished
f 1 that there is a place for everything ; and a clear expectation
| as well, that everything shall be in its place. Indeed, it
would be difficult to spend much time under the care of
the Lady Superintendent without learning some
valuable lessons of order and neatness. There
is plenty of space, too, for the disposal of photographs
and other girlish treasures, which do so much to make a room look pretty and a strange place homelike;
in fact, whichever way one turns, the same impression is still conveyed. As far as school training and
home life can be combined, they are combined here; and a girl is sure, not only of good teaching, but
of pleasant surroundings, wise influences, a distinctly religious atmosphere and kindly care when she comes
as a boarder to the Presbyterian Ladies’ College.


Interior Wyselaskie Hall.


IN CONCLUSION
HE following passage from the Head Master’s last Report may fitly close this little volume, which is
published as a souvenir of the completion of the twentieth year from the foundation of the College.
Alluding to the approach of this event, Dr. Wilson, whose recollection covers the greater
portion of the twenty years, says:—“ We may, now, begin to consider ourselves as a school
with a history. The leading members of some of the leading schools in every colony of
Australia have served on the staff or gone through our classes; one of the most
famous singers in the world sat on the benches; the names of our pupils are studded
over the Honour Lists of the University. From our midst have gone forth artists of
repute, well-known journalists, clever musicians, leaders in philanthropy, missionaries who
labour in Indian zenanas and the broad fields of China. Although only this day does it leave its
‘ teens,’ the reputation of the College as formative of character, as a school of sound
learning, as an Academy of Music and School of Art, extends far and wide over Australasia ;
and even in Europe the ladies’ journals know and refer to it as the Australian Eton
or Harrow!
“Surely the venerable Presbyterian Church of Victoria may well be proud of this
fair child of its wisdom.”
Presbyterian Ladies’ College,
East Melbourne, December, 1894.


South Facade , Facing Fitzroy Gardens.


SCOTCH COLLEGE, MELBOURNE.
Principal: ALEXANDER MORRISON, m.a.,11.d Vice-Principal : ROBERT MORRISON, m. a., Senior Hope Scholar, Edinburgh University.
Assisted by a Staff of Efficient Masters.
FEES. Day Pupils, from 2$ to 5 Guineas per Term; Resident Boarders, from 15 to 20 Guineas per Term,
s' "'HE Scotch College is situated in the healthiest and most retired part of Melbourne, facing the Fitzroy and the Treasury Gardens.
((7-') wa ? founded in 1851, to supply a High-Class Liberal Education, preparing alike for Business Pursuits and for the Public
\ —/ Examinations; and former pupils have attained to some of the highest positions in Parliament, in the Professions, and in
Mercantile and Banking Institutions. The College has always taken a leading position at the University. About 800 boys from
the School have Passed the Matriculation Examination, and upwards of 300 have qualified themselves for University Degrees or
for the Professions.
. The Boarding School. —ln the Boarding Establishment the means of instruction combine supervision and training by the
Principal and Resident Masters, with a systematic course of daily tuition by Experienced Teachers in the Public School. The accommodation
is of the most complete kind, and there are no dormitories.
, , Preparatory School.— This is intended for young boys from about 7 years of age. who are taught the ordinary English
branches, and the elements of French and Latin.
Physical Training.— This receives due encouragement, and the College holds a leading position in athletics.
UNIVERSITY RESULTS, 1894.
Matriculation Examination. —The Lists of Successful Candidates include the names of 32 different boys from the College,
which took an exceptionally high position in all the harder and more important subjects. Of these 13 passed in Greek, 5 with honours, and 1
failed; in Latin 28 passed, 10 with honours, and 2 failed; in Algebra 30 passed, 6 with honours, and 2 failed; in Euclid 31 passed, 2 with
honours, and 1 failed.
Matriculation Honours - Boys from the College gained 11 places in the Class Lists, including first place in Classics and the
Classical Exhibition. Of the 8 boys who obtained a place in the order of merit, in Classics, 4 were from the College; and of the sin Mathematics,
3 were from the College.
Ordinary Examinations.- In Arts, 14 former pupils passed, 35 in Medicine, 4in Laws, 14 in Engineering, and 16 in Law
Subjects ; a total of 83 passes in the respective years of their courses.
Honour Examinations —Former pupils gained 15 first classes (including first place in Classics in the first and second years);
12 second classes, 17 third classes, 9 exhibitions, 2 scholarships, and 13 degrees.
Ormond College.— Students from the Scotch College gained 14 scholarships, including first place at entrance in both
Classics and Mathematics.
The First Term of 1895 will commence on TUESDAY, 12th FEBRUARY.
Prospectus from Messrs. Melville and Co., Collins Street; and from the Principal.


MELVILLE, MULLEN & SLADE
Clßooksellers to tbe TUmversitß of /ifoelbourne),
HAVE ON HAND
A Large aqd Varied Stock of Books in all departs of Literature,
9leu) J3oofo Tieceitied 6y etiery 9/laiY £fteamed
UNIVERSITY AND COLLEGE TEXT BOOKS IN STOCK.
0 choice selection of PLAIN AND FANCY STATIONERY at Moderate Prices.
Orders for Periodicals, Printing, Visiting Cards, Bookbinding, &c„ receive immediate and careful attention.
Mullen’s Library
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION from ONE GUINEA.
Country Residents Liberally Dealt With.
Mullen’s monthly Circular
POSTED TO
ANY ADDRESS.
DVCEL'VILLE, UVTCTXjIEjEIN- & SLADE
Booksellers, Stationers, and Librarians-
262 and 264 Collins Street, Melbourne-


HICKS, ATKINSON & SONS
(LATE MOUBRAY, ROWAN & HICKS),
<£■> „ ,a wtfP'
# -SP -&*) y AX'
C s2,"^'I 0 ' v^
<T C .,e* -*°
#“ &)** #
■CV
p
&•'
3k
'l'
<§**' J r *s<y
HAVE BEEN APPOINTED SOLE AGENTS FOR VICTORIA OF THE
rated CXOTHIIfQ
The only Natural Gioitity (or lire toitat tody, tool it Summer; want it Witter.
Light, Durable, Economical, Healthy, and Comfortable. Cellular Clothing 1 combines all the essential attributes
of a perfect material for underwear.
A Large Stock of both Ladies’ and Gentlemen’s Undergarments is always on hand.
Please apply for Prices, Patterns, and Pamphlet, containing full particulars of the advantages of Cellular Clothing.
Jfiefa, stftkindon $£ ofond,^
And 65 and 66 Basinghall Street,
London, E.C.
eOLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.




Presbyterian Ladies' College Albert St East Melbourne
Presbyterian Ladies' College Handbook 1894-1895
