

iT7?
GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
OF AUSTRALASIA.
ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
CONTENTS:
President's Annual Address.
PROCEEDINGS
OF THE ’ - . S
, . ,4- ' ’’ r • jsSf sy ,■■ #.
J vjST ?
/M/
ROYAL
-* A A
IJJbelaibx :
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street.


P / ZUk


AUSTRALASIA.
ROYAL
GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN BRANCH
■HE Annual Meeting of the South Australian Branch
of the Royal Geographical Society op Australasia
was held on Friday afternoon, June Bth, 1900, in the
Society’s Rooms, 3, State Bank Chambers, Pirie Street,
The chair was taken by Simpson Newland, J.P., the
JL President.
The Minutes of the last Annual Meeting were read and
confirmed'. Mr. T. Gill (Hon. Treasurer) presented the balance
sheet, which showed that the total receipts for 1899-1900 were
£166 15s. 9d., and the expenses £162 3s. 4d., leaving a balance
of £4 12s. sd. The assets of the Society are valued at £2,247
16s. sd.
The President (Simpson Newland, Esq., J.P., then delivered
his Annual Address as follows ;
Since the last Report, dated June 16, 1899, your Council
has held seven meetings, and during that period six ordinary
members and two life members have been added to the Society.
Three papers have been read during the past session, comprising
a lecture on August 11 by Mr. Daniel Matthews on “ The Upper
Murray Tribes”; on October 25 by Mr. W. Griffiths, M.P., on


“ Australia Twice Crossed” ; and on November 20 by Rev. Dr.
Eitel, M.A., Ph.D., on “Chinese Notions of Geography and
Geomancy,” The two lectures last mentioned were delivered at
the Stow Lecture Hall, Flinders Street, which, in the absence of
any suitable room of our own, has been secured for future
lectures. Your Council has also, since the last annual meeting,
arranged for a new and more suitable office in the State Bank
Buildings, in Pirie Street, to which they removed in July last.
Its central position has been found a great convenience to the
members.
Polar Exploration.
Allusion was made in the last Report to the Expedition fitted
out by Sir George Newnes, Bart., under the leadership of Mr.
Borchgrevink, in the “ Southern Cross,” which left Hobart for
Cape Adair on December 19, 1898. Mr. Borchgrevink reports that
his expedition has been a signal success in traversing hitherto
unknown ground and in locating the position of the Magnetic
South Pole. The publication of details will be awaited with
much interest. A hearty welcome was extended to Mr. Borch-
grevink and his party, both at Hobart and in Melbourne, and it
was a matter of regret that his arrangements precluded a similar
privilege to our Society in South Australia. We were, however,
favoured by Mr. Borchgrevink, immediately after his arrival off
Stewart Island, New Zealand, on Sunday night, April 1, with a
telegram as follows :—“The object of the Expedition is carried
out. South Magnetic Pole located. Furthest south by sledge
78.50 deg. Zoologist Hansen dead. ‘ Southern Cross’ will call
at Port Adelaide on homeward voyage. All well on board.” Sir
Langdon Bonython, our Vice-President, wired as follows:
“ Hearty congratulations splendid result of Expedition, surpassing
all previous explorers. Deeply regret Hansen’s death. Glad
other members of the party in good health, and that ‘ Southern
Cross’ will call at Port Adelaide.”
Subsequently some members of the Council had the pleasm-e
of interviewing the doctor of the Expedition, who called at
Adelaide whilst travelling by the mail steamer, on Thursday, May
17th, when they offered to Dr. Herluf Kloostad their hearty con-
gratulations at the triumphant results attending the exploration.
Active preparations are now in progress for the dispatch in
July, 1901, by the Royal Geographical Society of Great Britain,
and by the German and Norwegian Governments, of three dis-
tinct expeditions, to make a full investigation of the southern
polar regions, including also meteorological and magnetic observa-
tions.


The extreme advantages of three such expeditions working
simultaneously cannot be over estimated. Fuller information and
more extended observations at different points will be obtained
than would be possible if undertaken by one expedition only. The
spirit of rivalry that is sure to be engendered by this arrange-
ment will no doubt have a tendency to stimulate the officers of
the various expeditions to thoroughly perform their duties, and
the advantages to science by the combined action will be incal-
culable.
Andrbe’s North Polar Explorations.
The bulletin of the “ Sooiete de Geographic,” Paris, of March
last, contains the following paragraph, which will be read with
deep interest. “On the 11th September, 1899, a seal hunter
discovered on the northern coast of King Charles Island, East
Spitzberg, a buoy belonging to the Andree Expedition. Reporting
the discovery at Stockholm, it was recognised as being a buoy of
the special dimensions and kind which the aeronauts intended to
launch when passing the North Pole. A most careful examination
of the buoy did not reveal the presence of any document, so that
the course followed by the balloon after July 13th, 1897, —the date
of the last authentic message—as well as the fate of the expedition,
are reduced to a mere hypothesis. A minute examination of the buoy
by Monsieur Lagerheim has revealed the presence of a number of
vegetable aud animal substances. In a central tube of the buoy
were discovered eight pieces of moss or seaweed, but we cannot
draw any conclusions from their presence as to the course of the
buoy. In ths polar regions fragments of these cryptograms
abound amongst the debris which the waves deposit on the coast.
It is very probable that during the period the buoy was stranded,
the moss was deposited on the buoy. In these deposits were
discovered sixteen different kinds of algse and thirty-five varieties
of diatoms, and the fauna is represented by portions of a species
of sponge related to the A.scetta Coriacea. By the position which
the buoy occupied on King Charles’ Island, Monsieur Lagerheim
thinks it must have been stranded by a floe of ice, and during the
winter of 1898-1899. Of the thirty-five species of Diatoraacea
which were discovered on this waif of the sea, four are found in
salt water, and two belong to those which live in fresh or in
brackish water. Most of these diatoms are known on the coasts of
Spitzberg and Greenland, and twenty-nine species are found in the
sea at Kara and on the coast of Finmark, Norway. If the diatoms
which adhered to the buoy,—concludes Monsieur Lagerheim,—
shortly after it was thrown into the sea, were not covered or
replaced by others, this feature indicates that the buoy did not


pass the neighbourhood of a large river and did not come from
the eastern portion of the north coast of Siberia. Monsieur
Nathorst, in a scientific discussion, concludes that the buoy was
thrown into the sea south of Latitude 82 deg.”
Protection of Birds.
At our Annual meeting held in June, 1898, your Council
expressed a hope that some effective legislation should be speedily
put in operation with a view to obtaining protection for and
disseminating the knowledge of the useful birds and insects of the
colony. It is gratifying to know that a Bill dealing with this
matter was laid before Parliament by the Hon. T. Playford at the
close of last season, when it was read a first time. It is earnestly
hoped that this Bill will be re-introduced in the coming session,
and that it will be approved and become law.
The Northern Territory,
As the difficulties which threatened to delay the passing
Commonwealth Bill by the Imperial Parliament appear to be
removed, it is fitting that some reference should be made to the
Northern Territory. Clause 131 of the Commonwealth Bill
provides that “ The Parliament may make laws for the govern-
ment of any territory surrendered by any State to, and accepted
by the Commonwealth.”
Pc may be assumed that South Australia will be prepared to
surrender the Northern Territory to the Commonwealth, and it
may be confidently anticipated that the Commonwealth Parliament
will accept it, on terms equitable to South Australia. It was, of
course, a hazardous experiment for a young and scantily populated
Colony, such as South Australia was in 1864, to undertake to
establish a Colony in the tropics, and the stocking and develop-
ment of 523,620 square miles of country. It is not surprising,
however much it may be regretted, that the results of gallant, if
somewhat spasmodic, efforts have not been successful either from the
financial or settlement points of view.
Much good exploring work has been done by the parties
under Messrs. David, Lindsay, F.R.G.S., C. Winnecke, F.R.G.S.,
E. Favenc, F.R.G.S., and W. H. Tietkens, F.R.G.S., the Hon.
D. Carnegie, and Captain Carrington, and by the journeys of the
late Rev. J. E, Tenison-Woods, F.R.G.S., and Messrs. H. Y. L,
Brown, F.G.S., Government Geologist, and J. V. Parkes, late
Inspector of Mines; and much valuable information has been
collected by the Government Residents and embodied in their


reports. But as the Elder Scientific, the Horn Scientific, and
Calvert Exploring Expeditions did not accomplish the work
originally contemplated by the late Sir Thomas Elder, several
large areas in the Northern Territory remain unexplored.
Mr. H. Y. L. Brown in his report on “ Explorations in the
Northern Territory,” 1895, says : —“ An exploration of the un-
known area lying to the west of the telegraph line, between
Tennant’s and Barrow’s Creeks and the West Australian border,
would add considerably to what is known of the geography and
geology of the Northern Territory, and lead to the discovery of
country likely to prove auriferous.”
It is earnestly to be hoped that the arrangements necessary for
the transfer of the Northern Territory to the Commonwealth may
be completed at an early date, so that the remaining work of
exploration may be undertaken, and the great mineral, pastoral,
and agricultural resources of the Northern Territory may be
developed.
Western Australian Exploration.
Volume 111. of our proceedings published last year, contained
an abstract of the Journal of Mr. L. A. Wells, leader of the
Calvert Expedition. In March last, your Council received the
Journal of the expedition from Mr. Wells, which has since been
forwarded to the Government of Western Australia, who have
kindly agreed to publish it and furnish this Society with copies.
Horse Breeding.
As one of the objects of this Society is the furtherance of
Australian commercial progress, attention may well be directed
to one branch of industry which, from recent African develop-
ments, is likely to come under prominent notice.
Horse breeding can be carried on within the province of
South Australia with more satisfactory results than in any other
part of this Continent, as regards the stamp of hardy animals
required for active, arduous service on the battlefield, or for
transport of ammunition and stores over a rugged, bare, or in-
hospitable country. The climate of this province, and the nature
of the feed and herbage in those northern districts where bush
horses are profitably reared, and where stock has to travel long
distances over rough country for pasturage far from natural
waters, give them constitution and hardiness capable of under-
going long journeys with a minimum amount of sustenance.


This has been abundantly proved by the experiences of our
Army in South Africa ; and although for many years an export
has been carried on with India, our pastoralists should extend
their operations by breeding on country so admirably adapted for
the purpose, a class of horses which will be always in demand
for foreign parts, and yield profitable returns if carefully
managed and attended to.
The Centenary of South Australian Discovery.
The time is rapidly approaching for initiatory steps to be
taken for commemorating the Centenary of Captain Flinders’
visit to South Australia.
Mount Lofty was named by Flinders on 23rd March, 1802,
and Encounter Bay on 9th April, 1802. At both places some
lasting memorial should be erected and duly celebrated. Public
subscriptions for this purpose will be invited from our patriotic
colonists.
Additions to Library.
The following publications, proceedings, and maps have been
received, and for which the Society is much indebted to the
donors, viz. : Four volumes Transactions Smithsonian Institution,
Boston; also Proceedings of American Museum of Natural
History, New York ; South African Philosophical Society, Cape
Town ; Proceedings and Volumes Royal Geographical Society,
London ; Imperial Institute Journal, London; Geographical
Societies of Liverpool, Manchester, Tyneside, Scotland,
and Cornwall; Royal Dublin Society, also Proceedings Socihtie
de Geographie, Geographic Commerciale, and Comte Rendus de
Seances, Paris ; Societie de Geographie Havre and Tours, Milano
and Finland • Catalogue Scientific Literature from Royal Society,
Queensland ] one vol. Australasian Association for Advancement
of Science, from Professor Liversidge, M.A., LL.D., F.R.S.,
University, Sydney; Transactions American Academy Arts and
Sciences, New York ; Academy Arts and Sciences, Madison,
Wisconsin, U.S.A. ; Royal Asiatic Society, Ceylon and Bengal,
and Bombay, and Government Museum, Madras; Pamphlet
on Aboriginal Carvings, Port Jackson ; Coloured Map
of the National Park, Belair ; and Geological Map of South
Australia, from W. Strawbridge, Esq., Surveyor-General. Also
Reports from Royal Society and School of Mines, South Australia ;
from Department of Lands and Survey, New Zealand ; Depart-
ment of Mines and Geological Survey, Sydney, N.S.W., and Perth,
W.A. ; one vol. “Fossil Remains of Diprotodon,” from Royal


Society, S.A. ; Dictionary of Lepcha Language from the Lieu-
tenant-Governor of Bengal ; Pamphlet, “ Amongst Tropical
Islands,” from Miss Chewings; and Proceedings of Australian
Museum, Sydney. This Society is also indebted to Mr. E. L.
Grundy, of Alice Springs, for the loan of lantern slides of Central
Australia. Beport by Secretary of Agriculture, Washington;
Canadian Institute, Toronto; atid Geographical Society of the
Pacific, San Francisco; Proceedings Geographical Societies Vic-
toria, New South Wales, and Queensland; Journal Polynesian
Society; and a valuable series of proceedings from New Zealand
Institute, Wellington, New Zealand.
One hundred and ten volumes have been added to the library
during the past year. We have now a valuable collection of
geographical and scientific literature, and members of the Society
are cordially invited to visit the room at the State Bank Build-
ings whenever so disposed. The room is open to members from
9.30 a.m. to 4 p.m. daily, excepting Saturdays.
Mr. H. A. Parsons, LL.B., moved the adoption of the report
and balance-sheet. He was glad to know that the past year had
been such an active one. The heroism and arduous labours of ex-
plorers had revealed new worlds and new treasures in the polar
regions, and he hoped that even more encouraging results would
be obtained in the year to come. The Society had reason to feel
grateful for the fact that something practical had followed their
efforts to protect the bird life of South Australia, and he trusted
that the Bill which had been before Parliament would become
law. (Hear, hear.) He took a personal interest in the Northern
Territory, and there was no doubt that this great country had not
received the attention it deserved. They all looked for great
benefits from federation in this direction. He took that oppor-
tunity of welcoming back to Adelaide Mr. Newland, whose health
had been improved by the trip to Europe, and he introduced to
the meeting Dr. Alexander, of Dunedin, a member of the Royal
Geographical Society.
Mr. C. Sabine, J.P., second the motion, which was carried.
On the motion of Mr. W. Strawbridge, J.P., the following
officers were elected for the ensuing year: —President, Mr. R. Kyffin
Thomas; Vice-President, Sir J, Langdon Bonython; Council,
Messrs. S. Newland, W. P. Auld, A. W. Dobbie, C. H, Harris, W.
H. Phillipps, J. A. Johnson, and C, L. Whitham, and Mr. A. T.
Magarey to be an honorary member ; Secretaries, Hon. J. L,
Parsons and Mr, E. H. Newman; Treasurer, Mr. T. Gill;
Auditors, Messrs. L. H. Sholl and F. W. Giles.


8 THE PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS.
The meeting then closed.
MUO
W K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Adelaide.
F(33A^
Mr. C. L. Whitham moved a vote of thanks to the retiring
officers. They had done well to secure the present location for
the Society’s rooms, and if their record of work contained no
more than the arranging for Dr. Eitel’s lecture, mentioned in the
report, they were to be congratulated. Personally, he took a
humble part in the work of the Society, and for eight or nine
months his department had been engaged in preparing a new
map of Australia for use in the public schools, bringing up to
date the railways and goldmining districts. (Hear, hear.) The
map at present in use was issued twelve years ago.
Mr. A. A. Simpson seconded the motion, which was carried,
On the proposition of Mr. Newland, seconded by Mr
Thomas, it was decided to forward the condolences of the Society
to Mr. A. T. Magarey in his illness. Hearty wishes were ex-
pressed for the future of Mr. C. Sabine, who is about to leave
South Australia to settle in South Africa.
Mr. R. Kyppin Thomas, J.P., in returning thanks on behalf of
the newly elected officers, congratulated Mr. Newland upon his safe
return to South Australia. During his absence from the colony
Mr. Newland had worked for the Society, and he was sorry that
he did not see his way clear to again fill the Presidential chair.
It was with great diffidence that he (Mr. Thomas) took up the
mantle of the three eminent gentlemen who had preceded him.
During the fifteen years of the Society’s existence there had been
three Presidents. For the first nine years its destinies were
guided by Sir Samuel Davenport, whose knowledge of colonial
affairs was unique, Then, for a period all too short, the late Mr.
G. W. Goyder, was the President. The latter had a wonderful know-
ledge of the geographical and other features of South Australia,
and it was a matter for regret that his health did not allow him
to occupy the position longer. Mr. Newland had been President
for five years, and the Society was indebted to him for much valu-
able work. He regretted that they were to lose Mr. Sabine,
Mr, Newland remarked that he retired on his own wish,
because he did not believe in the term of office being too long.
Anything he had done for the Society had been a labour of love.
Mr. Sabine thanked the members for their good wishes. As
a member of the Society the distance between Africa and Australia
was not so very great, and be hoped to return to Adelaide some
time in the future.
V\C> ' D£ C|W2




■'
r■ ' ■
r
t
