

p 11^4-0
W M| *IUT)
MresewtuHou of the ’Westimmiml to the Me t% Mr . Mmu&-
A MEETING- of the Committee of Subscribers to this Testi-
monial having been held this evening in the Lecture-Room
of the Australian College, Jamison-street,—Present, Messrs. James
Stewart, Robert Andrews, John Wilson, James Dodds, Andrew
Trimble, John M‘Nab, George Drown, John Aird, Donald
M‘Pherson and John Ranken ; the Chairman, Mr. George Brown,
in stating the object of the meeting, read the following Resolution,
which had been adopted at a Meeting of the Friends of the Rev.
Dr. Lang, held in Sydney, on the 22nd of September last—viz ;
That this Meeting, appreciating the great and untiring ex-
ertions of the Rev. Dr. Lang, both here and in the mother country,
on behalf of these Colonies, is of opinion that some substantial
acknowledgment should be made to him, on his return amongst
us : and therefore resolves, that Subscriptions be forthwith opened
for the formation of a Fund to be called the “ Lang Testimonial
Fund.”
In pursuance of this Resolution a Committee had been ap-
pointed, which, after labouring zealously in the cause, had at length
brought their labours to a close and had now assembled to present to
their respected friend and fellow colonist, the Rev Dr. Lang, the
following Address and Testimonial The Chairman then called
upon the Honorary Secretary, Mr. Donald M‘Pherson, to read the
Address which w..s as follows :
Address.
TO THE REVEREND JOHN DUNMORE LANG, D.D.
Reverend Sir,
It is with no ordinary degree of pleasure that we, on behalf of
the Subscribers, present to you this Address and Testimonial from
your fellow colonists. In the expression of our feelings towards
you we desire to speak in all sincerity, simplicity, and truth;
knowing, as we well do, the singleness of mind with which, during
your whole life, you have pursued the one great object of moulding
and building up" into a nation the fine and flourishing provinces
of this glorious Austral land.
When we look back to your labours long years ago. in your
efforts to secure a healthy flow of Free Immigration to these shores
when we witness your unwearied and unceasing exertions on the
same momentous question, even to the present hour—and when we
reflect on the prejudice with which your endeavours have been
received by some, the opposition they have met from others, and
the discouragement which has been thrown upon them by both the
Local and the English Government, we cannot but admire the
indomitable perseverance which has characterized your efforts, and
the large measure of success which has attended your labours.
In youf long continued exertions to introduce the extensive culti-
vation of new products into the rich and fertile districts of the
Moreton Bay country,—products which we trust will ere long be
found amongst the staple exports of our land, and which will be
the means of adding, in an immense and incalculable ratio, to our
wealth and prosperity as a nation—we recognise not only the
purest spirit of philanthropy and love to our species, but also the
very highest order of genuine and unalloyed patriotism.
The magnitude and importance of your services in the cause of
Australia’s Political Freedom can scarcely he sufficiently appre-
ciated. In this respect we cannot but regard you as the “ very
foremost man of all these times”; though we believe that
posterity alone will be fully able to do that justice
to your character on this topic to which your eminent
talents, your political forethought, and your profound statesman-
ship so justly entitle you. We believe, however, that the time is
rapidly approaching, even more rapidly than is by many imagined,
when the soundness of your views, the rectitude of your principles,
and the desirability of your plans for the future government of the
united provinces of Australia will be more fully recognised and
universally adopted. We are satisfied that ‘ Freedom and Inde-
pendence,” can alone give to these Golden Regions of the eartli that
position among the nations of the world which their resources,
their wealth, the intelligence and the enterprize of theii inhabitants
plainly indicate that they are one day to assume.
We beg, Reverend Sir, your acceptance of this Testimonial of
our respect, and admiration for your talents, your zeal and your
perseverance to advance the best interests of your adopted land.
Wo do not present it to you as an adequate acknowledgment for
your eminent services to this country ; for those services, great
as they have been, and imperishable as we believe will bo their
results, are beyond ‘ all money and all price,” and you can only
find an adequate reward for them in the consciousness that you
have performed fearlessly, and at all hazards, your duty to your
country as a patriot and a Christian man. This is a reward which
we cannot pretend either to partake or enhance ; it is in fact the
highest reward which man can in this world enjoy.
With our best wishes for your welfare, and that of your amiable
wife and family, and hoping that your valuable life will be pro-
longed to see this beautiful country raised from a mere dependency,
to the state and glory of a nation,
We are Reverend Sir, with the most unfeigned respect and
esteem, your most faithful and sincere friends and well wishers,
John Wilson Janies Dodds
John Aird John Ranken
Andrew Trimble
John M‘Nab, Chairman of General Meeting
George Brown, Chairman of Committee
James Stewart and Robert Andrews Joint Treasurers
Donald M‘Pherson, Honorary Secretary.
Sydney, New South Wales May 2tfih. 1854.
The Testimonial, a bag containing Five Hundred and Fifty
Sovereigns, was then presented to Dr. Lang, by the Joint-
Treasurers, Mr. James Stewart and Mr. Robert Andrews ; to
which Dr. Lang made the following
Reply.
Mr Chairman, Fellow-citizens, and Friends,
I receive the very handsome Testimonial with which you have
now presented me, on your own behalf, and on that of all the
Subscribers, together with the strong expressions of confidence and
the manifestation of unfeigned and kindly feeling with which it
is accompanied, with sentiments of the liveliest gratitude, and
with heartfelt emotion. Originating as it did when I was absent
from the colony, and emanating as it does principally from the
Working Classes of this community—the men who form the bones
and sinews of our body politic, and who comprise so large a
proportion of its intelligence and moral worth—l esteem it the violent collision with whole classes of men, and to arrav against him in
more highly, and cannot but regard it as a peculiarly gratifying deadliest hostility the worst passions of our nature. Truth,
reward for the past and a strong encouragement for the future. whether moral, religious, or political, is always in the minority,
In particular, I beg 4# return you my sincere thanks for the and it can only attain the universal ascendancy that awaits it by
strong approval with whßn you have, been pleased to regard my a series of self-denying exertions, of incessant struggles and of
humble efforts, for the proPotfen ofi Immigration. Arriving as I fierce conflicts with the worst passions of men. Besides, whether
did in this colony, when it ves a penal settlement, more from habit, from ignorance, or from self interest, men get attached
than thirty years ago, I was early anj strongly impressed with the to bad systems of government, and resist every attempt to improve
idea that the grand desideratum lot the developement of its them. The Federal constitution of the United States for example
vast resources, as well as for its gradual election in the scale of in- is now not only the glory and the pride of evow American, hut the
telligence and virtue, was the influx ot a numerous, industrious, wonder and admiration of the whole civilized world; hut it met
and virtuous free immigrant population ; and th. 3 impression was with such violent opposition from numerous quarters when it was
only strengthened, on my repeated voyages to England, by the under consideration, that an American patriot of the time is said
comtemplatiou ot the hope ess poverty and Wretchedness of a to have expressed himself in Congress to the following effect,
large proportion of the humbler classes in me Mother Country, “ The repugnance of a great part of mankind to good government
as contrasted with the comfort and comparative thc.t wm such, that he believed that if an angel from Heaven was to
were so easily attainable by all industrious famines and individuals bring down constitution formed therefor our use. it would never-
of these classes in this happier la:fd iEl r adoption. Perhaps, in theless meet with violent opposition.” During the prevalence of
my humble endeavours to realise this idea ofi an extensive scale, I shivery in the West Indies, the negroes were subject to some
have been led into a course ol procedure somewhat unusual for strange disease which created an extraordinary and unnatural sort
persons of my office and station in sock ty ; hut the effort to confer of appetite which Jed them to eat earth or dirt. And when a
extensive benefit on one s fellovmen is at least pardonable, what- negro once took to dirt eating, there wasno breaking him off* the
ever may be its results ; and the importance of laying the had habit, there was no curing him.lßJhy|adigestihle substance
foundations of society with th.j right materials in a land like this accumulated in his stomach, where it mass of matter
cannot surely be over-estinuted. I have been instrumental, and soon brought him to his grave. Now we have been in
directly, in bringing out upwards of two thousand persons, with a state of political slavery in this country that it is no wonderThalr''"'
very few exceptions I belie'e, of industrious habits and virtuous many of the white negroes, both in the Legislative Council and j
character, to these shore/ The of about four of it, should not only have taken to dirt-eating, as they have
thousand of the destitute population Highlands and Islands evidently done to a lamentable extent, but that the habit should
of Scotland was entirely owning to lumefiorts in England in the have been so formed, and the liking to the base material so strong,
year 1837; and I have ascertained that hundreds, and even that they hate the very sight of the honest political physician who
thousands of respectable families and individuals besides, have been tries to" break them of it, and to deprive them of "their dirty
induced by my writings, and lectures, and personal intercourse in meal.
the Mother Country, to leave their native land and to become I am not only gratified, but encouraged and delighted, with the
colonists in Australia. strong sympathy you have express id for what are called “the ex -
In regard to the discouragement I have occasionally experienced trerae opinions’*’ I have been putting forth of late On th? spirit- -
in the prosecution of these objects, the calumnies with which I stirring subject of Freedom Independence for the Golden
have been assailed, and the impotent attempts of persons in Lands of Australia. Believing as Ido that it is the law of
authority to blast my character and to put me down, to which you nature and the ordinance of God that we, the inhabitants of these
have so feelingly alhj’ded, I would only observe that, so far as lam Australian Colonies should be free and independent, I firmly believe
acquainted with the history of the past, this has been the uniform and am satisfied that our freedom and independence would be the
treatment which those who have been honestly labouring for the pest thing for Britain as well as the best thing for us. It is a
welfare and advai cement ot society, especially it at all out of the foul calumny to assert, as is done by the white slaves of this colony,
ordinary course of proceeding on the part of men generally, have —the Government officials, the Nominees, the Lickspittles and the
experienced fiom their contemporaries in every country without Toadies of New South Wales,—that the man who honestly and fear-
exception, and in every age. 1 have much reason to be thankful, lessly seeks to promote the freedom and independence of these
however, to the good Providence of God, that these hostile and not colonies, is an enemy either of Her Majesty Queen Victoria or of
us frequently malignant efforts, whether on the part of men of the British people. I throw back, with the scorn and contempt
influence in society, or of men in authority either at home or which it merits, this impudent lie, upon the contemptible dirt-
abroad, have hitherto proved unsuccessful, and I can still eaters that utter it. lam quite sure there is no breast in this
stand erect among my fellow colonists and fellow citizens, and be Colony in which there resides a stronger attachment to Hei
cheered and honoured with the confidence and esteem of so many Majesty Queen Victoria than in mine r there is no pulse that
of their number as lam this day. Per Ups I may be permitted to heats with a stronger feeling of affection than mine towards
repeat, without subjecting myself to tne charge of egotism Cie British people.
characteristic observation of a worthy colonist on this subject, who% Britain, with faults, I love thee still.”
is now no more, with whom most of us were acquainted, and whose vr„ T _ u p ’ i pAKr,* ’ c T
untimely 'and Lamentable end by the hand of mi assassin we have th A,® Zl L' id f g f
all doubtless deplored-I allude to the lute Dr. Cuthill. Some of would 1 say of my native
person happening to observe to that lamented gentleman shortly ’ „ Her saints fcalte stones,
after my return to the Colony in November last, that they had Her very dust to me is dear.”
not managed to nut me down vet. “rut him down” said Dr. T , , , 7 * 7 , ■ 7 , ? i c , 7 • .-
r. -n «a ~ 1 -,1 a " n . . . , . If I forget thee , let my right hand forget her cunning; if
Cuthill, “ that s impossible, 10a may as well try to sink a cork r j * . + . 7 %, , 7 „ J f J
v , ,n i, n 1 , J n , ,1 i.i Ido not remember thee, let my tongue roof of mg
in a bucket full of water—you have no sooner got it to the bottom mou th J J d
than it is up again at the top. But what I ask has all this to do with and inde-
Lut m attempting top.it me down, on one memorable occasion, denoe of Austra]ia? Nothing whatever: and I promise you
to which you abide, the Local Government in particular have f, c , T , T u n i■ , •*. \ n «• , - l • s,
i • i iii • • . ~ • , i , 1 therefore that i shall not intermit my humble efforts 111 this noble
done an incalcn able miurv to this whole colony. lor it my i t i ‘ ,1 7 ... *, , , ,
, i, -v. . ~, J -p ii i j,i i* 1. i “ cause, encouraged as lam bv your sympathy, and stimulated by
humble efforts at Moreton Bay had met with the slightest en- . f J ii r. i . T
. . ,i i , your approbation. Doubtless the ignorance and blindness that
couragement in that quarter, there would long ere this have been J v 1 . ■ i .iM , ■
r,i ? 1 •, ‘ 1 • 1 L • ® „ ..1 I prevail so extensively onAMTsubject, are a great obstacle in the
1 wen tv thousand virtuous and industrious persons settled on the 1 , , r u n i " l . • f P • , .
. • - . , f - , , „ J i •• ~ , Z way; hut I shall do my iWnost to inform that ignorance and to
various rivers along this coast to the northward, raising tne staff f \ . !; n „,n i -i, <. i
l7 r ,i P c i , ,i »... enlighten this darkness • and i feel perfectly confident that when
ot life tor the sustenance of our population, together with nume- , . • i n i ~ 1 A i „ u ..
, , •. 11 j. i.i -i i r a , ’ this important service shall have been rendered to our community,
rous other products suitable to the soil and climate, and ot vast , *. ,• n u T i i i
V ;r ci i ii p i T in the glorious consummation will speedily follow. In the dark and
importance to the commerce ot the world But our Local Govern- . , . .i . •i „ r „ n
1 , • . p . , , o i i i ill troubled future that evidently awaits the European world, there
mentis, most unfortunately for this whole colony, a mere helpless i , . « x- ,
n •, ~ ~i I ,will undoubtedly be some turn or fortune to favour us, and
Committee of Incapables, who without either mtell.gei.ce or public Allstralian and independence will come and will not tarry.
pint, occupy the position of the dog ,n to« manger in reference w gtall Bta nd forth as one of the first of the nations of the
o every effort for the good of the. country-they neither do any- , d Britain herse , t . wiU of while her mother > s
thing themselves, nor allow those who are able and willing to put 7 • 17 , 7 . J i ’ 7 . , 7
forth their hands to the work. 1 heart leaps with jo j, Many daughters have done virtuously,
I confess my efforts for the colonization of the Moreton Bay Australia, hast excelled them all
country were greatly stimulated bv the prospect which that por- . 1 f e , em . !t due to , t, 116 , D , umerous B "^° n ber to this Testimomal
.• , /. , J V , * i pi • 1 . to state, in regard to the appropriation ot the tund with which
tion of our territory appeared to me to hold out of becoming a vast L , ’ . *=* . i *l. In™ t .i •
/“ii. all /• ,*1 1 ... o Tj. . i c 11 i they have entrusted me, that as the obligations i contracted in
Cotton field for the manufacturers of Europe, and of thereby J f. . . .. ~ x . t* „ ° • na 1
enabling this country, not only to compete with the Americans in promoting immigration to Moreton Bay remain as a charge opoa
the cotton ma, ket of England, but to accelerate the emancipation ! n / remaining property, I propose to approp. ate the whole of that
of the three millions a„3 upwards of their negro slaves Allan- d ! n gening their amount: as I have reason to helieve that I
thropists and Statesmen of the highest caste in that country unite , shaUbe abl ? to ‘' e ,! le ' e tbat ofltS P resent lncum ‘
in testifying that there is no hope for the extinction of American Frances and to preserve it for my family.
slavery, except through the successful and extensive cultivation of ' Chairman an gen emen. ,<3 - , 11 o ' , l >riSS! 0
cotton by means offree labour elsewhere. Now this Territory f"PP os ® tbat } can I ? erlt the commendations with which you
possesses all the requisites for this purpose-soil, climate, and bave bonour " d ” e > 1 , ca " . full - v appreciate the great trouble
water-carriage—witn the single exception of population. And J™. baTe , all talien “ th,s matter > , a,,d bbe feelings
from all I have seen and leaned on this subject lam perfectly that bave b f n e x P f e sseJ sO , ’“ d 5 “ *°J ards m /“ lf
satisfied that, if we had only a numerous and industrious population and those who are neai an car , f J ' ves an le
settled along the various navigable rivers to the northward, to grow n°™frous body of subscribers you represen Accep of my grateful
cotton andothersuitableproducts, weshould not only be able tocom- thanks in return, an e assuie ' . . ,
pete successfully with the Slaveholder in all the higher qualities of DirKMOBF* I ANP
the article, but should thereby compel him to break every yoke and to . J ‘ *
let the oppressed go free. Nay, the produce which an industrious The Treasurers then in the name and on behalf of the Corn-
population could easily raise from our vast and unoccupied cotton fields mittee, presented the Honorary Secretary of the Testimonial
to the northward, would very soon he incomparably more valuable to Fund, with a handsome silver snuff box, with the following inscription,
Australia than all the vaunted produce of her richest mines. in token of their esteem for the zealous services he had personally
I have doubtless left myself open, in the estimation of narrow- rendered in the cause ; after which the meeting broke up with
minded persons of all classes, to the charge of being too much of a great cordiality.
politician; but the intellectual, the moral and even the religious . 1 resented p
advancement of society depends so much upon its political con- By the Committee of the “ Lang Testimonial Fund,”
dition, that no man who is honestly endeavouring to promote the To Donald M‘Pherson
one can possibly be indifferent to the other. And whoever lays Their Honorary Secretary,
himself out, so to speak, for this object will be sure to come into Sydney, N.S.W., May, 1854.
