

J^RESBYTEF^IAN
UNION QUESTION.
f/iH
Should the Tree Church unite with the United Presby-
terian Church and others ?
• o£>@(3o—•
speech:
BY THE
Key. JOHN KENNEDY,
OP DINGWALL.
Delivered at a public meeting held in the Music Hall, Inverness,
Scotland, on the 29 th September, 1870.
SYDNEY:
JOHN LUTTON, PEINTEE, 257, EILEY-STEEET, SUEEY HILLS.
1871.




PIIEBBYTEIIIAN UNION QUESTION.
speech:
Bsr the Eey. JOHN KENNEDY, of Dingwall, Scotland.
I would find it much easier, so far as my own feelings are
concerned, to refrain from saying anything on this occasion,
and if I might he allowed, I would give up the time to some
of the strangers I expect to address us. (Cries of, No, no.”)
I am far from well, and I feel very certain from my present
state of feeling that if Igoon I shall break down; but I hope
if Ido so you will excuse me. (Hear, hear, and applause.) I
can scarcely be said to have taken finally and publicly my
position on the Union Question up till now, but that was cer-
tainly not because I had not formed a very decided opinion on
the subject. I was at the outset very strongly opposed to en-
tering on negotiations with a view to Union. I was so on
several grounds. I looked on the desire for an incorporating
union of the Churches as another expression of the indiscrim-
inating charity that found development in the formation of the
Evangelical Alliance. I looked on that alliance as the expres-
sion of a sentiment produced by putting first what God put
last —the love of one’s neighbour before love to God, expressed
in a careful regard and faithful adherence to his truth. I was
also suspicious on another ground. There was some hands busy
in originating this movement that were not unused to laying
snares for the Church of Christ in Scotland. I could not forget
this, and remembering it, I could not but suspect what the result
of a movement so originated would be. Besides this I disliked
the movement because it bore a dishonest aspect to me at the
outset. Had there been such a previous growth of love between
the Churches as found expression in frequent and hearty co-
operation, I would have regarded the proposal to incorporate
as something that was sincere, but I must freely say that to me
any such pronounced expression of feeling was utterly im-
palpable, and I looked on the progress of a movement towards
incorporation as therefore a dishonest thing. I must also say
that I could not contemplate the movement as one wearing
either a spiritual or religious aspect. I consider it more of a
political movement than anything else. (Hear, hear.) These
were my feelings at the outset, but I was afraid that my impres-
sions might be prejudiced, and I resolved to give the question
all due consideration, to admit light from all quarters as I
studied it, and it was with that view that I entered into the
Union committee. I certainly did so not with the expectation
of contributing anything to the final settlement of the question,


but merely fbr the purpose of obtaining information foi my own
guidance as to the exact state of opinion and sentiment among
the negotiating bodies. As the result of that light, and from
watching the result of the movement, I have now come to the
firm conviction that the impressions which I had at the outset
were well founded. (Applause.) Let me only indicate a few
things that have emerged during the progress of the movement
that have sufficed to convince me. In the first place it has been
the means of causing alienation among brethren equally en-
titled to our respect in point of piety and intelligence. You
may tell me that no great object is gained without some agita-
tion, but when the sifting truly comes from God, surely the
end of it is to separate the wheat from the chaff. It is an
enemy’s hand that sifts so as to scatter the wheat, and the
result of this movement has hitherto been to separate those
whom the Lord has united in his holy Providence, (Applause.)
I have seen that to some extent it has had a most injurious
influence on the minds of those who are leading it. We did
not expect before 1863 that some of the leaders in the Union
movement would have declared in our Assembly that the
doctrine of establishment was outside of the Confession —
(Applause)—and that there is nothing in our confession with
which the doctrines of Amyraldism are not consistent. But
yet they have said so; and if the Union movement has brought
them this far, who can tell what it will do during its further
development? (Hear, hear, and applause.) Thirdly, I have
observed that this Union movement has made men impatient
of definite beliefs, —(Applause) —that it has developed in the
most remarkable way the revolt of proud intellect against
authority in matters of religion,'—(Hear, hear) —and that this
is now as manifest, alas! in the Tree Church as it is in the
scientific world. I know of few more alarming symptoms of
the state of feeling of the times in which we live. This move-
ment has produced another result which has convinced me
that it is not according to the mind of God. (After a pause.)
What I was going to say has dropped from my memory. There
was something else to which I attached special importance,
which has escaped my memory for the moment. You will ex-
cuse it, because I am speaking rather in a broken state both of
mind and body; but on these grounds, and on that other which
I have forgotten, and which I intended to be the main ground,
I have attained to the firm persuasion that the impression which
I formed at the outset was the light one, and that my duty,
and the duty of all who love the truth, is to do what in them
lies, by all lawful means, to oppose the consummation of this
Union. (Hear, hear.) I did not at first take a great interest
in the discussion of the question of the doctrine of the civil
magistrate. I was not trained as those who took part in the
Voluntary controversy were in that important question, and I
felt prepared to take mv stand in opposition to this union on


the ground of the differences existing regarding the fundamental
doctrine of the Atonement. I was persuaded then, and lam
still more persuaded now, that Amyraldism does prevail in the
United Presbyterian Church. (Hear, hear.) I came very early
into contact with that phase of doctrine, when I was searching
with my eternal all at stake, before God, and in view of eternity.
I leant upon it, and it failed me; I was deceived and almost
ruined by it, and I am under vow to God, from that day forth,
to testify by all means against it; and I hope lam ready to die,
rather than to countenance such views as these. (Applause.)
This is not the time to discuss it, and it would be unseemly
and unseasonable that I should enter on a discussion of it at
present, but I feel prepared to prove, first —that the doctrine of
the double reference of the Atonement cannot be held without
right views of the atonement being endangered in every mind
that holds it; and I am prepared also to prove that these doc-
trines cannot be preached without sinners being encouraged
to have hope in the goodwill of God, apart from a personal
Saviour —(Heai’) —in whom alone the love of God to sinners
can find expression, in whom alone a sinner can find an interest
in that love, and apart from whom he can neither enjoy its pro-
vision nor its embrace, but I am prepared now to take my stand
as well on the ground of the doctrine of the civil magistrate,
(Hear, hear.) I have been compelled to study it, and lam
now thoroughly persuaded that if our Church abandons her
position as called to testify both to the Crown rights of Christ
as King of nations and as King of Zion, she will be guilty of
a grevious sin. (Hear, hear.) It has been said that the im-
portant doctrine is the doctrine of the Church’s independence;
that compared with this the doctrine of the duty of the civil
magistrate is quite subordinate : and that, therefore, if the one
is held —and it is maintained the Voluntaries hold it in common
with us—the other may surely be left an open question. But
the more I have studied the matter the more thoroughly am I
persuaded that the two are inseparable,—(Hear, hear) —that
it is impossible for the Church to maintain Scripturally her
testimony in behalf of the Church’s independence, without at
the same time holding fast to the truth as to the duty of the
civil magistrate to the Church of Christ. (Hear, hear, and
applause.) _ These two things are joined by God in His word ;
they were inscribed on the banner of our Church when it was
displayed in behalf of thejtruth, and they were held and pled
together during the witness-bearing of our Church in the ten
years’s conflict. On what ground is it that the Church is
entitled to spiritual independence—to bo exempt from all
control in managing the affairs of Christ’s house ? On this
ground—that the Lord. Jesus hath appointed in the hands of
the Church officers and a government distinct from the province
of the civil magistrate ; on the ground of that appointment
her right to spiritual independence rests, and she must claim


her right from the civil magistrate as an act of allegiance on his
part to Christ as King of nations, —(Hear, hear, and applause)
—and only on the very ground on which she can claim to he
recognised and sanctioned as a Church of Christ can she claim
her right to spiritual independence in relation to the civil
magistrate. (Applause.) That, to my mind, is as clear as the
light of noon-day, and I am now persuaded that if the Tree
Church drops her testimony in behalf of Christ as King of
nations, and ceases to tell the civil magistrate that it is his
duty to recognise and sanction the Church of Christ in the
land, she will have dropped her whole testimony. (Hear, and
applause.) lam so persuaded of this now that lam free
from all hesitation as to what the path of duty is. I know
that it hath been said that while this is made an open question
there is no pressure brought to bear on my conscience, or the
consciences of any other in the United Church, but I must bo
careful not. only about my own consistency, my own peace of
conscience, my own good name and usefulness —I must be
careful also about the testimony of my Church, —(Hear, hear)
—and I cannot in my Church position emit my testimony to
any truth which my Church has abandoned. (Hear, hear.) It
has been said that this is not a practical question ; that surely
we don’t mean to say that there is any prospect of our claims
to establishment and spiritual independence being acknowledged
by the State. No, I have no such hope ; but am I therefore
to drop my testimony to the truth ? (Hear, hear.) Am I to
cease to testify to the truth because I can reap no temporal
gain thereby ? Am I to cease to tell the civil magistrate his
duty because ho has ceased to feed me with his loaves and
fishes ? No ; I feel all the more imperatively called to testify
to that truth. I like the self-deniedness of the opportunity of
this testifying for my Lord and Master, and no persuasion will
drive me, I hope, from a position so honourable. I think that
when the Lord gave us our position in 1843, ho gave us a place
of peculiar honour and eminence. I can conceive nothing
nobler than the position which our Church occupied when she
presented her claim of rights to the Government of this country,
and at the same time expressed a resolution to receive no
emoluments as the price of her liberty to serve Christ alone.
I'i-orn that position let her not be moved until the Lord as
distinctly call her to abandon, as he called her first to occupy
it. (Hear, and applause.) That time is not yet come; that
time shall never come. (Applause.) If she abandon that
position she has ceased to hold fast the truth which the Lord
intrusted to her, and when she has ceased to do that her crown
shall be taken from her. It has recently been said at a public
meeting in this town that to make thi smatter an open question
is no new thing—-that there arc open questions in our Church
already; that there are allowed differences of opinion not a
few, and that to make this matter an open question is only


something to which w r e have been long accustomed. To this
I answer first —that the matters about which there is allowed
difference of opinion among us now are not to be compared in
importance with that which it is proposed to make an open
question. Second, that if there are differences of opinion
among us it would be a more seemly work for the Church to be
harmonising the views of its office-bearers and members, rather
than adding to disagreements and differences, (Applause.) I
answer, thirdly, that to allow differences of opinion, which
casually arise among us, is a very different thing from consti-
tuting the Church on a basis of open questions. (Applause.)
But lam afraid I am trespassing on your time. (No, go on,
and cheers.) And what, friends, is to bo the gain, for making
the sacrifice which wo are asked to make F What is to be the
benefit received for dropping our testimony in behalf of the
Crown rights of Christ as King of nations ? The answer is—
union with other churches. And what is the benefit of that
Union? Time, if it takes place the united Church will bo
greatly larger than the Free Church is now, and if bigness bo
a benefit then there will be some gain ; but for the life of mo,
I cannot see what other benefit than this will result. If wo
had not love enough among us to allow us to co-operate
heartily in the work of the Lord before, is it likely when we
are crowded together, bristling with open questions, that we
shall get on better ? (Laughter and applause.) If there are
matters about which we differ let these lie as open questions
between us; do not bring them in among us to bo sources of
irritation and difference in years to come. We have more than
enough of that already. (Hear, hear.) Instead of this being
regarded as a desirable thing, I cannot refrain from stating it
as my conviction that I fear our Church is too large already.
(Applause.) I cannot but state my persuasion that wo have
more need of sifting than we have of heaping, —(Cheers)—
and I would look on a movement that had a sifting effect as
more likely in these times to bo in accordance with the mind
of God than a movement towards the agglomeration of
Churches without unity in the truth, (Cheers.) Is that army
strong because its wings have been thrown in upon its centre
till all divisions, and distinctions of divisions, and regiments,
have been blotted out, and you have a great united crowd ?
No ; surely an enemy by skilful strategy has caused that union.
He produces by fusion union, that by confusion he may bring
weakness. That is the light in which I look on the proposed
union of the Churches in the land in which we live. I see
with alarm the continued progress of this movement. We are
at this moment arrived at a most critical stage. The question
sent down to Presbyteries is this —is there any objection in
principle to the formation of this union on the basis of the
standards as accepted by the Churches ? Let us suppose that
the majority of Presbyteries find that there is no objection,


what will be the next step ? I cannot tell, but I can tell what
may be the next step. The Assembly of 1871 may form an
overture based on this finding of the Presbyteries, and send
it back to them in terms of the Barrier Act. Supposing the
Presbyteries approve of that overture, the Assembly in 1872
may declare that there is no bar in principle to the formation
of this incorporating union. By doing so they will have settled
the question of principle, and thereby altered and vitiated the
constitution of our Church before the question of expediency
is taken up at all, (Applause.) We have thus arrived at a
critical position, a time when we are required to count the
cost wisely. I have for years been forecasting such a crisis,
and I was afraid too that the skilful leadership on the other
side would put us into the position of being subjected before
the public to the odium of causing as well as to the pain of
enduring a disruption. I know not what the result shall be,
but I would just like to say in conclusion that when we speak
of disruption we speak of a most serious matter. I would be
very far from taking any st'ep that would seem to be courting
such a calamity, but surely the leaders of our Church by this
time of day, and.in the light that now shines on the question,
must see that if they go on in the course they are pursuing
they must evidently cause a disruption. It is no justification
of their conduct to say that they do not desire to separate from
the brethren in the minority. We are not craving any innova-
tion, we are not demanding anything which it is unconstitu-
tional to grant us. We are continuing to occupy the good old
ground. The change is on the other side; the pressure is
brought to bear by them on us. And why this pressure? Is
it because the new friends they are so anxious to get will prove
so much better than the old friends they seem so anxious to
lose ? It may be so, but will it be said by any man that those
who are constraining us to contemplate such a thing as a dis-
ruption are any better than those they are constraining to leave
them, in anything that constitutes the true strength of a
Church. And are they of opinion that they will get on far
better without us, and that we never can get on without them ?
If they are, they are quite mistaken in both. (Cheers.) Let
them separate us from them, they will find no cause to rejoice
in the work of their hands, and many names will haunt their
memories and embitter their reflections, as they think of the
men whom they have rudely severed from their communion.
And we, if we be faithful to the truth, will find that a few
wielding the sword of the Lord can be stronger than a multi-
tude, and that if our days of trial come, the God of truth and
mercy will not leave or forsake us. (Loud cheering.)
John Lutton, printer, 257, Eilet-steeet, Sydney.
