

PRESBYTERIAN UNION.
At a meeting of the Conference on Presbyterian Union, on the part of re-
presentatives of the Synod of Australia, in connection with the Established
Church of Scotland, the Synod of Eastern Australia, and the United Presby-
terian Church, held at Sydney, 10th November, 1863, it was unanimously
resolved, that the Basis of Union, Formula, and accompanying Eesolutions,
as finally amended and accepted by the negotiating parties, together with a
narrative of the other proceedings of the Conference, be printed and circu-
lated.
The following are the documents and resolutions referred to:—
Articles op Basis of Union.
1. That the designation of the United Church shall be “The Presby-
terian Church of New South Wales; ” and that the Supreme Court of the
Church shall be designated “ The General Assembly of the Presbyterian
Church of New South Wales.”
11. That the Word of God, as contained in the Scriptures of the Old and
New Testaments, is held by this Church as the supreme, and only authorita-
tive rule of faith and practice.
111. That the Westminster Confession of Faith, the Larger and Shorter
Catechisms, the Form of Presbyterial Church Government, the Directory
for the Public Worship of God, and the Second Book of Discipline, are the
subordinate standards of this Church.
IY. The subordinate standards above enumerated are received with the
following explanations:—
1. That, while the Confession of Faith contains the Creed to which as
to a confession of his own faith, every office-bearer in the Church
must testify in solemn form his personal adherence, and while the
Catechisms are sanctioned as Directories for catechising, the
Directory for Public Worship, the Form of Church Government,
and the Second Book of Discipline are of the nature of regulations
rather than of tests, and are not to be imposed by subscription
upon Ministers and Elders.
2. That, in adopting these standards, this Church is not to be held as
countenancing persecuting or intolerant principles, or any denial of
invasion of the right of private judgment.


The Synod of New South Wales having applied to the Synod of Eastern
Australia to be permitted to appear by deputation to confer with that Synod
on the subject of Union, and the Synod of Eastern Australia having declined
to receive such deputation, on the ground that it was precluded from doing
so by previous arrangements, but having, at the same time, referred the said
application to its Committee on Union, with instructions to submit it to t e
Conference, it was submitted to the Conference accordingly, when, after full
and careful deliberation, the following decision was come to by the three
negotiating parties :—“ That, as the negotiations have hitherto been carried
on by Churches here representing Churches at home, t it is inexpedient at this
stage that other parties be introduced into the Conference.
Before breaking up, the Conference agreed to recommend (as being, in its
opinion, highly desirable) that Ministers of the negotiating bodies should
practically exhibit the spirit of Union by exchanging ministerial communion
as generally as possible.
The Conference then adjourned.
Signed in name and by authority of the Conference,
John M.‘Gibbon, l chalrnien ,
James Cameron, j
Adam Thomson, Clerk of Conference
CM
cn
o
oc.
CD
CD
CM
CM
CM
CD
■-D
CD
Sherriff and Downing, Stationers, 266, George Street, Sydney.


3. That by Christ’s appointment, the Church is spiritually independent,
and is not subject in its own province, and in the administration
of its own affairs, to the jurisdiction or authoritative interference of
the civil power.
V. That this Church asserts for itself a separate and independent position
in relation to other Churches; and that its highest Court shall possess
supreme and final jurisdiction over its inferior judicatories, office-bearers,
and members.
VI. That this Church shall receive Ministers and Probationers from other
Presbyterian Churches applying for admission, on their affording satisfactory
evidence of their qualifications and eligibility, and subscribing the formula.
Formula.
I do hereby declare, that I do sincerely own and believe the whole doctrine
contained in the Confession of Faith, as adopted in the foregoing articles, to
be in accordance with the Word of Grod, and I do own the same as the con-
fession of my faith; as likewise I do own the -purity of worship presently
authorised and practised in this Church, and also the Presbyterian government
and discipline thereof; which doctrine, worship, and government, I am per-
suaded, are founded on the Word of Grod, and agreeable thereto. And I
promise that, through the grace of Grod, I shall firmly and constantly adhere
to the same, and to the utmost of my power shall in my station assert, main-
tain and defend the said doctrine, worship, and discipline of this Church,
and the government thereof by Sessions, Presbyteries, and provincial and
general Synods, together with the liberty and exclusive jurisdiction thereof;
and that I shall, in my practice, conform myself to the said worship, submit
to the said discipline, government, and exclusive jurisdiction, and not endea-
vour, directly, or indirectly, the prejudice or subversion of the same. And
I promise that I shall follow no divisive courses from the doctrine, worship,
discipline, government, and exclusive jurisdiction of this Church, renoun-
cing all doctrines, tenets, or opinions whatsoever contrary to, or inconsistent
with, the said doctrine, worship, discipline, and government or jurisdiction
of the same.
Resolutions.
1. That no official application for the supply of Ministers be made from
the United Church to any of the Churches in the United Kingdom.
2. That no agency for the supply of Ministers shall be appointed in the
United Kingdom for the United Church.
3. That, so soon as the necessary preliminary arrangements are effected,
the Union shall be consummated.
A committee was then appointed to consider what legal arrangements may
be necessary, or desirable, respecting the property of the several Churches
concerned in these negotiations.
A Committee was also appointed to consider what financial arrangements
it may be most advisable to adopt in the United Church, particularly in rela-
tion to the support of the Ministry.
It was remitted to a Committee to prepare and forward a Petition to the
Legislative Assembly, in relation to the Presbyterian College Bill now
before Parliament, with the view of staying legislation on the subject at
present.


TaTi
f 14M-
