

AUSTRALIAN NATIVES’ ASSOCIATION,
Hobart Branch, No. 1.
PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS
BY
ALFRED J. TAYLOR, F.L.S., Etc.
July, 1893.
Reprinted from the “Tasmanian News.”
PRICE, SIXPENCE.
19^3




Society a power for good in the land and
a powerful factor in the moulding of its
destiny. In order that there may be such
unity it is essential that there shall be
a proper understanding of certain impor-
tant questions, the right consideration of
which is necessary to our social well-being.
Such questions must necessarily include
many that I shall not have time to touch
upon now, but there are three or four that
I wish to give special attention to during
the short time at my disposal. First, let
me touch upon a truth too often over-
looked, viz., that people so far removed
from each other in manners, customs,
religions, and languages as the Hindu and
Icelander, the Eussian and the Italian, the
Englishman and the Frenchman, are the
children and descendants of forefathers
who lived in one home. A recognition and
realisation of this lact would lead to
kindlier feelings than exist between those
who now call each other foreigners and
aliens, and who war against each other in
the sacred names of honor and nationality.
Natural conditions have so varied and
modified the character of the different
off-shoots that found their life in the sap
flowing through the one central trunk that,
regarding them separately, it is almost im-
possible to believe that the great Indo-
European races as we now know them had
for their birthplace one home and a
common parentage. Geographical and
climatic conditions have done much to
bring about the many differences that
puzzle the superficial observer so much,
but we are slowly awaking to a realisation
of the fact I wish to impress upon your
minds to-night, that “ God hath made of
one blood all nations of men/’ and I would
ask you to give due consideration to this
truth when you are called upon to deal
with such questions as the proposed ex-
clusion of the so-called “ aliens ” from the
privileges which we individually hope to
enjoy as units in the future national
life to which we in these sunny southern
lands are steadily and surely advancing.
This naturally brings me to what I wish
to say upon the great question of Federa-
tion of the Australian colonies. I have
long held the opinion, and I hold to it still,
that Federation will ultimately be brought
about by some great danger which the
colonies will be called upon to face sooner
or later, and I believe that we may look for
that great danger from the direction that
seems to be least thought of by those who
are in the habit of discussing the future of
the Australian people. I refer to China.
This was the view I placed before our dele-
gates on their way back from the Confer-
ence recently held in Sydney, and although
some of them were inclined to scoff at the
suggestion, I find that I am not singular in
having held, and still adhering, to that
opinion, the French Admiral who lately
visited the colonies having given expres-
sion to identically the same views upon
this subject in so far as they bear upon the
direction from which danger to these
colonies may be anticipated. It was said
by Napoleon that if China once learned the
art of shipbuilding she would conquer the
world. That the Chinese have now reached
that stage may be gathered from the
following facts. She now manufactures
her own guns and other materials of war,
and builds her own battle ships. She has
warships covered with armour-plates, l iins
thick, and which carry four 12in Krupp
rifled and breech-loading guns, and two
6in ditto. They are two of the finest war-
ships afloat. She has an armed cruiser of
modern construction—several other heavily-
armed cruisers, and at least 12 gunboats,
built by Lord Armstrong, and a torpedo
boat of superior construction. These
vessels form the squadron for the p otec-
tion of the seat of Government and the
Northern parts of China. For the pro-
tection of Shanghai and other parts of
China, she has a squadron of between 40
and 50 vessels. She has lately been dis-
missing Europeans from her service,
and re-placing them with Chinese officers.
Her national army consists of 7000 officers
and 70,000 privates, besides other armies,
of which little information can be obtained
by Europeans. The bearing of all this
upon the interests of the colonies has been
fully recognised by The Colonies and India,
a weekly journal published in London in
the interests of the Indian and Colonial
Empire. “As we took occasion to point out
recently in these columns,” the editor
wrote not so very long ago, “China’s choice
of the part which she will play in the ‘Far
Eastern Question ’ is of the most vital im-
portance to British interests as a whole.
If she elects to join Eussia—and to join
Eussia will mean to join France to—it will
go hardly with us not only in India,
but throughout our Colonial Empire;
and, bearing in mind the outspoken
utterances of the members of the Imperial
Chinese Mission which recently visited
Australia, to enquire into the question of
Chinese settlement there, it is an im-


Australian Natives’ Association.
At the Academy of Music last evening
the members of the Hobart Branch of the
above organisation met to hear the Pre-
sident (Mr Alfred J. Taylor) deliver his
opening address, which was as follows :
Gentlemen, —I take it as one of the
penalties attached to acceptance of the
office to which you have so kindly elected
me, that I shall deliver a Presidential ad-
dress as a fitting opening to the serious
work of the current session.
In the first place, I would briefly state
for the information of those who may not
yet be associated with us as members, that
the Australian Natives’ Association is a
benefit society, one of its principle objects
being to raise a fund by subscription of its
members : 1. To provide surgical and
medical aid and medicines to benefit mem-
bers, their wives, and unmarried daughters
under 20 years of age, and for such of their
sons as may be under 16 years of age and
unmarried; and in certain cases to
honorary members, and to the widows and
widowed mothers of benefit members. 2.
To provide a certain weekly allowance to
benefit members in cases of sickness or
accident. 3. ' o provide a sum payable on the
death of a benefit member, and in certain
cases, of the wife of a benefit member, for
the purpose of paying the burial expenses.
4. For granting temporary assistance to
the widows and children of deceased mem-
bers, and for assisting members in dis-
tressed circumstances in accordance with
the laws. In the event of sickness or
being rendered incapable of following his
trade or occupation a benefit member is en-
titled, under the rules, for the first twenty-
six weeks of his illness to an allowance
of £1 per week; after that, if still inca-
pacitated, 10s per week for 26 weeks;
then, if still disabled, 5s per week for so
long as he may be disabled, should he con-
tinue to pay up his weekly contributions to
the Society. Furthermore, it is provided,
under certain reasonable conditions, that
every benefit member of the Association
shall be entitled to receive the sum of ,£lO
upon the death of his wife, and that in
the event of his own death his wife,
children, or next of kin shall be entitled
to receive the sum of £2O. Benefit
members must be under 40 years of age
when, they join the Association; but any
Australian native over that age may
become an honorary member on payment of
an annual subscription of 10s. Benefit
members pay an entrance fee according to
age, the scale being as follows : —lO to 24
years of age inclusive, ss; 25 to 29 years
of age inclusive, 10s; 30 to 34 years of age
inclusive, £1 ; 35 to 39 years of age inclu-
sive, ill 10s. The contributions paid by
benefit members are Is to Is 6d weekly,
and Is extra once in every quarter, as a
contribution to the Incidental Fund. It
will be seen that there is no pauperising
charity in all this. On the contrary, there is
the banding together of a brotherhood for
mutual assistance in times of sickness and
death and the insurance of a right to
assistance in the hour of need. The many
advantages of such a society cannot be
overrated. It encourages prudence and
forethought,—the cultivation of temperate
and regular habits of life and that sense of
brotherhood which must ever lie at the
root of all efforts to make man realise in
the fullest sense of the words his duty to
his fellow-men.
But great and important as these con-
siderations are, there are other equal ly-
important advantages to be derived from
association with such societies as that
which we are now endeavoring to make a
factor in the evolution of the social life of
this community. Our discussions, as you
know, are not confined to a consideration
merely of matters having to do with busi-
ness and finance. We have our social and
intellectual meetings at which questions of
the deepest interest and of the largest im-
port may be discussed with advantage and
profit to all concerned; and it is out of
such meetings that I hope to see a unity of
purpose emanate that will make our




portant question whether China’s choice
may not be seriously influenced by the
treatment which Australia accords to her
children.” China was able to show in her
last struggle with France what she can
accomplish as a nation prepared for war.
She was able to limit the victories of the
French in Tonquin, and obtained the re-
trocession of a cathedral overlooking the
Imperial grounds in Pekin. In the way of
a recognition of Imperial rights she has
secured on the part of Great Britain a de-
cennial Embassy for Burmah, and an
arrangement whereby the importation of
opium—forced upon her at one time at the
mouths of English cannon —is charged with
a duty of JEIS per ton. As part of her
Treaty with America the United States
have been forced to pay her over a quarter
of a million dollars for losses and injuries
sustained by Chinese subjects.
This is not a nation to be trifled
with lightly, and the recent attitude of the
Australian people upon the Chinese
Question is not calculated to lessen any
fears that when the first note of war calls to
arms the children of a newly-born United
Australia it will sound from the direction
I have indicated. But whether this be so
or not, let us ever keep steadily before us
the belief that the federation of the colo-
nies can only be a work of time. Whether
that Federation shall blossom as the fruits
of war, or in peaceful ways, come it surely
will. Even now those whose ears thrill
“ to that finer atmosphere,
Where footfalls of appointed things,
Reverberant of days to he,
Are heard in forecast echoings
Like wave-heats from a viewless sea,
Hear in the voiceful tremors of the sky
Auroral heralds whispering she is nigh.”
The chief thing I wish to impress upon
your minds regarding this question of
Federation is this: Do not allow your-
selves to be led astray from the considera-
tion of a question which may be regarded
as coming within the range of practical
politics—l allude to Australian Federation
—to follow an ignus fatus such as that
presented as more worthy of being followed
by the advocates of a wider form of Federa-
tion, viz., Imperial Federation, a question
that I unhesitatingly submit to be one
that is entirely outside the range of
practical politics for the time being. That
I do not stand alone in this opinion is
shown by the recent utterances of Lord
Jersey on his return to England after re-
linquishing the Governorship of New
South Wales.
Australian Independence does not neces-
sarily mean the severance of the national
ties that will always bind the children of
these colonies to the dear old Mother
Country. Far be it from me, believing as
I do in the brotherhood of man, to say or
do anything that will weaken a recognition
of the truth that God has made of one
blood all nations of the earth. With the
wild talk about “ cutting the painter,” in
the sense which these words usually convey,
I have not the very faintest sympathy.
The independence I look for and advocate
is an independence of national life, which
can only result in the bonds of brother-
hood and friendship being freed from the
strain that all but breaks them under
existing conditions. It often happens that
the many who stand by the mighty loom
at which Nature is ever working, see but
the flying shuttle as it travels to and fro
and see in warp and web but tangled
threads and knotted skeins. But those who
keep their attention fixed upon her busy
fingers can see that she is weaving a
marvellous pattern that has some definite
end in view ; and reading the future in
the light of the past they can arrive at no
other conclusion than that the future
destiny of the Australasian colonies lies in
the direction of independence based upon
the broad lines of nationality—an inde-
pendence that will make them powerful
for commerce and peace; powerful for their
common welfare; powerful for righteous-
ness and good work throughout the
world.
“ Oh fair ideal! unto whom
Through days of doubt and nights of gloom,
Brave hearts have clung, while lips of scorn
Made mock of thee as but a dream—
Already on the heights of morn
We see thy golden sandals gleam ;
And glimmering through the clouds that wrap
thee yet
The seven stars that are thy coronet.”
There is one great question bearing upon
the welfare of the people, and one that
has an interest for such Societies as ours
that I cannot afford to overlook. I allude
to the Temperance Question. No one who
takes the trouble to study the effects of the
liquor traffic can arrive at any other con-
clusion than that it lies at the root of
much of the crime, pauperism, and disease
that, disgraces our nineteenth century
civilisation. So far from being places of
convenience for the public, many of the
houses that are licensed in the colonies
are little better than drinking shops,
where the poor, broken-down drunkard


and tempest-tost girl may slake their
thirst in fluids that drown the voice of
reason, break down the physical strength,
and degrade humanity as it can be de-
graded in no other way. The question
is one that should interest us as a bene-
fit society, because it is a matter of
importance that we should only receive as
benefit members those who are sound in
health mentally and physically. Now, it
needs no arguments on my part to prove
to you that temperance is conducive to
health. That is an admitted truth; and
no one more fully recognises the fact than
the man who has become a victim to the
drinking customs of the day. You may
ask the question, “What can we, as a
Society, do to improve matters in this
direction ? ” Well, I could wish that you
were all total abstainers; but it is not
within the range of probability that all
who join our ranks will be that. I de-
sire to indicate one direction in
which the members of such a society
as ours might accomplish a large
amount of good. They might do
this by helping to abolish the senseless and
accursed custom of “ shouting ” that has
done so much to make drunkards and so
much to start on the downward road many
a young man who but for it might have
risen to a position of respect and honor in
the community. Think of the absurdity of
it all for a moment Why should you take
a drink at the expense of your friend ? and
why if you have done this, should you be
expected to ask him to take another at
your expense? And why, if half-a-dozen
are drinking together, should each one
feel himself to be “ mean ” if he in turn
does not “ shout ” for the rest ? Why fill
the stomach with fluid and cloud the brain
with alcoholic fumes when the first glass
has been sufficient to quench the thirst and
refresh the body ? Think of it I say—the
folly and the sin of—yes, the sin of it, for
I again emphasise the fact that the
accursed custom of “ shouting ” lies at the
root of much of the evil that may be traced
to the drinking habits of the people in
these, the last days of our boasted nine-
teenth century civilisation.
I now turn to two questions that are so
intimately associated with the evolution
and well-being of our social life that I
cannot afford to forget them—l refer to
the land and labor questions.
Turning first to the Land Question, for
this question really lies at the root of the
labor difficulty. It is generally admitted
that the present system of land [tenure is
indefensible. In the first place monopoly
prevents the land being turned to the best
purpose. Secondly, it enables a privileged
class to appropriate profits that have not
been earned by its members. It places it
in the power of a privileged class to pro-
hibit the use of the land unless the masses
requiring the use of it pay toll to that class
in the shape of rent, or consent to work as
laborers on the hardest terms which com-
petition in the labor market can wring
from them —which means, as my friend,
Mr A. J. Ogilvie, has well put it—that
“ the landowner has the power of appro-
priating the greater part of their earnings
in return for the mere permission to them
to earn anything.” Thirdly, it is the land-
lord who at present reaps the benefit of
the unearned increment, or increase in
the value of land brought about by the
construction of roads and railways, which
have been paid for by the general com-
munity, and from which improvements
the community as a whole should reap the
benefit. It is clear, however, that this can
never be while there is such a thing as
private ownership in land. Land being at
the basis of all industries there must
necessarily be keen competition for it, and
this competition must just as necessarily
shut from it the class most dependant upon
it for sustenance —those who are able to
pay the highest rents naturally (under
present conditions) securing its use.
Private ownership in land inevitably
forces rents up to prohibitive prices,
because under such a system of
land tenure an inducement is offered to
monopolists to put down large areas in
grass and turn thousands of acres of good
agricultural land into sheep runs that only
require a few hands to look after them,
and the competition for the land that is
left becomes intensified to a very painful
degree. From the latter consideration it
will be seen that monopoly of the land
tends to create a pauper class that need
not exist if the land locked up could be put
to its best use. The monopoly also brings
in its train other evils, for as the best of
the land is taken up, so the competition
becomes more keen for that which remains,
and it follows that the highest rents (in
proportion to the true value of the land)
must be paid for the poorest farms,
leaving still narrower the margin
of profits (over and above payment of
rent, etc.) upon which the tiller of such lands
has to exist. Fourthly it must be remem-


bered that under the present system of
land tenure any improvements which a
tenant may make that enables him to raise
better crops and larger profits for himself,
offers the natural inducement to the land-
lord to increase the rental on the renewal
of his lease, and this increase he is forced
to pay by the grinding law of competition
which the landlord has the power to bring
into operation. It will be seen from this
that the actual amount of profit which the
farmer can make in any case must remain
about stationary. In a word, he is condemned
to a posi ion of perpetual servitude. It
will be seen also that unless he can
reap for himself the benefits of
his foresight and industry he has
no inducement whatever to cultivate the
land he rents scientifically, or to adopt
labor-saving machinery to work it upon a
large scale. On the other hand, the temp-
tation is directly to make the most he can
out of the land while he has it, and to leave
it in a starved condition at the end of his
tenancy. Fifthly.—The effects of such a
condition of things must re-act mostprejudi-
cally upon the labor market. The rate of
wages paid for agricultural labor must
largely depend upon the rent the farmer
has to pay for the use of the land; and
the narrower the margin left for himself
after payment of this toll (which is neces-
sarily high, because regulated by com-
petition in a market where the demand is
greater than the supply) the less the
farmer has to spare for wages. Should a
large area of ground perforce remain idle
on account of the prohibitive rent de-
manded the monopolist has the option
of turning it into a sheep-run, and
thus withdrawing it, with all its
potentialities, from labor altogether. It
will be seen from this as one of the re
suits of land monopoly that the wages of
the agricultural laborer depends, not upon
any arrangement having justice or equity
for its foundation, but upon the autocratic
will of the one man who is the master of
the position—the landlord; for wages
may be forced down not only because such
a narrow margin is left to the tenant
farmer that he cannot afford to pay high
wages, but because labor may be thrown
out of work altogether by the locking up of
lands as referred to above, thus rendering
the struggle for employment more keen
in the labor market itself. The solu-
tion of this difficulty can only be found
in a system of Land Nationalisation,
a system under which private ownership
and monopoly of land shall be a thing of
the past, and every tiller of the soil shall
be a tenant of the State. How this can be
brought about is the crux of the whole
question. Let me say at once that I have
no sympathy whatever with the cry for
confiscation. I have no sympathy with
that cry because I have no sympathy with
any courss of action that would shake to
its very foundations our present social
structure and give us chaos in place of the
order that marks the natural evolution of a
stable social life. There is one plan that I
have ventured to suggest more than once
by which I think it possible that the State
might become possessed of the land with-
out doing any wrong to the present pro-
prietors. A simple illustration will best
explain that plan. Given the case of
a man at present owning land which
might fairly be valued at ,£SOOO. I
would have the State insure the owner's
life for that amount, and at his death hand
it over to his next of kin and take posses-
sion of the land for the benefit of the
people. In this way the State would
slowly regain that which it never had the
right to part with, and no wrong would be
done to a single individual. In the mean-
time, there should be no further alienation
of the public lands, and a progressive land
tax might be levied after a proper classi-
fication of the lands, with the object of
setting free the large agricultural areas
that are now waste lands in the hands of
men who value sheep more highly than they
value the lives and comfort of human beings.
Think what improved conditions would fol-
low the nationalisation of the land. Instead
of having to compete with the rich for the use
of it under circumstances that now practi-
cally reduce him to the condition of a serf,
the tiller would be able to rent his holding at
a fair valuation—would enjoy the certainty
of tenure that would encourage him to
make the best of his farm, and above all
would have the satisfaction of knowing
that the fruits of his labor would not be
taken from him, and that the rent he paid
to the State was being paid into a general
revenue, part of which would come back to
him again in improved means of com-
munication with the markets of the world.
Not only this, but the accumulation of
State rents would in time lead to the
reduction of taxation upon the necessaries
of life, and so make food more plentiful
for those who are now lingering
on the borders of starvation and
maintaining a bare existence in a land


fitted by nature to be a very paradise upon
earth. Relieved from the grinding
tyranny of the land monopolist, and the
cruel pressure of the law of competition,
the tenant of the State would be able to
pay higher wages to the agricultural
laborer, and tke first step would be taken
to make the way clear for the elevation of
classes that have been too long weighed
down by conditions that disgrace our pro-
fessions of Christianity, and our claim to
a share in the highest civilisation that has
yet been reached.
Gentlemen, I do not think it too much to
say that if those who preach the Gospel of
Christ fully realised the importance of the
question I am now dealing with —its
bearing upon the welfare of humanity and
the salvation of the masses—they would
thunder from their pulpits the gospel
truth that the land belongs to the people
until that gospel became a living fact in
our history.
Let me now turn to another question
that we must not ignore if we wish to have
any clear knowledge of the factors which
are moulding and shaping the conditions
of our solial life. That question is the
Labor Question. The history of the
many battles that have been fought
for the amelioration of the condition
of the working classes has been written
in letters of blood and in letters of
gold. It is a story of self-denial and
suffering, and in its progress we recognise
the movement of evolutionary forces
stronger than the will of any single man or
any body of men. In a recognition of this
truth we find our guarantee of the benign
influence that the movement is likely to
exercise in the future. The w r ay has been
spelled out in syllables of pain, but its
progress has been marked by sunlit mile-
stones that are nobler records of heroism
than any that are to be found in the grave
yards of the world. There is a tendency
just now to sneer at any reference to the
work of the Trade Unions, and this is
largely due to the fact that in the constant
conflicts that have taken place between the
capitalist and the laborer, the latter has
too often been made the victim of men
having only personal ends to serve, and
who cared little how much others might
suffer so long as they attained their
selfish aims and objects. But the
mere fact that a movement some-
time halts and appears to fail is no
more an indication of want of vital
strength than is the falling back of a
ripple on the sandy shores an indication
that the waters of the mighty seas, of
which the ripple forms a part, are receding
from the work of drawing down “ the dust
of continents to be.”
In the gradual evolution of the highest
civilisation there mpst necessarily be
different grades of social relationship, but
the sharp lines of demarcation that once
separated class from class are becoming
less distinct every day. This is largely due
to the uplifting of the masses and a fuller-
realisation of the just claim of the workers
to recognition as a part of the great
human family, each unit of which
has equal rights in all matters that
have to do with the welfare of mankind.
The conflicts that have taken place in the
past between Capital and Labor have not
been without a purpose or unattended with
an influence for good. If in striving to
give effect to the ideals they
Stretch lame hands of faith to reach
the Labor party has sometimes got caught
in the eddies of the flowtMo of social
evolution, the experience has been whole-
some and must be recognised as an essen-
tial factor in its advancement. In this
fact we may find our hope for the future.
Each mistaken effort of misused strength
in the past has taught the lesson that the
objects and aims of the party that is slowly
spelling out its way to a higher destiny in
syllables of pain must be attained peaceably
or not at all—that its work of re-
demption must be worked out upon
constitutional lines, and must find a re-
sponse in the national conscience if it is to
win the fruit that it hopes to pluck. The
more immediate effects of a recognition of
these truths must necessarily tend to bring
about a wider recognition of the rights of
the workers to a larger share than they
have yet enjoyed of the world’s wealth;
and the time cannot be far distant when
out of the present unsatisfactory and
nebulous condition of the Labor Question
there shall crystalise an industrial partner-
ship, in which, social distinctions being
set aside, the skilled workman will work
hand to hand with the man of capital and
each will reap the fair profit of his enter-
prise and skill.
These are a few of the more impor-
tant questions to the intelligent con
sideration of which I wish you to
direct your attention. Let me remind
you, in concluding these desultory re
marks, that the future of these colonies


depends very largely upon the character
of the young men who are growing up
into what we fondly hope will be the
citizenship of a federated Australia. We,
who belong to this Association, have a
special duty resting upon us to discharge
the high mission to which we have been
called —having a single eye to the future
greatness, glory, and honor of that fede-
ration. These lands of our birth in which
we take so much pride open out for us a
pathway to greatness that few have had
the opportunity of treading under similar
conditions. Towards the accomplishment
of that greatness each one of us, however
humble our station in life, may contribute a
part. As yet there are many volumes of the
world’s history to be written, and when the
work is finished not the least interesting of
its many chapters will be those relating to
the history and development of these
colonies. It is for those of us who are
just beginning to feel the strong heart
beats of Nationality pulsing through our
veins to bestir ourselves and fit ourselves
for the new responsibilities we shall have
to bear. Other nations have been born in
the strong throes of revolution and strife,
and some have won their independence
with the dripping sword and the point of
the bayonet. Their people have marched
to the beat of the war drum and the rattle
and the roar of musketry and cannon.
But here, in these fair lands of the south,
where the baptism of blood has not yet
been sprinkled, a peaceful pathway has
been marked out, along which we may
march to the same end.
And what shall be our laurels ? Not the
fame that comes of battles fought on
blood-stained fields, and flags half-mast for
those who have fallen on floating forts and
steel-coated batteries. Not these: But
rather the triumphs that come of know-
ledge attained in the cause of science—and
sacrifice in the cause of Truth. No room
for war’s alarum or the muffled drum here.
Only the victor’s crown unstained with
blood, and a record of honor and glory to
hand down to future ages.
At the close of his address, Mr
Taylor received hearty applause.
Alderman Bradley, Messrs Barrett,
Munro, Hall, Bussell Young, and the
Bev. M. Moorhouse followed with brief
speeches, all agreeing as to the advan-
tages to be derived by working unitedly.
The meeting then closed.
