

»4 * *.• r
1854. Present Condition and Future Prospects of Australia. 1
Art. C,— 1. A History of New South Wales. By Dr. Lang.
London: 1852.
2. Victoria, late Australia Felix. By WILLIAM WESTGARTH.
, Edinburgh: 1853.
3. South Australia and its Mines. By Francis Dutton.
'*■' 1"* >■>
London: 1850.
4. Article 4 Australia ,’ vol. iv. Encyclopedia Britannica. By
Samuel Mossman. Edinburgh: 1854.
5. Papers relative to the recent Gold Discovery in Australia.
Presented to Parliament 1852-1853.
r PHEEE4g.po region on this habitable globe, whether in or out
A of the British dominions, which has surprised the world
more at the rapid development of ife latent resources than
Australia; or from whose primeval dorpain the brawny arm and
industrious talents of man have extracted so much wealth
where so little was expected. We do not allude merely to the
recent gold discoveries amongst its mountains, but to the multi-
farious products generally, indigenous and exotic, which the soil
and climate of that genial south land hfcs yielded to the success-
ful energies of its civilised occupants 'since it was colonised in
1788. Its first settlement, its early struggles, its subsequent
progress and present material prosperity,—all within the memory
of a living generation, are unparalleled in the history of colo-
nisation.
It is true there are other lands on the shores of the mighty
Pacific which have sprung into as prominent a position among
the nations of the earth from similar causes within less time
than Australia, but these lands are situated on the old-esta-
blished territory of Western America, which has been known
for ages to be rich in mineral wealth as well as vegetable and
animal produce. Hence our first surprise at the extraordinary
growth of the young state of California is diminished when we
consider its contiguity to the auriferous and fertile regions of
Mexico and Peru. In like manner, also, the extending domi-
nion of the Great Republic itself ceases to excite our astonish-
ment, if we estimate the boundless extent of her arable and
pasture lands, intersected by some of the greatest navigable
streams on the earth, and her proximity to the over-populated
kingdoms of the old world, which for three centuries have been
peopling the American continent. But Australia—which has
been hitherto represented as a worthless desert region, destitute
of any natural vegetable or animal product fit for civilised man,
peopled by the lowest tribes of the human race who displayed
no gewgaws to the early navigators indicating the existence of
gold in their country;—a riverless contingent, subject to the most
desolating droughts, where famine threatened more than once to
destroy the wretched malefactors engaged at the outset in laying
the foundation-stone of the colony, and situated at the antipodes
of the parent-country, requiring a tedious! and expensive voyage of
many months’ duration to arrive at; who would have predicted
that in little more than half a century Australia should reach its
present state of material prosperity, when upwards of 18,000,000
of sheep, about 2,250,000 head of cattle, and 150,000 horses
graze upon her pasture-lands; and during the past year the
amount of produce exported from her Shores exceeded twenty
millions sterling?) Formerly the despised*, ‘ Botany Bay ’ country,
fit only to be the common receptacle of our worst criminal
population, who was prepared to find it, in the sixty-sixth year
of its growth,, inhabited by nearly 600,000 free settlers, who have
built many prosperous cities within furnished with all
the elegancies and comforts of life; and that in the-yewr-l-&54 it is
considered one of the most desirable fields for emigration within
our colonial empire? Even so, the Australian wilderness has
been subdued by the persevering energy of the Anglo-Saxon
W M 7' * * ‘
£*A CeK4rn*j
c V


fair
iif time to rival in
ir c(
3i*petitors — India
/
nsp]
:Atation of British -
fperation conveys /
of
mis(
Js of new lands.
s
ns
if* a virgin country
/
for
Ithe support of a
be
I of an indifferent
)
f ii)
igei
om
se <i
irod
Eustrial wealth, so
pal to the growth
these causes alone
If live stock on the.
, and the abundant
Jr
f
s
on]
the sandy soils of
c
can
e of the successful
>
% *T> '
t b
attributed to the
/
sett
ers in overcoming
the
P r
results to be seen
ve that there have
f
Ivei
y city and seaport.
\
)
ch
an
he traveller meets
1 industry of our
rili
sua
y of the country
exertion on their
/
f
se
dorn happens that
odr
ost
ctive, or that the
profusely lavished.
/
or
the part of man.
)e e
ispensed with, it is
)
earp his bread by the
Jr
f
ungrateful soil for its
‘T
th the position and
ob ;
we beg to draw
Y
lying under the
h
misphere. It is of
s
iperficies is within
w
ch extends during
d,
;
de
6° S. lat.—a line
nd that the other
of the temperate
2,6
03 British statute
3 width of 1,040 miles,
race; and that * Great Siuth Lajnd ’ bids fair i
wealth and Commercial iiiportande its older cor
and America. /
The success which has attended the transpl
capital and labour to t lat distant field of
many instructive lessor 3 to future colonist
Here is a proof that the natural productions
may be of the most rr ;agre description for
civilised community; een the soil may be
character, and yet possi ss the elements of ir
long as the climate an herbage are conger
of exotic vegetable and animal food. From
may be attributed the i nexampled increase
thinly-tenanted pasture- ands of the Kangaroi
production of cereals a: d esculent roots on
Australia. At the san } time, the main ca
colonisation of these distant regions must bi
indomitable perseverance of the pioneer sett
the natural obstacles in their way. And the
scattered over the surface of that fair land pn
been few, if any, idlers amongst them. Ever
village and hamlet, mansion and hut, which
with, presents a monument of the skill ai
enterprising countrymen. The very sterili
seems to have brought forth more than usua
part, and verified the Observation, that *it si
‘ the richest countrh 3 are the most prodi
‘ bounty of Nature, \ here it has been most
‘ is improved by corr spending exertions o
* Repugnant to laboui where labour can be
‘ necessity alone whi< i compels him to ear:
* sweat of his brow, fend to torture the un
‘ scanty products.’
Presuming that or r readers are familiar
O
shape of this island- continent on the glo
their attention to it 3 physical geography
meteorological influences of the southern i
importance to that one-half of its
the influence of the/tropic of Capricorn, w
the summer solstice* south of the parallel,
wdiich will be founc| to bisect the island;
moiety is within the most genial latitudes oi
zone. That its extifcme length is about 2,603
miles from east to wist, having an average widtl
and forming a superf ci
about three-fourths o ’
thirty-two times larg ;r
or cordillera, on the e;
north to its extreme s
miles, equal to 1,965 st
ties of climate incid in
latitude, and is furth r
sea-level to the perp< tu
speak generally of t le
were good, bad, or|in(
to place the various i oil
under one category. :
Although the con ini
correctly laid down uj
gators Cook and Fli de
remain unexplored. H
geography brought t i
chell, Leichhardt, a d
veyors, in concluding tl
nita Australis is desert-
geography, situated s
zones of the southeriiln
and distinguishable flat
of region from the etehi
climate and soil o:
ndifterent, would beanore
>ils and climates of the Eur
Inuous outline of this
upon our charts by
ders, still three-fourt
However, we have s
light by the explor
other adventurou
Fat the greater port
t-land. That the cl
,s it is within the
lemisphere, presents
iture; but that it c
•nal snow'-llnc of alpi
lies of 2,690,810 squaire miles—equal to
‘ the European contin nt, and upwards of
ir than England. Tha its mountain-chain.
eastern section exten s from its extreme
south—a distance o 1,708 geographical
statute miles—and pc ssesses all the varie-
!nt to its position between 10° and 40° of
:r influenced by altitudes varying from the
tual snow-line of th* Alps. So that to
Australia as if they
nore erroneous than
European continent
immense territory is
those eminent navi-
is of its vast interior
ifficient details of its
tious of Sturt, Mit-
travellers and sur-
m of the terra incog-
iracter of Australian
jrrid and temperate
io one great, general,
Fibits every variety
e peaks, to the ever-


scorched sands of th A desert. We behold ir
mountains, valleys, i vers, lakes, and coasts
intersected by water alternating between
the most barren, ofte i side by side, and pr
Geologically speakir y, it is an extinct A
sea-bed upheaved b< neath the burning ra;
which through count ess ages has graduall
incumbent waters as the sea became sha
volcanic force upon its bed, leaving the
crusted with saline d posits after evaporati
ing the fructificatioi of the hardiest seed
winds could strew >ver its sterile soil.
its varied surface of
a congeries of lands,
he most fertile and
miscuously mingled.
• chipelagos , with its
s of a vertical sun,
dried up its super-
ower from internal
exposed surface lo-
rn ; thereby prevent-
which the burning
And those streams
which now flow thipugh fertile valleys
sources and become f absorbed in the san
>m their mountain
of the desert, at a
tide which rippled
id the Australasian
far-gone epoch ming|ed their floods with th<
upon the shores of eitiuct islands that stud'
The surface geology of Australia bein<
character, and the climate assuming great i
as it is influenced byfthe local causes allud
Lof tlvis chequered
Sri ability, according
[l to, it accounts in
[its concerning the
|ich have appeared
sently arrived there
is a general agree-
cp the purity of the
fitness of the sky.
mt are the causes
some degree for the contradictory stateim
weather, and the q lalities of the soil, w
lately in the public j< urnals from settlers re
and writing from dif ;rent localities. Then
raent, however, amc igst them in describi
atmosphere, its arid ;y, and the intense b
These not only cha acterlse its climate,
which render it oim of the most salubrl
is countries in the
at present
mies of New South
situated. This sec-
ia on the map, in
i the centre of the
world. More especi fly that portion which
pur particular consk aration, where the co]
Wales, Victoria, am South Australia are
tion is denominated South-eastern Austr;
consequence of its compass direction froi
island, and comprises within its proclair
largest quarter of its entire superficies, am
est portion of available country for the p
colonisation. Through this extensive cou
ied boundaries the
contains the great-
irposes of European
itry flows the great
ms, flowing from its
300 miles. To the
r / /
River Murray, with i s numerous ramificat
extreme source to its mtlet, a distance of ‘
southward and eastv ard of the Austral
in Cordillera, from
: lands towards the
intains which iuter-
whence these streams irise, the intermedia
coast are well waterec ; and the Snowy M<
vene not only temper the climate, but th
moisture throughout i re summer to many
afford a supply of
;reams which would
bern Ocean, encom-
otherwise be dried up while the great Soi
passing two-thirds of ts outline, throws u
which descend in abu dant rains. About
clouds of moisture,
ie-half of this terri-
locks and herds, at
julatiou, it extends
3rage width of 150
3 settled districts a
i British Isles, Yic-
Tory is occupied by tl 3 settlers, with their
the present time. 1t an approximate ca
along the coast for ,500 miles, by an a 1
miles, New South M ales having within i
tract of land equal t the superficies of tl
toria about the exte t of England, and S*
that of Scotland.
iith Australia about
unexplored wilder-
'it lay a blank upon
I by a few tribes of
the natural poverty
ited no more to the
would have done if
Sixty-six years ag this territory was a]
ness. With the exception of its coast-line
the terrestrial atlas, afd was only inhabit
savages, whose attemsited frames betray^
of the land. At tha period ‘it contri
‘ wealth and progress of the world than
4 its shores had beei submerged beneat,
*' Southern Pacific.’ S r or was it until mai
the waves of the
y years after a set-
uctive lands in the
valent was extracted
ms outlay of extra-
ury upon the colony,
ary of State for the
:hat in the ensuing
msiderable reduction
olony of New South
tlement had been effected on the unproi
neighbourhood of Por Jackson that an equ
from its soil to coun erbalance the enorm
neous wealth expeml d by the British tre:
It was about the yea| 1823 that the Seer
Colonies intimated #> the Government
Session of Parliamei® there would be a
‘ in the estimates for njhintaining the penal


Wales. Up to that date it had cost the mother-country on an
average 300,000|L per annum, or aboui two millions sterling. ,
After this a favourable change came over the prospects of the "') i
colony. The Governor, Sir Thomas Brisbane, had expressed
himself in his despatches to the effect that the emigration of
free settlers with means to employ the convicts had set in
with such vigour, that he hoped they would in time relieve
the Home Government from the large expenditure on the
establishment, and render the colony self-supporting. Such
were the moderate expectations entertained by the authorities
of the future position of Australia not more than thirty years
ago. So that the era which has ushered in her present un-
exampled prosperity is of more recent date than appears at first
sight.
At that period of her history the indigenous products of 7
Australia were scarcely known to the settlers. Doubtless they
burned native coal in their stoves, and had built themselves / A$
habitations, and constructed articles of utility out of the timber 4 * !/ /
and stone of the country, but as far as any product available in 7; ~v ,
a foreign market was reckoned upon, there were none mentioned
in her slender export-sheet. One gentleman who shipped some
of the pure drift sand from the hills near Sydney to England
had some articles of crystal ware manufactured from it, which
he presented to the Governor. For this first attempt to render
the mineral resources of the colony available, he was rewarded
for his enterprise by a grant of some Crown land. Here, how-
ever, the matter ended, and the colonists despaired of ever find-
ing any mineral or vegetable productions in the country to add
to their list of exports.
After the occupation of the Port Phillip territory by the Van
Diemen’s Land settlers, and the formation of the province of
South Australia, in 1836, much was made of a small export of
bark for tanning, from the wattle-tree ( Acacia dealbata ), found
abundantly in the former colony; and of gum, from one of the
acacia trees (A. implcxia ) in the latter province; but in a
few years these natural productions were exhausted as far
as their exportation would remunerate the colonists, and there
being no pains taken to increase the native plantations of
these trees, the two exports soon disappeared from the list.
Since then a more successful result has attended the export of
native cedar from the northern districts of New South Wales.
Jf _
;, tf
£ A /f
t "**!' y
This timber is much prized among furniture manufacturers, and
obtains a remunerative price to the exporter in the London market.
The wood of the blue-srum and iron-bark trees have likewise
The wood of the blue-gum and iron-bark trees have likewise
been valued for their lasting properties when immersed in
water, being admirably adapted for ship-building. But the long
voyage to this country will prevent the shipment of cargoes of
such timber for British ports becoming profitable. Nevertheless
the forests of Australia are sources of great wealth to the colo-
nists themselves, both for ship-building and house-building, and
the manufacture of implements and machinery where wood is
employed. For we are satisfied that there are no descriptions
of timber which will stand the influences of the Australian
climate better than the woods from her indigenous trees; and
we fear that the settlers are too regardless of the value of
their primitive forests, while they so recklessly burn and destroy
them.
This comprises the list of vegetable products useful to civi-
lised man as yet known in Australia. The native animal
productions are even of still smaller account; these include /
all the fish found in the seas and rivers, and the game birds in o
the interior, which are only used for home consumption. An
attempt has been made, unsuccessfully, to cure the large cod- Jy - ’
fish found in the river Murray, for exportation to the Mauritius,
likewise to preserve the sea-slug, or beche-de-mere — which is
found at Moreton Bay—for the Chinese market. But this
also has failed; although the Malays carry on a successful
trade in the same article, obtained from the Gulf of Car-
pentaria, in Northern Australia, which they calf trepang.
Pearl shells have been fished up off the east coast, and realised
50 1, per ton in England; but the more remunerative employ-


ment of searching for her mineral treasures has, for the time,
entirely drawn away private enterprise from developing these
and other resources of Australia.
Although metalliferous minerals were met with
occasionally during th(| early settlement of the parent colony,
yet the attention of thl Government, or thlcolonists, was never
seriously drawn to infestigate their nature. It was reserved
for the enterprising c(|ionists of South Australia to establish
the fact that Australia was possessed of g*eat mineral wealth.
In 1841, the fifth ye|r of their occupation of that colony,
specimens of lead orelwere discovered, so|ne of them contain-
ing a small percentage of silver ( Argentiferous galena.') In
1843, copper ore ( Cmrhnnated copper. Malachite) was found ,
abundantly in one locality, which led to the working of the /
Kapunda mine. It vi its not, however, unjtil the discovery and
■P -ri A. • /_
f .it y/ Vi
working of the faraou Burra Burra copp€ r mine in 1845, that
the extent of the m aeral resources of Australia were made
apparent to the wor 1. The rich depo its of copper ore it
yielded close to the urface, surpassed everything experienced
in Cornish mining, was literally quanting the ore. During
the first three years’ 1 working of this mine, 33,386 tons of ore
were raised, which p "oduced upwards of 10,000 tons of pure
copper, valued at 70( ,000/. Subsequently the yield of copper
ore from this mine a 3ne was on an average 18,000 tons an-
nually, and would d .übtless have continued increasing until
the present time, bit for the discovery of the gold mines
in 1851, which had tile effect of drawing away the miners to
the neighbouring coloi ies. Consequently There has been a rapid
decline since then in t e export of copper ore from South Aus-
tralia, even including the produce of several other mines of
less importance which lave been worked.| The colonists expect
that when labour bee >mes more abundant, they will resume
their wonted vigour. Che fact, however,; is significant, that the
value of copper and opper ore, exported from this province
durino- 1850, was 275, )00/. out of 453,668/.—the total amount
of exports for that yeah—showing where the native products of
one portion of this undeveloped region began to assume a pre-
ponderance over the foreign productions hhich were cultivated
as articles of export. , This new source iof wealth, which con-
as articles of export. , This new source
tributed to the onwardjprogressof Australia, at a most opportune
period, was only the precursor of that great event in its brief
history—the Gold Discovery —the particulars of which are now
patent to the world. | I
The effects of this discovery are not pierely matters of local
consideration because these colonies have| been benefited by the
addition of a new alticle of export to their resources; but
already in the third yiar of this new en,, the gold discoveries
in Australia have produced effects of hhe greatest national
importance to the British empire, and tb the progress of the
world at large. The discovery itself ofjsuch a mass of trea-
7- ' f ifjr t,- .
' I
sure, which the policy lof mankind has set up to regulate the
products of their industry, in this hitherto neglected region, is
a subject of interest to the historian and statesman. After the
occupation of that territory, doubtless from a very remote
period, by a keen-observing, though socially-degraded race of
Aborigines, and for more than sixty yearsfinhabited by no mean
class of observers from amongst our oufe countrymen, it is
remarkable, to say the least of it, that this discovery should be
made so late in the day. If the first specimens of the precious
metal had been found in unexplored and less practicable localities
than they were, we would have wondeifed the less. But its
discoverer, Mr. Hargraves—to whom all credit be given for be-
ing the first demonstrator of the great fact—found it on the
surface of the ground, at the first spot where he looked for it,
and subsequently it was picked out in loose grains from garden
soil, while the stones which formed part of the foundation of a
bridge, and the metal used upon the adjacent road, were com-
posed of quartz matrix striated with virgin gold. Now that the


fact is patent and substantial to the world, .creditable statements "'N
have been put forth that the local auth >rities had been ap- /
prised of the existence bf gold in the An itralian mountains at
various periods anterior Vo the recent dis( ivery, and that they
suppressed the information, fearful of it consequences upon
the industrial progress ofl the colony. The se prudential motives
on the part of the earliA local governmei ts are commendable;
for the condition of the] colony then, cor posed as it was of
a convict population, wafe not prepared t receive intelligence
of such boundless wealthlying open to their hands. Moreover,
the gradual increase of live stock, which his furnished so much
animal food to the people at the time of discovery, was a pro-
vidential circumstance, when so little vegetable food could be
had upon that emergency. Therefore, late in the
history of this remarkable south land, thefdiscovery of gold was
made propitious time. Notwithstanding these favourable
circumstances of time and place, it will be in the recollection of
our readers that much crime and anarchy prevailed during the
first year of the discovery. Now that t|ie first excitement has
cooled the fevered mine 3of the colonists, ; and the romance of
gold-digging has given p ace to the most ai cirrous toil in procuring <
the metal, the future developm snt of the golden re- J
sources of Australia pro nises to be condu :ted in the same steady
manner that the other remunerative employihents of the colonists —s
are pursued. For the present this discovery has turned the n
scale by an overwhelming amount of indigenous exports over the
cultivated products for exportation. Ten years ago the former
stood almost at nil on the balance sheet; now they quadruple
the value of exotic productions. The aggregate value of exports
from the three colonies of South-Eastern Australia during the
past year was upwards of 20,000,000/., out of which less than
4,000,000/. will represent the proceeds of wool, tallow and other
produce, while the remaining sum of 16,000,000/. represents
their mineral wealth.
At such a favourable climax in her onward progress, the con-
dition of Australia, at the present day, contrasts remarkably
with what it was not more than thirty years ago. At that
period the colonisation of her shores was a burden and a shame
upon the nation. She stood in the position of a profligate off-
shoot from the mother country, that required to be maintained
abroad, by withdrawing the nourishment from her industrious
children at home, without receiving any material equivalent
in exchange. Mark the change which has come over her
relations with the parent commonwealth. Such announce-
ments as the following appearing in the public journals of the
day require no further comment. ‘ The rapid rise of ‘yester-
* day in the English funds was in consequence of the arrival
‘ of an Australian steamer with 250,000 ounces of gold, valued
<at a million sterling.’ ‘ The sales of Australian wool this
< season have reached the enormous quantity of 50,000,000
, lbs., averaging Is. 10c/. per lb. Not only are our manufactures
< of fine woollen fabrics mainly dependent upon Australia for
* their supplies of the raw material, but large purchases have
( been made by foreign manufacturers, who find the quality of
* woo i more suitable for their delicate fabrics than the German
‘ and Spanish wools.’
This brings us to the consideration of those Australian pro-
ducts which have been introduced from time to time from other
countries for the purposes of home consumption and export.
It will be readily supposed that these are all of vegetable and
animal growth. The list is numerous, and comprises almost
every description of produce cultivated in Europe, and several
of tropical origin. Not only is the soil and climate of South-
Eastern Australia of that genial nature adapted to the pro-
duction of all European articles of food and clothing, but they
attain a growth and perfection unknown in our northern hemi-
sphere. The capabilities of the country, especially for the
growth and increase of sheep and cattle, are of the most favour-
able description. The boundless pasture-lands of its temperate v. J
regions at once furnish the settlers with abundance of animal
■jntit
'rfo
f f Uf
/ a <


food, and the valuable commodities of wool, tallow, beef,
hides, horns, &c. for
trade in their external commerce. Before the gold discovery,
these alone were raising the internal revenue of South-Eastern
Australia far above the wants of the community. Upon the
eve of that event, the colony of Victoria, with a population of
70,000, exported 1,042,000/. from her pastoral resources >
against 745,000/. of imports, or an export value of raw produce
equal to 15/. per head of population. An average of exportable
resources hitherto unknown amongst industrial colonies. What
shall we say then of the astounding average value of the exports, \
including gold, from the same colony in 1852, which amounted
to 75/. for every man, woman, and child, and they had increased'
to 200,000?
It will be admittei that the basis of rational prosperity is
founded upon the ablndance of food to % obtained for the
sustenance of the peolle. If the country il old, a dearth cre-
ates rebellion and dislase; if it is young, \ scarcity of pro-
visions retards its progilss. Thus it was in the early days of
wia-
the distant settlement 1
New South Wales. PJ
munity before the capaq
tion of grain and esculen
grateful soil was discove:
Jackson, the vegetable
yielded abundantly, ur
Inch first sprung u» on the coast of
nine threatened to aimihilate the com- \
llities of the countrwsfor the reproduc-
[ roots was When a more
Id than that around ®e shores of Port
{productions planted! by the settlers,
11 in a few years shey were inde-
pendent of foreign supples. Moreover, it has been proved
that the grain from South Australia is of the finest quality
in the world, while the potato raised from the seed in Van
Diemen’s Land has not its equal in percentage of nutriment.
When we add to these common necessaries of life, the varieties
of fruits and kitchen garden stuffs, from a pine apple to a carrot,
which grow profusely in the genial atmosphere and loamy soil,
we cannot hut conclude that there are few regions, if any, which
possess the capabilities of Australia for the production of exotic
edibles. f
But more than this, At is upon the reproduction of these
imported commodities of universal consumption that the great
future in store for the Australian empire depends. We infer,
from experience, that In time copper min|s become worked
out, and gold fields exhausted; but the sam| causes which pro-
duce the fleece on the sl|eep’s back, and the beeves of to-
day will multiply these products when the dbriferous treasures
of the mountains are a|pong the historical of the past.
Nor is it likely that the Reproductive exports of Australia will
then be confined to wool, tallow, and other animal products
alone. Already much has been done in growing wine, oil,
tobacco, cotton, and other valuable articles of exotic vegetation, k
Nor have the more prudent settlers been neglectful of their
plantations in the universal scramble for gold. During the past
year upwards of 1,300 acres of land were laid out as vineyards,
which produced 100,000 gallons of wine and 2,000 gallons of
brandy, while 20,000 cwts. of tobacco were grown and manu-
factured in New South Wales. The cultivation of cotton has
likewise been successfully and profitably accomplished on the
banks of the Brisbane Biver at Moreton Bay. The experimental
farmers have exported their first produce to this country, from
which they have realised a clear profit of 12/. per acre; and
the quality of the cotton has been pronounced by the Manches-
ter Chamber of Commerce to be the finest in the world. The
locality here alluded to, and the country, for a thousand miles
to the north, is capable of producing sugar, coffee, rice, and
all other tropical articles of consumption. In fine, there are no
limits to the extent and variety of reproductive commodities,
either for home consumption or for exportation, which the
accommodating climes and soils of this chequered region are
Capable of yielding to the industry and enterprise of man.
Many of our readers may feel incredulous as to the correct-
A TJL
r J > / •


ness of our statements regarding the extensive agricultural re-
sources of these colonies; especially, if they have formed their
opinions from the early accounts of the barren land around the
first settlement at Port Jackson, but we are confident that in
time these will be made manifest, when a sufficient population
of agricultural labourers are found to cultivate the inexhaustible
alluvial soils on the western flank of the Australian Cordillera,
on the slopes of the Mount Lofty range, and throughout the
whole extent of the fertile colony of Victoria. In this province
alone—which is of greater # extent than England and Wales
together we do not exaggerate when we state, that the
breadth of arable land there is not far short of what it is in
that section of Great Britain. Doubtless
ere this have been in a better developed
grain had yielded as | rofitable a return to
•rofitable a return to
port of wool. The d stance, however, of tl
great market for brei d stuffs has hitherto )
tion of grain crops al lost a prohibition beyi
scanty population. . low, however, since tf
change has come ove the prospects of the
The influx of emigra ts to the gold fields h
for their produce whi h the united efforts o
Van Diemen’s Land! farmers cannot suppl
there is an insatiabla demand for small agj
land amongst the mo® prudent and fortuna]
In cultivating the soillto produce the golden
only a more remunerative description of
toiling for the goldenfdust in the bowels o
which givfts them a territorial holding in the
It would appear that wie Government of V
lese resources would
:ate if the export of
ie settler as the ex-
it country from any
endered the cultiva-
ind the wants of its
} gold discoveries, a
gricultural settlers. / a
is created a demand / J /
and dd'j ' . - ’ *'
Consequently,
ricultural blocks of /*!
e labourins; classes. * /
• , ° If; ft S . u
gram, they see not \j \' P f v‘- 1
employment than
[ the earth, but one
r adopted country.
:toria were unpre-
pared with a sufficiency of surveyed lands of the description
required to meet the wants of the colonists; and when they
looked for new spots lo survey, they found that the richest
agricultural tracts wl|it have been termed the ‘ eyes of the
* country,’ are locked |rp in the pastoral leases granted to the
squatters. Moreover, t|at the regulations for the disposal of
crown lands prohibitedithem from selling less than 640 acre
sections beyond the town and suburban allotments. Hence
there has been a unanimous cry amongst the non-squatting
population for the Government to unlock the lands, and dispose
of them in small lots tolmeet the applications of those who will
bring them immediately under tillage; for at present they are
at the mercy of the landiiobber.
bring them immediately under tillage; for at present they are
at the mercy of the land|jobber.
The land question in Australia more especially in the (
colonies of Victoria and New South Wales is of a very com-
plicated nature. This has arisen out of the several land systems v "' /
which have been introduced from time to time by the Govern- \GLa* *
ment, from the foundation of the latter colony, when land was
given away for nothing to the present time, when town allot- JJ *
ments sell at 10,000 Z. per acre. The first system adopted was
to give a free grant of land to any one who could improve it by
labour, or who could prove to the governor that he possessed a
specified sum of money for that purpose; the quantity of land
so granted being regulated according to the means of the appli- /
cant whether free or bond. The governor for the time being /
was invested with full power to regulate the disposal of all
crown lands. Besides free grants of land, licences to occupy
waste lands for pastoral purposes were given at an early date, /
free of charge. Not only were the lands freely disposed of in
this manner, but the Government assisted the occupants by
allowing them convict labourers to clear the ground ; and, in
many instances, rationed the proprietor and his family for six
months fi’om the Government stores. As the lands increased in
value with the progress of the colony, a yearly quit-rent of 2s. /
per 100 acres, which was 'gradually increased to 155., was de-
manded by the Government, besides requiring the employers of
convict labourers to ration them at their own expense. This
system continued until 1824, when Sir Thomas Brisbane first


gold the crown lands of New South Wales at ss. per acre,
giving the purchasers a long credit. At the same time, the
Colonial Minister issued new regulations for the disposal of I
waste lands in Australia, for the guidance of the local governors,
to the effect, that: 1. The whole territory be divided into
counties, hundreds, and parishes; and an average price given to
the lands in each parish. 2. That they be put up for sale at
\
/
the fixed minimum price. 3. All purchasers to apply by
written application for the lands they wish to have put up.
4. The purchase-money to be paid in four quarterly instalments,
5. The land to be put up in lots of thijee square miles. Subse-
quently, in 1826, Governor Darling created a land board, con-
sisting of four officials, who issued a fresh set of regulations,
x. * n n
rendering applications for land tedious and unsatisfactory. So
much so, that the settlers preferred depasturing their stock
upon lands under the licensing system. Hence arose the for-
midable body of Squatters, whose interest in the disposal of
crown lands at the present day has become a matter of serious
consideration with the Government, lor, while at first they
were only yearly tenants at will, the Government, in 1847,
granted their petition to hold leases of eight and fourteen years
duration, with right of pre-emption to purchase any portion of
their * runs ’ which might be put up for sale at the minimum f
price ; while they paid 10/. per annum on every 4000 sheep or
600 head of cattle, and to receive compensation for improve-
ments should the land or leases pass out of their hands. Mean-
while, it was resolved to put up the lands to be sold by auction,
instead of by sealed tender; which gave the colonists an oppor-
tunity of competing for good sections; at the same time, the
lots were restricted to a square mile (640 acres). -The minimum
price was likewise raised from ss. to 125., which again was
altered at the time of forming the colony of South Australia in
1836, when it was raised to 1/.—at which price it has continued
ever since. „ , ,
w ' /
CVCI OUIOC* t PI 1* i
In consequence of these fluctuating systems for the disposal
of the waste lands of the Crown, they have stirred up mnong
the colonists contending interests for the possession of territorial
holdings, which have created a great deal of animosity. The
right of pre-emption, which the squatting leaseholders possess,
is justly complained of by their fellow-colonists as a virtual
monopoly of the finest tracts of land for agricultural purposes;
while they are paying famine prices for imported gram. The /
question in Victoria has assumed a degree of importance, which
the local government has responded to by throwing into the
market great quantities of land within the village reserves, and
suburban allotments in the neighbourhood of the towns. These
have been greedily bought up by the fortunate class of colonists,
and many are now quietly settling down to farming pursuits on
their small holdings who would otherwise probably have spent
their earnings in the slough of drunkenness. The formation of
a class of yeomen in Australia has always been considered a
matter of vital importance to the steady progress of the com-
munity ; for hitherto the pastoral population were anj thing but
a fixed class of colonists; and the late gold discoveries has, it
anything, rendered the population more of a wandering gipsy
character than before. A change in the present land system
which would lower the minimum price, and dispose of the
country sections in smaller lots, where the labouiing man and
his family could sit down upon their own freehold, it is calcu- }
lated would cause thousands of productive spots to spring up in
the wilderness, and create a more contented and settled popu-
lation. . _. ,
Besides these means of developing the indigenous and exotic
resources of Australia! as a field for raw (productions, we must
not overlook the advantages she possesses as a future seat for
manufactures—her prlbable destiny as the Great Britain of
the Southern Hemispllpre. At present, tjie merchants in the
mother country look u|on her as the palladium of colonies for
the sale of British manufactures. This will have its check. Her
A
ITUfCtr^L


~- r
ts
I
i
)
/' - Jr ;
Present Condition and
future prosperity is i bt tacked on to tl
port of merchandise a the rate of 20 1.
This is a great draina ;e of capital whicl
circumstances, will pi >bably be reduced
according to the higl est average consul
chandise by other c< lonies. With the
grants there is a lar ;e proportion of on
lation mingled, who dll form the elem
munity at our antipoi es. And who, be<
the rude occupations of producing the
and wool, would ref lily assemble rou
capitalist at the loom < r the anvil. Nor
|e present yearly im— N
»r head of population.
[ under more matured
to one-fourth, or less,
Iption of foreign mer-
influx of British emi-
:• manufacturing popu-
ints of a similar com-
bming dissatisfied with
raw materials of gold
id the manufacturing
iave the older colonists
been idle in the matter, fcix woollen-cloth manufactories have
been in operation during the last five or ten years, which, in
1853, produced upwards of 200,000 yards of cloth. In the
cities of Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide there are 15 iron
and brass foundries ; some of them capable of casting and
finishing the machinery of a hundred horse-power steam-engine.
-There are also 7 potteries, 4 rope and 4 hat manufactories,
4 smelting works, 1 glass work, and 36 tanneries; besides 3
large establishments for sugar refining, 16 for making soap and
candles, 15 for manufacturing tobacco and snuff, 5 for salting
and preserving meats, 100 for tallow melting, and upwards of
200 steam, water, wind, and horse mills for grinding and dressing
grain. dhese are, no doubt, the forerunners of a great manu-
facturing trade the restless enterprise of the industrial y
genius of our nation is likely to introduce ppon the shores of
the southern seas.
As a nation of jvorkers in metals, we may congratulate our-
selves on having i blonised Australia. Here is a new field for
our surplus mechi nical talent. With an ascertained coal-field
equal to tlm large t in Europe, besides indications of other de-
posits of this inv iluable product, and an finknown extent of
iron, lead, and cof per ores, her mineral resources for the pur-
poses of ordinary are practically boundless. We
have not mentioned before that ores of iifon are found in the
ly boundless. We
m are found in the
mineral districts; these have been ascertained by the govern-
ment geologists st present surveying the- country to abound
everywhere. Frolm the enormous expense of erecting proper
works for extracting this metal from thefore, it will be a long
time before thesft mines are made available. The only de-
scription of iron ore which has been smelted in the colony is an U*
oxydulated iron ore, found at Berrima in New South Wales,
from which the finest description of steel has been extracted. 4
Altogether, there are elements of wealth to be found in the • a l ><* 1 *
unemployed resources of Australia which are worth the parti-
cular investigation of manufacturers and capitalists.
The geographical position of the group of colonies under con-
sideration is eminently favourable for the purposes of inter-
colonial traffic; not only from their relative positions with each
other by land and sea, but their proximity to Van Diemen’s
Land the gianaiy of Australasia. A glance at the map will
point out to the observant eye that the chief seat of local
commerce is destined to be in the harbour of Port Phillip. Its
cential situation in the midst of the group—being almost equi-
distant by sea from the capitals of the neighbouring colonies
gives it a commanding position over the harbours of Adelaide
Hobart Town, and Sydney. Although the latter harbour has
been pronounced by maritime authorities the finest commercial
port in the world; and the barrenness of the surrounding
country has been the means of creating a large local import
trade in grain to its shores, which has augmented its shipping
to a considerable extent, — still it is too far distant from th?
outposts of the neighbouring colonies to maintain a first position
as the emporium of the group. The great estuary of Port
Philip, with its two ports of Melbourne and Geelono- on the
other hand, is inferior in its facilities for the accommodation of
shipping; but it is the key to the richest pastoral, agricultural.
Yi L* /*


and gold region in Australia now known to the world as the
province of Victoria. Hence this extensive harbour has be-
come the rendezvous of the greater proportion of foreign as
well as colonial traders.
The inquiring traveller visiting the shores of Australia is par-
ticularly struck with t ie animated appearance of the principal
sea-ports. Arriving ii Hobson Bay, the /Melbourne anchorage
in Port Phillip whe’e at least 200 vtpsels may be seen at
anchor of the aggrega e measurement on 100,000 tons —looks
more like a harbour i i the old country tjpan one only eighteen
years old at the antipodes. So land-locked and extensive is
this harbour, that the united mercantile and warlike navies of
the world could ride safely at anchor. From its entrance to
Hobson’s Bay it is twenty-seven miles; while its western arm
stretches from Geelong to its eastern shore a distance of fifty
miles. The amount of shipping inwards during the year 1852,
numbered 1657 ships of 408,216 tons ; conveying imports to the J
amount of 4,043,896/. Besides Port Phillip, Victoria has several
minor ports: there are Portland Bay, Port Fairy, Warnambool, j
Western Port, and Port Albert. From the first two, and the
Ports of Melbourne and Geelong combined, 21,310,294 lbs. of
wool was shipped during the year ending July 5. 1853. Port
Adelaide, the sea-port of South Australia, is of an inferior
description to Port Phillip ; at the same time, it is capable of
improvement as the trade of the port increases. Port Jackson,
however, surpasses in beauty and convenience all the harbours
in Australia. It is tae sailor’s delight to be snugly moored in
Sydney Cove. As y<|u enter between the heads of this inlet,
the picturesque scene: y of the upper h irbour opens upon you
with panoramic magi ificence. As yo . pass a succession of
bays and coves guard* 1 by several isleti , you are charmed with
the fairy-like aspect af the scenery; and when the captain
informs you that eac i of these bays i| deep enough to float a
man-of-war, you canm t but marvel at the maritime advantages
of Sydney harbour. And as you approach the city, it appears
the very perfection of a sea-port town. No dirty, muddy
stream, nor dingy-looking warehouses, meet the eye ; as too
frequently happens in other countries. All is bright, clean,
and cheerful. The cl|ar waters below, and the blue sky over-
head, throw out in bpld relief the freestone buildings
which compose the town. It is admirably situated for a city in
a hot climate. It isfbuilt upon Hills' of easy ascent, whose
valleys form the basins which constitute the coves and bays of
Port Jackson. Hence it is naturally well drained, without any
low parts of the town where squalid misery could take up its
abode. What may lie considered the it. Giles or Wapping of
the city is the most!elevated quarter,!known as ‘the rocks.’
Here a population of 70,000 are surrouu ed by all the elegancies
and adornments of lift; and the architec ural beauties of Greece
and Rome find a dwel ling-place at the a tipodes.
Besides the harboi.r of Port Jacksoi, New South Wales,
possesses about twent; r other smaller andjess important shipping
ports. Amongst the principal of these are Port Hunter and
Moreton Bay. The 1 ormer being situa ed at the mouth of the
Hunter River, where the coal measure! are worked, near the )
town of Newcastle. The latter is the out-port of the produce
from the northern districts, and the town of Brisbane, on its
shores, promises to become in time the entrepot of the tropical
productions these districts are capable of yielding. The sea-
board Avhich the harbours enumerated command within the
boundaries of south-eastern Australia is not far short of two
thousand miles, if we follow the sinuosities of the coast
from Spencer’s gulf, in South Australia, to Wide Bay, in
New South Wales. And when it is considered in addition to
the trade and commerce of the country that these ports are
frequented by six hundred sail of whaling ships which cruise
about the southern seas, it will be conceded that the ports and
harbours of Australia are of vast importance to a maritime
A. f. W
it
if


Present Condition and
nation like ours. The demand for seamen to carry on the trade J
between Britain and these shores has been seriously felt during
the past two years. And as another indication of the growing /
importance of these possessions, their influence in this respect )
has caused serious inconvenience in manning the Royal Navy at
the present juncture.
While the external traffic of the country has no impediment
in its way to multiply a thousand-fold as the commerce and
increase of population demand it, the inland means of transport
are of the most wretched description, and insufficient to meet the
wants of the community at the present time. When vessels /
arrive in port laden with the necessaries required by the settlers
in the interior, there are no roads available for traffic at a certain
season of the year, and in ordinary seasons they incur a ruinous
expense upon the colonists. The enormous charges made by the
carriers of Victoria for conveying merchandise from the coast to
the interior are unexampled in the history of commercial traffic.
Between the port of Melbourne and the Mount Alexander gold
fields, a distance varying from sixty to one hundred miles, it was
1/. per ton per mile. And it has been calculated that one year's
outlay would have constructed a railway between the two places, j
Naturally deficient in navigable rivers, it is alone by means of
railway communication that Australia can unite the resources of (
the interior with the out-ports on the coast. This desideratum
to inland traffic once established to a sufficient extent, so as to /
link the principal towns in one chain of communication, there
would be no limit to the combined inter-colonial trade between
the three provinces. Already a company have commenced lay-
ing down a line of railway from Sydney to Goulburn, which
may be continued on| to Melbourne. I And at Melbourne a
company have projected another line towards the Murray, and
eventually to join the Sydney line. While smaller branches are
in the course of construction from Geelong to Melbourne, and
from Melbourne to Hobson’s Bay and William Town. Taking
the extent of country throughout these colonies, there is not a
more level region suitable for railways in the world. The un-
dulating open forest lands and extensive plains, of which they
mostly consist, would not require the excavation of a tunnel
necessary, while the general gradients in a hundred miles would
not exceed 1 in 200.
In mentioning that Australia is deficient in great
rivers, we must except that noble stream, the Murray, which ,
has recently been navigated for I,|oo miles in a steamboat by A/
an enterprising ship-master named Cadell. A man of practical ‘
attainments in the arts of ship-building and navigation, he con- /
structed a vessel after his own model to cross the dangerous bar
at the entrance of Lake Alexandrina, where the Murray
debouches, and with a party of adventurous men succeeded in
taking her safely through all obstacles, and navigating this
magnificent stream. The result of this feat is incalculable. It
will open up the rich lands of Victoria and New South Wales
on this river and its tributaries, to the enterprising colonists of
South Australia; and create an inter-colonial trade with these
favoured provinces, which will in a measure recompense them
for the drawbacks they have sustained and nobly battled with,
in consequence of their own territory not having yet proved a
remunerative gold region. As indicative of the mutual ad-
vantages likely to accrue from the opening up of this great
natural highway through the interior of these provinces, we may
instance the fact that during the year 1852 the amount of gold
transmitted from Victoria to South Australia, by land and sea,
was 2,215,167/., while 250,000/. value of bread stuffs and farm
produce were shipped in return. Although the tariffs of each
dependency slightly differ, the elements of Free Trade policy
govern their inter-colonial trade. And as the recent elevation
of the Governor of New South Wales to the position of
Governor-General of Australia, has established a
gtep towards political confederation, so will the establishment of
I \rCetcrK
A it
WVt V i f
Ir*j, ft i r*
outfox


railway communication, and the navigation of the Murray river,
unite the commercial interests of the colonists in one federal
union, and tend to destroy all local jealousies and rivalry, save
• - I-:.
that of contributing to the general welfare.
Sufficient data, we presume, have been set forth in the fore-
going brief review of the known indigenous resources and
acquired capabilities of Australia, to warrant us in saying that
her future as a great nation is no longer a matter of conjecture.
Her commercial condition at the present time, influenced by the
recent gold discoveries, has raised the certainty of that con-
summation into the embodiment of a great fact in the minds of
the people ; and grave wealthy men are calculating the chances
of leaving the old country with their families and property
the Antipodes, that they may multiply their names, and re-
plenish the future empire of the South.
Let us now inquire into the social and political condition of
the colonists, as at present manifested, after the singular revolu-
tions which have marked the history of their adopted country in
the constitution of its body politic. And here arises of
grave import to the statesman, viz.: the political position which
may ere long be assumed by the rapidly increasing population
of these colonies, situated at such a distance from the Parent
State; with apparently inexhaustible riches at their command.
As long as they were merely huge gaols and penitentiaries, sub-
ject to military rule, and the Governors standing over the con-
vict populace with lash in hand as irresponsible gaolers, there
was little fear of keeping them in a state of coercion. Or
subsequently, when it promised to be of no greater consequence
than a pastoral country, with a thinly spread population of
shepherds and stockmen, the questions of defending its shores
from foreign aggression, and ruling its domestic affairs according
to the wishes of the people, were of small moment to the
Imperial Legislature, from that which they assume at the present
day. The sagacious politician, looking towards the future, sees
much that will harass the local governments, and create anxious
deliberations among English statesmen, which may remind them
of the debates of their predecessors on the American question.^
The material progress which the settled regions of Australia
have made in the short space of sixty-six years, from a condition
of civilised poverty and natural desolation to one of unbounded
wealth is not more extraordinary than the social advancement
of their communities from bondsmen and felons to free and in-
dependent British subjects. From the inborn love of country
which mankind possesses, voluntary expatriation has been con-
sidered during all ages an act of personal sacrifice; conse-
quently, banishment, or involuntary expatriation at the time the
first settlement was formed, was looked upon with great dread
by malefactors. And if we consider that the condemned criminal
was made aware of the fact that the place of his banishment was
an unexplored region at the farthest confines of the earth, where
he would have to toil for years in unrecompensed bondage, we
can readily suppose that the power to transport convicts beyond
the seas was a formidable engine in the hands of Justice for the
punishment of offenders. No sentence from the judicial bench—
that of death scarcely excepted conveyed more terror to the
culprit at the bar, during the close of the last century and the
commencement of the present, than ‘ banishment to Botany Bay.’
Time, however, which changes human institutions with the
most unsparing hand, has rendered that sentence a reward which
formerly was a dreaded punishment. The transported felon in
those days might have been seen standing on the deck of the
convict-ship, holding aloft his manacled hands in despair, and
gazing with tearful eyes upon his native shores as they receded
from'view. Now-a-days, we have it recorded that the male-
factors on board our hulks mutinied in consequence of their
sentences of transportation not being carried into effect. And
repeated instances have occurred of the commission of crimes by
perpetrators who adopted this mode of being eligible for trans-
portation to Australia as a convenient means of emigration.
/
\
V I
/


Without discussing the vital question of transportation as an -
effectual mode of punishment, we shall merely advert to its
influence upon colonisation in New South Wales, as exemplified
by the introduction of convict labourers at the outset. In this
instance they have become the instruments of human progress,
and thus good has proceeded out of evil. Whether the ministry
in office who founded the colony, contemplated any greater
benefits to accrue from the transportation of criminals to that
distant possession, beyond their intended punishment, probable
moral redemption, or the relief which their deportation gave to
the plethora of the gaols, we are not in possession of documents
to say. But most certainly we have the facts before us, that
despatching a body of convict pioneers to clear the way for an
army of free colonists has been the most successful method of
colonisation in modern times. And without compromising our
valid objections to the existence of penal colonies, it seems to us
that of all classes of society from whom to select labourers to
encounter the privations and overcome the obstacles which stand
in the way of the first settlers in a new country, this appears to
be the most efficient. The generality of enthusiastic emigrants
who undertake this laborious, and frequently perilous task, are
too often incompetent individuals; while the convicted felon,
toiling under severe discipline, becomes a most efficient. labourer,
and the work he performs during his penal servitude serves as
an equivalent to society for the wrong doings he has committed
upon his fellow-men, as seen in the case before us. The
prisoners condemned by the laws of their offended country to
work under bondage without recompense, and from fear of the
lash in New South Wales, had no choice but to toil on until
they had accomplished the tasks set before them. In this
manner they constructed bridges, made roads and other neces-
sary public works, in the face of hostile Aborigines, and across
almost inaccessible mountains where free labourers would have
abandoned the task in despair; and to overcome such stupendous
obstacles it would have been sheer folly at the time to have
expended private capital. And thus the wilderness was first
cleared and rendered habitable for civilised man, but for which,
the glorious destiny of Australia under British colonisation
might never have existed.
So much for the benefit of the convict colonist. Alas! we
are constrained to read a different tale of the moral evils which
resulted from the establishment of penal settlements in Australia-
Their criminal populations consisting of a frightful excess of
the male sex condemned them in the eyes of both God and
man. The hording together of such communities, even under
the most stringent guardianship, must be at all times pregnant
with the direst evil effects. It is tantamount to nursing and
concentrating crime towards its nadir point of viciousness. In
forming the penal settlements at New South Wales, Van
Diemen’s Land, and Norfolk Island, the Christian Government
of the day were erecting anew the blasted cities of the Dead Sea.
We are glad to throw the mantle of oblivion over the immoral
consequences of convict colonisation in Australia. Neverthe-
less we shall advert to its baneful effects upon the free popula-
tion who subsequently emigrated, and point out its scourge at
the present day amongst the industrial colonists, although
transportation has virtually ceased to these shores.
Notwithstanding the advantages of employing a labouring
convict population at the beginning, to perform all the drudgery
and hard work of laying the foundation of New South Wales,
it must not be supposed for a moment that the free settlers who
had the honour of rearing the superstructure of the colony
found an easy task before them. On the contrary, every thing
was to be done to render the colony independent of foreign sup-
plies of food, and after that to fit it for the profitable occupation
of a free community. The Government opened up the colony
to free immigrant capitalists about 1805, seventeen years after
its settlement. The most favourable inducements were held
Q
r
I
I .
)
i
j
/
I
I


out for agriculturists and farmers acquainted with the rearing '
of live stock to proceed to the colony. Free passages to them-
selves and families, a grant of land according to the means they
possessed, and convict labourers assigned to them, clothed and
fed from the Government stores, were offered upon condition
that they brought a certain amount of value, in stock and farm
implements, with them, or money to be invested in clearing and
improving the land. A few enterprising men accepted the
terms, and, after many years of care and watchfulness, they not
only succeeded in cultivating a sufficiency of grain to render
the colony independent of imported bread stuffs, but their live
stock had increased so much beyond their wants under the
genial influence of the climate, that they began to consider the
propriety of turning their surplus resources to account. Among
the experimental produce sent to England for approval were a
few bales of wool, which brought the enormous price of ten
♦ shillings and sixpence per lb. tinder these circumstances, the
business of rearing fine merino sheep became the great object of
the settlers, and they were not long in discovering and occupying
the extensive pastures of the country with their flocks and herds.
These increased in time so rapidly, that convict labourers could
not be had to tend them, and carry on the other necessary em-
ployments of the colony. Consequently the Government de-
spatched a proportion of free bounty emigrants along with the
usual deportation of convicts. By this time the latter were no
longer ted and clothed by the Government. The settlers had
not only to do this, but to pay them as well, while the free
workmen and labourers received such high wages, that it re-
quired no further inducement for others to follow. So the
stream of free emigrants soon doubled and trebled the number
of prisoners sent out, until the convict population became the
lesser portion of the community. The fame, likewise, of the
successful cultivation of the * golden fleece ’ brought out fresh
capitalists, so that an influx of monied immigrants kept pace
with the profitable increase of the sheep and cattle. The land
was no longer given away in free grants, but sold to the new-
comers at high rates. Old penal settlements were broken up,
which were re-colonised by free emigrants, until a complete
revolution came over the social fabric of the colony, ending in a
special edict of the Government that transportation should be
discontinued, which was tardily enforced. In fine, before sixty
years had closed over the original penal settlement of New
South Wales, the colony was snatched from the grasp of the /
felon, and the entire region of South-eastern Australia w r as
under the dominion of free British subjects, who in their tide of
emigration were fast clearing away the sewer of convictism.
Unfortunately for the moral status of these dependencies, the
advent of the Gold discovery in 1851 was the means of resusci-
tating the dregs of convictism existing in the community at
that time, and which had become almost dormant. Hence {
unbridled crime once more stalked through the land, accom-
panied with lawless depredations and murderous acts of violence.
Happily these offences are now subsiding, and it would appear
as if they emanated from the last throes of an expiring criminal
community. If Government act justly towards the colonists,
and allow them some latitude in their local acts, they will
adopt active enough measures to prevent the introduction of
any more of these double-distilled criminals from Van Diemen’s
Land and Norfolk Island, and thereby restore confidence and
tranquillity to the colonists in pursuing their avocations.
A cursory glance at the population statistics of this group of
colonies will show the overwhelming increase of the free popu-
lation over the bond during the periods we have alluded to. If
we take the lB2l as the middle period of Australian his-
tory to the present time—being the thirty-third year of her
occupation, and the commencement of her career as a free
colony under the governorship of Sir Thomas Brisbane—we
shall find that the white population of New South Wales con-


sisted of 29,783 souls. Of these about 22,000 were either prk
soners of the Crown or emancipated convicts, and the remainder
free settlers, while scarcely one-sixth of the whole population
were females. In 1851—prior to the Gold discovery, and
after the extension of the parent colony to Port Phillip, with its
influx of free settlers, besides the colonisation of the free British
province of South Australia, the population of South-eastern
Australia was in the aggregate 359,158 souls, two-fifths of
whom were females, and scarcely 10,000 were convicts. Since
then, the convict population have ceased to be reckoned as
an element of the community, although, unfortunately, the
remnant exist as ticket-of-leave holders, the populations of the
three provinces have been estimated in June 1853 as follows:
New South Wales 220,000, Victoria 250,000, South Australia
80,000. Showing an aggregate population of 550,000 inhabi-
tants within the territory of South-eastern Australia, of whom
it may be said that not one in fifty come under the category of
the old convict community.
It has been the practice of certain speculative colony-mongers,
who manufacture colonies by Act of Parliament, to create emi-
gration capital for their bantlings in New Zealand, by publish-
ing aspersions on the character of the Australian colonists, on
account of the convict origin of the community. And a late
Secretary of State for the Colonies asserted from his place
in Parliament, that convicts would compare favourably with
the class of emigrants who have proceeded thither, while he
goaded the colonists to the last stage of forbearance, bordering
upon rebellion, by persisting in forcing a felon population
amongst them. Even the great mass of the British public until
within the last few years —in fact since the Gold discovery
have always considered Australia as a f ßotany Bay country’
peopled by a community of rogues and malefactors. Without
shrinking from a just condemnation of the convict-leaven still
fo be found, —or defending every vagabond fellow, or scape-
grace youth whom their friends and relations have been glad to
get rid of out there, or that class of adventurers who flock to
new colonies where they are not known, to entrap the unwary,
—we venture to state that the general character of our fellow-
subjects in Australia, whether native-born or emigrant, will
bear comparison with any like number of inhabitants in the
most favourable localities of the British Isles, as regards
industry, perseverance, integrity in business, and general moral
conduct. This is enough! Comparisons are invidious when
they tend to cast reflections upon communities of one common
origin, or we might draw a truthful, but far from favourable,
contrast between the Australian settlers and their neighbours
in New Zealand. Aye! or the promoters of the bankrupt
schemes of colonisation to that country themselves. The recent
legislative inquiry in Victoria into the causes of crime in that
province, and the facts elicited at the trials of the perpetrators
of the diabolical outrages which have been committed since the
Gold discovery, attribute all the heinous offences to the Pen-
tonville exiles (!) from England, old convicts from New South
Wales, ticket-of-leave holders and runaways from Van Diemen’s
Land, and expirees from Norfolk Island the proteges of Earl
Grey. This we think is a sufficient answer to that ex-colonial
minister for his foul aspersions on the character of the free Aus-
tralian colonists.
In no community $n this every-day world does
manual labour stand so pre-eminent, or sectire for the worker so
high a reward as in Australia. The newly-arrived emigrant
launched into the vorte : of Australian Ufa is bewildered for a
time at the unceasing din and bustle of alfi around him. From
morn till night, whethel in the harbours cl* Port Jackson, Port
Phillip, or Port Adelaicfe—in the streets of Sydney, Melbourne,
or Adelaide—on thei auriferous mountains of Bathurst or ’
Ballaarat, or the Burral Burra Copper Mipes—every where
hum and noise of labour resounds from a'busy population. Al|


are at work—save thosqj who are spending their earnings—
above ground or below, on the water or up in the mountains,
you see them continual)ypoing about rowing, carrying, carting,
riding, driving, or walkiiw— intent upon business; or ploughing,
sawing, planing, hammcing, grinding, digjng, or ‘rocking,’ it
is all one work! work* work! is the orfflbr of the day. He
that does not labour is f blot in the community, for the cry is
still, * Send us more mergand women, but Wey must be workers.’
If they are of the rightfkort, and industrials, they will obtain
employment at high wales the first dayjjfhey land. If other-
wise, and they be notjnanual and, from pride or
laziness, fail to put shoulders to §he wheel, they will
linger about the highways dispirited, jbstled, and unpitied.
Does the lounger abor| the London Ddcks imagine that the
towering bales of wooti from Australia, which he sees in heaps
upon heaps in those Capacious stores, are produced without
labour? Let him ask |ie shepherd who bees it grow from day
to day all the year roind, as he follow! his flock over some
4000 miles of ground #re it is washed, (slipped, packed, carted,
stored, and then shiJied for England Or does the idler
sauntering along LomlSrd Street, and liking into the bullion-
I Maa^/iCo
broker’s windows, wheft he sees the bight gold nuggets and
dust from Australia disposed, suppose that they are dug up
without labour ? Let Sim ask the haggrtrd-visaged gold-digger,
who has sunk some tin holes twenty ;teet deep, excavated a
tunnel, and washed, rdiked, sifted and strained some hundreds
of tons of earth and giavel before he
ore.
is found the glittering
Many sensitive pecmle are inclined
writers of the letter* from Australi
columns of the press,i&vhen they perm
) sympathise with the
which appear in the
their accounts of the
so-called privations tjiey encounter, the ‘ horrid degrada-
‘ tions ’ they submit o in earning thjfir daily bread. Much
sympathy is felt also i ir the ‘ first man ’' who is obliged to drive
a team of oxen to tl i diggings, by who have applauded
his foolish Waterforc an exploits at l*pme, or remember him
driving a * drag ’to ' Ipsom. And those friends who used to
dine upon the fuxurio s viands at the -spendthrift’s table pity
him with a hypocritic .1 sigh at his position in the bush of Aus-
tralia, where he has 1 ) subsist upon damper, tea, and mutton.
Better, far better is t for such non-workers and ‘ne’er-do-
wells,’ that circumstances have compelled them to perform the
task which earns for t em an honest livipg. And surely there is
more honour to the m >n who lives upof| rough bush fare, and
earns it, than he who ; *ulps down champagne at the expense of,
others. In these ins inces —which are'jcorarnonly met with in
Australia —society ha pronounced upon&he natural capabilities
of the men. It is a mere matter of accident that Charles or
Frederick are the sons of ‘ gentlefolks.’ llf they show nothing
of nature’s nobleness n their home car&r, their natural posi-
tion in society was lover in the social scab. So, when we find
them employed in m&iial occupations, dir toiling as unskilled
labourers in these colonies, we consider|that they have only
taken to those employments for which indolence or want
of capacity fitted best. In the sphere in which they were
born, such individuals ire more than useless members of society;
they are positively lln evil element of our social fabric.
Whereas in the rougll and ready communities of new colonies
they become in time Lseful, and frequently independent men.
From this knowledgelof their ultimate destiny, gathered from
long experience in thise colonies, we are pot among those who
perceive those gigantic evils which result from the emigration
of the poorer educated classes. On the contrary, we are of
opinion that much go id results from their migration, after they
overcome those perse lal discomforts to which their early train- /
has made them n ore sensitive than their fellow-emigrants
of the labouring class. Their presence in those young commu-
nities assists material y in maintaining the intellectual element


of society among the fnasses, which the | preponderance of a
merely rude labouring population tends tojfcounteract.
Before the gold discoveries society was rmich upon the same )
footing as it is in the mother-country, but since that event the
relations of master and servant have experienced a complete
revolution. Especially in the colony of Victoria, as graphically
described by Mr. Westgarth in the work whose title is prefixed
to this article. Nevertheless these communities are still divisible
into classes of employers and employed, besides the democratic
mass of gold-diggers who own no master. The squatters,
merchants, trader's, mechanics, and labourers have still each a
distinct stains in society; and it is anticipated that in a few
years, with the present rate of increase of population, and as
the novelty of the levelling pursuit of gold-digging passes
away, these grades of society will resume their former position,
when the social machine may work all the smoother for the
trials it has undergone. In the more remote localities, how-
ever, from the great revolutionising centres of Mount Alexander
and Bathurst, that is, in the vicinities of the Gulf St. Vincent,
Moreton Bay, and Hunter Biver, there is no great visible alter-
ation in the former relations of Society. There the visitor will
find the gentleman ‘squatter’ upon his ‘station’ surrounded by
all the comforts of life, and enjoying an independent position
among his servants and labourers, equal to the better class of
our English squirearchy.
L A '
i/tsCnca
Allhough the Austfal
graziers and sheep far nc
be put in comparison w
mean no disparagemer t
gentlemen of college e< u«
practised the liberal j ro
English farmer or gr izi
growers and cattle-bro d(
ox in their lives before tl
of them have been docl ar
naval officers, or are t le
have invested capital i i
means of obtaining ( oc
besides filling up their in
in society these gentle ic
the first class of coloni its,
alian squatters are, s rictly speaking, the
ners of the country, still they are not to
with the same class in this country (we
t by the allusion), fc r as a body they are
ucation, many of the n having previously
rofessions. So that compared with the
izier, they are more like amateur wool*
ders : few, if any, e er bred a ewe or an
they set foot in Aus :ralia. Nine-tenths
ors, lawyers, clergyn en, and military and
le sons of bankers find merchants who
hxilc^H
i the securities of sheep and cattle, as a
ood interest for thi money employed 5
ime by a not unpleas ng pursuit. Hence
icn and their famllie are ranked among,,
ts.
Prior to the gold discoveries they claimea, with justice, to be
the mainstay of the country in producing the staple exports of
wool and tallow, which raised the balance of trade in favour of
the colonies; and, notwithstanding the overwhelming competi-
tion of the gold producers in the same field, the squatters are
still an important body in the commercial fabric of Australia. -idL
In round numbers they possess 18,000,000 of sheep, which, fl l '
according to the latest quotations, are valued at 1 1, per head ; /
2,250,000 head of horned cattle at 4/. per head; and 150,000
horses of the average value of 20/. each. A total of 33 millions jp -* ,
sterling, which includes the cost of buildings and improvements 1 4 '
upon the stations, with right of run. This amount of vested
property is in the hands of about 3000 squatters, and yields at a
fair rate ten per cent, clear profit, or an average annual income
to each proprietor of 1,100/., and produces a yearly export to the
colonies of 3,000,000/. Moreover, the extent of country which
the squatters hold, in leases of eight and fourteen years, from
the Government, place them in local status and influence far
above any other class of their fellow colonists. Allowing the
average of Australian pasture-land of three acres to each sheep,
and eight acres to every head of cattle, these gentlemen are in
the immediate occupation of 80,000,000 acres of land, more than
the superficies of Great Britain, whereon about 60,000 people
are employed by them in pastoral and agricultural pursuits.
Thus each squatter is on the average the nominal proprietor of
forty square miles of land, and, when labour is to be had,
employs about twenty servants and labourers. As time rolls


on, however, the position and influence of the Australian}
‘ squnttocracv,’ as they are locally designated, must gradually \
pass away. It is not in the nature of things that the few should
hold such extensive tracts of land to the exclusion of the many.
S(>, with the influx of emigrants, and the spreading - of a mining
population, the life and manners of society in pastoral Australia,,,
will have mingled with its past history.
The heterogeneous elements of which the gold-digging class
pf colonists are composed, and the novelty of the pursuit, renders
it a matter of doubt at present to say in what direction their bias
on society will tend. Hitherto it has been subversive of the
relations between master and servant; and the nature of the
occupation is neither conducive to domestic comfort or mental
improvement. Whether a more settled state of things will
spring up amongst this erratic population on the rugged
mountains where their labour lies, time will show. At present
the majority pursue the exciting occupation of gold-digging, as
a transitory employment. Hence they are mostly regardless of
personal comforts or domestic refinement. Nevertheless, they
are described by all visitors to the gold fields as industrious,
temperate and hospitable, and unanimous to a degree for the
maintenance of law and order. Those who have figured
notoriously as the disturbers of peace amongst them, have been
minted to the death by their fellow labourers, and delivered up
1o the authorities. And the greater number acquiesce in the f
Government measure of prohibiting the sale of intoxicating 1
liquors at the gold fields. Nay, more, they have welcomed with
open arms and purses the ministers of religion and school- j
masters who have taken up their abode amongst them; while
many of the single men upon meeting with success hie them- )
selves off to the towns, and return with wives to cheer andT
assist them in their rough homes.
'L.lJi'-'h*'
jtU/-
In all ages the pursuit of gold finding has been one of the
prime movers of colonisation, it has ever proved the mightiest
influence to lure mankind from their crowded homes and im-
poverished hearths to become adventurers- over the face of the
earth. Although the power and wealth of the Indies and
America at the present day are no longer centred in their gold
mines, still it was the thirst for this coveted metal which led the
early navigators to discover, and subsequently attracted the
civilised races of the West to people those lands, which they have
subdued and rendered contributory to the world’s progress.
However much we may condemn its abuse and influence in the
social sphere as a standard of value, and sage philosophers
pronounce it to be the ( root of all evil,’ nevertheless, we can
trace in these instances where it has led to the greatest results
in geographical discovery and practical colonisation, to the
establishment of mighty civilised empires, where millions of our
fellow men are enjoying the bounteous gifts of nature, who
might otherwise have been toiling through a wretched existence
in want and penury. The discovery of gold in Australia is just
the fulfilment of an ordinary chapter in the world’s history which
completes the work of the distribution of the human race. The
unknown extent of these auriferous deposits, and the uncertainty
which accompanies the researches of the gold seeker, will, for
ages to come, attract the enterprising and industrious to that
far-off land from the over-peopled busy hives of Europe,
Already it has accelerated the colonisation of the Australasian
islands by half a century in time; and has produced the lever
by which the more permanent resources of these fertile lands
may be rendered available, that otherwise would have remained
dormant for want of capital and labour to bring them to light.
If we include the mining population at the copper mines of
South Australia, and at the coal measures in New South Wales,
along Avith the gold-digging community, avc shall find that this
body of colonists number 120,000. Thus, these innovators
among the pastoral community Avhich heretofore tenanted these
solitudes, have already out-numbered them in the proportion of
IjyUr^i^v
A--fd ii If


two to one. Their distribution, however, is unequal throughout
the three colonies in question. In South Australia out of a
population of 90,000, about 3,000 are employed at the mines.
In New South Wales with a population of 220,000, not more
than 17,000 are at work upon her various mineral fields, while
in Victoria it is calculated that there are upwards of 100,000
labourers upon the gold mines out of a population of 250,000.
The general proportions of the mining population in each of
these colonies is respectively 1 in 30, 1 in 13, and 2 in 5 ; con-
sequently, the latter colony presents this altered phase of
Australian society in its boldest relief. Especially when con-
trasted with the present scanty pastoral population. For every
shepherd or stockman there are five gold diggers. Hence the
influence of the squatters and their men upon the general
welfare of this community is precisely the opposite of what it is
in the neighbouring colonies. Mr. Westgarth remarks upon
this head:
4 But when I speak of pastoral Australia, I describe a scene of life
and manners that has already sensibly began to pass away. Perhaps
no country ever experienced a change so sudden and so complete in
its social features as the colony of Victoria, by the effects of her
auriferous soil. The case of California was less striking, because
little comparatively of a previously established social polity was en-
countered and overturned. In Victoria, on the other hand, the general
rush to the diggings, which curiosity at first prompted, paralysed
everything in a variety of industrial callings. The labourers in the
warehouses and shops, and about the wharves and shipping, domestic
servants everywhere, the workmen belonging to young and prosperous
manufactories, deserted in the entire mass.
‘ The turmoil occasioned by the first rush to the gold fields was
soon succeeded by that of the newly arriving colonists, who, struck
by the electric news, hastened from all parts of the world towards
Victoria. The adjacent colonies first poured in their streams; and
then came small and varied accessions from India, the Cape, and else-
where. At length a surprising tide rolled in from the shores of the
mother country.
‘ While many of the mixed society (from Van Diemen’s Land)
applied themselves creditably to the auriferous soil, and plied their
sinewy hands with much success—for many were reputable and well-
conducted colonists —a formidable proportion, with the old impulses
still predominant, sought a more summary, although more dangerous,
road to fortune, by tracking and robbing the successful diggers. The
towns, the highways, the gold-fields, became infested by numbers of
daring marauders, to Avhose crime-hardened minds human life and
human suffering, to say nothing of mere private property, were a
matter of the smallest consideration.’
Thus, while the effects of the gold discoveries in Australia
have advanced the material prosperity of the colonists to an
incalculable extent, their social progress, which had reached a
commendable degree of tranquillity, has suddenly been thrown
back to the days of the felon bushranger.
Whilst these anomalous classes of society, of which there are
no counterparts in the mother country, have arisen out of the
exigencies of Australian colonisation, the mercantile portion of
the community, including all the inhabitants of the towns, are
thoroughly English in their habits and avocations. The bankers,
merchants, shopkeepers, and traders of every class, by sea or on
land, pursue their callings in the same unvarying routine as that
observed by the commercial classes in this country. While
there is a degree of romance and novelty in the life which a
squatter or a gold digger leads, and a negligent independence of
conventionalities adopted by these producers of the raw material,
the business man is the same sleek individual in his personal
appearance, occupying the same description of warehouses, shops,
and offices, and carrying out his domestic arrangements in
spite of the differences of climate exactly as his fathers have
done before him in the old' country from time immemorial
Hence the general aspect of the streets and the inhabitants of
Sydney, Melbourne, Geelong, and Adelaide, are much the same
as we are accustomed to find in English towns of an equal extent'


1
\
i
y
\
/
/
/
the
o?
and population. And these may be estimated from the follow-
ing : __ Melbourne, 80,000, Geelong, 20,000, other towns in
Victoria, 20,000; Sydney, 65,000; Bathurst and western towns,
15,000; Southern towns in New South Wales, 5,000; Northern
towns, 10,000; Adelaide, 25,000; other towns in South
Australia, 10,000 forming a total of the town population in
the three colonies up to December, 1853, of 250,000, which more
than doubles the mining portion of the community, and
quadruples the pastoral population.
In erecting these strongholds of the institutions and customs
of our common fatherland at the antipodes, John Bull has re-
produced the commercial element of the British Lmpire in all
its strength and utility. And, although the social condition of
the chief cities has been subverted for a time from the effects of
the gold discoveries, still the equilibrium of all mercantile
transactions has been maintained with the strictest integrity.
The British merchant, in transmitting his merchandise for sale
to these colonies, has the greatest confidence in the commercial
honesty of the local traders. And the amount of his shipments
are now assuming a magnitude which has raised the Australian
export trade from this country to become a matter of national
importance. The total value of manufactured goods shipped
from our ports to Australia during the past year, has been esti-
mated by the Customs authorities at 13,000,000/. equal to
20Z. per head of population for the entire community, in-
cluding Western Australia and Van Diemen’s Land. The
probable consumption of such a large average supply of foreign
merchandise betokens a degree of extravagance on the part of
the colonists, which is not known in any other country. Our
merchants and manufacturers are not the men to cavil at this
extravagance as long as they get paid for the goods in gold
dust and wool. But the more orderly amongst the townspeople
have to lament and suffer from the intemperance, and evil
examples set before their children by the unruly consumers of
these goods when they throng to the towns to make purchases;
or that portion of the townspeople who waste their substance in
the pot-houses which abound.
In mingling amongst the inhabitants of these towns, the
stranger is struck with the high tone of intelligence which
marks society, especially if he be prejudiced against it by the
hastily-pronounced opinions of disappointed letter-writers. Oq
this point Mr. Westgarth remarks, that
‘ An impression is prevalent in the mother country that her colo-
nies—the more recent and progressive of them at least—are for the
most part peopled from the humbler walks of her crowded society.
The mechanic, the field-labourer, the able workman in all depart-
ments of bone and muscle, as distinguished from those of brains and
mental cultivation, are supposed to comprise, with few exceptions,
the masses of population that stream forth incessantly into our colo-
a population, therefore, naturally unfavourable, as much to a
high social refinement as to those aristocratic and time-honoured
institutions that characterise the fatherland.
‘ If some of these conclusions have a savour of truth, the premises
from which they are derived are at all events erroneous. Our colo-
nies have proved, in later times at least, quite as attractive to the
" educated as to the unlettered classes of home society. I venture even
further to think, that of these two social divisions, the worker by
mind and the worker by hand, the proportions of the former are
found to have emigrated into our newer colonies in excess of what
they appear at home. The present population of Melbourne is chiefly
composed of persons born and for the most part brought up in the
motlier country; and 1 believe that I speak to a general local im-
pression, that the proportion of persons who have received a good
practical education, of persons of some cultivation and address, accus-
tomed to social intercourse, and of some measure of refinement, is
rather beyond that which might be found pertaining to a town of
similar extent in Britain.’ f
The total population of the three provinces in South-eastern , 1 /
Australia, according to the latest census is, in round numbers, S ff'
550,000; thus;—-in Victoria, 250,000; New South Wales, %


220,000; and in South Australia, 80,000. OF these, we have
120,000 to account for in the social fabric of society. They
may be classed under the head of the agricultural and farming
' population. These are scattered promiscuously over the whole
extent of territory, cultivating all kinds of grain, and’ esculent
roots, tobacco, wine, and other produce for home consumption.
For the mbst part, they are small land-holders, and form a
yeomanry population of considerable importance on the banks
of the Hunter River in New South Wales, and on the alluvial
slopes of the Mount Lofty range in South Australia. In
general, they are the most frugal-living and steady portion of
the community. Many went to the diggings at the first blush
of the discovery; but they have wisely returned to their fields,
and perceive a mine of surer wealth in their crops of golden
grain than the fickle produce of the auriferous soil. That they
are increasing in numbers with the advancement of the country
is a matter of congratulation to the orderly disposed colonists.
Those amongst the more prudent of the fortunate gold-diggers
have joined their ranks, and settled down upon their own free-
holds. These in time will form an independent fixed farming
population; without which no country can thrive. The govern-
ments of these colonies are not sufficiently alive to the import-
ance of encouraging this class of colonists in preference to the
erratic, pastoral, and gold-digging portion of the community, by
unlocking the lands and selling them in small lots to induce
them to purchase a few acres at a reasonable price to settle
down upon. On the contrary, the land is sold in large sections
beyond the means of the small capitalists; and hence it is j
bought up by speculators who increase its value, when sub-
divided, so that a profitable investment by the practical farmer
is, in nine cases out of ten, a thing not to be done.
We have here stated sufficient in an impartial manner to
show that our countrymen and women in Australia are ‘ not
* unworthy of bearing the British name,’ as regards their social
relations with each other, under the extraordinary circumstances
of their position. The sudden flow of wealth, such as occurred
amongst them, we venture to say, would overthrow the best
regulated society. And, notwithstanding the dash of anarchy
and crime which ushered in the advent of the gold discovery,
we are confident that that discovery has been of the most bene-
ficial nature to mankind. AVe are none of those censorious
grumblers who cavil at what is termed the ‘ depravity of this age,’
because the attainment of material wealth and consequent inde-
pendence is within the grasp of the many. In the case before
us, we anticipate the most beneficial results from the possession
of gold in large quantities by our labouring fellow-subjects in
Australia. Of all European races, they are the most prudent
to be in possession of it. For although Englishmen may be
fond of a ‘quiet bet’ occasionally, they do not practise the vice
of gambling which is so rife with evil in California. And
though the artisan is somewhat of a spendthrift when he is
flush of pocket-money, yet, when he becomes possessed of a
sufficiency to raise himself on a par with his employer, he acts
prudently, and steps from his cellar to the higher landings of
society, where he ultimately becomes a preserver of those insti-
tutions which he previously imagined to be the bane of the
labouring classes. This progressiveness of the Anglo-Saxon
character is nowhere so marked as in those young communities
at the antipodes. Notwithstanding the continued political mur-
murings which reverberate from them round the Cape of Storms
to the British Isles, they have a secret regard for the authorities
that be, and love for the institutions of the mother country.
Even the many transgressors of the law who have expiated
their offences on those distant shores have a lurking admiration
of the parent State which administered the lash.
Colonies which have undergone such remarkable phases of
development in their material and social progress as those under
consideration, will be supposed to have experienced political


changes of an equally momentous character. The absolute „
system carried into execution by the early governors, under the
penal code, presents a striking contrast with the free elective
legislature, under the control of a mild Executive, which cha-
racterises the government of the present day. The old colonist,
who now enjoys the immunities and privileges of free insti-
tutions under the easy rule of Sir Charles Fitzroy, shudders
when he looks back to the tyrannous sway of King and Bligh.
Doubtless it was necessary during the early struggles of the
parent colony to maintain discipline amongst her refractory
children at all hazards; still we have much harrowing evidence
preserved during that period to conclude, that the administration
of affairs was corrupt in the extreme, and executed with bar-
baric severity.
The dawn of constitutional government upon the soil of
Australia was in 1824. At that period a legislative and execu-
tive Council was appointed, according to an Act of Parliament,
to assist and control the governor in the exercise of his autho-
rity. Since then, these colonial robes of state have been
patched and darned, from time to time, to meet the exigencies
of -political weather, so that very little of the original texture
remains. And the question which is now mooted amongst the
colonial public, upon the recent proposals of Her Majesty’s
Government, is not, as formerly, what kind of constitution is
this, which has been thrust upon us, but they are asked, in gra-
cious terms, what form of legislative assembly will suit them
for an £ Upper House.’ Would it be believed that the first re-
sponse to this question by what has been characterised the ‘ Re-
* publican elective Assembly of New South Wales,’ was a recom-
mendation to create the members of the Upper House colonial
hereditary Barons. One of the members for Sydney, noted for
his eloquence and revolutionary predilections, who formed one
of the committee on that occasion, was asked in Council what
arms and crest he should wear when created Baron Yaucluse.
Here, at all events, a conservative spirit has been evinced
among the old colonists, whatever democratic tendencies may
exist elsewhere.
Like the social condition of the colonists, the politic aspect of
affairs is, for the present, in a transition state. Although the
institutions of the body politic have not felt the revolutionising
influences of the gold discoveries, so much as the domestic rela-
tions of society, nevertheless, the democratic element of the
community has augmented in consequence. Already symptoms
of a liepublican spirit have been manifested by the people,
which the local governn lent found themse ves unable to control.
And it becomes a mattir of grave import for British statesmen
to make themselves ac( uainted with Aus trallan politics in the
event of a rupture with these wealthy! colonies. Hitherto,
members of Parliament have paid little heed to colonial ques-
tions brought before them—especially anything connected with
the colonies in question, when suffering under the ban of trans-
portation. But now they are waxing strong in population and
wealth, and the refusal of a hearing in the Imperial Legisla-
ture, to their grievances, may end in those scenes of strife and
contention between the governed and their local rulers, which \
was the means of losing the flower of our American colonies.
It is generally understood by the colonising public, when
they emigrate to Australia, that upon settling down and exa-
mining the institutions of their adopted country, they will find
themselves enjoying the same political privileges they held as
their birthright in the mother country. In this supposition,
however, they find that the full measure of an Englishman’s
rights has not as yet emigrated with them. It is true they have
the property franchise as low as 10/., with power to elect mem-
bers for the local parliament. But these representative mem-
bers become almost a nullity in the legislature if their measures
are in the smallest degree obnoxious to the Government. Ar-
rayed on the Crown benches are a majority of crown-nominees /
and ex-officio members, who can at any time throw out a bill if
it does not meet the approbation of the Governor. Moreover,
N-*i
1 -
(lama
r


a schedule is placed before them, prepared by the Imperial
Government, containing a list of fixed salaries, for the civil
officers of the Crown, which the representatives have no control
over, and are necessitated to pass without the power of reduction,
although they may add as much as they please.* Also, until
recently, they had no control over the disposal of any portion
of the general revenue, so that the hands of the representative
members were, in a measure, tied up, from exerting those
political privileges which constitute the pabulum of our British
Constitution.
Thus the British emigrant finds on his arrival in Australia
that he has left part of his political birthright behind; and be-
cause he has the spirit to remonstrate, and demand his rights,
the uninformed take him to be an unruly subject, who ought to
be put down. On the contrary, he becomes more than ever a
lover of order and good government. In this respect the
colonists have shown themselves more inclined to adopt strong
measures for the preservation of peace than either the local or
the home Government have exhibited. While the latter have
endeavoured to give every latitude to the spread of the old
convict leaven throughout these regenerated communities, the
legislature of Victoria passed a law, instituting a right of search
on board all ships from Van Diemen’s Land, with power to
send back any doubtful passengers, which has been thrown out
by the Government, and re-enacted by the Legislature.
From this almost revolutionary act of the Victoria Legis-
lature, and the determined spirit shown by the gold-diggers in
that province, it is evident that the future political creed of the
Australians will emanate from there. Already the colony has
grown to such a bulk from the effects of her gold discoveries,
that it has become unwieldy under the hands of a not over
efficient government. A very Mephistopheles in its organism, the
Frankenstein governor was unable to control the monster body
politic which had been created out of the heterogeneous elements
that have thronged to these shores. And yet the system of
government is conducted upon a scale of national magnitude.
There are at present 5090 employes on the establishment, and
the probable expenditure for 1854 is estimated at 3,265,000
which amongst a population of 250,000 shows that they are
governed at the enormous average of 13/. per head. A new
governor. Sir Charles Hotham, has been appointed with a
salary, voted by the elective House of Assembly, of 15,000/. —
equal to that of the Governor- General of India. Mr. Latrobe,
who has held the reins of government from the first settlement
of that now important province, has returned to England. It
is to be hoped that Sir Charles will prove a more popular
governor with the colonists than his predecessor; and that he
will maintain the political institutions of the country with a
more efficient and liberal policy, so that they may be respected
by the orderly colonists, and feared by delinquents.
It must not be supposed, however, that the embryo legislature
of this colony became ripe at once to advise upon grave measures
of state. This could not be expected; and it is questionable
whether the first talent in the community came forward on
the occasion. We should have supposed that the proposal to
elect a local parliament upon a scale commensurate with the
importance of the colony would have assembled together the
ablest men in the community. In the neighbouring province
of New South Wales, this boon to the colony was responded to
by the election of a body of gentlemen who would stand a
favourable comparison with the members of the British House
of Commons. (We have listened with feelings of pride and
* An instance of this occurred jn Victoria during the session of
1852 most creditable to the representative body of the legislature.
From the increase of living in the colony consequent upon the gold
discoveries, the amounts of the salaries of the Governor and judicial
functionaries was inadequate to meet their expenses. Without hesi-
tation the Governor’s salary was. raised from 2000/. to 5000/., and be-
sides increasing the judges’ salaries 50.per cent., another was added
fo their number, \


admiration to the eloquence of Lowe and Wentworth in the
Sydney House of Assembly). In Victoria, on the contrary, a
wayward spirit amongst the colonists prevented the better class of
men from coming forward. Hence the talents for public business
of those elected, with a few exceptions, have been below medio-
crity. At the same time, in justice to the more efficient members
who resigned during the second session, it must be admitted that n
they promised to be useful and able legislators, but they found
that the measure of constitutional legislation allowed to them,
was so often negatived by the acts of the Governor and the in-
structions of the Colonial Minister, that their functions became
almost a dead letter, when any important measure was brought
forward. Consequently they felt it imperative upon themselves
to resign; and thus many of the best qualified members vacated
the council chamber. To gentlemen conversant with public
business, there is ample scope in these colonies for the exercise
of their talents; and their presence would be hailed with
enthusiasm by the ardent citizens of the embryo nation. Here
are the materials out of which to construct a model government;
all that is required are a few political architects to plan the
edifice; and liberal concessions from the State to assist the
builders.
The foundation of an Australian empire is no longer a matter
of conjecture, even with the British public. The conviction is
gradually assuming the form of a certainty in men’s minds.
Ask the mechanic, the farmer, or labourer, whom you may see /
any day tranquilly leaving their native shores for this land of
promise, and they will tell you that they are going to a country
where labour obtains its highest reward upon the earth; and the /
people are not taxed to maintain idlers and ancestral burthens C.
a country where the privileges and citizenship of a great nation
are in store for their posterity. Ask the colonists who are
busily rearing the superstructure, what those gigantic strides A /.. , /
in their career betoken, and they will tell you that ‘a cr rea t
‘ nation is rising on the fehores of the Southern Pacific. Whether
that future nation wil raise the standarc of independence, or
* ret: . l * n its fealty to the British Crown, is i matter of time and
4 P‘ )lic y- At present re are not strong i nough to throw off
‘ the yoke ; but when fve can count our population by millions,
‘ then shall we proclaim our strength to stubborn Secretaries of
State in a manner that shall command their gravest considera-
tion. Ihe result of our Anti-Convict League in finally
‘ causing the cessation of transportation from the United
Kingdom the recent Act of the Victoria Legislature in con-
‘ travemng the instructions of the Colonial Minister to the
‘ Governor, concerning the introduction of Van Diemen’s Land
and Norfolk Island felons; and the concessions which the
‘ Governor of that province was forced to grant to the gold-
diggeis in reducing the licence fee, are significant of the spirit
* as well as the power of the Australian people.’
These expressions of the feelings and prospects entertained by
the colonists may be considered E utopian by the hereditary chiefs (
of the 1 arent State, who attribute a rebellious spirit to the people
that utter them ; nevertheless, they are deserving on their part of •
the gravest consideration. The astute statesman traces in the
present murmurings of the people the future storm of political
contention. It is better policy, therefore, to concede in time those
privileges which enlarge the measure of political freedom without
dissevenng the ties which unite the more distant subjects of our
scattered empire, than to withhold them so often and so long
t lat still greater concessions are necessary to appease the
exasperated and neglected petitioners, to prevent dismemberment.
A spirit of this kind seems to animate the present Ministry in
tneu instructions to the colonial Governors. While the recent
concessions to the colonies have been gratefully acknowledged,
and have disseminated a spirit of confidence in the justice of the
mother country amongst them which has called forth the most
loyal demonstrations. By persevering in such a course of
colonial policy on the part of the present and future govern-
ments, we have no fear of an Australian rebellion. Above all
thmgs it is important that the Governors and their
staffs appointed to the administration of affairs should be efficient
men, and a fair amount of patronage open to local talent. In
t ie proposed intention of the present Government to open up the
Civil service establishments of the country fo competition, where
talent, efficiency, and experience will supersede the questionable
system of patronage, we look forward to an early extension of
the princijue to colonial establishments. And as regards the
executive 7 departments of the Government there are none which
require a more thorough revision at home and abroad than the
Colonial d/partment.
. -j- n necessarily brief review of tfie present con-
dition amd future prospects of Australia, we have only made
some small allusion to the important colony of Van Diemen’s
Land, and the lesser province of Western Australia. As these
possess elements of interest connected with the subject of trans-
portation, the former an emancipated penal colony of only one
years standing, and the latter a penal settlement of not more
than four /ears’ experience, we have reserved them for a future
occasion on which we may return to the consideration of the
subject of Australia. Enough has been shown, we presume, in
the preceding sketch of the resources and people of that rising
country to substantiate its claims to the highest consideration of
the Parent State. Although the subject of the picture at present
is small in its dimensions, yet there is ample room for the human
germ to expand. The small numerical strength of the people is
enhanced to our view by the magnitude of their operations.
Here are 550,000 colonists spread over a territory equal to the
superficies of the British Isles which they have reclaimed from
the wilderness, and established thereon the dominion and the
institutions of their fathers. Taking them in the mass as a
P eo pl e who are able and willing to carry on the business of
civilised life, we are not over-estimating their efficiency as
industrious, intelligent, and persevering workers, possessed of
sufficient available wealth to conduct their operations at double
their number of the same class of subjects in Britain. And if
we consider them as representatives of floating capital, giving an
impulse to the commerce and progress of the world, their influ-
ence is incalculable. While the unlimited resources of the vast
region they have made their adopted country points it out as the
future seat of a model self-dependent nation.


■
J cm '}/l f.
M ■ <d
. ‘ ' ' 0
■
*.
,
,
• ' - >.. % ■ ... ' ■-
.
