

6~o</
i)OUU*-Lt I
PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS:
PROFESSOR LIYERSIDGE, F.R.S, &c.




PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS.
. By Professor Liversidge, F.R.S., &c.
[Delivered to the Royal Society of N.S. IV., 5 May, 1886.]
Ox this the 65th anniversary of the foundation of the Royal
Society of New South Wales, it devolves upon me to address you,
and to thus continue what has hitherto been the annual custom
since the first formation of the Society. It is true that there have
been breaks, but the years in which they have occurred are few
and far between. For many reasons I should have been glad to
have been relieved, but I am afraid that it would have appeared like
shirking the duties and responsibilities of the high office to which
you elected me, after having enjoyed the honors of the position.
It has been more than once suggested by previous Presidents
that the custom should be discontinued, since the Council has often
failed to secure the services of competent members to fill the
Presidential Chair, simply on account of their inability to find
time to prepare the expected annual address. For my own paid,
I can thoroughly sympathize with them; and as a compromise
between the usual address upon scientific matters to which you
have hitherto been accustomed, and none at all, I venture to
bring before you a few remarks upon certain matters which may
perhaps be not altogether devoid of interest to you, inasmuch as,
with one or two exceptions, they may be regarded as belonging
more or less completely to the domestic affairs of the Society.
In the first instance, it is my melancholy duty to place on record
a brief notice of such of our members as have been removed from
our midst during the past year.
At the meeting held in November last we expressed our grief
for the loss we had sustained in the removal of the late Hon. Prof.
5h 5—86


John Smith, 0.M.G., M.L.C., LL.D., M.D., our former President,
our appreciation of his life and labours, and our heartfelt sympathy
with his widow in her great bereavement.
It is, however, only fitting that I should give a somewhat fuller
account of the work which he did for us and for the public at 1? *ge,
and especially, as I said on that occasion, since but very few a pear
to know how much the Colony is indebted to him. Quiet, u
sive, conscientious workers, such as he, especially when they are
unpaid for their self-imposed and philanthropic labours, seldom
receive during their lifetime a just recognition of their deserts,
and not always after their death.
Professor Smith was born in Scotland, about the year 1821,
and was educated at Marischal College, in the University of Aber-
deen, where he took the degrees of M.A. and M.D. After taking
his degrees, he for some five years carried on the chemistry class
in Marischal College during the illness of Prof. Clarke.
When the University of Sydney was endowed and incorporated,
■!a Committee was appointed in London, consisting of Sir John
Herschel, F.R.S., Bart., Sir George Airey, Astronomer Royal,
Prof. Malden, of University College, London, and others, to select
Professors for the Chairs of classics and mathematics, and one for
'Certain portions of science. This Committee made the three ap-
pointments in 1852, and Dr. Smith was selected as the first
Professor of chemistry and experimental physics ; and he retained
the latter portion of the original Chair from the time of his arrival
in October, 1852, until his death in October, 1885. In addition,
he was for many years Dean of the Faculty of Medicine. He
was a Fellow of the Chemical Society of London, and an honorary
ip ember of the Royal Society of Victoria.
'Soon after landing here, in 1853, he was appointed to the Board
of National Education, and remained one of its most prominent
and useful members until 1866, when the Board was superseded
by the Council of Education, constituted under the Public Schools
Act, to which he was gazetted as one of the first members, and of
which he was nine times 'elected President. During his period of


office Prof. Smith took the opportunity to effect many improve-
ments, and the Colony is indebted to him for several of the best
features of the present system of Education.
He devoted himself to the work, and undertook duties of a most
laborious character— he was in fact during this period the chief
administrative officer of the Educational system of the Colony.
The old officials under the late Board of Education all unite in
bearing testimony to this, in speaking in terms of regret for the
loss of their late President, of his many good qualities and great
consideration for those under him —as one of them states, he was
“ the last to censure but the first to forgive”—and of the great in-
debtedness of the Colony to his labours.
He spent years of self-sacrificing toil without emolument and
without hope of reward. The work was done so quietly and unob-
trusively that he could not have been actuated either by hope of
praise nor of social distinction, the motive being a real love for the
work and of his fellows.
One or more afternoons and most of his evenings in each week
were spent at the offices of the Council, transacting its business and
arranging for future action. He in fact performed gratuitously
the work which would have devolved upon the Minister for Public
Instruction had one then existed.
As a mark of the value set on his business qualities, it may not
be out of place here to mention that in 1864 Dr. Smith was chosen
a Director of the Australian Mutual Provident Society, and was
for many years its Chairman.
In 1867 he was President of the Royal Commission appointed
to inquire into the supply of Water to Sydney and its Suburbs.
From his position he necessarily had much to do with the direction
and methods of investigation followed, and especially in the
scientific questions relating to the sources of the water supply,
and the collection and chemical examination of the samples.
The labours of the Commission in examining witnesses, visiting
the catchment areas, obtaining records of rainfall, flow of rivers


preparation of sections and other matters extended over some two
years, and the work was not completed until 1869, in most of which
he took a leading part. The scheme recommended by the Com-
mission is practically that now being carried out by the Govern-
ment.
He was elected a Member of the Legislative Council in 1877,
and retained his seat until his death. He always showed great
interest in his legislative duties, and often took a leading part in
the debates, especially when they were connected with scientific or
medical questions.
For some years he was a Trustee of the Australian Museum,
but relinquished his connection with the Museum about 1870, on
account of want of time.
He was appointed one of the Commissioners for carrying out
the Sydney International Exhibition of 1879. Before this he had
sat as a member of other similar Commissions. He was a member
of the Commission for the New Zealand Exhibition in 1865, and
for the Paris Exhibition in 1867. He was a member too of the
Royal Commission upon the Sydney and Suburban Sewerage and
Water Supply, which was appointed in 1875, and took an active
part in its labours and investigations. In recognition of his public
service in this Colony, his alma mater , the University of Aberdeen,
made him an Honorary LL.D. in 1876, and in 1878 he was made
a Companion of the Order of St. Michael and St. George.
Before settling in this Colony Dr. Smith had travelled exten-
sively, having visited China, Java, the Polynesian Islands,
Mauritius, India, Indian Archipelago, 4rc. ; after his arrival he
visited New Zealand and the other Australasian Colonies. He re-
visited Europe on three occasions, to keep himself abreast of the
times; and on one of these journeys he travelled through America
and the principal parts of Europe, and made a rather lengthened
excursion through Egypt and the Holy Land.
On these trips he took occasion to visit the principal educational
and scientific institutions, and to make the acquaintance of the
leading scientific men; and on his return he always gave the public
the benefit of his gleanings, by lecture or in other ways.


Dr. Smith was one of the oldest members of our Society, he
having joined it as far back as 1852, when it was known as the
Australian Philosophical Society.
At a meeting presided over by Sir William Denison, the then
Governor-General, held on May 9th, 1856, the Australian Phi-
losophical Society was remodelled, and renamed the Philosophical
Society of New South Wales, when Dr. Smith was appointed one
of the Honorary Secretaries in recognition of the active part he
had taken in bringing about the changes ; he retained this position
until 1860, and the earlier records in the minute books are in his
handwriting.
He was a member of the Council for nine out of the eleven
years during which the Society was known as the Philosophical
Society, and during those years he read the following papers :
August 13th, 1856.—“ On the action of Sydney Water upon
Lead.”
November 16th, 1859.—“ On the Separation of Gold from
Mundic Quartz.”
August 15th, 1860.—“ On the Quartz Reefs of Upper
Adelong. ”
November 11th, 1863.—“0n ancient flint Implements found
near Abbeville.”
August 17th, 1864.—“0n the probable reasons that led
Fahrenheit to the adoption of his peculiar Thermometric
Scale.”
Afterwards, when the constitution was again reformed and the
name changed to that of the Royal Society, he was retained as a
member of the Council, which position he has held for eighteen
years. During this time he filled the office of Vice-President for
ten years, and he was twice elected to the Presidential Chair.
Previous to 1879 the Governor for the time being was, ex officio,
President, so that Dr. Smith, as senior Vice-President, was in
reality performing the duties of President for several years.


The following papers were read by him betwen the years 1868
and 1884;
14 Oct,, 1868. —“ On the Water Supply of Sydney.”
17 Nov., 1869.—“0n the results of the Chemical Examina-
tion of Waters for the Sydney Water Commission.”
12 May, 1871.—“ Anniversary Address.”
3 Oct, 1877. —“On a System of Notation adapted to ex-
plaining to Students certain Electrical Operations.”
28 May, 1879.—Anniversary Address.
4 May, 1881.—Anniversary Address.
7 May, 1884.—Anniversary Address.
He was a regular attendant at the Council meetings as well as
at the general meetings, and did much in many ways for the
promotion of the objects of the Society, its interests and welfare.
I repeat what I have already said on a previous occasion,—that
only those who have worked with or who have otherwise been
closely associated with our late Vice-President can fully appreciate
and testify to his great honesty of purpose, impartiality, even dis-
position, tolerance, and uniform courtesy.
The regret of his friends and the respect in which he was
generally held were shown at his funeral by the large gathering
of all classes, and especially of his past students. Public bodies,
such as the University, the Legislative Council, and other institu-
tions with which he was connected, also expressed their apprecia-
tion of his long and meritorious services, by passing resolutions of
condolence and sympathy with his widow in her bereavement.
As you are aware, it has been resolved by the Council to collect
subscriptions for the purpose of providing a memorial for our late
Vice-President, in the form of an oil painting, similar to that of the
Rev. W. B. Clarke, a former Vice-President, and, if there be any
surplus funds, to found a prize to be awarded from time to time for
meritorious contributions to physical science. lam sorry to say,
however, that the amount collected up to the present is quite
insufficient for the latter purpose.


During the past year death has been unusually busy amongst
our medical members. By the death of Dr. Fortescue, M. 8., of
London University, and Fellow of the Linnean Society of London,
this community has lost one of its most prominent members of the
medical profession, and the Society one of its most respected
associates. Dr. Fortescue was twice a member of the Council,
viz., in 1867, 1868, and he was three times elected a member of
the Committee of the Medical Section; but being a busy man, he
only found time to prepare one paper for the Section, viz., “ Upon
a series of Experiments on a normal Eye, with the watery extract
of Duhoisia myoporoides .” He was for several years a Trustee of
the Australian Museum, in which institution he took great interest.
On account of his genial and kindly disposition he was a general
favourite, and his loss is regretted by a wide circle of friends.
In Dr. T. Cecil Morgan we have lost another much respected
member of the medical profession. Dr. Morgan joined the Society
in 1876, and was a constant attendant at the meetings of the
Medical Section ; he was twice elected on to its Committee, he
regularly took part in the discussions, on several occasions brought
forward matters of interest, and twice communicated papers to it.
Dr. Morgan was more particularly distinguished for his attain*
ments and position here in respect to ophthalmic science.
I regret to have to record the deaths also of two of our younger
members, in the persons of Dr. Arthur Annesley West, M. 8., of
Dublin University, and of Dr. George J. Benwick. The latter
was a student of the University of Sydney, where he took his
degree in Arts, He afterwards went home and studied medicine
at Edinburgh, where he took the degrees of M.B. and C.M,
Dr. Benwick gave great promise of occupying a prominent
position in his profession, and what would probably have been a
distinguished career has been arrested by his premature death.
The Colony has sustained the loss of a valuable life and the
Society of a much respected member by the death of Sir George
Wigram Allen, K.C.M.G., the late Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly. Sir G. Wigram Allen joined the Society some fifteen


years ago ; liis attention was not particularly drawn to matters
witli which the Society is interested, he being more closely
identified with politics, but he devoted a good deal of time to
educational matters. He was associated for fourteen years with
the late Professor Smith as a member of the National Board
for Education, for some years he was a Trustee of the Sydney
Grammar School, a member of the University Senate, and he was
the first Minister for Justice and Public Instruction. Although
he never took an active part in the work of this Society, that he
was willing to assist in the advancement of learning is shown by
his founding a scholarship at the University for the encourage-
ment of the study of legal science.
The Society has also lost by death two other members, in Mr.
Douglas Helsham and Mr. William Wallis, the latter an old
colonist, whose name deserves to be recorded as the contractor for
the first railway in the Colony, and for the encouragement he gave
to art.
I have the pleasure to congratulate you upon the very satis-
factory state of the Society’s affairs. It is true that the number
of members has undergone a slight decrease, but the diminution is
immaterial, and will doubtless be made up during the present year
by the election of new members.
The number of members on the roll on April 30th, 1885, was
491; during the past year twenty-seven new members have been
elected, and two names have been restored to the roll. Against
this increase we have lost eight members by death, ten have left the
Colony or resigned, ten names have been struck off the roll for
non-payment of subscriptions, and three elections have been can-
celled for the same reason, leaving on April 30th last an effective
list of 492. In addition there are twenty honorary and five cor-
responding members.
As shown by the Hon. treasurer’s balance sheet, our financial
■affairs are also in a very satisfactory state. It is true we have not
a very large cash balance in hand, but that, I think, is what we
.should avoid. Once the Society had managed to save some £4OO,


mainly by leaving necessary matters undone, and it lived upon
these savings of more energetic and prosperous days as long as
they lasted, and as a consequence nearly died the ignominious
death of a pauper. It is our duty to expend the funds entrusted
to us wisely—certainly to the best of our ability—to promote the
Society’s objects, without wasteful extravagance, neither should we
wrap them up idly in a napkin.
During the past year the Society’s house has been much im-
proved by the alterations and additions to the front of the
building. After defraying the cost of the improvements, some
£l6B, the Council is still in a position to jiay off another £lOO
from the debt, so that the amount now owing upon the building
is only £BOO. During the past year the special subscriptions to
the building fund amounted to £35, and there remain promises to
the extent of about £2BO, which were made in 1882 conditionally
upon sufficient funds being obtained to clear off the debt; hence,
if the members would at once subscribe another £250, we could,
with the Government grant and entrance fees, entirely pay off
the mortgage. Up to the present, out of our 492 members only about
160 have subscribed to the building fund. If the majority of the
remaining 340 were to give only one pound each the debt would
be extinguished. Ido not think this is asking too much, for we
have probably but few members who cannot afford this amount.
Closely connected with the question of funds is the fact that
we ought to make efforts to publish our volume ourselves, and
we shall hardly be in a position to do that until we are out of
debt. We are deeply grateful to the Government for its assist-
ance in this matter; but there is no doubt we suffer somewhat
from the delay which necessarily arises in the appearance of the
volume; we cannot, however, expect our printing to take prece-
dence over that for the Parliament and Public Departments of
the Colony.
For the past three or four years fairly considerable sums, for
us, have been expended upon the library ; special efforts have
been made to render the collection of books as complete as


possible in scientific periodical literature, i.e ., in the Transactions,
Journals, and similar publications of kindred Societies and Insti-
tutions. A poor Society such as this cannot, of course, hope
to have a complete library in all classes of scientific books—
we must content ourselves with some one department—and
that chosen is the one less likely to be undertaken by other
Libraries in the Colony. Most modern scientific books can be
purchased at any time, and are purchased by the Free Public and
other Libraries in Sydney, but the earlier volumes of the Transac-
tions of Scientific Societies are not so likely to be purchased by
them; they, too, are becoming more expensive and more difficult
to obtain every day. Such publications are absolutely essential to
all who are actively engaged in research of any kind. Unless the
investigator can refer to what has already been done by others,
much labour may be unnecessarily repeated and valuable time lost
thereby.
We have now secured the principal series; in the future the
expenditure upon such publications need not be so large, although
many important sets have yet to be completed.
Many of our series have been completed by the generosity of the
Societies which published them, and some of the presentations thus
made at our solicitation are extremely valuable and important.
During the past year the Society has received 1,420 vols. and
pamphlets as donations, amongst which the following call for
special recognition :
Faune du Calcaire Carbonifere de la Belgique. Vols. I-TII
10 parts, 4to. Presented by the author, Professor De
Koninck.
Reports of the Second Geological Survey of Pennsylvania.
7G vols. Presented by the Board of Commissioners.
Monographs and Reports published by the United States
Geological Survey. 9 vols. 4to. Presented by the
Director.
Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Artsand Sciences,
from the commencement in 1866 to 1885 complete.
Presented by the Society.


Bulletin of the Societe de France. Tomes Ito
8 complete. From the Society.
Bulletin, vols. 1 to 4, and Memoires vols. 1 and 2,4 to. of the
Comite Geologique Institut des Mines, St. Petersburgh.
Presented by the Committee.
Journal of Civil Engineers (4 series). Yols. 1 to and
atlases of drawings. Presented by the Minister of
Public Instruction at Borne,
A large number of missing parts were presented by the Boston
Society of Natural History, and the Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, to make the sets of their various publications, now in
the Society’s Library, as complete as possible.
A complete set of Braithwaite’s Retrospect of Medicine, vols. 1
to 92, from the commencement in 1840 to 1885, was
generously presented by Dr. Chisholm Ross, of
Gladesville.
The Society has presented its Journal and Proceedings vol.
XYIII for 1884 to 326 kindred institutions, as per printed list,
and it has likewise been distributed to all the members entitled to
it. Yol. XIX is in type, and will soon be ready for distribution.
Since the last year the following new Societies have entered
into an exchange of publications, viz. ;
Amsterdam, L’Association Coloniale Neerlandaise.
Denver, Colorado Scientific Society.
Edinburgh, Scottish Geographical Society.
Florence, Societa Africana dTtalia (Sezione Fiorentina).
Lipzig, Kdnigleich SachsischeGesellschaft des Wissenschaften.
New York, New York Microscopical Society.
Philadelphia, Second Geological Survey of Pennsylvania.
Vienna, K. K. Naturhistorische Hofmuseum.
And the following Societies already on the list have commenced
sending their publications, in exchange for ours, viz. :—■
Adelaide, Public Library, Museum, and Art Gallery of South
Australia.
Helsingfort, Soci6t6 des Sciences de Finlande.
Li&ge, Societe Royale des Sciences.
The Bureau of Ethnology, Washington.


The Society has subscribed to forty-eight scientific journals and
periodicals, and has purchased 390 vols., at a cost of £260 14s. 5d.,
amongst the most important of which are the following complete
series from the commencement:—
Annals of Natural History, Series 1,2, 3, 4. 76 vols.
Catalogue of the Pathological Department, Royal College of
Surgeons, 7 vols.
Medico-Chirurgical Society—Transactions, vols. 1, 64, 68,
Obstetrical Society—Transactions, vols. 1, 23, 24.
Pathological Society—Transactions, vols. 1, 32, 34.
Petermann’s Mittheilungen Geographic, vols. 1, 25, 27.
Reports of the Medical Officer of the Local Board of Health,
London, 1858-1883, 17 vols.
Scientific American (2nd series), vols. 1-39.
Zoological Society—Proceedings (coloured plates), 1830-
1883, 55 vols..
During the past session the Society held eight meetings, at
which the following papers were read, viz. :
1885.
6 May. Presidential Address, by H. C. Russell, 8.A.,
F.R.A.S.
3 June. Notes on Flying Machines, by Lawrence Hargrave.
~ On a System of Accurate Measurement by means
of long steel Ribands, by G. H. Knibbs.
1 July. Local variations and vibrations of the Earth’s
surface, by H. 0. Russell, 8.A.,F.R.A.5.
5 Aug. Some causes of the decay of the Australian
Forests, by Rev. Peter MacPherson, M.A.
2 Sept. The History of Floods in the Hawkesbury River,
by J. P. Josephson, A.M.I.G.E.
7 Oct. The Ringal of the North-western Himalaya, by
Dr. Brandis, F.R.S. (Communicated by Baron von
Mueller, K.C.M.G.)
4 Nov. Notes on experiments in mounting the Amphi-
pleura pellucida in media having a higher refractive
index than Canada Balsam, by William Morris, Pel,
Fac. Phys. and Surg. Glas., F.R.M.S., Lond.


4 Nov. Notes on the characters of the Adelong Reefs, by
S. Herbert Cox, F.C.S., F.G.S.
„ Stone Implements of the Aborigines of Australia
and some other countries, by Rev. Peter MacPherson,
M.A.
2 Dec. On a Form of Flying-machine, by Lawrence
Hargrave.
„ On a New Form of Anemometer, by H. C.
Russell, 8.A., F.R.A.S.
The Medical Section held eight meetings, at which eighteen
papers were read.
The Microscopical Section held eight meetings, and three papers
were read by Dr. Morris, viz. :
11 May. On Phylloxera vastatrix.
14 Sept. Notes on experiments with highly refractive media.
14 Dec. Method of mounting in sulphur and arsenic.
The Clarke Memorial Medal has been awarded for the year
1886 to Dr. L. G. De Koninck, M.D., the celebrated Belgian
Geologist, formerly Professor in the University of Liege. A
more deserving award could not have been made. It is not
necessary to point out in detail the work which he has done for
geology and palaeontology. Professor De Koninck has been
selected in recognition of his long continued scientific researches
and numerous valuable publications upon geology and palaeontology
and distinguished scientific attainments, but more particularly on
account of his splendid contributions to our knowledge of the
palaeontology of the carboniferous rocks of Europe, the geology of
Belgium, and the palaeozoic fossils of New South Wales. The
award will probably be none the less acceptable to the recipient,
inasmuch as I understand Professor De Koninck is an old friend,
and certainly for long a coadjutor of the late Rev. W. B. Clarke.
It is a source of some regret that the Clarke Memorial Fund is as
yet too small to permit us to proceed with the proposed Clarke
Memorial Lectures. There has been a slight loss in interest by
the suspension of the Bank in which the funds were deposited,


but it is expected that in time the whole of the capital will be
repaid ; we then hope to be in a position to make a commencement,
giving occasionally a short course of lectures upon geology, the
science to which he was so much devoted.
According to established custom, I waited upon His Excellency
the Governor, and I have the pleasure to inform you that Lord
Carrington has expressed his willingness to accept office as our
Honorary President, and to render every service to the Society, and
promote its interests in any way which may be within his power.
As you will see from the ballot papers, we are about to lose
the valuable services of Dr. Leibius, who for the past eleven
years has been one of our Hon. Secretaries. When I state
that we all regret that he finds it necessary to retire from the
position which he has so honorably and efficiently filled for so
many years, I feel that I am but imperfectly expressing the
gratitude which the members entertain for the many services he
has rendered to the Society, their appreciation of his great worth,
and of the interest and care which he has always shown for the
Society’s welfare.
Personally I am probably better aware than most of you how
much of his time he has given to its affairs. Not only has he
been one of our Secretaries for so long, but previously to that he
was for some years a Member of Council. I know that, he has
often devoted his leisure and evenings to the Society, at a great
sacrifice to his own comfort and convenience. I need hardly
remind you that his duties at our Council and general meetings
absorbed but a small portion of the time which he has cheerfully
placed at our disposal. I trust, and I am sure you will all join
with me in expressing the hope, that he will long remain with us
in a more honorable although less exacting position such as that
for which he has been nominated.
It is a source of much regret and considerable concern that the
number of original papers contributed to the Society is so small.
Out of nearly 500 existing members, only thirty-five have con-
tributed papers, and the majority of those have been supplied by


some seven or eight individuals. It is not from lack of subjects,
for there are many questions which require investigation, but
rather from the lack of competent investigators who can spare the
necessary time. There are but few men of leisure in the Colonies,
and still fewer of learned leisure.
Up to the present but little original work has been done in
working out the chemistry of our mineral and vegetable products,
and really but very little in many branches of biology. The
descriptions, catalogues, lists, &c., of our flora and fauna are making
fair progress, but still very little has been published relating to
the development and life history of the fauna of Australia, even
of forms of life peculiar to this part of the world.
In matters of natural history, geology, and allied subjects, it
is apparent to every one that the materials for original work are,
in New South Wales, thickly spread about us, and a considerable
amount of very valuable work is being done in this direction by
the Linnean Society of New South Wales, but the amount which
is waiting to be done is far more than we can cope with at
present.
There is probably a greater number of questions waiting to be
solved in other branches of science, yet, from the circumstances
naturally connected with a new country, it is not easy to make
progress with their solution. Too often physical, chemical, and
similar questions, not only involve long-continued labour for their
investigation, but too often also bulky and expensive apparatus is
required—not always to be obtained in new countries. Fortunately
in certain branches of natural history this is not always the case,
and, accordingly, much more work has been done in questions
relating to the systematic sciences than to problems in the experi-
mental ones; but few workers here have the advantage of even a
poorly furnished physical or chemical laboratory, and no one of a
first-class or well-appointed one—such does not at present exist in
the Colony, although some improvements have of late years beer;
effected in this direction at the University,


This Society is doing what it can to encourage original work, by
offering its medal and money prize for the best orignal communica-
tions upon certain specified subjects; but the amount which
we can spare for this out of our limited income is only £lOO a
year, and we are quite aware that the Society’s medal and the sum
of £25 will not repay any one for perhaps years of labour ; but it
is hoped that the recognition which the award carries with it may
serve as a slight additional stimulus, and help to promote the taste
for original investigation.
Up to the present time we have had but few researches of suffi-
cient merit to entitle us to make the award. I am, however, con-
fident that good is being done, and I do not think we should
lose heart; attention is directed to such matters, and doubt-
less work is being done, in response to our suggestions, of
which we as yet know nothing. The writers of the many papers
which failed to reach the required standard, although perhaps
disappointed, have not suffered by the failure of their attempts,
but on the contrary, have doubtless been much benefited by their
efforts, and our stock of information upon those subjects will in
the future probably owe much to their apparently disregarded
work. We have had inquiries from scientific chemists in England
and elsewhere for supplies of material, notably of the gums and
resins, the so-called “kerosene shale,” and of the iron and other
ores of the Colony. Arrangements have been made in two cases
to furnish a supply of the kerosene shale. I may perhaps here
mention that attempts have been made, by repeated advertise-
ments and otherwise, to obtain samples of the New South Wales
gums and resins to supply those who wish to examine them, and
for our Museums, but unsuccessfully up to the present; hence it
might be thought that the Colony is not so rich in such products
as is usually stated.
I regard this difficulty of obtaining samples of gums and resins,
true to name, as an additional proof of the ignorance which exists
with regard to the natural products of the Colony. It is quite
certain that but little use is made of them. Of the large number of


gums, resins, tanning materials, and other similar products, almost
the only ones made use of are grass-tree gum, eucalyptus oil, and
wattle-bark.
If such questions as “ The Chemistry of the” Australian Gums
and Resins,” “The Tin Deposits of New South Wales,” “The
Iron Ores,” and the “ Silver Ores of New South Wales,” &c.,*were
thoroughly worked out, the results would doubtless be of great
pecuniary value to the Colony; and their investigation is really a
matter of great public importance, and accordingly I think this
Society should not be left, with its limited funds, to deal with
it single-handed; it is a work in which the Government might
assist with propriety —special help in particular cases should be
rendered to those who are willing to engage in such researches.
The Imperial Government places the sum of £4,000 annually at
the disposal of the Royal Society of London for the encourage-
ment of scientific research, on the understanding, of course, that
such assistance should not be used personally, but merely to defray
the legitimate expenses of the work. Wealthy colonists who are
not able to undertake such work themselves might, with great
advantage to the State and credit to themselves, place funds at the
disposal of the Council for encouraging original investigation.
Certain of the other English Societies, like the Chemical Society
and the British Association, also expend considerable portions of
their own funds in encouraging research by such grants. The
former has a fund specially collected for the purpose.
No communications of sufficient merit were received during the
past year to justify the award of the Society’s Medal and prize.
The Council has accordingly invited contributions upon the same
subjects for the year 1888, so that the list of subjects for which it
offers the Society’s Medal and prize of £25, for communications
containing the results of research or observation, is as follows :
Series Y.—To be sent in not later than Ist May, 1886.
No. 16.—0 n the Chemistry of the Australian Gums and Resins.,
The Society’s Medal and £25.
17. —On the Tin Deposits of New South Wales. The Society’s.
Medal and £25.


18. —On the Iron Ore Deposits of New South Wales, The
Society’s Medal and £25.
19.—List of the Marine Fauna of Port Jackson, with descriptive
notes as to habits, distribution, &c. The Society’s
Medal and £25.
Series VI.—To be sent in not later than Ist May, 1887.
No. 20. —On the Silver Ore Deposits .of New South Wales. The
Society’s Medal and £25.
21. —Origin and mode of occurrence of Gold-bearing Veins and
of the associated Minerals. The Society’s Medal and
22. —Influence of the Australian Climate in producing modifica-
tions of Diseases. The Society’s Medal and £25.
23. —On the Infusoria peculiar to Australia. The Society’s
Medal and £25.
Series VII. —To be sent in not later than Ist May, 1888.
No. 24.—Anatomy and Life History of the Echidna and Platypus.
The Society’s Medal and £25.
25.—Anatomy and Life History of Mollusca peculiar to Australia.
The Society’s Medal and £25.
26. —The chemical composition of the products from the so-
called Kerosene Shale of New South Wales. The
Society’s Medal and £25.‘
This Society also tries to encourage scientific research by offering
money grants under the usual conditions, but up to the present
there have not been applicants for such assistance. This may be
partly due to the offer not being sufficiently known, but in some
instances would-be applicants have refrained from applying, since
they feel that the Society cannot well afford to do more than it
does in offering the £lOO a year for special prizes.
The Microscopical Section has a wide field before it; and many
of its members, who are not already contributors, have the
necessary ability and appliances for doing some good original
work, and I am confident that they could do much if they would
only take up some definite line of investigation. I know that in
some cases the non-production of papers is due to a feeling of
diffidence, and an idea that such work can only be performed by
those who have undergone a special training, but this is not


necessary, although of course it is highly desirable and very
advantageous. Most of the advances and discoveries made in
microscopy have been made by what may be termed amateurs.
Even the preparation of lists of microscopic forms of “ moulds,”
fungi, diatoms, desmids, &c., would be useful, and I would strongly
urge every member who possesses a microscope to commence original
work of some kind. He will be pleased and astonished to see how
valuable facts will rapidly grow and accumulate under his hands.
I would also venture to suggest that such of the papers read
before the Medical Section as are suitable should be published in
the Society’s volume. The others, if necessary, and thought desir-
able by the Section, might be printed separately and forwarded
only to the members of the Medical Section.
One of the few facilities for scientific work which we possessed
here and in which the Society assisted in founding, viz., the
Biological Laboratory at Watson’s Bay, has been closed. I regret
to say that the Government has resumed the house and grounds
for defence purposes. Up to the present the laboratory has
not been so much used as was hoped and expected; this was
probably due to its comparative inaccessibility, and to its lack of
fittings and appliances, especially for marine biology,—M. de M.-
Maclay, to whose exertions the formation of the laboratory was
mainly due, having been, so far, the only worker who has made use
of it. The Government will doubtless refund the trustees the cost
of the building, and with that as a nucleus we may be able to
start afresh. It would be a great pity to allow such an under-
taking to drop here, especially as there is such an unlimited field
for marine biological work before us in Australia.
In the course of years it is to be hoped that this scarcity of
scientific workers in the Colony will gradually disappear with
the spread of general and liberal education. By a liberal educa-
tion I mean something more than the ordinary course in Arts.
After a lapse of some thirty odd years from its foundation, the
University has at last been able, by the greater liberality of Parlia-
ment, and by the receipt of private endowments, to make better


provision for instruction in science, although many of the arrange-
ments are still of a very meagre and imperfect character, and more
or less unworthy of the boasted greatness and richness of the
“oldest and richest Australian Colony.” The accommodation and
appliances are by no means equal to those of many schools for
boys at Home, on the Continent, and in America, and certainly
not to colleges in Japan.
Of late we have been told by the newspapers that the University
is richly endowed. This is very far from the case. If the income
of the Sydney University be compared with that of other Univer-
sities (not Australasian, for none of these have yet been placed
upon a proper footing), it will be seen that proportionately it is
very poor, and in a more or less starved condition. To properly
equip the University in all the various departments of science,
literature, art, medicine, law, engineering, «fec., would require very
much more than its present income.
In connection with the subject of the education of our future scien-
tific investigators, perhaps I may be allowed to refer to some recent
expressions of opinion upon this. Professor Huxley, in his Presi-
dential Address to the Royal Society in November last, in speak-
ing of scientific education, says:—“There is no reason in the nature
of things why the student who is destined for a scientific career
should not in the first place go through a course of instruction such
as would ensure him a real, that is to say, a practical acquaint-
ance with the elements of each of the great divisions of mathemati-
cal and physical science; nor why this instruction in what (if I
may borrow a phrase from medicine) I may call the institutes of
science, should not be followed up by more special instruction,
covering the whole field of that particular division in which
the student eventually proposes to become a specialist. I
say not only that there is no reason why this should not
be done; but, on ground of practical experience, I venture
to add that there is no difficulty in doing it.” * * * He,
then refers to the success of the Royal School of Mines. * *
“ Nothing would help the man of science of the future to rise to


the level of his great enterprise more effectually than certain
modifications, on the one hand, of primary and secondary school
education, and on the other, of the conditions which are attached
by the Universities to the attainment of their degrees and their
rewards.
“We have a right to claim that science shall be put upon the
same footing as any other great subject of instruction, that it shall
have an equal share in the schools, an equal share in the recog-
nized qualification for degrees, and in University honors and
rewards.
“It must be recognized that science, as intellectual discipline, is
at least as valuable, and, as knowledge, is at least as important as
literature, and that the scientific student must no longer be
handicapped by a linguistic (I will not call it literary) burden,
the equivalent of which is not imposed upon his classical compeer.
“Let me repeat that I say this, not as a depreciator of litera-
ture, but in the interests of literature. The reason why our
young people are often so scandalously and lamentably deficient
in literary knowledge, and still more in the feeling and the desire
for literary excellence, lies in the fact that they have been with-
held from a true literary training by the pretence of it, which too
often passes under the name of classical instruction, * * *
“Nothing is of more importance to the man of science than
that he should appreciate the value of style, and the literary work
of the school would be of infinite value to him if it taught him
this one thing. But Ido not believe that this is to be done by
what is called forming one’s self on classical models, or that the
O *
advice to give one’s days and nights to the study of any great
writer is of much value.
“Le style est Vhomme meme ” as a man of science who was a
master of style has profoundly said; and aping somebody elsS
does not help one to express oneself. *****
“ A good style is the vivid expression of clear thinking, and it
can be attained only by those who will take infinite pains, in the


first place, to purge their minds of ignorance and half knowledge,
and in the second, to clothe their thoughts in the words which
will most fitly convey them to the minds of others.
“I can conceive no greater help to our scientific students than
that they should bring to their work the habit of mind which is
implied in the power to write their own language in a good style.
“ But this is exactly what our present so-called literary educa-
tion so often fails to confer, even on those who have enjoyed its
fullest advantages ; while the ordinary schoolboy has rarely been
even made aware that its attainment is a thing to be desired.”
Lord Rayleigh, in his Presidential Address to the British Asso-
ciation, at Montreal, says : —“ It can hardly be denied that their
supremacy ( i.e . of the dead languages in school education) is the
result of routine rather than of argument * * * * Ido not
myself take up the extreme position. I doubt whether an exclu-
sively scientific training would be satisfactory; and where there
is plenty of time and a literary aptitude I can believe that the
Latin and Greek may make a good foundation. But it is useless
to discuss the question upon the supposition that the majority of
boys attain either to a knowledge of the languages or to an appre-
ciation of the writings of the ancient authors. The contrary is
notoriously the truth; and the defenders of the existing system
usually take their stand upon the excellence of the discipline.
From this point of view there is something to be said. The laziest
boy must exert himself a little in puzzling out a sentence with
grammar and dictionary, while instruction and supervision are
easy to organize and not too costly. But when the case is stated
plainly, few will agree that we can afford so entirely to disregard
results.
“In after life the intellectual energies are usually engrossed
with business, and no further opportunity is found for attacking
the difficulties which block the gateways of knowledge. Mathe-
matics especially, if not learned young, are likely to remain
unlearned. I will not further insist upon the educational impor-
tance of mathematics and science, because with respect to them I
shall probably be supposed to be prejudiced.


“ I believe that French and German, if properly taught, which
I admit they rarely are at present, would go far to replace Latin
and Greek from a disciplinary point of view, while the actual
value of the acquisition would in the majority of cases be incom-
parably greater. In half the time usually devoted without success
to the classical languages, most boys would acquire a really service-
able knowledge of French and German. History and the serious
study of English literature, now shamefully neglected, would also
find a place in such a scheme.”
Herbert Spencer, in his essay upon Education which appeared
in the Westminster Review for July, 1859, since reprinted with
his other works on Education, makes the following remarks :
“ Among mental as among bodily acquisitions, the ornamental
comes before the useful. Not only in times past, but almost as
much in our own era, that knowledge which conduces to personal
well-being has been postponed to that which brings applause.
“ In the Greek schools, music, poetry, rhetoric and philosophy,
which, until Socrates taught, had but little bearing upon action,
were the dominant subjects; while knowledge aiding the arts of
life had a very subordinate place. And in our own Universities
and schools at the present moment, the like antithesis holds. We
are guilty of something like a platitude when we say that through-
out his after-career, a boy, in nine cases out of ten, applies his
Latin and Greek to no practical purposes. The remark is trite that
in his shop or his office, in managing his estate or his family, in
playing his part as dmector of a bank or a railway, he is very
little aided by his knowledge he took so many years to acquire—
so little that generally the greater part of it drops out of his
memory ; and, if he occasionally vents a Latin quotation or alludes
to some Greek myth, it is less to throw light on the topic in hand
than for the sake of effect. If we inquire what is the real motive
for giving boys a classical education, we find it to be simply con-
formity to public opinion. Men dress their children’s minds, as
they do their bodies, in the prevailing fashion. As the Orinoco
Indian puts on paint before leaving his hut, not with a view to


any direct benefit, but because he would be ashamed to be seen
without it; so, a boy’s drilling in Latin and Greek is insisted on,
not because of their intrinsic value, but that he may not be dis-
graced by being found ignorant of them—that he may have { the
education of a gentleman’—the badge marking a certain social
position, and bringing a consequent respect.
* * * * *
“ Men who would blush if caught saying instead of
Iphigenia, or would resent as an insult any imputation of ignorance
respecting the fabled labours of a fabled demi-god, show not the
slightest shame in confessing that they do not know where the
Eustachian tubes are, what are the actions of the spinal cord,
what is the normal pulsation, or how the lungs are inflated. While
anxious that their sons should be well up in the superstitions of
two thousand years ago, they care not that they should be
taught anything about the structure and functions of their own
bodies —nay even wish them not to be so taught. So overwhelm-
ing is the influence of established routine—so terribly in our
education does the ornamental over-ride the useful!”
The opinions of many others might be also cited, but the
above are perhaps sufficient.
Although written nearly thirty years ago, Mr. Spencer’s remarks
are nearly as applicable to-day as when they were penned,
and should be read by every one. I have quoted these opinions
and referred to the matter more particularly in reference
to school education in the Colonies, since at the University the
science and professional student is now, after many a hard struggle,
emancipated from most of the old classical fetters in cases where
he has not the time or inclination to proceed with such studies.
Mr. Spencer evidently regards the compulsory and often un-
reasoning drilling in the classical languages as a fashion which came
in a few centuries ago, and which will also work itself out in time.
I believe that amongst a few there still lingers an antiquated
notion that the study of science is not so respectable as that
of the classics; and scholars on what is termed the modern side


of a school are somewhat looked down upon, and regarded as
inferior to those on the so-called classical side—thus bearing out
the notion which, if my memory serves me aright, Lord Chester-
field impressed upon his son, viz., that it was the distinguishing
mark of a gentleman to know Greek.
Most of the older writers who have laid so much stress on the
advantages of a merely classical education over a mixed literary
and scientific education, and therefore a really liberal one, were
not properly qualified to judge or give an opinion, for they only
knew one side of the question, and were necessarily, although per-
haps unconsciously, more or less prejudiced ; whereas all or nearly
all of those who have upheld the claims of science to have a part
in a general and really liberal system of education have been
through the classical mill as well as the scientific, so that they
have the advantage of experience of both systems.
The ordinary classical and mathematical education cannot pro-
perly be regarded as a liberal one, since it only attempts to educate
one portion of the student’s faculties ; his powers of observation,
and of reasoning from such observations, are entirely neglected and
undeveloped.
It must not be thought that I wish to disparage the study of
the classics—such is far from my thoughts—it is quite fitting and
necessary that some should devote their lives to such subjects ;
but boys should be relieved from the useless drudgery of subjects
in which they are not likely to distinguish themselves nor obtain
much profit from the alleged beneficial discipline which these
subjects are said to impose.
As far as I can learn, there is almost an entire absence of
real instruction in even the most elementary science in the schools
of this Colony. In some few schools I understand that a little
instruction is given in the form of lectures practically illus-
trated by experiments, but I do not know of any case where the
boys themselves perform experiments with their own hands,
although of course there may be such. If lam wrong, I shall be
only too glad to be corrected upon this point.


Judging from my experience as an examiner, I should say that
by far the largest majority of the candidates who present them-
selves for the Matriculation, Public, and similar Examinations, in
science, have not only never performed any of the most elementary
experiments for themselves, but have not even seen them performed,
nor the instruments which they often glibly enough describe from
books; and they would probably be dumbfounded if the simplest
piece of apparatus itself were placed before them, and they were
asked to perform an experiment with it.
In my experience it is no uncommon thing for a candidate to
reproduce the book description of a common rock, mineral or
fossil, but fail to recognize the same when the actual thing itself
is placed before him for description. He has perhaps described a
piece of granite correctly, according to the book or his teacher, but
has failed to recognize a common and characteristic specimen of
it when placed before him at the same time for recognition,
although allowed ample time to examine it minutely.
It is not instruction of that kind which is required—that is
merely cram, and of a bad kind; it is the teaching which is at
fault, not the scholar’s want of capacity j he has probably done
his best, and if he had received real instruction, would have gained
real knowledge, and not the false half-knowledge referred to.
Until this is remedied, we cannot hope for very much progress
in primary scientific education.
As at home, a certain minimum compulsory number of experi-
mental illustrations should be given by the teacher, when the
knowledge imparted, although smaller in amount, i.e. covering less
ground, would be of real value as far as it goes.
There are several drawbacks to the pursuit of science, especially
in the Colonies, which deter many from taking a degree in science
instead of in arts. One is the fact that it is easier for a lad who
has had the ordinary school education to take a degree in arts,
for which he has already done much of the work, than in natural
science subjects, which are probably quite new to him, and another


is that the student in the natural sciences has at present usually
but very little prospect of any great pecuniary success in life, in
spite of their having been termed the “ bread and butter ”
sciences.
The openings are but few, and usually not well paid. The necessity
of having well-trained scientific managers to mines, metallurgical
works, and manufactories, is hardly yet recognized—and certainly
this is the case in the Colonies.
In many cases it would pay Companies to have a Manager well
trained in scientific principles, at the rate of even £3,000 or
£4,000 a year, instead of a more or less incompetent one at a small
salary, as is too often the case; the thoroughly trained man would
often make the difference between failure and success.
The Board of Technical Education is now doing good work in
spreading elementary scientific, and technical education over the
Colony, by means of science classes in Sydney and at various
centres outside of Sydney, and in a less systematic manner by the
aid of itinerant lectures. The latter are sent out mainly to draw
attention to the fact that there are educational subjects other than
the ordinary school courses, and to help to create a taste for such.
Many people who are considered fairly well educated are quite
ignorant of such matters, and lie under the impression that the
subject of physics deals with drugs, and the subject of chemistry
with the art of compounding and dispensing the same, so that if
they are only taught that physics deals with the forces of nature
some good has been done ; for of course we cannot expect much
to be learnt from an attendance upon one or two more or less
popular lectures; it is more or less true, as has been said by
Faraday, “ popular lectures do not really teach, and lectures which
really teach are not popular.”
It is gratifying to find that the necessity of scientific education
is gradually being realized in other quarters ; and it is satisfactory
to notice that at the present time there is a motion before the
Legislative Assembly to place the sum of £lO,OOO upon the Esti-
mates for the establishment of Schools of Mines in the various


mining centres, although the amount is quite insufficient for the
purpose. It is highly probable that one really good central School
would be in every way preferable and much more efficient.
A School of Mines pure and simple could not possibly have a
large number of students, while it is a most expensive institution
to maintain. The best plan is to attach a mining department to
some existing scientific institution, or to found such with provision
for instruction in mining. Even at home—with it population of
35,000,000 to draw from, the Royal School of Mines never had a
large number of students, and in order to lessen the expense by
more fully utilizing the staff and appliances it has been recently
amalgamated with the Normal School of Science.
Apparently but few, however, are aware that at the present
moment there are practically two Schools of Mines in Sydney
already.
At the University we have provided for a Mining Department
or School, and instruction is afforded at the present time in all the
subjects but two, and lecturers would doubtless be at once appointed
in those subjects if any students presented themselves, but up to
now none have come forward, although the existence of the depart-
ment has been made public.
Then at the Technical College, Sydney, under the Technical
Board, a fairly complete course of instruction in all branches suit-
able for the miner are given, including mining itself, which is not
taught at the University, for the reason given; but the number of
students is so small that it is almost a question whether the Board
is justified in continuing the outlay for this department.
The Board also is giving instruction in mineralogy, geology, and
other allied subjects needed by the miner in certain of the country
mining districts, but the attendance of students leaves much to be
desired.
Although the number of persons presenting themselves for
instruction in mining is not so great as we might expect from
the appeals which are made from time to time, I do not think
that is a very strong reason against trying to meet the actual want;


but there is no doubt that many who are crying out for technical
education do not seem to be aware how far their wants have been
supplied, and that the technical education which they are asking
for is in some instances being given and the classes are languishing
for want of students. There appears to be a difficulty in some cases
in bringing the student and the instructor together. There is no
doubt whatever as to the dearth of educated men capable of taking
the management of mines.
There is another motion to be brought before the Legislative
Assembly, to make provision for the creation and endowment of
twenty scholarships, of the value of £2OO per annum, each tenable
for three years, at the Sydney University. This proposition if
carried will I am sure be followed by satisfactory results to the
holders; it will still further utilize existing teaching powers at
the University, and I trust it will be put into execution.
As another instance of the way in which the existing agencies
for technical education are not fully recognized, I may mention
that very few appear to be aware that we have in our midst the
nucleus of a very good Technological Museum, at present obscurely
and indifferently sheltered in the old Agricultural Hall in the
Domain. The collections would have been much more complete
had it not been for the loss of all the first collections in the Garden
Palace fire : but in spite of that, the managing Committee have
already quite sufficient material to fill a much lai’ger building than
the present temporary and unsuitable one. Many things cannot be
shown at all, and the others are so overcrowded it is difficult for
visitors to examine them properly, and moreover they suffer from
the combined attacks of the sun, wind, and rain, for the iron shed
in which they are housed is by no means weather-proof.
A special feature in the Museum is the series of educational
appliances, and especially of cheap and simple sets of physical,
chemical, and other apparatus, geological and other collections, for
the use of schools and teachers, so arranged that they can see the
kind of apparatus to be employed and its cost.


I do not refer to what has already been done for technical
education to stay the hands of any one, because a vast amount more
requires to be done, but merely to draw attention to the presence
of existing educational agencies in this direction.
Professor Huxley, in his Anniversary Address to the Royal
Society, in November last, in speaking of the Fellowship, says:—
“ Since this Society was founded, English-speaking communities
have been planted, and are increasing and multiplying in all
quarters of the globe ; to use a naturalist’s phrase, their geographical
distribution is ‘ world-wide.’ Wherever these communities have
had time to develop, the instinct which led our forefathers to
come together for the promotion of natural knowledge has worked
in them and produced most notable results. The quantity and
quality of the scientific work now being done in the United States
moves us all to hearty admiration; the Dominion of Canada, and
our Colonies in South Africa, New Zealand, and Australia, show that
they do not mean to be left behind in the race ; and the scientific
activity of our countrymen in India needs no comment.
“ Whatever may be the practicability of political federation for
more or fewer of the rapidly growing English-speaking peoples of
the globe, some sort of scientific federation should surely be possible.
“Nothing is baser than scientific Chauvinism, but still blood is
thicker than water.” And he further says—“l have often ventured
to dream that the Royal Society might associate itself in some special
way with all English-speaking men of science; that it might
recognize their work in other ways than by the rare opportunities
at present offered by election to our Foreign Fellowship, while they
must needs be deprived of a large part of its privileges.
“ How far this aspiration of mine may be reciprocated by our
scientific brethren in the United States and in our Colonies I do
not know; I make it public on nry own responsibility, for your
and their consideration.”
Doubtless all agree with Prof. Huxley that it is desirable to
have closer bonds of union between the Royal Society and the


men of science who are scattered over the wide areas of English-
speaking countries, but it does not appear to be very easy to
suggest a method for bringing this about.
It is really very difficult to suggest any improvement upon the
present relationship between the parent Society and non-resident
English-speaking men of science, certainly as far as the Colonies
are concerned, for any one who really does good work in the
Colonies is seldom overlooked, but his merits are usually duly
acknowledged by election to the Fellowship of the Royal Society.
There are probably many earnest workers in science in English-
speaking countries who would like to be connected with the Royal
Society, and who are well fitted, as far as attainments go, to be
elected to its Fellowship ; but I fear that many difficulties will be
met with in trying to bring about any change in the present system.
One amongst others is that the number of Fellows, at present
limited to 500, would have to be very largely increased ; for if we
assume that there are sixty to seventy millions of the English-
speaking race resident elsewhere than in the United Kingdom, and
the proportion of men worthy and desirous of the undoubtedly
great honor of its Fellowship be anything like that amongst those
resident in the United Kingdom, then the 500 would have to be
made at least 1,000, and probably much more, a number which
would swamp the old Royal Society.
Personally I am inclined to think, as a beginning (I, however,
make the suggestion with considerable diffidence and with all
respect), until some workable scheme has been evolved, that perhaps
the Royal Society might be able to grant certain privileges to the
members of the older and recognized Colonial and American Socie-
ties. The members of the branch Societies—for the Colonial and
American Societies are really offshoots of the original Royal Society
—when visiting the old country might be given increased privi-
leges for attending its meetings, be allowed access to its valuable
library, &c., and they might perhaps be granted copies of its pub-
lications at reduced prices.


It is true that at present the Royal Society’s rules are so liberal
that a visitor need seldom be debarred from attending its meetings,
yet increased facilities might be granted to a certain number of
properly accredited members of external Societies.
Another way in which the Royal Society and other scientific
Societies at home could render us material help is by giving us
assistance in the publication of our papers. Too often a paper
read before a colonial Society is practically not published at all
outside of the particular Colony in which it is read and printed.
Although the publications of the colonial Societies are usually
distributed to the principal Societies and Journals outside of the
Colonies, yet but few people see them. The book is placed on the
library table or shelves, and is perhaps just glanced at by one or
two ; whereas if abstracts of the papers which it contains, or even
their titles, were to be more regularly inserted in the publications
of the home Societies, more use would be made of the work done in
the Colonies and America. In the case of the more valuable
papers, it might be desirable to have the whole of the contributions
published in the Journal of some home Society ; arrangements
could readily be made so that the paper should appear simul-
taneously at home and in the Colony. Any such recognition
would, I am sure, do a great deal to further the advancement of
science in the Colonies.
Now-a-days few have the time to unearth books in a large
library; to reach the person for whom it is intended the paper
must be placed in his hands, or otherwise closely brought under
his notice.
In the same way it might be arranged that papers written in
England, America, and elsewhere, upon matters interesting in the
Colonies, might be simultaneously read and published by the
colonial Societies.
After a paper has been published (/,<?., technically), in the
Colonies, although very few have seen or heard it, no other scien-
tific Society according to the present custom can pay any attention


to it, so that to all intents and purposes the matter remains un-
published. Hence, as I have already said, publication in the
Colonies is too often practically no publication.
The effect of this is often seen in popular books upon the Colonies,
and in some too which are not intended to be popular, where
the same long exploded errors are carefully reproduced by
generation after generation of writers.
Whether the late distinguished President of the Royal Society
is able or not to carry out his wishes, we cannot but be grateful to
him for the full recognition he makes of our efforts to follow in the
footsteps, although in but a feeble way, of the grand old parent
Society.
On September 16, 1884, the following letter appeared in the
Sydney papers, and was afterwards reproduced by most of the
other Colonial and some of the Home papers :
“ The British Association.
“ To the Editor.
“ Sir, —During the past fortnight we have received several tele-
grams from London respecting the late meeting of the British
Association at Montreal, and in some of them references are made
to suggestions that a future meeting should be held in Australia.
“As far as one can judge, the idea seems to have been thrown
out when Professor Moseley, F.R.S., announced Mr. Caldwell’s
discovery of the oviparous nature of the platypus and Australian
porcupine.* The news seems to have created or rather re-awakened
interest in the peculiarities of Australian Natural History, and on
the spur of the moment some of the more enthusiastic members
appear to have proposed that a subsequent meeting of the British
Association should be held in Australia.
“ The Victorian Premier, with commendable promptitude, at once
telegraphed the necessary invitation for the Association to visit
Melbourne next year; an invitation might also have gone from
Sydney, and especially under the circumstances. Without such
invitation the meeting is not likely to take place here, for the
* Sent from Sydney by cable.


Association only visits towns to which it is invited, and generally
there is more or less competition amongst the principal towns to
secure the acceptance of their invitations, and to bring this about
the competing towns offer as many attractions as possible.
“ For the Montreal Session all the great English Steamship Com-
panies between England and America, and the Canadian and
United States Railway Companies reduced their fares to members
and their families; the Government Railways were, of course,
made free to them, and the Telegraph Companies also granted
free use of their lines all over Canada and the United States,
Numerous free excursions were arranged to places of interest,
some extending over a period of twelve or fourteen days, the
members and their families merely paying for their meals and
sleeping-berths at quite nominal rates.
“In addition to the reductions made by the Steamship Companies,
the Canadian Committee voted $14,000 for the purpose of still
further reducing the cost of members’ (and of their relatives’)
passages to Canada. The Australian Colonies would of course
gladly help in the same way ; but, taking the much greater
expense and time of voyage into account, the amount to be
raised here would have to be many times as much.
“ I am however very much afraid that, although Australia, New
Zealand, and the Islands offer great attractions to many of the
members (I know of one eminent scientific man who is returning
to England via Australia from the Montreal meeting), yet but
comparatively few could afford the time and money to come out
here. The visit to Montreal and the excursions through Canada
and the United States could all be managed in a month or six
weeks, and at comparatively small expense—in fact, most of those
who went to Canada made the trip do duty for the annual autumn
holiday or visit to the seaside; but out of the 2,000 to 3,000
members and associates (2,714 attended the Southport meeting in
1883) only a comparatively small number could arrange to visit
Australia; the round voyage could scarcely be squeezed into the
long vacation of those fortunate enough to have one, and the


necessary travelling expenses would considerably exceed the whole
year’s income of many—for the pursuit of science is not a lucrative
one, and as a rule its followers are poor. Hence, taking all things
into account, I do not think we could expect more than fifty
members, if so many. And unless some 400 to 500 attended
(between 800 and 900 entered their names for the Montreal
session) the gathering could scarcely be considered as a meeting of
the British Association. Therefore, instead of looking for a near
visit from the Association, I would suggest that we should rather
be preparing the way for issuing an invitation later on, when we
have made suitable provision to entertain our intended Scientific
guests; and as a preliminary step I would venture to suggest, as a
life member of the parent Association, that we might try to bring
about a federation or union of the members of the various Scientific
Societies in Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand into an
Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science on the
lines of the British Association, with a view to hold the first
general meeting in Sydney on the hundredth anniversary of the
Colony, when there will probably be an International Exhibition
to celebrate that event. With the combined attractions we might
hope to gather together a very fair number of scientific visitors to
take part in the proceedings.
“ I mooted this question during the last Exhibition in Sydney in
1879, but matters seemed hardly ripe for it; but now, perhaps,
with the greater advancement in numbers and in wealth something
might come of it in 1888.
“ The details for an Association suited to the scattered Austral-
asian Colonies necessarily offer some difficulties, but they can all
be more or less readily overcome, and I hope to be able shortly to
communicate with the different Societies to discuss the necessary
arrangements.
“ After the first meeting the gatherings could take place annually,
or every two or three years, in one of the principal towns in
Australasia, as agreed upon by the members.


“I am sure that such an Association—which must come sooner or
later, if we are to hold our own—would not only do a great deal
for the advancement of science in the Colonies, but would also
materially favour their progress in many other ways.
“Trusting that this letter may bring about an expression of
opinion upon the matter, —
“ I am, &c.,
“A. LIYERSIDGE.
“The University, September, 16, 1884,”
I am still of opinion that arrangements should be made for
holding such a meeting in 1888, and for founding the proposed
Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science, and I
shall be glad if those who are in favour of it will kindly send me
their names as intending members, so that the necessary pre-
liminary steps can be taken.
The regulations for the Australasian Association might bo drawn
up on the same general lines as are followed by the parent
Association, but with certain modifications to suit our local cir-
cumstances ; they might be somewhat as follows :
There should be a General Committee or Council, having
the supreme control, to be composed of delegates from
the different Colonies or Colonial Scientific Societies, who
could be elected or appointed according to some scheme
to be decided upon. The number of delegates from each
Society or Colony should be proportionate to the number
of members subscribing or otherwise taking part in
the proceedings; each Society might be allowed to
nominate a delegate for each one hundred members.
A local Committee would be required in the place of meet-
ing, to make arrangements for the reception and enter-
tainment of the visitors, and to make preparations for the
business of the General Meetings.
Sectional Committees would also require to be appointed for
the following subjects :
Section A.—Astronomy, Mathematics, Physics, and
Mechanics.


Section B.—Chemistry and Mineralogy.
Section C.—Geology and Palaeontology.
Section D. —Biology.
Section E.—Geography.
Section F.—Economic Science and Statistics.
Section G.—Anthropology.
Section H.—Medical and Sanitary Science.
Section I.—Literature and the Fine Arts.
Section J.—Social Science.
The rights and privileges of membership should be in the main
similar to those afforded by the British Association,
subject to revision and alteration after the first meeting
of the proposed Australasian Association for the Advance-
ment of Science.
Should the proposal meet with approval, it will be necessary to
take immediate steps in order that all arrangements may be ready
for 1888.
If the General Committee were appointed on the basis suggested,
viz., one delegate to each 100 members or less, the total number of
such representatives would be about twenty-five to thirty, since
there are some twenty recognized Scientific Societies in the
Australasian Colonies, and the number of members between 2,500
and 3,000.
From the above numbers it does not appear unreasonable to
expect a sufficient number of papers to make the meeting a success.
In addition to the papers, excursions would of course be organized
to various places of interest, such as the Jenolan, Wambeyan, and
other Caves, the Blue Mountains, and similar places of interest to
geologists.
Probably the best and most suitable place for the general and
other meetings would be the University, as it is the only building
in Sydney which possesses a sufficiently large hall and the requisite
rooms for the sectional meetings.


The objects of the British Association are as set forth as follows,
and the proposed Australasian Association would probably do well
to try to follow the same lines :—“ The Association contemplates no
interference with the ground occupied by other institutions. Its
objects are—to give a stronger impulse and a more systematic
direction to scientific inquiry—to promote the intercourse of those
who cultivate science in different parts of the British Empire, with
one another and with foreign philosophers —to obtain a more
general attention to the objects of science, and a removal of any
disadvantages of a public kind which impede its progress.”
Amongst its rules which might also be adopted are these—l
have modified them to suit our circumstances :
All persons who have attended the first meeting shall be entitled
to become members of the Association upon agreeing to conform
to its rules.
The Officers, Members of Council, Fellows, and Members of
Literary and Philosophical Societies, publishing Transactions or
Journals in the British Empire, shall be entitled in like manner
to become Members of the Association. Persons not belonging
to such Institutions shall be elected by the General Committee
or Council to become life members of the Association, annual
subscribers, or associates for the year, subject to the approval of
a general meeting.
All members who have paid their subscriptions shall be entitled
to receive the publications of the Association gratis.
The Association shall meet for one week or longer. The place
of meeting shall be appointed by the General Committee two years
in advance.
The first meeting of the British Association was held in 1831,
and it was attended by 353 members ; since that date the numbers
have increased very largely, and close upon 3,000 members and
associates have been present at the later meetings, and even at
the Montreal meeting the number was 1,777 ; of which 235 were
old life members, 20 new life members, 317 old annual members,
219 new annual members, 826 associates (t.e. members for the


particular meeting only), 74 ladies, and 26 foreign members; and
60 members of the American Association who were admitted as
honorary members for the meeting. The returns for the Steamship
Companies show, as far as they go, that they carried across some
747 members. The Montreal meeting, under the presidency of
Right Hon. Lord Rayleigh, was a great success, in spite of the
distance from its head-quarters at which it was held.
The Montreal meeting is of rather more interest to residents in
Australia than usual, since at it was made the announcement by
cable of the successful results of Mr. Caldwell’s investigation into
the oviparous nature of the echidna and platypus.
The Parliament of the Dominion of Canada voted $25,000
towards the expenses of the meeting. Fifty officers of the Asso-
ciation had the cost of their return passages defrayed out of this
sum; old members received vouchers defraying about one-third
the cost of return ticket, and in addition, certain of the Steam
Companies reduced their fares to members of the Association, and
to three of their near relations who accompanied them. The City
Council of Montreal supplemented the Government grants by
$5,000, and the citizens subscribed another $lO,OOO.
Local Committees, and an influential Citizens’ Committee, under
the Presidency of the Mayor of Montreal, were appointed to make
general arrangements for the meeting, and for the reception,
lodging, and entertainment of the members. The head-quarters
of the Association were at the beautifully situated M‘Gill College.
The Presbyterian, Wesleyan, and Congregational Colleges were
also placed at the disposal of the Association for meetings of the
Sections, &c.
All the most prominent and distinguished residents, not only in
Montreal, but in Canada generally, seemed to have vied with one
another in extending their hospitality to their visitors, and in
endeavours to make their stay a pleasant one; visits and excursions
were planned for all, some of great length, and welcomes were
extended from every quarter, extending from the Governor-General
downwards. About 140 residents in Montreal alone each received


from two to six guests in their houses, and, from the account of
the Montreal meeting given by General Sir J. Henry Lefroy,
K.C.M.G., C. 8., F.R.S. to the Colonial Institute, the gathering
must have been very interesting and most enjoyable. Any one
wishing for further particulars should consult his paper, to which
I am indebted for some of the above references to the Montreal
meeting.
Although so many old members of the British Association
visited Canada, including nearly all its most distinguished members,
we cannot, I think, as I said in my letter, reasonably expect the
British Association to visit Australia for some years to come, but
I think that if we arrange for a gathering of all the most pro-
minent scientific men and well-wishers of science in Australia, and
invite the members of the British and American Associations to
visit us, we may probably have a fair number of visitors.
There is no doubt that a meeting of the kind held during the
centennial year would confer great benefit upon the Colonies and
convey much instruction to our visitors. It would afford a
unique opportunity for the exchange of ideas and information;
and it would not only have an immediate beneficial effect, but
would permanently raise the high-water-mark of thought in all
the Colonies, and especially in connection with scientific matters.
It would tend to stimulate all classes, and disseminate a taste
for most branches of knowledge.
The British Association meeting at Montreal seems to be re-
garded on all hands as having been a success from every point of
view—from the special scientific one of the Association itself, and
from the picnic point of view of those who merely went for
pleasure.
At the Sydney meeting in 1888 the opportunity should be taken
to take stock, as it might be termed, of all scientific matters more
particularly connected with Australasia.
It would be a splendid opportunity to correlate and correct all
the scattered and fragmentary geological maps and memoirs
relating to the various Colonies, and to adopt a uniform system of
nomenclature, colouring, etc., for all Australasian geological maps.


It would be beneficial if botanists were to prepare and revise
the census of plants for each Colony, especially to show their dis-
tribution ; and similar questions could be discussed by the zoolo-
gists for land and marine organisms.
If the proposed Australian Association for the Advancement of
Science should really become an accomplished fact, as I hope it
will—for progress in material affairs cannot well be expected, and cer-
tainly will not be made unless a corresponding advancement be first
made in science—we should not necessarily be compelled to hold
yearly meetings at first. The head-quarters, however, of the
Association could not conveniently be shifted every year; but,
so that each Colony should have an equal share in its affairs, the
offices might be moved at stated intervals from capital to capital.
I must crave your indulgence for the length of my remarks.
The matter has grown under my hands, and I find myself, unfortu-
nately, without the time to give it that somewhat ruthless pruning
which I feel it needs.
With this my duties as President cease; and it now only remains
for me to express the pleasure I have had in endeavouring to fill
the office to the best of ray ability, and to hope that the Society
may have a long and flourishing career. It has, I think, safely
got over most of the troubles incidental to such Societies in new
countries. We now have a large roll of members, the largest of
any single Society in any of the Colonies; we have the nucleus of
a good special library, and a fairly comfortable and commodious
house and hall for our meetings ; whereas a few years back the
whole of our chattels and effects were carried backwards and for-
wards by the Assistant Secretary in a carpet-bag ; so that it now
only remains for us to make a reputation for the Society by the
character and amount of the work which is done under its auspices.
Sydney : Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lBB6.


■
W


/
1
If
1
*
.


f n
%
■ - w
