

PRESBYTERIAN LADIES' COLLEGE
GOULBUIRN




PRESBYTERIAN LADIES' COLLEGE
GOULBURN
TELEPHONE: 229
DAY AND BOARDING SCHOOL FOR GIRLS
Principal:
MISS CHRISTINA BRYANT, M.A., DIP.ED.
Chairman of the Council:
MR. D. B. FRASER, LL.B., COULBURN
[1940]


THE
ENTRANCE CATES


THE SCHOOL
FOUNDATION:
The Presbyterian Ladies’ College, Goulburn, was established at the beginning of 1921.
The School is the property of the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales and is registered
as a Secondary School under the provisions of the Bursary Endowment Act. The School is
controlled by a Council nominated by the State Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of New
South Wales.
AIMS:
The Council of the School desires to provide for the girls a liberal education in a Chris-
tian atmosphere, and under social conditions which will equip them for responsible citizenship.
SITUATION:
The School is situated at Goulburn, on the Southern Tablelands of N.S.W., 137 miles
from Sydney, 57 miles from Canberra, and 60 miles from the coast. Its altitude, over 2,000
feet above sea-level, ensures a healthful and invigorating climate. The winter is bracing with-
out being severe, and even the warmest summer days are followed by cool nights. The School
is three-quarters of a mile from the Post Office, and has a commanding view of the
surrounding hills. It is built on the eastern slope of a wooded hill, which protects it from
the westerly winds.
GROUNDS:
The grounds comprise an area of more than 41 acres, with extensive lawns and
gardens. A kitchen garden supplies the School with fresh vegetables. The garden slopes
down to four well laid-out tennis courts, and to the north are playing fields for basketball,
hockey and cricket. Surrounding these is a field of natural grass rising to a hill set with
pines and native trees.


CHRISTINA
BRYANT
HALL


BUILDINGS:
The main School block consists of classrooms equipped with modern fittings and single
desks and heated by Esse stoves. In addition to these, the building has various rooms used
for specialised work—The Art Studio, suitable for all branches of Drawing and Craft work,
a Laboratory for Physics, Chemistry and Physiology: an equipped Gymnasium and a
Reference Library. The Library is maintained by the Old Girls Association.
To accommodate the Kindergarten, a separate building was erected. Ihe main room is
40 feet by 30 feet, while there are three smaller rooms and verandahs 10 feet wide.
The residence for the boarders consists of three large wings, one housing the Juniors, the
others the Seniors. Each house is under the supervision of a senior member of the staff, assisted
by housemistresses and a trained nurse. As w ell as bedrooms, excellent provision is made
for open-air sleeping by a large balcony in each wing specially designed for this purpose.
The houses are well equipped with modern bathrooms and a good hot-water system.
A large Assembly Hall can be used for Church Services, School Meetings, Concerts and
Plays.
SCHOOL INSTITUTIONS:
Apart from its purely scholastic side, the School presents many opportunities for the
development of special ability.
The House System plays an important part, as it fosters co-operation in work and games,
and provides opportunity for girls to develop their powers of leadership. There are four
Houses —Elgin, Melrose, Roslyn and Stirling.
Activities of various kinds are conducted by the girls, e.g., the Lor Others Society,
Current Topics, Debating Society, Dramatic Society, Music Society.


PLAYING FIELDS


SCHOOL UNIFORM:
The School uniform is tartan, and the complete outfit can be obtained through David
Jones. Uniform material by the yard can be obtained from David Jones. Parents are
specially asked to note that the wearing of any jewellery (except a wristlet watch), e.g., brace-
lets, rings and brooches, is forbidden.
Every article must be clearly marked with Cash's woven names.
SCHOOL WORK
The School opens each morning at 9 o'clock with Assembly and Morning Prayers. All
girls must be present. School closes each afternoon at 3.10, after which there are organised
games under the supervision of the Games Mistress.
The School Year consists of three terms of approximately thirteen weeks each.
KINDERGARTEN AND PREPARATORY SCHOOL:
A special feature is made of the Preparatory School and Kindergarten, where girls are
accepted at the age of five. The classrooms are separated from the main School buildings, and
are surrounded by wide, sunny verandahs.
PRIMARY SCHOOL:
The Primary School carries on the work of the Preparatory School, and gives a thor-
ough grounding in English (Reading, Spelling, Elementary Grammar), Writing, Arithmetic,
Geography, History, Nature Study, Drawing, and Needlework.


ONE OF THE
CLASS ROOMS


SECONDARY SCHOOL:
In the Upper School, girls are prepared for the Intermediate, Leaving and Matriculation
Examinations. Also provision is made in the Curriculum for girls who do not wish to ma-
triculate; these may study non-academic subjects.
The Curriculum includes;
English, French, Latin.
History—Ancient, European, Modern.
Geography.
Mathematics I and II and General Mathematics.
Economics.
Physics, Chemistry, Physiology, Biology.
Drawing and Arts and Crafts.
Speech Craft.
Class Singing.
Gymnastics.
Students are prepared for the annual examinations of the Australian Music Exami-
nation Board in Pianoforte, Singing and Violin, and these may be taken as subjects
for the Intermediate and Leaving Certificate examinations.
A special School Choir is trained by a Resident Music Mistress.


THE
SCIENCE ROOM


EXTRA SUBJECTS:
There are qualified resident and non-resident Music Teachers.
Pianoforte, Violin and Singing are taught as extra subjects, and all practices are
supervised.
For girls wishing to take a business training, typing, book-keeping and shorthand are
taught. Girls may also learn dressmaking, art of speech, and dancing.
SCRIPTURE:
Scripture is taught by the School Chaplain and the Form Mistresses. The teaching is
unsectarian in character and all girls are expected to attend the classes.
PHYSICAL CULTURE:
Physical Culture is taught throughout the School by a fully qualified mistress. Every
girl is expected to attend the daily physical training classes and, in summer, the swimming
class, unless medical advice is given to the contrary.
GAMES:
As far as possible, all girls are expected to take part in some game. Instruction is given
in tennis, basketball, hockey, baseball, and swimming.
Girls are prepared for the tests of the Royal Life Saving Society. As the School has its
own swimming pool and dressing sheds, the girls are free to practise within the
School grounds, but only under the personal supervision of the Games Mistress.


THE
DINING ROOM


EXAMINATIONS AND REPORTS:
Steady, regular work is one of the main efforts of the School, and the progress of the
pupil is gauged throughout each term by frequent tests. Marks gained in these tests, together
with those in the terminal examinations, determine places in the class lists at the end of the
year. A report is sent to parents each term and, when completed, this report shows a record of
the year’s work both in subject and class position. Parents are requested to follow the pupil’s
progress and to return the report signed at the beginning of each term.
ABSENCE:
Any girl absent for a day or part of a day must bring from her parent or guardian a
written statement of the cause and the length of her absence.
NOTICE OF REMOVAL:
The Council requires that a full term’s notice of intention to remove a pupil shall be
given or else a full term’s boarding and tuition fees.
\ '
ARTS AND HANDICRAFTS:
Art work and Craft work of every kind are encouraged and a specially trained mistress is
in charge of this department. The object of the work done in the Art room is to provide
for the needs of girls who are not preparing for a purely academic course, and to substitute
a training in Crafts in place of such subjects as Latin and Geometry. Regular classes are
held as part of the class time-table, and extra classes in special subjects can be arranged. The
Arts and Crafts Section includes Weaving, Lettering, Leatherwork, Glove-making, Em-
broidery, Drawing from objects, Perspective Painting.
Girls can be prepared for the Intermediate and Leaving Examinations in Art.


SLEEPING-OUT
BALCONY


HEALTH:
Medical Inspection for both day girls and boarders is part of the ordinary School rou-
tine. If any special attention is needed, the Principal will notify parents.
BOARDING ARRANGEMENTS:
Boarders attend the Presbyterian Church or the Cathedral on Sunday morning. On
Sunday evening a special service for the boarders is conducted by the Principal at the School.
A trained nurse is in residence and is responsible for the health of the children. She
attends to minor illness, but parents are reminded that they must meet the expense of special-
ised nursing in the event of an infectious or serious illness at the School.
Parents are requested to see the child is not in contact with any infectious disease for
at least a fortnight before returning to School. On entering the School after each term holiday
every boarder is required to hand in personally her health certificate.
Epidemics can spread so rapidly through the School that parents are asked, for the safety
of their own and other children, to comply strictly with this regulation.
Hampers are permitted only at Mid-Term and for birthdays: fruit may be sent at any
time.


THE
TENNIS COURTS


Pocket money must be forwarded to the Principal and is given out weekly by the
Senior Mistress. Boarders are not permitted to keep money in their rooms and parents are
requested to co-operate with the Principal in the observance of this regulation and not to give
or send money to their daughters for their private use. Money for special purposes may be
sent to the Principal, who will hold it in trust.
Parents are asked to furnish a list of those persons who may visit the School and with
whom the pupil may correspond.
Except on certain special weekends, boarders are permitted to visit friends any Saturday
from noon until 7 p.m., and any Sunday after Church until the beginning of the Evening
Service. Permission to do so must be given by the parents to the Principal in writing: and
the pupil must be accompanied by an escort.
During the School Hours no boarder is free to receive visitors.
It is important that girls, unless prevented by illness, return punctually at the beginning
of each term. In no case should a girl leave School before the day, or before the particular
time on the day, appointed for the break-up.


THE POOL
AND BOARDING
HOUSES


TERMS OF ADMISSION:
Entry forms must be filled in when application is made and a vacancy will be held only
after this application has been received.
Two written references are required before admission and should accompany the entry
form. If in attendance at another school, one reference must be from the Principal of that
School.
A report of the intending pupil’s work must accompany the entry form and references.
A term’s notice in writing, or a term’s fees are required before withdrawal of a pupil.
Fees are due on the first day of the term.
A proportionate reduction of tuition and boarding fees is made for girls who enrol and
enter during the currency of the term. If a pupil already enrolled is unable to attend at the
beginning of a term, the fees are nevertheless due.
A reduction of fees is made for the daughters of Clergy of all denominations.


RAMSAY, WARE PUBLISHING PTY. LTD.
129 KING STREET, MELBOURNE, AUSTRALIA


PRESBYTERIAN LADIES’ COLLEGE, GOULBURN
APPLICATION FOR ADMISSION
Pupil’s Name in full
Date of Birth
Age on December 31 next
Full Boarder, Weekly Boarder?* or Day Pupil
Name and Address of Parent or Guardian
Telephone Number
Profession or Occupation of Parent
Religious Denomination
Names and Addresses of Two Referees to whom the Principal may apply
Probable length of stay at School
Previous School or Schools (if any)
Standard—Pupil (previous reports being satisfactory) is ready to enter
Year in Secondary School or Class in Primary School.
Enclose School Report and School Certificate of Conduct
Date when admission is desired
Extra Subjects desired
I request that the above pupil be admitted to the Presbyterian Ladies’
College. I have read the Business Regulations set out overleaf, and I agree to
be bound by these and any other Regulations that may be in force in the School
for the time being.
Date Signature of Parent or Guardian
(Please turn over)


Attention of Parents is drawn to the following:
1. The minimum period for which a pupil will be en-
rolled is two years.
2. Pupils seeking admission for February should apply
as soon as possible.
3. The entrance fee of (boarders only) must
accompany this form.
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
The following Business Regulations have been passed by the
Council:
1. Fees are payable when the account is rendered.
2. No pupil shall be allowed to enter on a new term at
the College while the fees for the previous term are
unpaid, unless a satisfactory reason for the non-pay-
ment has been given.
3. A term’s notice in writing (at the beginning of the
term) must be given to the Principal before the
withdrawal of a girl from the College or from any
Extra Class.
This Regulation applies in cases of all withdrawals,
whether at the end of or during the first, second or third
terms of the school year. Failure to give such notice will
render the parent or guardian liable to pay one term’s fees.


54a ﬂmﬂ/
< s%>-t6&bte'i,it,.




