

PATENT
SPIRAL
RIVETED
PIPES
MEPHAN FERGUSON,
MELBOURNE.




Mephan Ferguson,
Engineer, Boilermaker, etc.
Melbourne, Perth, and London.
Price List
PATENT
Spiral Riveted Pipes
1902.
MANUFACTURER OF
Ferguson’s Patent Lockingbar Steel Pipes,
Wrought and Cast Iron Pipes, Flumings,
Tanks, Castings, Forgings, Rabbit Extermin-
ators, Nelyamboo Scoops, Bolts, Nuts,
Washers, and every description of Cast or
Wrought Iron Work.
Sole Agent in Australia for:
J. and E. Hall’s Patent Carbonic Anhydride
Refrigerating and Ice-making Machinery.
CITY OFFICE : 475 COLLINS STREET WEST.
Head Office and Works:
FOOTSCRAY, VICTORIA.


SECTION.
CAST IRON JOINT.
This joint is recommended where the pressure is excessive. It makes a perfectly
tight joint, is simple and inexpensive. No lead is required, and the
cost of laying and jointing is reduced to a minimum. It acts as an expansion
joint, and is readily tapped for service connections.
PATENT BOLTED JOINT.
4
MEPHAN FERGUSON, ENGINEER, MELBOURNE.


Spiral pipe, 9ft. long, loin, diameter, 13 gauge. Tested on the 12th October, 1896,
in the presence of Mr. W. Davidson, Inspector-General of Public Works, and Mr.
W. Dovvden, Engineer of Water Supply, and others. The pipe began to sweat at
616 lbs., showing first sign of leak at joint. At 980 lbs. per square inch it leaked at
all seams slightly, and burst in centre of plate at 1372 lbs.
SPIRAL RIVETED PIPE, FLANGE JOINTS.
MEPHAN FERGUSON, ENGINEER, MELBOURNE.


Department of Public Works,
Melbourne, 25th Feb., 1902.
'
Mr. Mephan Ferguson,
Sir, —With reference to the life of Wrought
Iron or Steel Pipes, the fact is that anticipations
have been so much exceeded, and dismal prog-
nostications upset, that I am not yet able to fix
a period as the limit of their durability.
It now seems almost that given the conditions
(, a ) Sound, well selected plates, free from rust.
(. b ) Honest workmanship.
(c) Perfect coating with refined Trinidad As-
phaltum, or other equally efficacious
envelope.
(d) Care in transit and laying so as to avoid
abrasion of coating, or the proper treat-
ment of unavoidable abrasions.
the life of Wrought Iron Pipes may equal
that of Cast Iron.
When I introduced W. I. Pipes into Australia
for Water Supply purposes, it was on the basis of
Californian practice, and notably as carried out
by Mr. Schussler, Engineer of the Spring Vale,
(San Francisco) Water Works, who at that date
had nearly twenty years’ experience of the system,
with the result, that whenever opened up, the
pipes were found to be in as good condition as
when laid, and, with an added eighteen years,
I am aware that the same condition prevails.
Although at first I was rather sceptical as to a very
extended life for them, I was able to demonstrate
that from a financial point of view, if Wrought
Iron Pipes continued to be effective in the Mel-
bourne Water Supply System for fourteen years
and were then altogether abandoned, there would
6
MEPHAN FERGUSON, ENGINEER, MELBOURNE.


DIA.
LENGTH.
DIA.
LENGTH.
in.
miles.
chns.
in.
miles, chns.
53
3
76
30
14 68
5o
5
36
24
7 4i
32
20
40
18
5 70
be an actual monetary gain at the then relative
prices for Cast Iron and Wrought Iron, which
made a difference of over 50 per cent, in favour
of the latter.
But eighteen years have now elapsed, and it
can be said of our original Wrought Iron Main,
one of seven miles long and 30 inches diameter,
that as is also Mr. Schussler’s experience in
America, it is as sound in every particular
as when laid down, and I see no reason why
it should not be found as sound fifty years hence.
I find, that before giving up the Melbourne Water
Supply in 1890, I laid W. I. Pipes, as follows :
or say 58 miles. Excepting in the case of a few
pipes laid through bad ground in South Melbourne
and in respect of which it was afterwards found
thatl there had been carelessness in handling,
there has been a complete absence of failure, and
of the whole of them, as of our initial main, it
may be said that they continue to be so sound,
that no line is afforded from which to predict
when they will be otherwise.
I continue to be, I assure you, quite satisfied
with my action in successfully combating doubt
and opposition to the adoption of Wrought Iron
for large Water Mains.
Very truly yours,
(Sgd.) W. Davidson,
Inspector-General of Public Works, Victoria.
7
MEPHAN FERGUSON, ENGINEER, MELBOURNE.


Department of Public Works,
Melbourne, 18th May, 1902.
Sir, —In extension of my letter dated 25th
February, on the subject of the life of Wrought
Iron Pipes, I cannot now help apprising you of the
great pleasure and satisfaction I have just
received from the inspection of a length of
the 24 inch wrought iron South Melbourne Main,
the pipes for which you will remember you
manufactured. The main crosses from Preston
reservoir to Brunswick and thence down the
Sydney road and via Queen’s Bridge into the City
of South Melbourne. It is, I think, about 10 miles
long. The pipes are of the original pattern of
\ inch plate, with longitudinal double rivetted
and transverse single rivetted seams in 28 ft.
lengths, fitted with spigots and facuets. The
M. and M. Board within the past- week or so
made some alterations in this main on the S.M.
side of the bridge, which necessitated the cutting
out of a length of 24 inch pipe, to which had been
attached a cast iron 12 inch branch, with sluice
valve, etc. This is the pipe which I at once took
an opportunity of inspecting.
It was laid early in 1887 in ground that is the
most unfavorable of any in the Melbourne dis-
trict to the preservation of ferruginous, material;
inside the pipe is now as if it had just come out
of your works, so perfect and Japan like is the
coating, and making allowance for the adhering
clay, the same may be said of the outside, except-
ing that in cutting out rivets, the pipe appears to
have been taken out in sections and in the handl-
ing and cartage portions of the exterior coating
have been knocked off. This, for the purpose of
my examination, I found to be rather an advant-
age, as it afforded me a welcome opportunity for
examining the plates in several places. These
are in perfect order, and considering the absence
of change in practically 16 years of service, I see
8
MEPHAN FERGUSON, ENGINEER, MELBOURNE^:


no 'reason why the same condition should not
prevail for 16 years longer, or for the matter of
that for 60 years or longer —indefinitely. Where
'no change has taken place it is certainly warrant-
able to assume that under a continuation of
like conditions none will take place. Not the
least source of my gratification —having first be-
come satisfied as to the stability and certain
longevity of this main—is in the splendid con-
ditions of the interior of the pipe. Its perimeter
is perfect without signs of incrustation, obstruc-
tion or deposit. This is the more remarkable
from the fact that in an equal period a Cast Iron
Pipe of 24 inch diameter would have lost at least
one inch and more probably two inches of section
from incrustation. The cast iron branch which
had been connected to this W.I. Pipe with its
valve, were heavily covered with material adher-
ing to the inner surfaces in the form of nodules,
and consisting of oxide of iron and earthly matter
attracted to it. This deposit or incrustation is
peculiar to all C.I. pipes, large and small, in the
Melbourne Water Supply System. Its rate of
growth is equal to the complete filling up of a
4 inch pipe in from 15 to 18 years. The coating
of the Wrought Iron Pipes, as used in the Yan
Yean, is now demonstrated as being absolutely
impervious to incrustation, the initial effort in
which must be from the iron and establishes the
impermeability of the Trinadad asphaltum process.
Altogether the result is so pleasing to me, although
I have now nothing to do with water supply
affairs, that I cannot refrain from expressing it to
you, who were so closely associated with my first
efforts in introducing Wrought Iron Pipes, and
indeed to ask you to share my feelings of satis-
faction, and in doing so to authorise you to make
any use of this note you see fit.
Very truly yours,
WM. DAVIDSON,
Inspector General of Public Works, Victoria.
9
MEPHAN FERGUSON, ENGINEER, MELBOURNE.


The Melbourne & Metropolitan Board of Works.
Office ; 501 Collins Street,
Melbourne, 25th Feb., 1902.
Memo.
WROUGHT IRON PIPES.
The experience of Wrought Iron Pipes in the
Melbourne Water Supply system extends back to
1886, when the first wrought iron pipe was laid.
Up to the present no trouble has arisen from
them and there is no indication of trouble.
The only position in which wrought iron should
be avoided is in alluvial ground saturated with salt,
but this ground also rapidly deteriorates cast iron.
Wrought iron, or steel pipes, are very suitable
for long lengths of large mains ; causing a very
considerable saving in first cost, cartage, and
laying when compared with cast iron, and I
believe, in good ground, when the pipes are well
made and coated, will last for a great number of
years, and fully justify an engineer in Australia
using them in long mains of large diameter for
water supply purposes. An expenditure which
might be justified in older, well settled countries
would he sheer waste of money in opening up
Australia.
(Signed) W. Thwaites,
E ngineer-i n-Chief.
Mr. M. Ferguson.
10
MEPHAN FERGUSON, ENGINEER, MELBOURNE.


LIFE OF WROUGHT IRON AND
MILD STEEL PIPES.
Wrought Iron Pipes have been in use in
the Melbourne Water Supply since 1886. Owing
to the construction and alterationof railway
hues, sewers, and roads, and for the purpose
of connecting other pipes, several of these
mains have had to be stripped, and often
lilted and relaid, and on all occasions have
been found in perfect order, and free from
corrosion both inside and outside, with the excep-
tion of a short length of 24 in. main laid in low
lying ground, filled up with dredgings from the
river bed (tidal), containing salts, etc., having a
powerful corrosive action on iron ; but in all
cases of leaks it was found that the coating had
been damaged in laying and not noticed, owing
to the wet and muddy nature of the ground. &
Experience in the Melbourne Supply has
shown that in ordinary good ground clay loam,
sand, or rock (where stones are kept away from
the outside coating) Wrought Iron Pipes, properly
coated, have remained in excellent preservation.
In ground filled with tidal river dredgings, or
low-lying swampy ground, where any consider-
able quantity of decaying vegetable matter exists,
then Wrought Iron or Steel Pipes are apt to
become porous if the coating be damaged in any
way.
These latter remarks also apply to Cast Iron
Pipes, but as they are generally thicker than W.I.
they resist the action of salt, etc., somewhat
longer.
[Signed) W. Thwaites,
Engineer-in-Chicj Melb. and Met. Board of Works.
[Signed] W. Dowden,
24/2/02, Engineer of Water Supply.
11
MEPHAN FERGUSON, ENGINEER, MELBOURNE.


SUITABLE FOR WATER SUPPLY.
Department of Victorian Water Supply,
Melbourne, 29th April, 1902.
Extract from report on spiral rivetted Wrought
Iron Pipes for water supply and jointing thereof :
Some two years or more ago Mr. Ferguson
laid about 15 miles of spirally rivetted pipe for
the St. Arnaud Trust. This was of 10 gauge and
of 10 inches diameter. The joints were of the
ordinary spigot and faucet form, the faucets being
of wrought steel rivetted to the pipes, and the
spigot ends stiffened by suitable rings. The
joints were yarned and leaded. No trouble what-
ever was experienced with these pipes, both
barrels and joints proving perfectly water tight
under the tests.
The spirally rivetted Wrought Iron Pipes have
been successfully employed in several other
works carried out by or under the supervision of
this department.
I am of opinion that these spirally rivetted
Wrought Iron Pipes are very suitable for water
mains where lowness of first cost is a prime
consideration.
With the experience already gained there
need be no practical difficulty in making water
tight and efficient work of both barrels and joints.
STUART MURRAY,
Chicj Engineer of Victorian Water Supply.
Atlas Press, Block Place, Melbourne.
MEPHAN FERGUSON, ENGINEER, MELBOURNE.




