

Sid $ py
/ .
PRIMARY EDUCATION.
My Dear Mr. D alley,—
“ Our purple is ever tied with a rougher cord ”
says one of the old English writers ; and here is a new
example of it. Just when we were thinking that I should
gain a little renown by Theodore Martin’s Dedication, up
gets an honourable member and demolishes the frail ark of
my ambition ! It is too plain ; I am, and am to be nobody.
If you ask the cause of all this despondency, look at the
Parliamentary report in the newspapers. Some of the
debaters on the new Education Bill are doubtful about
my authority being worth much in the matter of
primary instruction. Others have no doubt at all ■; but
on their own authority declare mine to be perfectly worth-
less. It is the old story -nothing but authority! Ho
matter how simple, or how purely local a proposition may
be, we are never to think for ourselves, because we have the
European writers to think for us. The exercise of common
sense, or the attempt to form conclusions of our own from
the evidence before us, is an invasion of the rights of
Herbert Spencer, or John Stuart Mill, or some other of those
renowned authors, who have become implements of terror
and torture in the hands of these oracles of our country,
whose only argument is quotation. As for myself, I will
save all doubters about my jurisdiction the trouble of push-
ing their enquiries any further, by saying that I claim none.
My position is one as simple and unpretending as it is


possible for the holder of any opinion whatever upon any
subject to assume. I tell my fellow-citizens that the quality
of the education which is given to their children under the
sanction ef the Council is bad; that if they will only take
the trouble to look into the books which are put into then-
children’s hands, and to ask themselves whether this is the
kind of instruction which they wish their children to receive,
they will come to the same conclusion as myself.
And yet I owe it to the classical studies with which my
name is associated to interpose this remark ; that even sup-
posing the evidence on which my assertions are supported
were not, as it is, open to all tne world ; if the credibility of
what is alleged depended, in this case, upon the competence
and trustworthiness of the person alleging it; I am not
acquainted with any gentleman in this colony whose right
to an opinion on a matter of education I should very readily
grant to be superior to my own. You will remember that
Mr. Max Muller in a recent address claimed one Basedow
as his maternal ancestor, and that, after mentioning his
labours and sufferings in the cause of education, he summed
up all his merits by speaking of him as the precursor of the
great Pestalozzi. Now Pestalozzi was my dear and honoured
master; and no silly fear of appearing vainglorious shall
prevent me from adding, that I was his favourite pupil, and
one of those whom he delighted to exhibit to visitors as an
illustration of his system. I was a slovenly child, much
afflicted with chilblains, which I was not sorry to have ; for
it gave me command of larger quantities of turpentine than
a child is generally entitled to. But I mention this ciicum-
stance to make you see that I was not a show boy on account
of any personal beauty. But under that admirable system I
was taught to think. I was not crammed with technical terms,
and left to imagine what real distinctions, if any, they were
intended to represent. Our teachers taught us to think, and


so to distinguish ; and when we had seized the distinction, and
therefore wanted ai name to give it, then came the term to
meet our need ; amd it was readily apprehended, and retained
without effort, because it came, not as an incubus of the
memoiy, but as tlhe satisfaction of a previous want. lam
speaking of a time now far distant; but the sound of that
oid German teacher’s voice continually repeating to me
Tink Patham is fresher in my recollection than many
grander deliverances to which I have been subjected in later
years. You will readily understand, my dear friend,
that when I afterwards became the voluntary disciple, and
constant companion of Frederic Denison Maurice, and
heard him maintain in his fervent, and unaffected style, that
“ a ° d was man ’ s teacher, and that His whole teaching might
“ be summed up in this : that He taught man first to under-
“ stand his own real wants, and next that He alone was
capable of supplying them,” I again recognized this
Pestalozzian theory' of want and supply, and my heart was
carried back to thatt old castle of Yverdun, and to “ Tink
Patham,” and the turpentine and the chiblains, and that
happy expansion of la free mind in a free atmosphere. When I
became a schoolmaster (and I was one for some twenty years)
I endeavoured, to tlhe best of my ability, to apply to others
the same mode of culture under which my own mind had grown.
From first to last my maxim was, “ The business of a school-
master is not to heair lessons, but to teach; and I was almost
fanatical enough to sympathise with Plato when he laments
over the discovery of the alphabet, as a mechanical con-
trivance for learning all about everything, puffing up men
with a semblance of knowledge, and superseding that true
wisdom which can (only be brought out of a man by oral
teaching, and the clhecks upon presumption, which nothing-
save question and answer conducted by a living teacher can
supply.


And yet my voice is not to be heard when the quality
of instruction is in question. “ Aye, but you only taught
Latin and Greek !” To this objection I have two answers :
first, that it is quite untrue ; and secondly, that, if it were
ever so true, there is no force in it. And as this is really a
very important matter, and I see that even thinking men
are walking in a mist and seeing all objects inverted and
out of proportion, and all for the want of a little reflection
upon the subject, I crave leave to trouble you with an
argument with which you, at least, are sufficiently familiar.
We talk of primary and secondary education as if they were
two distinct things ; as if there were two educations ; two arts
of teaching depending on different principles, and as if the
professor of the one were as distinct from the professor of
the other as a pastrycook is from a doctor. But as the
mind only learns in one way whatever it learns, so the prin-
ciples of the art of teaching are one, whether the thing to
be taught be the Hornbook or Homer ; whether the mind
to be informed belong to the son of a glazier, or to the
child of the lordly mansion over which the glazier casts his
protecting aegis of glass and putty.
A man who can make a child understand the English
syntax (such as it is) can make him understand anything
else in the world, provided always that he knows it himself;
and, on the other side, if he can handle the implement of his
craft on a complex subject, he will surely betray no clumsi-
ness in his operation on a simpler material.
The proposition that because a man is a scholar
(meaning thereby a Greek or Latin scholar) he cannot judge
of primary education, is not a whit less monstrous than if
you were to say that a man cannot carve a shoulder of
mutton because his blade can with magic precision and
rapidity dissever the ligaments and commissures of a hare or an
ortolan. I use this homely and Socratic illustration because I


am most anxious to strip this question of any appearance or
pretence of abstruseness such as questions are sometimes apt
to assume. You well know the saucy air which controversies
are ready to give themselves ; how they amble disdainfully
past such ignoramuses as you and me, as who should say :
“ Don't pretend to touch me, sir! lam a controversy for your
betters.” But this question at least is one for all the world,
from the squatter, who is richer in sheep than Esterhazy
(yet never bestows a penny upon Bursaries) to the poorest
free selector who tries his wits against him in the intricate
and amusing game of double dummy.
Every man is capable of appreciating this humble piece
of logic which I here offer to one and all for adoption. 44 If
a man has had experience in teaching children, whether he
has taught them Chinese or English (unless he has utterly
wasted his time) he must have studied the minds of children;
and if such a man tells me, as this old schoolmaster does,
that my boys are being taught a parcel of rubbish, I say he
is worth listening to ; and I will try and find out whether
he is in the right, for all that may be said by Mr. This and
Mr. That. Of course they try to put him out of court
because he stands there as a witness of their negligence.”
As if I were the only witness ! How many schoolmasters,
how many educated men have you and I heard vehemently
denouncing the pedantry of this newfangled scholastic science
of Analysis ? How many serious and thoughtful parents, of
all professions, have ridiculed the notion of making the
English language a sort of horse on which to hang a whole
shopful of technical terms ? And yet here am I hunted and
driven into egotism, forced to mount a platform to hold
forth upon self-evident propositions, because forsooth others
like their ease ! As if I did not also like it, if truth would
only suffer me to be silent. You know well that we have a
legion at our back ; but hitherto (alas !) it has been a mute


and immovable legion. You also know, and can testily,
that I am not the man to want any one of them in order
that they may derive away from me some portion of tl e
abuse which I provoke; for I have a scorn within me, which
is seldom shewn, but which can bear me above the assaults
of men who from time to time delight to disfigure our
language in the effort to say something that shall sting me to
the quick. But though I feel nothing that they can say, I
feel most keenly the necessity which is laid upon me, that
I must speak of myself. I have this consolation, that I will
speak of no one else to his dispraise, either by name, or by
innuendo, except when the very nature of my proof compels
me.
One of the ancients has observed that there would be
no stupider race in the world than that of grammarians it it
were not 'for the philosophers; another, who thought more
highly of the latter class, looks upon the grammarian ns a sort
steekit metaphysician, and compares the tribe to the suitors
of Penelope, who, finding the lady of the house inexorable,
consoled themselves by philandering with her waiting-maids.
Certainly more than half the critical scholarship of modern
times is engaged in undoing the mischief wrought by
pedantic grammarians; but if we are to have leaden
philosophy and leaden grammar amalgamated together, and
if the proficients of this heavy lore are to form the heart and
understanding of our rising youth, just consider what the
effect will be upon this City of Sydney. Have we such
mines of wit, such a perennial spring of humour, or such
treasures of fancy to spare, that we can afford to risk this
saturnine experiment ? Hoes anybody suppose, that the
vulgarities and personalities with which public speaking and
public writing in this place are fraught, proceed from innate
love of baseness, and mere malignity? and not rather fiorn
the dearth of something better, from the Australian drought


which has visited our wells of imagination so that they can
yield little more than mud and refuse ? What then is the
remedy? Do not imagine, Messrs. Bradley Headstone, and Co.,
that I am going to propose some splendid scheme of
literary instruction which is to call out the spark of
genius wherever it is latent, or to fan the youthful
fancy into a genial flame ; hut let the poor lads alone;
fling away your abominable forceps and leave the intellectual
birth to the kindly efforts of nature, and to the fostering
care of those who understand her operations, and second
them with reverential hands.
It is unnecessary to trouble you with a reproduction of
the passages which have already been adduced elsewhere to
illustrate the kind of teaching against which it is our duty to
protest. You will have seen the Report of the Public Exami-
ners to the Senate, and the hints to candidates in Section 11,
which are appended to the new edition of our Manual. But
there is one topic which we have often discussed together,
and to which you will expect that some allusion should be
made. Many a time have you asked “How can anyone
explain why this scholastic staff shows such a terrible
addiction to geography ? Hot to physical geography,
which is an admirable excercise of the thinking power,
or to a knowledge of the great divisions of the world,
and the nations contained in them, which is altogether
to be commended, as necessarily embodying some
little of the general history of mankind; but to that
dreary row of names in all the languages under the
sun, indicating places, in which it is impossible for any
one to take the slightest interest, except as the theatres of
events, and the Book of those events is unfortunately a sealed
volume in our Public Schools; and then one of us has ex-
claimed, “ Oh, that these town-engulphing heroes could only
be sent to dwell in the scenes of their achievements!” If we


could despatch one to Stettin, another to Astracan, and
another to the hanks of what they euphoniously call the
« Gwoddelquiver ,” or, with a letter of introduction from Dr.
Vaughan, to the derelict See of Nazianzus ! But why certain
persons are so addicted to this sort of geography is easily ex-
plained. “We love facts, Sir.” “ Give us plenty of facts.”
“ The learned man is the man whose mind is well stored with
facts.” This is the language of those who think (as Plato
expresses it), that to teach is to put something into the
mind and not to bring something out of it; in the eyes of
this gentry a well crammed auction mart is a, “ palatial resi-
dence.”
But it is high time, my dear friend, that this part of my
observations should be brought to a close. This then is the
sum of the reflection which every parent in this colony is
invited to make for himself. —I want my boy to know his
own language; to know it, as things only can be known, by
a process of thinking. This analysis of sentences, and all
these curious pigeon-holes into which all the classes of each
part of speech, after being duly labelled, are thrust, (like
galley slaves with their crimes on their backs are poked into
their appropriate cells,) and all this “gabblery” of proper
names, which you call geography, will neither teach him to
speak, nor to write, nor to think. What does Mr. Robertson
know about “relational adjectives?” Ask Mr. Parkes to
analyse one of his own sentences ! And yet I suppose Mr.
Robertson knows what adjectives to use; and when Mr.
Parkes has a subject in hand, you may be pretty sure that
the predicate will follow, to the delight of some and the
amazement of others.
A certain member of the Assembly either feels, or
affects to feel, some curiosity about my correspondence.
He wishes to know what letters I have addressed to the
Council of Education. It seems to me that a little


reflection would have saved him the trouble of the
enquiry. Was it for me to lecture that Board (or any
Board) on its public functions ? Was I to to tell them
through their secretary that they were leaving a power in
their secretary’s hiands which they were bound to wield them-
selves ; and to want for a “ Sir, I have the honour to inform
you,’ signed by my “obedient humble servant, William
Wilkins ? ” I have said all along, as you well know, that I
believe Mr. Wilkins to be a conscientious industrious man,
loving children, and with his heart in his work. But I say
that this hierarchy of Secretary and Inspectors is fraught
with latent despotism to the unfortunate schoolmaster ; and
that this potential tyranny may at any moment become
actual, unless we have some one Minister of State who shall
govern in person when personal interference is necessary;
who will be able to learn more than merely what his satellites
chose to tell him ; who will not be hindered by jealousy from
asking the advice of thinking men, and whose every act
will be in the eye of the House and of the country. But
let not anyone suppose that the Council of Education was
ignorant of these complaints. More than seven years ago in
a lecture at Bathurst, I read to an appreciating audience
some specimens out of a popular English grammar, I did
not mention the name of the author; my business was with
his work, and not with himself. But the book was not
Morell’s; nevertheless, some persons thought proper to jump
at the conclusion that it was. Forthwith a scholastic maga-
zine, long since dead, attacked me, and reproved the Eev.
Dr. Heekie for presuming to endorse my opinion. The con-
ductors of that j ournal then sent all the pieces necessary for
securing my conviction to Dr. Morell himself; and I shall
never forget the jubilation with which they published his
answer when it arrived. The tone of it was mild and courte-
ous enough, somewhat patronizing perhaps; but then you must


remember that Dr. JVXorell was an inspectoi. But, as far as
I can remember, the argument was of tnis kind, tbat scien-
tific terms were necessary \ tbat their uncouthness was a,
family failing, and that familiarity would soon recon-
cile you to their ugliness, and furthermore that his book had
been adopted as a class book in England, and that his oook,
or his method (I forget which) was largely used in several
continental nations. This was notoriety enough by way of
commencement. Since that time, year after year, I have
complained to several members of the Council about the
continuance of this nuisance. Four years ago I spoke in
presence of Dr. Smith, at the University commemoration,
and my chief subject was the English language with a special
reference to Public Schools. Three years ago the public
examiners in their report to the Senate drew their attention
to the evil in the following words :
« We regret to say that the results of this part of the Ex-
amination were upon the whole far from satisfactory, and that
the candidates generally showed much more aptness in nam-
ing the parts of speech and their grammatical connection
in sentences given for that purpose, than in their knowledge
of the English language ; and it is our opinion that this
deficiency arises from a too exclusive attention to the techni-
calities of grammar, and the comparative neglect of sound
English reading, accompanied by suitable explanations and
exercises thereon. It is to the same cause that we attribute
the many instances of very defective spelling which we have
met with in the papers of many candidates, some of whom
could not even spell correctly the technical terms of grammar
which they had been taught to employ.
And after all this a gentleman who lately told his hearers
that your Glovernment could claim no merit for suppressing
the Council of Education, because it was already tumbling
to pieces of itself, has the Herculean generosity to thiust his


shoulders under the crumbling’ edifice, and is preparing to
ask questions whereby they may convict me of treacherously
undermining it.
But enough of this. And now shall I venture to
say anything of the general character of the Bill ? Why
not ? Why am I to subscribe to the self-complacent
magnates who say in their hearts, “ We are members, and can
pass censure on everything human and divine. You had
better hold your tongue; because a Professor of Greek cannot
possibly know anything of politics, and if he opens his mouth
we shall ask questions about the University in “Our Places.”
I should never have offered any opinion upon the Bill as a
whole, if certain members of the Assembly had not questioned
my lignt of having an opinion at all. But I will now speak
in the simple assertion of that right; and as this is merely
done pro forma a very few words will suffice
There are two kinds of Denominationalists—those who,
like Mr. Stuart and Mr. Butler, sincerely believe in the
efficacy of what is called religious education in schools, and
those who, though they would rather that religion were
taught elsewhere, regard the compromise offered by Mr.
Parkes’ Act as wise and statesmanlike. These persons
cannot close their eyes to the fact, that if we shut up
Denominational Schools altogether, we are practically
depriving the Roman Catholics, and perhaps the Anglicans,
for all time to come, of a great and signal benefit, which
all the rest of their fellow citizens will continue to enjoy.
Of this number I am one. It is all very well to call this
opposition on the part of priest or people toilful; but
could they by any efforts will otherwise ? or is a man to
turn himself inside out, because we don’t like the colour of
his creed ? ‘ But, sir, it is rank bigotry.” Yes, the same
sort of bigotry which makes a. limpet stick to its rock—->
because upon the whole he thinks he is safer there than where


you propose to put him. “ But it is an absurd error:” Absurd ?
Damnable, if it will relieve you to say so; but, suppose
be cannot help it; suppose it is of that class of errors for
which the Church, in her charity, expressly contrived the
name of invincible; and will you punish for all ages to
come and for no nobler motive than that of economising
on your taxes the men who help you to pay those taxes, for
a necessity which they cannot unwill, for an instinct which
is part of their being, for an error which is not their fault
but their misfortune ? You, too, who are fervid apostles of
education, who talk of the thousands that are ready to perish
for the want of it; for the sake of these thousands on paper
will you disfranchise and proscribe, and that for ever, the
living and real thousands of the poorest sect in Australia ?
Strange economy I strange statesmanship !
You know that my sympathy with your co-religionists is
mainly founded on the observation of the insolent tone which
every Muggletonian Pope thinks himself at liberty to assume
towards them. But you must have seen more than once how
that sympathy has changed to a very different feeling when
priestly organizations have made themselves felt on the bust,
ings, and the “ Catholic vote ” has sent into Parliament men
whom they neither trusted nor loved ; and vve, forsooth, were
to have the benefit of their legislation in all other matters,
because they had been chosen in order to secure a preponder-
ance of denominational votes. This is not a state of things
that any country can be expected to tolerate for a long time,
and yet as long as there is the standing menace of the League
—-or, at least, as long as the League is at all formidable —it
is quite certain that there will be a Catholic party in politics,
which of course, by the law of reaction, will produce a Protes-
tant party, and we (the greater number) who would fain invoke
a blessing upon both their Houses, if they would but leave the
State alone, must suffer, whilst your controversies are raging,
12


delay of legislation!, which is so far worse than delay of jus-
tice, in that the lattter falls on individuals, while the former
affects the people aat large. To put an end to this disreput-
able confusion, it was necessary that there should be some
binding compromise, such as the general public would accept,
and so to let the League die out of inanition for want
of new supporters, and tranquillize those whose pri-
vileges were in jeopardy, on the condition of a small
surrender of their claims. It was necessary, I say, to re-enact
the principle on which the Denominational schools are based,
but to curtail its operation so that men should no longer
have a case against it, as interfering with the growth of
Public Schools. It is in the very nature of a compromise that
neither of the litigating parties should be satisfied therewith ;
but there is a far larger party than either that is sick of the
contest, and if this party is united it will be strong enough to
insist upon the acceptance of such fair and honourable terms.
No good citizen can love the League, for it is altogether
an unconstitutional movement. The Anti-Corn Law League
n England was itself unconstitutional, but it was justified by
the defective representation of the country. Men did not see
why the accident of their not having votes should lead to the
further accident of their not having bread. But here, where
every man has a vote, we can surely carry on the legislation of
the country without forming into clubs to bully and dictate to
the Parliament. lam not Quixotic enough to run a tilt at
that terrible Statistical Windmill, who is the only man of
power that I recognise amongst them. But, admitting the
truth of all his figures, it does not follow that the thousands
who are not being taught to read and write, are perishing for
want of education. Perhaps the education of being useful to
their parents may be doing them more good than spelling or
arithmetic, when administered by compulsion. It does not
follow that, because ignorance is in proportion to crime,


ignorance (I mean of school learning) leads to crime. It is
at least as likely that excessive poverty leads to both at once.
Nevertheless, I rejoice that we have Mr. Greenwood
amongst us; and I hope that, ere long, his flock will see its
way to letting him sit in the Legislative Assembly. But, in the
meanwhile, though we cannot help detesting the half-bully-
ing, half-propagandist tone of many of his followers, we
cannot afford to despise them until, by the passing of this
Act, the people shall acquire the right to say—“ This matter
is now ended. The compromise, which was offered for'the
sake of peace and quietness, has become law ; and we will not
stultify ourselves by joining in the demand to tear a leaf out
of the statute book when the ink is scarcely dry.”
You know, my dear friend, with what reluctance I write
all this. The psalter of my years has nearly come to “ Exaudi
Deus,” and, ever since, the X got on to the wrong side of the
L, the units have been clustering after it so rapidly, that my
life becomes alarmed at its own speed, and seeks to slacken
its course by tranquillity and retirement. To have broken
through these habits in a cause, the success or failure of
which cannot possibly affect me personally, ought surely to
prove that I have written these hurried lines with conviction,
and in the service of Truth.
CHARLES BADHAM.
Gibbs, Shallard, and Co„ Printers, 108 Pitt Street, Sydney.
