

SPEECH
OH THE
EDUCATION DEBATE,
PRIMARY EDUCATION.
BY
ALEXANDER STUART, ESQ.
One of the Members for East Sydney,
On TUESDAY, 1st JUNE, 1875.
Sydney:
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 370, GEORGE STREET,
“Australian Churchman” Office,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OF NEW SOOTH WALES.
1875.
Price 3d.




The accompanying Speech has been revised from the very excellent
Reports in the Sydney Morning Herald and Evening News, with the
addition of two short extracts relating to American Schools.
A. S.


Speech.
Mr, DIBBS moved (pursuant to notice) —“ That, in the opinion
of this House, a Bill for the amendment of the Public Schools
Act of 1866 should be introduced, and that such Bill, among
other matters, should provide for the discontinuance, upon
reasonable notice, after a certain period to be fixed by law,
of assistance from Public Funds for Denominational Schools.”
Mr. STUAKT said, —In rising to oppose the motion which has
been submitted to the House by the hon. member for West
Sydney, I wish to disclaim all intention of saying or doing
anything that could in the slightest degree be interpreted
as placing a restriction upon education. On the contrary, it is
my earnest desire that the means of primary instruction should
be placed within the reach of every child in this community ; and
beyond that, I desire that the blessings of a higher education may
be extended to a very much larger portion of the community
than they have hitherto reached. I object altogether to this
motion upon two grounds. In the first place I do not consider
the present to be a fitting time to bring forward such a resolu-
tion as this. The session is dragging its weary length along, while
it is the desire of hon. members to bring it to a close as speedily
as possible ; and we have already, a great amount of discussion to
be undergone with regard to the important measures remaining
to be dealt with; it, therefore, appears idle to bring forward, at
this late period of the session, a proposal affirming that another
measure should be introduced, even if on its merits it were desir-
able. And if it be alleged that the resolution does not go the
length of saying that a bill should be brought in this session, it is
still more idle for us to discuss a bill to be brought in next session.
We were told that the Government are preparing, and, in fact,
have prepared a bill, but that they are unable to bring it forward.
When they do so, then will be the proper time to discuss it. But
I am not going to shelter myself under the plea of shelving this
question because this is an unfit time. lam perfectly prepared to
meet the hon. member upon the merits of the case—(hear, hear)
—and upon the merits of the case alone we ought to give the
question a direct negative, as containing the elements of the most


unjust legislation tliat had. ever been submitted to tbis House,
(hear, bear.) But in order that there may be no mistake about
my views, on tbe important subject involved in tbe motion, I will
place them before the House as clearly as I can, putting them in
the form of three propositions.
First, that tbe best system of education is that which is
based upon religion, and that the only fitting time to inculcate it
is during the daily school life of the child.
Second, that in a community such as ours, where there is a wide-
spread difference of religious opinion, a mixed system of education
is the only system worthy of the name of national, as carrying with
it the willing service of the people. A mere determination on the
part of the Parliament of the country to subsidise one form of
education against the wishes of a large portion, if not a majority
of the people, could never make such subsidised portion to be
national.
Third, that the present system of education was a reason-
able compromise, and that it is capable of being extended to
meet all the requirements of the colony, and therefore, in its
main features, it ought not lightly to be disturbed.
I wish the hon. mover had spoken at greater length upon
the subject. He has done little more than throw before the House
the resolution in its naked form. I should like to have heard
some reasons advanced for such a sweeping change as is proposed
in this resolution, (hear, hear.) I have heard none, except that sec-
tarian feeling has been the cause of great bitterness throughout all
ages of the world, which is a fact known to us long before the hon.
member’s resolution, and that some hot-headed zealots had, in
their sectarian zeal, found fault with an inscription upon a tomb-
stone in some obscure English village ; but he has utterly failed
to shew that a change in our educational policy would allay these
feelings in the slightest degree.
Before entering upon the argument, I would like to state my
definition of primary education, I do not mean the three E’s. as
my hon. friend has called it, for I look upon them as merely
the mechanical arts which are bent into the service of education.
I would define education as not merely the culture of the
intellect, but as the awakening of the emotions, the quickening of
the observation, the strengthening of the memory, the disciplining
of the reason, the cultivating the taste; and the best system of


education is that which gives to each part of our complex nature
its just and proportionate development.
In considering my first proposition, viz That the best
system of education is that which is based upon religion, and
that the only fitting time to inculcate it is during the daily
school life of the child,” I am met with three classes of objectors
to my views. The first consists of those who call themselves
extreme secularists, not secularists in the very extraordinary
Parliamentary definition of that term, but in the ordinary
acceptation, as being worldly, in contradistinction to religious.
Hon. members have, no doubt, seen the views of that class care-
fully put forward in a pamphlet, which has been industriouslv
circulated throughout the country, and which is called “ Religion
versus Education.” In order that I may not charge those persons
with anything they do not themselves put forward I will state, in
their own words, what their main principles are. They state that
“ there is an inconsistency and a disunity existing between revealed
religion and education, and that true education is the development
of worldly knowledge emancipated from religious superstition.”
There is no mistake, no uncertain sound about those views,
but it is perfectly monstrous to say that religion can be versus
education at all. The two have gone hand-in-hand all through the
world. What would England have been to-day, had it not been
for her religion and education going hand-in-hand together p
The Church of England has been the chief educator in England.
The secularists have done nothing for education that we have ever
heard of. Education in England may not have been all that the
friends of true education desire, but, had it not been for the
work done by the Church of England, there would have been
little or no education in England at all. This is clear from the
number of schools in England itself. Out of 14,500 schools in
England, 11,300 belong to the Church of England; 700 belong
to the Roman Catholics, and 2,500 are dissenting and secular
schools. The voluntary contributions for school buildings
during the year 1870, amounted to £112,000, towards which the
Church of England gave £IOI,OOO. The total number of children
under instruction amounted to 1,512,000, and out of that number
1,096,000 belonged to the Church of England. In voluntary
contributions towards the maintenance of its schools, the Church
of England contributed £329,000 out of £480,000 from all vol-
untary sources, in the same year; in the face of such facts as
these it is idle to talk of a disunity between religion and educa-


tion. On the contrary, there is and ever ought to be the closest
unity between them.
The second class of objectors is represented by those who
admit that religion is essential to education, but look upon it as
too sacred a thing to be allowed in the schools ; and I may take
the hon. and learned member for the Western Gold Fields (Mr.
Buchanan) as the exponent of the views of this class, for in a
very able address which he recently made in this chamber he told
us, and I was very glad to hear his frank and manly avowal, that
he deemed the Bible essential to education; but that he w r ould not
allow it to be taught in the schools ; that if it were so taught he
would not permit his child to be instructed therein ; that he would
merely give his child the Bible and say, “ here my boy read this
and it will give you a wise foundation for all your learning, from
this you will learn that true Christianity is to do unto others as
you would be done by, &c.” All I can say is, that the hon. and
learned member has greater faith in the self-perfectability of the
human heart than I have if he deems that such a small modicum
of religious teaching will suffice for the moral training of youth
generally, and must very much underrate the natural corruption
of the heart, if he does not believe that it requires a continual
reiteration of the Gospel truths to make any headway against it;
there may be exceptional cases, but I speak as to the mass of
children generally.
The third class of objectors is composed of those whose
advocacy is represented by the mover of this resolution —those
whom we have been accustomed to call the main followers
of the League ; whose views are something of this sort: —That
the teaching of religion is all very well during the child’s life, but
it should be relegated to the family and the Sunday school, and
has no right to be mixed up with secular teaching, or to be taught
in the State schools. The family theory is very good, if every
family and parent had time, and were awake to their duty, or were
able to give religious instruction, but alas, we know through un-
willingness or inability thousands of families grow up without any
home inculcation of religion. As for Sunday-school teaching, I
do not underrate its influence, and I honour those who are en-
gaged therein, and who deny themselves much rest and relaxation
in order to devote themselves to this work. But there is some-
thing more required than the hour, or the hour and a half, usually
given in the Sunday-school to instil those principles of action


which should guide these children's lives. I contend that re-
igious instruction should form part of the daily, or nearly daily
*Hhe fo 7 7 bee “ referred *° America as a S™d example
77 , S , “ SyStem thorou S% national, and entirely
n i, r ° m a . sectarlamsm - The hon. member might almost as
well have added-free from all religion. (Hear, hear.) The only
religion allowed in any school in America, and herein my
own personal knowledge bears out the report of others is the
reading of eight or ten verses of Scripture, without any note or
comment (Hear, hear.) It is a mockery and a delnsfon to call
sue teaching religion. A hymn, varied sometimes by a popular
c W SU “ S ’ “ d th ™ th 6 CLildren disperae t 0 their various
Let us examine the reports of those who have devoted their
lives to education m America, and what do we find ? In Pen-
PhdTt’ (7 efertotMa because my hon. friend has alluded to
Philadelphia) in a report the year before last, I find these words
15 ZtiTi . many that our P ublic scbools lack moral culture
and that the training of our children should be more surely in the
hands of religious persons; this conviction is strengthening the
eelmg for parochial schools, wherever they can •
116 , cons ®3 uence ls th e withdrawal of many hundreds of
children from the public schools.” * nunareds ot
. v ßut , le . Bt _ it mi S bt be that that is the view of only one
individual, T turn to the State of New York, and find that an
inspector with twenty-one years’ experience, in his report-a
special report to the State of New Fork:— P
“The importance, if not the absolute necessity of a system of
religious training m our Public schools, ° f
apparent; the clashing of different religious creeds '
of sectarian dissensions, are far less to be feared than thmli 18
of all rel gious instruction. It is false deb “ ne which eeks
to avoid this imaginary evil for one that is real. It is essential tn
the sustaining and perpetuation of our civil as well TO i' •
institutions, that the tone of manhood and standard of Chn’r
character be elevated, and this can onty be earne 0“
th6 SCll ° ol life ofthe ri!“ n r -'
This extract alone shows that it is idle to refer to America as an
eduZ f U f n , q r lifi6d SUCC6SS 0f a P urely secular system of
education, for if they are now finding that they have sown the
wind and are reaping the whirlwind, are we to throw away the
system we have, and take up the system of America ? They have


found it a fallacy to enforce secular without religious instruction,
and they now seek to come back to what we already possess.
Upon my second proposition, I first ask what constitutes the
State’s right to interfere in education at all ?
Mr. DIBBS: What constitutes the State’s right to interfere
in religion at all ?
I will come to that by-and-bye. On an a'priori view we say that
it is the parent’s duty to educate his child as well as to clothe and
feed it. But then there steps in the question of citizenship, and it is
the guardianship of citizen rights, and that alone, that justifies the
State in interfering with the question of education. But the
State should take care not to destroy either the voluntary effort of
the people, or the responsibility of the parent, and should only enter
where the parent ceases to exercise his right, or ignores his
responsibility. I cannot see how, on any other ground, State
education can be justified at all. All voluntary effort ought to be
encouraged and not destroyed by the State, and the effect of des-
troying Denominational schools will be to destroy voluntary
effort. The object of this resolution is to destroy these schools,
although my hon. friend says it is not; but it certainly will have
the effect of converting the upholders of these schools from free
and equal citizens into the position of martyrs, though it may not
put a stop to their schools. It will force them, by taxation, to
support one class of schools while for the education of their own
children they support another class of schools in accordance
with their conscientious convictions. If the State does assume
the parental responsibility, and says, “you shall have your
children educated in our particular way, and no other,” then
the State, having assumed the responsibility, is bound to give the
child a religious education. The State has no right to take the
child and cram it with secular knowledge, and exclude all the
religious knowledge which is by far the most valuable, or, at all
events, is so in the opinion of a vast number of the people. Giving
the child secular instruction only is a gross injustice to the child,
and the State has no right thus to assume one part of the parental
responsibility and neglect the other. State schools should, in my
opinion, be entirely supplementary. When a Denomination
chooses to place a school in a locality in which it is entitled under
the law, the State ought to give it equal nourishment to that
which it gives to the Public schools, and show no undue favour
to one or the other. The Denominational schools are indeed well


worthy of aid, as being more largely connected with the voluntary
effort, for voluntary aid will always chiefly be given denomina-
tionally. There has always been the greatest difficulty to get
subscriptions towards the erection of a Public school; but the
Denominational schools have been built entirely by the voluntary
efforts of the people. My hon. friend is entirely mistaken in
supposing that the proposition of Mr. Parkes, “that henceforth the
whole cost of erecting the Public schools shall be borne by the State,
and that no local effort shall be required or recognised,” will ex-
tinguish Denominational schools. Denominationalism will flourish
in spite of that proposition. It has never been indebted to the
Council of Education for one penny for the building of its schools.
One had only to go through the streets of Sydney on Church-
hill, for instance—where there are the noble schools—St. Philip’s,
educating 600 children, erected entirely by voluntary aid.
Mr. DIBBS: What about St. James’s ?
St. James’s is the only example in Sydney of a Church school
built by the State, and in the days when it was built the Church was
handmaid to the State. Then there is the fine building at the
back of St. Benedict’s, now being built, entirely by voluntary aid.
Moreover one of the chief adornments of our city, our worthy
friends of the Hebrew persuasion are building at their own cost.
The Denominational schools will not be extinguished either by the
recent motion of the hon. member for East Sydney (Mr. Parkes,)
or by the present motion of the hon. member for West Sydney
(Mr. Dibbs,) but there will thereby be inflicted upon the
Denominations a tyranny that will be felt for many long years
hereafter—the tyranny of being bound to support schools which
they do not approve of, while for their own children they will be
conscientiously compelled to support the schools of their own
Denomination. We have been told that we ought to receive this
blow in the same meek spirit that we received the blow of the
abolition of State-aid to religion. But the two things are not
parallel. State-aid to religion was abolished on the principle that
the State would not and could not have any religious opinions at
all. But, in regard to education, the proposal of the hon. gentle-
man for abolition of State-aid to one class of schools, is that the
State should continue to pay for another system of education of
which a large portion of the community cannot conscientiously take
advantage. If the State said at once that it would withdraw en-
tirely from all aid to schools of any kind then the proposal would
be parallel to the withdrawal of State-aid to religion. It is very


easy to say that by this proposal we should be establishing a national
system. How can such a system be called a national system, see-
ing that it would be only a partial system which never can be truly
national ? You may call it by that name, but it will be just as
contradictory as the extraordinary definition of the word “ secular ”
in our Public Schools Act. If you force away from the Parlia-
mentary or legalised schools of the colony one-half of the nation,
how can it be called a national system F And that this will be
the effect of such legislation as is implied in the motion to which
our assent is asked, is perfectly clear. In proof, I refer to what
has taken place in America. There, in consequence of the absence
of religious teaching, one part of the community is being driven
out of the State schools.
Mr. Nichol, who has made education in America his special
study, during a residence of upwards of forty years, states, —
“ There are ninety-six Catholic academies, 212 seminaries for
girls, and a vast number of primary schools, supported by Catholics
for education of their children, while they are obliged to con-
tribute to taxes for support of the common schools. This heavy
burden will not be borne long in many of the States, the day is
not far distant when they will claim to be emancipated from the
burden, and demand a division of the State School Fund.”
Other observers have noticed the same thing. Wecan nottake up
a report on anyof the United Statesschoolswithoutbeingimpressed
with this great fact —that the Roman Catholics are being rapidly
driven away from all participation in the State schools. They are
being driven away by their own conscientious conviction that relig-
ion is absolutely necessary to betaughtintheschoollifeofthechild,
in order that it may grow up not only an intelligent child but a
good citizen. The eminent and deservedly popular Bishop Fraser,
of Manchester, whose experience in all /natters connected with
primary and other education is surpassed by none, and probably
equalled by few men in the world, in summing up the result of
his enquiry into the state and working of the American school
system, undertaken at the request of the Royal Commission on
Education, in 1865-6, says, —
“ There is a growing feeling that more distinctly religious
teaching is required, and that even the interests of morality
are imperfectly attended to. The Eoman Catholic hierarchy
radically dissatisfied with it, are watching for the opportunity
of substituting their own cherished system of separate schools
—and already in the State of Ohio nine tenths of their children
attend their own schools, and in Connecticut 8000 do so as against
16,000 in the public schools.”


In Victoria precisely tlie same result is taking place. The
system that has been recently established in Victoria is secular
in the extreme —even beyond the wishes of those who advocate
the league views here. The Eoman Catholics are, in consequence,
establishing separate schools as rapidly as they can, and withdraw-
ing their children from the Public schools. Mr. Cameron, head
master of the Ipswich Grammar School, in a report he has recently
furnished to the Eoyal Commission appointed in Queensland for
the purpose of considering the whole question of education, points
out in a verj r clear manner the failings and defects as well as the
advantages of the Victorian system, this gentleman being favour-
able to a great extent to the system. Amongst the failings, Mr.
Cameron particularly alludes to the fact that numbers of the
Eoman Catholic children are being rapidly withdrawn from the
schools, that body having now 85 schools in full working
order, while before the end of the year they will have as many
as 130 in various parts of Victoria—schools totally independent
of State control and inspection. In my opinion this is a very
undesirable state of things. If the State interferes at all in
giving secular education, it ought to have a certain amount of
control over all the schools in the country, and it can only have
that in schools which it supports. Then with regard to this
colony, I am, on the highest authority, assured that, if the
resolution now submitted do pass, a large section of this commu-
nity will withdraw their children from the State schools and con-
sequently from all State control in the matter of education. The
Eoman Catholics will maintain their own schools, and the people
of the Church of England to a very large extent, will maintain
their own schools.
[Mr. DIBBS: So much the better for the children.]
I maintain that if we are thus driven to support our own schools,
it will be at too high a price. It will leave a rankling and festering
sore in the minds of all those persons who cannot conscientiously
send their children to the State schools, though they have to pay
to support them, and have at the same time to pay for the support
of the education of their own children in their own schools. This
state of things would be extremely undesirable also on the ground
that the secular education given in the Denominational schools
would be withdrawn from State inspection.
Now I pass on to the third proposition—which is, “ that the
present system is a reasonable compromise, capable of extension
for all our requirements, and in its main features ought not


lightly to be disturbed.” As regards the merit of the proposer of
the existing law, upon whose alleged boasting of his Act, some
ridicule has been thrown, I only hope that in my career my name
may be associated with some such Act, that will redound as much
to my credit as this does to that of my hon. colleague for East
Sydney (Mr. Parkes.) I care not whether the whole of the pro-
visions of the Act emanated from the hon. member himself or were
forced upon him even against his then preconceived ideas upon the
subject. The Act reflects credit upon him in adopting, even if put
forward by others, those clauses which, to my mind, are strong
points for our admiration in the Public Schools Act. It has been
asked by the hon. gentleman who moved the resolution why land
others who formerly opposed the present Act, are now such earnest
advocates of it. How, it was said, are we now in love with the
Act which we formerly hated P I, for one, never hated the Act,
but only the scant justice, or more correctly, perhaps, the great
injustice done to our smaller Denominational schools. I objected
to the Bill as originally proposed, and, in common with others, I
opposed it to the uttermost; and though not embodying all we
asked for, we accepted the Act as a reasonable compromise, with
the above exceptions. The Bill that was introduced into the House
was of a very different character from the Act which emanated from
it at the close of the discussion. I have never denounced the Act.
It would have been absurd in me to have done so, because it re-
cognises the Denominational schools, which I hold are the only
schools that are worthy of the name as together with a secular
education they gave a good religious education. Therefore it
would have been utterly absurd for me to have called the system
godless. Those who did call it godless knew probably very little
about it, or spoke under the great irritation of finding that a large
number of their schools had been wrested from them. lam not
prepared to say that the Public Schools Act requires no amend-
ment, or that it is so faultless as to recommend itself to our entire
appreciation.
Before going into any question of the amendment of it, I
would like to consider the objections which have been brought
against that portion of it which is specially aimed at by the present
motion, viz: its Denominatioualism. Those objections I understand
to be these—first, that it has been the means of encouraging small
rival schools, with their consequent inefficiency; secondly, that it has
tended to the perpetuation of sectarian differences; and thirdly, that
it has kept up a system of State-aid to religion of a worse kind even


than direct payments to the Churches, inasmuch as it is in dis-
guise. From those objections the objectors have endeavoured to
draw the corollary that the Denominational schools have thereby lost
favour, as shown by their rapid extinction under the Act. With
regard to the first objection, I admit at once that there are and
have been many small schools. (Hear, hear.) But I deny that
we get quit of small schools by ceasing to maintain the denomin-
ational character of our schools. The majority of schools in this
colony must, by reason of the sparseness of the population, be
small. One or two cases have been brought forward as exhibiting
abuses—one or two which were below the number fixed by
the Act. These have been trumpeted forth as showing that the
Council of Education has not been alive to its duty in not putting
a stop to them, as probably it had a right to do under the Act.
All I can say is that the friends of Denominationalism do not
consider they have received any great favour generally speaking,
at the hands of the Council of Education. (Hear, hear.) We may
be right or wrong in holding this opinion, but we certainly do hold
it, and, in my opinion we have a considerable justification for so do-
ing. But what are the facts in some of these cases ? I wish, in
order to illustrate my meaning, to call attention to this fact —I have
taken eight schools, which were Church of England schools
when the Act was passed, but whose certificates have been
withdrawn in consequence of the number of children in attend-
ance being below the number specified in the Act. The first
upon my list is Narellan near Cobbity. That school had 30
children at the time of the passing of the Act. I know the district
well, and I know that every child in it attended that school. The
certificate was withdrawn, and it is now a Public school, and the
children number 23. It is evident that it is not from being a
Denominational school that the smallness of the school exists
for the Inspector says “there are only three children in the
district who do not attend.” The next school on my list
is Theresa Park, which, at the time of the passing of the
Act, was a Church of England Denominational school, with
23 children; it has now 19, and is a Public Provisional school.
The next on my list is Mulgoa ; it had 31 children as a Church
of England school ; it has now, as a Public school, 29. The next
is Tarana, which had 26 as a Church of England school, and has
now 13 as a Public school. Then comes TJlladulla, which had 32
as a Church of England school, but has now only 28 as a Public


school, and so on with the others. Ido not blame the Public
school system for the smallness of the attendance. I know most of
those districts, and I know that the population of those districts
has very materially decreased, by reason of the migration of
some of their inhabitants having removed to free selection
districts. But what I ask has been gained by shutting up those
Denominational schools, and opening them as Public schools ?
I say that nothing has been gained (hear, hear), and there are
scores of instances of a similar kind. Then we are told that by
Denominationalism we encourage rival schools. "Well, I acknow-
ledge that to some extent this is the case, but is it an unqualified
disadvantage or not P I maintain there is some advantage—that
rivalry in Education is wholesome, and better than the dead
apathy of uniformity. I maintain that rival schools are not
necessarily to be classed as undesirable. On the contrary, they
are, to a certain extent, desirable. And lam not merely putting
forward my own opinion when I say this. I have a much higher
opinion to give than any of my own. I have an opinion to give
from a gentleman to whose name every hon. member will bow
with that deference which his high position and thoughtfulness
demands. This is what was said by the late John Stuart Mill, and
I wish every hon. member to mark his words: —
“ One thing must be strenuously insisted on ; that the Govern-
ment must claim no monopoly for its education, either in the lower
or in the higher branches; must exert neither authority nor influence
to induce the people to resort to its teachers in preference to others,
and must confer no peculiar advantages on those who have been
instructed by them. Though the Government teachers will
probably be superior to the average of private instructors, they
will not embody all the knowledge and sagacity to be found in
all instructors taken together, and it is desirable to leave open
as many roads as possible to the desired end. It is not
endurable that a Government should, either de jure or de
facto , have a complete control over the education of the people.
To possess such a control, and actually exert it, is to be
despotic. A Government which can mould the opinions and
sentiments of the people from their youth upwards, can do
with them whatever it pleases. Though a Government, therefore,
may, and in many cases ought to, establish schools and colleges,
it must neither compel nor bribe any person to come to them;
nor ought the power of individuals to set up rival establishments
to depend in any degree upon its authorisation. It would be
justified in requiring from all the people that they shall possess
instruction in certain things, but not in prescribing to them how
or from whom they shall obtain it,”


I claim that eminent thinker as a advocate for rival systems of
education. Now I come to the question of efficiency. Are small
schools, after all, so very inefficient as compared to large schools p
I say they are not. I say there are schools in this colony that
are too large. No doubt in those large schools you probably
get the cleverest boys; the very rivalry induces some such to
come to the surface. But what of the timid child, the retiring
backward child ? He runs the risk of being neglected amidst
the mass of children in those very large schools. Dr. Mathew
Arnold, who is no light authority on matters of education, has
spoken upon this subject, and has deliberately stated his opinion
that no head master of any school ought to have more than from
250 to 300 children under his care, and that no individual master
ought to have more than from 40 to 50. That gentleman’s words
are “ Destroy the individualty which ought to exist between the
teacher and the taught, and you immediately destroy the
efficiency of the teaching.” We know that the most efficient
schools, those which turn out the largest number of well-instructed
youths year by year, are the schools in which on the minds of the
boys attending them there is the impress of the individuality of the
teacher more than there can possibly be in a very large school.
Such a school as the Fort-street school, with its 1400 children, is,
I think, too large. With regard to Denominational schools, the
small ones are chiefly in small places, where there are not more
children to attend them. In our towns the Denominational schools
are of such a size that no advantage can possibly be gained by
doing away with them, and doubling two or three of them into a
Public school. In Sydney there are at least eight or ten
Denominational schools that number from 300 to 500 children.
And the same law of moderate-sized schools obtains throughout
America. With the exception of the city of New York, I believe
there is no school in any State of America that numbers more
than 300 children. It has been laid down again and again by
school authorities in America that 300 children is the maximum
number that ought to be in any school, Let us take Philadelphia,
which has been quoted by the mover of the resolution before the
House, and what do we find is the condition of schools there ?
There are 400 schools there, with 80,000 scholars, and 1600
teachers. The average attendance of children at each school is
200, the average attendance to each teacher being 50. It will
be seen from this, that long experience has led the Philadelphians
to adopt moderate-sized schools. Now, with regard to the ques


tion of the expense of these small schools, what are the facts ?
Throughout the whole colony the Denominational schools cost
the State 345. 9d., whilst the Public schools cost 40s. 9d., for each
child in average attendance. I have taken those figures from the
last report of the Council of Education that has been laid before
the House. I regret exceedingly that the House has not had, as
I understood it was to have had before this debate came on,
another year’s experience of the Council. It may be said it is
all very well to put the matter as I have done ; but, after all, it
must be admitted that, in consequence of the sparseness of popu-
lation, not only are there small Denominational schools, but there
are a still greater number of small Public schools. The Public
schools being spread through the country are necessarily more
expensive than they otherwise would be, and it is owing to the
smallness of the Public schools that the expense is so great. But
let us compare the schools of the city of Sydney. I find that, of
the Church of England schools, the highest cost is that of St.
Andrew’s, which cost the State 295. lOd. for each child attend-
ing; the lowest is Christ Church, which cost the State 21s.
fid. each child; the average cost of all the Church of England
schools being 255. 6d. I find that of the Public schools the
highest is the one in Sussex-street, which cost the State 48s. 9d.
for each child, or within a fraction of £1 more than any Church
of England denominational school in Sydney. The lowest is that
of Eort-street, which cost the State 18s. 4d., the average cost of
each child in the whole of the Sydney Public schools is 235.
The average is thus slightly in favour of the Public schools. But
thatis entirely owing to the Eort-street school. Well, the Eort-street
school they must all admit is an exceptional school. In the firss place
it is a very large school—in my opinion much too large. It is I
believe impossible that justice can be done to 1400 or 1500 children
in one school. You may multiply your individual teachers, but to
turn out year by year efficiently instructed children you must have
the individuality of the head master of the school stamped upon
their minds, and this is, on all hands, declared to be impracticable
in so large a school. Moreover, Eort-street is the normal school.
All those who are going forth to teach in other schools go
through a certain amount of preparation there—a certain amount
of work is given to them in the school itself —and thus it is that in
Eort-street school the expense of each child is brought as low as 18s.
This is evident, because if we take any other school in Sydney —
William-street, for instance, which is an excellent school, with


about 700 children, the cost of each child is 255. 9d., or 2s. 3d.
more than the average cost of the Church of England schools.
It is idle, with such facts as these before us, to talk of the
Denominational schools being objectionable because they are more
expensive than the Public schools. We have six Church of England
schools, with an average attendance of 250 children, and they
cost less than the William-street school.
[Mr. DIBBS : —Do they get as good an article for the money ?]
I will deal with that presently. Ido not find fault with
the Public schools because they cost a few shillings more. Hor
should fault be found with the Denominational schools where they
cost a few shillings more. Economy is good to a certain extent,
but is the education of the children of this great country to be put
up to tender to be done at the lowest contract price? Let us rather
see that the children are well instructed and fitted to perform the
duties of that position in the State which they are destined to
occupy. It has been asked, “do they get as good an article for
the money?” When the opponents of Denominational schools
were beaten on the matter of expense, they discovered what
they called “ the unit of proficiency,” and that it cost less in
the Public than in the Denominational schools, and they played
that as their trump card. What does it mean ? Simply this, that
taking into account all that is taught to the children, the percent-
age of proficiency is greater in the Public schools than in the
Denominational schools. I will refer you, however, to the dis-
trict of Bathurst, where the inspector shows that in the matter of
reading, writing, arithmetic, grammar, geography, and object
lessons the proficiency in Public schools is 349 as against 372 in
Denominational schools. So far as primary instruction goes,
upon which alone we are called to legislate, the inspector’s report
shows that the comparison of proficiency is in favour of the
Denominational schools. #
* I am indebted to a correspondent of the Herald for pointing out that the
above is not strictly correct. The error has arisen from some confusion of
figures but does not materially affect the argument. It will be seen from the
Inspector’s figures given correctly in this note that in one or other of the
Denominational schools the result on each of the subjects is as stated in the
text, but on each school taken as a whole the result is slightly in favour of the
public school.
Public Roman Church of Highest in one
School. Catholic. England, or other Denom.
Eeading 67 ... 66 ... 70 ... 70
Writing 76 ... 55 ... 72 ... 72
Arithmetic 42 ... 42 ... 28 ... 42
Grammar 49 ... 50 ... 36 ... 50
Geography 64 ... 70 ... 41 ... 70
Object Lessons 51 ... 57 ... 68 ... 68
349 340 315 372


[Mr. DIBBS: That is an isolated case.]
It is one of the largest districts in the colony. Notwithstand-
ing this, however, the Public schools in the Bathurst district are
returned as more efficient than the Denominational schools of
that district. On looking into the matter I find that in the
question of drawing the Public schools are put down at 52 as
against the Denominational schools 8, and in music 70 as against
45. It is thus by means of the accomplishments of drawing and
music that the Public schools are made to show a higher degree
of proficiency than the Denominational schools. Cricket and
football might just as well be brought in as additional items of
proficiency; Ido not undervalue accomplishments but surely what
we are now called on to consider and what the State has to regard,
is proficiency in primary education, and not accomplishments. Are
then the Public schools so far in advance of the Denominational
schools that we should be called upon to sacrifice the latter merely
for the purpose of increasing the former P I think not. Again
the only schools in this country which apparently may give any
instruction in history are the Denominational schools.
[Mr. FITZPATRICK : And they give different versions of it.]
They do give different versions, no doubt, but they are the only
schools that have attempted to give some little knowledge of history.
In this grand particular the Public schools utterly fail. I wish I
were possessed of the eloquence with which the hon. and learned
member for the Western Gold Fields (Mr. Buchanan) pressed
this important matter on our attention in his able address on this
subject a few weeks ago, an address which deserved a better fate
than the desertion, by the refusal to second it, of the disciples of
the League, but I can only say that I re-echo every word he uttered,
and look upon the non-leading of History as a great blot on the
administration of the system. The excuse for not teaching history
is that sectarian feelings may not be moved. Was there ever such
absurdity ? Is it because the result has been religious liberty in
its emancipation from the unity which characterised the dominion
of Rome throughout the world that our youth are to be kept in
utter ignorance of the noble galaxy of names which distinguished
the birth of freedom in our land, and of the glorious deeds accom-
plished by them ? Is it because the excesses of the times and the
uncontrolled passions of men, aided by the dogged obstinacy of
the King led to the abominable atrocity of a regicidal act, that
our youth are to be debarred from the knowledge that the very
freedom under which we live and especially that which enables us


to meet in this House, and you, Mr. Speaker, to occupy that
chair, was won for us, step by step, and inch by inch, by such
noble men as: Eliot, Pym, Hampden, Coke, Selden, Cromwell,
and others ? Do we iu the slightest degree mitigate sectarian
feeling by neglecting to teach history p We do not. Men must
learn it in the course of time, and it is fitting that their minds
should be guided aright in their childhood. There may be different
versions, but there can only be one set of facts.
[Mr. EITZPATRICK: Different ways of stating them.]
There may be different deductions from them, but the
glorious facts of English history and of all history remain the same;
and it is not because different persons take different views that all
history should be shut out. Ho wonder that we hear of the
conceit of the rising generation, or that, brought up in ignorance
of all history, and having knowledge of none other with whom
they may compare themselves, they begin to think they them-
selves are the personification of all wisdom. I do not care
whether a man be a Protestant or a Catholic, he would be
none the worse citizen for being instructed in history. Was
there ever a Protestant made the worse citizen by knowing thorough
history, that his religion is the triumph of freedom of thought
over the infallibility of a single despotic will ? Or was there
ever a Catholic made the worse citizen because he had been his-
torically taught to deplore over a wide spread defection from that
which he had been instructed to consider the true faith, and
thereby to desire the reunification of Christendom ? I maintain
that in every respect the Denominational schools are as efficient as
the Public schools for all purposes of primary instruction. I grant
that there is added or grafted on to the Public schools a higher
instruction, which draws a class of children higher in the social
scale than those who attend Denominational schools, and whose
home circumstances are not so favourable to their progress; and
this would naturally lead us to expect a higher state of pro-
ficiency in the Public schools, for, surrounded by the best of
home influences, it would be a lasting disgrace if such children
were outstripped by those attending the Denominational schools,
deprived, as many of them are, of such home influences and sur-
roundings. We are told that one of the objections to the
Denominational schools is that they perpetuate sectarian differ-
ences. What is propounded to us instead ? That we should
abolish all Denominational schools, have one common school,
and teach religion in separate class-rooms. Is that the way


to allay sectarian differences ? I believe it to be the way to
intensify them. T7e should have the children of one sect going
into a class-room at one side of the school, and those of another
into a second, and so on, and I fail to see how that is likely to
promote harmony in regard to religious differences, when these
very differences are thus brought into closer and sharper promi-
nence. Another charge against them is, that they are a State
support to religion. This I utterly deny and assert that we
do not advocate Denominational schools as a means of sup-
porting religion. We advocate them as a civil right. We
maintain that it is a civil right for the parents of children to
have their children educated as they please, so long as they con-
form to the State requirements in secular instruction. It has
been said that the Denominational schools are losing the popular
favour, because of their rapid extinction. I deny that; the dimin-
ution of schools is entirely owing to the fact that the Public
Schools Act placed an arbitrary limit upon the attendance at
Denominational schools, and thus at the coming of the Act into
operation a large number of the small Denominational schools
were swept away to become, as I have shewn in many cases, still
smaller Public schools. It is a fact that many Denominational
schools have increased largely, and are daily increasing, notwith-
standing the establishment, in the very town where they exist, of
rival Public schools. At the time of the passing of the Act the
average attendance of children at the Church of England school
at Ashfield was 86, and it has now increased to 139, while the
Public school, which had an average attendance of 22 at the time
of the passing of the Act, has now an average attendance of only
44, In the Church of England school at Bathurst the average
attendance has increased from 71 to 130, at the same time that
there is an efficient Public school in existence there. In
Mudgee the average attendance in the Church of England
school has increased from 105 to 205, and the attendance at the
Public school increased from 140 to 203. I also refer to East
Maitland and to Pyrmont, to show that the Church of
England schools there have progressed. In thirty-three Church
of England schools, the attendance at the time of the pass-
ing of the Act was 2580, and it has increased to 3870. In
the face of these facts, it would be unjust to abolish Denomina-
tional schools, nay, more, it would be a piece of monstrous
tyranny. By passing the resolution of the hon. member (Mr.
Dibbs) we shall strike a blow not at Denominational schools, but


at the independence of the people of this country. Why should
we sweep away our Denominational schools, when they gave an
equal secular education, minus accomplishments, and they super-
add to that teaching a religious instruction, which, whether the
opponents of the system think it valuable or not, we (the sup-
porters of the system) think it valuable, and surely we have a
right to give what teaching we choose to our own children, so
long as we comply with the secular requirements of the State.
I must again press on the House the experience of America in
this matter —the necessity of religious instruction. The first
authority, I quote, is from the observation of that great thinker
on political and social subjects, Mr. Herbert Spencer, who says :
“ The school system of the United States brings up the whole
population in uniformity on supposed principles of right and wrong.
Nevertheless, in its political life, and by many of its social occur-
rences, shows that uniformity to these principles is anything but
complete.”
The Massachusets report of 1865, says :
“ Morality not founded on Christian principle is like a baseless
fabric, is limited in its range of duties and is of short duration.
Genuine virtue is the offspring of Deity. The code of morals of the
Bible is the only unerring standard of right and wrong. A solemn
reverence for Holy Scripture and a full acknowledgement of the
obligation to be bound thereby, are indispensable elements in the
moral training of children. To avoid sectarianism —have we not
nearly ruled all religion out of our schools, but if we would have
our children become virtuous and useful members of society, we
must re-introduce teaching the laws of God as well as laws of the
land ; to reverence God’s holy name ; to love Him with the whole
heart, and our neighbour likewise; in no other way can we truly
teach them to be just, good, kind, affectionate, true, and honest.”
The Rhode Island Commissioner, says:—
“ The standards of moral instruction need to be carried much
higher in all our schools, Christian morality should be under a dis-
tinct and daily study. We need an education such as will furnish
our youth with faith in God as well as in man, with placing truth
above falseness, giving mastery over passion, and this can only be
done by admitting religious instruction into our schools.”
I do not intend to enter into the question of the attendance at
the schools, whether education should be free or partly paid for,
or whether it would be desirable to have a compulsory law, or to
seek to draw in the neglected children by the greater law of kind-
ness. The practical point is that there are hundreds of children
in our streets without any education at all. Under a compulsory
law I do not believe that we should have many more children in


our schools than we have now. No doubt, it may be said, “in
Prussia they can do it.” Tes, but the Prussian, while a compul-
sory system, is a Denominational one —there are the two grand
classes of schools, one the Catholic the other the Lutheran, the
State cares not to which, but to one or other it compels all
children to be sent ; but it is so thoroughly Denominational that
the State requires, as a passport to her service, and all youths
must enter her military service, the evidence of their churchman-
ship by the production of their confirmation ticket, or, whatever
the specific document may be. Are the advocates of a Prussian-
like compulsory system, willing to adopt the religious and
Denominational character of Prussian education ? I think not,
and certainly it is not the kind of Denominationalism which I
advocate. The State should have nothing to do with religion.
(Hear, hear.) The State, however, has no right to monopolise the
whole school life of the child, when during that school life the
parent is bound to see that the child has a religious instruction.
If the parent neglects its duty the Church is bound to see to it.
[Mr. DIBBS: Hear, hear.]
My hon. friend says, “ hear, hear,” meaning, no doubt, that the
religious education should be given in the Sunday-school; but I
have already shown that it cannot be done in the Sunday-school
alone. The daily school life of the child is the time when this
religious instruction should be given. As to these poor neglected
children, the Arabs of our streets, growing up a moral pestilence
and nest of crime in our midst. You cannot get them by a
compulsory law, and this is the opinion of those who have
practical experience of the matter. The report of the state of
things now existing in Victoria shows that the lowest grade of
children have not been reached. That report proves that under
this law you cannot get this class of children to attend. The law
in Victoria, is this —that the child shall attend at least sixty
days in every half-year. If a child be found not to have attended
sixty times in the half-year, he is brought up, and a conviction is
attempted to be obtained. But there is the greatest difficulty in
obtaining a conviction. If a conviction be obtained, a fine is in-
flicted, and six months must elapse before the child can be
brought up again. This difficulty had been experienced in
Victoria, and every inspector recognises the same thing —that the
compulsory law entirely fails to get into the schools the sort of
children that it is desirable to reach. I will read the reports


of some of the inspectors of American schools, which show that
the same difficulty is experienced there. One of these reports
says :
“ The obligations to make all possible effort to check and
suppress the growing evils of truancy and absenteeism has never
been so great as at the present time. The evident increase of
these evils, the prolific source of juvenile rowdyism and crime, is
a fact of the deepest concern to every good citizen.”
New York city superintendent, C. W. Eandal, says :
“ The dictates of self-preservation demand that the thousands
and tens of thousands of destitute and vagrant children now roam-
ing about our streets and alleys, untaught and undiciplined, should
be reclaimed from their degrading and dangerous associations and
gathered into our Public schools. We estimate that 100,000
children in the city enter no school, or have their instruction
limited to the briefest period.”
Hon. J. D. Phillrich, city superintendent of Boston, says: —
“No fact connected with our schools has impressed me so
sadly as the extent of truancy and non-attendance, and the strange
apathy of the public as to this fruitful germ of juvenile crime.
This great evil calls loudly for a remedy ; our laws are utterly
disregarded.”
Mr. J. E. G-erard, who has spent a lifetime, and is now near
seventy-five years of age, in philanthropic visitation of schools,
says:—
“It is my decided conviction that this great evil can only
be reached by the voluntary philanthropic action of religious
bodies and individuals, carried on in a missionary spirit and on
much larger scale than anything that at present exists. Paro-
chial schools, i.e., schools connected with different religious
congregations, do, it is true, exist in considerable numbers, and
in the hands of Eoman Catholics, are vigorous and well attended.
They hardly, however, lay hold of the class in view, and the In-
dustrial and Eagged schools are, though useful and well-conducted,
neither numerous nor powerful enough to arrest the evil. The
children to whom I allude must be clothed and fed as well as
taught, as their parents are dead to all self-respect, care for their
children, or sense of responsibility.”
Mr. Nuthrop, the agent of the Massachusets Board of Education,
reports: —
“ No fact connected with our schools has impressed me so sadly
as the extent of truancy and non-attendance, and the strange apathy
of the public as to this fruitful germ of juvenile crime. This great
evil calls loudly for a remedy. In a few small townships the laws,
in reference to truants and absentees from school, are faithfully
executed with the happiest results, while in others these laws are
over-looked, or, utterly disregarded.”


Rev. Mr. of Manchester) says :
“ The condition of the schools in America, as respects per cent-
age attendance and period of attendance is no better than amongst
ourselves—no flattering picture, but teaching us that under all
systems their remains a mass of apathy, thoughtlessness, or
ignorance, through which it is our duty to fight, but it is vain to
hope to thoroughly subdue.”
I maintain that those experiences prove that those children who
roam about the streets and lanes of our cities require something
more than a compulsory law to get them to attend our schools.
The very strongest philanthropic feelings of every member of the
community should be enlisted to devise some system under the
law of kindness, by which they can be persuaded and not driven
into our schools. There should be special schools for this class
of children, where they would be cared for, both with regard to
their moral wants and their physical requirements. The only
way to reach the Arab population of the back streets and lanes o
our city is to establish some such means as this.
I will conclude with one quotation from the eminent Bishop
Fraser, to whom I have already referred, he says :
“If there is one sentiment more than another in which all
practical educators in England, whatever sect they be, are agreed,
it is that education ought to be religious —meaning bv the term,
not merely that it ought to awaken religious emotions, but that it
ought to teach a religious creed; and how to do that without
infringing the rights of conscience, or, introducing the elements
of sectarianism, is one of the unsolved problems of the day.”
Then let us not rashly pull down that which now exists. We
have now a magnificent set of Denominational schools, that will
bear comparison with any Public schools, and which are strongly
implanted in the affections of our people, and which are in some
degree solving the problem alluded to by the author above quoted.
Let us, then, not pull these schools down merely for the purpose
of trying the experiment of substituting schools which a large
portion of our people have shown that they have no affection for,
but on the contrary, to which they have shewn that they possess
strong conscientious objections, and which they feel it would be
a tyranny if they are to be compelled to use for their children.
(Hear, hear.)
