

OUEEN
YICTORIA
PRINCIPAL
INCIDENTS
DURINC
HER
REICN
1837 TO 1886




PRINCIPAL EVENTS
IN THE LIFE OF
Her Majesty Queen Victoria,
1837 to 1886.
COMPILED FOR PRESENTATION TO THE GUESTS
AT A
** * *
GIVEN AT
THE TOWN HALL, SYDNEY,
IN CELEBRATION OF THE
GOMMENGEMENT OF THE FIFTIETH YEAR OF HER REIGN,
21st TUNE, lee©.
® mayoß, ®


“ On Tuesday, at 2\ a.m., the scene closed (death of William IV. at
Windsor Castle), and in a very short time the Archbishop of Canterbury and
Lord Conyngham, the Chamberlain, set out to announce the event to their
young sovereign. They reached Kensington Palace about five; they knocked,
they rang, they thumped for a considerable time before they could rouse the
porter at the gates ; they were again kept waiting in the courtyard, then
turned into one of the lower rooms, where they seemed forgotten by every-
body. They rang the bell, and desired that the attendant of the Princess
Victoria might be sent to inform H.R.H. that they requested an audience
on business of importance. After another delay and another ringing to
inquire the cause, the attendant was summoned, who stated that the Princess
was in such a sweet sleep, she could not venture to disturb her. Then they
said, ‘ We are come to the Queen on business of State, and even her sleep
must give way to that. ’ It did, and to prove that she did not keep them
waiting, in a few minutes she came into the room in a loose white night-
gown and shawl, her nightcap thrown off, her hair falling upon her shoulders,
her leet in slippers, tears in her eyes, but perfectly collected and dignified.”
From the ‘ Diaries of Miss Frances Williams Wynn.'


John Sands, lith.
Sydney.
VICTORIA REGINA
“We are come to the QUEEN”
after H.Wells. R.A .




Pff ; 1 feHlii-11 ■I liflP iPBH 1
mm IHIIHI
■B£i|{ b
Wjgggßm HE touching incident depicted in
l||r|i§PPk\ the preceding page was very quickly
( followed by a meeting of the Privy
Council. Princes and peers, and
high officers of the church and state
W / assembled, and the Council was com-
-■r ' posed of the principal men of the
\y country. The Queen passed through
the trying ordeal of all present swearing allegiance to her
and kissing her hand, and pleased everyone by the simplicity and
dignity of her demeanour. It has been said by those who were
present, that “ the Queen was extremely beautiful, her features
being delicately formed, her skin smooth, and her glossy and
smooth hair being worn close to her face in the simplest way.
The newly made Queen received visits from many noble pei-
sonages during the day. London was in a state of great
enthusiasm, which was, however, mingled with respect for the
memory of the King who had passed away. On the day
following, the ceremony of the proclamation was performed.
Her Majesty, accompanied by a large escort, proceeded through
streets crowded with her people to St. James’s Palace, where,
in accordance with custom, she appeared at one of the windows.


The great Lords of the Nation were present in their state robes
and gathered around her, and the quadrangle below was tightly
packed with spectators. The Queen was attired in mourning,
and her mother stood beside her watching her with a tender care,
as she was evidently much moved by the loyal acclamations of the
people. In the court below heralds and pursuivants were
posted, as well as officers-at-arms on horseback bearing silver
maces; serjeants-at-arms, and trumpeters and other officers.
Presently the Garter King-at-arms read the proclamation
announcing the accession. Then a band played the National
Anthem, guns were fired in the park which were replied to by
the guns at the Tower, and the acclamations in the Court were
taken up by thousands of persons outside, while a thrill of joy
spread through the City and extended throughout the whole
land. The excitement caused by the proceedings at the Palace
was so intense that the youthful Queen was overpowered, and
she clung to her mother, and wept. Three weeks afterwards
she left her home at Kensington to reside at Buckingham
Palace, taking with her the happiest memories of her early life.
Her Majesty's predecessors had been monarcbs of Hanover as
well as of England, but as the Salic law forbade a woman’s reign-
ing in Hanover, her uncle, the Duke of Cumberland, became
sovereign of that kingdom, and England was relieved of all
responsibility with regard to it.
On July 17th, the Queen prorogued the Parliament of
England. She was drawn thither, for the first time, by
the famous cream-colored horses from the royal stables,


and sat upon the Throne of her Ancestors in the
House of Lords. Fanny Kemble, who was present, has written
that “ the singularity of the Queen’s great position lent a senti-
mental and poetical charm to her youthful face and figure.
The serene, serious sweetness of her candid brow, and clear
soft eyes, gave dignity to her girlish countenance, while the want
of height only added to the effect of the extreme youth of the
round but slender person. Her voice was exquisite and gently
distinct in her spoken words, and the illustrious assemblage
listened to her with almost breathless silence.” The sturdy
republican, Charles Sumner, was warm in his praises of the
Queen; and there is abundant testimony to indicate that she
was a lovely girl, and charmed all sorts and conditions of people
by her affability and grace. Numerous deputations, represent-
ing various bodies, waited upon her to assure her of their
loyalty and good wishes, and amongst them was one consisting of
fifty members of the Society of Friends, who presented an ad-
dress containing expressions of loyalty and of the hope that she
would be guided by the blessed principles of peace. The mem-
bers of this deputation declined to take off their hats even in
the presence of Royalty, and to obviate the difficulty these were
gently removed by yeomen of the Guard stationed on the stairs
leading to the reception room.
It is stated that one of the first cares of Her Majesty,
now that abundant means were at her disposal, was
to pay her father’s debts and the advances English
nobles had made to her parents to enable them to maintain a


high position. In the early period of her reign she rose at eight,
and occupied her time until quarter to ten in signing despatches
and engaging in other routine business. At noon the Queen
met her Ministers, and afterwards indulged in riding or walking
exercise. She entertained a select company at dinner, and in
the drawing room afterwards always took part in singing or play-
ing, in each of which accomplishments she was proficient. She
entertained a strong aversion to attending to even State business
on Sundays, and endeavoured always to postpone it until the
following day. At this time Her Majesty was relieved
of a very painful duty. In accordance with custom it fell
to her lot to sign death warrants. On one occasion the
Duke of Wellington placed a court-martial death warrant
before her that she might attach her signature to it, but
she shrank from the task, and asked if nothing could be
said in favor of the condemned soldier. The Duke replied in
the negative, and added that the man was a very bad
soldier, and had deserted three times. The question was
repeated, and His Grace then replied that “some one had
spoken of the man’s good character, and that he might be a good
fellow in private life.” With true womanly instinct she accepted
this as a pretext for saving the man’s life, and immediately wrote
“Pardoned” on the awful document, with her clear signature
beneath it. Acts of a kindred nature on her part led Parliament
to arrange for the signing of death warrants to be performed
by Royal commission. The reason alleged for this was that
Her Majesty might be relieved from the painfulness of such a


duty, but it was held in fact that her heart could not be trusted
in such circumstances. Such was the loyal feeling which
was entertained towards the youthful Queen that O’Connell
chivalrously declared —“If necessary I can get 5 00 ? 000 brave
Irishmen to defend the life, the honor, and the person of the
beloved young lady by whom England’s throne is now filled.”
The boast was not a vain one. How well the Irish
troops have 'assisted to preserve the integrity and honor of Her
Majesty’s Empire is well known to all who have watched their
actions in the field.
In the autumn of the year of accession the
Queen took possession of Windsor, the stateliest of all the
palaces, where amidst the lordly halls and towers, the rich historic
associations, and the surroundings of ancient and modern
chivalry, she must have realised that she was indeed a Queen.
On November 9th of the same year she attended the Lord
Mayor’s banquet at the Guildhall, and thus paid her first regal
visit to the city. She wore a magnificent costume of pink satin
shot with silver, and on her head a tiara of large diamonds, and
she was driven through dense crowds of her subjects who
greeted her with loud and continuous acclamations. At Temple
Bar the Lord Mayor presented to her the Keys of his province,
which she graciously returned, after which the Lord Mayor and
the Aldermen joined in the procession and accompanied her
through the streets. At St. Paul’s the National Anthem was
sung by an immense choir of scholars, the senior of which pre-
sented to Her Majesty an address of welcome. Her Majesty


was pleased to make the Lord Mayor a Baronet, and to confer
Knighthood upon the two Sheriffs. Of the latter, one was Sir
Moses Montifiore, who was not only a great philanthrophist, but
was the first Jew who received such a distinction at the hands of
a British Sovereign. This man, worthy in all respects, long
enjoyed his title, and died not long ago at the venerable age
of ioi years. A fortnight after the banquet, the Queen went in
state to open her first Parliament. The sum of ,£385,000 a year
was voted as an income for her, not solely, however, for
personal requirements, but partly towards liquidating salaries
and expenses not under her immediate control.
During the first part of the year 1838 preparations were
actively carried on for Her Majesty’s Coronation, which took
place on the 28th June. The Crown used by George IV. and
William IV. was too massive, and also too large for the royal
head, so another was made less than half its weight, a cap of
blue velvet with hoops of silver, brilliant with diamonds, pearls,
rubies, sapphires, and emeralds. Above the Crown a ball was
placed, covered with small diamonds, and surmounted by a
Maltese cross of brilliants, with a large sapphire in the centre.
In front was a second Maltese cross, in which was set
an enormous heart-shaped ruby, once worn by the Black
Prince. The precious stones in the Crown numbered 2,166, and
were worth £ji 13,000. Grand old Westminster Abbey, vener-
able in its antiquity, and sacred by the remains of the illustrious
dead entombed within its walls, on this auspicious occasion lost
its sombre character, and became resplendent with light and life.


The stone pavement of the long nave was covered with purple
and crimson cloth, and on each side was a line of the tallest Life
Guards, above whose nodding plumes might be seen temporary
galleries covered with crimson cloth and golden fringe, and
accommodating a thousand persons. In the choir, on a platform
decorated with cloth of gold, stood the gilded chair of homage,
facing the altar ; and nearer the altar still, which was gleaming
with massive communion plate, stood the celebrated chair of
St. Edward, in which so many Monarchs had sat, and beneath
which lay the stone used in past ages for the coronation of
Scottish Kings. On this stone, as legend tells, the head of Jacob'
reposed when he dreamed of angels ascending to and descend-
ing from heaven. The galleries, tapestried with green and gold,
were filled with distinguished persons, and in the transepts were
peers, gorgeous in their state costumes, and peeresses ablaze
with jewels. Harriett Martineau who witnessed the ceremony
wrote: “ About nine the first gleams of the sun slanted into
the Abbey and presently travelled down to the peeresses. I
had never before seen the full effect of diamonds. As the
light travelled each peeress shone like a rainbow. Ihe bright-
ness, vastness, and dreamy magnificence of the scene produced
a strange effect of exhaustion and sleepiness. Some of the
peeresses had been five hours in their seats when at noon, to
the measure of triumphant music, a grand procession moved up
the nave. There were princes and ambassadors, and great
nobles bearing England’s regalia admirable in their presence and
bearing. But the chief interest naturally centred in the person


of the young Queen, a maiden of nineteen, with a fair pleasant
face, rather small in stature, but showing a queenly carriage.”
Her Majesty wore a royal robe of crimson velvet, furred with
ermine and bordered with gold lace, and she had a golden circlet
on her head. She was escorted by two bishops, while eight
daughters of English dukes bore her train, and fifty ladies of
rank holding offices in her household followed her. The pro-
cession was delayed a moment in a most remarkable way. The
Turkish ambassador seemed so bewildered with the impressive-
ness of what was transpiring that he stood in its way, and it
was not until he was courteously aroused to a sense of his
position that he moved to the place assigned to him. Every
one rose as the Queen advanced; the anthem, “I was glad,”
pealed forth, and the jubilant Westminster boys chanted “ Yivat
Victoria Regina.” A silence of a few minutes followed as the
Queen knelt in private devotion, and then began the first
ceremony—the “ Recognition.” The Archbishop of Canterbury
presented Victoria as undoubted Queen of the realm and
was replied to with shouts of “ God Save Queen Victoria.”
Divine service followed in which the sermon was preached by
the Bishop of London, and after which Her Majesty took the
oath to maintain the law and the established religion. The next
ceremony was the “Anointing.”' Four Knights of the Garter
held a canopy of cloth of gold above the Queen’s head while
the Archbishop anointed her head and hands with oil. After
the orb, ring, and sceptre had been handed to her the Arch-
bishop offered up prayer, and then reverently placed the Crown


of the realm upon his Sovereign’s head. Her Majesty was then
enthroned in the Chair of Homage, and the Archbishop knelt
to her and offered homage. The Princes of the blood also touched
the Crown, took the oath and, having kissed Her Majesty’s
left cheek, retired. Similar acts were performed by a long
train of dukes, marquesses, earls, viscounts, and barons who,
however, kissed only the royal hand. Finally, the sacrament
was administered to Her Majesty, and, after a few closing cere-
monies had been performed, she left the Abbey. She had been
there no less than five hours. The same evening the Queen enter-
tained a hundred distinguished guests at her dinner table, and
high festival was held throughout the land. The London
theatres were opened to the people free, the town was illu-
minated, and grand displays of fireworks took place in the parks.
Rejoicing was not confined to England, Ireland, and Scotland,
but extended amongst the English-speaking races all over the
world. The total expense of the Coronation, so far as it
affected the public purse, was
Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg wrote a cousinly letter to Queen
Victoria congratulating her on becoming the “ Queen of
the mightiest land in Europe,” and hoping that she would still
frequently think of her cousins at Bonn. In 1839, the Prince
and his brother, Ernest, visited Windsor where they were re-
ceived with much favor, and very soon the names of Victoria
and Albert were linked together in people’s conversation.
Strangely enough it was the Queen’s duty, in consequence of
her exalted position, to first propose matrimony, and one even-


ing at a ball she performed it. After a dance with the Prince
Her Majesty gave him her bouquet; he was in uniform close-
buttoned up to the throat, but taking out a penknife he cut a
slit in his coat just over his heart, and thanking Her Majesty
in graceful terms, he placed the flowers safely there. On the
following day Her Majesty sent for the Prince and made him
“an offer,” which was accepted to the apparent delight of both.
The “ coming event ” was announced in the newspapers, and
was received with approbation by the people, and in January,
1840, the Queen, when she opened Parliament, asked her faith-
ful Commons to vote an income for her husband. On Feb-
ruary 4th, Prince Albert was taken in State to Buckingham
Palace, where his intended bride and her mother met him at
the door, and in due course all the preliminary arrangements
were made. The wedding took place six days afterwards in
the Chapel Royal of St. James’ Palace. “ The Queen was,” wrote
Mrs. Oliphant, “ extremely pale as she passed under the gaze of
multitudes, her mother by her side, crowned with nothing but
those pure flowers which are dedicated to the day of bridal, and
not even permitted the luxury of a veil over her drooping face.
The lace fell about her but left her countenance unveiled.
Even at that moment she belonged to her kingdom.” The
bride was attired in white satin and orange blossoms, and a veil
of Honiton lace. She was attended by twelve noble maidens
as bridesmaids, each of whom wore white satin and white roses.
The Chapel, which was sumptuously adorned for the occasion,
was crowded with the English nobility, Foreign Ambassadors,


and other distinguished people. The Queen returned to the
Palace no longer pale but serene, “ with a joyous countenance,
flushed, perhaps, in the slightest degree,” and smiling upon her
applauding subjects. The sun shone out, and “ Queen s
weather ” prevailed for the rest of the day. After the wedding
breakfast the happy pair were driven to Windsor through twenty-
two miles of spectators, and under numerous beautifully deco-
rated arches. “ Our reception,” Her Majesty writes, “ was
most enthusiastic, hearty, and gratifying in every way, the people
quite deafening us with their cheers, and horsemen and vehicles
going along with us.” All Windsor was sparkling with lights
when they reached the town, and ‘‘the Eton boys, the Queen
states, “ accompanied the carriage to the castle cheering and
shouting as only schoolboys can. They swarmed up the
mound as the carriage entered the quadrangle; they made the old
castle ring again with their acclamations. A few days after
the wedding in writing to her friend Stockmar, the Queen
said, “ there can exist no purer, dearer, nobler being in the
world than the Prince.” The life of “Albert the good” subse-
quently justified Her Majesty’s expressions of her earl)'’ senti-
ment towards him, and, as all her subjects are aware, Her
Majesty’s tender and aftectionate regard for him and his
memory never varied.
With a husband at her side the Queen was relieved of many
difficulties with which she had been surrounded, and she became
blessed with a long period of happiness and contentment.
Prince Albert made it a great object to lighten the state cares


of his wife as much as possible, and she almost invariably
consulted him on points of difficulty. The tastes of the
married pair were very similar ; and her Majesty has recently
written of her early marital happiness, and stated that “ the
business of State was far less heavy than it is now.” The Prince at an
early stage of his residence in England identified himself with the
advocates of progress, and took the chair at a meeting for the
abolition of the slave trade, on which occasion he made his
first speech in the English language. A young Quaker lady
who was present on this occasion, states that “ the acclama-
tions that greeted the Prince’s entrance were perfectly
deafening, and he bore them all with calm, modest dignity,
repeatedly bowing with considerable grace. He certainly is
a very beautiful young man, a thorough German, and a fine
poetic specimen of the race. He uttered his speech in rather
a low tone and with the prettiest foreign accent.” A great
deal of debate having arisen as to the position the Queen’s
husband should occupy on state occasions, the Duke of
Wellington solved the difficulty by saying, “ Let the Queen
put the Prince where she likes and settle it herself, that is the
best way.” Similarly when the Master of the Horse was
asserting his right to have a seat in the Sovereign’s coach on
state occasions, the Iron Duke remarked, “ The Queen can
make him sit at the top of the coach, under the coach, behind
the coach, or wherever else Her Majesty pleases.” Her
Majesty, it may be said, always took care that her husband


never occupied any position of inferior degree, and that he
should be almost invariably at her side.
That a Queen standing so high in the affections of her
people as Queen Victoria does should have her life attempted
seems strange, but it is a fact that Her Majesty has on several occa-
sions been shot at. In June, 1840, when great distress prevailed in
the country and the Ministry of the day was unpopular and
much discussion occurred with regard to the costliness of Court
festivities, the Queen was occasionally received with silence,
and in one or two instances ominous expressions were directed
towards her. One summer evening as the Queen, in company
with Prince Albert, was driving in the park, she was twice
fired at. The miscreant, whose name was Oxford, was im-
mediately arrested, and it being ascertained that he was
crazy and came from a family similarly afflicted, he was treated
accordingly, and was sent to an asylum. Subsequently he was
sent to Dartmoor, but was eventually released, and it is
stated that in 1882 he was in Australia working as a house-
painter. He declared that his attack upon Her Majesty was
due to sheer vanity and a love of notoriety. On May 30, 1842,
the Queen was fired at a third time. The assailant, whose
name was John Francis, was sentenced to death, but this
dreadful penalty was, at the Queen’s desire, commuted to one
of banishment for life. The day following that on which Francis
was reprieved, a hunchback, named Bean, aimed at Her
Majesty but his pistol missed fire. Bean eluded arrest for a
considerable time, but when captured he was sentenced to


a long term of imprisonment. On May 19th, 1849, while the
Queen was again being driven in the park—this time with three
of her children —an Irishman, named Hamilton, fired a blank
cartridge at her. Hamilton was promptly arrested and was
sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment. In June, 1850, the
Queen was assailed in a most cowardly manner. She was
returning from a visit to her Uncle, the Duke of Cambridge,
when a gentleman, who had been in her service as a military
officer and had been dismissed for his eccentricities, struck her
a sharp blow on the face with a stick inflicting a severe bruise
and a slight abrasion on her forehead. This assailant was also
sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment. In February, 1872,
when about to alight from her carriage, a youth, named Arthur
O’Connor, rushed at the Queen with a petition in one hand
and a pistol in the other. O’Connor had been brooding over
his country’s wrongs until his mind was affected, and he
imagined he could redress those wrongs by causing the Queen
to read his petition which was drawn up on behalf of the
Fenians. He was seized by John Brown, one of Her Majesty’s
most faithful attendants. His pistol was found to be damaged
and old, and to contain no bullet. The unfortunate lad was
put under restraint until his mental condition improved. On
this occasion the Queen was about to issue gold medals to
domestics who had served her long and faithfully. John
Brown, for his prompt action, received the first medal as well
as an annuity of twenty-five pounds. The last attack upon the
Queen took place in 1882 at Windsor. Her Majesty accom-


panied by Princess Beatrice was entering her carriage at the
Windsor station, when she was fired at by a man, named
Roderick Maclean, who was arrested on the spot. Maclean,
who was respectably connected, was tried for high treason,
but in consequence of his being insane he was found not guilty,
and was ordered to be confined during the royal pleasure.
Her Majesty resides principally in England, but she has
visited Ireland, and is much attached to Scotland. In the
autumn of 1842 she paid her first visit to the last-named country.
She entered Edinburgh in state, and was loyally received.
Thence she proceeded to the Highlands, where also her re-
ception was a most hearty one. Regarding the proceedings at
the seat of the Marquis of Breadalbane, she writes: “ There
were a number of Lord Campbell’s Highlanders, in the Campbell
tartan, drawn up in front of the house, with Lord Breadalbane
himself in a Highland dress at their head; a few of Sir Neil
Menzies’ men in red and white tartan, a number of pipers
playing, and a company of the 92nd Highlanders also in kilts.
The firing of the guns, the cheering of the great crowd, the
beauty of the surrounding country with its rich background of
wooded hills, altogether formed one of the finest scenes imagin-
able. It seemed as if a great chieftain in olden feudal times was
receiving his sovereign. It was princely and romantic.” In
August, 1843, while on a yachting cruise, the Queen visited
Southampton, and an act of gallantry similar to that enacted by
Sir Walter Raleigh towards Queen Elizabeth was repeated.
Queen Victoria landed at the port while a heavy rain was falling,


and the landing stage was not properly covered. The mayor
and aldermen of the place, who were present to receive Her
Majesty, seeing the difficulty of the occasion, pulled off their
gowns and spread them on the pier, that she might have a dry
footway. The students of Cambridge, a few months afterwards,
acted in a similarly gallant way to her. The next cruise the
Queen made was to France. It was the first visit which an
English sovereign had made to that country since Henry VIII.
and Francis I. met on the Field of the Cloth of Gold. She was
accompanied by the Prince Consort, and was met by Louis
Philippe, the Citizen King. The Queen’s next foreign trip was
to Brussels, whither she went from a desire to visit her uncle
and aunt. She there saw “ Little Charlotte,” who she has de-
scribed as “ quite the prettiest child you ever saw.” “ Little
Charlotte” is now the sad and widowed ex-Empress of Mexico.
In 1844, Czar Nicholas, the Emperor of all the Russias,
visited the Queen, and impressed everyone at the English
Court by his dignity and courtesy.
On one occasion a trip, in search of health and pleasure,
was terminated in consequence of Her Majesty and Prince
Albert having to reach Windsor to receive Louis Philippe who
desired to return their visit to him. The King was received
with regal honors, and expressed himself as highly delighted with
all the grandeur and festivities prepared for him. The same year
Her Majesty opened the New Royal Exchange in London.
She was met on this occasion at Temple Bar by the Cor-
poration of London. Her Majesty made a tour of the new


John Sands, lith.
Sydney.
BALMORAL CASTLE
Scotland.




building, and then participated in a banquet given in the large
room of the underwriters. During 1844 and 1845 Her Majesty-
engaged in a royal visitation to the houses of some of the nobles
of England. She went to Burghley, the seat of the Marquis of
Exeter, and so trod in the footsteps of glorious Queen
Elizabeth, and she also went to Stowe, the grand palace of the
Duke of Buckingham. After a short stay at Windsor, Her
Majesty visited the Duke of Wellington at Strathfieldsaye.
Regarding her presence there, Miss Tyler says : “ There was
much that was unique and kindly in the relations between the
Queen and the greatest soldier of the day. He had stood by
her baptismal font; she had been his guest when she was the
girl-princess at Walmer; he had sat at her first council; she
was to give his name to one of her sons; in fact, he had taken
part in every event of her life. The present arrangements were
a graceful, well-nigh filial, tribute of affectionate regard for the
old man who had served his country both on the battle-field
and in the senate, who had watched his Queen’s career with the
keenest interest, and rejoiced in her success as something
with which he had to do.” In the autumn of 1845, the
Queen paid her first visit to Germany. Prince Albert accom-
panied her, and showed her the house at Bonn which he and
his brother had lived in while they were students at the university.
The royal pair visited Rosenau, the early home of the prince,
and Gotha, also where Her Majesty met her old governess, the
Baroness Lehzen. The Queen went in 1847 to the west coast
of Scotland, and at Inverary saw a child ‘’just two years old,


a dear white, fat, fair little fellow, with reddish hair, but very
delicate features —a merry, independent little child.” This was
Her Majesty’s future son-in-law, the Marquis of Lome. In the
following year, Her Highness the Princess Louise was born.
In 1848, the Queen purchased, as a royal residence, the
estate of Balmoral, on the banks of the Uee, Aberdeenshire, and
of her new abode, she wrote : “ It is a pretty little castle in the
old Scotch style. There is a picturesque tower, and garden
in front, with a high wooded hill; at the back there i 3 a wood
down to the Dee, and the hills rise all round. It was so calm
and solitary it did one good as one gazed around, and the pure
mountain air was most refreshing. All seemed to breathe
freedom and peace.” Here, with her husband, Her Majesty
spent the happiest moments of her life, enjoying excursions,
drives, Highland sports, deer-stalking, fishing, and incognito
journeys of exploration, and acquired the physique and spirits
which have carried her so gently into her maturer years. Her
interest in her poorer neighbours was incessant. She visited
them in their own dwellings. “ Really,” says Her Majesty,
“ the affection of these poor people, who are so hearty and
happy to see you taking an interest in everything, is very
touching and gratifying.” Pier kindness to the poorest of her
subjects is one of the brightest features of her character, and the
meetings of the highest lady in the land with the humblest
classes have presented scenes of the most pathetic nature. It
was her frequent custom to attend the beds of the sick and to
read portions of Holy Writ to the occupants; and it is her


womanly instinct, quite as much as her ability and wisdom in
wielding the sceptre of the great empire over which she presides,
that has given her so exalted a position in the affections of her
people.
The Queen paid her first visit to Ireland in 1849, arriving
in “ The Fairy ” at the Cove of Cork, while bonfires blazed
on the surrounding hills, and rockets shot up from all the
vessels in the harbour. When the Queen landed, a large
number of public bodies presented addresses. She called the
place Queenstown, in honor of its being the first spot on which
she had set her foot on Irish soil. As she stepped on shore the
cannon roared around her, and the enthusiastic cheering of the
people almost deafened her. At Cork more addresses were
presented, and a splendid reception was accorded to her. In
Patrick-street a triumphal arch was erected, bearing the words
“ Victoria cead mille failthe.” The Queen rode through Cork in
Lord Bandon’s carriage, and so many carriages and horsemen
joined in the procession that two hours were occupied in passing
through the streets. Her Majesty has said she saw crowding
around her men “ with such dark hair and eyes and such fine
teeth; almost every third woman was pretty, and some
remarkably so.” The royal children pleased the people wonder-
fully. One woman is recorded to have shouted “ Make one of
them Prince Patrick and all Ireland will die for you.” A royal
baby was born in May the following year, and the Queen did
christen him Patrick. The party sailed from Cork to Dublin.
Here was witnessed, says the Queen, a wonderful and exciting


scene; such masses of human beings, so enthusiastic, so
excited, yet such perfect order maintained; then the number of
troops, the different bands stationed at certain distances, the
waving of hats and handkerchiefs, the bursts of welcome which
rent the air—all made it a never-to-be-forgotten scene.” As the
royal carriage passed beneath the last triumphal arch, “ a dove,”
the Queen adds, “was let down into my lap, with an olive
branch around its neck, alive, and very tame.” Her Majesty
proceeded thence to Belfast, and was everywhere received with a
joyousness and enthusiasm which clearly proved how easily the
affection and esteem of the Irish nation were aroused towards
her, and how gladly they recognised the attention she thought
it wise to pay them. /
The year 1851 was celebrated by the opening of the first
International Exhibition —the beautiful Crystal Palace, by Her
Majesty. This event the royal pen has described in glowing
terms. It states that “the great event has taken place, a
complete and beautiful triumph, a glorious and touching sight-
one which I shall ever be proud of. It is a day which makes
my heart swell with pride, glory and thankfulness. The park
presented a wonderful spectacle, crowds streaming through it,
carriages and troops passing through it, quite like Coronation Day.
The sun shone and gleamed upon the gigantic edifice, upon
which the flags of all nations were floating. The sight inside was
magical, so vast, so glorious and so touching. God bless my
dearest country which has shown itself so great to day ” The
exhibition was visited several times by the Queen afterwards.


Altogether six million two hundred thousand persons entered
its doors, and on October the 15th it was closed. Not a single
accident occurred in connection with it, and the receipts
amounted to half-a- million of money.
Another beautiful residence which the Queen enjoys, is
Osborne, in the Isle of Wight; where, with her family, she has
more repose than at Buckingham Palace or Windsor. It is a
charming place. The building, besides being architecturally
handsome, is luxuriously furnished, artistically ornamented, and
commands magnificent views of the sea and land. It is situated
on the summit of a series of terraces, which extend to the beach,
and are ornate with bright flower-gardens, fountains and statuary.
One of the principal features in the landscape is a Swiss Cottage,
about a mile distant from the Palace. There is a laboratory in
connection with this, and here in the days of Albert the Good,
the Princes worked at various occupations, and were paid for
their labor. The Princesses managed the kitchen, the dairy
and larder, learned to make tarts and cakes, and to cook or
preserve the vegetables and fruit which they themselves had
cultivated.
The first great war-cloud that darkened the reign of Victoria,
gathered in February, 1854, fourteen months after the death
of England’s dread Commander, Wellington. How England
was drawn into the contest, it is not necessary to state. The
Queen saw her soldiers depart amidst the greatest enthusiasm,
and when her guns were thundering at Russia’s stronghold, and
she learned that those soldiers were enduring the cruellest of


hardships, which arose from mismanagement, she expressed a
large amount of indignation. She wrote to Lord Raglan about
the needless privations the men were exposed to; and Florence
Nightingale, who was moved by the same unnatural incidents
as her Majesty, went to the Crimea with a body of trained
nurses, and did all she could to convert the hospitals from dens
of horror and despair into abodes of comfort and peace. The
force of Miss Nightingale’s brave example has never died out,
and the army and navy have never had a better friend.
During this time Napoleon 111, and the Empress Eugenie,
visited England. Concerning a ball, which was given in their
honor, the Queen wrote “It is strange, that I, the granddaughter
of George 111, should dance with the Emperor Napoleon, nephew
of England’s great enemy, now my nearest and most intimate ally,
in the Waterloo room, and this ally only sixteen years ago, living
in this country in exile, poor and unthought of.” The Emperor
and Empress were very popular in England at this time, and
were entertained in a manner befitting their illustrious positions.
They attended a banquet at the Guildhall, and were taken by
the Queen to the Crystal Palace, where thousands of persons
greeted them with acclamations. Through the Summer of 1885
the War was still raging, and it was the Queen’s sad pleasure to
frequently visit and condole with the invalided and wounded
troops that were sent home, as well as to dispense the medals
and Victoria crosses won by bravery. In August 1885, the
Queen, accompanied by her husband and the Prince of Wales,
returned the visit of Napoleon and Eugenie, and were greeted


with many manifestations of favor by the French people. Ihe
Royal party were shown all the sights of Paris, and the beauti-
ful palace of St. Cloud was accorded to them as a residence.
A state ball in their honor was also given at Versailles. For
more than four centuries, that is to say, since the infant King
Henry VI was crowned in Paris, no English monarch had
visited the capital of France, and ever and anon the two
nations had regarded each other as natural enemies. At Bou-
logne the Queen witnessed a grand review of the French army,
near the spot where, sixteen years before her birth, Napoleon I
prepared for his projected invasion of England. Sebastopol
was taken in September, after thousands of soldiers and sailors
had perished The welcome news was taken to the Queen at
Balmoral, and all England rejoiced, as best it could amidst sor-
row and tribulation, that its flag had been planted triumphantly
above what Russia had considered as impregnable ramparts.
The treaty of peace was signed in March, 1856, and was
celebrated in the United Kingdom by gun firing, bell ringings
and grand illuminations.
In the autumn of 1858, Her Majesty proceeded with Prince
Albert to Prussia to visit the Princess Royal of England, the
wife of the Crown Prince. Concerning the meeting of the
daughter and her parents on this occasion, the Queen says :
“ There on the platform stood our darling child, with a nose-
gay in her hand. She stepped in, and long and warm was the
embrace as she clasped me in her arms ; so much to say, and
to tell, and to ask, yet so unaltered; looking well and quite


the old Vicky still.” Her Majesty was agaih on the continent
in September jB6o, to see her daughter. The relations
between her—the greatest monarch on earth—and the heiress
to another mighty crown have always been of the most affec-
tionate nature, and have augured well for future friendship
between the two great nations of Germany and England.
Her Majesty enjoyed a long period of happiness, but the
time arrived, as it arrives to most mortals, for her to drink of the
cup of sorrow. The draught in her case was a long and bitter
one. In March, the Queen lost her beloved mother, the Duchess
of Kent, and though she knew that the nation, who had always
greatly esteemed the Duchess, shared her sorrow, she was
deeply grieved. In the retirement of Osborne she overcame
the first excess of her grief, but from this time a cloud of sad-
ness overshadowed her joyous and happy life. In the summer
she visited the Lakes of Killarney to recruit her health, and
in doing so she learned how well the generous Irish race
can respect a woman in her sorrow. She also sojourned at
Balmoral and engaged in excursions amongst the Highlands,
and gradually she recovered much of her natural composure.
Towards the end of the year, unexpected complications arose
to distress her. A dreadful civil war was raging in America,
in which England happily had no part. The Southern Confed-
eracy of America in its desperation, however, endeavored to
embroil England and induce her to take part against a people
who were sacrificing their life’s blood for the suppression of
slavery. Two men, named respectively Mason and Slidell,


were sent to England, as the people of the Union thought, to
make arrangements there for the construction or purchase of
war ships. The men were passengers by a British steamer
named the Trent, and were taken forcibly from her by an
American vessel and conveyed back to the United States. The
English were exceedingly indignant, as the Americans had fired
at the Trent, and in doing so, had attacked their flag. A
remonstrance was sent by Lord Palmerston to the American
Government, and, as it was not quickly responded to, war
seemed inevitable. Her Majesty the Queen, however, dread-
ing such a circumstance, determined to supplement the dispatch
of her Minister with one of a more conciliatory yet equally
dignified character, and this had the most satisfactory results.
The United States Government repudiated the action of the
captain of their vessel, the two prisoners were set free,
and war was happily averted. It must be added, that Prince
Albert was largely instrumental in having the despatch sent
from the Queen of England to America. It was one of the
last acts of his beneficent life.
The greatest blow the Queen suffered was the death of
her husband who, by a common assent, the people have named
“ Albert the Good.” It fell swiftly and suddenly, and was dire
in its consequences, its effects being felt even to the present
day. The Prince was attacked by fever on December 2, 1861,
and on Saturday, December 14, he died. The action of his
daughter, the Princess Alice, towards him was of the most
self-sacrificing nature. It ennobled her and endeared her to


the nation. She was his most constant attendant, she shed no
tears in his presence, but sat by him conversing with him or
repeating or singing hymns, and when she could not restrain
herself she walked calmly to the door and rushed to her room,
returning presently with a calm, sad face, but shewing no traces
of the terrible agitation she had undergone. Immediately
upon the death of Prince Albert, the solemn tones of the bell
of St. Paul’s pealed forth and proclaimed to the nation that a
Royal Prince had gone to his rest. For a time it appeared as
though the Queen would speedily follow her husband. During
several days she lay prostrate with weakness, and her pulse
could scarcely be felt. Hope revived, however, as soon as
calm sleep overtook her, and when she had gained sufficient
repose she was taken to her quiet home at Osborne. The
body of the Prince was laid in the Royal Chapel at Windsor,
but Her Majesty had it removed thence to a mausoleum she
caused to be erected in the grounds of Frogmore. Princess
Alice became the right hand of the Queen in the first period of
her bereavement, and was the chief means of communication
between her and her Ministers. Eventually, however, Her
Majesty awakened to a sense of her high duties, though she
shrank from state ceremonials and the mere splendours of
royalty as much as she could with a due regard to her position.
Of the manner in which, during her widowhood, she has dis-
charged state duties, the late Earl Beaconsfield has spoken
in the following impressive terms :—“ There is not a despatch
that is received from abroad, or sent from this country abroad,


which is not submitted to the Queen. The whole of the
internal administration of this country greatly depends
upon the sign-manual of our Sovereign, and it may be said
that her signature has never been placed to any public docu-
ment of which she did not know the purpose, and of which she
did not approve. Those Cabinet Councils of which you all
hear, and which are necessarily the scene of anxious and im-
portant deliberation, are reported, on their termination, by the
Minister to the Sovereign, and they often call from her critical
remarks requiring considerable attention ; and I will say that
no person likely to administer the affairs of this country would
be likely to treat the suggestions of Her Majesty with indifference,
for at this moment there is probably no person living who has
such complete control over the political condition of England
as the Sovereign herself.” The Queen was much touched at
the close of the first year of her widowhood by a present made
to her. It was in the form of a richly-bound bible, and was
presented through the Duchess of Sutherland as an offering
from “many widows of England.” Considering the religious
instincts of Her Majesty, the present was a most appropriate
one, and in acknowledging her thanks for it to her “kind sister
widows,” she said “ That our Heavenly Father may impart to
many widows those sources of consolation and support is their
broken-hearted Queen’s earnest prayer.”
In the month of March, 1862, at Osborne, Her Majesty
gave as bride to Prince Louis of Hesse her beloved daughter
Alice, and in March of the following year she had the


happiness of seeing her eldest son wedded to Alexandra, the
u sea king’s daughter,’’ a lady who fell at once into her place as
one of the Queen’s family, and became an established favourite
with the nation.
Her Majesty’s first public appearance after her husband’s
death, was at Aberdeen, where she unveiled a statue to his
memory. In the summer of 1865, she performed a similar action
at Coburg. On the second occasion some royal personages of
Europe desired to attend, but the Queen replied that the matter
was one of domestic intert st only and that the presence of strangers
would be unacceptable. In the square of the little town stood
the gilt bronze statue, ten feet high, the right hand resting on a
plan of the Exhibition of 1851. A hymn written by Luther
was sung, and then the Queen, approaching the statue, handed
her bouquet to be placed on the pedestal; the Princesses and
other ladies followed her example, and their fragrant offerings
rose high above the feet of the statue. In the early part of
1866 the Queen opened Parliament for the first time after her
husband’s death. As she entered the House of Lords silence
instead of the customary flourish of trumpets prevailed, and the
robes of state instead of being worn were laid upon the throne.
During the same year, Her Majesty instituted the Albert Medal
for the saving of life at sea, reviewed the troops at Aldershot, and
created Prince Alfred Duke of Edinburgh. She also attended
the weddings of Princess Mary of Cambridge to the Duke of
Teck, at Kew, and of Princess; Helena to Prince Christian, at
Windsor.


The foundation stone of the Albert Hall, one of the finest
structures in England, was laid by Her Majesty in 1867.
During this year also, Her Majesty published her interesting
diary, by means of which the people have learned so much of
the inner life of the royal family. A copy of this was forwarded
to Charles Dickens, in which she had inscribed with her
characteristic modesty, “ From one of the humblest writers to
one of the greatest.” In May, she laid the foundation stone of
St. Thomas’s Hospital, and reviewed 27,000 Volunteers in
Windsor Park, and two months afterwards she visited
Switzerland. <
One of the greatest personal friends Her Majesty possessed
was Dr. Norman McLeod. In many of her passages she
speaks warmly of his friendship, and the consolation he gave
her in the early years of her great sorrow. And the reverend
doctor himself, writing of one of his visits to Balmoral, states
that “ after dinner the Queen invited me to her room, where
I found the Princess Helena and the Marchioness of Ely. The
Queen sat down to spin on a fine Scotch wheel while I read
Burns to her —‘ Tam o’ Shanter, and a Man’s a Man for a’
that ’ —her favorites.” When the good man died, the Queen
remembered all his friendship and sympathy for her as well as.
the excellence of his Christian teaching, and she felt keenly also,
how “ this too, like so many other comforts and helps was for
ever gone.”
In the year 1869 the loyal people of England, who much
regretted the enforced retirement of the Queen from public life*


learned with satisfaction of the probability of her moving
amongst them again. Her Majesty, whose regard for her
people seems as infinite as her love for her husband, laid aside
her grief as far as was possible and entered more fully upon
public life. In November of the year named, she opened the
Blackfriar’s Bridge and the Holburn Viaduct. On these
occasions, however, Her Majesty still wore mourning robes,
and each of her servants wore a band of crape on one arm.
In 1870, the year in which her country happily escaped from
being involved in the calamitous war between France and
Germany, and was blessed with peace, she opened the new
buildings of the London University. Her feelings on this
occasion could scarcely have been those of unalloyed pleasure.
Her sons-in-law were engaged in the terrible conflict against
her intimate friends Napoleon and Eugenie, and she was aware
that her daughter Alice was an attendant at no less than four
hospitals. In 1871, Princess Louise was married at Windsor to
the Marquis of Lome, Her Majesty being present and giving
the bride away. During the same year, unfortunately, the joy
of the remembrance of this circumstance was overshadowed by
the alarming illness of the Prince of Wales. This again
brought into the boldest relief the self-sacrificing nature of the
Princess Alice, who was the Prince’s constant, untiring,
and kindly nurse while it lasted. The anxiety of the nation
concerning the future monarch was exceedingly great, for his
illness was of a most severe type. When, happily, it was over,
there was much rejoicing and a thanksgiving day was held to


celebrate his recovery. The Queen and the Prince went from
Buckingham Palace to St, Paul’s, along streets dense with
people, and a most impressive service took place at the great
Cathedral The Queen wore white flowers in her bonnet, and
looked happier than her people had seen her for ten years. In
the evening the city was illuminated, and the dome of St. Paul’s
was outlined with colored lights. On the following day, as
already stated, Her Majesty was fired at by a half-crazy Irish
lad. This, however, only served to intensify the wide-spread
loyalty which the people were expressing towards both the
Queen and the Prince of Wales. In January, 1874, the Queen
welcomed to Windsor another daughter-in-law, the Grand
Duchess Marie of Russia, who had been married at St.
Petersburg to the Duke of Edinburgh. It was generally hoped
that the auspicious event would be the means of establishing
peace on a firm basis between the two great nations. In
August, 1875, an unfortunate collision took place between Her
Majesty’s yacht and a pleasure yacht named the Mistletoe,
which ran across her bows. The occupants of the Mistletoe
were thrown into the water, and a lady was drowned, and the
master killed by a spar falling on him. The Queen was on
deck at the time, and she not only exhibited a great deal of
distress at the occurence but personally aided to restore the
sufferers.
The magnificent Albert Memorial at Kensington Gardens
was completed in the spring of 1876, and in this year also the
Queen unveiled a statue of the Prince Consort at Edinburgh,


the grand old city making itself exceedingly gay and lively for
the occasion.
On New Year’s day, 1877, twenty years after the terrible
Indian Mutiny occurred, Her Majesty was proclaimed at Delhi,
and other principal towns of India, Empress of that great
country.
The Queen lost her beloved daughter Alice in 1878, and
also her cousin the blind King of Hanover who died in exile
at Paris ; and in April, 1884, she suffered another great bereave-
ment by the decease of Prince Leopold the Duke of Albany.
In 1885, the youngest of the Queen’s daughters, Beatrice
Mary Victoria Feodora, was married to Prince Henry of
Battenburg.
In 1886, Her Majesty opened the first Parliament in which
all classes of her subjects were represented. The pageant in
this instance was a most striking one. An immense concourse
of people hailed the Queen with loud cheers when they recog-
nised her as the centre of a brilliant procession, which, with a
splendid escort of Horse Guards, swept onwards from Bucking-
ham Palace through St. James’ Park, and past historic White-
hall and venerable Westminster Abbey to the Peers’ entrance
of the House of Lords. As usual the Queen sat in the chariot
of state drawn by eight cream-colored horses. The House of
Lords, gay with colored windows and frescoes and golden orna-
ments, presented a most imposing aspect, and its attractiveness
was greatly enhanced as peers in scarlet and ermine, and
peeresses resplendent with jewels, took their seats. Attended


John Sands, lith.
Sydney.
OSBORNE HOUSE
Isle of Wight.




by high officers of the State, Queen Victoria once more ascended
her throne, and the faithful Commons having attended, her
speech was read to them.
For well-nigh fifty years Her Majesty has wielded the
sceptre of England, and her reign has been more blessed with
peace than stained with war. In the arts of peace her people
have advanced to a position which has placed them on the
same plane as the most refined nations of the earth, and in
the art of war they have acquired a knowledge that makes
them respected, if not feared. Her Majesty has seen her
immediate subjects increased by millions, and many a distant
people eager to come under her sway, until now she is
acknowledged to be the greatest monarch of which there is
any record. It cannot be seen when the extension of her
dominions will cease, for every year additions are made to
them. Her flag is borne with pride in Europe, Asia, Africa
and America. Her brave sons have planted it amidst the
snow and ice and wintry storms of the Arctic regions, and it
floats proudly in the glowing sunshine of the southern seas
over millions of subjects as loyal to her as the inhabitants of
her own loved island. Her bayonets, also, have glinted in
every sun, and millions of brave hearts are prepared to draw
the sabre in her cause. The people of this bright land,
England’s fairest daughter, have shown by peaceful displays of
loyalty and warlike exhibitions of their strength, how well they
appreciate her beneficent sway j and should the time arrive
when danger may threaten to shake her broad-based throne,


men, even from the antipodes, will stream forth in thousands,
armed and ready to assist those around her to make it firm
again. Well may her subjects pray “ God save the Queen.”
As Queen she has fulfilled their every wish: as wife, friend and
mother she has ennobled herself, and shown examples which
have won for her the affection and regard of every pure-
minded woman in the empire. England never had a purer
Court than hers, nor has it under any other reign than hers
made such strides in commerce and material wealth. Happy
England! happy Monarch ! As a queen bee our ruler sits
surrounded by industry, with her busy swarms of ships bringing
honey to her hive from every field. The spread of democracy
has not shaken her in her proud position, and there can blow
no evil wind that will be permitted to do her harm With the
spread of freedom her people have revered her the more, for
they feel that beneath her care they have become the freest of
all nations, while she herself has recognized how good and wise
a thing it is to rule over free men rather than serfs and slaves.
One more quotation that will throw a light on the inner
thoughts of this Royal Lady shall bring this brief record to
a close. It is taken from the instructions which she gave to
the governess of the Princess Royal, and it may be studied
with profit by young and old. It runs as follows: —“I am
quite clear that she should have great reverence for God, and
for religion ; but that she should have the feeling of devotion
and love which our Heavenly Father encourages His earthly
children to have for him, and not one of fear and trembling ;


and that thoughts of death and our after life should not be
represented in an alarming and forbidding view, and that she
should be made to know, as yet, no difference of creeds, and
not think that she can only pray on her kness, or that those
who do not kneel are less fervent or devout in their prayers.”
“ Long Live the Queen.”
John Sands, Printer, Sydney.






BANQET TO CELEBRATE
THE
JUBILEE YEAR
Mayor 1886':
JOHN SA ND'S, L ITH.
