

PRINCIPAL WOMEN OF
THE EMPIRE:
AUSTRALIA AND
NEW ZEALAND
Mi, ♦ , ’• *' , »♦ *7 j ' / <
* V V vV ->v-! > ,‘>t \ v »,*<• M;
'v'-T








PRINCIPAL WOMEN OF THE EMPIRE ;
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
VOL. I.




PRINCIPAL WOMEN
OF THE EMPIRE:
AUSTRALIA AND
NEW ZEALAND
VOL. I.
London :
THE MITRE PRESS
Mitre Street, E.C. 3
1940




PREFACE
It had been anticipated by the Editors that this
first issue of Principal Women of the Empire :
Australia and New Zealand, would have been a much
larger volume. But owing to the very exacting dis-
crimination that it was necessary to exercise to
ensure the biographies included justifying the
volume’s title, the first edition has proved un-
expectedly slim.
It is, however, realized that there must be very
many more ladies in Australia and New Zealand
qualified for inclusion in this compilation, and
editorial work is still proceeding to collate data on
as many of them as possible for publication in the
next issue.
It is hoped that the second volume will be several
times the number of pages of this first edition, and
every effort will be made to make Volume 11.
comprehensive, yet maintaining the same high
standard requisite to a biographee’s inclusion.




PRINCIPAL WOMEN of the EMPIRE:
AUSTRALIA and NEW ZEALAND.
ALBISTON, Harriette (Mrs.), 43, Auburn Road, Hawthorn,
E. 2, Melbourne; b. Buckland, Victoria; ed. Grammar and
State Schools; dau. of William Elliot Skinner and Emily
Skinner ; m. Rev. Professor Albiston, clergyman, son of Rev.
Joseph and Elizabeth B. Albiston ; he was President of Victoria-
Tasmania Methodist Conference ; Professor of Theology, Queens
College University, Melbourne, and President General of
Methodist Church of Australasia. Mother of Dr. Norman Arthur
Albiston (b. Sept. 21st, 1895), who is a psychiatrist, and is
Clinician at Royal Melbourne Hospital; Dr. Harold Edward
Albiston (b. March 26th, 1898), who is a Doctor of Veterinary
Science, and is Director of Veterinary Research Institute,
University of Melbourne ; Marianne Emily Albiston (b. Nov.
23rd, 1900), and Dr. Leslie Howard Albiston (b. March 4th,
1902), who is a dermatologist, and is Clinician at Royal Melbourne
Hospital. Mrs. Albiston is interested in church and Christian
missions abroad ; fond of entertaining, motoring, travelling.
Was State President of Women’s Auxiliary for Overseas Missions
in Victoria for eight years. Religion : Methodist. Politics :
Free Trade and Independent.
ALCOCK, Olga Marie Therese (Mrs. H. Alcock), " Kincraig,”
Sefton Road, Clayfield, N. 2, Brisbane, Queensland; b. in
Kensington, London, England ; ed. convent in Belgium ; dau.
of Emile and Jane de Tuetey ; m. Henry Alcock, Professor of
History and Economics, Univ. of Queensland, son of Henry
and Lucilla Alcock ; he holds degree of M.A. (Oxon.), and was
one-time exhibitioner of Magdalen College ; now Dean of the
Faculty of Commerce ; formerly Dean of the Faculty of Arts
and, later, President of the Professorial Board (1931-37) ; Fellow
of Aust. Nat. Research Council, etc., etc. Mother of Pamela
Diane Riversdale Alcock (b. Feb. 14th, 1919), Antoinette Lucille
Alcock (b. Oct. 9th, 1924), and Olga Rosemary Alcock (b. April
11th, 1929). Interested in literature and music; fond of
motoring, travelling, theatre-going, reading. Member of :
Lyceum Club (Brisbane). Interested in promotion of orchestral
music. Religion : Church of England. Politics : Moderately
progressive.
ALISON, Winifred Violet (Mrs. E. W. Alison, Jr.), 60, Lillington
Road, Remuera, Auckland, New Zealand ; b. July 7th, 1880, in
London, England ; ed. Heathleigh School, Horsmonden, Kent,


England ; dan. of Captain W. J. Reed ; m. Ewen Wm. Alison,
Jr., barrister and solicitor, son of Ewen Wm. and Mary Ann
Alison ; he is the author of “ New Zealander Sees the World,"
and " New Zealander Looks On." Mother of Cameron Ewen
William Alison (b. 1905), Ellice Alison (b. 1907, d. 1938), Audrey
Alison (now Mrs. Browne) (b. 1910), Geoffrey Alison (b. 1911),
and Lyned Alison (b. 1915). Cameron Alison is the inventor of
a variable pitch propellor for aeroplanes. Mrs. Alison is very
interested in Girl Guide Association, being member of Head-
quarters Executive for many years ; plays contract bridge ;
fond of travelling and theatre-going. Mrs. Alison undertook
several voyages as child with her parents in Irish “ Stars "
sailing ships. One voyage lasted thirteen months ; from
Newcastle, England, to Santa Rosalia, California, took four
months ; then to Melbourne and London. Later with parents
in steamships, frozen meat trade, to Australia and New Zealand.
Religion : Church of England. Politics : Conservative.
ALL WRIGHT, Edith (Mrs. R. E. All wright), Peckham Vale,
Gretna, Tasmania ; b. May 24th, in Hobart ; ed. Girls’ High
School, Hobart ; dau. of S. Percy Crisp, of Hobart, barrister
and solicitor; m. Richard E. Allwright, pastoralist, son of
S. R. G. and Bessie Allwright (nee Ayers) ; he is a J.P., a member
of Hamilton Council for sixteen years ; Chairman of St. Mary’s
Men’s Club, Gretna ; President of Royal Agricultural Society
of Tasmania for three years. Mother of Helen Elizabeth
Stanfield Allwright (b. Feb. 20th, 1917), who completed a
brilliant course of nursing at Alfred Hospital, Melbourne ; and
Richard Thomas Allwright (b. Nov. 11th, 1925), who was ed.
at Clewes College, Newtown, Tasmania. Mrs. Allwright is
interested in charity, art, education, music ; plays bridge and
golf ; fond of entertaining, motoring, gardening, and all country
pursuits, including fishing. Mrs. Allwright is Chairwoman of
Hamilton branch of Red Cross Society, and Secretary of St.
Mary’s Women’s Guild. Her husband is a Trustee of the
Farmers and Stockowners’ Association of Tasmania, being a
foundation member. Also he has been a committee-man of the
Royal Agric. Society for ten years. Is a churchwarden of St.
Mary’s, Gretna. Religion : Church of England. Politics :
Nationalist.
ALSOP, Edith Annie Mary (Miss), Darley Dale, Dorset Road,
Croydon, Melbourne, and Lyceum Club, Melbourne ; b. Mel-
bourne ; ed. Ruyton, Melbourne ; dau. of John Alsop, of Darley
Dale, Derbyshire, England, and Anne Alsop (nee Howard).
Interested in art, music, literature; fond of entertaining,
travelling, good concerts and books, good art exhibitions (ancient
and modern), and chalk and pencil portraits. Has made
numerous European sketches, streets, figures, etc. Member of :
Lyceum Club, Melbourne. Studied music and painting during
school years, and for some years helped in many charity concerts,
generally as accompanist. After leaving school, studied art at


Melbourne National Gallery. Has made three European tours
for the purpose of studying art. Returned to Melbourne, 1930.
Studied wood engraving at Central School of Arts and Crafts,
London. Studied painting with Andre Lhote, Paris. Visited
all exhibitions and galleries available in Paris, London, Belgium
and Italy. Spent a year in Italy (1929-30), and did many chalk,
pencil and water-colour drawings which were exhibited in
Melbourne on her return. During the winter she worked in
the British Academy, Rome. Has been on the Council of the
Arts and Crafts Society, and has been actively interested in it
and its exhibitions, and in all the art world of Melbourne. Re-
ligion : Church of England.
AMIES, Geraldine Christein Wilhelmina (Mrs. A. B. P. Amies),
146, Grey Street, East Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Aug. 26th, 1906,
in Delft, Holland ; ed. in Scotland and abroad ; dau. of Pieter
Collie, of Delft, Holland ; m. Arthur B. P. Amies, Professor of
Dental Science, University of Melbourne, son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Amies, late of Perth, Western Australia ; he is a medical
and dental practitioner, and was appointed to Chair of Dental
Science in December, 1934. Mrs. Amies is interested in music
and modern art; plays golf; fond of riding, swimming, enter-
taining, travelling. Member of : Alexandra Club, Melbourne,
and Melbourne University Union. Qualified in Medicine, 1938
(Edin.), and qualified in Dental Science at Edinburgh in 1928.
Practised in London (Harley Street) as a dental surgeon for
children, prior to living in Australia. Is honorary physician to
Diabetic Clinic, Queen Victoria Hospital, Melbourne. Interested
in Student activities of University. Religion : Protestant.
Politics : Conservative.
ANDERSON, May Synnitt (Mrs. A. K. Anderson), The Scots
College. Bellevue Hill, Sydney, N.S.W. ; b. Nov. 25th, 1893, in
Dunedin, New Zealand ; ed. Girton College, Dunedin ; dau. of
John and Mary Irvine ; m. Alexander Knox Anderson, College
Principal—The Scots College, Sydney, since 1935, son of James
and Margaret Anderson, M.A., F.R.Hist.S. ; he was Rector, St.
Andrew’s College, Christchurch, New Zealand, 1920-34. Mother
of Beverley May Anderson (b. Jan. 23rd, 1919). Interested in
art, music, education, and Y.W.C.A. work (being member of
Sydney Executive) ; fond of entertaining, motoring, travelling,
theatre-going. Religion : Protestant (Presbyterian).
ANNAND, Helen Alice (Mrs. F. W. G. Annand), 9, Mayfield
Street, Ascot, N.E.2, Brisbane, Queensland ; b. December 31st,
1871 ; ed. Toowoomba, Queensland ; dau. of Thomas George
and Elizabeth Robinson ; m. Colonel F. W. G. Annand, Bank
Manager, Company Director, son of James and Harriet Annand ;
he served in Great War, 1915-19 ; five mentions, D.S.O. and
Bar ; was first Town Clerk of Greater Brisbane, acted seven
years, then returned to Bank. Mother of Geoffrey Grant
Annand (b. Nov. 16th, 1899), Robin Annand (b. Sept. sth, 1901),
Douglas Shenton Annand (b. March 22nd, 1903), Jean Annand


(b. May 11th, 1905), Allan Annand (b. May 27th, 1909, d. May
27th, 1909), Helen Elspeth Annand (b. Aug. 30th, 1910), and
Frederick Annand (b. Feb. 27th, 1913). Geoffrey and Frederick
hold University Diplomas for Mechanical and Electrical
Engineers ; Robin is patentee of electric water-heaters (three
types) ; Douglas is an illustrator, designer of Commonwealth
coinage, and art director of Australian exhibit at World’s Fair
of New York, 1939 ; Helen also assisted. Mrs. Annand is
interested in music, art, religion, education ; fond of motoring,
travelling, gardening, pottery, reading. Member of : Young
Women’s Christian Association. Religion : Congregational.
ANTHONEY, Edith (Mrs. E. Anthoney), ” Hiawatha,”
Brighton, Adelaide, South Australia ; b. Feb. 4th, 1890, in
Norwood ; ed. Dryburgh House College ; dau. of the late James
Ashton, artist ; m. Ernest Anthoney, legislator ; he was Mayor
of Brighton for two years ; was Member for Sturt for seventeen
years ; Member of University Council, also School of Mines, etc.
Mother of Rex Ashton Anthoney (b. May 4th, 1922), who is
News Editor at Broadcasting Station 5.D.N., Adelaide. Mrs.
Anthoney is interested in music (piano), reading, politics, and
charity, having done some work with charitable organizations ;
plays tennis and bridge; fond of travelling, entertaining,
theatre-going and motoring. Religion : Anglican. Politics :
Liberal.
ARGYLE, Violet (Lady Argyle), 29, Bruce Street, Toorak,
Melbourne, Victoria ; b. July 31st, 1869, in Blackwood, Victoria ;
ed. privately ; dau. of Thomas Lewis ; m. Sir Stanley Argyle,
medical practitioner, son of Edward and Mary Argyle, Kyneton,
Victoria ; he was Lt. Colonel, Australian Army Medical Corps,
in War, 1914-17 ; entered Parliament 1920 ; Chief Secretary and
Minister of Health, 1923-27-28-29 ; Premier, 1932-35 ; Leader
of Opposition, 1939. Mother of Inez Violet Argyle (Lillies)
(b. 1895), Bessie Abbot Argyle (Hill) (b. 1897), Thomas Milner
Stanley Argyle (b. 1899), and Hector Stanley Argyle (b. 1901).
Interested in charity, literature, art; fond of motoring, travelling,
theatre-going. Member of : Quamby Club (Melbourne).
Religion : Church of England. Politics : United Australia
Party.
ARMITAGE, Lilian Mary (Miss), Girls’ Grammar School,
Ipswich, Queensland, and 101, Kent Street, Maryborough ;b.
Maryborough, Queensland ; ed. Girls’ Grammar School, Mary-
borough, Queensland, and University of Melbourne, Victoria ;
dau. of Edward Fitzgerald Armitage. Interested in education,
literature, music ; plays golf and bridge ; fond of entertaining,
motoring, yachting, travelling, theatre-going, gardening, and
handcrafts of all kinds. Religion : Church of England.
Politics : Liberal.
ARMSTRONG, Elizabeth Jane (Mrs. W. G. Armstrong), 49,
Wentworth Road, Vaucluse, Sydney, New South Wales ;b.
Sept. sth, 1862, in Windsor, N.S.W. ; ed. Rosebank College,


Sydney ; dau. of Rev. C. F. Garnsey, Rector of Christ Church,
Sydney ; m. Dr. W. G. Armstrong, Director General of Public
Health, N.S.W. (retired), son of Captain R. R. Armstrong, R.N.,
and Mrs. E. S. Armstrong ; he was the first medical graduate of
Sydney University; has written on public health subjects.
Mother of Mrs. Mary Enid Arundel, Principal, Church of England
Grammar School for Girls, North Sydney; and Commander
John Malet Armstrong, R.A.N. Her son fought in H.M.A.S.
Australia in the Great War. Her daughter was one of the band
of V.A.Ds. sent to England by the Red Cross in 1916 to help in
English hospitals, and was there till June, 1919, nursing at a
military hospital. Mrs. Armstrong is interested in charity and
baby welfare ; plays auction bridge. Member of : The Girls'
Friendly Society, The Mothers’ Union, and The Royal Society
for the Welfare of Mothers and Babies. Religion : Church of
England. Politics : United Australia Party.
ASKEW, Marion Enid (Miss), Dublin Street, Clayfield,
Australia ; b. Cleethorpes, Lincolnshire, England ; ed.
Brisbane Girls’ Grammar School ; dau. of William Edward and
Rosa Emma Askew. Interested in child welfare work, music,
dramatic art, literature, education, cooking ; plays tennis, golf,
bridge ; fond of entertaining, travelling, theatre-going, rowing,
dancing. Member of : Brisbane Repertory Theatre Society,
“ Twelfth Night Theatre,” Art of Speech Association, and
Creche and Kindergarten Association. She is Principal of the
Alexandra Private School, for children 2-9 years, a school aiming
at scientific child education and modern methods of child
psychology. Was trained at the Brisbane Kindergarten Training
College, and studied methods in Melbourne. Religion :
Protestant.
AUSTIN, Alice Winifred (Mrs. S. Austin), Wambiana, Trangie,
New South Wales ; b. March, 1874, in Rosedale, Victoria ; ed.
Tintern College, Melbourne ; dau. of Rev. George Kelly ; m.
Sidney Austin, grazier. Mother of Sidney Noel Austin (b. 1902,
d. Jan., 1910), Sidney Austin (b. Nov. 20th, 1912), and Betty
Austin (b. March 3rd, 1914). Interested in music ; plays poker
and bridge ; fond of flying, travelling, motoring. Member of :
Macquarie Club, Sydney. Religion : Church of England.
BABINGTON, Eleanor (Lady), Pinnacle Hill, Kelso, Scotland ;
b. Sydney, New South Wales ; dau. of Thomas Lawson ; m.
Lieut. Gen. Sir James Babington (b. July 31st, 1854, d. June
16th, 1936), soldier, son of Colonel William Babington, 7th
Hussars ; he held the awards of K.C.8., K.C.M.G., and was a
Commander of The Legion of Honour ; commanded in New
Zealand for five years after the Boer War ; commanded the
23rd Division at the beginning of the Great War, and later in
the war the XIV. Army Corps. Mother of Captain Geoffrey
Babington, 16th Lancers, who m. The Lady Anne Egerton,
eldest daughter of The Earl of Ellesmere. Lady Babington is
a member of one of the oldest Australian families. Her ancestor.


William Lawson, went out as a Lieutenant in the 102nd Regi-
ment, the first regiment that went to Australia. He is known in
New South Wales as Iron Bark Lawson. He was the central
figure of the party which first crossed the Blue Mountains. He
went to Sydney with the N.S.W. Corps. The majority of the
Corps returned to England, and those who remained formed the
Veteran Corps, of which her ancestor was the commanding
officer. He received a grant of land and named the rambling
house he built Veterans Hall. The land on which the old house
stood was resumed years ago by the Water Board. Iron Bark
did a great deal for New South Wales ; he started wine-making,
and had the first thoroughbred horses. It was his horse.
Spring Gun, that won the big race at the first race meeting in
Sydney. Lady Babington was born on a large sheep station.
There were no railways or bridges, and when they travelled they
went in a coach with four horses which her father drove.
Religion : Church of England.
BALE, Alice Marian Ellen (Miss), 83, Walpole Street, Kew,
Victoria ; b. Richmond, Victoria ; ed. Methodist Ladies' College,
Kew, Victoria, and National Gallery School, Melbourne, Victoria ;
dau. of William Mountier Bale, F.R.M.S., and Marian (nSe
Adams) Bale. Interested in art, actively ; in music, to some
extent actively ; in literature as a reader ; and in charity, but
not as an actual worker. Four of her paintings, all flower studies,
are in the National Gallery, Melbourne, one in Adelaide Gallery,
one in Sydney Gallery, one in Ballarat Gallery, and two in
Castlemaine Gallery. Portraits of hers have been shown in
The Royal Academy, London (portrait of “ Mr. and Mrs.
Hampel ”), and Paris Salon (“ Miss Wright ”). Member of :
Twenty Melbourne Painters' Society, Victorian Artists’ Society,
and Melbourne Society of Women Painters. Has never left
Victoria ; consequently her art education has been received
there. In addition to the course at the National Gallery Schools
she studied with Mr. Max Meldrum ; and (prior to the National
Gallery course) with Miss May Vale. She has made a collection
of art books. Religion : Agnostic. Politics : Nationalist.
BARNARD, Elsie Joyce (Mrs. C. Barnard), Coranderrk Street,
Reid, Canberra, A.C.T. ; b. Jan. 9th, in Petersham, N.S.W. ;
ed. Springwood Ladies' College, Springwood, N.S.W. ; dau. of
Frederick Younger Deane and Emily Broughton ; m. Colin
Barnard, agricultural scientist, son of James Vincent Barnard
and Elizabeth Runcie ; he was ed. Woodford Academy and
Sydney University ; was Demonstrator and Lecturer, Sydney
Univ., 1924-27 ; graduated Doctor of Science, March, 1936 ; his
publications include numerous papers and articles on botanical
and horticultural subjects in various scientific journals ; Senior
Research Officer, Division of Plant Industry, Council for
Scientific and Industrial Research, Canberra ; Representative
for Australia at the 12th International and Horticultural
Congress in Berlin, 1938. Mother of James Alan Barnard (b,


Nov. 6th, 1928), Peter Deane Barnard (b. April 25th, 1932),
and Colin Frederick Barnard (b. June 27th, 1936). Interested
in education ; plays tennis and bridge ; fond of travelling.
Member of : Canberra Mothercraft. Religion : Church of
England.
BATE, Elsie May (Mrs. H. J. Bate), Mountain View, Tilba
Tilba, New South Wales ; b. Bernagie ; ed. Tilba Tilba School;
dau. of Mr. Jas. W. Mead ; m. H. J. Bate, M.L.A., farmer, and
Member for the South Coast, son of Mr. and Mrs. R. M. Bate ;
he has been Member for the South Coast since 1926 ; was Acting
Chairman of Committees and Acting Deputy Speaker, 1936 ;
was in local government for twenty years ; was President of
Shires Association for two years. Mrs. Bate plays tennis, and
is fond of gardening. Member of : Country Women's Association.
Vice-President of South Coast Group of C.W.A. Was President
of The Tilba District Country Women's Association for three years.
President of Hospital Auxiliary. President of Presybterian
Mission. Religion : Church of England.
BEARD, May Lillian (Mrs. H. E. Beard), 101, Heidelberg
Road, Clifton Hill, N.B, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Geelong ; ed.
Geelong ; dau. of William Humphrey ; m. Henry Elisha Beard
(d. Dec. 18th, 1910), Member of Parliament, son of Elisha Beafd
and Sara Rimmington, of England ; he was ed. in the Wellington
University ; he was a member of the Legislative Assembly in
the State Parliament of Victoria from 1904 to 1907, and was
elected by a huge majority to the House of Representatives in
the Commonwealth Parliament in 1910 ; but died in Melbourne
on 18th December, 1910. Mother of Leonard Henry Beard (b.
April 6th, 1900), Daphne May Beard (b. June 22nd, 1901),
William Rimmington Beard (b. Sept. 2nd, 1904), and Beatrice
Lily Beard (b. June Ist, 1910), all being born in Melbourne.
Beatrice is an elocutionist, and amongst other qualifications she
has her A.L.C.M. and L.L.C.M. ; she has taken the leading part
in many plays, including the presentation of “ The Girls of
Gottenburg,” in which she appeared as “ Clementine ” ; her
performance was so outstanding that the Press acclaimed her
as a “ gifted actress " ; she was ed. at the Presbyterian Ladies’
College, Melbourne, and at the age of seventeen years gave a
recital on her own in the College Hall, the proceeds of which
were given to charity ; she has acted in plays from National and
“ B " Class Radio Stations. Leonard is an Accountant by
profession ; but is at present employed by Radio Station 3KZ,
Melbourne, C.l, as Organizing Secretary of 3KZ Friendship
Circle, of which he was the Founder ; he is affectionately known
to thousands of members and listeners as “ Uncle Vim,” and
the social welfare work carried out under his direction has
brought real happiness to an enormous number of children in
various Institutions and private homes. Daphne was Private
Secretary to the Governing Director of the largest Theatrical
Corporation in Australasia for some years, and resigned on the
13
Australia and New Zealand


occasion of her marriage. Mrs. Beard is interested in charity
and literature ; fond of gardening and motoring. Has written
many plays and serial and short stories, all of which have appeared
in Melbourne newspapers ; her most outstanding efforts were :
The Terrors of the Retreat, Retribution, The Murder at Charters
Towers, The Haviland Mystery, The Way of Life, Daphne, The
Lady Beatrice, and The Lady of the Three Towers. Has been
a teacher of Elocution and English for many years, and has the
Teacher’s Diploma of the London College of Music (T.D.L.C.M.),
after having acquired the A.L.C.M. and L.L.C.M. Has adjudi-
cated in some of the leading Elocutionary Competitions in
Melbourne, and possesses a good clientele of students. Several
of her plays have appeared on the stage in Melbourne, and many
short stories and serials written by her have appeared in
Melbourne newspapers and have been broadcast from Radio
Stations. Religion : Church of England.
BEATH, Marjorie Eunice (Miss), “ Avon,” Carnarvon Road,
Caulfield, 5.E.7, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. in Parkside Street,
Malvern, Victoria ; ed. ” Korowa ” Girls’ Grammar School,
Malvern, Victoria ; dau. of George James Beath. Interested in
charity and education; plays bridge; fond of motoring,
travelling, theatre-going. Member of : Royal Automobile
Club. Very interested in kindergarten work, and was for thirteen
years Headmistress of the Presbyterian Ladies’ College, Branch
School, at Malvern. Since then has done charity kindergarten
work. Religion : Presbyterian. Politics : Liberal.
BEISCHER, Minna (Mrs. A. L. Beischer), " Girrahween,”
Bendigo, Victoria, and “ Normanhurst,” Ranelagh, Mt. Eliza ;
b. Bendigo ; ed. ” Girton ” C. of E. Girls’ Grammar School;
dau. of Robert and Minnie Matchett; m. Dr. Albert L. Beischer,
dental surgeon, son of William and Henrietta Beischer ; he has
been Superintendent of Australian College of Dentistry and
Melbourne Dental Hospital, Chairman of State Dental Council
of Victoria, and is now President of Dental Board of Victoria.
Mother of William Robert Beischer (b. Dec. 6th, 1928), Norman
Albert Beischer (b. April 16th, 1930), and Margaret Helen
Beischer (b. Aug. 2nd, 1932). Interested in infant welfare,
hospital auxiliary work, and music; plays golf and bridge and solo;
fond of motoring and entertaining. Member of : Bendigo Golf
Club, and Arts Club. Religion : Church of England. Politics ;
Nationalist.
BELCHER, Sara (Lady), Box 1406, Nairobi; b. Oct. 31st,
1885, in London; ed. St. Helena College, Ealing; dau. of
Harman Visger, M.D., and Jane A. Owen Visger ; m. Sir Charles
Belcher, Colonial Judge (retired), son of the Hon. G. F. Belcher,
M.L.C. (Victoria), and Fredda Bayly Belcher [nee Thorre).
Mother of Elizabeth Belcher (now Mrs. H. J. Sankey, Ken/a)
(b. April 23rd, 1909), William Redmond Morres Belcher (b. Jan.
Ist, 1912), and Barbara Mary Belcher (b. March 4th, 1924, d.
Oct. 4th, 1924). W. R. M. Belcher fought in the Spanish Civil


War for the Barcelona Government; is an engineer. Lady
Belcher plays bridge, and is fond of motoring and theatre-going.
Member of : Royal Empire Society. Religion : Church of
England.
BENNETT, Catherine Josephine (Mrs. A. J. Bennett), Runny-
mede, Ada Street, Randwick, N.S.W. ; b. March 12th, 1877, in
Sydney, N.S.W. ; ed. Convent of Sacred Heart, Rose Bay,
N.S.W. ; dan. of John Lawler, of Sydney and Springwood,
N.S.W. ; m. Colonel A. J. Bennett, C.M.G., D. 5.0., V.D., Retired
List, Australian Military Forces, son of Mr. and Mrs. B. B.
Bennett. Mrs. Bennett is interested in charity, music (has sung
in church choirs for forty years), religion, racing ; plays golf,
croquet, bridge ; fond of entertaining, motoring, travelling,
theatre-going, historical records, education and cookery. Mem-
ber of : Catholic Women, Sydney. President of Catholic Action
Sewing Guild, Randwick, N.S.W. As wife of Administrator of
Norfolk Island she has promoted and supported all activities of
benefit to hospital, schools, sports and social functions. Enter-
tained distinguished visitors and residents at Government House.
Religion : Catholic.
BEST, Maude Evelyn (Lady Best), Worane, Callantina Road,
Glenferrie; b. May 21st, in Moonta Stn. ; ed. Hardwicke
College, Adelaide ; dau. of Geo. Crocker-Smith ; m. Sir Robert
Best, K.C.M.G., barrister and solicitor, son of Robert and Jane
Best; he has been a member of State and Federal Parliaments
for thirty-four years, and a cabinet minister of both Houses for
eleven years. Mother of Margot Stall, Phyllis Fleming, Helene
Mellotte and Roberta Best. Phyllis is m. to Atholl Fleming,
actor, residing in London has worked on stage with Irene
Vanbrugh, Oscar Asche, and other prominent actors. Helene is
m. to Dr. James Mellotte, of Harley Street, London. Roberta
Best paints and draws, and ballet dances. Lady Best is inter-
ested in hospitals, music, politics, art, and education particularly ;
plays tennis ; fond of entertaining young people, and of theatre-
going. Member of : Alexandra Club, Collins Street, Melbourne.
Has held position of Divisional Commissioner for Melbourne
Girl Guides (a few years ago) ; now resigned. Canterbury Boy
Scouts are “ Lady Best’s Own.” Has resigned from all
committee work. Religion : Church of England. Politics :
Progressive Liberal.
BIGNOLD, Alice Green (Mrs. E. B. Bignold), Port Moresby,
Papua ; b. Dec. 17th, 1905, in Kempsey, N.S.W. ; ed. “ Abbots-
leigh ” and Normanhurst, Sydney, N.S.W. ; dau. of R. H.
Sefton, Esq. ; m. Esm6 Baron Bignold, barrister, Crown Law
Officer of Papua, son of H. B. Bignold, barrister, Sydney ; he
was five years at the Bar in Sydney, and in present position
since 1927. Mother of Jill Baron Bignold (b. May 22nd, 1931),
and Terry Baron Bignold (b. July sth, 1933). Interested in
literature and art; plays tennis and bridge ; fond of swimming,
riding, entertaining, theatres. Member of ; Girls’ Secondary
15
Australia and New Zealand


Schools Club, Sydney, N.S.W. Religion : Church of England.
Politics : United Australian Party,
BILBE-ROBINSON, Rosa Hannah (Lady Bilbe-Robinson),
7, Cambridge Gate, Regent’s Park, London, and Redriff, North
Foreland, Broadstairs; b. February, 1882 ; ed. Broadstairs ;
dau. of Walter Cowell, of Broadstairs ; m. Lt. Col. Sir Thomas
Bilbe-Robinson (d. May 15th, 1939), Director of Mcllwraith
McEacharn, etc., Agent General for Queensland, 1911-21, son of
William Robinson, shipbuilder ; he went to Australia in 1881 ;
was Major in Command of Ist Queenslanders ; managing partner
of Walter Reid, Rockhampton ; Director Federal Steam Navi-
gation Co.-, Ltd., New Zealand Shipping Co., and Queensland
National Bank ; Director of Allied meat supplies during the
Great War. Mother of Phyllis Rosa (b. 1906), m., 1930, Richard
D. D. Birdwood, 1.M.5., and has one son and one daughter ;
Olive Marion (b. 1908), m., 1928, Captain I. N. R. Moore,
Grenadier Guards, and has two daughters and one son ; and
Allan Bilbe (b. 1909), now in New Zealand. Lady Bilbe-
Robinson is interested in education and gardening. She was
Commandant of Australian V.A.Ds. during war, in London, and
represented Australia at International Red Cross Conference in
Geneva, 1920 and 1923. Owns Walton Downs, Charleville,
Queensland. Religion : Church of England. Politics : Con-
servative.
BIRTLES, Nea (Mrs. F. Birtles), “ The Gunyah,” 200, Beach
Street, Coogee, Sydney, N.S.W. ; b. Sydney, N.S.W. ; ed.
Dominican Convent, West Maitland, N.S.W. ; dau. of George
Duncan McCutcheon ; m. Francis Birtles, author and explorer,
son of Sarah Jane and David Birtles ; he has pioneered in
Australia by sea, land and air ; motored from England to
Australia. Mrs. Birtles is interested in photography and explora-
tion ; plays golf and bridge ; fond of outdoor sports and theatres.
Member of: Country Women’s Association. Motored, pioneered
twenty-five thousand miles of outback Australia. Religion :
Roman Catholic. Politics : National Outlook.
BLACKBURN, Doris Amelia (Mrs. M. M. Blackburn),
“ Duneira,” Louisville Avenue, Pascoe Vale South, Victoria ;
b. 1889, in Auburn, Victoria ; ed. Hessle College, Camberwell,
Victoria ; dau. of Lebbeus Hordern and Louisa Dewson Hordern ;
m. Maurice McCrae Blackburn, barrister and solicitor. Member
of House of Representatives, Federal Parliament, son of Maurice
and Tomasanne Blackburn; he was Member of Legislative
Assembly in Victorian Government (1914-1917, and again from
1925-1934) ; Speaker in the Victorian Parliament in 1933-1934 ;
returned Member for Bourke, Federal Parliament, 1934, a seat
which he still retains. Mother of Maurice Blackburn (b. 1915),
Gerard Blackburn (b. 1918), and Louisa Blackburn (b. 1921).
Maurice Blackburn took his degree as Master of Science at the
Melbourne University in April, 1937, and holds the position of
Marine Biologist in the Fisheries Research Department of the


Australian Council for Scientific and Industrial Research.
Gerard Blackburn, having graduated also at the Melbourne
University in Agricultural Science, completing the course for the
Bachelor of Agricultural Science degree before his 21st year,
holds a position in the Agricultural Department of Victoria as
Soil Erosion Officer. Mrs. Blackburn is interested in literature,
world politics, and education (in particular the education of the
pre-school child) ; fond of motoring, gardening, and the outdoor
life. Member of : The International Peace Campaign, Spanish
Children's Aid Council, Victorian Playgrounds' Association, and
The Wranglers’ Debating Society. Religion : Christian.
Politics : Radical.
BOAS, Adela Isabel (Mrs. I. H. Boas), 1, Kelvin Grove,
Armadale, S.l, Melbourne ; b. Adelaide, South Australia ; ed.
Adelaide and Melbourne ; dau. of Samuel I. Solomon ; m. Isaac
Herbert Boas, Chief of Division of Forest Products, C.5.1.R.,
Melbourne, son of Rev. A. G. Boas, Adelaide ; he is an M.S.C.,
Western Australia, A.1.C., A.A.C.1., and member of National
Research Council ; author of, Original Research into Making
Paper from Australian Hardwoods. Mother of Harold John
Boas (b. 1909), who is engaged in commerce ; Bernard Abraham
Boas (b. 1911), who is a B.Sc., University of Melbourne ; Eliza-
beth Boas (b. 1914), and Norman Samuel Boas (b. 1916), who
is engaged in engineering. Mrs. Boas is interested in charity ;
fond of travelling and theatre-going. Member of : Royal
Melbourne Hospital Kiosk, Committee of Jewish Woman’s
Guild, and other committees. Mrs. Boas is a great-grand-
daughter of Samuel Isaac Solomon, who arrived in Australia in
1833. Her father was born in Queensland in 1845. Religion :
Jewish. Politics : United Australia Party.
BOOTH, Angela Elizabeth (Mrs. J. Booth), 424, Victoria Street,
N. Melbourne, and Nilga, Warrandyte ; b. Liverpool ; ed.
Liverpool and the Continent; dau. of Thomas Patrick Plover ;
m. James Booth, medical practitioner, son of Ernest Hardwicke
and Mary Ann Booth ; he is a non-Labour Alderman of Broken
Hill, N.S. Wales ; children’s magistrate ; having taken promi-
nent part in introducing psychological exam, of delinquent
children ; Founder of the Queensland Ambulance Brigade ;
President of the Australian Literature Society for ten years.
Mrs. Booth is interested in music, literature (contributing articles
to the press) and politics (being an acknowledged speaker on
political questions) ; fond of walking, motoring, the theatre and
gardening. Authoress of pamphlets on the Payment of Women’s
Work, The Voluntary Sterilization of the Unfit, etc., and Sex
Education. Member of : Alexandra Club, and Lyceum Club.
She is a lecturer and writer on sociological subjects ; was Shire
Councillor for seven years ; one of the first seven women
appointed to the Commission of the Peace ; contested the State
seat of Brighton in the U.A.P. interest. First President of the
Women’s Citizens’ Movement, and a leader in the Women's


Course, and first President of the reformed Playlovers’ Club.
Religion : Anglican. Politics : U.A.P. (Nationalist).
BOOTH, Beryl Gertrude (Mrs. J. J. Booth), 188, Hotham Street,
East Melbourne ; b. Feb. 22nd, 1896, in Melbourne; ed.
Stratherne Ladies’ College, and Melbourne Church of England
Girls’ Grammar School ; dau. of Alexander Edward Bradshaw ;
m. Joseph John Booth, Bishop of the Church of England, son
of Joseph and Mary Booth ; he was ed. Ridley College, Melbourne
University ; ordained 1914 ; war service, 1916-19 ; Vicar of
Fairfield, 1919 ; Archdeacon of Dandenong, 1933 ; Bishop of
Geelong, 1934. Mother of Joan Lloyd Booth (b. Dec. 24th, 1920),
Doris Margaret Booth (b. Sept. 23rd, 1923), and Patricia Mary
Booth (b. July Bth, 1926). Interested in charity, music, religion.
Religion : Church of England.
BOWERING, Millicent Maud (Mrs. J. R. Bowering), 9, Bath
Street, Glenelg, South Australia ; b. Laura, South Australia ;
ed. various schools ; dau. of Rev. C. A. A. Munns ; m. J. R.
Bowering, accountant; in early manhood he was in building
trade ; later engaged in commercial agency, accountancy and
auditing. Mother of Dr. Beryl Bowering, of Jiaganj Hospital,
Bengal, India ; before going to India Beryl was Lady Doctor
and Surgeon at the Adelaide Hospital. Mrs. Bowering was an
unsuccessful candidate for parliamentary honours at the elections
in 1938 ; fond of entertaining, motoring, travelling, lecturing.
Member of : Women’s Non-Party Association of South Australia.
Is past President of the Women’s Christian Temperance Union
of South Australia, and Vice-President of the Democratic
Women's Association. Also past President of the Baptist
Missionary Union of South Australia. Religion : Congrega-
tional. Politics : Non-Party.
BRIDGES, Hilda Maggie (Miss), Wood’s Farm, Sorell, Tas-
mania, and Lyceum Club, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Oct. 19th,
1881, in Hobart, Tasmania ; ed. Scotch College, Hobart, Tas-
mania ; dau. of Laura and Samuel Bridges. Interested in
literature, and music—but not “ modern,” or “ ultra-modern ”
music ; fond of travelling, theatres, gardening. Authoress of
the novels : Our Neighbours, Chinese Lacquer, Chinese Jade,
House of Storms, House of Make-Believe, Ship of the Mist,
Derelict Island, Conesby’s Corner, Distant Fields, Men Must Live,
etc. ; also serials, short stories, etc. Member of : Lyceum Club,
Melbourne. Her serial stories were first to be read over national
stations in Victoria and Tasmania. She is interested in early
Australian records, etc. ; her mother’s grandparents were
Tasmanian pioneers. Cares much for the little farm (206 acres)
—Wood’s Farm —granted to them, and now in her brother’s
possession. Religion : Church of England. Politics : Labour
usually (Australian).
BRIGGS, Hazel Jeanne, B.Sc. (Mrs. E. A. Briggs), ” Thane
Cottage,” 50, Cheltenham Road, Cheltenham, 1, N.S.W. ; b.
Epping, N,S,W.; ed. Sydney Girls’ High School, and University
18
Principal Women of the Empire :


of Sydney; dau. of Archibald Campbell and Rosa Mu veil
Campbell; m. Edward Alfred Briggs, Professor of Zoology,
University of Sydney, son of William and Louisa Briggs ; he
graduated B.Sc., 1911 ; graduated M.Sc., 1924 ; graduated
D.Sc., 1929 ; was Zoologist, Australian Museum, 1912-18;
Leader of University New Guinea Expeditions, 1924-27. Mrs.
Briggs is interested in education and cinema photography ; fond
of travelling and garden planning. She and her husband are
both very interested in coloured movie photography, and have
spent a great deal of time in out-of-the-way corners of the East
making coloured movie films of native life and customs.
BROWN, Doris Jocelyn (Mrs. A. J. Brown), “ Fountains/’
Springdale Road, Killara, N.S.W. ; b. 1898, in Brisbane,
Queensland ; ed. Summer Hill and Royal Art Society, Sydney,
N.S.W. ; dau. of Sydney Reynolds Giles, of Gt. Yarmouth,
England ; m. Alfred J. Brown, N.Z., architect and town-
planner, son of Mr. and Mrs. D. Chadwick Brown, Auckland,
N.Z. ; he was assistant architect, Welwyn Garden City, Herts.,
1920-23 ; Soane Medallist, 1921 ; Vernon Memorial lecturer,
Sydney University, 1930-39 ; first President of the Town and
Country Planning Institute of N.S.W. ; served with N.Z. forces
during Great War ; wounded 1917. Mother of John Wyndham
Brown (b. July 11th, 1921), and Paul Valentine Chadwick Brown
(b. Feb. 14th, 1924), who were ed. at Sydney Grammar School
and The Armidale School, N.S.W. Interested in British Israel,
as lecturer and broadcaster, housing and slum clearance,
painting and handicrafts ; plays chess ; fond of entertaining
and the repertory theatre. Member of : Society of Arts and
Crafts of N.S.W., Sydney Business and Professional Womens'
Club, and The Housing Council of N.S.W. She is a practising
landscape architect. Her paintings have been exhibited by the
Art Society, Auckland, N.Z., and The Society of Artists in
Sydney, N.S.W. Religion : Anglican. Politics : Conservative.
BROWNE, Helen de Guerry (Mrs. D. Browne), 48, Queen
Anne Street, London, W.l, England ; b. Dec. Ist, 1897 ; ed.
Convent of the Sacred Heart, Sydney, and University of Oxford ;
dau. of Edward Percy Simpson ; m. Denis Browne, Fellow of
the Royal College of Surgeons, son of Sylvester Browne and
Anne Catherine Stawell; he is Surgeon to the Hospital for Sick
Children, Great Ormond Street, London. Mother of Clemence
Helen Browne. Interested in politics as a hobby, and earns
her living as a novelist; fond of collecting books on cookery,
witchcraft, and Australian history. Authoress of : Boomerang,
The Women on the Beest, and Under Capricorn. Member of a
great many clubs and societies, including the Detection Club
and the Guild of Bell-ringers. She is a candidate for Parliament,
standing as an opposition Liberal for the Isle of Wight. Religion :
Roman Catholic. Politics : Liberal.
BUILDER, Margaret Bettie (Mrs. G. Builder), 3, Holwood
Avenue, Ashfield, N.S.W. ; b. March 22nd, 1911, in Perth ; ed.


Perth College, and Universities of W.A. and Melbourne ; dan.
of Dr. Robert McFarlane Mitchell and Ellen Mary Hamfield
Mitchell [nee Pizey) ; m. Dr. Geoffrey Builder, physicist, son of
Alfred Earnest Builder and Grace Builder [nee Clarke). Mother
of Margaret Ann Builder (b. June 29th, 1938). Interested in
music, bacteriology, painting ; plays tennis, bridge, billiards.
B.Sc. of W.A., and Post Graduate studies in Bacteriology at
Melbourne University. Religion : Church of England. Politics :
Conservative.
BUNTINE, Bertha Florence (Mrs. W. M. Buntine), 181,
Kooyong Road, Toorak, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Melbourne ,
ed. Presbyterian Ladies’ College, Melbourne ; dau. of the late
Richard Gibbs, Barrister-at-Law and Registrar General and
Registrar of Titles for Victoria, and Amelia Hardwick Gibbs ;
m. Walter Murray Buntine, former Headmaster, Caulfield
Grammar School, Melbourne, son of Robert and Janet Murray
Buntine, both of Scotland ; he was a member of Council of
University of Melbourne (five years), member of Council of
Public Education, Representative of Govt, of Victoria at
Conference on Education, Geneva, 1935, etc. Mother of Lt.
Walter Horace Carlyle, M.C. (b. Aug. 10th, 1895), who served in
R.F.C. and Sherwood Foresters Regt., and died on Active Service,
June 17th, 1917 ; Richard Murray Buntine, M. 8., 8.5., D.T.M.
& H. (b. Jan. 12th, 1897), who has a suburban practice in MeL
bourne; Martyn Arnold Buntine, Ph.D. (Edin.), M.A. (Mel.)
(b. Dec. 27th, 1898), who is Headmaster of Hale School, Perth,
W.A. ; Bertha Mary Gladys Buntine, Dip. Mus. (Mel.) (b. April
19th, 1901), who m. Dr. Allan Wilson, Perth, W.A. ; and Robert
Douglas Buntine, M. 8., B.S. (b. July 11th, 1906), who is in a
country practice, Victoria. Mrs. Buntine is interested in
charitable and religious work, literature and education ; fond
of motoring, travelling, reading. Was for many years member
of the Lyceum Club, but recently resigned. For eighteen years
Diocesan Secretary of the Mothers’ Union, C.E., Melbourne.
Specially interested in youth work in schools and colleges of
Victoria. Religion : Church of England.
BUNTINE, Gladys Selby (Mrs. M. A. Buntine), Hale School,
Perth, Western Australia ; b. Sept. 7th, 1902, in Melbourne ;
ed. Melbourne Church of England Girls’ Grammar School (Merton
Hall) ; dau. of Reginald Selby Spurling ; m. Dr. M. Arnold
Buntine, headmaster, son of Mr. and Mrs. W. M. Buntine,
Toorak, Victoria ; he holds degrees of M.A. (Melbourne Univer-
sity) and Ph.D. (Edinburgh University) ; past Headmaster,
Camberwell Grammar School, Victoria ; now Headmaster, Hale
School, Perth, Western Australia. Mother of Robert Walter
Buntine (b. Feb. 18th, 1929), and John Mackenzie Buntine
(b. Oct. 18th, 1934). Interested in literature, music, art,
education ; plays tennis and golf ; fond of reading, motoring,
travelling, theatre-going, walking. Member of : Lake Karrinyup
Country Club, Kylie Music Club, and Perth Repertory Society.


Was for some years “ Commissioner of Lores ” in the Girl
Guides Association ; is at present a member of the Executive
Committee. Religion : Anglican. Politics : Nationalist.
BURGMANN, Edna Carey (Mrs. E. H. Burgmann), Bishopthorpe,
Goulburn, N.S.W. ; b. Sept. Ist, 1895 ; ed. Fort Street Model
School, Sydney, N.S.W. ; dau. of Morgan and Emma Marion
Crowhurst ; m. E. H. Burgmann, Bishop of Goulburn, N.S.W.,
son of Henry and Mary Burgmann ; he was Warden of S. John's
College, Armidale and Morpeth, N.S.W., 1918-34 ; Bishop of
Goulburn since 1934. Mother of Victor Dudley Burgmann (b.
Dec. sth, 1916), Joyce Edna Burgmann (b. Aug. 29th, 1918),
Paul Alton Burgmann (b. July 9th, 1920, deceased), Alan Bernard
Burgmann (b. April 28th, 1923), Betty Marion Burgmann (b.
May 29th, 1925), and Dorothy Margaret Burgmann (b. Oct. sth,
1927). Victor Dudley Burgmann holds degrees of B.Sc., 8.E.,
and received First-class Honours at graduation ; Commonwealth
Research Scholar. Joyce Edna Burgmann holds degree of 8.A.,
and received First-class Honours in Psychology at graduation.
Both of Sydney University. Mrs. Burgmann is interested in
charity, religion, music ; plays tennis ; fond of motoring.
Apart from her duties as wife of a College Principal and a bishop,
her home and her children have fully occupied her, except that
she has always and still finds time for tennis. Religion ; Church
of England.
BURING, Ida Agatha (Mrs. L. Buring), Leonay, Emu Plains,
N.S.W. ; b. Watervale, S.A. ; ed. Stanley Grammar School,
Watervale, S.A. ; dau. of Carl Sobels ; m. Leo Buring, wine
merchant and expert, son of Hermann Buring, of Adelaide ; he
holds Diploma and is Gold Medallist of Roseworthy Agricultural
College, S.A. ; Councillor Royal Agricultural Society of N.S.W. ;
Blue Mountain Shire Councillor. Mrs. Buring is interested in
charity ; fond of travelling, entertaining, gardening, theatre-
going. Member of : International Society of N.S.W. Religion :
Anglican. Politics : Democratic.
BURNAGE, Helen (Mrs. G. J. Burnage), Woorilla, Cary Bay,
Toronto, N.S.W. ; b. Dec. 16th, 1872, in Oswaldtwisle, Lancs.,
England ; ed. in England and Germany ; dau. of Rev. Boulby
Haslewood ; m. Granville John Burnage, Colonel, C. 8., V.D. ;
he was first commissioned in N.S.W. military forces as Lieut.,
1883 ; commanded 4th Inf. Regt. and Commanding Officer,
Newcastle Defences, 1906-13 ; served in S. African War, 2nd in
command, 3rd Mt. Rifles (Queen’s Medal, five clasps) ; in Great
War was in Gallipoli landing, C.O. 13th Batt., wounded May
29th, 1915; C.B. 1915; three voyages with reinforcements when
on sea transport service ; was C.O. of troops on Barunga when
torpedoed ; put on retired list, A.M.F., 1921. Mrs. Burnage is
interested in needlework, and music especially ; fond of travelling,
country life and gardening. Religion : Church of England.
Politics : Conservative.


BURRELL, Susan Emily (Mrs. H. J. Burrell), Yarrenbool,
141, Darley Road, Randwick, N.S.W. ; b. Pallamallawa, N.S.W. ;
ed. Ladies' Private Boarding College ; dau. of the late William
and Susan Rebecca Hill; m. Harry James Burrell, naturalist
and author, son of the late Douglas and Sarah Rose Burrell; he
is a world authority on the natural habits of monotremes ; author
of, The Platypus, and co-author of, The Wild Animals of
Australasia. Mrs. Burrell is interested in nature study, charity,
literature, music, education ; fond of motoring and travelling.
Member of : Royal Zoological Society of New South Wales.
Was a member of the Red Cross for nearly twenty years, of
which, during that time, she was President of the Excelsior
Branch for fourteen years. Received the King George the
Sixth Coronation Medal for charity work. Religion : Church
of England. Politics : United Australian Party.
BYLES, Marie Beuzeville (Miss), “ Knoll Platt," Day Road,
Cheltenham, N.S.W., 2, Hillview Road, Eastwood, N.S.W., and
3, Castlereagh Street, Sydney, N.S.W. ; b. April Bth, 1900, in
Ashton-on-Mersey, England ; ed. Presbyterian Ladies’ Colleges,
Croydon and Pymble, N.S.W., and Sydney University ; dau. of
Cyril Beuzeville Byles and Ida Margaret Byles [nee Unwin).
Interested in wild life and bushland preservation, reservation of
national parks and primitive areas, and extension of bush-
walking and hiking facilities ; fond of mountaineering, bush-
walking, hiking, travelling, but principally her work as a lawyer.
Authoress of : By Cargo Boat and Mountain. Member of :
New Zealand Alpine Club, Canadian Alpine Club, Sydney Bush-
walkers, Rucksack Club, Women's Club of Sydney, Royal
Geographical Society, and H.H. Club of Sydney. First woman
to be admitted as a solicitor in N.S.W. (1924), and has built up
a tolerably flourishing practice ; has done a certain amount of
mountaineering and exploration work in New Zealand ; has
organized a mountaineering party to the Sansato Mountain
Massif in Western China, but the mountain was not climbed.
Religion : Agnostic. Politics : Liberal or Radical (not any
party).
CAMBRIDGE, Enid Helen Gray (Miss), Springtrees, James
Street, Chatswood, N.S. Wales ; b. Mosman, Sydney, N.S. Wales ;
ed. “ Redlands " Private College ; dau. of Henry Gray Cam-
bridge and Stella Cambridge. Interested in art, education,
religion ; fond of entertaining, travelling, riding, theatre-going.
She is a landscape painter in oils and water-colours. Member
of : Contemporary Group of Artists, and exhibits with other
Societies. Has been Honorary Secretary of the Contemporary
Group of Artists for seven years, and is particularly interested
in the education of children in creative art, and exhibiting their
work in public. Religion : Church of England. Politics :
United Australian Party (Liberal).
CAMM, Sarah May (Mrs. J. P. Camm), “ Sunnyside," Corry
Lynn Road, Claremont, Western Australia ; b. Avoca, Victoria ;


ed. at high school; dau. of William and Mary Chamberlain ;
m. John Percy Camm, surveyor, son of J. S. and Hannah Camm ;
he has been “ Surveyor General ” of Western Australia for
fifteen years. Mother of Hilda May Camm (b. March 20th),
Dora Camm (b. April 16th), Harold Camm (b. Sept. 7th), and
John Camm (b. March 10th). Harold Camm is Inspector of
Plans and Surveys in Titles Office. John Camm is an account-
ant in bank. Dora Camm holds Diploma of Music. Mrs. Camm
holds classes for the education of women in public speaking ;
plays bridge and croquet; fond of entertaining in her home,
and travelling. Member of : Kanakatta Club and Myola Club.
Life member of Infant Health Centre. Religion : Methodist.
CAMPBELL, Kate Isabel (Miss), 1293, Burke Road, East
Kew, E. 4, Melbourne, Victoria, and 33, Collins Street, Melbourne,
Victoria; b. Hawthorn, Melbourne, Victoria ; ed. Hawthorn
State School, Methodist Ladies’ College, Trinity College, and
Melbourne University ; dau. of Donald and Janet Campbell.
Interested in child welfare, particularly the new-born ; fond of
theatre-going and motoring. Authoress of medical articles.
Member of : The Lyceum Club, British Medical Association,
and Victorian Medical Women’s Association. Religion :
Anglican. Politics : Liberal.
CAMPBELL, Phyllis Violet (Mrs. E. F. Campbell), 5, Kardinia
Road, Clifton Gardens, Mosman, N.S.W. ; b. Torquay, England ;
ed. Clifton High School, England, and Hildesheim, Germany ;
dau. of Mr. Justice Charles P. Caspersz, 1.C.5., and Mrs. Caspersz ;
m. Mr. E. F. Campbell, 8.E., A.M.1.E.E., A.M.I.E.Aust.,
Lecturer in Electrical Engineering, Sydney University, son of
Mr. J. F. Campbell, F.R.A.H.S., and Mrs. Campbell (both
deceased) ; he is a P. N. Russell Scholar ; Organizing Secretary,
Sydney University 75th Anniversary Appeal for
1927-28 ; Ex-President and now a Senate Representative on
Board of Directors, Sydney University Union ; Ex-President
of other University Societies ; Ex-Chairman, N.S.W. Advisory
Committee, The Institution of Electrical Engineers, London ;
Ex-Chairman, Electrical Engineering Branch, Sydney Division,
The Institution of Engineers, Australia ; Member of Council,
N.S.W. Branch, League of Nations Union. Mrs. Campbell is
interested in music, English, French and German Literature,
education, animal welfare. Authoress of : A Piper’s Tune
(album of piano pieces, 1934) ; articles in several periodicals ;
unpublished violin and piano sonatas, violin, piano, viola, organ
solos, many art songs in English and German, motets and other
compositions. Holds degree of A.R.C.M. (London). Has
lectured on musical subjects. Has broadcast violin solos and
own compositions. Is registered as a qualified teacher of violin,
piano and theoretical subjects by Musical Association of N.S.W.
Has been composition pupil of the late Norman O’Neill (London)
and Alfred Hill (Sydney). Owner of Testore violin (1700 A.D.).


• CARDELL-OLIVER, Annie Florence Gillies (Mrs. A. C. Oliver),
Perth, Western Australia ; b. Victoria ; ed. Victoria, England
and France ; dau. of Johnston Wilson ; m. Arthur Cardell-
Oliver (d. Sept., 1929), medical practitioner, who served in the
Boer War and the Great War. Mother of two sons who were
ed. in England and France ; one holds degree of M.A. (Cambridge
University) and the other holds degrees of M.A. (Cambridge
University) and LL.B., and is Barrister, Inner Temple. Mrs.
Cardell-Oliver is interested in charity, literature, politics, religion ;
has travelled extensively in most countries of the world. She
is President of W.A. Women's Hockey Association, Women
Painters of W.A., Women's Branch of National Party, and
Branch of Red Cross. Vice-President of National Party of
W.A., and The Women Service Guild. Authoress of : Empire
Unity or Red Asiatic Domination, and many pamphlets. Member
of : R. 1., London, and The Legislative Assembly in W.A. —
the only woman member in this Parliament. Religion :
Protestant. Politics : Nationalist.
CARRINGTON, Kathleen Elizabeth (Mrs. V. G. Carrington),
The Residency, Alice Springs, Northern Territory of Australia ;
b. Winton, Queensland ; ed. All Hallows’ Convent, Brisbane,
Queensland ; dau. of the late David and Marie O’Keefe, of
Brisbane, Queensland ; m. Victor George Carrington, District
Officer, son of Edith and the late George Carrington, of Rock-
hampton, Queensland ; he was Government Resident of Central
Australia, 1929 ; Deputy Administrator, N.T., 1931, and later
District Officer, Alice Springs. Mother of Brian George Carring-
ton (b. July Bth, 1928). Interested in charity and social life,
and in Scouts, Guides, and all children's activities ; plays tennis,
croquet, deck games, table tennis, and bridge ; fond of enter-
taining, motoring, travelling. Member of Victoria League.
Patroness of Alice Springs Branch Country Women’s Association.
President of Alice Springs Branch Northern Territory Division
of the Red Cross Society. Religion : Catholic.
CARSE, Winifred Joyce (Mrs. J. R. F. Carse), Moonbria, Near
Jerilderic, N.S. Wales ; b. Clare, South Australia ; ed. Church
of England Girls' Grammar School, Geelong, Victoria ; dau. of
the late George E. Maslin, Bundaleer, South Australia ; m. John
R. F. Carse, land-owner and stud sheep-breeder, son of Samuel
H. Carse and Alice M. Carse [nee Falkiner). Mother of Catherine
Joyce Metford Carse (b. 1921), Nancy Louise Carse (b. 1922),
and John Samuel Carse (b. 1924). Interested in politics, her
home, family and garden, and literature; plays tennis and
bridge ; fond of motoring, entertaining, riding, racing, and care
of animals and birds ; has a large aviary of Australian parrots.
Member of : Alexandra Club, Melbourne Royal Empire Society,
and numerous racing and sporting clubs. She is a grand-
daughter of the late John Maslin, of Bundaleer, one of the most
prominent of the pioneering land-owners of South Australia, and
her mother was a Miss Young, a member of a family which also


played a prominent part in the history of the same state. Her
husband's family is a very old Scotch-Irish land-owning one ;
his maternal grandfather, F. S. Falkiner, was a very large land-
owner in Australia, and founder of the largest merino sheep stud
in the world. Religion : Anglican. Politics : Conservative.
CARTER, Emily Bryce (Mrs. B. M. Carter), “ Moorong,” 41,
Mary Street, Longueville, Sydney, N.S.W. (private address), and
“ Art Pottery Shop,” No. 15, The Sydney Arcade, 101, King
Street, Sydney, N.S.W. ; b. Blayney, N.S.W. ; ed. Blayney and
Bathurst; second dau. of Joseph Josephson ; m. Bryce Morrow
Carter (d. Jan. sth, 1939), professional ’cellist, son of Harold
and Janet Carter ; after the death of his master (Herr Gerard
Vollmar) her late husband was principal ’cellist of Sydney for
many years ; leader of Amateur Orchestral Society, Sydney
Symphony Orchestra and Philharmonic Society ; appeared as
soloist to Dame Nellie Melba on one of her visits to Sydney,
and at the time of his death was a member of the Australian
Broadcasting Communion Orchestra. Mother of Eric Bryce
Carter and Frances Bryce Carter (now m. to John Hamilton
Jackson). Her son Eric has inherited the artistic qualities of
his father’s family, and is engaged in the hand-making of typical
Australian pottery. Mrs. Carter is interested in charity,
literature, music, art, commerce. Was for many years an active
charity worker, but had of necessity to give up these interests
when entering business in 1934 with her son. She reviews
three books weekly for “ The Northern Daily Leader,” published
at Tamworth —one of the largest circulation country papers in
N.S.W. Because of the depression she was forced to resign
from all clubs, committees and charitable work five years ago,
and entered business with her son, and they are now definitely
established as artistic hand-workers of typical Australian pottery.
For some years prior to that she lectured at many of the women’s
clubs of Sydney on musicians and their lives, and especially to
Tree-lovers’ Associations on the subject of ” Trees ” and their
wide-reaching effects of spoliation.
CARTER, Lydia Kate (Mrs. H. G. Carter), 8, Braeside Street,
Wahroonga, N.S. Wales ; b. Feb. 24th, 1886, in Glebe Point,
Sydney, N.S. Wales ; dau. of Henry J. King ; m. Herbert Gordon
Carter, consulting engineer, son of Herbert James Carter and
Antoinette Charlotte Moore; he was Lt. Col., sth Pioneer
Battalion, A.1.F., and was Alderman H. G. Carter (Mayor of
Kuringai Municipality), 1938-39. Mother of Beatrice Wynne
Carter (b. May 26th, 1918, d. March 3rd, 1920), Edward Gordon
Carter (b. Aug. 14th, 1919), John Whitfield Carter (b. April
20th, 1921), Anthony James Carter (b. June sth, 1923), and
Shirley Moore Carter (b. Oct. 7th, 1925). Mrs. Carter is President
of Girl Guides’ Local Association, and President of Executive of
National Emergency Service for Kuringai Municipality ; plays
golf and bridge; fond of entertaining, travelling, motoring.
Member of : Killara Golf Club. Religion : Church of England.
Politics : United Australia Party.


CASS, Helena Whitney (Mrs. W. E. H. Cass), Punt Hill, South
Yarra, Melbourne, S.E.I ; b. Toronto, Canada ; ed. London,
England ; dau. of the late W. H. Holmes, Truro, Nova Scotia ;
m. Brigadier W. E. H. Cass, C.M.G. (d. 1932), Australian
Permanent Forces. Interested in broadcasting, journalism,
travelling, and has been three times round the world. Member
of : Lyceum Club, etc., etc. Travelled in the U.S.A., Canada
and England, 1936-39, as an official lecturer on Australia. Her
articles have appeared in many newspapers and magazines
throughout the Commonwealth.
CHALMERS-BORELLA, Elsie J. (Mrs. A. Chalmers-Borella),
Fleurbaix,” Hensley Park, via Cavendish, Victoria ; b.
Hamilton, Victoria ; ed. Hamilton State School; dau. of Mr.
and Mrs. Geo. F. Love ; m. Lieut. A. Chalmers-Borella, V.C.,
M.M., land-holder and soldier, son of the late Mr. and Mrs. L.
Borella, late of Boort, Victoria, and Moama, N.S. Wales ; her
husband was one of the first to take up land in North Territory ;
left there and travelled to nearest recruiting office in Queensland
and enlisted during Great War ; won V.C., M.M. ; he contested
Dundas seat in State House, Victoria, in 1923, against Wm.
Slater. Mother of Mervyn Chalmers-Borella (b. March 18th,
1930), Maxwell Chalmers-Borella (b. March Ist, 1932), Rowan
Chalmers-Borella (b. Nov. 16th, 1933), and Neville Chalmers-
Borella (b. Sept. 30th, 1938). Interested in religion, politics,
literature, art, music (singing teachers, the late J. T. Warren,
Madam Kugleberg and daughter) ; plays tennis ; fond of
motoring and riding, but dream of her life is to travel —particu-
larly over Australia. Member of : Red Cross, Aux. of Return.,
S. and S.L. of Australia (Hamilton B.) ; before her marriage was
Secretary of A.W.N.L. and W.C.T.U. Both she and her husband
paint in oils, and her husband does pen-and-ink drawings. Her
mother’s mother was a Matthews, dau. of Wm. Matthews,
England, and famous book-binders, London. Harry Chalmers,
first Mayor of Ballarat, was a brother of her husband’s grand-
father. Religion : Methodist. Politics : Country Party.
CHAMBERS, Winifred Marian (Mrs. G. A. Chambers), Bishop's
House, Dodoma, Tanganyika Territory, and 35, York Mansions,
London, 5.W.1l ; b. Sept. 21st, 1888, in London; ed. by
governesses at home ; dau. of the Rev. the Hon. W. Talbot
Rice ; m. the Right Rev. G. A. Chambers, Bishop of Central
Tanganyika, son of Mr. and Mrs. William Chambers ; he was
formerly Rector of Dulwich Hill, N.S. Wales, and Warden of
Trinity Grammar School, Sydney, N.S. Wales. Mother of Talbot
Alexander Chambers (b. March 19th, 1921), and Roland George
Chambers (b. May 27th, 1923). Interested in child welfare and
education (especially in Africa), literature, religion ; fond of
entertaining and travelling. Member of : The Overseas Club.
Religion : Church of England.
CHAPMAN, Eva Maud (Lady R. Chapman), High Street,
Burnside, South Australia ; b. Oct. 9th, 1868, in Williamstown,


Victoria ; ed. private schools, Williamstown and Colac, Victoria ;
dau. of George H. B. Hall, of Williamstown, Victoria ; m. Sir
Robert Chapman, C.M.G., Professor of Engineering, son of
Charles and Matilda Chapman, of Ivanhoe, Victoria ; he recently
retired after fifty years’ service at Adelaide University ; past
President of both Institution of Mining Engineers and Inst, of
Engineers, Australia. Mother of Robert Hall Chapman (b. Jan.
sth, 1890), Charles George Chapman (b. Nov. 19th, 1891, killed
in action 1916), Eva Florence Chapman (b. Dec. sth, 1893),
Lilian Eleanor Chapman (b. June 23rd, 1895), Walter Harrison
Chapman (b. Nov. 13th, 1896), James Douglas Chapman (b.
Dec. 29th, 1901), Ernest Stirling Chapman (b. April 23rd, 1906),
and Leslie Drake Chapman (b. Dec. Bth, 1911). The three
eldest sons served in the 1914-18 war ; one killed, in Mesopotamia,
Lieut, in R.E. ; Robert Hall is now Chief Engineer for South
Australian Railways ; daughters married; Walter Harrison
gold-mining in New Guinea ; James Douglas is Deputy City
Engineer for Adelaide ; Ernest Stirling is dentist at Clare, S.A. ;
Leslie Drake is Engineer Surveyor at Barrage, at mouth of
Murray. Mrs. Chapman is interested in the welfare of the
Australian Aborigines, missionary effort, hospitals, and the
church ; also good music and literature. Member of : Women’s
Non-Party Association, and University Wives’ Club. Religion :
Anglican. Politics : Liberal.
CHAUVEL, Elsie May (Mrs. C. Chauvel), 113, Hopetoun
Avenue, Vaucluse, Sydney, N.S. Wales; b. Feb, 10th, 1900,
in Melbourne ; ed. Sacred Heart Convent, Johannesburg, South
Africa ; dau. of Edward Silveni ; m. Charles Chauvel, motion
picture producer, son of Major Allan Chauvel ; he is the producer
of such well-known films as “ The Wake of the Bounty,”
“ Heritage,” and “ Uncivilized ” ; discoverer of Errol Flynn
and Mary Maguire. Mother of Suzanne Marie Chauvel (b. Dec.
10th, 1930). Interested in art and drama ; plays tennis ; fond
of travelling, riding, and expeditionary work. Continuity writer
for all her husband’s films. Travelled the interior of South
Africa by ox wagon as a small child. As young girl, toured her
own musical company through South Africa and Basutu-land.
With her husband toured the Pacific and visited its many
islands. They lived upon lonely Pitcairn Island, with descend-
ants of “ Bounty ” mutineers. Religion : Church of England.
Politics : Democratic.
CILENTO, Phyllis Dorothy (Lady Cilento), “ Seiano,” 683,
Ipswich Road, Annerley, Brisbane, Queensland ; b. March 13th,
1894, in Sydney ; ed. Tormore House, Adelaide, South Australia ;
dau. of Capt. C. T. McGlew and Alice L. Walker ; m. Sir Raphael
Cilento, Barrister-at-law, Director of Health and Medical
Services, Queensland, and Professor of Social and Tropical
Medicine, University of Queensland, son of R. A. Cilento and
Frances E. E. West ; he grad. Adelaide University, M. 8., 8.5.,
1918, and M.D., 1923 ; received Dip. Trop. Med. and Hygiene,


London, 1922 ; Director of Institute of Tropical Medicine,
Townsville ; Director of Health, Ter. New Guinea ; Commissioner
to Pacific for League of Nations ; and Commonwealth Medical
Officer. Mother of Raphael Charles Frederic Cilento (b. 1920),
Phyllis Margaret Cilento (b. 1922), Ruth Yolanda Cilento (b.
1924), Carol Lindsay Cilento (b. 1928), Elizabeth Diane Cilento
(b. 1932), and David Philemon Cilento (b. 1936). Raphael
Charles Frederic Cilento is a medical student at University of
Queensland, and Phyllis Margaret Cilento is studying art. Lady
Cilento is interested in her profession, specializing in maternal
and child welfare ; also interested in charity as it affects mother-
craft ; plays tennis ; fond of motoring. Authoress of numerous
articles on mothercraft in Aust. Med. Journal, popular magazines
and papers ; also the booklet, Square Meals for the Family.
Member of : B.M.A. and Lyceum Club. Founder and President
of Mothercraft Association of Queensland ; Education Committee
of Creche and Kindergarten Association; and Executive
Nutrition Council of Queensland. Spent much of her early
married life in tropics with husband. Lady Medical Officer,
Lower Perak, F.M.S. Practiced in Rabaul, Mandated Territory,
New Guinea. Lived also in North Queensland. Religion :
Anglican.
CLAGUE, Mona Edith (Mrs. P. Clague), 360, New Canterbury
Road, Dulwich Hill, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. Drummoyne,
Sydney, N.S. Wales ; ed. Drummoyne Convent School; dau. of
Thomas and Ophelia Price ; m. Philip Clague, mechanical
draughtsman, son of Joseph and Sarah Clague ; her husband
has a great interest in scientific literature, and they conjointly
hold Commonwealth letters patents. Mother of one child (b.
and d. Dec. 23rd, 1937). Interested in art, charity, education,
music ; fond of entertaining and travelling.
CLARKE, Josephine May (Mrs. E. de C. Clarke), 8, Charles
Street, South Perth, Western Australia; b. Clare, South
Australia ; ed. “ Advanced School for Girls,” Adelaide, South
Australia, and Elder Conservatorium, Adelaide ; dau. of Alfred
and Anne Palmer ; m. Edward de Courcy Clarke, Professor of
Geology, University of Western Australia, son of Marsden and
Frances Clarke ; he undertook geological survey of New Zealand
and Western Australia. Mother of Edward Stuart Clarke (b.
Oct. 9th, 1918), engineering student, Melbourne University ;
Miles de Courcy Clarke (b. Feb. 18th, 1920), medical student,
Adelaide University, and John Rigailsford Clarke (b. March
26th, 1925), student at Hale School, Perth. Mrs. Clarke is
interested in music, architecture, pottery ; plays golf, ping-pong,
bridge ; fond of motoring, travelling, gardening, and reading
French and German. Authoress of newspaper articles, and
broadcast items. Member of : Karrakatta Club, Royal Perth
Golf Club, University Choral Society, and Victoria League.
COLE, Annie Elizabeth (Mrs. A. E. Cole), “ Avon,” 17,
Norman Parade, Eagle Junction, N. 2, Queensland; b. Dec,


27th, 1898, in Birmingham, England ; ed. Stratford-on-Avon,
England ; dan. of Frederick William and Elizabeth Ann Timms ;
m. Alfred Edward Cole, Director Queensland Government
Tourist Bureau, son of George and Fanny Sophia Cole ; he is
the youngest Government Tourist Director in Australasia
(appointed when thirty-five years of age). Mother of Harvey
George David Cole (b. Oct. 22nd, 1935). Interested in music,
religion, education, handcrafts ; plays tennis and bridge ; fond
of travelling. Religion : Church of England. Politics :
Nationalist (U.A.P.).
COLLETT, Anne (Mrs. H. B. Collett), 75, Guildford Road,
Mt. Lawley, Western Australia ; b. Perth, Western Australia ;
ed. Private Schools ; dau. of T. Whitfield, of Perth, Western
Australia ; m. Col. The Hon. H. B, Collett, Minister without
Portfolio, Menzies Government, son of F. A. E. Collett, of
Guernsey, Channel Islands ; he served four years with Australian
Imperial Force in Great War ; severely wounded ; mentioned
in despatches ; promoted Colonel, C.M.G., D.S.O. ; elected
Senator, Commonwealth Parliament, 1933. Mother of Herbert
Thomas Wedlake (b. 1905, d. 1912), Francis Murray Graham
(b. 1906), and Laurie Milburn Brayley (b. 1908). Interested in
charity and politics; plays golf and bridge. Member of :
Karrakatta Club, Victoria League, and Kindergarten Union.
Religion : Church of England. Politics : Nationalist.
COLLINS, Phyllis Laishley (Mrs. J. A. Collins), C/o Captain
John Collins, Navy Office, Melbourne; b. Oct. 26th, 1906, in
Sydney; ed. “ Sand Toft," Sydney; dau. of Alexander J.
McLachlan ; m. Captain J. A. Collins, R.A.N., Naval Officer,
son of Dr. and Mrs. M. J. Collins ; he entered Navy in January,
1913 ; served in Grand Fleet, 1917-18 ; specialized in gunnery ;
promoted Commander, June, 1932 ; promoted Captain, Dec.,
1937. Mother of Gillian Collins (b. May 6th, 1936). Interested
in art and literature, but her particular interest is historical
costume ; plays tennis ; fond of surfing, entertaining and being
entertained, and most normal recreations. Member of : Royal
Sydney Golf Club. Exhibited Society of Artists, Art Society,
and Women Painters. Gave one-man show in 1927. Religion :
Church of England. Politics : U.A.P.
CORDER, Ada E., Mus. Bac. (Melb. Univ.), 94, Pleasant Road,
Upper Hawthorn, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. March 20th, 1895,
in Ararat ; ed. Convent F. C. J. Vaucluse, Richmond ; dau. of
Mr. and Mrs. J. C. Freeman ; m. Henry Corder, son of Mr. and
Mrs. H. J. Corder ; he is a Master of Arts (Melb. Univ.). Mrs.
Corder is interested in music ; fond of motoring and travelling.
Member of : Lyceum Club. She is a solo pianist and teacher.
Prominent pupils : Nancy Weir, concert soloist, London ; and
Raymond O'Connell, scholarship holder, Royal College of Music,
London. Religion : Catholic.
COWLISHAW, Kate Burgoyne (Mrs. T. O. Cowlishaw),
“ Burgoyne," 56, Breakfast Creek Road, Brisbane, Queensland ;


b. Oct. 31st, 1872, in West Maitland, N.S. Wales ; ed. West
Maitland, N.S. Wales ; dan. of Edward Peter Capper and Mary
Pearson Capper ; m. Thomas Owen Cowlishaw, solicitor, son of
James and Charlotte Cowlishaw. Interested in charity ; plays
bowls and bridge ; fond of entertaining, motoring, travelling.
Member of : Moreton Club, Brisbane Women's Club, Forum
Club (Sydney), Red Cross Comforts Fund, Victoria League,
Royal Empire Society, and The National Geographic Society
(U.S.A.). President of Queensland Braille Writing Association.
Was presented to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth when she visited
Brisbane as the Duchess of York in April, 1927. Religion :
Church of England.
COXEN, Adelaide Rebe (Mrs. W. A. Coxen), “ Egham,” 83,
Caroline Street, South Yarra, S.E.I, Victoria ; b. 1884, in Rock-
hampton, Queensland ; ed. Quetta Memorial School, Thursday
Island ; dau. of the late Frederick Jepson and Mrs. Bear; m.
Major Gen. Walter Adams Coxen, C. 8., C.M.G., D. 5.0., retired
military officer, son of the late Henry William Coxen ; he served
in the Great War with the Australian Forces ; was General
Officer Commanding Royal Artillery of Australian Corps ; Chief
of General Staff, Australian Military Forces. Mother of Rebe
Ella Coxen, Marion Queenscliff Coxen, Adelaide Ethel Coxen,
Emily Dorothy Coxen, and Walter Frederick William Coxen
(Derek) (b. 1924). Interested in charitable work. Delegate of
National Council of Women. Vice-President Friendly Union of
Soldiers’ Wives and Mothers. Received King’s Jubilee Medal
and Coronation Medal in recognition of charitable work.
Religion : Church of England.
CRANSWICK, Olive Carr (Mrs. G. H. Cranswick), Bishopscourt,
Sale, Victoria ; b. London, England ; ed. Normanhurst, Ashfield,
N.S. Wales ; dau. of Mr. and Mrs. E. Carr Hordern, Sydney,
N.S. Wales ; m. The Right Rev. The Bishop of Gippsland (Dr.
G. H. Cranswick), son of The Rev. Canon Cranswick and Mrs.
Cranswick, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; he was a missionary, 1909-
1914 ; Bishop of Gippsland from 1917 ; Moorhouse Lecturer,
1923 ; National President of the Church of England Men’s
Society in Australia, 1926-36. Mother of Olive Edith Frances
Littleton (nee Cranswick) (b. April Bth, 1912), Winifred Mary
Joy Cranswick (b. June 30th, 1914), Ruth Ward Cranswick (b.
July 25th, 1915), Mary Harvard Cranswick (b. Dec. 27th, 1918),
James Harvard Cranswick (b. May sth, 1922), and John Edward
Cranswick (b. Oct. 30th, 1925). Mrs. Cranswick is interested in
charity, religion, education ; plays tennis and golf ; fond of
entertaining, motoring, travelling, motor-boating. She is the
Diocesan President of The Mothers’ Union, Gippsland Diocese.
Religion : Church of England.
CRAWFORD, Agnes Mabelle Mackgill (Mrs. S. H. Crawford),
“ Picardy,” 268, New Street, Brighton, Melbourne, 5.5, Victoria ;
b. April sth, 1899, in Melbourne ; ed. “ Ormiston ” Ladies’
College, Melbourne, and Kilburn and Brondesbury High School,


London ; dan. of Mr. and Mrs. H. A. Thomson, of London ; m.
Stanley Henry Crawford, civil servant, Secretary of Civil
Aviation Dept., son of H. Crawford, of Sydney; has been
twenty-five years in the public service ; been an original member
of the Civil Aviation Dept. ; served in the Great War ; returned
as Captain after being attached to Horseferry Road. Mrs.
Crawford is interested in charity, music, literature, art; plays
golf on 15 handicap, tennis, bridge, solo, poker, and most games ;
fond of all outdoor sports, walking and physical culture.
Member of : Woodlands Golf Club, and National Council of
Women. Her father was ed. musically in Germany, with much
distinction. Her family were originally from England. Her
father for years was the chief study teacher of music at Melbourne
University, and is well-known in musical circles. Her brother,
Dr. Donald Thomson, is an anthropologist and is well-known in
the Commonwealth and abroad. Religion : Presbyterian.
Politics : National.
CRISP, Doris Lillian (Mrs. A. P. Crisp), “ Ramleh,” Wayne
Avenue, Lower Sandy Bay, Hobart, Tasmania ; b. Kempton,
Tasmania ; ed. Church of England Collegiate School, Hobart,
Tasmania ; dau. of the late William Henry and Emily Selina
Ellis ; m. Lt. Col. Alan Percy Crisp, D. 5.0., V.D., A.D.S. (F.),
LL.B., solicitor, son of the late Samuel Percy Crisp and the late
Myra Gertrude Crisp ; he is A.D.C. to Governor General of
Australia. Mother of William Percy Crisp (b. Dec. 17th, 1926,
in Hobart). Interested in bush nursing and hospital work ;
plays tennis and bridge; fond of entertaining, motoring,
travelling, theatres. Member of : Bush Nursing Association,
Royal Hobart Hospital Auxiliary, and St. John Ambulance
Association. Religion : Church of England. Politics : National
(U.A.P.).
CROLL, Marian Winifred (Mrs. D. G. Croll), Sherwood,
Brisbane ; b. 1886, in Brisbane ; ed. Brisbane Girls’ Grammar
School and All Hallows’ Convent; dau. of Arthur Peel and Julia
Finch Payne ; m. Dr. David Gifford Croll, medical practitioner,
son of Andrew Usher and Mary Croll. Interested in literature
and art; fond of yachting and gardening. Member of : Moreton
Club, National Council of Women, Girl Guides, Mothercraft,
National Parks Association, and Naturalists’ Club. Was in the
Australian Army Nursing Service, 1914-1916. Religion :
Protestant.
CROTTY, Katie Cowper (Mrs. F. E. C. Crotty), The Vicarage,
14, Acland Street, St. Kilda, Victoria ; b. 1882, in E. Melbourne,
Victoria; ed. Church of England Girls’ Grammar School,
Melbourne ; dau. of William Edward Morris, Registrar, Diocese
of Melbourne ; m. F. E. C. Crotty, D.D., clergyman, Canon of
St. Paul’s Cathedral, Melbourne, son of the late Rev. E. C. Crotty
and Mrs. Crotty ; he was ed. at Church of England Grammar
School, Melbourne, and Trinity College, Melbourne University ;
8.D., D.D., Toronto ; before ordination he had business training


in Bank of N.S. Wales ; for some years Examining Chaplain to
the Archbishop of Melbourne. Mother of John Cassian Morris
Crotty (b. June 12th, 1911), Clare Edith Crotty (b. Nov. 28th,
1912), Kathleen Elizabeth Crotty (b. Oct. 23rd, 1914), Bernard
Cassian Crotty (b. April 2nd, 1917), and Mary Crotty (b. Jan.
16th, 1922). John was ed. at Church of England Grammar
School, Melbourne, and is a B.A. of Trinity College, Melbourne
University, and B.Litt., Oxford Univ. ; also studied at Beda
College, Rome; Clare was ed. at Church of England Girls’ Grammar
School, Melbourne, completed her training as a nurse at Royal
Melbourne Hospital, and is now nursing in London ; Kathleen
was ed. at Melbourne Church of England Girls’ Grammar School;
Mary was ed. at Melbourne Church of England Girls’ Grammar
School, and is training as a nurse ; Bernard was ed. at Melbourne
Church of England Grammar School, and is overseer of
Maranthona Station, Queensland. Mrs. Crotty is interested in
charity (especially in relief work of the church and benevolent
societies), literature, education ; walking and sight-seeing are
her special forms of recreation ; fond of entertaining, motoring,
travelling, theatre-going. Member of : The Australian Women’s
National League, and The Australian Literature Society. In
1930 she visited England and the Continent with her husband,
when he obtained leave of absence from the diocese for a seven
months’ holiday. Hopes to travel more extensively when the
opportunity offers. Has had one short trip by air, and enjoys
that form of travelling more than any other. Considers motoring
the next best. Religion : Church of England. Politics :
National United Australia Party.
CUDMORE, Kathleen Mary (Mrs. A. M. Cudmore), 64, Penning-
ton Terrace, North Adelaide, South Australia ; b. Marryatville,
South Australia ; ed. Adelaide, Montreux, Lausanne, Dresden ;
dau. of Wentworth and Mrs. Cavenagh-Mainwaring ; m. Arthur
Murray Cudmore, surgeon, son of Mr. and Mrs. J. F. Cudmore ;
he holds honours of C.M.G. and F.R.C.S. ; is Consulting Surgeon
of Adelaide Hospital, President of the Medical Board, and
member of Council of University. Mother of Rosemary Main-
waring Cavenagh-Mainwaring Cudmore, Kathleen Cavenagh-
Mainwaring Champion de Crespigny. Interested in charity,
literature, politics, art, education; plays bridge; fond of
entertaining, travelling, theatre-going. Member of : Queen
Adelaide Club. Religion : Protestant. Politics : Conservative.
CUSACK, (Ellen) Dymphna (Miss), 14, Boronia Street, Ken-
sington, N.S. Wales ; b. Wyalong, N.S. Wales ; ed. St. Ursula’s
College, Armidale, N.S. Wales, and Sydney University (8.A.) ;
dau. of James and Beatrice Cusack. Interested in literature,
education, politics ; fond of talking, surfing, riding. Authoress
of : Jungfrau (novel published by “ Bulletin), Shallow Cups
(one-act play), Red Sky at Morning (three-act play). Pioneers
on Parade (novel, in collaboration with Miles Franklin), and
His Honour Comes to Tea, Second Rhapsody, and Anniversary
32
Principal Women oe the Empire :


(one-act plays). Member of : Professional and Business
Women's Club, Sydney. Engaged as vocational psychologist
at Sydney Girls’ High School, N.S. Wales. Interested in
educational broadcasting, and in all questions concerning welfare
of women and children. Politics : Socialist.
DACEY, Eileen Frances (Mrs. J. C. Chanter), “ Wyuna Park,"
Lake Cargelligo, N.S. Wales ; b. Echuca, Victoria ; ed. Brigidine
Convent, Echuca, Victoria ; dau. of Thomas Francis Dacey ;
m. John Courtenay Chanter, farmer and grazier, son of John
Moore and Mary Ann Chanter ; he served in S. African War,
Ist Australian Bushmen’s continent; medal, five bars ; served
Great War ; major, 4th A.L.H., D. 5.0., 1919 ; Shire Councillor,
Lachlan Shire Council. Mother of John Courtenay Chanter
(b. Sept. 17th, 1908), and Mary Ann Chanter (b. Feb. 20th,
1913). Interested in Country Women's Association ; plays golf
and bridge ; fond of motoring. Member of : Country Women's
Association.
DAKIN, Catherine Mary Gladys, B.Sc. (Mrs. W. J. Dakin),
69, Hopetoun Avenue, Vaucluse, Sydney, and University of
Sydney; b. Sept. 9th, 1890, in Birkenhead, England; ed.
Birkenhead High School (then University of Liverpool) ; dau.
of Owen Lewis, Cheshire, England ; m. William John Dakin,
Professor of Zoology, University of Sydney, son of William
Dakin, merchant, Liverpool, England ; he was formerly Pro-
fessor of Biology, Perth, Western Australia, 1913-1920 ; then
Professor of Zoology, University of Liverpool, England, 1921-
1928. Mother of William Peter Harvey Dakin, who studied
medicine at University of Sydney (graduated M. 8., 8.5., 1938) ;
now Resident, Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney. Interested
in zoology, education, and medical charities ; plays golf and
bridge ; fond of entertaining, motoring, yachting, theatre-going,
travelling. Member of Women Graduates’ Association, Univer-
sity of Sydney. President of Sydney University Women Sports
Association. Religion : Protestant.
DALEY, Henrietta Jessie Shaw (Mrs. C. S. Daley), Balmain
Cr., Acton, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory; b. May
17th, 1890, in Melbourne, Victoria ; ed. Presbyterian Ladies'
College, Rosbercon, and University of Melbourne (Ist Year
Science only) ; dau. of Thomas Bryce and Rosa Phillis Obbinson ;
m. Charles Studdy Daley, Civic Administrator, Commonwealth
Public Service, son of Charles Daley, Esq., 8.A., F.L.S., and
Caroline Rose Daley, of Melbourne ; he was b. July 4th, 1887 ;
ed. Harvard College and School of Mines, Stawell, Victoria,
Ormond College, Melbourne University, graduate of Melbourne
University (8.A., LL.B.) ; Associate of Chartered Institute of
Secs., London ; special association with foundation and develop-
ment of Canberra, 1905-1924; Secretary, Federal Capital
Commission, 1924-30; 0.8. E., 1927 ; Civic Administrator,
1930-32 ; now Assistant Secretary (Dept, of Interior) in charge
Civic Administration; Executive Member, National Capital
33
Australia and New Zealand


Planning and Development Committee; Commissioner for
Housing ; President of Canberra Musical Society ; President of
Scout Association ; Foundation Member of Council of Canberra
University College; member Canberra Advisory Council,
Chairman Apprenticeship Board; member of Rotary Club;
town planner; member of National Memorials Committee;
Vice-Pres. Canberra Eisteddfod Society ; member of Church of
England ; Organist at Presby. Cathedral Church of St. Andrew’s ;
J.P. ; recreations, tennis, golf, music. Mother of Margaret
Rose Daley (b. Oct. 29th, 1917), Geoffrey Charles Campbell
(b. Jan. 10th, 1920), Arthur Thomas Studdy (b. Jan. sth, 1924,
d. July 21st, 1930), Nancy Beatrice Daley (b. June 12th, 1926),
and Joan Studdy Daley (b. July sth, 1928). Margaret is
employed in Commonwealth Public Service, and is in charge of
Ist Canberra Guide Co. Geoffrey is also employed in Common-
wealth Public Service. Mrs. Daley is interested in charity,
literature, music, politics, religion, art, commerce, education ;
plays golf; fond of entertaining, motoring, travelling (particu-
larly by aeroplane), theatre-going, music, dramatic art, comedy,
etc. President of National Council of Women of A.C.T. Non-
resident member of National Y.W.C.A. of Australia. President
of Royal Canberra Golf Associates. Vice-President of Y.W.C.A.
of Canberra. Was first President and later first Commissioner
of Girl Guides in Canberra ; now Counsellor ; formerly Vice-
President for some years ; later, for short time. President of
Mothercraft Society ; interested in and formally on Parent and
Citizen Committees of Territory Schools. Religion : Christian
Science.
DATTILO-RUBBO, Mildred Russell (Mrs. C. Dattilo-Rubbo),
45, Prince Albert Street, Mosman, Sydney, N.S. Wales; b.
Sept. Bth, 1884, in Sydney, N.S. Wales ; ed. Presbyterian Ladies’
College, Croydon, N.S. Wales; dau. of John Jobson; m.
Cavalier Dattilo-Rubbo, artist, son of Raffaela Rubbo and
Raffaele Dattilo-Rubbo ; he is a naturalized British subject;
made Cavaliere of the Crown of Italy, 1932 ; represented in all
National Art Galleries of the Commonwealth of Australia and
New Zealand ; exhibitor in several international exhibitions.
Mother of Sydney M. Dattilo-Rubbo (b. Sept. 11th, 1911), and
Mark Antony Dattilo-Rubbo (b. March 9th, 1917, d. Sept. Ist,
1933). Dr. Sydney M. Dattilo-Rubbo graduated at Sydney Univer-
sity, and was appointed Senior Lecturer in Bacteriology at the
Melbourne University ; studied at the London University of
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, where he obtained a degree of
Doctor of Philosophy, and diploma for bacteriology, bio-
chemistry and micro-organisms. Mrs. Dattilo-Rubbo is inter-
ested in art and literature ; fond of motoring, travelling, theatre-
going. Member of : The Royal Empire Society, United
Australia Party, and Arts Club. Her husband founded the
Manly Art Gallery of N.S. Wales, to which he has donated most
of his works. Was also head of the Art School founded in 1898,


where many well-known artists of to-day received their early
training. Religion : Presbyterian. Politics : National Demo-
cratic Government.
DAVIDSON, Hilda Dorothea Mary (Lady Davidson), 211,
Elizabeth Street, Sydney, N.S. Wales, and “ Montgreenan,”
Ito Parade, Leura, N.S. Wales ; b. Sydney ; ed. “ Eldinhope,”
Wahroonga, and “ Woodstock,” North Sydney ; dan. of Charles
Louis Tange, solicitor, Sydney ; m. Sir Alfred Charles Davidson,
K.8.E., Banker, General Manager, Bank of N.S. Wales, son of
James Madgwick Davidson and Lucy Cribb ; joined Bank of
N.S. Wales, 2nd January, 1901 ; toured Europe, 1910/11 ; was
successively Manager, Gisborne (N.Z.), Sub-Inspector, Welling-
ton, N.Z., Manager, Perth, W.A., and General Manager of The
Western Australian Bank, 1926/27 ; on amalgamation of W.A.
Bank with 8.N.5.W., became Inspector for W.A., 1927, Chief
Inspector for N.S. Wales, Sept., 1928, and General Manager, Ist
January, 1929. Lady Davidson is interested in charity, nursing,
literature, music, art, education, gardening ; fond of entertaining,
motoring, travelling, housekeeping, and domestic duties of all
kinds. Member of : Queen’s Club, Macquarie Club, Royal
Sydney Golf Club, and Leura Golf Club. Religion : Church of
England. Politics : Liberal.
DAVIES, Gladys J. Rhys (Miss), 19, Beech Street, East
Malvern, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Echuca, Victoria ; ed. by
her father and by private tutors ; dau. of John Rhys Davies
(schoolmaster). Interested in charity, literature, music, religion,
art, education ; fond of hiking, entertaining, motoring, travelling,
theatre-going. Compiled a thumb-nail History of Musicians
and Musical Activities in Victoria from 1853 to 1934, entitled,
” Music Makers of the Sunny South ” ; a biographical compila-
tion of all musicians, instruments, festivals, etc. (still unpub-
lished) ; Biblical Play, performed 1936 ; poem on the death of
the late King George V. (graciously accepted by Queen Mary),
and a number of adaptations of poems and recitals to music.
Member of : Music Teachers’ Association, and Victorian Musical
Society. For some years she was a student at the University
Conservatorium, Melbourne, taking piano as chief study, and
singing as second study. Took special teaching course there,
obtaining certificate for same. Teacher of piano in Melbourne —
privately and in schools. Later studied pipe-organ, and for some
years was a church organist. Holds diploma for elocution,
Melbourne, Victoria. During Great War served as V.A.D. at
the Caulfield Military Red Cross. Her maternal grandfather
went to Australia in 1849, from Edinburgh, and was a pioneer
pastoralist and wool-grower. Religion : Protestant. Politics :
Democratic.
DAVIES, Ina Jane (Mrs. E. H. Davies), “ Oswestry,” 95,
Hutt Street, Adelaide, South Australia ; b. April 22nd, 1874,
in Gawler, South Australia ; ed. Gawler, and at ” Tormore,”
Adelaide ; dau. of Benjamin E. Deland and Jane M. C. Combe


(both of England) ; m. Edward Harold Davies, Mus. Doc.,
Professor of Music and Director of Conservatorium, University
of Adelaide, son of John Whitridge Davies and Susan Davies,
Oswestry, Shropshire ; he was the first Doctor of Music in
Australia ; founder of Adelaide Bach Society and South
Australian Symphony Orchestra, etc. Mother of Harold
Whitridge Davies, George Campbell Davies (killed in France in
Great War, June 28th, 1916), Edward Walford Davies, Ina
Margaret Deland Davies (now Thyer), and Catharine Mary
Davies (now Cheesman). Harold Whitridge Davies is Professor
of Physiology and Pharmacology, Sydney University ; also
Lt. Colonel in Army (Medical) ; was Captain in Great War,
1918-19. Mrs. Davies is interested in charitable societies. Red
Cross work, china painting and tapestry ; plays croquet on rare
occasions ; fond of motoring, yachting, flying, and entertaining
her numerous grandchildren. Member of : Sailors, Soldiers and
Nurses’ Relatives’ Association, Young Women’s Christian
Association, and Red Cross Society. Has received the Corona-
tion Medal for twenty-four years’ voluntary service to Returned
Soldiers ; also the Red Cross Medal for twenty years’ voluntary
service, including sewing for the Children’s Hospital. Holds
the R.5.5.1.L.A., “ Order of Merit,” Medal. During the last
ten years has done about thirty-five pieces of tapestry and a
lot of china-painting and pottery-making for her own pleasure.
Religion : Congregational. Politics : Non-Party.
DEAMER, Dulcie (Mrs. A. Goldie), C/o “ The Sydney Bulletin,”
George Street, Sydney ; b. Dec. 13th, 1890, in Christchurch,
New Zealand ; ed. privately at Christchurch ; dau. of Dr. George
Edwin Deamer ; m. Albert Goldie (d. 1934), journalist; he was
widely known in Australasian journalism, and also practised that
profession in New York and other American cities. Mother of
Edwin Deamer Goldie (b. Aug. 9th, 1909), Antony Goldie (b. Jan.
Bth, 1912), Christopher Goldie (b. June 18th, 1914), and Rosemary
Goldie (b. Feb. Ist, 1916). Rosemary studied at the Sydney
University, and before she was twenty won a travelling scholar-
ship, which entitled her to two years at the Sorbonne, Paris,
from where she returned in 1938. Mrs. Goldie is interested in
literature, comparative religion, psychology, anthropology;
fond of swimming, dancing, hiking, and the intellectual theatre.
Authoress of the following published books : As It Was in the
Beginning, The Suttee of Saja, Revelation, The Street of the
Gazelle, The Devil’s Saint, and Messalina (collected poems).
Member of : The Fellowship of Australian Writers. Has had
three full-length plays produced in Sydney—” The Lucid
Interval,” ” That By Which Men Live,” and ” Victory ” —and
is writing a fourth. Has travelled very widely, living at times
in England and America, and crossing the Line eight times.
Has earned a living as a journalist for the last sixteen years.
Religion : No formal creed. Politics : Moderately ” left.”


DEAN, Jean (Mrs. E. T. Dean), “ Karinya,” Moculta, via
Angaston, South Australia ; b. May 24th, 1890, in Truro, South
Australia; ed. “ Tormore House ” Girls’ College, South
Australia ; dau. of Charles Grieve, Glenosmond, South Australia ;
m. Colonel E. T. Dean, pastoralist; he served in the A.I.F. in
the Great War, 1915-19 ; C. 0., Ist F.A. Brigade, Ist Division ;
mentioned in despatches four times ; awarded D.S.O. and
Chevalier Legion D’Honneur. Mother of Edwin George Dean
(b. 1913), Margaret Jean Dean (b. 1915), and Helen Dean (b.
1920). Interested in charity, politics, religion, and welfare of
women and children ; plays tennis, and is interested in all forms
of true sport; fond of motoring, gardening, travelling, and
well-bred animals. Member of : Queen Victoria League, S.A.,
and Norfolk House Club, 1917-19, London. President, Congrega-
tional Church Women’s Society, fifteen years. Member, Sailors,
Soldiers and Nurses’ Relatives’ Association, S.A. Member of
Red Cross, S.A. Division, since 1914. Member of Red Cross
Executive, Angaston. Officer-in-Charge of Voluntary Service
(Red Cross), and holds First Aid, Home Nursing and A.R.P.
St. John Ambulance Certificates, 1939. Member of Tubercular
Soldiers’ Aid Society, Travellers’ Aid Society, and Wattle League
of Australia. Leader of Fighting Forces Comforts’ Group, S.A.,
in Angaston. Divisional Commissioner, Girl Guides, for ten
years. Religion : Congregationalist. Politics : Liberal (Country
Party).
DERHAM, Enid (Miss), The University of Melbourne ; b.
March 24th, 1882, in Melbourne; ed. Presbyterian Ladies'
College, Melbourne, University of Melbourne, and University of
Oxford ; dau. of Thomas Plumley Derham and Ellen Hyde
Derham, of Melbourne. Interested in literature ; fond of
motoring and the theatre. Authoress of : The Mountain Road
and Other Verses (1912), and Empire (a Morality Play for
Children) (1912). Member of : Lyceum Club, English Associa-
tion, Classical Association, etc. Religion : Protestant. Politics :
Liberal.
DEVANNY, Jean (Mrs. F. H. Devanny), Box 2119 L, General
Post Office, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. 1894, in Nelson District,
New Zealand ; ed. Nelson country schools ; dau. of William
Francis Crooks ; m. Francis Harold Devanny, contractor, son
of William Francis Devanny, Nelson ; he is prominently asso-
ciated with Labour politics and Left Labour publications,
magazines and newspapers ; tutor in Economics and Philosophy.
Mother of Karl Harold William Devanny (b. Feb., 1912, d. Sept.,
1934), artist and journalist; Patricia Marian Devanny (b. Nov.,
1913), leading public speaker and activist in Left Wing Labour
Politics ; and Erin Devanny (b. Sept., 1915, d. Sept., 1921).
Mrs. Devanny is interested in literature, politics, music ; fond
of travelling and the theatre. Authoress of the following books :
The Butcher Shop, Lenore Divine, Old Savage, Riven (American
edition called “ Unchastened Youth ”), Bushman Burke, Poor


Swine, Devil Made Saint, Dawn Beloved, The Ghost Wife, Out
of Such Fires, Virtuous Courtesan, Sugar Heaven, Paradise
Flow. All books published in London, New York or Sydney,
from 1926 to 1938. Authoress of one play, the dramatization
of “ Paradise Flow.” Unpublished manuscripts. A brochure
on “ The Emotional Life of the Maori.” A big work on ” The
Evolution of the Sex Life According to the Materialist Conception
of History.” Authoress of innumerable short stories, and
journalist on Left Wing Labour papers. Executive member of
Fellowship of Australian Writers. She is the most prominent
woman platform speaker in Australia on Left Labour Politics.
Constantly tours the country on lecture and organizing work.
Consistent worker in Peace Movement. Original Australian
delegate on the International Committee of Movement Against
War and Fascism. In 1931 attended World Conference in
Berlin as Australian National Delegate for Workers’ International
Relief. Religion : Humanitarianism. Politics : Left Labour.
DIXON, Alice Crossland (Mrs. O. Dixon), “ Yallambee,” 4,
Higham Road, Upper Hawthorn, Melbourne ; b. Aug. 27th,
1893, in Lyndoch, South Australia ; ed. Church of England Girls’
Grammar School, Melbourne ; dau. of Rev. H. A. Brooksbank ;
m. Owen Dixon, Justice of High Court of Australia, son of Joseph
William and Edith Annie Dixon. Mother of Franklin Owen
Dixon (b. March 12th, 1922), Edward Owen Dixon (b. April
26th, 1924), Elizabeth Owen Dixon (b. Nov. sth, 1929), and
Anne Helen Owen Dixon (b. April 20th, 1934).
DOYLE, Olga Marie (Mrs. E. Doyle), 12, Helenslea Road,
Caulfield, Victoria, and Gembrook Road, Emerald, Victoria ;
b. Fitzroy, Melbourne ; ed. Santa Maria College ; dau. of Mr.
B. F. Kritz and the late Mrs. Kritz ; m. Edward Doyle, Editor
of ” The Australasian,” son of the late Mr. and Mrs. R. T.
Doyle, of London ; he served during the Great War with the
A.I.F. (1916-19) ; was a member of the Australian Industrial
Mission to America (1927) ; Chief of Staff, “ The Argus ” (1924-
28) ; Associate Editor, ” The Australasian ” (1928-37) ;
appointed Editor, 1937. Mrs. Doyle is interested in literature,
music, house-planning and interior decoration; plays golf,
tennis and bridge ; fond of riding and travelling. Member of :
Kingston Heath Golf Club, and Emerald Country Club.
DOVERDALE, Audrey Ailsa (The Rt. Hon. Lady Doverdale),
14, Arlington House, London, S.W.I, England, and Westwood
Park, Droitwich, Worcestershire, England ; b. April 20th, 1910,
in Sydney, N.S. Wales ; ed. Shirley College, Sydney ; dau. of
Arthur Pointing, of Darling Point, Sydney ; m. The Rt. Hon.
Lord Doverdale (Edward), Chairman of “ The Barrow Paper
Mills, Ltd.,” son of Oswald Partington, 2nd Baron, and The
Hon. Clara Isobel Murray. Lady Doverdale is interested in
charity and politics ; plays bridge and golf ; fond of swimming,
travelling, theatre-going, entertaining, ski-ing. Studied ballet
with Miss Minnie Hooper, Prof. Rhoe, of Philadelphia, and


Madame Viola, of New York. Played leading parts on the
legitimate stage, 1925/32. Religion : Church of England.
Politics : Conservative.
DRAKE-BROCKMAN, Henrietta (Mrs. G. Drake-Brockman),
9, Venn Street, Cottesloe, Western Australia ; b. July 27th, 1901,
in Perth, W.A. ; ed. St. Katherine’s, Scotland, Cottesloe High
School, W.A., and Frensham, N.S. Wales ; dau. of M. E. Jull,
First Public Service Commissioner, Perth, W.A. ; m. Geoffrey
Drake-Brockman, civil engineer, P.W.D., Perth, son of F. S.
Drake-Brockman, Surveyor-General of W.A., and Grace Bussell ;
he served in A.I.F. during Great War ; commanded 9th Field
Co. Engineers (Major) ; awarded M.C. ; is now engineer for the
North-West P.W.D., W.A., and is President-Elect of Institution
of Engineers, Australia. Mother of Julia Fay Drake-Brockman
(b. Feb. 3rd, 1925), and Paris Morton Drake-Brockman (b. July
7th, 1927). Interested in literature, politics, art, education ;
plays tennis, bridge, poker; fond of motoring, swimming,
travelling, riding, theatre-going, and most outdoor activities.
Authoress of the novels : Blue North, Sheba Lane, Younger
Sons ; also the plays : (three-act) Men Without Wives, Women,
and (one-act) Dampier's Ghost, Man from the Bush, The Blister.
Won Australian Sesqui Centenary Prize. Writes articles and
short stories. Won “ Bulletin ” Short Story Prize, 1939, with
“ Anti-Climax.” Also won several radio play competitions,
and contributes to all leading papers in Australia. Lived for
five years in the Far North, and is very interested in the question
of the Aborigine. Member of : Fellowship of Australian Writers,
Perth Repertory Club. Past President of Women Writers’ Club,
Perth.
DRUMMOND, Isabel Rachael Mary (Mrs. R. M. Drummond),
157, Fouad El Awal, Cairo, or C/o Barclays Bank, Ltd., Westow
Hill, Upper Norwood, London, 5.E.19, England ; b. Aug. 14th,
1903, in Pinner, Middlesex, England ; dau. of the late Paris
Frederick Drake-Brockman, barrister-at-law ; m. Air Commo-
dore Roy Maxwell Drummond, D. 5.0., 0.8. E., M.C., P.S.A.,
Idc., R.A.F., Serving Officer, Royal Air Force, son of Caroline
Lockhart and John Maxwell Drummond. Mother of Isabel
Anne Maxwell Drummond (b. Jan. 13th, 1931), and John Peter
Maxwell Drummond (b. May 15th, 1935). Interested in Service
families’ welfare, children’s welfare, and education ; plays golf,
squash, bridge, baccarat ; fond of entertaining, motoring,
travelling, theatre and ballet, needlework, ski-ing, and hill-
climbing. Religion : Protestant. Politics : Conservative.
DUCIE, Maria Emma (Countess of Ducie), Tortworth Court,
Falfield, Glos., England ; b. June 27th, in Maryborough, Queens-
land ; ed. Girls’ Grammar School, Maryborough, Queensland ;
dau. of Frederick and Maria Bryant; m. sth Earl of Ducie,
son of the Hon. Mrs. B. B. Moreton and 4th Earl of Ducie ; he
was b. in Queensland ; was in metallurgical works, Queensland
and Broken Hill, then went on the land. The Countess of Ducie


is interested in music, art, religion, charity, politics; plays
tennis and bridge ; fond of entertaining, travelling, motoring,
theatre-going. Member of : Carlton Club, London. Helped
with Lady Francis Ryder’s Scheme for Dominion people from
overseas to England. Religion : Church of England. Politics :
Conservative.
DUMAS, Muriel Elsie (Mrs. R. J, Dumas), Mount Lawley,
Western Australia; b. June Bth, 1894, in Adelaide, South
Australia ; ed. Tormore House, North Adelaide, South Australia ;
dau. of Mr. and Mrs. Oliver H. Rogers, South Australia ; m.
R. J. Dumas, Chief Engineer, Metropolitan Water Supply and
Sewerage Dept., Perth, Western Australia, son of Mr. and Mrs.
C. M. R. Dumas, South Australia. Mother of Lesley Russell
Dumas (b. Aug. Bth, 1921), and John Charles Oliver Dumas
(b. Jan. 18th, 1923). Interested in charity work and literature ;
plays tennis ; fond of motoring and riding. Religion : Anglican.
DURRANT, Clara Ellen (Mrs. J. M. A. Durrant), Anglesea
Barracks, Hobart, Tasmania ; b. Toongabbie, N.S. Wales ; dau.
of Mr. and Mrs. Henry P. C. Birk, Toongabbie, N.S. Wales ; m.
Brigadier J. M. A. Durrant, C.M.G., D. 5.0., permanent soldier
(Australian Staff Corps), son of Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Durrant,
Goodwood Park, South Australia ; he served in Great War,
1914-18 ; has been Commandant in Tasmania since 1937.
Mother of John Henley Durrant (b. April 19th, 1919), and Neville
Murray Durrant (b. Aug. 28th, 1921, d. Nov. 11th, 1921). John
Henley Durrant graduated from Royal Military College in 1938 ;
appointed Lieutenant, Australian Staff Corps, Dec. 14th, 1938.
Religion : Anglican.
DWYER, Vera G. (Miss), “ Rawhiti,” Clanville Road,
Roseville, N.S. Wales ; b. Hobart, Tasmania ; ed. privately ;
dau. of G. Lovell Dwyer (deceased). Interested in literature,
music, art, and collecting book-plates ; fond of travelling and
theatre-going. Authoress of the novels : The Kayles of Bushy
Lodge, The Marches Disappear, In Pursuit of Patrick, House of
Conflict, etc., etc. Member of : P.E.N. Club. Religion :
Church of England.
EASTAUGH, Elizabeth Muriel Grace (Mrs. F. A. Eastaugh),
Orewa, 72, Alexandra Street, Hunter’s Hill, Sydney, N.S. Wales ;
b. June 17th, 1886, in Newark-on-Trent, Notts., England ; ed.
at home ; dau. of Col. E. H. Nicholson and Mrs. Nicholson (nee
Prior) ; m. Professor F. A. Eastaugh, Professor of Engineering
Technology, Sydney University, son of Mr. and Mrs. F. Eastaugh ;
he was ed. at Enfield Grammar School and Royal School of
Mines, London; he was appointed lecturer in mining and
metallurgy, Sydney University, in 1907 ; did war service under
Ministry of Munitions on Solvent Recovery at Gretna ; on his
return he instituted the Course of Engineering Technology at
Sydney University, of which he now holds the chair. Mother
of Edward John Eastaugh (b. June 7th, 1912, d. July 10th,
1935), Betty Eastaugh (b. Nov. 6th, 1914), and Helen Eastaugh


(b. Oct. 6th, 1921). Edward was ed. at Church of England
Grammar School, Sydney, rowed in the school eight, and held
records in athletics ; died suddenly of pneumonic influenza
during his medical course at Sydney University ; a memorial
window in St. Andrew’s College (to which he gained a bursary)
was put in by a number of friends, who wished the memory of
his great influence for good in his short career to be kept before
those who should come after him. Betty was ed. at Sydney
Church of England Grammar School for Girls, and is now a
karitane nurse ; spent a year travelling and in England ; did a
refresher course at the London Karitane Centre. Mrs. Eastaugh
is interested in literature, music, art, charity ; plays golf (handi-
cap 16) and contract bridge; fond of gardening, motoring,
play-reading. Authoress of short poems published in the
“ Sydney Morning Herald.” Member of : Pymble Golf Club.
Religion : Church of England. Politics : United Australian
Party.
EDKINS, Lucy Elizabeth (Mrs. E. R. H. Edkins), Bimbah,
Longreach, Queensland; b. Nov. 9th, 1873, in Ellerby, Moggel,
Queensland; ed. Private School, Rockhampton, and Girls’
Grammar School and All Hallows’ Convent, Brisbane ; dau. of
John and Elizabeth Rule ; m. Edward Rowland Huey Edkins
(d. June 23rd, 1939), grazier, son of Edward Rowland and
Edwina Edkins ; he was one of Queensland’s great men, pioneer-
ing in the wool industry in Central Western Queensland. Mother
of Lucy Bimbah Peterson (b. June 25th, 1896), Edwina Rosa-
mond Brown (b. Feb. 4th, 1898), and Rowland Rule Edkins
(b. June 13th, 1900). Interested in charity ; plays tennis and
cards ; fond of entertaining, motoring, travelling. Member of :
Queens Club, Sydney, N.S. Wales, and The Moreton Club,
Brisbane, Queensland. She was a leading and prominent
worker in all social and charitable activities, particularly during
the war years, 1914-1918. Religion : Anglican. Politics :
Nationalist.
ELSEY, Cecilia Sarah (Mrs. W. E. Elsey), Bishopsbourne,
Kalgoorlie, Western Australia ; b. Pyramid Station, near Roe-
bourne, Western Australia; ed. Tintern College, Melbourne,
Victoria, and at Hove, Brighton, England, and in France ; dau.
of the late Kenneth and Cecilia Lucy Jane McLean; m. the
Right Rev. William Edward Elsey, D.D., Bishop of Kalgoorlie,
son of William Edward (the late) and Sarah Ann Elsey ; he was
ed. at King Edward VI. Grammar School, Louth, Lines., Lincoln
College, Oxford, and Cuddesdon Theological College ; ordained
Deacon 1904, Priest 1905, in St. Paul’s Cathedral, London ; at
St. Faith’s, Stepney, 1904-1914 (Priest-in-Charge, 1908-1914) ;
Brotherhood of S. Boniface, Diocese of Bunbury, Western
Australia, 1914-1919 (Warden 1915-1919) ; Bishop of Kalgoorlie
since 1919. Mother of John Kenneth Edward Elsey (b. June
25th, 1922). Interested in literature, religion, education ; plays


tennis, golf, bridge ; fond of motoring, travelling, gardening.
Religion : Church of England.
ELTHAM, Phyllis Elise Sydney (Mrs. E. P. Eltham), 74,
Sargood Street, Hampton, 5.7, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Heidel-
berg, Victoria ; ed. Presbyterian Ladies’ College, Melbourne,
Victoria ; dau. of Mrs. S. Boyd Graham and the late Mr. S. Boyd
Graham ; m. Ernest Percy Eltham, Chief Inspector Technical
Schools, Victoria, and Deputy Director Education, son of Mr.
and Mrs. Andrew Eltham ; he has been sent overseas twice —
to investigate the manufacture of machine guns for Common-
wealth Government, and later to study education abroad.
Mother of Kenneth Graham Eltham (b. June 22nd, 1928).
Interested in literature, music (particularly grand opera), art,
education ; plays tennis, golf, badminton, auction bridge ; fond
of motoring, travelling, dancing, swimming, entertaining,
theatre-going. Member of : Kooyong Tennis Club, L.T.A.V.,
Victoria, and Cheltenham Golf Club. Began a medical course
at Melbourne University, but after completing two years left to
be married. Since her marriage she has travelled fairly
extensively. Religion : Presbyterian. Politics : Liberal.
EVANS, Emily Mary (Lady Evans), 31, Stoke Street, New
Town, Hobart, Tasmania ; b. Sept. 27th, 1860, in Hobart,
Tasmania ; ed. Miss Giblin’s Ladies’ College, Hobart, Tasmania ;
dau. of James Harcourt, Birmingham, England ; m. Sir John
Evans, Kt., C.M.G., Manager of Huddart, Parker and Co.,
Shipping Agents, son of Capt. George M. Evans, Wales, and
Mary Fisher, Liverpool, England. Mother of George Harcourt
Evans, Lila Winifred Evans, and John Llewellyn Evans. John
served in the Great War, and died in 1925, the result of the war.
Lady Evans is interested in the Queen Alexandra Hospital, and
Tasmanian Sanatorium. Authoress of a book on the life of her
husband. After public life for five years she broke down and
has had to live a very quiet life ever since. Religion : Con-
gregational.
EVANS, Gladys Jeanette (Mrs. A. A. Evans), “ Ivanhoe,”
Launceston, Tasmania ; b. June 20th, in Launceston, Tasmania ;
ed. Launceston, Tasmania ; dau. of Edgar Main Luttrell, a
descendant of the lineage of the Luttrells, of Dunster, in
Somerset ; m. Major The Hon. A. A. Evans, D. 5.0., M.C.,
V.D.J., M.L.C., Member of Tasmanian Parliament, son of
Alexander and Elizabeth Grace Evans [nee Groom) ; he served
in South African War as a member of the Tasmanian Bushmen ;
represented Tasmania in the following amateur sports : rowing,
cycling and running ; Alderman of the City of Launceston for
nine years, and Mayor of the City in 1926 ; served in Great War
in Australian Artillery. Mother of Beverley Grace Graeme
Evans, Alexander Lexican Graeme Evans, Pilot Officer Francis
Raymond Graeme Evans, and June Jeanette Graeme Evans.
One son, Francis Raymond Graeme Evans, is a Pilot Officer in
the Royal Air Force, England. Mrs. Evans is interested in


charity, politics, literature, religion, education ; plays bridge ;
fond of entertaining, motoring, yachting, travelling, theatre-
going. Member of the Executive of the Launceston Branch of
the Victoria League, and Vice-President of the Junior Section,
Red Cross League. She was Mayoress of Launceston, 1926,
and Deputy Mayoress, 1927-28. Religion : Church of England.
Politics : Independent.
FAIRBAIRN, Peggy (Mrs. J. V. Fairbairn), Alcaston House,
Melbourne, and Mt. Elephant, Derrinallum, Victoria; ed.
Toorck College, Melbourne, Victoria ; dau. of Charles Forrester ;
m. Hon. J. V. Fairbairn, M.P., grazier, son of Charles Fairbairn ;
he has been M.P. for Flinders since 1933 ; Vice-President,
Executive Council, and Minister for Civil Aviation, April, 1939.
Mother of Geoffrey Forrester Fairbairn (b. Oct. 6th, 1924), and
Angela Elizabeth Fairbairn (b. July 10th, 1927). Member of :
Alexandra Club, Melbourne, and Royal Melbourne Golf Club.
Religion : Church of England. Politics : U.A.P.
FALK, Fanny (Mrs. L. A. Falk), 69, Cook Road, Centennial
Park, Sydney; b. Dundee, Scotland; ed. Dundee Harris
Academy ; dau. of Isaac Rosen, Dundee ; m. Rabbi L. A. Falk,
clergyman; he was ed. at various European theological
seminaries ; before the war was minister at Plymouth, England ;
served with British Forces as chaplain during the war ; accepted
call from Great Synagogue, Sydney, in 1922, where he is at
present Senior Minister. Mother of David Falk (b. April 10th,
1916), Gerald Falk (b. July Bth, 1918), Balfour Falk (b. Oct. 18th,
1922), and Peninna Falk (b. Dec. 19th, 1924). Interested in
charity and education. Member of various Jewish communal
organizations. She is a foundation committee member of the
National Council of Jewish Women of Australia, a foundation
committee member of the “ Ivriah ” Women’s Zionist Organiza-
tion, and a foundation committee member of the Women's
Auxiliary Jewish Education Board of N.S. Wales. Religion :
Jewish.
FALKINER, Una Caroline (Mrs. O. R. Falkiner), Boonoke
North, Widgiewa, The Riverina ; b. Royal Park, Melbourne ;
ed. Presbyterian Ladies’ College, Melbourne ; dau. of Albert
Alexander Cochrane Le Souef ; m. Otway Rothwell Falkiner,
stud master, son of Frank Sadlier Falkiner, founder of the
Boonoke flock, now the largest merino stud in the world ; it is
now carried on by her husband, who is now managing director ;
his father came from Beechwood, Tipperary, Ireland. Mother
of Laur6 Rothwell Falkiner and John Alexander Falkiner. The
latter was ed. at Geelong Grammar School, and is reading law
at Trinity College, Melbourne. Mrs. Falkiner is interested in
art, music, charity, literature ; plays tennis and golf ; fond of
entertaining, motoring, riding, travelling. Has illustrated
children’s books, one being “ The Spider’s Telephone Wire."
Member of : Ornithologist’s Union, Alexandra Club, Melbourne,
Sydney Forum, Royal Empire Society, and Victoria League of


Victoria. President of the Country Women’s Association,
Urana, N.S. Wales. Invented a “ wheel-yr-work ” to make
women’s work easier, especially washing days and gardening.
Religion : Church of England. Politics : National.
FARMER, Mary (Mrs. J. Farmer), Miyako, Olinda, Victoria,
and 9, Collins Street, Melbourne, Victoria (studio) ; b. May
2nd, 1883, in Kyneton, Victoria ; ed. at Kyneton and at Ruyton
Kew ; student of Max Meldrum, Australia’s leading artist; dau.
of Henry Hurry; m. John Farmer, artist, son of Hiram and
Laura Farmer ; he was a student of Max Meldrum; travelled in
China and Japan ; lived and exhibited pictures in Paris and
London—salons, academy, etc. Mrs. Farmer is interested in
art, principally portrait painting ; fond of country life. Member
of Lyceum Club. Exhibitor with chief Melbourne Art Societies.
Has always kept to her original signature, “ P. Hurry,” for her
pictures. Religion : Church of England.
FERGUSON, Alice R. A. (Lady Ferguson), 16, Cranbrook
Road, Rose Bay, Sydney ; b. Sydney ; ed. privately ; dau. of
Robert and Catherine (Gardere) Curtis ; m. Sir David Ferguson,
formerly Judge of Supreme Court, son of John and Elizabeth
(Johnston) Ferguson. Mother of Bernard Hall Ferguson (b.
1888, d. 1912) ; Arthur Gardere (b. 1891), Captain A.1.F., killed
in action, 1916 ; Keith Aubrey Ferguson (b. 1895), Lieut., A.1.F.,
served in Great War ; and Dorothy Vera Ferguson, wife of
Commander Arthur Powell, R.N. Member of : Queen’s Club,
Sydney. Religion : Presbyterian.
FERGUSON, Amy Ruby (Mrs. J. W. Ferguson), " Edina,”
Heydon Avenue, Warrawee, N.S. Wales; b. Waverley, N.S.
Wales ; ed. Ravenswood College, Gordon, N.S. Wales ; dau. of
Ebenezer Vickery; m. J. W. Ferguson, 1.5.0., M.8.E., Acting
Under Secretary and Permanent Head of Premier’s Department
°f WM O8 * son of Thomas Henry Ferguson ;he was formerly
Official Secretary and Commercial Officer for N.S. Wales in
London; from 1932-34 in charge of N.S. Wales Offices in
London; holder of Diploma of Economics and Commerce,
Sydney University ; holder of Silver Medal and Diploma, Royal
Life Saving Society, N.S. Wales ; member of Junior Carlton
Club (London) and University Club (Sydney). Mrs. Ferguson
is interested in music and charity ; plays golf and tennis ; fond
of travelling and entertaining. Member of : Forum Club,
Girls’ Secondary Schools’ Club, and Pymble Golf Club. Grand-
daughter of the late Hon. Ebenezer Vickery, M.L.C., grazier,
merchant and philanthropist. Her great-grandfather arrived in
Australia in 1833, and she is of the fourth generation in Australia.
Grand-daughter of the Rev. F. Firth, one of the first missionaries
Tonga in the Pacific Islands. Religion : Presbyterian.
Politics : Democratic.
FINEY, Nellie Phoebe (Mrs. G. E. Finey), “Inverness,”
Pittwater Road, Brookvale, N.S. Wales; b. Nov. Bth, 1901 ;
ed. Bondi Public School, and Cleveland Street High School;


dan. of Samuel Murray ; m. George Edmond Finey, artist, son
of Harry and Rosa Emily Finey ; he did four years' service in
New Zealand Exped. Forces ; has published a book of carica-
tures, “ Art in Australia ” ; cartoonist all leading papers,
Sydney ; first Australian artist to hold modern exhibition —
enamel paintings, still life, cartoons, landscape; opened by
director of National Gallery, Melbourne. Mother of Edmond
Finey (b. Nov. 21st, 1922, d. March 20th, 1923), Bruen Finey
(b. Oct. 10th, 1923), David Finey (b. Dec. 9th, 1924), Georgia
Anne Finey (b. May 4th, 1929), Mitzi Finey (b. May 15th, 1930),
Maxim Daniel Finey (b. Feb. Bth, 1935), and Jill Finey (b. July
20th, 1936). Interested in art and amateur theatricals ; plays
ludo ; fond of swimming, motoring, entertaining. Member of :
Housewives’ Association. Has successfully managed her hus-
band’s art exhibitions in Melbourne and Sydney. Also interested
in making cheese and experimenting with poultry. Religion :
Church of England.
FISK, Florence (Lady Fisk), Beaconsfield Parade, Lindfield,
N.S. Wales ; b. Sydney, N.S. Wales ; ed. Abbotsleigh, Wah-
roonga ; second dau. of Samuel Chudleigh, Killara, N.S. Wales ;
m. Sir Ernest Fisk, Chairman of Directors, Amalgamated
Wireless (Australia), Ltd., son of Thomas Harvey Fisk and
Charlotte Harriett Fisk (nee Halland). Mother of Ernest Kelvin
Fisk (b. Oct. 19th, 1917), Thomas Maxwell Fisk (b. June 9th,
1919), Graham Chudleigh Fisk (b. Feb. sth, 1928), and David
Marconi Fisk (b. Feb. 4th, 1931). Interested in charity, litera-
ture, music, art, education ; fond of travelling and gardening.
Her religious interest is centred in the Church of England. Her
husband was b. at Sunbury-on-Thames, England, on August
Bth, 1886. He entered the Marconi Company’s training school
at Liverpool, England, in June, 1906, and also received training
at the Marconi Works and laboratories at Chelmsford, and at the
Marconi administrative headquarters in London. He was
engaged in wireless engineering, operating and development work
in the pioneering days of wireless. He also assisted in the
development of the marine wireless communication and ships’
news services on the Atlantic. Sir Ernest Fisk undertook a
special mission to the Arctic Icefields in 1909, and during that
and the following year engaged in demonstrating Marconi wireless
for the Newfoundland seal-hunting fleet. He also erected and
operated wireless stations in New York for the American Marconi
Company and assisted in the early development of marine wireless
along the St. Lawrence shipping route. In 1910 Sir Ernest
visited Australia on the R.M.S. Otranto and demonstrated the
use of Marconi wireless apparatus for the Orient Line of Royal
Mail steamers, establishing early records in long-range communi-
cations from the Indian Ocean to Sydney Harbour. He installed
the first British wireless stations in ships of the Australian and
New Zealand mercantile marine, and established the first
Marconi service depots in Australia and New Zealand (1911).


Sir Ernest assisted in the formation, in 1913, of Amalgamated
Wireless (Australasia), Limited, became General Manager and
established the manufacture of wireless apparatus in Australia.
On the outbreak of war in 1914 Sir Ernest volunteered for active
service, but was requested by the Australian Naval Board to
continue wireless work in Australia. He established wireless
detection stations at various points on the Australian coast,
organized and supplied equipment and personnel for radio
service with New Guinea Expeditionary Force, also for British
food ships built in Japan and China. Sir Ernest also directed
the erection of wireless stations for war service at various points
in the Pacific Ocean and organized various protection measures
for ships at sea. In September, 1918, after long experiments
at Wahroonga, N.S. Wales, in association with Marconi’s station
at Carnarvon, Wales, Sir Ernest received the first direct wireless
messages from Great Britain to Australia, and immediately
thereafter proposed to set up a regular direct wireless service
between the two countries. He attended the Imperial Conference
held in London in 1921 as adviser to the Prime Minister, the
Rt. Hon. W. M. Hughes, who opposed a wireless service by short
distance relays and successfully advocated direct communication
between Great Britain and the Dominions as demonstrated by
Sir Ernest’s continued experiments. In 1922 an Australian
Parliamentary select committee recommended the adoption of
the agreement advocated by Sir Ernest to provide for a direct
commercial wireless service to England at rates 33 \% below
existing cable charges, also increasing capital of Amalgamated
Wireless Company to and providing for the Australian
Government to become the largest shareholder. The agreement
was adopted and signed in March, 1922. Later, Sir Ernest
visited South Africa and persuaded the Prime Minister of that
country to adopt a direct instead of indirect wireless service
with Great Britain. He visited England later and successfully
advocated a change of policy, by which the Imperial Government
was to permit Australian and other British wireless companies
to establish direct commercial wireless services. In 1924 Sir
Ernest conducted experiments at Vaucluse, N.S. Wales, in
association with Marconi at Poldhu, Cornwall, demonstrating
the possibility of Beam Wireless communication between Great
Britain and Australia, and later, through the same means,
transmission of the human voice over same distance. He
successfully advocated adoption of Beam Wireless for Empire
inter-communication. Supervised erection of first Beam stations
in Australia, and organized all technical and commercial branches
of new service which opened in April, 1927. This was followed
in 1928 by the inauguration of a similar service between Australia
and Canada. Sir Ernest organized further experiments in long-
distance voice transmission by wireless, including first inter-
Empire broadcast from Sydney to London in September, 1927,
and pioneered the Australian end of the first inter-Empire direct


wireless telephone service in April, 1930. He also established
the first world-wide broadcasting service from Australia. Mean-
time, Sir Ernest built up engineering and manufacturing equip-
ment and organization in Australia, including an ideal modern
factory, established in large, attractive gardens, employing
more than 1,500 people and producing all kinds of wireless
equipment and allied apparatus. He also established manu-
facture of radio valves in Australia. In July, 1919, Sir Ernest
gave the first demonstration of wireless broadcasting in Australia,
and in January, 1921, established the first regular broadcasting
service. In October, 1920, he installed one of the first large-
scale public address systems in the world at Parliament House,
Melbourne. He inaugurated first daily newspaper on board
British ships in the Pacific Ocean. Sir Ernest is the inventor
and patentee of numerous wireless improvements, also of a
system of sound-proof open windows and sound-proof ventilating
partitions, and a new system for air-conditioning. Successfully
organized and controlled the finances of Amalgamated Wireless,
and negotiated all its important agreements and contracts,
including three embodied in Acts of Parliament. Sir Ernest
Fisk is an accomplished writer, interesting lecturer and public
speaker on scientific subjects, business administration, economics
and various other subjects. Appointed Managing Director of
Amalgamated Wireless (Australia), Ltd., in 1917, and Chairman
of the Board in 1932. Chairman, Industrial Section, Royal
Society of N.S. Wales, 1921-22. President Institution of Radio
Engineers, Australia, 1932-37 inclusive. Re-elected President
for 1939. Vice-President Chamber of Manufacturers of N.S.
Wales, 1935 and succeeding years. Associate member of
Institution of Engineers, Australia. Fellow of Institute of Radio
Engineers, U.S.A. Vice-President of Institute of Radio Engin-
eers, U.S.A., since 1938. President of the Electrical and Radio
Development Association of New South Wales. Vice-President
of the Australian Air League. Vice-President of Boy Scouts'
Association (N.S. Wales Division). Member of the Advisory
Committee of the Young Men’s Christian Association. Campaign
Chairman, Y.M.C.A. appeal, 1939. President of Royal Phil-
harmonic Society (N.S. Wales). Fellow of Royal Empire Society.
Fellow of Royal Australian Historical Society. Member N.S.
Wales (Government) Advisory Committee in Aviation, Chair-
man of State Council for Physical Fitness (N.S. Wales Govern-
ment). Member of Road Safety Council of N.S. Wales. Secre-
tary to the Commonwealth Government Economic Cabinet, 1939.
Director of Economic Co-ordination, Commonwealth Govern-
ment, 1939. Chevalier of the Cross of the Crown of Italy (1933).
Knight Bachelor (1937 Coronation). Jubilee Medal (1935).
Coronation Medal (1937). Fellow of Royal Society of Arts
(Great Britain). First Principal : Chapter Electron Scottish
Royal Arch Freemasons, Sydney, 1937. Chairman of Amal-
gamated Wireless (Australasia), Limited. Director : Amal


gamated Wireless Valve Co. Pty., Ltd. ; Australian Radio
Technical Services and Patents Co. Pty., Ltd. ; The Machining
and Electrical Co. Pty., Ltd. ; Royal Exchange Assurance
Company ; Sargents, Limited ; Standard Portland Cement Co.,
Ltd. ; York Air Conditioning and Refrigeration (Australasia),
Pty., Ltd. Clubs : (Sydney) Union Club, Australian Club,
Rotary Club, Royal Yacht Squadron ; (Melbourne) Australian
Club and Athenaeum Club.
FLETT, Beatrice (Miss), 6, Vickery Street, East Malvern,
Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Warrnambool, Victoria ; ed. Warrnam-
bool and Melbourne; dau. of John Brown Flett and Christina
Flett. Interested in education, English literature and Nor-
wegian literature ; plays golf ; fond of entertaining, travelling,
theatre-going. Authoress of some light verse. Member of :
English Speaking Union, Overseas League, and Christian Club,
Melbourne. Also interested in elocution, voice culture and
verse-speaking ; also dress, art and design, and home decoration.
Religion : Presbyterian. Politics : Democratic.
FLOYD, Frances Mary Griffiths (Mrs. A. E. Floyd), Winton,
Selbourne Road, Toorak, Melbourne ; b. March 19th, in Frankton
Grange, Frankton, Ellesmere, Shropshire ; ed. Queen’s School,
Chester ; dau. of Dr. W. Aylmer Lewis, Oswestry, Shropshire ;
m. Dr. A. E. Floyd, musician (organist of St. Paul’s Cathedral,
Melbourne), son of Rev. C. H. and A. M. Floyd. Mother of
John Hulme Aylmer Floyd (b. June 12th, 1922), and David
Arthur Floyd (b. Nov. Ist, 1925). Interested in literature and
music. Religion : Church of England.
FLYNN, Lily Mary (Mrs. T. T. Flynn), 4, Broomhill Park,
Belfast; b. Sydney, N.S. Wales ; dau. of Captain Young, M.M. ;
m. Professor T. Thomson Flynn, Professor of Zoology, Queen’s
University, Belfast; he was Professor of Biology, University of
Tasmania, 1909-1931 ; member of Australasian Antarctic
Expedition, 1915. Mother of Errol Flynn (b. June 20th, 1909),
and Rosemary Flynn (b. Dec. 2nd, 1921). Errol Flynn is film
star with Warner Bros., Hollywood, U.S.A. ; taken leading part
in “ Captain Blood,” ” Charge of the Light Brigade,” ” Robin
Hood,” “ Dawn Patrol,” ” Dodge City,” etc. ; he is also author
of “ Beam Ends ” and “ White Rajah ” (film scenarios).
Mrs. Flynn is interested in charity and music ; plays bridge,
golf, badminton; fond of entertaining, motoring, travelling,
theatre-going, concerts. Member of : Alpha Club, and various
golf and sports clubs. Religion : Church of England.
FORD, Annie Kellett (Mrs. B. W. Ford), 16, West Street,
Balgowlah, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. Hay, N.S. Wales, Australia ;
ed. Kempsey, N.S. Wales, by Governesses ; dau. of William
Thomas Baker ; m. Bertram Willoughby Ford, architect and
town planner, son of John Thomas Ford and Margaret Lousia
Cowper ; he has been President of Town Planning Association
of N.S. Wales since 1934 ; member of Council of International
Federation of Housing and Town Planning since 1935 ; member


of Building Regulations Advisory Committee of N.S. Wales
since 1936 ; member Housing Improvement Advisory Committee
since 1937 ; President Balgowlah U.A.P. since 1934 ; Delegate
to U.A.P. Council, Convention and Conference since 1935 ; was
Fellow of the N.S. Wales Institute of Architects, 1913-31 ; he
originated only known system of protection of brick buildings
from the destructive effects of movement of the sub-soil in clay
and black soil country ; secured (through the local Federal
Member) for Sir Charles Kingsford Smith an airworthiness
certificate for his Lockeed-Altair plane, “ Lady Southern Cross/'
and successfully advocated the purchase for the Australian
nation of the world-famous aeroplane, “ Southern Cross ” ;
he is authority on lawn tennis, and was a writer on lawn tennis
for “ Sydney Morning Herald " for six years, 1925-31. Mrs.
Ford is interested in religion, politics, charity, music, art ; plays
lawn tennis, ice hockey, and bridge ; fond of fancy figure and
free skating on ice, entertaining, motoring, travelling, riding,
theatre-going, and oil and water-colour painting. Member of :
Town Planning Association of N.S. Wales (Hon. Organizing
Secretary for eight years), and Women’s U.A.P. Club, Sydney.
Member of Balgowlah U.A.P. Branch (Hon. Secretary for five
years (since 1935) and Hon. Organizing Secretary for six years
(since 1934) ). Formed the Sydney Ladies’ Ice Hockey Club
in 1922, and was Honorary Secretary for six years ; represented
her State in inter-State ice hockey matches for eight years.
Won the Women's Sculling Championship of N.S. Wales in an
outrigger in 1922, and was one of the crew of four that won on
the same day the women’s championship four. Was lady tennis
champion for twelve years, and represented her State for
twenty-two years. In 1922, the “ Referee,” the leading
sporting paper, carried her photo, and said, ” Mrs. Bertram
Ford is now recognized as the best all-round woman athlete in
Australia.” Championship titles won by Mrs. Bertram W.
Ford : —N.S. Wales Championships : Ladies’ Singles six times,
Ladies’ Doubles five times, Mixed Doubles twice. Metropolitan
Championships : Ladies’ Doubles five times, Mixed Doubles
twice. City of Sydney : Ladies’ Singles three times, Ladies’
Doubles four times, Mixed Doubles once. Western Suburbs :
Ladies’ Doubles twice, Mixed Doubles twice. Northern Suburbs :
Mixed Doubles once. Victorian Championships : Ladies’
Singles once, Ladies’ Doubles once, Mixed Doubles once.
Queensland : Ladies’ Singles eight times, Ladies’ Doubles three
times, Mixed Doubles six times. New Zealand : Ladies’
Doubles twice. Australasia : Ladies’ Doubles once. Repre-
sented her State (N.S. Wales) twelve times in N.S. Wales, eight
times in Queensland, once in N. Zealand, and once in Victoria.
Prior to the introduction of the Australasian Championships
Titles, the N.S. Wales Championships were generally regarded
as such. Taught the Scripture in the State Schools in N.S.
Wales every week for nine years, from 1928, for the Church of


England, in an honorary capacity ; had very large classes, from
a hundred to two hundred or more, three and four classes each
week. Has been having a rest, but intends returning to her
post again very shortly. Religion : Church of England.
Politics : United Australia Party.
FOX, Dorothea Catherine (Miss), Eton Square, 474, St. Kilda
Road, Melbourne, Victoria ; ed. Presentation Convent College,
Dandenong Road, Windsor, Victoria ; dau. of William Ivory
Fox, of Melbourne. Interested in all charitable movements ;
when possible, likes to give time to dramatic art —it being one
of her favourite hobbies ; plays golf; fond of entertaining,
motoring, theatre-going, riding and walking. Member of The
National Council of Women. Foundation member of the
National Theatre Movement, the Therry Society, and other
Dramatic Movements. For the past ten years she has been
Secretary of the Victorian Housewives' Association, which
organization it has been her proud privilege to see steadily grow
in strength and numbers (approx. 65,000) and usefulness, feeling
happy to think that her own efforts have helped to bring about
such a Society to help and secure reforms for women and children.
Its all-embracing activities assist them also in the management
of their homes and cultural pursuits. Religion : Roman
Catholic.
FRANKLIN, Miles (Miss) ; b. N.S. Wales ; dau. of John
Maurice Franklin and Susannah Margaret Eleanor Franklin [nee
Lampe). Authoress of : My Brilliant Career, Some Everyday
Folk and Dawn, Old Blastus of Bandicoot, Bring the Monkey,
All that Swagger (Prior Memorial Prize, 1936), Rose Scott
(Biographical Sketch in Sesqui-Centenary Women’s Memorial
Volume), No Family (one act play in “ Best Australian One Act
Plays ”), and Pioneers on Parade (in coalition with Dymphna
Cusack).
FREETH, Gladys Mary (Mrs. R. E. Freeth), Guildford Grammar
School, Guildford, Western Australia ; b. March 12th, 1886, in
Cape Town; ed. S. Cyprians, Cape Town; dau. of Alfred
William Snashall; m. Robert Evelyn Freeth, Headmaster,
Guildford Grammar School, son of Sir Evelyn and Lady Freeth.
Mother of Gordon Freeth (b. Aug. 6th, 1914), Ernest Evelyn
Freeth (b. Feb. 29th, 1916), and Elizabeth Oakes Freeth (b.
April 13th, 1918). Gordon Freeth holds degree of LL.B. Ernest
E. Freeth holds degree of 8.E., and is carrying out research work
on producer gas. Elizabeth C. Freeth holds Diploma of Austra-
lasian College of Physical Education. Mrs. Freeth is interested
in missionary (Church of England) work and art; plays golf
and contract bridge ; fond of entertaining, motoring, theatre-
going, travelling. Member of : Karrakatta Club, Perth, and
Mount Lawley Golf Club. President of Women’s Auxiliary,
Australian Board of Missions (in Diocese of Perth). Religion :
Church of England.


FULLERTON, Mary Eliza (Miss), 181 c, High Street, Kensing-
ton, London, W.B, and “ Arden/' 24, Evansdale Road, Haw-
thorn, Melbourne ; b. April, 1868, in Gippsland, Victoria ; ed.
by her mother and in State Schools ; dau. of Robert and Eliza
Fullerton. Interested in literature, drama, politics ; played
cricket as a girl; since then, literary games, cross-word puzzles,
etc. ; fond of motoring, travelling, theatre-going. Authoress of :
Bark House Days (sketches), Moods and Melodies, The Breaking
Furrow (poetry), and Australian Bush (descriptive), and six
novels under her own name or noms-de-plume . Politics :
Socialistic, based on the essential worth and dignity of the
common man.
GARDNER, Hilda Josephine (Mrs. J. F. Gardner), 132,
Riversdale Road, Hawthorn, Victoria ; b. Sept. 6th, 1890, in
Adelaide, South Australia ; ed. Unley Park School, Adelaide ;
dau. of Joseph and Bertha M. Florey ; m. John Forrest Gardner
(d. Aug. 6th, 1928), medical practitioner, son of Gavin and Mary
Gardner ; he was in medical practice at Richmond, Victoria, at
time of his death. Mother of Joan Forrest Gardner (b. June
16th, 1918), and David Gavin Gardner (b. Oct. 22nd, 1924, d.
July 11th, 1932). Joan Gardner is an undergraduate in Science
at Melbourne University. Interested in all matters pertaining
to the medical profession. Member of : British Medical Associa-
tion, and Lyceum Club. She graduated M. 8., 8.5., Adelaide
University, 1912, and was Resident Medical Officer, Adelaide
Hospital, Adelaide Children’s Hospital, and Women’s Hospital,
Melbourne. Married in 1917. Following death of husband
became Assistant Bacteriologist, Melbourne Hospital, in 1929.
Since 1934 has held the position of Bacteriologist and Clinical
Pathologist, Royal Melbourne Hospital. Religion : Church of
England. Politics : Liberal.
GAUNT, Mary Eliza Bakewell (Mrs. H. L. Miller), Villa Camilla,
Bordighera, Italia ; b. Feb. 20th, 1861, in Indigo Goldfields,
Victoria; ed. Grenville College, Ballarat, and Melbourne
University ; dau. of His Honour Judge Gaunt, Victoria ; m.
Hubert Lindsay Miller (d. Oct. 20th, 1899), Doctor of Medicine,
practising in Warnambool, Victoria, son of John Lindsay Miller,
M.D., Launceston, Tasmania, and Margaret Kenyon. Interested
in travel and the starting-out of the younger generation ; plays
bridge. Author of : Dave’s Sweetheart, As The Whirlwind
Passeth, Harmony, That Scar, and many other novels and travel
books. At her husband’s death, having only small means, she
travelled to England to make her way in literature. Had exactly
ten shillings per week. After a tremendous struggle she made
her way, and has travelled from the Amur River to the Missis-
sippi, from the Hoang Ho to the Congo, from the West Coast of
Africa to Inner Mongolia, and many lands between. She has
been in Saghalien and lived in Jamaica. Has been to New
Zealand and Tasmania. Thinks Hobart the loveliest harbour
in the world, and from the top of Mount Lofty has seen Adelaide


on the plain below, sparkling at night like a golden star. Travel
is, in fact, her hobby. Has paid for it all with her pen. Religion :
Church of England. Politics : Conservative, an ardent follower
of Neville Chamberlain.
GARSIA, Dorothea (Mrs. R. C. Garsia), Monaro Crescent,
Canberra, A.C.T. ; b. 1892, in Sydney, N.S. Wales ; ed. Presby-
terian Ladies’ College, Croydon, N.S. Wales ; dau. of Dr. H.
Sanderson Lloyd ; m. Commander R. C. Garsia, naval officer,
son of Capt. Christopher Garsia ; he served in Royal Aust. Navy
during the Great War ; Administrator of Territory of Nauru,
1933-38. Mrs. Garsia is interested in Girl Guides, literature,
education ; plays golf, tennis, bridge ; fond of gardening and
sewing. Religion : Church of England.
GEACH, Portia (Miss), The Astor, Macquarie Street,
Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. Melbourne, Victoria ; dau. of Edwin
and Catherine Geach, Cornwall, England. Interested in social
betterment, charity, literature, music, politics, art, education.
Member of : Women’s Club, Sydney, Lyceum Club, Melbourne,
Council of N.C.W. (Sydney), Victorian Artists’ Society, etc.
She is an artist ; gained scholarship from National Gallery,
Melbourne, to Royal Academy, London ; exhibited in England,
Paris, New York, etc. —murals and portraits. Founded House-
wives’ Association and Progressive Club, Sydney, in 1917 ; for
many years President and Liaison Officer ; also Past Federal
President.
GIBLIN, Eilean Mary (Mrs. L. F. Giblin), 142, Domain Street,
Melbourne, S.E.I, Victoria ; b. Aug., 1884, in East Molesey,
Surrey, England ; ed. Wycombe Abbey School, England ; dau.
of E. P. Burton and A. M. Burton ; m. L. F. Giblin, Professor
of Economics, University of Melbourne. Interested in literature,
music, politics, art, commerce, education. Member of : Lyceum
Club. President of the Council of University Women’s College,
University of Melbourne. Politics : Labour.
GIBSON, Kathleen Grace (Mrs. A. B. Gibson), 50, The Avenue,
Parkville, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Feb. 16th, 1901, in Melbourne ;
ed. Presbyterian Ladies’ College, Melbourne ; dau. of Mr. and
Mrs. H. H. Derham, of Melbourne ; m. Alexander Boyce Gibson,
Professor of Philosophy, University of Melbourne, son of Pro-
fessor and Mrs. W. R. Boyce Gibson ; he holds degree of M.A.,
Oxon., 1925, and has occupied his present position since 1935.
Mother of Ann Boyce Gibson (b. Jan. 27th, 1938). Interested
in social work, education, and international affairs ; plays tennis ;
fond of entertaining, motoring, travelling, theatre-going, and
the training and showing of dogs. Religion : Protestant.
Politics : Liberal.
GOBLE, Kathleen Doris Laetitia (Mrs. S. J. Goble), C/o Air
Board, Victoria Barracks, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Teignmouth,
Devon, England ; ed. Camberley and Eastbourne, England;
dau. of Col. F. W. Wodehouse, C.I.E. (retd. Indian Army) ; m.
Air Vice-Marshal S. J. Goble, Air Force Officer, son of George


and Anne Goble (deceased) ; he has been awarded C.8.E., D. 5.0.,
D.S.C., C.deG. (French) ; served in R.N.A.S. and R.A.F. during
Great War, 1914-18 ; loaned to Australian Government, 1919-21 ;
transferred R.A.A.F., 1921 ; undertook first circumnavigation
of Australia by air, 1924 (Brittania Trophy) ; graduated R.A.F.
Staff College, 1926, and Imperial Defence College, 1927 ; present
appointment. Chief of Air Staff, R.A.A.F. Mother of John
Douglas Goble (b. April 12th, 1923), Alan James Goble (b. July
sth, 1925), and Ivor Norman Goble (b. July 19th, 1929). John
Douglas Goble is a Cadet Midshipman in Royal Australian Navy.
Mrs. Goble is interested in charity, literature, art; plays golf;
fond of swimming, travelling, riding. Served with V.A.D.,
England, 1915-18. Religion : Church of England. Politics :
Liberal.
GODLEY, Louisa Marion (Lady Godley), Poughley, Woodlands
St. Mary, Newbury, Berks., England ; b. Rahinston, Co. Meath,
Ireland ; ed. at home ; dau. of Robert Fowler, Esq., D.L. ; m.
General Sir Alexander Godley, soldier, son of Col. and Mrs. W. A.
Godley ; he is a General in the British Army ; commanded the
New Zealand Forces, 1910-19 ; Commander-in-Chief, Army of
the Rhine and Southern Command ; Governor of Gibraltar.
GOLDBERG, Agolda (Mrs. F. Goldberg), 122, Victoria Road.
Bellevue Hill, Sydney ; b. Aug. 10th, 1894, in Wellington, New
Zealand ; ed. Hill Street, Convent, Wellington, New Zealand ;
dau. of Mr. A. Levy and Mrs. Frances Levy ; m. Frank Goldberg,
advertising expert, son of William and Frances Goldberg,
America ; he is a J.P. in Australia and New Zealand ; holds
honour of F.R.G.S., and is a director of a number of companies;
Governing Director of Goldberg Advertising (Aust.) Pty., Ltd.,
Sydney, Melbourne, and with branch offices in Wellington,
Auckland, Christchurch and Dunedin ; also director of other
companies. Mother of Cara Goldberg (b. Aug. 2nd, 1916), and
Inez Goldberg (b. April 26th, 1925). Interested in charity,
religion, art; plays bridge, golf, tennis ; fond of theatre-going,
entertaining, motoring. President of Jewish National Fund.
Member of Women's International Zionist Organization.
Religion : Jewish. Politics ; Liberal.
GRAINGER, Ella (Mrs. P. Grainger), 7, Cromwell Place, White
Plains, New York, U.S.A. ; b. May Ist, 1889 ; ed. in Sweden,
England, France; foster-dau. of Oscar and Hilda Strom,
Sweden ; m. Percy Grainger, composer, son of John and Rose
Grainger. Mrs. Grainger writes poetry, paints pictures, and
reads poetry and books ; fond of swimming, ski-ing, and parties
of all kinds. Has painted portraits and is doing designs for
poems. Religion : Lutheran.
GRAY, Elizabeth (Mrs. J. A. Gray), 26. Wellington Street,
Kingston, Ontario; b. Alfreton, Derbyshire, England ; ed.
privately, and at The Guilds Internationale, Paris, and Swedish
Institute, London ; dau. of Albert Watson ; m. Joseph Alex
Gray, Research Professor of Physics, son of the late James Gray,


Melbourne. Interested in education; plays bridge. Member
of : Ladies’ Army Auxiliary, London. Specially interested in
cripple’s welfare, and has given many years to the study and
treatment of cripples. Was Assistant Directress for two years
of the International Students’ Dispensary in Paris. Worked for
the British, French and American Red Cross organizations from
1914 to 1919 in France and England. Holds original Mons
Star and Service Medals. Religion : Church of England.
GRIFFITH, Yrene (Mrs. M. E. De B. Griffith), S. Luke’s
Vicarage, Ekibin, Brisbane, 5.3, Queensland, and Box 421 F,
G.P.0., Brisbane,; b. January 26th,'in Santander, Spain; ed.
St. Helen’s School, Glasgow, Scotland ; dau. of William Thorburn,
M. M.1.C.E., and Edith Moss ; m. the Rev. M. E. De
Burgh Griffith, M.A., Director of Religious Education and Vicar
of Ekibin, Diocese of Brisbane, son of Llewellin Downes Griffith
and Felicia Marion Victoria Bryant ; he was Chaplain A.1.F.,
1916-18 ; Director and Secretary, Church of England Sunday
School Institute, London, 1925-27 ; Warden of S. John’s College,
University of Queensland, 1932-36 ; National President, National
Council of Religious Education of Australia, 1937-39. Mother
of Maureen Yrene De Burgh Griffith (b. June 21st, 1928),
Christopher Thorburn De Burgh Griffith (b. March 28th, 1930),
and Silvia Kathleen De Burgh Griffith (b. May 14th, 1931).
Interested in religious education and child welfare ; plays tennis
and bridge ; fond of gardening and organizing charity functions.
Member of : The Mothers’ Union. Religion : Church of England.
GRIMSHAW, Beatrice Ethel (Miss), Wayside, Kelso, Bathurst,
N. Wales ; b. Cloona House, Dunmurry, Co. Antrim, Northern
Ireland ; ed. Pension Retaillaud, Caen, Victoria College, Belfast,
Bedford College, London, and Queen’s University, Belfast; dau.
of Nicholas Grimshaw, of Cloona House, Dunmurry, Co. Antrim,
Northern Ireland. Interested in tropical colonization, explora-
tion, and development of native populations ; fond of travelling
and exploration. Authoress of : When the Red Gods Call,
Guinea Gold, Red Bob of the Bismarcks, The Sorcerer’s Stone,
The Terrible Island, The Lady of the Island, Kris-Girl, Conn of
the Coral Seas, Black Sheep’s Gold, The Star in the Dust, The
Paradise Poachers, My Lady Far-Away, The Sands of Oro, The
Coral Palace, The Candles of Katara, The Long Beaches, The
Beach of Terror, The Little Red Speck, The Valley of Never-
Come-Back, The Wreck of the Redwing, My South Sea Sweet-
heart, The Coral Queen, Helen of Man-of-War Island, Vaiti of
the Islands, Queen Vaiti, The Mystery of Tumbling Reef, White
Savage Simon, In the Strange South Seas, From Fiji to the
Cannibal Islands, The New New Guinea, Isles of Adventure, The
Victorian Family Robinson. Religion : Catholic (Roman).
Politics : Conservative.
GROSE, Fannie Jane (Lady Grose), Goldsmith Street, Goul-
burn, N.S. Wales ; b. Balmain, Sydney ; ed. North Sydney ;
dau. of Arthur Bowman Chisholm ; m. Sir James T. Grose,


Retired General Manager of National Bank of New Zealand ;
he was formerly Inspector of Banks, N.S. Wales ; holds several
important company directorships. Mother of Neville Chisholm
Sendall (b. April 20th, 1900), solicitor. Interested in
charity, music, etc. ; plays contract bridge; fond of enter-
taining, motoring, travelling, etc. Patron of R.S.P.C.A.,
Goulburn. Member of : Queen’s Club, Sydney, and Lady
Belmore Club, Goulburn. Her former husband, who died in
1923, was A. E. Sendall, solicitor, of Goulburn ; and his uncle
was the late Sir Walter Sendall, one-time Governor of Cyprus
and British Guiana. The Chisholm family, of which she is a
member, was one of the earliest and best known in the Goulburn
District. They were the owners of several extensive grazing
properties. Her grandfather, the Hon. James Chisholm, was in
the earlier days of the Colony a member of the Upper House of
the N.S. Wales Parliament. Religion : Church of England.
Politics : Country Party.
HAASE, Caroline Hallett (Miss), Lyceum Club, Melbourne,
Victoria ; b. Melbourne, Victoria ; ed. Victoria Ladies’ College,
Albert Park ; dau. of John Godfrey Haase. Interested in
music, literature, art, education ; fond of theatre-going, reading,
travelling, walking. Member of : Lyceum Club, and the
International Club. Spent several years in England on the
stage. Her stage career started at the Manchester Repertory
Theatre, with the then famous Horniman Company, in Greek
and Classical Drama. Toured England with Iden B. Payne in
Bernard Shaw and Modern Comedy. Played in London with
Fred Terry and Julia Neilson in Romantic Drama. Played in
Granville Barker’s war production of Thomas Hardy’s
“ Dynasts ” at the Kingsway Theatre. Returned to Australia,
where she trains students for the stage ; also speech and diction
in the public schools.
HALL, Edith Mary (Mrs. R. Hall), Littlegrange, High Street,
Sandy Bay, Hobart, Tasmania ; b. Hobart, Tasmania ; ed.
Selbourne House, and Ladies’ College, Hobart, Tasmania ; dau.
of W. R. Giblin, sometime Premier Attorney General and subse-
quently Premier Judge, Tasmania ; m. Robert Hall, scientist,
F.L.S., C.M.Z.S. ; his father was a merchant captain, of Irish
nationality, and his mother Scotch ; he travelled 5,000 miles up
Lena R., Siberia (probably first Englishman to do so), collecting
bird specimens ; he sold the collection to Lord Rothschild, and
it was lodged in Tring Museum in 1904. Mrs. Hall is interested
in charity, literature, music, art, education, drama ; plays
contract bridge ; fond of entertaining, motoring, travelling,
theatre-going, the cinema. Authoress of many papers for a
literary society, of which she has been a member for thirty-five
years. Member of : Child Welfare Association, Women’s
Literary Club, and Queen Mary Social Club. President of
District Nurses’ Association. Went as delegate from Tasmania
for Child Welfare National Council of Women, to Geneva, 1927.


Ran a play-reading society for six years (men and women), when
they read plays by Shaw, Barrie, Drinkwater, Milnar, Synge,
Stephen Philips, Galsworthy, Sean O’Casey, Rostand, Tchekov,
Van Druten, R. Besier, Lord Dunsany, A. A. Milne, Bennett,
Monkhouse, Brighouse, L. Housman, F. A. Ferguson, R.
Berkeley, Lady Gregory, Granville Barker, etc., etc. Religion :
Church of England. Politics : Nebulous.
HAMILTON, Dulcie Seymour (Mrs. P. M. Hamilton), Brisbane
Boys’ College, Toowong, Brisbane ; b. Nov. 25th, in Woolwich,
England ; ed. St. Margaret’s College, Bushey, Herts., England ;
dau. of Rev. J. Shepherd ; m. P. M. Hamilton, Esq., M.A.,
Principal of The Brisbane Boys’ College, son of Andrew
Hamilton ; he was a Rhodes Scholar, 1917 ; Headmaster of
Scots College, Warwick, 1925-30 ; and Brisbane Boys’ College
since 1931 ; M.A. (Melbourne), B.Litt. (Oxon.), Dip. Ed. (Oxon.).
Mother of Patrick lan Peter Hamilton (b. July Bth, 1924), and
Nola Dulcie Anne Hamilton (b. July 17th, 1928). Interested in
music, art, education, literature ; fond of entertaining, motoring,
travelling, theatre-going. Member of : Art Society, and New
Education Fellowship. Religion : Church of England.
HANSEN, Gwendoline Dorothea Julie (Mrs. H. W. Hansen),
Flat 3, 40, Elizabeth Street, Artarmon, N.S. Wales, and C/o
Commonwealth Film Censorship Board, 9/13, Bligh Street,
Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. Wollahra, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; ed.
Parramatta High School; dau. of Alfred Julius Nielson ; m.
H. W. Hansen (d. July, 1928), science master ; he served in the
18th Battalion in the Great War ; died from gas poisoning due
to war service. Mother of David Sinclair Hansen (b. Nov. 3rd,
1925). Interested in charity, literature, music, art, education
(psychology) ; plays golf, solo whist, bridge ; fond of enter-
taining, motoring, travelling. Member of : Pymble Golf Club,
N.S. Wales. Religion : Protestant.
HARDIE, Marianne (Lady Hardie), Blythsdale, Hamilton,
Brisbane ; b. May 26th, 1861, in Nairn, Scotland ; ed. Private
School, Nairn, Royal Academy, Inverness, Scotland (Home
Park, Broughty Ferry, near Dundee) ; dau. of Alexander Jeans
and Isabella Blyth; m. Sir David Hardie, medical profession, son
of John Hardie and Margaret Masson ; he was knighted in
January, 1913. Mother of David Alexander Hardie (b. June
10th, 1884, d. April 7th, 1885), Margaret Helena Isabella Hardie,
and John and Jean Blyth Scott Hardie. Helena is m. to Percival
Lodge Cameron ; John is a medical man in Brisbane, and m. to
Phyllis King ; he was awarded the Military Cross in the Great
War; Jean is at Blythsdale. Mrs. Hardie is interested in
charity, literature, music, politics, religion, art, commerce,
education ; fond of entertaining true friends, and motoring.
Religion : Protestant. Her politics are guided by whatever is
for the benefit of mankind and animals.
HARPER, Sylvia (Mrs. R. R. Harper), 13, Turnbull Avenue,
Toorak, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Oct. 19th, 1896, in Strathfield,


N.S. Wales ; ed. Presbyterian Ladies’ College, Croydon, Sydney,
N.S. Wales ; dan. of the late Charles Carey Lance and the late
Louisa Christie Lance; m. Robert Rainy Harper, Manager,
Holden’s Motor Works, Melbourne, son of the late Andrew and
Barbara Harper, of Edinburgh ; he was a Captain in the Great
War ; was awarded D.S.O. and French Croix de Guerre, and
twice mentioned in despatches ; served Gallipoli and France ;
severely wounded and returned in 1916. Mother of lan Rainy
Lance Harper (b. Jan. 4th, 1932). Interested in music ; plays
tennis, golf and bridge ; was Australian singles tennis champion,
1924, and runner-up 1930 ; won many state titles, singles and
doubles ; captain of first tennis team of women to tour Britain,
Continent and America in 1925 ; fond of entertaining, motoring,
theatre-going, and most sports. Member of : Lawn Tennis
Association of Victoria, Royal South Yarra Tennis Club, and
Yarra Yarra Golf Club. She is honorary official coach to
L.T.A.U. for junior girls, and a selector of Victorian women and
girls tennis teams. Religion : Presbyterian. Politics : United
Australia Party.
HARVEY, Joan Mary Temple (Mrs. R. M. Harvey), 39, Murphy
Street, Elsternwick, 5.4, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Feb. sth, 1884,
in Bangalore, India ; ed. Queen Elizabeth School for Girls, W.
Kensington, London, and Miss Rudds, Canford Cliffs, Hants.;
dau. of Brig. General A. T. Cox, C. 8., Indian Army, and Kate
Georgina Butler, Tasmania ; m. Ronald McPherson Harvey,
Electrical Engineer on Betterment Board Staff, Victorian
Railways, son of Thomas and Alice Harvey, Adelaide, South
Australia ; he obtained Diploma of Engineering, Adelaide School
of Mines ; had extensive engineering experience, Westinghouse,
Manchester; he enlisted 22nd Royal Fusiliers, Sept., 1914 ;
wounded Festeubert, 1916 ; received Coronation Medal for
services to Engineering, 1936. Mother of John Aberdian Harvey
(b. May 3rd, 1918, in Brixton, London, S.E.) ; Mary Angelica
and Patience Temple Harvey (b. April 4th, 1920, in Williams-
town, Victoria) ; James Young Harvey (b. Feb. 13th, 1922, in
Melbourne), and Ronald Alexander Harvey (b. Dec. 6th, 1923,
d. June sth, 1939). John left England and arrived in Tasmania
11th Oct., 1918, after perilous voyage ; he was ed. Melbourne
Church of England Grammar School, Melbourne, and is studying
for B.Sc., Melbourne University. Patience and Mary (twins)
were ed. Melbourne Church of England Grammar School for
Girls and The Melbourne School of Design. James (Junr.) was
ed. Melbourne Church of England Grammar School, and is now
studying accountancy. Ronald Alex was ed. Melbourne Church
of England Grammar School; died very suddenly of meningitis.
Mrs. Harvey is interested in charity, literature, music, politics,
religion, art, commerce, education, but has made a speciality of
art, and especially Australian drama ; fond of entertaining
chiefly young people (her children’s friends) ; riding, amateur
dramatics and wireless are her amusements. Authoress of two


Prize Plays, “ Light Breaking Through ” and “ The Hidden
Valley/ ’ which have been broadcast by the A.B.C. Also wrote
“ Random Elements,” a play of Australian youth, which was
produced by the Dramatist Club of Australia, Nov., 1938. Other
plays include : “ Gold ” (one act), produced Bryant’s Theatre,
Sydney, 1936, and “ Children of To-morrow ” (read at Play-
lovers and at Peace and Freedom League). Several other plays
have been read at Dramatic Societies. Another play, “ Peace
by the Derwent ” (a three-act Tasmanian play) was performed
at the Garrick Theatre, Oct., 1935, and also read at the Play-
lovers. Member of : National Theatre Movement, The Play-
lovers, The Australian Reading Union, Dramatist Club of
Australia, and Local Association Girl Guides. The chief interest
of her life, outside her home, is the furtherance of Australian
drama. Born in India, she left at the age of eighteen months,
and lived with her grandfather, Charles Butler, in a palatial
old house in Hobart till her father retired. Wrote plays from
babyhood. At fourteen went to England to be educated;
also spent six months in Lausanne and Germany. Returned to
Tasmania when 18. Her father was a friend of Lord Roberts,
and was in command of Fort Dakka, Khyber Pass, during the
dash for Khandahar. In Hobart, her mother’s home till 1914,
she studied at the Technical School and Hobart University.
At her father’s death returned to England with the idea of
studying the stage. Took lectures at Kensington University.
The war called her services to nursing and canteen work.
Married in 1916, and returned to Hobart in 1918. Then went
to Melbourne, where her husband joined the Electrical Staff of
the Victoria Railways. The ambition of her life is to get the
London stage with a pure Australian play. Religion : Church
of England. Politics : Democratic.
HATFIELD, Janet Guthrie (Mrs. W. Hatfield), Waterman’s
Bay, Western Australia, and 89, Castlereagh Street, Sydney ;
b. 1912, in Glasgow ; ed. White Hill School, Glasgow ; dau. of
Alexander Fulton ; m. William Hatfield, author ; he worked
passage to Australia in 1911, and travelled and worked at almost
everything all over continent ; reached recognition with “Sheep-
mates ” in 1930 ; other successes include “ Australia through
the Windscreen,” “ Desert Saga,” “ I Find Australia,” etc.
Mother of Lois Allison Hatfield (b. Oct., 1937, in England), and
William Hatfield (b. Jan., 1939, in England). Interested in
literature and politics, from the angle of socialism ; played golf
from childhood, but child training and participation in husband’s
work precludes games now ; fond of gardening. Member of :
Workers’ Art Guild and Left Book Club. Religion : Christian.
Politics : Socialist.
HAVILAND, Annie Victoria (Mrs. F. E. Haviland), Austinmer,
N.S. Wales ; b. Clarence Town, N.S. Wales ; ed. church and
public schools ; dau. of Charles and Kate Smythe ; m. Arch-
deacon F. E. Haviland, clergyman, archdeacon, son of Edwin


and Clara Haviland ; he has been Editor of the “ Bathurst
and Diocesan Church News ” for eight years, and is a member
of Linnear Society, N.S. Wales, and Naturalist Society. Mother
of Gertrude Alice Haviland (b. 1885), Edwin Ernest Haviland
(b. 1889), Athol Charles Haviland (b. 1894), Yara Winifred
Haviland (b. 1900), and Alfred Rupert Haviland (b. 1902). The
two elder sons served in the A.I.F. and the youngest in the R.A.
Navy during the Great War. Daughters were voluntary
workers for same. Mrs. Haviland is interested in charity ; fond
of motoring and entertaining. Past President of Mothers’
Union. Member of Red Cross. Religion : Anglican. Politics :
National Policy.
HAY, Mary Violet (Mrs. W. G. Hay), Nangawooka, Victor
Harbour, South Australia, and Cragend, Marino Rocks, South
Australia ; b. March 29th, 1876, in Adelaide, South Australia ;
ed. Harpurhey School, Unley Park; dau. of Rev. Francis
Williams, Headmaster, S. Peter’s College, Adelaide, and Celia
Roubel Laurie ; m. William Gosse Hay, novelist and historian,
son of the Hon. Alexander Hay, M.L.C., and Agnes Grant Gosse ;
he is author of, The Escape of Sir William Heans, Captain
Quadring, The Mystery of Alfred Doubt, and other historical
novels of early days of Australia and Tasmania ; also historical
and exploration articles under title, An Australian Rip Van
Winkle. Mother of Alexander Hay (b. July 15th, 1902) ;
William Beaumont Hay (b. Aug. 27th, 1906), and Andrew Gosse
Hay (b. Sept. Ist, 1909). Alexander Hay was ed. S. Peter's
College, won scholarships, and is now in business. William
Beaumont Hay was ed. S. Peter’s College, and Rose worthy
Agricultural College; awarded first class Diploma, and
won silver and gold medals for head boy in two final
years ; grazier. Andrew Gosse Hay was ed. S. Peter’s College
and S. Barnabas Theological College; obtained Th.L.
degree; now Assistant Vicar, St. Mark’s Mission, Fitzroy,
Victoria. Mrs. Hay is interested in charity, literature, religion,
gardening, poultry, flowers and birds of the native scrub, and
collects native orchids ; at present time she plays only contract
bridge, but in the 1890 s played much tennis and cricket with
women’s club ; was test player in England. Fond of sewing,
knitting, cooking, and of watching cricket at all times, especially
England Tests ; also Australian game of football. Does her
husband’s typing. President of Victor Harbour branch of Red
Cross, and holds long-service medal : twenty-four years’ work.
For some years she was President of Anglican Missionary Circle,
S. Augustine’s, Victor Harbour. Religion : Evangelical Church
of England. Politics : Liberal.
HAY, Maud Caroline (Mrs. R. S. Hay), Bishopscourt, Hobart,
Tasmania ; b. Clapham, Surrey, England ; ed. at home ; dau.
of William Joseph Glenny, Professor of King’s College, London ;
m. Robert Snowdon Hay, Bishop of Tasmania, son of James and
Elizabeth Hay; he was ed. Durham University and Hatfield


College ; Th.L. (honours), 8.A., D.D. ; Associate Fellow of
Australian College of Theology ; ordained at Durham, 1891 ;
served in diocese six years, then Queensland ; Hon. Canon ;
Dean of Hobart, 1916 ; Bishop of Tasmania, 1919 ; Senior
Military Chaplain, Ist Class ; played for Durham County and
University at football; member of various societies, and Rotary
Club. Mother of Arthur Snowdon Laidley Hay, Kathleen Maud
Glenny Hay, Dorothy Helen Hay, Robert Blair Hay, Elizabeth
Frances Hanson Hay, Marjorie Grace Rivers Hay, and Frederick
James Andrew Hay. Her eldest son served in the A.I.F. during
the Great War. Mrs. Hay is interested in art, literature, and
all church work ; fond of motoring and travelling. A member
of the Commonwealth Council of Mothers' Union. President of
the Mothers’ Union in Tasmania. President of Women’s Council
for Church work and Girls’ Friendly Society. Has been honoured
by receiving one of the Jubilee Medals from His Majesty King
George the V., and a Coronation Medal from His Majesty King
George the VI. Did Red Cross work from 1915 to 1918.
President of Returned Sailors and Soldiers Mothers and Wives’
Association. Vice-President National Council of Women.
Tasmanian delegate to Washington, 1925, and Brisbane, 1926.
President of Nurses’ Club. Vice and Acting President of
Lindesfarne Convalescent Home. Vice-President of Overseas
League. Member of Victoria League and the Royal Society of
St. George. A member of the Board and House Committee of
St. John's Church of England Hospital. Religion : Church of
England.
HENTY, Margaret Isabell, J.P. (Mrs. F. E. de Witt Henty),
“ Yarraby,” 7, Peace Street, Glen Iris, Melbourne, Victoria ;
b. Toorak, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; ed. Melbourne
University Conservatorium of Music; dau. of John Horne,
grand-daughter of George Horne, an Australian pioneer who
settled in Victoria less than ten years after the first white settler,
m. Frank Edward de Witt Henty (d. Nov. 14th, 1937), journalist
and author ; he was the grandson of John Henty, one of the
four Henty brothers who founded the first white settlement in
the State of Victoria (Australia) ; he was a noted Australian
writer of verse and prose, a contributor to the “ Sydney
Bulletin ” for over thirty years ; his short stories and verse,
which deal with Australian life, have been published in book
form. Mother of Steven de Witt Henty, who is a noted Aus-
tralian camera-journalist and writer ; he has already published
over a score of short stories ; his special articles and photographs
have appeared in over thirty Australian papers, as well as being
published in the press of America, England, Denmark, France,
Germany, Finland, India, South Africa, Manila, Switzerland and
other countries ; he is the originator of the photo-series, using
animals as the subject-matter ; his first strip of this nature
appeared in “ Life ” Magazine (New York) in 1937 ; the London
“ Tatler ” first published his work the following year ; since


then, his work has been much in demand all over the world.
Mrs. Henty is interested in charity, literature, music, politics.
President of the Portland Ladies’ Association, all members of
which are grand-daughters or daughters of Australian pioneers.
Member of the Honorary Justices’ Association of Victoria (Inc.) ;
an Executive Member of the Women Justices’ Association of
Victoria ; Vice-President of the Glen Iris East Branch of the
Women’s National League ; Vice-President of the Camberwell
Benevolent Society. For many years she has adjudicated on
the Court of Petty Sessions of Camberwell, Melbourne, Victoria.
The famous Dutch Admiral, de Witt, is one of her ancestors.
Religion : Church of England. Politics : Nationalist.
HERROD, Kathleen Elizabeth Ireson (Mrs. E. E. Herrod),
“ Waroong," Northwood Road, Northwood, Sydney, N.S.
Wales ; b. Parramatta ; ed. Our Lady of Mercy, Parramatta ;
dau. of Jerimah Kennedy Regan ; m. Colonel E. E. Herrod,
Secretary, N.S.W. Fruit-growers, son of Edward and Alice
Herrod ; he was awarded C.M.G., D. 5.0., and White Eagle of
Serbia during the Great War. Mother of John Edward Ireson
Herrod (b. 1920), Margaret Alice Ireson Herrod (b. 1922), Pamela
Mary Ireson Herrod (b. 1924), and David Kennedy Ireson
Herrod (b. 1928). Interested in charity ; plays golf and bridge ;
fond of motoring. Member of : Gordon Golf Club. Religion :
Roman Catholic.
HICKS, Florence Stanton (Lady Hicks), Woodley, Glen
Osmond, South Australia ; b. June 25th, 1903, in Dunedin,
New Zealand ; ed. St. John’s (Private) School and Columba
College, Dunedin; dau. of John Haggitt, stockbroker; m. Sir
Cedric Stanton Hicks, Kt., M.D., Ph.D., M.Sc., F.1.C., Professor
of Human Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Adelaide,
son of Geo. Henry Hicks, journalist, and Sarah Stanton Evans ;
he was responsible for construction of first wireless telegraph
and telephone operated in New Zealand, 1908 ; issued Report
on research on preserving New Zealand timber, 1915 ; prior to
enlisting, 1915, devised synthesis of Chloramine-T for Army ;
first Beit Memorial Fellow to be elected from New Zealand,
1923 ; solely for imperial reasons accepted Australian post
instead of important English appointment; during eight
expeditions has investigated physiology of Australian aboriginal
under extremely difficult circumstances, and has identified new
alkaloid poison used by them to catch game ; was one of the
committee who conducted Commonwealth Nutrition Survey,
1936-39 ; has devoted himself to improvement of methods of
Medical Education. Mother of Michael D’Arcy Hicks (b. 1931),
and Godfrey Duval Hicks (b. 1937). Interested in music (plays
violin), art, literature, handicraft (weaves on hand-loom) ; plays
tennis ; fond of walking, swimming, horse-riding, travelling in
foreign countries, ski-ing, theatre and ballet, and has played in
orchestra. Member of : University Wives’ Club, and Committee
of Clayton Kindergarten. Religion : Anglican. Politics : Con


servative-Socialist, recognizing essential changing nature of
society but holding to institutions of proved value until useful-
ness outlived. Considers change should be intelligently antici-
pated rather than forced by circumstance, and that forces making
for disruption of family life are inimical to national life.
HIDES, Marguerite Montbelle Lister (Mrs. J. G. Hides), 14,
Newark Crescent, Lindfield, Sydney ; b. Aug. 16th, 1912, in
England; ed. “ Ascham,” Burling Point, Sydney; dau. of
Clement Lister Priestley ; m. Jack Gordon Hides (d. June 19th,
1938), explorer and author, son of Horace and Helena Hides ;
he joined Papuan Administration as cadet, at eighteen years of
age ; retired when thirty years old, after leading several expedi-
tions into Papua’s hinterland ; wrote four travel books ; died
from pneumonia, in Sydney, four days before 32nd birthday.
Mother of Marguerite Isobel Hides (b. Feb. 14th, 1935), and John
Fairfax Hides (b. Nov. 24th, 1938). Her daughter was born
during Jack Hides’ famous Strickland-Purari expedition.
Interested in charity, literature, music, religion, art, education ;
plays tennis ; fond of motoring, travelling, theatres, dancing,
concerts, entertaining, and lectures on travel and natives.
Member of : Pacific Islands Club, and Toe H. Society (League
of Women Helpers). Is very interested in all matters regarding
natives, and Pacific peoples. Plays piano and mandolin, has
soprano voice, composes sacred songs ; and is keenly interested
in amateur theatricals, the writing of plays, novels and poetry.
HOAD, Sheila Main (Mrs. O. V. Hoad), 18, Ridley Street,
Auchenflower, Brisbane, Queensland ; b. Dec. 2nd, 1887, in
Warnambool, Victoria; ed. Korowa, Girls’ School, Malvern,
Victoria ; dau. of Mr. and Mrs. Arthur H. McDonald ; m. O. V.
Hoad, soldier (Colonel), son of Major-General Sir John Hoad and
Lady Hoad ; he served in the Great War, 1914-1918. Mother
of Arthur Oswald Hoad (b. June 9th, 1914), who follows pastoral
pursuits. Plays tennis and bridge; fond of gardening and
animals, and enjoys reading novels and general literature and
travel books. Member of : Moreton Club, Brisbane, Queensland,
and Quamby Club, Melbourne, Victoria. Religion : Church of
England.
HOLMES, Elsie Ada Harland (Mrs. H. R. Holmes), The
Deanery, Bathurst, N.S. Wales ; b. Ashfield, N.S. Wales ; ed.
Girls’ High School, Sydney, and The University of Sydney ;
dau. of William Mackrell Mills ; m. Henry Robert Holmes,
clergyman, Dean of All Saints’ Cathedral, Bathurst, son of John
Patterson Holmes and Cecilia Lucy Holmes ( nee Woodpell) ;he
holds degrees of M.A. of The University of Melbourne and
Licentiate in Theology (Th.L.) of Australian College of Theology ;
ordained deacon 1903 ; priest 1904 ; in India as C.M.S. mission-
ary, 1905-1921 ; he was C.O. of an Indian Labour Corps in the
Great War ; Rector of St. Mary’s, West Maitland, N.S. Wales,
1921-28 ; at All Saints’ Cathedral, Bathurst, since 1928. Mother
of two sons and five daughters, all living. One daughter,


Marjorie Doris Holmes, holds degrees of B.A. and Dip. Ed.
(Diploma of Education) of University of Sydney. Another
daughter, Enid Coralie Holmes, holds degree of B.A. of University
of Sydney, and also diploma of Board of Social Study and
Training, Sydney. Mrs. Holmes is interested in social move-
ments, literature, religion, education, and international affairs ;
plays golf ; fond of motoring. Member of : Country Women's
Association of N.S. Wales (was President of Bathurst branch
for 1939) ; also member of Bathurst Local Association of Girl
Guides and Diocesan Council of Mothers' Union. Holds the
degree of Master of Arts of the University of Sydney. Religion :
Church of England.
HOUGHTON, Eleanor Isabel (Mrs. S. R. Houghton), 30,
Mawhera Avenue, Sandy Bay, Hobart, Tasmania ; b. Jan. 21st,
1893, in Hobart, Tasmania ; ed. Hobart, Tasmania ; dau. of
the late John Caulfeild and Emma James ; m. Sydney Robert
Houghton (retired), son of Edgar Houghton and Catherine
Molloy ; he was ed. Launceston, Tasmania ; enlisted with 12th
Battalion A.M.F., 1907 ; 2nd Lieut., No. 9 Australian Corps of
Signals, Hobart, 1913 ; at the outbreak of War enlisted in 12th
Battalion A.I.F. and sailed with first expeditionary force ; took
part in the landing at Gallipoli on 25th April, 1915 ; Captain,
1916, (twice wounded, despatches, M.C., D. 5.0.) ; discharged
from A.1.F., 1919 ; Long Service medal and Colonial Auxiliary
Force Officer's decoration, 1925. Mrs. Houghton is interested
in charity and art; plays tennis and bridge ; fond of motoring
and gardening. Member of : Hobart Arts and Crafts Society.
Religion : Church of England.
HOWDEN, Vanda Mary Sanders (Mrs, H. Howden), C/o
Captain H. L. Howden, 0.8. E., R.A.N., Navy Office, Melbourne ;
b. June 28th, 1904, in London, England ; ed. Roedean School,
England ; dau. of William Sanders Fiske, LL.B., of London,
and Grace Fiske ; m. Captain Harry Howden, 0.8. E., R.A.N.,
naval officer, son of Patrick Grieve Howden, of Edinburgh,
Scotland, and Mary Elizabeth Niblett, Devonshire, England ;
he fought in the Grand Fleet during the Great War ; promoted
Commander, Dec., 1931 ; promoted Captain, June, 1938 ;
awarded 0.8. E., January, 1937. Mother of Patrick Ffyske
Niblett Howden (b. June sth, 1934), and Merlin Harry Evelin
Howden (b. Feb. 11th, 1937). Interested in literature, politics,
painting, sculpture ; plays golf and tennis ; fond of swimming,
entertaining, travelling. Member of : The Egypt Exploration
Society, London. Her father, William Sanders Fiske, had a
well-known Collection of Antiques in London, known as the
“W. Sanders Fiske Collection." Three pieces of porcelain from
this collection she loaned to the Sydney Art Gallery, Her
husband owns a large property in New Zealand, Furneaux,
Queen Charlotte Sound, N. 2, which has been presented to
National Trust as a Scenic Reserve. It is in that district that


Captain Cook careened his ship the “ Endeavour." Religion :
Church of England. Politics : Conservative.
HOWROYD, Verna Fredericka (Mrs. E. R. A. Howroyd),
Alfred Street, Scottsdale, Tasmania ; b. Sept. 28th, 1903, in
Scottsdale ; ed. Launceston High School; dau. of Hedley
Augustus Sutherland and Maude Sutherland (deceased) ; m.
Eric Richard Aldred Howroyd, engineer, son oi Charles Richard
Howroyd, M.H.R. (deceased) and Laura Octavia Howroyd
(deceased) ; he is a Justice of Peace ; member of Scottsdale
Hospital Board ; member of State Parliament (House of
Assembly) ] at one period member of Scottsdale Municipal
Council. Mother of Richard Brian Howroyd (b. July 17th,
1929), Laurence Hedley Howroyd (b. May 18th, 1931), Denis
James Howroyd (b. July 29th, 1933), and Terence David
Howroyd (b. Dec. 9th, 1935). Interested in music, literature,
politics ; plays tennis ; fond of motoring. Religion : Roman
Catholic. Politics : Labour.
HUGHES, Florence Marjorie, M. 8., 8.5., D.A. (Mrs. M. H.
Betz), 111, Collins Street, Melbourne, Victoria, and 667, Burke
Road, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Melbourne, Victoria ; ed.
Shelford Girls’ Grammar School and Presbyterian Ladies’
College ; also University of Melbourne ; dau. of Oliver Hughes ;
m. Maurice Henry Betz, Associate Professor of Mathematics,
University of Melbourne ; he was ed. at University of Sydney
and University of Cambridge, England ; co-author with Prof.
J. H. Michell of book on “ Mathematical Analysis ’’ ; member
of Council of University of Melbourne. Interested in languages,
literature, study of foreign affairs, and medicine ; plays tennis ;
fond of travelling and the French theatre. Co-author with
medical men of book on “ Practical Anaesthesia.’’ Member of :
Alliance of Melbourne, British Medical Association,
and International Association of Anaesthetists. Holds Honorary
Hospital Appointments as Anaesthetist at Royal Melbourne
Hospital, Alfred Hospital, Prince Henry’s Hospital, and Eye
and Ear Hospital. Religion : Church of England.
HUNT, Dorothy Violet (Mrs. R. W. R. Hunt), Nalang Station,
Bordertown ; b. Bordertown ; ed. Bordertown School, Adelaide
High School, and Adelaide University ; dau. of A. E. W. and
E. F. Virgo ; m. R. W. R. Hunt, pastoralist, son of W. H. and
R. Hunt ; member of Parliament of South Australia for five
years. Mother of Donald Murray Hunt (b. April 11th, 1925),
and Margaret Dorothy Hunt (b. Aug. 19th, 1928). Interested
in charity, literature, politics, religion, education ; plays bridge ;
fond of travelling and theatre-going. Member of : Country
Women’s Association, and Liberal and Country League. Founded
the Bordertown Girls’ Sports Club. Also established in 1937
and was first President of Bordertown branch of the Country
Women’s Association, and still holds that office. Religion :
Congregational, Politics ; Country Party.
64
Principal Women of the Empire :


HYNES, Margaret Josephine (Mrs.), Groom Street, Kedron,
Brisbane. Queensland; b. Mackay; ed. Girls’ State School
Mackay ; dau. of Mr. and Mrs. J. C. Hennessey, Nebo Road,
Mackay ; her husband was a Cabinet Minister, who died
21st March, 1939 ; he was Minister for Labour, A. Industry O
son of Mr. and Mrs. P. M. Hynes ; held Townsville seat for
sixteen years , acted as Premier on several occasions. Mother
of Kathleen Margaret Hynes (b. Dec. sth, 1907), Eileen Agnes
Hynes (b. Feb. 6th, 1909), Patrick Maurice Hynes (b Dec 28th
1912), Mary Alice Hynes (b. Oct. 6th, 1915), and James Vincent
Hynes (b. July 15th, 1917). Interested in politics; fond of
motoring, travelling, and the theatre. Religion : Roman
Catholic. Politics : Labour.
INNES, Frances Blanche (Mrs. G. E. M. Innes), 51, Hornton
Street, London, W.B, England ; b. Shepton Mallet, Somerset,
England ; ed. Melbourne, Victoria ; dau. of Edwin and Alma
Gray ; m. Guy Edward Mitchell Innes, journalist, son of William
and Eliza Beaumont Innes. Mother of Geoffrey Innes (b Oct
3rd 1914). Interested in charity, literature, politics, art; plays
bridge; fond of entertaining, travelling, riding, and target
shooting. Was first woman to get B.D.Sc. at Melbourne
University. Was Chairman of British Commonwealth League
1932-39. Religion : Anglican, Politics ; Non-party g ’
JACOBS Phyllis Vesper (Mrs. M. R. Jacobs). Arthur Circle,
Collins Park, Canberra, A.C.T. ; b, March 7th, 1905, in Sydney
N.S. Wales; dau. of A. R. Quinton, Esq., Wollongong; m!
Dr. M. R. Jacobs, research officer (forestry), son of Mr and Mrs
I. Jacobs, Kingswood, S. Australia ; he is a graduate of Adelaide
University ; studied at Oxford and Dresden, 1930-32 and is
now at Yale University, U.S.A. Mother of Janice Jacobs (b.
Dec. 11th, 1935), and Nancy Jacobs (b. Oct. 10th, 1937)
Interested in music, gardening, crafts ; plays tennis ; ’ fond of
swimming. Member of : English Speaking Union, Yale Dames
Red Cross. Religion; Presbyterian. Politics: U.A.P
JOHNSTON, Alice Maude (Mrs. T. H. Johnston), Esplanade
Henley Beach, Adelaide, South Australia ; b. Sydney, Ns’
Wales ; ed. Dulwich Hill, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; dau. of John
Pearce; m. T. Harvey Johnston, M.A., D.Sc., Professor of
Zoology, University of Adelaide, son of Thomas and Mary
Johnston ; he was Professor of Biology, University of Brisbane,
1919-22 ; and has been Professor of Zoology, University of
Adelaide, since 1922 ; Scientific Controller, Commonwealth
Prickly Pear Control Investigations ; Senior Biologist, British
Austr., N.Z. Antarctic Research Expeditions, 1929-30, 1930-31 •
awarded Mueller Medal for Research by Australian Association
for Advancement of Science. Mother of Maudie Johnston (now
wife of Dr. W. W. Jolly, of Eastwood, Adelaide), and Dr. John
Harvey Johnston (m. to Dr. Violet Plummer). Interested in
women’s and children’s welfare, and the aboriginal half-caste
problem; fond of motoring. Member of : Lyceum Club
65
Australia and New Zealand


Adelaide, South Australia League of Women Voters, National
Council of Women, and of Government Advisory Board for
Aborigines, South Australia (since 1932). Was President of
South Australian Women’s Non-Party Association, 1932-35, and
has been a member of its committee since 1924. Vice-President,
Y.W.C.A., 1935-36-37. Queensland Red Cross worker, 1915-22.
Religion : Protestant. Politics : Liberal.
KAHN, Esther (Miss), 127, Doncaster Avenue, Kensington,
N.S. Wales ; b. London, England ; ed. Riviere College, Sydney,
N.S. Wales ; dau. of Bernhardt Kahn. Interested in charities,
music, art, literature, languages, education, and musical thera-
peutics ; fond of the study of healing mental disorders by music.
Member of : Lyceum Club, Josef Kretschmann Memorial Club,
and International Society of Musical Therapeutics. Foundation
member and late president music circle of Sydney Lyceum Club.
Foundation member and for three years president of Josef
Kretschmann Memorial Club. Founder in Australia of Inter-
national Society of Musical Therapeutics (Inc.), president and
musical director. She is a composer-pianiste. Made her first
public appearance at the age of five, and was considered a
“ wonder kind.” At age of six won a scholarship which took
her to Guildhall School of Music, but studies were interrupted
by parents removing to Australia. In Sydney, Maestro Josef
Kretschmann “ discovered ” her, and she made many successful
public appearances in Sydney Town Hall, etc. Has composed
and published many pieces for piano, violin, organ and songs.
Was honorary musical therapeutist at Glades ville mental
hospital from 1928 to 1935, under the supervision of Dr. Now-
land. Religion : Unitarian. Politics : Democratic.
KEDDELL, Winifred Mary (Mrs. P. A. Keddell), 20, Repton
Street, Merivale, Christchurch, New Zealand ; ed. private
school; dau. of Walter J. Moore; m. Phillip A. Keddell (d.
June 4th, 1929), Registrar of Pensions, son of the late Major
and Mrs. Keddell; he served in the South African War and for
three years in the Great War. Mother of Mary Patricia Keddell
(b. Nov. 28th, 1921), and Peter Jackson Keddell (b. April 29th,
1923). Religion : Church of England.
KENYON, Alexandrine Delepine (Mrs. A. S. Kenyon), 147,
Lower Plenty Road, Heidelberg, Victoria ; b. St. Heliers, Jersey ;
ed. Coutance Convent, France ; dau. of Frederic Delepine ; m.
A. S. Kenyon, civil and hydraulic engineer (now retired), son
of Alfred Henderson and Agnes Fleming Kenyon ; he was Chief
Engineer, Water Supply ; Commissioner of Water Supply
(retired 1935) ; now, Numismatist and Keeper of the Antiquities
Public Library. Mother of Justine Agnes Delepine Kenyon
(b. Sept. 16th, 1897). Interested in charity, music, art ; used
to play golf; fond of entertaining and cooking. Religion :
Presbyterian. Politics : National.
KERR, Margaret Henderson (Miss), 119, Kooyong Road,
Armadale, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Maryborough, Victoria,


Interested in literature, music, art, education, and in giving
professional services in charity’s cause ; plays golf and tennis.
Member of : Music Teachers’ Association, and Melbourne Music
Club. Commenced concert platform work at the age of five
years. Has had extensive broadcasting career, Melbourne and
Interstate, in works of Barry Pain, A. A. Milne, Series of
Famous Old London Street Cries,” etc. Own Adaptations and
Dramatizations for the Platform and Radio. Mistress of Speech
Training and Dramatic Art at “ Presbyterian Ladies’ College,”
Academy of Mary Immaculate ” and Atherton College.
MIDDLE, Mauna Loa (Mrs. J. B. Kiddle), 37, Domain Street,
South Yarra, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Nov. 2nd, 1889, in
Grenfell, N.S. Wales ; ed. by private tuition ; dau. of Louis
and Elizabeth Burrett ; m. John Beacham Kiddle, solicitor, son
of Lewis and Alice Kiddle ; he was awarded 0.8. E. for work
as Hon. Secretary of Australian Red Cross Information Bureau,
1915-19 ; President, Law Institute of Victoria, 1924 ; Vice-
President, Royal Melbourne Hospital, 1937 ; Chairman of
Directors, Permewan Wright, Ltd., since 1933 ; Director of
Hoffman Brick and Potteries, Ltd., since 1937. Mother of
Margaret Loch Kiddle (b. Sept. 10th, 1914), Lewis Kiddle (b.
March 10th, 1919), lan Beacham Kiddle (b. March 23rd, 1920),
Elizabeth Kiddle (b. May 19th, 1921). Margaret Loch
Kiddle is a B.A. (2nd Class Honours), Mrs. Kiddle is interested
in education, art, charity, home-training, gardening ; fond of
entertaining, motoring, travelling, theatre-going. Member of :
Alexandra Club, Melbourne. Religion : Presbyterian. Politics :
Nationalist.
KIEK, Winifred (Mrs. E. S. Kiek), Parkin College, Kent Town,
South Australia ; b. Manchester ; ed. Urmston Higher Grade
School of Science and Art; dau. of John Robert Jackson ; m.
Rev. Principal E. S. Kiek, college principal (theological), son of
Sidney Kiek ; he was ed. Wadham and Mansfield Colleges
Oxford ; M.A., Oxon., Ist Class Hons. Mod. Hist. ; M.A.,
Adelaide ; 8.D., London, Hons. ; Congregational minister in
England, 1909-20; Las been Principal of Parkin College,
Adelaide, since 1920 ; lecturer and author. Mother of Sidney
Noel Kiek (b. Dec. 22nd, 1912), Margaret Lucy Kiek (b. June
14th, 1914), and Laurence Edward Kiek (b. June 29th, 1918).
Sidney Noel holds degree of B.Sc., Adelaide University, and is a
geological surveyor. Margaret Lucy (m. O. C. Knauerhase,
1936) is a poetess, and holds degree of 8.A., Adelaide University.
Mrs. Kiek is interested in politics, religion, education, inter-
nationalism ; plays bridge, and also word and spelling games ;
fond of swimming, walking, gardening, travelling, drama,
handicrafts. Authoress of : Child Nature and Child Nurture.
Member of : National Council of Women, Congregational Church
Women’s Association, Women’s Non-Party Association, Women’s
Christian Temperance Union, and International Peace Campaign.
Mrs. Kiek holds degrees of B.A. (Manchester University), M.A.


(Adelaide University), and Hons. B.D. (Melbourne College of
Divinity). Ordained to Christian ministry 1927. Minister of
Colonel Light Gardens Congregational Church, 1926-33. Minister
of Knoxville Congregational Church since 1938. Religion :
Congregational. Politics : Non-Party.
KILLEN, Irene Ella (Mrs. E. L. Killen), “ Pine Park,”
Wellington, N.S. Wales ; b. 1892, in N.S. Wales ; ed. Presby-
terian Ladies’ College, Croydon ; dau. of the late George and
Mary Henderson ; m. Eric Lyle Killen, grazier, son of the late
Edward and Annie Lyle Killen ; he is President of the Graziers
Association of N.S. Wales, and Chairman of the United Country
Party Central Council. Mother of Isobel Beatrice Killen (b.
Jan. 26th, 1914), Thora Lyle Killen (b. June 13th, 1915), Neal
Beresford Killen (b. Feb. 21st, 1917), Bernice Muriel Killen
(b. April 18th, 1918), Anne Irene Killen (b. Dec. 31st, 1919),
Mary Elizabeth Killen (b. Dec. 9th, 1926), and Diana Lyle Killen
(b. Feb. 11th, 1929). Interested in music, gardening, literature ;
plays tennis and bridge ; fond of motoring, travelling, theatre-
going. Member of : Macquarie Club, and Wellington and
Macquarie Picnic Race Clubs. Religion : Presbyterian.
Politics : Country Party.
KINCAID, Hilda Estelle (Miss), City Health Office, Town Hall,
Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Melbourne, Victoria ; ed. Methodist
Ladies’ College, Hawthorn, Melbourne, Victoria ; dau. of John
Kincaid. Interested in science, medicine, social problems,
education, art, literature ; fond of motoring, travelling, theatre-
going, dancing. Authoress of various contributions to scientific
and medical journals. Member of : British Medical Association,
Melbourne University Graduates’ Association, Victoria League,
Methodist Ladies’ College, Old Collegians Club, and Medical
Women’s Association. Holds the degrees of Doctor of Science,
Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery of the Melbourne
University. Is a registered teacher. Has been attached to the
staff (in earlier years) of the Physiology Dept, in Melbourne and
in Sydney University. Has been a resident medical officer (in
earlier years) at the Royal Melbourne Hospital and the Renwick
Hospital, Sydney. At present is medical officer for child welfare
for the city of Melbourne, and has made a special study of
nutritional work with children. Religion : Protestant.
KING, Lorna Jane (Mrs. E. S. J. King), 231, Kooyong Road,
Toorak, Melbourne, 5.E.2, Victoria ; b. July 29th, 1903, in
Casterton, Victoria ; ed. Ararat Church of England Grammar
School ; dau. of William H. and Isabel [nee Black) Shaw ;m.
E. S. J. King, surgeon, son of John E. King and Beatrice Margaret
[nee Thomson) ; he holds degrees of M.D., M.S., D.Sc. (Melb.),
F. F.R.A.C.S. ; is a Jacksonian Prizeman (Roy. Coll.
Surgeons) ; Hon. Surg. to Roy. Melb. Hospital; author of
“ Localized Rarefying Changes of Bone,” and numerous papers
in medical journals. Mother of Lorna Robin King (b. April
18th, 1933), Rosemary Isobel King (b. Sept. 19th, 1936), and


Patricia Fay King (b. May 12th, 1938). Interested in literature,
art, domestic science ; plays tennis and bridge ; fond of motoring,
gardening, care of animals, and theatre-going. Holds nursing
certificates : General (Alfred Hospital, Melbourne) and mid-
wifery (Women’s Hospital, Melbourne). Religion : Presby-
terian. Politics : Conservative (U.A.P. in Australia).
KIRKHOPE, Elizabeth Kilgour (Miss), Lauriston Girls’ School,
Malvern, Victoria; b. Melbourne, Victoria ; ed. Lauriston,
Malvern, and University of Melbourne ; dau. of John Kirkhope.
Interested in education ; fond of travelling ; spent two years
abroad in Europe and England; has travelled in Australia
fairly extensively. Member of : Lyceum Club and International
Club. Headmistress of Lauriston Girls' School, and also owner.
Degrees : M.A. (Melb.), Dip. Ed. (Melb.). Religion : Protestant.
KIRWAN, Lady, Kalamunda, Western Australia ; b.
Bth, 1888, in Perth, Western Australia ; ed. Loretto Convent,
Perth, Western Australia ; dau. of the late Hon. T. F. Quinlan,
C.M.G., for six years Speaker of Western Australia Parliament ;
m. Hon. Sir John Waters Kirwan, newspaper proprietor and
journalist, son of Nicholas John Kirwan, of Sandymount House,
Co. Galway, Ireland, and Mary, dau. of John Waters, of Waters-
town, Ireland, Lieut. 21st Fusiliers ; he has been President of
Legislative Council of Western Australia Parliament since 1926 ;
represented Australia at seventeenth Conference Parlementaire
Internationale du Commerce held at Prague, 1931, and at
eighteenth Conference held at Rome, 1933 ; delegate to Imperial
Press Conferences at London, 1909, at Ottawa, 1920, and at
Melbourne, 1926 ; member of Senate of University of Western
Australia from the foundation of the University in 1912 until
1934, when he resigned ; author of, ” An Empty Land ” (1934),
‘My Life Adventure ” (1936), also articles in “ The Times,”
” Nineteenth Century,” etc. Mother of John Daniel Kirwan
(b. Feb. 15th, 1913, in Perth, Western Australia) ; he is well
known in aviation circles in England ; he competed twice for
King’s Cup, also was competitor in other famous air races ; and
Edmund Francis Kirwan (b. March 14th, 1915, in Perth, Western
Australia) ; he is a Bachelor of Arts, Cambridge University, and
is now studying medicine at Guy’s Hospital, London ; the third
son, Cecil Martin Kirwan, was b. Dec. 24th, 1917, in Perth.
Western Australia. Lady Kirwan is interested in charitable
work and music ; fond of hunting, and has followed the hounds
all her life ; also reading and piano-playing. Travelled exten-
sively throughout the world, both before and after marriage.
Religion : Roman Catholic.
KNOX, Alice Cecilia (Mrs. T. O. Knox), Anglewood School,
Burradoo, N.S. Wales ; b. Kilmore, Monaghan, Ireland; ed.
Bishop Strachan’s School, Toronto, Canada, and Alexandra
College, Dublin, Ireland ; dau. of Rev. Canon Robinson, M.A.,
8.D., T.C.D.; m. Thomas Oliver Knox, 8.A., T.C.D. (Sydney
University), headmaster, son of Mr. and Mrs. Thos. Knox ; he


was Asst. Master, Avoca School, Blackrock, Ireland, and Palmers
School, Grays, England; Senior Assistant, Knox Grammar
School, Wahroonga, N.S. Wales; Headmaster, St. Andrew's
School, Manly, and Anglewood School, Burradoo, N.S. Wales.
Mother of Margaret Cecilia Knox (b. Aug. 28th, 1921), Georgina
Alberta Knox (b. Nov. 12th, 1922), Thomas Knox (b. April 28th,
1927, d. Aug. Bth, 1927), and David Wykeham Knox (b. Dec.
27th, 1935). Interested in education and politics ; plays golf,
tennis, contract bridge ; fond of motoring, travelling, theatre-
going. Member of : Berrima Educational Club. Religion :
Church of England.
KNOX, Gertrude Mary (Mrs. E. G. Knox), 11, Myamyn Street,
Malvern, 5.E.3, Victoria ; b. Feb. 10th, 1899, in London, W.,
England ; ed. Assumption Convent, Kensington Square, W. ;
dau. of the late George Milbank Coore and Augusta F. Coore ;
m. Errol G. Knox, journalist, son of Joseph and Elizabeth Knox,
Sydney, Australia ; he was Managing Editor, “ Evening News,"
1922-31 ; and Managing Editor, “ Argus," Melbourne, since
1937. Mother of Patricia Monica Knox (b. Sept. 28th, 1920),
Peter Edmund Knox (b. Nov. 15th, 1923), and Pamela Anne
Knox (b. Aug. Ist, 1928). Interested in religion, charity,
animals; plays tennis; fond of riding, swimming, racing,
motoring, yachting, travelling. Religion : Roman Catholic.
Politics : Democratic.
LAMBERT, Jill (Mrs. R. E. Lambert), 4, Kenleigh Grove,
Armadale, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Brisbane, Queensland ; ed.
Loreto Convent, Mandeville Hall, Toorak, Melbourne ; dau. of
Thomas Joseph Ryan (former premier of Queensland) and Lily
Virginia Cook ; m. Raymond Edouard Lambert, artist, and pian-
ist virtuoso, son of Edouard Lambert and Maria Crabby ; he has
toured Australia and New Zealand as solo pianist six times with
leading artists ; chief study teacher at Melbourne University
Conservatorium. Mother of John Raymond Lambert (b. Nov.
2nd, 1935), and Jillian Raymonde Lambert (b. Nov. 20th, 1937).
Interested in literature, music, art; plays golf, bridge and solo ;
fond of swimming, travelling, concert-going. Religion : Roman
Catholic.
LAMBIE, Elizabeth Anne (Mrs. C. G. Lambie), Wentworth
Towers, Point Piper, Sydney, N.S. Wales; b. Edinburgh,
Scotland ; ed. St. Mary's and St. Anne’s School, Abbots Bromley,
Staffordshire, England ; dau. of W. G. Walton, F.F.A., Pres.F.A,
(Scotland) ; m. C. G. Lambie, Professor of Medicine, son of
Colonel G. Lambie, 0.8. E. ; he was one of Dr. Banting’s team
of research workers in Toronto, Canada, when Banting dis-
covered insulin ; and C. G. Lambie brought the first insulin to
Great Britain in 1924. Mother of Brenda Jean Lambie (b.
Jan. 29th, 1926), and Wilda Lambie (b. May 6th, 1930). Inter-
ested in music, charity, art, and folk-lore in all its branches,
including folk-songs; plays golf and badminton; fond of
entertaining, travelling, riding, theatre-going, motoring, skating


and walking. Member of : Overseas League, Scottish Society
and Burns Club of Sydney. Religion : Church of England.
LANGSFORD, Dorothy Mary (Miss), 3, Flora Terrace, Prospect,
South Australia ; b. Feb. 20th, 1896, in Mintaro ; ed. Methodist
Ladies’ College, Adelaide; dau. of Rev. W. A. Langsford.
Interested in literature and art. Authoress of : Cooee of
Glenowie, The Outlaw, Sun-chased Shadows, Dan of the Ridge,
etc. She is a District Captain, Girl Guides. Editor of, “ The
Methodist Kindergarten Magazine,” South Australia. Free-
lance journalist. Writer of serials, etc. Religion : Methodist.
Politics : Liberal.
LANGSLOW, Clyde Helene Hooper (Mrs. M. C. Langslow),
“ Lynton,” 3, Albert Street, Middle Brighton, Victoria ; b.
Bright, Victoria ; ed. Methodist Ladies’ College, Victoria, also
Brussels, Paris and Geneva ; dau. of Mr. and Mrs. J. B. Merry ;
m. Major M. C. Langslow, Finance Member Air Board, Dept, of
Defence, son of Mr. and Mrs. R. C. Langslow. Plays golf and
tennis ; fond of riding, skating, etc. Member of : Woodlands
Golf Club. Religion : Presbyterian.
LEE, Gladys Irene (Mrs. J. R. Lee), 15, Cambridge Road,
Drummoyne, N.S, Wales ; b. Sydney ; ed. Normanhurst College,
Sydney ; dau. of Tom and Shane Dickinson ; m. Hon. John
Robert Lee, M.L.A., engineer, son of James and Jessie Lee.
Interested in music, politics, and the work of the N.S. Wales
Crippled Children’s Society ; plays golf and bridge ; fond of
entertaining, motoring, travelling. Member of : Forum Club,
Sydney, Australia. Religion : Anglican. Politics : Democratic.
LEESON, Ida (Miss), Mitchell Library, Sydney, and (private
address) Holbrook Avenue, Kirribilli, Sydney ; b. Feb. 11th,
1885, in Sydney ; ed. Girls’ High School, Sydney, and University
of Sydney (8.A.) ; dau. of Thomas Leeson. Interested in
literature, politics and music. Member of : Institute of Inter-
national Affairs (member of Council, N.S. Wales Branch).
Librarian of the Mitchell Library, Sydney. Religion : Anglican.
Le SOUEF, Mary Emily Louisa (Mrs. A. S. Le Souef),
“ Raraku,” 3, Silex Road, Mosman, Sydney; b. Armidale,
New England, N.S. Wales ; ed. Riviere College, Sydney ; dau.
of the late W. A. B. Greaves, of Derby, England ; m. Albert
Sherbourne Le Souef, Curator, Taronga Zoological Park, Sydney,
son of Albert Alexander Cochrane and Caroline Le Souef ; he
was b. in Melbourne ; graduate of Melbourne Veterinary College ;
Corresponding Member, Zoological Society, London ; member
of Royal Society of N.S. Wales, Royal Empire Society, Orni-
thologists’ Union ; co-author, “ Wild Animals of Australasia ;
author of many papers in scientific journals. Mrs. Le Souef plays
auction and contract bridge ; fond of entertaining, travelling,
needlework, gardening, theatre-going. Member of : Macquarie
Club and Wauganui Private Sewing Circle for R.N.S. Hospital.
She and her husband are typical second generation Australians,
bound by strong ties of loyalty to Great Britain. They feel it


a privilege to help to develop their great country, as part of the
Empire Heritage. When in England, they find relatives in
many counties. On her father’s side to the Blakes of Menlo
Castle, Ireland, and to the Hopetown family, and through her
mother she is related to several Scottish families, such as the
McKenzies of Seaforth and Dockcairn. Is the great grand-
daughter of the late Captain Thomas Fitzherbert Hawkins,
R.N., who arrived in Australia in 1822. Her father’s birthplace
was Ashbourne, Derbyshire. He arrived in Australia in 1852,
and was by profession a surveyor. He owned a large pastoral
property on the Clarence River in N.S. Wales. Religion :
Church of England. Politics : National.
LINDSAY, Mary Janet (The Honourable), Jurien Bay, Western
Australia, and Yanship Estate, Western Australia ; b. Naples,
Italy ; ed. at home ; dau. of the late Sir W. J. Clarke, Bart.,’
and Janet Lady Clarke ; m. Major The Honourable Robert H.
Lindsay (d. 1911), Major in Royal Scots Greys, son of 26th Earl
of Crawford and Balcarris, etc. ; he was A.D.C. to Lord Curzon
when Viceroy of India ; also A.D.C. to Earl Beauchamp,
Governor of Sydney, N.S. Wales ; fought through the S. African
War. Mother of Robert William Ludovic Lindsay (b. 1905),
ed. Eton and Sandhurst ; formerly Captain Grenadier
and for three years Captain Trans-Jordan Frontier Force '
Joyce Emily Lindsay, m., 1932, Martin Alexander Lindsay,
formerly Lieut. Royal Scots Fusiliers ; leader of British Trans-
Greenland Expedition, 1934 ; has issue Ronald Alexander (b
1933), Jacynth Rosemary (b. 1934), and Oliver (b. 1938) ; and
Rosemary Jean Aileen Lindsay, m., 1928, William Ayshford
Sanford, and has issue, Edward William (b. 1929) and Joy
Primrose (b. 1931). Mrs. Lindsay is interested in emigration,
and the after-encouragement of those who emigrate ; fond of
travelling, riding, entertaining. Authoress of various short
stories. Member of : Ladies Empire Club, London, “ Overseas’
League, London, and Royal Automobile Club, West Australia.
She donated and managed for the War Office the “ Robert
Lindsay Hospital for Officers ” during all the Great War at her
house in Charles Street, Berkeley Square. Mentioned in
despatches. Assisted the Marchioness of Londonderry to replace
all men cooks in the army with women before the final pushes
of the Great War. Inspector and first Captain in the Women’s
Land Army. Religion : Church of England.
LINDSEY, Elizabeth Inez (Miss), 31, Riddell Parade, Elstern-
wick, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Portland, Victoria ; ed. privately •
dau. of Thos. C. Lindsey (deceased), pastoralist, Western District
Victoria, and E. E. Lindsey. Interested in charity, literature,
music and art, and social welfare (connected with children) ■
plays bridge ; fond of entertaining, travelling, the theatre, and
specially of grand opera and the ballet. Has had a number of
short articles published by different magazines. Member of :


Overseas Club. Having always been interested in any work for
the benefit of children, she trained as a nurse at The Children’s
Hospital, Melbourne, and later did a course in Infant Welfare.
After extensive work with the leading children’s specialists in
Melbourne, she was appointed Matron of a Foundling Hospital
(up to fifty children from birth to school age) at Beaconsfield,
Victoria, and remained there for several years. When, in 1934,
the Royal Victorian Institute for the Blind established its
Nursery School (infants, to six years of age) —the only one, as
yet, in the Southern Hemisphere —she was asked to take charge
of this branch of the Institute’s activities, and she continues still
as Sister-in-charge. Religion : Protestant. Politics : National.
LLOYD, Mary Elizabeth (Lady Lloyd), 24, Trinity Street,
College Town, South Australia ; b. May 17th, 1869, in Adelaide ;
dau. of Harry Lockett Ayers ; m. Sir Howard Watson Lloyd,
Accountant and Company Director, son of John Sanderson Lloyd
and Charlotte Emily Lloyd {nee Watson) ; he was created Knight
Bachelor in 1937. Mother of Ursula Howard Hargrave (b.
April sth, 1899), Marian Howard Lloyd (b. Jan. 18th, 1901, d.
Dec. 29th, 1901), Lancelot Howard Lloyd (b. Nov. 25th, 1902),
and Henry Howard Lloyd (b. June 28th, 1904). Ursula Howard
Lloyd was married on 31st May, 1922, and Henry Howard Lloyd
on 16th September, 1936. Lady Lloyd is a member of the
Queen Adelaide Club. Religion : Church of England.
LODEWYCKX, Anna Sophia (Mrs. A. Lodewyckx), 1, Beatty
Street, Mont Albert, Melbourne, E.lO, or The University,
Melbourne, N. 3 ; b. March Bth, 1887, in Fish River, Cape
Province, South Africa ; ed. Cape Town and Oslo (Norway) ;
dau. of Captain Axel Hartwig Hansen ; m. Augustin Lodewyckx,
Professor (University of Melbourne), son of Jan Lodewyckx and
Dymphna Maes ; he has travelled extensively, and has had
prolonged stays in South Africa, Belgian Congo, several European
countries, Iceland, Russia, etc. Mother of Karel Axel Lodewyckx
(b. Dec. 4th, 1910), and Hilma Dymphna Lodewyckx (b. Dec.
18th, 1916). Hilma Dymphna Lodewyckx was m. 31st January,
1939, to Charles Manning Hope Clark, 8.A., at Oxford. Mrs.
Lodewyckx is interested in languages and literature, music, art,
travel; fond of swimming, rowing, travelling (Europe and Far
East, Africa), theatre-going, entertaining. Member of : Lyceum
Club, and Melbourne University Union. Conducted Secondary
Schoolgirls’ Tour to the Far East (Japan, China, Philippine
Islands) in 1935. Instructor in Scandinavian Languages in the
University of Melbourne. Religion : Protestant. Politics :
Democratic.
LONG, Margaret Ellen (Mrs. C. R. Long), Edgecliffe, Cliff
Road, Frankston ; b. March 6th, 1875, at Daylesford, Victoria ;
ed. Daylesford ; dau. of William Henry Willard ; m. Charles
Richard Long, Inspector of Schools, Victoria, son of Samuel and
Sarah Long; he was a Shakespeare Scholar of Melbourne
University ; founder of the Australian Literature Society ; and


foundation member of the Historical Society. Mother of Wylfa
Alice Long (b. Dec. 26th, 1909), who is a Master of Arts of the
University of Melbourne ; and Charles Richard Willard Long
(b. April 20th, 1913). Interested in literature, music, politics,
education ; plays croquet and bridge ; fond of motoring and
theatre-going. Member of : The Country Women's Society,
Woman’s Christian Temperance Union, Australian Women's
National League Club, and Girl Guides Association. She was
President of the North Carlton Branch of the Red Cross Society
during the Great War. She is a Vice-President of the Australian
Women s National League, and a Vice-President of the Local
Girl Guides’ Association. Religion : Anglican. Politics : United
Australia Party.
LONGMAN, Irene M. (Mrs. H. A. Longman), Chelmer, Brisbane,
Queensland ; b. April, 1877, in Franklin, Tasmania ; ed. Sydney
Girls High School, and ‘ Redlands," Sydney ; dau. of the Rev.
J. M. Bayley ; m. Heber A. Longman, F.L.S., Scientist, Director
of Queensland Museum, son of the late Rev. F. Longman, of
Heytesbury, England ; he was President of Royal Society of
Queensland, 1919, and again in 1939 ; published many scientific
papers, chiefly on vertebrates, recent and fossil ; author of
Religion of a Naturalist " (published 1914). Mrs. Longman
is interested in charity, music, religion, art, commerce, education,
literature, sociology and economics, and politics. Authoress of
newspaper articles on current events and topics of general
interest. Member of : National Council of Women, Inter-
national Peace Campaign Council, Queensland Women’s Peace
Movement, Australian Council for Civil Liberties, etc., etc.
Her profession before marriage was teaching. For many years
she took a leading part in welfare work and in women’s organiza-
tions in Queensland. President of Queensland National Council
of Women from 1921-25. Member of Parliament in the Queens-
land Legislative Assembly from 1929-32. Religion : Rationalistic.
Politics : Socialistic.
LORIMER, Isa (Miss), 12, Bridge Street, Sydney ; b. Sydney ;
ed. by private tutors ; dau. of William and Mary Lorimer.
Interested in dancing, music, literature, art, health ; fond of
travelling, riding, and the theatre. Is preparing books on
dancing and physical culture with a view to publication. She
is actively engaged in teaching dancing (ballet and ballroom),
and also in doing remedial and health exercises for women and
children.
LYON, Doreen (Mrs. A. V. Lyon), Commonwealth Research
Station, Merbein, Victoria ; b. 1905, in Boort, Victoria ; ed.
Sacred Heart Ladies’ College, Kyneton; dau. of Mr. j. H.
Baines ; m. Mr. A. V. Lyon, agricultural scientist, son of Mr.
and Mrs. J. C. Lyon ; he established research work dealing with
horticultural work of the Murray River Irrigation Areas. Mother
of Barbara Noreen Lyon (b. April 22nd, 1939). Step-mother
to Mary Katherine Lyon (b. 1919), James Henry Lyon (b. 1921),


Verna Margaret Lyon (b. 1924), and William Alexander Lyon
(b. 1926). Mary is typist at Research Station ; James Henry
has studied Agricultural Science at Melbourne University—
winner of Chaffey Scholarship. Mrs. Lyon is interested in
charity and welfare of the sick poor, and also in education ;
plays golf and tennis, and most card games ; fond of entertaining,
travelling, motoring, etc. She is a double-certificated trained
nurse, and especially interested in the surgical work and research.
Religion : Church of England. Politics : Country Party.
LYONS, Enid Muriel (Mrs. J. A. Lyons), “ Home Hill/'
Devonport, Tasmania ; b. July 9th, 1897, in Smithton, Tas-
mania ; ed. State School, Burnie, and Teachers’ Training College,
Hobart ; dau. of William Charles Burnell; m. Joseph Aloysius
Lyons (d. April 7th, 1939), teacher, Minister of the Crown, son
of Michael and Ellen Lyons ; he was Premier of Tasmania,
1923-28, and Prime Minister of Australia, 1932-39 ; P.C., 1932 ;
C.H., 1936 ; Hon. L.L.D. (Cantab.), 1937. Mother of Gerald
Desmond Lyons (b. Nov. 13th, 1916), Sheila Mary Lyons (b.
Sept. 27th, 1917), Enid Veronica Lyons (b. Nov. 18th, 1918),
Kathleen Patricia Lyons (b. Dec. 31st, 1919), Moira Rose Lyons
(b. Feb. 7th, 1921), Kevin Orchard Lyons (b. Feb. 7th, 1922),
Garnet Philip Lyons (b. Oct. Bth, 1924, d. Aug. 6th, 1925),
Brendan Aloysius Lyons (b. June 17th, 1927), Barry Joseph
Lyons (b. July 20th, 1928), Rosemary Josephine Lyons (b. Sept.
25th, 1929), Peter Julian Lyons (b. Sept. 20th, 1931), and Janice
Mary Lyons (b. Oct. 25th, 1933). Interested in charity, litera-
ture, politics, religion, education, music ; plays billiards ; fond
of motoring, air travelling, needle-work, conversation, debating.
Member of : Victoria League, National Council of Women, and
County Women's Association. Has done a great deal of public
speaking, broadcasting, and written many articles. Represented
Australia with her late husband at the Jubilee Celebrations in
London, 1935, and at Coronation, 1937. Created Dame Grand
Cross of the Order of the British Empire, 1937. Religion :
Roman Catholic.
McARTHUR, Theodosia (Mrs. G. S. McArthur), Meningoort,
Camperdown, Victoria ; b. Aug. 31st, 1907 ; ed. Merton Hall,
Melbourne ; dau. of the late Sir George Addington Syme ; m.
Gordon Stewart McArthur, barrister-at-law and grazier, son of
the late the Hon. Sir William Gilbert Stewart McArthur, K.C.,
and Margaret Rutherford ; he served in R.F.A., 1916-18 ; 1921,
8.A., Cantab. (Hons. Mechanical Science Tripos) ; called to Bar ;
Inner Temple, 1929 ; Victoria, 1929 ; elected Legislative
Council, Victoria, 1931, and still sits. Mother of Fergus Stewart
McArthur (b. Oct. 27th, 1937), and John Gordon McArthur
(b. Sept. 9th, 1939). Interested in charity and politics ; plays
tennis and contract bridge ; fond of entertaining, motoring,
travelling, riding, theatre-going. Religion : Presbyterian.
Politics : United Australia Party,


MACARTNEY, Caroline Tottenham Lucas (Lady Macartney),
The Hutt, Yeerongpilly, Brisbane, Queensland; b. Ipswich,
Queensland ; ed. privately ; dau. of Pollet Gardew, P.M. ; m.
Sir Edward Macartney, solicitor, son of William Isaac Macartney
and Henrietta Dane. Mother of Arthur Chichester Macartney
(b. April 30th, 1889, d. Sept. 23rd, 1923), and Edward Ellison
Macartney (b. Aug. 17th, 1891). A. C. Macartney, M.1.M.E.,
was Captain 172nd Tunnelling Co., Royal Engineers, 1915-18,
and was mentioned in dispatches, March, 1919. E. E. Macartney
is a solicitor and served in Royal Garrison Artillery and Royal
Air Force, 1915-18 (Captain). Lady Macartney is fond of
gardening and reading. Member of : The Moreton Club
(President, 1936-39), The Scribblers’ Society, and Girl Guide
Association. Has been Chief State Commissioner, Girl Guides,
Queensland, since the Movement started in Queensland in 1919.
Member of Committees, Queensland Sock Fund and Comfort
Fund, 1914-18. Religion : Church of England. Politics :
Conservative.
MacDONALD, Christiana (Mrs. A. N. MacDonald), 127, Second
Avenue, Mount Lawley, Western Australia ; b. Sept. 11th, 1898,
in London, England; ed. Clapham, England; dau. of J. w!
Hildreth, Esq., London, England ; m. Senator Hon. Allan N.
MacDonald, accountant (served with A.1.F., 1914-19), son of
the late Alex. MacDonald, Gourepore, India, and Mrs. H. C.
MacDonald, Dundee, Scotland ; he was elected Commonwealth
Senate, Sept., 1934 ; appointed Assistant Minister of State for
Commerce, Nov., 1937, and was Assistant Committee Treasurer
Dec., 1938 to April 27th, 1939. Mother of Hildreth MacDonald
(b. Sept. 27th,1921), Jeanne K. MacDonald (b. Sept. 30th, 1923),
Alex K. MacDonald (b. Nov. 29th, 1925), and Bruce and Ross
MacDonald (twins) (b. Nov. 2nd, 1927). Interested in politics
(Empire and Australia) and women’s organizations ; plays golf ;
fond of motoring and travelling. Past President, British Ex-
Service Women’s Association. Her war service included service
with the Women’s Legion and the Forrestry Corps. Religion :
Church of England. Politics : United Australia Party.
MACFARLANE, Florence Annie Mary (Mrs. T. B. Macfarlane),
Cullingral, Merriwa, N.S. Wales ; b. Dorchester, Dorset,
England ; ed. Riverton High School, Southland, New Zealand ;
dau. of Rev. Thomas Neave, of Dorchester ; m. Thomas Brydone
Macfarlane, grazier, son of Mr. and Mrs. Donald Macfarlane,
Perth, Scotland ; he is a prominent stud sheep-breeder, whose
stud of Corriedale sheep is renowned throughout the world ; he
is a Councillor of the Royal Agricultural Society of N.S. Wales,
Councillor of the N.S. Wales Sheep-breeders’ Association,
Councillor and Vice-President of the Australasian Corriedale
Society, and member of the Australian Club, Sydney. Mother
of Mairi Margaret Sime Macfarlane, who m. Geoffery Gerald
Halligan, grazier, of Murrumbong, Wellington, N.S. Wales.
Mrs. Macfarlane is interested in charity, literature, politics,


religion, art, education ; plays contract bridge ; fond of enter-
taining, motoring, travelling, theatre-going, is a keen gardener,
and is very interested in her husband’s work, stud sheep-breeding.
Member of : The Victoria League in N.S. Wales. Religion :
Protestant. Politics : Liberal, or Anti-Labour.
MACGROARTY, Doreen Mary (Mrs. N. F. Macgroarty),
“ Dome,” 20, Augustus Street, Toowong ; b. Dec. 31st, 1899,
in Sydney ; ed. Sisters of Mercy Convent, Warwick ; dan. of
Mr. and Mrs. Charles E. Joseph; m. Neil F. Macgroarty,
barrister-at-law, son of Mr. and Mrs. Daniel C. Macgroarty ; he
was Attorney General for Queensland, 1929-32 ; and President
of Queensland Irish Association, 1925-32. Mother of Donn
Cannon Macgroarty (b. Sept. 3rd, 1930), Margaret Therese
Macgroarty (b. Oct. 12th, 1932), Neil Joseph Macgroarty (b.
Aug. 31st, 1934), Gerrard Peter Macgroarty (b. May 6th, 1936,
d. May 9th, 1936), and Patricia Mary Macgroarty (b. Dec. 23rd,
1937). Interested in music and commerce ; plays golf and
bridge; fond of entertaining and motoring. Her hobby is
designing miniature gardens with Great Barrier Reef coral and
shells tinted. Religion : Roman Catholic.
McINNES, Violet Muriel (Mrs. W. B. Mclnnes), 54, Lucerne
Crescent, Alphington, N. 20, Victoria ; b. Jan. 18th, in East
Prahran, Victoria ; ed. Malvern Road State School; dau. of
Alfred Ferrie Musgrave ; m. William B. Mclnnes, artist, son of
Malcolm and Alice Beckwith Mclnnes ; he has been the winner
of Archibald Competition eight times ; painted King then Duke
of York in 1933, and opening of Parliament at Canberra. Mother
of Laura Jean Mclnnes (b. May 25th, 1915), Malcolm Musgrave
Mclnnes (b. July 16th, 1918), Geoffrey William Mclnnes (b.
Nov. 13th, 1921), Alan Beckwith Mclnnes (b. March 31st, 1924),
lan Gordon Mclnnes (b. June 15th, 1926), and Gwendoline
Elaine Mclnnes (b. April 30th, 1928). Laura Jean is an
Instructress at Emily Macpherson School of Economy ; trained
at National Gallery. Malcolm is a Flying Officer at R.A.A.F.,
Point Cook. Geoffrey has applied for R.A.A.F. Mrs. Mclnnes
is interested in art; fond of entertaining, motor and air travel,
gardening, cooking, snow sports and swimming. Does flower
and portrait painting. Member of : Australian Academy of
Art, Melbourne Society of Women Painters, and Victorian
Artists’ Society. Religion : Protestant.
MACKAY, Mollie Barker (Mrs. R. W. G. Mackay), 4, Gower
Street, London, England, and The Cliffe, Limpley Stoke, near
Bath, England ; b. April 30th, 1907, in Tumut; ed. Redlands
College, Neutral Bay, Sydney, N.S. Wales; dau. of R. M.
Hassall; m. R. W. G. Mackay, solicitor, son of the late A. W.
Mackay and Mary Knight Mackay ; he was formerly a member
of firm of Sly and Russell, solicitors, of Sydney ; Chairman
Australian Institute of Political Science; now Prospective
Labour Candidate, Frome Constituency, Somerset, England.
Mother of Donald Gordon Mackay (b. March 11th, 1931), and


Barbara Joan Mackay (b. Sept. 23rd, 1933). Interested in
English Labour Politics ; plays tennis and golf ; fond of travel-
ling, theatres, riding, motoring, gardening. Member of the
English Labour Party. Most of her time is taken up in helping
her husband in his constituency. Religion : Church of England.
Politics : Labour.
McLAREN, Ada Elizabeth (Mrs. J. McLaren), 8, Halsey House,
Red Lion Square, London, W.C.I, England ; b. Bendigo,
Victoria ; ed. Presbyterian Ladies’ College, Melbourne, Victoria ;
dau. of W. K. McKenzie, Esq. ; m. Jack McLaren, author, son
of The Rev. John and Mrs. McLaren ; he lived and travelled
extensively in the South Seas. Mother of two children by former
marriage to Captain E. F. Moore, of the Australian Infantry
Forces, killed in the Great War : William Moore, ed. at Geelong
Grammar School (Australia), and Richard Moore McLaren,
incorporated accountant, ed. in England. Their grandfather,
E. Notley Moore, Esq., was, up till his death, Chief Stipendiary
Police Magistrate in Melbourne, Australia. Mrs. McLaren is
interested in history, literature, metaphysics ; fond of travelling.
Authoress of two novels : Which Hath Been, and Autumn Grey,
and various newspaper articles and magazine stories. Member
of : Lyceum Club, Melbourne. Has had journalistic experience
on the staffs of “ The Graphic ” (Melbourne) and “ The Herald ”
(Melbourne).
MADIGAN, Wynnis Knight (Mrs. C. T. Madigan), Blackwood,
South Australia ; b. 1888, in Glenelg, South Australia ; ed.
Miss Martin’s School, Adelaide ; dau. of Mr. and Mrs. Tullie C.
Wollaston (father dead) ; m. Dr. C. T. Madigan, M.A., D.Sc.
(Oxon.), B.E. (Adel), F.G.S., geologist, son of the late Mr. and
Mrs. Thomas Madigan ; he was awarded Rhodes Scholarship
in 1911 ; went to Antarctic in 1911, with Mawson Expedition ;
served through Great War in Royal Engineers ; entered Sudan
Civil Service in 1920, afterwards settling in South Australia,
where he has done much exploring in Central Australia ; crossed
Simpson Desert in 1939. Mother of David Cecil Madigan (b.
1916, in London, England), Wollaston Neith Madigan (b. 1919,
in Oxford, England), Russell Tullie Madigan (b. 1921, in South
Australia), Michael Roebourne Madigan (b. 1923, in South
Australia), and Rosemary Wynnis Madigan (b. 1927, in South
Australia). Interested in charity, literature, music, politics,
religion, art, education ; fond of motoring, gardening, reading,
travelling, and has a love of camping and outdoor life. Member
of : University Wives’ Club, Adelaide, and many committees.
President of Local Association of Girl Guides, Blackwood, last
seven years. Has travelled about Australia and New Zealand ;
been to England several times (married in London during the
war), and also on the Continent with her father before marriage.
Religion : Church of England.
MAGENNIS, Anne Stewart (Mrs. W. H. Magennis), “ Thorley,”
90, Holmes Road, Moonee Ponds, Victoria ; b. Melbourne; ed.


Grammar School, Ararat; dau. of James and Jean Walker;
m. William H. Magennis, Judge, County Court, son of William
J. and Elizabeth Magennis ; her husband, after practising for a
number of years as a barrister-at-law in Victoria, was appointed
in 1935 a Judge of the County Court; he has ridden to hounds
for many years, and is the Master of the Oaklands Hunt Club.
Mother of Betty Christine Magennis (b. Sept. 22nd, 1918), and
William Douglas Magennis (b. May 2nd, 1920). Betty is m. to
Hugh Wallace-Smith. Her son is a law student at the Melbourne
University, and regularly rides to hounds. Mrs. Magennis is
interested in charity, music, art; plays tennis and golf ; fond
of entertaining, travelling, theatre-going. Member of : English
Speaking Union. Religion : Presbyterian.
MAIN, Mary (Mrs. G. Main), Retreat, Illabo, N.S. Wales ;
b. April 14th, 1885, in Mintaro, South Australia ; ed. Tormore!
Adelaide, South Australia ; dau. of F. H. Weston, of South
Australia ; m. George Main, grazier, son of Hugh and Mary S.
Main, Ardrossan, Scotland ; he was Chairman, Australian Jockey
Club, 1937 ; has been member of Committee of A.J.C. since
1921. Mother of Mary Eleanor Main (b. Dec. 11th, 1908),
George Fullarton Main (b. Dec. 25th, 1909), Jean Mclver Main
(b. Aug. 13th, 1911), Agnes Weston Main (b. Oct. 16th, 1914),
and Hugh Henry Main (b. March 25th, 1919). Jean Mclver is
a qualified nurse, and Agnes Weston is a commercial artist.
Mrs. Main is interested in charity; plays bridge; fond of
gardening, entertaining, motoring, racing. Member of : Queen's
Club, and Royal Sydney Golf Club (both of Sydney), and
Country Women's Association, N.S. Wales.
MAPLESTONE, Isobel Alice (Mrs. P. A. Maplestone), 6/2,
Moira Street, Calcutta ; b. May 12th, in Victoria, Australia ;
ed. Melbourne ; dau. of the late C. V. Collins ; m. Philip Alan
Mapleston, Research Professor in Medical Parasitology, son of
Henry and Lucy Maplestone ; he did five years’ service in Great
War, in A.A.M.C. ; awarded D. 5.0., mentioned in dispatches ;
was Lecturer in Protozoology at Liverpool School of Tropical
Medicine ; now research worker, School of Tropical Medicine,
Calcutta. Mother of Patrick Alan Maplestone (b. March 12th!
1926). Interested in charity, literature, music, politics, religion!
art, commerce, education, but chiefly in the first-named ; plays
golf and bridge ; fond of entertaining, motoring, travelling,
theatre-going, gardening. Member of : Saturday Club, Calcutta!
and Tollygunge Club, Calcutta. Religion : Church of England.
Politics : Conservative.
MARKS, Viva Bessie Meurant (Mrs. F. W. Marks), Keith
House, Bradleys Head Road, Mosman, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b.
Dubbs, N.S. Wales ; ed. Arden College ; dau. of Anthony Louis
Stinson; m. Fredrick William Marks, C.8.E., consulting
accountant, son of Mr. and Mrs. M. Marks ; he is Chairman of
Directors of several Public Companies ; Chairman, Prince Henry
Hospital; Chairman, Theatres and Films Commission ; Chair


man, Met. Meat Industry Advisory Council ; Trustee, Australian
Museum, etc. Mother of Viva Joan Marks, Mrs. Ronald Hull,
Dudlee Gray Marks, Alison Rosemary Marks, and John Hedley
Douglas Marks. Mrs. Marks has many general interests.
Religion : Church of England.
MELBOURNE, Ellen Mary (Mrs. A. C. V. Melbourne), Archer
Street, Toowong, Brisbane, Queensland ; b. Liverpool, England ;
dau. of Emil Lowenthal ; m. A. C. V. Melbourne, Associate
Professor of History, University of Queensland, son of William
Clifford and Elizabeth Melbourne.
MIKULICIC-RODD, Neredah (Mrs. J. Mikulicic-Rodd), 1, Ver-
non Street, Mosman, Sydney ; b. Toorak, Melbourne, Victoria ; ed.
Fort Street School and “ Arthursleigh, ” Albion Street, Sydney ;
dau. of Mr. and Mrs. George Withers; m. Joseph Mikulicic-
Rodd, Consul for Yugoslavia, son of Mr. and Mrs. F. Mikulicic-
Rabic ; he served for four years with the Australian Imperial
Expeditionary Forces. Interested in The Royal North Shore
Hospital (Mosman Auxiliary) ; plays tennis and bridge ; fond
of travelling. Religion : Protestant. Politics : Neutral.
MILBANKE, Sheila Margaret (Lady Milbanke), 82, Hamilton
Terrace, St. John’s Wood, London, England ; b. Sept. 9th, 1898,
in Sydney, N.S. Wales ; dau. of the late Harry Chisholm ; m.
Sir John Milbanke, Bart., son of the late Sir John Milbanke, V.C.,
and the late Lady Mahon. Mother of Lord Loughborough and
The Hon. Peter Erskine (Pilot Officer, R.A.F.), sons of the late
Lord Loughborough, Lady Milbanke’s first husband. Both sons
were ed. at Eton ; and subsequently Lord Loughborough went
to Magdalen College, Oxford, and the Hon. Peter Erskine to
Cranwell College (R.A.F.). Lady Milbanke is interested in
charities and reading ; plays golf and tennis ; fond of skating,
swimming, riding, travelling. Member of ; The Bath Club.
Religion : Church of England.
MOLE, H. Josephine de (Mrs. L. E. de Mole), 25, Murdoch
Street, Cremorne, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. Bendigo, Victoria ;
ed. Bendigo ; dau. of George Frederick Walter (late of Bristol,
England) ; m. Lancelot Eldin de Mole, C.8.E., civil engineer,
son of William Frederick and Emily Moulden de Mole ; he
submitted plans for an “ armoured car ” to the War Office in
1912 ; served in the Great War ; was awarded a C.B.E. in 1920
in recognition of his work in Tank Design and Invention (Civil
Division) ; one of the first inventors of multi-wheel vehicles and
automatic telephones. Mrs. de Mole is interested in literature,
music, art ; plays bridge and the piano ; fond of motoring and
travelling. Member of : Overseas Club. Religion : Church of
England. Politics : Conservative.
MORRIS-MILLER, Catherine MacKinnon (Mrs. E. Morris-
Miller), Skara Brae, Lipscombe Ave., Sandy Bay, Hobart,
Tasmania ; b. Campbeltown, Scotland ; ed. Campbeltown
Grammar School, and Melbourne; dau. of Rev. John Carson;
m. E. Morris-Miller, Litt.D., Professor of Psychology, and Vice-


Chancellor, University of Tasmania, son of David and Georgina
Miller, of Dundee and Melbourne ; he is author of works on
psychology and philosophy, and “ Australian Literature from
the beginnings to 1935 ” (2 vols., 1939). Mother of Ailsa
Catherine Morris-Miller (b. 1916, in Hobart), who is Social
Secretary, Young Contingent, Victoria League, Tasmania.
Mrs. Morris-Miller is interested in charity and education ; plays
auction bridge ; fond of motoring, theatre-going, gardening.
Member of : Royal Automobile Club, Hobart. Religion :
Presbyterian.
MURDOCH, Nina (Mrs. J. D. Brown), 18, Henry Street, North
Kensington Park, Norwood, South Australia ; b. Oct. 19th,
1893, in Melbourne, Victoria ; ed. Girls’ High School, Sydney ;
dau. of John A. Murdoch ; m. J. D. Brown, journalist. Inter-
ested in all the arts, travel, broadcasting, and international
politics ; fond of walking, boating, Russian ballet, good films
(especially Walt Disney cartoons). Authoress of : Seventh
Heaven, She Travelled Alone in Spain, Tyrolean June, Vagrant
in Summer (all travel books), Miss Emily (novel), and Songs of
the Open Air (verse). Member of : The Incorporated Society
of Authors (London), and The Lyceum Club.
MURDOCH, Violet Catherine (Mrs. W. Murdoch), Blithedale,
South Perth, Western Australia ; b. 1872, in Daylesford,
Victoria ; ed. Presbyterian Ladies’ College, Melbourne ; dau. of
Johnston Hughston ; m. Walter Murdoch, university professor.
Mother of William and Anne Murdoch, and Catherine King.
Interested in education ; fond of entertaining and travelling.
President of Kindergarten Union of Western Australia. Religion :
Christian. Politics : Labour.
MUSCIO, Florence Mildred (Mrs. B. Muscio), 14, St. Neot
Avenue, Potts Point, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. N.S. Wales ; ed.
University of Sydney (M.A.) ; dau. of Charles Fry ; m. Professor
Bernard Muscio (d. May 26th, 1926), Challis Professor of
Philosophy, University of Sydney ; he holds degrees of M.A.
(Cantab.) and M.A. (Sydney) ; author of, Lectures on Industrial
Psychology, and numerous articles on Philosophy and Psychology.
Mrs. Muscio is interested in public work of various kinds. Past
President of Sydney Lyceum Club (1929 to 1935). Was awarded
the 0.8. E.. Was President of National Council of Women of
N.S. Wales, 1927 to 1938. Fed. Pres., 1927 to 1931. President
Sydney University Women Graduates’ Association, 1923 to 1926.
Member of Federal Royal Commission on Child Endowment,
1927-28. Member of delegation to League of Nations Assembly,
1937.
NELSON, Edna Lillian (Dr.) (Mrs. W. T. Nelson), 141,
Macquarie Street, Sydney ; b. Nov. 17th, 1896, in Candelo,
N.S. Wales ; ed. Sydney Girls’ High School ; dau. of Wright
Smith, educationalist ; m. William Thomas Nelson, medical
practitioner ; he holds degrees of M.D. (Sydney) and M.R.C.P.
(London) ; was Bacteriologist to Commonwealth Serum Labora


tories, Melbourne, 1929-36 ; has had research articles published
on Gastro-Enteritis in Infants, Lead Poisoning, etc. ; Industrial
Hygienist, Sydney, since 1936 ; consultant Industrial Physician.
Mother of Thomas Peter Wright Nelson (b. Feb. 27th, 1926),
William Paul Nelson (b. July 20th, 1927), and David John and
Richard James Nelson (twins) (b. Aug. 20th, 1929). Interested
in social hygiene, and questions concerning equal status of
women ; plays tennis ; fond of motoring, touring, and holiday
outdoor pursuits with her husband and sons. Member of :
Women's Club, Sydney, Medical Women’s Society of N.S. Wales,
and Business and Professional Women’s Club of N.S. Wales.
Obtained her medical degrees in 1920, at University of Sydney.
Married in 1924. In 1928 set up in general medical practice in
Melbourne, later specializing in Gynaecology and Venerology in
consultant capacity. Part-time Director of Venereal Diseases
Clinics at Queen Victoria Hospital for Women and Children,
Melbourne. Appointed in 1936 as Director in Sydney, at Rachel
Forster Hospital for Women and Children, of largest Australian
treatment clinic for Venereal Diseases in women and children.
Travelled to Great Britain in 1939 for post-graduate study in
Dermatology and Venerology ; studied in London, Edinburgh,
Copenhagen and Stockholm until outbreak of war. Returned to
Sydney at end of 1939. Now in practice as a specialist in
Dermatology and Venerology. Religion : Congregational.
Politics : Nationalist.
NEWBURY, Ruth Compson (Mrs. A. G. Newbury), Cromwell
Street, Eltham, Victoria ; b. London, England ; ed. Toorak
College, Melbourne ; dan. of J. W. and S. Trumble ; m. A. G.
Newbury, artist, son of S. and J. Newbury ; he is represented
in all the Capital Galleries of Australia ; twice winner of
“ Crouch ” prize for painting ; Foundation Member, Australian
Academy of Art. Mother of David Newbury (b. July 23rd,
1925). Interested in literature and art mainly. Religion :
Church of England.
NOCK, Ethel Evelina (Lady Nock), 63, Wentworth Road,
Vaucluse, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; ed. Claremont College, Randwick,
Sydney, N.S. Wales ; dau. of Mrs. E. H. Stiefvater and the late
G. W. Bradford ; m. Sir Norman Nock, merchant and Company
director, son of Mr. Thomas Nock ; he is a Justice of the Peace
for N.S. Wales ; Alderman for Gipps Ward (within the City of
Sydney) since 1933, and Lord Mayor of Sydney, 1938 and 1939.
Mother of Graham Nock (b. 1929). Interested in charity ; plays
golf. Member of : Australian Golf Club and Pymble Golf Club.
O’KEEFE, Agnes (Mrs. D. J. O’Keefe), 111, Cameron Street,
Launceston, Tasmania. Her father, Andrew Blong, was b. in
England, was soldier and fought in Crimean War, and was
accorded a military funeral when he died in Melbourne, Victoria,
about twenty years ago. Her mother was b. in Ireland. One
son, now thirty years of age. Mrs. O’Keefe is a member of
Australian Labour Party, and President of Women’s Branch,


Sandhill," Launceston. She is a Justice of the Peace and
member of Committee of Tasmanian Bush Nursing Association ;
and of Soldiers’ Remembrance Club ; and of Deaf, Dumb and
Blind Association Relief Committee ; takes an active part in
organizing gatherings to raise funds for these and other charitable
objects. Recreations : tennis and bridge parties for above
funds. Her husband is a member of the House of Assembly ;
was elected Speaker in 1934 and again in 1937, and still occupies
the position. Was elected as Senator for Tasmania in first
Parliament of Commonwealth of Australia in 1901, and was
Chairman of Committees and Deputy President of Senate for
four years. Was in the Senate for seventeen years ; defeated
in 1919 ; elected to House of Representatives, 1922, defeated
in 1925. Followed business occupation till 1934, then elected
to State Parliament and re-elected in 1937. Original profession :
journalist. Recreations : shooting, fishing, walking.
OLDFIELD, Ruth Maud (Mrs. W. A. S. Oldfield), “ Poitiers,"
66, Springdale Road, Killara, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. Sept.
23rd, 1907, in Dulwich Hill, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; ed. Shirley
College, Edgecliff Road, Edgecliff, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; dau. of
Mr. and Mrs. John Hunter ; m. William Albert Stanley Oldfield,
business proprietor (sports store), son of John and Mary Oldfield
(both deceased) ; he is an international cricketer ; author of,
Behind the Wicket. Mother of Ruth Mary Oldfield (b. Jan.
7th, 1930), and Judith Ann Oldfield (b. March 11th, 1932). Both
children are passionately fond of outdoor life, riding horses and
bicycles, and of all forms of sport. Mrs. Oldfield is interested in
music, education, and art in forms of designing, decorating,
dramatic art and diction; fond of entertaining, motoring,
dancing, tennis, organizing, but most of all of her home life—
training and educating her children. Has made two trips round
the world with her husband. First occasion in 1929 on their
honeymoon, and the second occasion when her husband broadcast
the Test matches between England and Australia in 1938 for
the 8.8. C. and the A.B.C. In 1938 they dined at Windsor
Castle with Sir Alexander and Lady Hardinge, the King’s Private
Secretary, and later they were shown over the historic Castle.
They also attended a Garden Party at Buckingham Palace.
Religion : Church of England. Politics : United Australia
Party.
PALMER, Nettie (Mrs. V. Palmer), 601, St. Kilda Road,
Melbourne, 5.C.3, and 7, Ridgeway Avenue, Kew, Melbourne,
E. ;b. Aug. 18th, 1885, in Bendigo ; ed. Presbyterian Ladies’
College, Melbourne, University of Melbourne, and post-graduate
courses in England, France and Germany ; dau. of John Higgins,
F. ; m. Vance Palmer, author and broadcaster, son of
H. B. and Jessie Palmer, of Queensland ; he is a novelist, poet,
dramatist and critic ; has been awarded, literary prizes and
medals for novels ; plays produced in capitals of Commonwealth.
Mother of Aileen Yvonne Palmer (b. April 6th, 1915), 8.A.,


Melbourne, with first-class honours ; served two years with
First British Medical Aid Unit on Active Service in Spain ; and
Helen G. Palmer (b. May 9th, 1917), B.A. (similarly) in French
and English. Mrs. Palmer is interested in literature, politics,
music, art, education (especially languages and kindergarten),
and broadcasting (especially on literary matters and person-
alities) ; fond of walking-tours, travelling, theatre, art films,
foreign languages, and correspondence, especially with overseas
writers. Authoress of : Essays : Talking It Over (1932),
Biography : Henry Bourne Higgins (1930), Modern Australian
Literature (1924), etc., etc. Member of : League for Peace and
Democracy.
PARKER, Janet Marion (Mrs. R. L. Parker), Launceston,
Tasmania ; b. Frome, England ; ed. Selwood School, Frome,
and University College, Southampton ; dau. of James T. Swaine ;
m. R. Lewis Parker, barrister (retired), son of Robert John
Parker (barrister) and Jane Parker ; he was ed. at Church of
England Grammar School, Launceston; Associate of Arts,
1879 ; admitted to Bar, 1884 ; member of firm of Ritchie and
Parker (established 1826) ; member of Board of Launceston
General Hospital fifteen years ; President of Northern Law
Society of Tasmania, 1920-32 ; Associate Commissioner, Hydro-
Electric Commission (retired 1936) ; member and Chairman of
Church Grammar School Board ; Trustee, Toosey Memorial
Hospital, Longford ; Chairman of Trustees, Anzac Memorial
Hostel, Tasmania, 1919-37 ; awarded Certificate of Merit and
Badge Returned Soldiers and Sailors' Imperial League of Aus-
tralia ; Life Fellow, Royal Empire Society; Chairman of
Committee and Trustee, Flood Relief Fund, 1929-30 ; Chairman
of Directors, Equity Trustee Co. of Tasmania ; Commissioner
of Sinking Funds of City of Launceston ; C.M.G., 1930 ; Jubilee
Medal. Mrs. Parker is interested in music and art; plays golf
and bridge ; fond of motoring, travelling, theatre-going. Member
of : Red Cross Society and Country Women’s Association.
Religion : Protestant. Politics : United Australia Party.
PARSONS, Ethel Ann (Mrs. J. W. Parsons), 146, Woodville
Road, Woodville, South Australia ; b. July 14th, 1880, in
Yankalilla; ed. Christ Church School, Yankalilla; dau. of
Richard and Jane Roads ; m. J. W. Parsons, farmer, son of T.
Parsons and Mary Parsons ; he served in South African War,
first contingent, 1899-1901 ; selected to represent South Australia
at King Edward Coronation, 1902 ; served in Great War, in
11th Light Horse, from 1915-19, rank of Colonel; awarded
D.S.O. ; was A.D.C. to Governor General, 1929 to 1934 ; now
reserve officer. Mother of Frank Parsons (b. Feb. 9th, 1910),
Gordon Parsons (b. Sept. Ist, 1913), and Edith Parsons (b. and
d. Oct. 30th, 1915). Both her sons hold Roseworthy College
agricultural diploma, South Australia. Mrs. Parsons is interested
in art; fond of motoring. Member of : Country Women.
Her mother, Jane Roads, was one of the first white children


born in South Australia ; her parents travelled to Australia in
the Winchester on September 24th, 1838. She was b. on Jan.
30th, 1839, in the only hut in Port Adelaide. Her parents,
Daniel Attrill and wife, left the Isle of Wight on the 4th June,
1838. Religion : Church of England.
PATON, Margaret Isabel (Mrs. D. D. Paton), 16, King’s Park
Road, Perth, Western Australia ; b. Sydney, N.S. Wales ; ed.
Presbyterian Ladies’ College, Croydon, N.S. Wales ; dau. of
Hugh Davis Norman ; m. David Duncan Paton, M.A., M. 8.,
Ch.B. Honors (Edin.), D.O. (Oxon.), F.R.A.C.S., ophthalmic
surgeon, son of David Paton, M.D., L.R.C.S.E., and Anne Osier
(Angus, Scotland) ; he was President Western Australia Branch
8.M.A., 1922 ; President, Section of Ophthalmology Congresses,
8.M.A., 1923 (Melb.) and 1929 (Sydney) ; Vice-President Section
of Ophthalmology, B.M.A. Centenary Congress, London, 1932 ;
Foundation Fellow, Royal Australasian College of Surgeons ;
President Elect, B.M.A. Congress, Perth, 1940. Mother of
Margaret Helen Paton, who m. Theodore Rosslyn Ambrose,
Jan. 20th, 1937 ; and Anne Isabel Paton, who gained B.A. (Hons.
French), Oxford, 1937 (Lady Margaret Hall). Mrs. Paton is
interested in literature, music, art ; plays bridge and mahjongg ;
fond of travelling, theatre-going, concerts, entertaining and
gardening. Member of : Karrakatta Club (President 1919-20,
1934-35-36), Lake Karrinyup Country Club, Perth Repertory
Club, and Victoria League. Very interested in collecting antique
furniture and china, and has frequently given radio talks on
same.
PATRICK, Maude (Mrs. W. Patrick), 17, Ruby Street, North
Perth, Western Australia, and “ Ladyland,” Northampton,
Western Australia ; b. Nov. sth, 1896, in Melbourne, Victoria ;
ed. Modern School, Western Australia ; dau. of John and
Marjorie Sinclair ; m. William Patrick, M.L.A., farmer and
legislator, son of William and Jane Patrick ; he pioneered
Northampton district ; elected 1930 to Legislative Assembly as
member for Greenough, and in 1936 as Deputy Leader of the
Country Party—position he still holds. Mrs. Patrick is interested
in art, curios and crafts, and home industries being taken to the
women who live in the rural districts ; fond of travelling and
motoring. Member of : Country Women’s Association and the
Overseas League. In July, 1939, she was elected as Chairman
and Hon. Organizer of the Handicraft and Home Industry
Section of the Country Women’s Association of Western
Australia. Religion : Presbyterian. Politics : Country Party.
PAVY, Dorothea (Mrs. G. Pavy), 7, Rutland Avenue, Unley
Park, South Australia ; b. North Adelaide ; ed. Adelaide and
London Universities ; dau. of Cornelius and Emily Proud [nee
Good) ; m. Gordon Pavy, barrister and solicitor, son of Julius
and Eliza Pavy [nee Radford) ; he was a Captain in A.I.F. ;
served four years abroad in Great War. Mother of lan Gordon
Pavy (b. Dec. 12th, 1920), and Rosemary Dorothea Pavy (b.


March Bth, 1926). Interested in sociology. Authoress of :
Welfare Work. Member of : National Council of Women.
She was the first Catherine Helen Spence Scholar; B.A.
(Adelaide) ; D.Sc. (Econ.), London ; Diploma of Social Service
(London) ; now a (D.P.) member of the South Australian Bar,
Commissioner, etc. ; C.B.E. (1917); Ministry of Munitions and
Ministry of Labour, London, 1915-19.
PEAKE, Hertha Viola (Mrs. R. A. Peake), “ Weeroona,”
Ormonde Avenue, Millswood Estate, Adelaide, South Australia ;
b. Feb. 25th, 1893, in Gomersal, South Australia ; ed. Tanunda ;
dau. of the late J. A. Schwartz ; m. Robert Archibald Peake,
Public Trustee, South Australia, son of Archibald Henry Peake
(thrice Premier of South Australia) and Annie Peake ; he was
ed. at Hahndorf College and Business College, Adelaide ; entered
Civil Service as Junior Clerk in 1907, and rose to head of his
Dept, as Public Trustee in 1934. Mother of Reginald Brontd
Peake (b. May 26th, 1915), Robert Geoffrey Peake (b. Feb.
13th, 1920), and Archibald Bruce Peake (b. Nov. 9th, 1925).
Interested in music ; plays croquet (captain of Millswood “ C ”
Team) and golf; fond of motoring, travelling, gardening.
Religion : Presbyterian. Politics : Liberal.
PEARSON, Mavis (Mrs. J. Pearson), “ Lenna,” Battery
Point, Hobart, Tasmania ; b. May 25th, 1897, in Wellington,
New Zealand; ed. Craven School, Palmerston North, New
Zealand ; dau. of Frank Meadowcroft, Wellington, New Zealand ;
m. Joseph Pearson, scientist, son of Daniel and Cecilia Pearson,
England ; he was formerly Director of Colombo Museum, Ceylon,
and Head of Ceylon Fisheries Dept, for twenty-five years.
Mrs. Pearson is interested in house decorating and collecting
antiques; plays golf; fond of entertaining and travelling.
Member of : Queen Mary Club, Hobart, and Royal Society of
Tasmania. Religion : Church of England. Politics : Con-
servative.
PERKINS, Evelyn Mary (Mrs. J. A. Perkins), “ Booralga,”
James Street, Manly ; b. Cooma, N.S. Wales ; ed. “ Cooma ”
School, and privately ; dau. of the late Henry T. Bray ; m.
John Arthur Perkins, M.P. (retired), son of Edward and Annie
Perkins (deceased) ; from 1904-1908 he was a member of Local
Land Board; Coroner, J.P., 1904; M.L.A., Goulburn, N.S.
Wales, 1921-26 ; M.H.R., Eden Mararo, N.S. Wales ; Gov.
Whip, 1926-29 ; Assistant Minister, Trade and Customs, Minister
for Interior, Oct., 1932 ; Minister for Trade Customs, 1928-39 ;
Minister administering external Territories, since 1939. Mrs.
Perkins is interested in charity, literature, music, politics ; plays
golf and contract bridge; fond of entertaining, travelling,
theatre-going. Member of : Victoria League, Canberra, Inter-
national Club, Country Women’s Association, Manly, Manly
Golf Club, and Royal Canberra. Religion : Church of England.
Politics : United Australia Party.


PICKEN, Anne Mackintosh (Mrs. D. K. Pickea), The Lodge,
Ormond College, University of Melbourne ; b. March 2nd, 1883,
in Christchurch, New Zealand ; ed. privately ; dau. of Colonel
Stuart Newall, C.B. ; m. David Kennedy Picken, Master of
Ormond College, University of Melbourne, son of David and
Margaret Picken (deceased) ; he holds degree of Master of Arts
(Glasgow, Cambridge, Melbourne) ; was Metcalfe Fellow of
University of Glasgow, 1899 ; Ferguson Scholar in Mathematics
of the Scottish Universities, 1900. Step-mother of Margaret
Wilson Stevenson (b. Dec. 9th, 1908). Mother of Jean Gumming
Picken (b. June 14th, 1912), Anne Newalt Picken (b. Dec. 20th,
1913), Helen Georgena Picken (b. March 13th, 1916), Evelyn
Clare Picken (b. Sept. 27th, 1918), and Mary Elmslie Picken
(b. March 24th, 1923). Anne Newall is now Mrs. Thomas Purves.
Jean Gumming is Master of Arts with Honours in the School of
French. Mrs. Picken is interested in charity and education.
Member of : The Lyceum Club. Religion : Presbyterian.
PICKERILL, Cecily Mary Wise, M. 8., Ch.B. (Mrs. H. P.
Pickerill), Beech Dale, Silverstream, Heretaunga, New Zealand,
and Kelvin Chambers, Wellington, New Zealand ; b. Taihape,
New Zealand ; ed. Diocesan High School, Auckland, and Otago
University ; dau. of Rev. P. W. Clarkson ; m. Dr. H. P. Pickerill,
plastic surgeon, son of Thomas and Mary Ann Pickerill,
Hereford, England ; he was formerly Dean of the Dental School,
Otago University, and now practicing Plastic Surgery in Sydney,
Australia, and Wellington, New Zealand. Mother of Mary
Margaret Anne Pickerill. Mrs. Pickerill is a practising Plastic
Surgeon with her husband in New Zealand and Australia.
PIKE, Alice Maude (Mrs. G. H. Pike), 3, Arnold Street, Killara,
N.S. Wales ; b. Gresford, N.S. Wales ; ed. Gresford, N.S. Wales ;
dau. of John Bush ; m. George Herbert Pike, Ist Judge of Land
and Valuation Court, son of Henry Morris Pike and Marie Louise
Pike ; as Royal Commissioner he investigated soldier settlement
throughout Australia for the Commonwealth Government.
Mother of Charles Morris Pike (b. Feb., 1894, d. Nov., 1894),
Eric Herbert Pike (b. 1895, d. 1922), George Keith Pike (b. 1896),
John Dinham Pike (b. 1899), Marie Beatrice Pike (b. July, 1902),
Annie Eleanor Pike (b. Jan., 1904), Florence Maud Pike (b.
1905), and Philip Henry Pike (b. 1906). E. H. Pike practised
as a doctor until his death. J. D. Pike is a barrister-at-law.
Marie is m. to Major Hellstrom, Eleanor to Dr. A. L. Green, and
Florence to H. Russell, solicitor, Sydney. Mrs. Pike is interested
in charity and religion ; plays bridge ; fond of motoring and
travelling. Member of : Women’s Guild. Religion : Church of
England. Politics : Liberal.
PILCHER, Eva Alberta (Mrs. C. V. Pilcher), 12, March Street,
Bellevue Hill, Sydney, N.S. Wales; b. Nov. 25th, 1885, in
Comber, Ontario, Canada ; ed. Trinity College in the University
of Toronto ; dau. of Francis Frederic Jones, of Comber, Ontario ;
m. The Right Reverend C. Venn Pilcher, Bishop-Coadjutor of


Sydney, son of Francis Pilcher and Mary Alma Eleanor Wood
Pilcher (nee Elliott). Mother of Eleanor Alberta Pilcher (b.
Jan. 26th, 1909), who is the wife of Henry Allison Roberts, of
the National City Bank, New York, U.S.A. ; and Francis Eric
Venn Pilcher (b. Oct. 12th, 1912), who is an officer of the Bank
of N.S. Wales. Religion : Church of England.
PITMAN, Edith Elinor Josephine (Mrs. E. J. G. Pitman),
Raalangta,” 301, Davey Street, Hobart, Tasmania ; b. Feb.
19th, 1910, in Hobart, Tasmania ; ed. The Friends’ School,
Hobart, and University of Tasmania ; dau. of William Nevin
Tatlow Hurst ; m. E. J. G. Pitman, Professor of Mathematics,
University of Tasmania, son of the late Edwin Edward Major
Pitman and Ann Ungley Pitman. Mother of Edith Jane Pitman
(b. Dec. 6th, 1932), .and Mary Elinor Pitman (b. Oct. 6th, 1934).
Interested in charity, literature, kindergarten and pre-school
child development ; plays lawn tennis. Member of : Hobart
Free Kindergarten Union, and Tasmanian Free Kindergarten
Union. She holds degree of Bachelor of Arts of the University
of Tasmania. Religion : Church of England.
PITT, Marie Elizabeth Josephine (Mrs. W. H. Pitt), “ Marien-
fels,” 155, Clarke Street, Northcote, N. 16, Victoria ; b. Bulum-
waal, Victoria ; ed. State School, No. 1616, Wy Yung, Victoria
(and privately) ; dau. of Edward McKeown and Mary Stuart
McKeown ; m. William Henry Pitt (d. 1912), law student
(discontinued for health reasons) and farmer. Mother of
E valine Marie Pitt (artist), William Pitt, and Ida Mabel Pitt
(commercial artist). Mrs. Pitt is interested in literature,
politics, religion, art, education ; fond of motoring, collecting
fossils, and nature study. Authoress of : Horses of the Hills
(1911), Collected Poems (1925), and much uncollected matter,
poems, articles, etc. She is a publisher’s reader and author.
Has won several literary competitions, including being placed
first of the first five competitors for a prize of fifty pounds given
by Messrs. Isbister and Co., “ Good Words ” Magazine, London,
in 1902, for a Song of Empire. This competition was open to
the English-speaking world and brought in three hundred poems.
Religion : Unitarian. Politics : Democratic.
PLATT, Dorothy Emma (Mrs. A. E. Platt), 62, Brougham
Place, North Adelaide, South Australia ; b. Adelaide, South
Australia ; ed. various schools in N.S. Wales, and Teachers'
College, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; dau. of Willis John Williams,
B.Sc. ; m. Albert Edward Platt, M.D., B.S.JD.T.M., D.T.H.,
F.R.A.C.P. Dip. Bact., medical profession, son of James and
Alice Maud Platt ; he was Medical Officer, 1929-32, Mandated
Territory of New Guinea ; Research, 1932-34, London and
Cambridge Universities ; Lecturer-in-charge, Dept. Bacteriology,
Univ. of Adelaide, 1935-38 ; Professor of Bacteriology, Univer-
sity of Adelaide, 1938 ; Deputy Director, Inst, of Medical and
Veterinary Science, Adelaide, 1938. Mrs. Platt is interested in
art and music ; plays tennis and bridge ; fond of entertaining,


motoring, yachting, travelling. Member of : University Wives’
Club, Adelaide. Has travelled extensively with husband in New
Guinea. In England and Europe, 1932-34. Chief Designer for
Sydney firm of fancy work manufacturers, 1927-28. Religion :
Church of England.
POMEROY, Teresa Mary (Mrs. R. N. Pomeroy), “ Mizpah,”
9, St. Leonards Road, Ascot Vale, Melbourne, Victoria ; b.
Colac, Victoria ; ed. “ Star of the Sea ” Ladies’ College, Garden
Vale, Melbourne ; dau. of Michael and Margaret Gleeson ; m.
Redmond N. Pomeroy (d. Jan. 4th, 1925), timber merchant,
son of Merideth Pomeroy and Margaret Pomeroy; he was a very
keen business man, and was a director in the firm of Bowen and
Pomeroy. Mother of Veronica Mary Pomeroy, Redmond
Michael Pomeroy, and Nicholas Pomeroy (b. July 11th, 1905,
d. same day). Veronica Mary gained many honours in music,
and won the Royal Academy’s Gold Medal, given by the King
for highest marks ; won diplomas of L.A.8., R.A.M., R.C.M.
and A.T.C.L. Redmond Michael m. Beryl, only daughter of
Mr. and Mrs. Edgar Langford, and has three daughters.
Mrs. Pomeroy is interested in charity, religion, art, commerce,
education, music ; plays bridge, solo and patience ; fond of
entertaining, motoring, theatre-going.
POND, Margaret Jean (Mrs. S. F. Pond), “ Bry Anston,”
Howitt Road, Caulfield, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Melbourne,
Victoria ; ed. Presbyterian Ladies’ College, Melbourne, Victoria ;
dau. of Andrew Brunton, J.P. ; m. S. F. Pond, merchant, son
of Samuel and Emma Pond ; he is a well-known merchant;
he is on Executive of Big Brother Movement, New Settlers’
League, Royal Empire Society, British Dominions Emigration
Society, Empire Day Movement, Red Cross Society; Past
President Dorset Society and Past President Royal Society of
St. George. Mrs. Pond is interested in music (was chosen by
Madam Melba for her scholarship at conversatorium for singing),
charity, benevolent work, and is President of local Red Cross
branch ; plays tennis and golf ; as wife of President of Royal
Society of St. George she does a lot of entertaining of notable
people —Vice-Regal, army, navy, and heads of religious bodies.
Since leaving college has always driven her own car. Also keen
on riding, shooting and fishing. Member of : Yarra Yarra Golf
Club, University Club, Royal Society of St. George, Royal
Empire Society, and Royal Red Cross. She is the niece of Sir
William Brunton, and her family has always been prominent in
the civic and business life of Melbourne. Religion : Congrega-
tional. Politics : In England, Conservative; in Australia,
National Liberal.
POOLE, Ruth Lane (Mrs. C. E. L. Poole), Canberra, Australian
Capital Territory ; b. 1885, in Limerick, Ireland ; ed. Alexandra
College, Dublin ; dau. of Frederick Henry Pollexfen ; m. Charles
Edward Lane Poole, Inspector General of Forests for the
Commonwealth, son of Stanley Lane Poole and Charlotte Belj


Wilson ; prior to present appointment, which he has held since
1926, he was Conservator of Forests, Sierra Leone, Western
Australia, and Conservator of Forests, West Australian ; com-
missioned by the Commonwealth Gov. ; reported on the forest
resources of New Guinea, Papua, Norfolk Island and Australian
Capital Territory. Mother of Charlotte Ruth Poole (b. 1913),
Mary Jet Poole (b. 1918), and Phyllis Gainsborough Poole (b.
1922). Interested in art, and applied art, particularly in design
and decorative work ; also gardening, and the arrangement of
flowers and floral work. Her profession is interior decoration.
The most important work she has done is the furnishing of
Government House, Canberra, and the Prime Minister’s Lodge.
Religion : Church of England. Politics : Liberal.
PORTEUS, Frances Mainwaring (Mrs. S. D. Porteus), 2620,
Anuenue Street, Honolulu, Hawaii; b. Lindenow, Victoria,
ed. Government schools and private tuition ; dau. of Joseph
and Mary Evans (nee Whitbourne) ; m. Prof. Stanley D. Porteus,
D.S.C., F.R.S.A., F.G.S., psychologist, son of Rev. David
Porteus and Katherine Porteus ( nee Hebden) ;he was Director
of Research, Vineland Laboratory, 1919 ; Professor of Psy-
chology, University of Hawaii; Chief, Expedition to Central and
N.W. Australia, 1929 ; Kalahari Desert, South Africa, 1934 ;
author of, Maze Tests, Psychology of Primitive People, Primitive
Intelligence and Environment, etc. Mother of David Hebden
Porteus (b. Oct. 27th, 1910), 8.A., University of Hawaii, and
LL.B., Harvard University, an attorney; and John Ruxton
Porteus (b. Sept. 25th, 1916), 8.A., University of Hawaii.
Interested in psychology, literature, horticulture ; fond of
motoring, travelling, gardening, photography. Member of :
Women’s Faculty Club, University of Hawaii, Honolulu Academy
of Arts, and Outdoor Circle. She accompanied her husband on
South African journey, acting as assistant in psychological study
of Bantu tribes in S. Rhodesia and Transvaal. Religion :
Protestant. Politics : Liberal.
PRELL, Caroline Ivy (Mrs. C. E. Prell), Gundowringa, Crook-
well, N.S. Wales ; b. 1875, in Hereford, England ; ed. Culspeth
Hall, Bowdon, Cheshire, England ; dau. of W. F. Chave, The Moor
House, Hereford, England ; m. Charles Ernest Prell, grazier,
son of F. W. and Mrs. Prell, lona Toorak, Melbourne, Victoria;
he was a pioneer in pasture improvement in N.S. Wales ; breeder
of stud Corriedale stud sheep ; he received 0.8. E. at the Corona-
tion, also Silver Jubilee and Coronation Medals. Mother of
Charles William Prell (b. April 3rd, 1897, killed Oct. Bth, 1917,
in European War), Helen Mary Prell (b. March 24th, 1899, d.
Oct. Ist, 1899), Harold Fairbairn Prell (b. April 14th, 1901),
Stanley Prell (b. Nov. 23rd, 1904), Dorothy Ivy Prell (b. Jan.
12th, 1906), and Margaret Anstey Prell (b. July 20th, 1911).
Margaret Anstey holds degree of B.A. from Sydney University ;
both sons are graziers ; Dorothy is a good photographer, and
specializes in children. Mrs. Prell is interested in the Country


Women’s Association, and reading; plays bridge; fond of
wireless, theatres, pictures. Member of : The Queen’s Club,
Sydney, and The Lady Belmore Club, Goulburn. Has been
President of the Goulburn Branch of the Country Women’s
Association since its inception, about sixteen years ago. Received
both Silver Jubilee and Coronation medals. Religion : Church
of England. Politics : National.
PRESTON, Margaret Rose (Mrs. W. G. Preston), 525, Kent
Street, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. Adelaide, South Australia ; ed.
by private tutor ; dau. of David Macpherson ; m. William George
Preston, merchant, son of Eliza Ann Emery Nichols, Torn
Farm, Devonshire ; he served in Great War in A.1.F., and is
now director of various companies. Mrs. Preston is interested
in art and literature ; fond of travelling. She is represented by
oil paintings and wood-cuts in all public galleries in Australia.
Member of : Society of Artists, N.S. Wales. Painted six oil
paintings for Government of Australia at New York World's
Fair ; four oil paintings for Government of Australia at San
Francisco Fair, and four oil paintings for caf6 of S.S. Or cades
(Orient liner). Received silver medal for oil paintings at Paris
Exhibition, 1937. She is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Arts,
London. Lectures under Carnegie Bequest for National
Art Gallery, N.S. Wales. Religion : Presbyterian. Politics :
Conservative.
PRIOR, Dorothy Edna (Mrs. C. Prior), 24, Bower Street,
Manly, N.S. Wales, and Keswick Barracks, Keswick, South
Australia; b. N.S. Wales, Australia ; ed. Brighton College,
Manly, and Sydney Girls’ High School; dau. of John Plant
and Florence Wright; m. Major Claude Prior, military staff
officer, son of William Henry and Selina Ann Prior ; he is A.D.C.
to H. E. The Governor of South Australia. Mother of June
Winsome Prior (b. Oct. 2nd, 1921). Interested in music and
literature ; Mus.Bac. (pianoforte) A.S.C.M. ; plays tennis ; fond
of swimming, ice-skating, motoring, travelling, theatre-going.
Authoress of numerous local sketches in Australian and American
papers. Religion : Church of England. Politics : National.
RAPKE, Julia (Mrs. A. B. Rapke), “ Torquay,” Goldsmith
Street, El wood, Victoria ; b. Christchurch, New Zealand ; ed.
Wellington Girls’ College ; dau. of Ralph Levoi, J.P. and Miriam
Levoi (both deceased) ; m. A. Bernard Rapke (retired). Mother
of Ralph Rapke (b. 1909), Trevor George Rapke (b. 1908), and
Betty Pearl Rapke (b. 1916). Ralph is the father of Roger
(b. 1932) and Wendy Julia (b. 1934) ; Trevor holds degrees of
8.A., LL.B., and is a practising barrister-at-law; Betty is
interested in amateur theatricals and is a member of Judaen
Repertory Society. All three are fond of sport, especially riding,
tennis, motoring, swimming. Mrs. Rapke is interested in
politics, education, literature, philanthropy and social welfare
activities ; plays an occasional game of solo whist; fond of
reading, writing, the drama, and household economy, especially


cooking. Authoress of numerous articles in Australian and
overseas magazines, mainly on children's courts, child welfare
and women's movements, with emphasis on political movements.
Member of : Victorian Women Citizens’ Movement Club, and
National Council of Women (Victoria). Vice-President, Aus-
tralian Fed. of Women Voters. Vice-President, Victorian
Women Citizens’ Movement. President, Women Justices’
Association of Victoria (founder 1938). Hon. Secretary,
Australian Pan-Pacific Committee (and foundation member).
Hon. Secretary and Treasurer, Australian Liaison Committee
of Women's International Organizations (and foundation
member). Children’s Court Magistrate and Chairman of
Children's Court, St. Kilda, Victoria. Justice of the Peace, and
sitting regularly in St. Kilda Police Court (received both these
appointments in 1929). Member of Victorian International
Refugee Emergency Council. Executive member Brighton
Beach Branch Australian Women’s National League. Patroness
Judaen Repertory Society. Member Australian Open Door
Council. Has taken an active part in public affairs in Australia,
and in Victoria in particular. Activities cover all aspects of
“ women’s work ” —equal status groups ; all movements for
welfare of women and children, including maternal and infant
and child welfare ; children’s courts and delinquency problems ;
municipal and political campaigning (in interests of United
Australia Party). Free-lance writer, broadcaster and lecturer,
chiefly on public questions bearing on problems of women and
children. Studied Sociology, Juvenile Delinquency and Crimin-
°l°By* Investigated Children’s Court Systems throughout
Australia and New Zealand. Attended many inter-state
Conferences of Women. Taken leading part in debating circles.
Was until 1938 a foundation member of Victoria’s Model Parlia-
ment, and for several years woman member of its Supervisory
Committee. Interested in Youth Employment and Executive
member of Girls’ Employment Movement. Member of Council
Girl Guides’ Association. Member of Cultural Group of
Women’s International Zionist Organization (W.1.Z.0.) (Vic-
toria). Decoration : King’s Coronation Medal. Religion :
Jewish. Politics : National Party (U.A.P.).
READ, Annie Thomasine (Mrs. F. M. Read), “ The Residency,”
Northam, Western Australia ; b. Stawell, Victoria ; ed. Patrick
Street School, Stawell ; dau. of Andrew and Matilda Bartley ;
m. Fred M. Read, stipendiary magistrate, son of Fred J. and
Ellen Read ; for a number of years he was Mining Registrar on
Goldfields and Coalfields of the State, and Stipendiary Magistrate
at Carnarvon, Bunbury, and Northam. Mother of Edna, Isaac,
Harold and Patricia Read. Interested in music and art ; plays
bridge ; fond of entertaining and gardening. Member of : The
Red Cross Society. Religion : Methodist.
REES, Coralie Clarke (Mrs. L. Rees), Shellcove Mansions,
9, Shellcove Road, Neutral Bay, Sydney ; b, Oct, 23rd, 1908,


in Perth, Western Australia ; ed. Perth Modern School, Univer-
sity of Western Australia and London University ; dau. of
Guildford Clarke ; m. Leslie Rees, Federal Play Editor, Austra-
lian Broadcasting Commission, son of John Henry and Mary
Elisabeth Rees ; he holds degree of B.A. (Western Australia) ;
won Travelling Scholarship, 1929 ; was dramatic critic, London
“ Era,” 1931-35 ; contributor to many English, American and
Australian publications. Mother of Megan Clarke Rees (b. Aug.
30th, 1938). Interested in literature (principally), then politics,
education, music, art ; plays tennis ; fond of swimming,
motoring, theatre-going, entertaining, travelling. Member of :
Fellowship of Australian Writers. Mrs. Rees holds degree of
Bachelor of Arts of University of Western Australia. In 1930
was awarded Travelling Scholarship to continue study of drama
at London University. When course completed, married and
remained in London until 1936, doing widespread journalistic
work as London Woman Correspondent of “ The West Austra-
lian,” and a contributor to various publications in London and
Sydney. Religion : Free thought. Politics : Liberal Democracy.
REYNOLDS, Linda Mary (Mrs. C. Reynolds), “ Kirribilli,”
480, Main Street, Kangaroo Point, Brisbane, Queensland ; b.
Sept. 16th, 1888, in Willoughby, N.S. Wales ; ed. Mont St.
Angelo Convent, North Sydney ; dau. of Edwin George Temple
and Mary Marcia Temple ; m. Chester Reynolds, Editor,
“ Queensland Govt. Mining Journal,” son of Walter B. Reynolds
and Sarah Reynolds ; he was formerly on staffs of ” Australian
Star ” and ” Sydney Morning Herald ” ; was Captain A.1.F.,
and served at the landing of Gallipoli, and in Egypt, France and
Belgium ; Major, V.D., Retired List, C.M.F. ; he is great-
grandson of Colonel William Paterson, Lieut.-Governor of N.S.
Wales in 1801 and succeeding years. Mrs. Reynolds is interested
in New Thought and Christian Science ; fond of surfing,
motoring, golf. Member of Australian Country Women’s
Association ; member of League of Nations ; on Regimental
Comforts and Welfare Committee of Australian Army Service
Corps ; also as member of Australian Red Cross served as a
V.A.D. during the Great War at the Coulter Hospital, 5,
Grosvenor Square, London. Religion : Church of England.
RICHARDSON, Eugenie Margaret (Mrs. J. A. Richardson),
“ Beverley,” 20, Barry Street, Kew, Melbourne, Victoria ; b.
Hawthorn, Melbourne ; ed. Grace Park Ladies’ College, Haw-
thorn, St. Hilary’s, Scarborough, England, and St. Heliers,
Jersey ; dau. of John Falding McCrea and Eugenie Jackson ;
m. Joseph Arthur Richardson, Judge of the County Courts,
Melbourne, son of Samuel Alfred Richardson and Bessie Maria
Walker ; he was ed. Leighton Park School, Reading, England,
and London University ; called to the Bar, Inner Temple, Nov.,
1901 ; Bar of Victoria, 1905 ; appointed Judge of County Courts,
Feb., 1936. Mother of Margaret Kathleen Richardson (b. Aug.
21st, 1905), Arthur Leighton Richardson (b. May 27th, 1907),


John Winton Richardson (b. March 19th, 1912), and Joseph
Raiding Richardson (b. Dec. 16th, 1916). Margaret m. Rev.
Cyril Denis Ryan and has two children, Meredith Harold and
Margaret Veronica. Leighton m. Elizabeth Helen Mcßride, and
has one child, Timothy Leighton. Leighton and John are
graziers at Beaconsfield, Upper Victoria. Raiding is studying
Science at Melbourne University. Mrs. Richardson is interested
in literature, politics, education, languages, and Girl Guide work ;
fond of motoring, travelling, theatre-going, reading, gardening.
Member of : Royal Automobile Club, Victoria. Religion :
Protestant. Politics : Liberal.
RICHARDSON, Henry Handel, C/o Wm. Heinemann, Ltd.,
99, Great Russell Street, London, W.C.I, England ; b. Mel-
bourne, Australia ; dau. of the late W. Lindesay Richardson,
M.D., Melbourne ; ed. Melbourne, and in Germany. Authoress
of : Maurice Guest, 1908 ; The Getting of Wisdom, 1910 ; The
Rortunes of Richard Mahony (Australia Relix), 1917 ; The Way
Home, 1925 ; Ultima Thule, 1929 ; Two Studies, 1931 ; The
End of a Childhood, 1934 ; The Young Cosima, 1939
RILEY, Lucille Mary (Mrs. C. L. Riley), Bishopscourt, Bendigo,
Victoria ; b. Herne Hill, Western Australia ; ed. Girls’ High
School, Cottesloe, Western Australia ; dau. of William Gerald
and Rlora May Lefroy ; m. Charles Lawrence Riley, Bishop of
Bendigo, son of Charles Owen Leaver (Archbishop of Perth) and
Elizabeth Riley; he is Senior Chaplain, Australian Military
Rorces ; formerly Archdeacon of Northam, Western Australia.
Mother of Lawrence William Riley (b. Jan. 24th, 1917), ed.
Gouville and Caius College, Cambridge (B.A. 1938) ; Mary
Riley (b. July 16th, 1920) ; Charles Owen Riley (b. March 2nd,
1923), and Joan May Riley (b. Nov. 27th, 1924). Interested in
charity, literature, music, religion, education ; fond of travelling
and fishing. Member of : The Mothers’ Union, The Red Cross
Society, and League of Women Helpers of Toe H. Religion :
Church of England.
RISCHBIETH, Bessie Mabel (Mrs. H. W. Rischbieth),
“ Unalla,” Peppermint Grove, Western Australia ; b. North
Adelaide, South Australia ; ed. Miss Stanton’s School, Glenara,
Glenelg, South Australia, and at Advanced School for Girls,
Adelaide ; dau. of Mr. and Mrs. W. Earle, and nurtured by an
uncle and aunt, Hon. W. B. and Mrs. Rounsevell, “ Tremere,”
Glenelg, South Australia ; m. Henry Wills Rischbieth (d. March
25th, 1925), wool merchant, Western Australia, son of Mr. and
Mrs. Charles Rischbieth, Glenelg, South Australia ; he was ed.
at Prince Alfred’s College, Adelaide, South Australia ; trained
as a wool expert at Bradford and on the Continent, and set up
business as a wool merchant in Western Australia under the
title of Henry Wills and Co. Mrs. Rischbieth is interested in
social-political work of a non-party nature, which deals particu-
larly with Women’s Status (economic, social, political) under
the law. President of Australian Rederation of Women Voters.


For nine years President of the Women’s Service Guilds of
Western Australia. Vice-President British Commonwealth
League, London. Member of Board of International Alliance
of Women for Suffrage and Equal Citizenship. Has attended
many international Conferences abroad. Fond of travelling,
flying, gardening. Appointed by the Australian Government
as Woman Alloenate delegate to the League of Nations Assembly,
1935. Order of the British Empire conferred by His Majesty
the King, Jubilee celebrations, 1935. Justice of the Peace, the
State of Western Australia. Hon. Editor of the women’s paper,
“ The Dawn.” For fifteen years Hon. Magistrate, Children’s
Court Bench, Western Australia.
ROBERTSON, Philadelphia Nina (Miss), 0.8. E., Alexandra
Club, Melbourne ; b. Wangaratta, Victoria ; ed. Presbyterian
Ladies’ College, Melbourne ; dau. of the Very Rev. John W.
Robertson. Interested in charity, music, and especially in
literature ; plays golf and bridge ; fond of travelling, walking,
theatres, concerts. Authoress of : An Anzac Budget (verse)
and Shreds and Patches (sketches and verse). Member of :
Alexandra Club, Victoria League, Albert Park Golf Club, and
Overseas League. Was first Secretary General appointed to
Australian Red Cross Society, and held that position, as well as
Secretaryship of Victorian Red Cross Division, from 1915 to
1938. Represented Australia at British Red Cross Conference,
1930, and International Red Cross Conference, 1938. Religion :
Presbyterian.
ROBINSON, Gwendolen Jean (Mrs. L. Robinson), “ Nithsdale,”
Ranelagh, Mt. Eliza, Victoria ; b. June, 1901, in Sydney, N.S.
Wales ; ed. Armadale College, N.S. Wales ; dau. of Dr. William
S. Hinder, of Sydney, N.S. Wales ; m. Commander Lionel
Robinson (b. July, 1888), Royal Navy, son of Frederick F.
Robinson, of Melbourne, Victoria ; he served twenty-three years
in Royal Navy ; retired as Commander, 1926 ; Director of
Companies ; President of Woollen Manufacturers of Australia ;
Vice-President of Chamber of Manufacturers of Victoria ;
D.S.C., M.V.O. Mother of Lionel Anthony Robinson (b. Sept.,
1924, in Taplow, Bucks., England), and Margaret Jean Robinson
(b. July, 1928, in Melbourne, Victoria). Interested in art and
music, and particularly painting ; plays golf and cards ; fond
of travelling and entertaining. Member of : Ranelagh Club,
Mt. Eliza. Religion : Church of England. Politics : Liberal-
Nationalist.
ROBSON, Mary Frederica Walters (Mrs. T. K. Robson),
Elsinore, Pen-y-Bryn Place, Launceston, Tasmania ; b. Sept.
20th, 1875, in Sydney, N.S, Wales ; ed. Girls’ High School,
Sydney, N.S. Wales ; dau. of Donald Alexander Macleod and
Jessie Macleod ; m. Thomas Kentish Robson (d. Jan. 21st, 1932),
son of Edmund Robson and Anna Maria Robson [nee Fraser) ;
he was the grandson of Captain George Robson, of H.M. 52nd
Regiment, who fought at Waterloo ; also grandson of Captain


Simon Fraser, of H.M. 80th Regiment, killed in the Indian
Mutiny. Mother of Thomas Keith Macleod Robson (b. Nov.
22nd, 1895, killed in action at Gallipoli, May 2nd, 1915), Jessie
Alexandrina Robson (b. May 10th, 1897, d. July 9th, 1897),
Alastair Carmichael Robson (b. Dec. 30th, 1899), lan Fraser
Robson (b. June 10th, 1901), Marcia Benedicta Robson (b. April
27th, 1906), and Patricia Mary Robson (b. Feb. 23rd, 1913).
Keith was, and lan is, in the Customs Department of the Federal
Public Service. Alastair is manager of a branch of the Com-
mercial Bank of Australia at Katoomba, N.S. Wales. Marcia
and Patricia are occupying secretarial positions of responsibility.
Mrs. Robson is interested in communal welfare work ; plays
bridge and cribbage ; fond of motoring, travelling, riding,
theatre-going. Member of : Victoria League and Royal Empire
Society. Officer of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem. Member
of the British Empire (M.8.E.). A Justice of the Peace for the
City of Launceston. Special Magistrate of the Children’s Court.
Associate of the Royal Sanitary Institute (London) by Examina-
tion. Hon. Secretary Junior Red Cross for Northern Tasmania.
Hon. Secretary of the St. John Ambulance Association. Hon.
Secretary, Lachlan Park Hospital Auxiliary. Government
nominee, Queen Victoria Hospital Committee, Launceston,
Tasmania. Religion : Church of England. Her politics are
the greatest good for the greatest number.
RODDA, Violet Mary (Mrs. L. Rodda), Warracknabeal, P. 8.,
Victoria ; b. July 6th, 1894, in Warracknabeal ; ed. St. Brim
State School and Warracknabeal College ; dau. of Lewis Wurfel
and Jessie Wurfel ; m. Leonard Rodda, farmer and politician,
son of Frederick and Mary Rodda ; he entered Legislative
Council, Victorian Parliament, as Country Party Member, on
6th July, 1937. Mother of Howard Leonard Roy Rodda (b.
March 12th, 1923), Trevor Bruce Rodda (b. Oct. 6th, 1926), and
Gwenda Margaret Jessie Rodda (b. Oct. 11th, 1929). Interested
in charity, literature, music, politics, religion, country improve-
ments, education ; plays tennis ; fond of motoring and travelling.
Member of : Women's Section United Country Party, Country
Women's Association and Local Debating Society. Her farm
life is very strenuous, but their little community tries to improve
itself with a “ Mutual Improvement Society," which meets
fortnightly and debates questions of the world. The two elder
children are away at High School and College respectively, and
at present she is more interested in chicken-raising than anything
else. Religion : Methodist. Politics : Country Party.
ROONEY, Marjorie Lorna (Miss), Broadland House Church of
England Girls’ Grammar School, Lyttleton Street, Launceston,
Tasmania ; b. Dec. 23rd, 1898, in Perth, Western Australia ;
ed. Girls' High School, Claremont, Western Australia, and The
University of Western Australia ; dau. of Mr. and the late Mrs.
W. J. Rooney, of Perth, Western Australia. Interested in
education, literature, and music (slightly) ; used to play hockey


and tennis, now plays bridge and solo. Member of : Northern
Tasmania Hockey and Basket-ball Associations, Launceston
Players, and Trinity College of Music (Northern Tasmania
Association). She holds degree of Bachelor of Arts, University
of Western Australia. From 1927-30 was Headmistress of Girls’
High School, Claremont, Western Australia. Present position :
Headmistress of Broadland House Church of England Girls’
Grammar School, Launceston, Tasmania (a day and boarding
school). Religion : Church of England. Politics : Nationalist.
ROSS, Euphemia Welch, B.Sc. (Mrs. A. D. Ross), 31, Ventnor
Avenue, Perth, Western Australia ; b. 1889, in Irvine, Ayrshire,
Scotland ; ed. Irvine Royal Academy and University of Glasgow ;
dau. of Bailie James Murchie, Irvine, Scotland ; m. Professor
A. D. Ross, Professor of Physics, University of Western Australia,
son of Dr. David Ross ; he has been Professor of Physics in the
University of Western Australia since its foundation in 1912 ;
Kelvin Medallist for researches in Natural Philosophy, 1914.
Mother of Verna Helen Marion Ross (b. 1920). Interested in
education and social welfare movements ; Assistant State
Commissioner for Western Australia of Girl Guides; plays
bridge; fond of music. Her husband is Chairman of the
Western Australia University’s Music Board, and she has
assisted him in receiving music artistes who have visited Western
Australia. Member of : Karrakatta Club, Perth, Western
Australia. When at Glasgow University she held the Thomson
Experimental Scholarship for research in Physics. Religion :
Presbyterian.
ROYLE, Ethel (Mrs. F. A. Royle), 11, Etham Avenue, Darling
Point, Sydney ; b. Dunedin, New Zealand ; dau. of William
Cargill Kirkcaldy ; m. Frederick Arthur Royle, underwriter,
Consul General, Paraguay, son of Charles John and Emily Royle.
Mother of Norman Charles Kirkcaldy (b. July 9th, 1907, d.
March 10th, 1914), William Arthur Kirkcaldy (b. Feb. 9th, 1909),
and Marjorie Ethel (b. Feb. 23rd, 1915). Marjorie Ethel was
m., 1936, to Robert Blyth Fleming, Captain Royal Land-
Regiment. William Arthur K. Royle holds degree of M.A.,
Cambridge University. Mrs. Royle is interested in charity,
literature, music, religion, education ; plays tennis and bridge ;
fond of entertaining, travelling, riding. Member of : Ladies’
Army and Navy Club, St. James' Place, London. Religion :
Church of Scotland. Politics : Conservative.
SCHMITT, Agnes Elizabeth Clarissa (Mrs. L. J. Schmitt),
34, Arawa Road, Hataitai, Wellington, New Zealand ; b.
Dunedin, New Zealand ; ed. in Australia ; dau. of James Goldie
Hendry ; m. Louis John Schmitt, Permanent Head, New Zealand
Government Depts. Industries and Commerce, Tourist and
Publicity, son of Francis and Margaret Schmitt; he is Trade
Commissioner for New Zealand in Australia ; member of New
Zealand Arbitration Court, Chairman Bureau of Industry,
Chairman New Zealand Tobacco Industry Board, and member


of New Zealand National Parks Board. Mother of Gwendoline
Schmitt (b. 1909), Bernard Schmitt (b. 1915), Patricia Schmitt
(b. 1919) and Geoffrey Schmitt (b. 1921). Interested in charity,
literature, music, politics, religion, art, commerce, education ;
fond of motoring and travelling. Member of English Speaking
Union. Vice-President of Wellington Travel Club. Religion :
Catholic.
SCHNEIDER, Shirley Laura (Mrs. W. H. Schneider),
“ Ardrossan,” Bishop Street, New Town, Tasmania ; b. Nov.
10th, 1906, in Melbourne, Victoria ; ed. “ Cromarty ” Girls’
School, and University of Melbourne ; dau. of Michael Philip
Fox, solicitor, Melbourne ; niece of E. Phillips-Fox, artist; m.
Walter Herman Schneider, university lecturer and engineer, son
of Theodore and Elizabeth Schneider ; he is a Bachelor of
Engineering (Univ. of Adelaide, South Australia), Bachelor of
Commerce (University of Tasmania), A.M.I.Mech.E. (Eng.), and
Economic Adviser to Minister for Transport, Tasmania Govern-
ment. Mother of Michael Philip Schneider (b. Jan. 20th, 1935),
and Laurence Theodore Schneider (b. Sept. 6th, 1937). Inter-
ested in literature, music, art ; fond of motoring, travelling, home
interests, and walking. Authoress of pamphlet on “ Roman-
ticism ” ; also annotated programmes for orchestral concerts,
Melbourne. Before her marriage she was lecturer on staff of
Conservatorium of Music, University of Melbourne. Graduate
in Music (University of Melbourne). Bachelor of Music (only
graduate to take degree in School of Aesthetics and Criticism).
Gave several series of wireless talks for the Australian Broad-
casting Commission. Religion : Congregational.
SCOTT, Frances Fanny (Mrs. H. H. Scott), Windermere Flats,
No. 6, Broadway, Elwood, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Launceston,
Tasmania ; ed. Ladies’ College, Elphin Road, Launceston ; dau.
of Mr. and Mrs. F. Stearnes ; father b. Suffolk, England, mother
Tasmania ; m. Herbert Hedley Scott (d. March Ist, 1938),
Curator of Museum, Launceston, son of Peter Dura Scott and
Mary Scott; he was b. in London, and ed. in England and
U.S.A. ; for reasons of health emigrated first to New Zealand,
then to Tasmania ; Curator Queen Victoria Museum and Art
Gallery, Launceston, 1897-1938 ; author of monograph on
Nototheria, “ Vertebrate Animals of Tasmania,” with Clive E.
Lord, and numerous scientific papers ; he was a Foundation
Fellow, Royal Society of Australia; Gold Medallist, Royal
Society of Tasmania ; received Coronation Medal ; honorary
member of Rotary Club, the highest honour accorded ; member
of various associations, and the founder of The Microscopical
Club, Launceston. Mother of Eric Oswald Gale Scott (b. Oct.
23rd, 1898), and Tla. Tanthe Scott (b. April 21st, 1906). E. O.
G. Scott holds degree of B.Sc., University of Tasmania ;is a
director of Queen Victoria Museum and Art Gallery, Launceston,
Tasmania ; author of numerous papers, chiefly icthyological.
Tla. Tanthe Scott m. Mr. Raymond Allen, radio technican, who


is associated with the Amalgamated Wireless Association,
Melbourne ; Mrs. Allen is a keen golf player, and is a holder of
a golf championship, and several trophies ; won gold medal in a
swimming contest. Mrs. Scott is interested in literature, music,
art, drama, and interior decorating ; plays chess ; fond of
entertaining, motoring, travelling, theatre-going. Member of :
Queen Victoria League and A.W.N.A. Association. Belonged
to the Launceston Shakespeare Club, and was a pupil of Mr.
Abraham Barrett, an eminent Shakespearian scholar. Appeared
with him in “ The Merchant of Venice ” as Portia, he playing
Shylock. In the production of “ Macbeth" she portrayed
Lady Macbeth. Has played many dramatic roles in amateur
productions ; also appeared on the concert platform in song
recitals. At the first Literary and Musical Competitions in
Launceston she won the highest aggregate number of marks.
During her life she has belonged to many societies, but in later
years has been forced by doctor’s orders to adopt the go-slow
policy (owing to having strained her heart), so reluctantly has
had to live more or less a private life the past few years. Was
a member of the Launceston Operatic Society in its earlier
productions. Religion : Congregationalist. Politics : United
Australia Party.
SEWELL, Alice Maud (Mrs. S. V. Sewell), Road’s End, Berwick,
Victoria ; b. Feb. 16th, 1881, in Newlyn, Victoria ; ed. Presby-
terian Ladies’ College, Melbourne, and Melbourne University ;
dau. of James Erskine Cumming, of Ballarat ; m. Dr. Sidney
Valentine Sewell, physician, son of Richard Blamire Sewell ;
he holds degrees of F.R.C.P., London, and F.R.A.C.P. ; is Senior
Physician at Royal Melbourne Hospital ; examiner for many
years for M.D., Melbourne, and sole examiner for M.D., New
Zealand ; Senior Vice-President and President Elect of Royal
Australasian College of Physicians. Mother of Mary McLaren
Sewell (b. 1909), Joan Sidney Sewell (b. 1912), Sidney Arnold
Sewell (b. 1913), Elizabeth Sidney Sewell (b. 1915), Suzanne
Sidney Sewell (b. 1917), Patience Sidney Sewell (b. 1919), Phyllis
Sidney Sewell (b. 1920), and Willoughby Sidney Sewell (b. 1923).
Joan Sidney Sewell holds degree of M.A., Melbourne University,
and m. Dr. J. E. Sewell in 1936. Sidney Arnold Sewell holds
degrees of M. 8., 8.5., Melbourne University. Elizabeth Sidney
Sewell holds diploma of Physical Education of University of
London and of Bedford Physical Training College. Mrs. Sewell
is interested in the Country Women’s Association, education,
music, literature ; fond of gardening, handicrafts, and enter-
taining in the country. Member of : Lyceum Club, Melbourne,
Country Women’s Association, Victoria League, Ormond
Women’s Association, and Catalysts. She holds degree of M.A.,
Melbourne University. Is a Wyselaskie Scholar in Classics.
Was Deputy State President of C.W.A. of Victoria, and now
for three years Chairman of Handicrafts and Home Industries
Committee of C.W.A. Received Coronation Medal, 1937.


Visited England and continent for two years, 1908-1909, and
again in 1937, making contacts with associated countrywomen of
the world. Politics : United Australia Party.
SHARP, Madeline Elizabeth (Mrs. L. H. Sharp), Koala, Pacific
Highway, Gordon, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. Christchurch, New
Zealand ; dau. of William Stewart King and Charlotte King [nee
Scott) ; m. Lewis Hey Sharp, chartered electrical engineer,
university lecturer, son of Rev. Canon W. Hey Sharp and Mary
Edith Patteson [nee Farr). Interested in all matters in con-
nection with art and craft-work, and its place in education ;
fond of sketching and motoring. Authoress of : Sydney
Sketches. Member of : The Women’s Club, Beaumont House,
Sydney, and Society of Arts and Crafts. Religion : Church of
England. Politics : Liberal.
SHAW, Rachel (Mrs. C. G. Shaw), 57, Clendon Road, Toorak,
5.E.2, Melbourne, Victoria, and “ Kyrton,” Flinders, Victoria ;
b. 1890, in Camberwell, Victoria ; ed. Milverton College and
Melbourne University ; dau. of A. Champion, of Melbourne,
Victoria ; m. C. Gordon Shaw, surgeon, son of George Shaw, of
E. Melbourne ; he holds degrees of M.D., B.S. (Melb.), F.R.C.S.
(Eng.), and Col. A.A.M.S. ; served in Great War, 1914-18 ;
received D.S.O. ; mentioned in despatches ; at present D.D.M.S.
Victoria ; Senior Surgeon, St. Vincent’s Hospital, Melbourne.
Mother of Hugh Michael Shaw (b, Jan. 18th, 1919), Margery H.
Shaw (b. June 27th, 1920), Richard G. Shaw (b. July 10th, 1922),
and C. Gordon Shaw (b. Sept. Ist, 1924). The two elder children
are undergraduates of Melbourne University (Medicine and Arts
respectively). Mrs. Shaw is interested in music, education,
literature, and hospital administration ; plays tennis, golf,
contract bridge ; fond of chamber music (practising with amateur
string quartette). Member of : Lyceum Club, and Royal
Melbourne Golf Club. Graduated M. 8., 8.5., Melbourne
University, in 1914. Served as Assistant Surgeon at Endell
Street Military Hospital, London, during 1916-17. Temporary
Out-patient Physician, Great Ormond Street Children’s Hospital,
London, 1918 ; also medical officer to W.A.A.C.S. during 1918.
Religion : Protestant.
SHEARER, Muriel Jane (Mrs. J. Shearer), 89, Thomas Street,
Nedlands, Western Australia ; b. July sth, 1896, in Perth,
Western Australia ; ed. Perth, Western Australia ; dau. of
Gilbert A. Aitken and Agnes L. Aitken ; m. John Shearer,
university lecturer in physics, son of John B. Shearer and Cecile
A. Shearer ; he was on the Scientific Staff of the Carnegie
Institution of Washington, 1920-23 ; Lecturer in Natural
Philosophy, Melbourne University ; Lecturer in Physics,
University of Western Australia. Mother of David John
Shearer (b. Sept. 16th, 1932), and Aurelie Jean Shearer (b.
April Ist, 1934). Interested in music, art, education ; plays
tennis, golf, bridge ; fond of entertaining and travelling. Has
painted Western Australia wild flowers on china, and depicted


Australian bush scenery in French pastel. Member of :
“ Alliance Frangaise,” and Nedlands Golf Club. Has made a
special study of the education of the pre-school child, and of the
child attending school for the first two years. Religion :
Presbyterian.
SHEPHERD, Emma Tarrant Amanda (Mrs. A. E. Shepherd),
20a, Woolridge Avenue, Millswood, South Australia ; b. Balak-
lava, South Australia ; ed. Advanced School for Girls, Adelaide ;
dau. of George Shepherd ; m. Arthur E. Shepherd, Surgeon ;
Colonel in A.1.F., son of E. Shepherd, Adelaide ; he was a Surgeon,
Adelaide Hospital; now Consulting Surgeon; State and
Commonwealth Militia Officer since 1908 ; Colonel in A.I.F. ;
served in Egypt, France and Belgium for four years ; received
C.8.E., D.S.O. and Long Service Medal, also French decoration.
Mother of Arthur Claude Shepherd (b. Aug. 16th, 1896), Reginald
George Shepherd (b. July 11th, 1898), Jessie Pretoria Shepherd
(b. April 29th, 1900), Lyle Cecil Shepherd (b. April 20th, 1907),
Esm6 Shepherd (b. April 20th, 1907), and Arthur Essington
Shepherd (b. Dec. 14th, 1908). Arthur Claude and Reginald
George served in Great War for three years, in 3rd Light Horse
Regiment. Mrs. Shepherd served twenty years in Red Cross,
and was awarded Red Cross badge in 1938. Religion : Church
of England. Politics : Liberal.
SIMPSON, Jessie Baird (Dr.), “ Rosehaugh,” 35, Normanby
Street, Middle Brighton 85, Victoria ; b. Armadale, Victoria,
Australia ; ed. Presbyterian Ladies’ College, Melbourne, and
Melbourne University ; dau. of the late Mr. William Simpson
and Mrs. Simpson. Interested in charity, literature, music,
politics, religion, art; plays tennis, auction bridge, eucre, whist
and “ five hundred ” ; fond of motoring, travelling, theatre-
going. Member of : Lyceum Club (Melbourne), Royal Auto-
mobile Club (Victoria), British Medical Association (Victoria
Branch), Victorian Women’s Medical Society, Presbyterian
Ladies’ College, and Old Collegians’ Association. Religion :
Presbyterian. Politics : United Australia Party.
SLATER, Winifred Mary (Mrs. J. C. Slater), Flinders Naval
Depot, Victoria ; b. Dec. 21st, 1905, in Sydney, N.S. Wales ;
ed. Ravenswood College, Gordon, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; dau. of
George W. Cocks, solicitor, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; m. Instructor-
Commander J. C. Slater, Royal Australian Navy, son of David
Slater and Margaret Slater. Interested in music ; plays tennis,
squash, golf, contract bridge ; fond of entertaining and theatre-
going. Religion : Methodist. Politics : United Australia
Party.
SMITH, Edith Winifred (Mrs. K. W. A. Smith), King’s College,
Halton Terrace, Kensington Park, South Australia ; b. June
4th, 1904, in St. Peters, South Australia ; ed. Methodist Ladies’
College, Wayville, and Kindergarten Training College, North
Adelaide ; dau. of Charles Walter Rutt, F.5.A.1.A., F.R.1.8.A. ;
m. Kenneth William Algernon Smith, Headmaster, King’s


College, son of William and Sarah Rayner Smith. Mother of
Josephine Whitmore Smith (b. April 6th, 1928), Rayner Whit-
more Smith (b. Dec. 28th, 1929), and Barry Whitmore Smith
(b. Oct. 12th, 1935). Interested in education, art, music ; plays
tennis and auction bridge ; fond of entertaining, riding, theatre-
going. She was appointed Headmistress of Preparatory School
of King’s College at its inception in 1924, having gained a Ist
class Diploma in Theory and Practice at Kindergarten Training
College the previous year. Retained this position for three
years. Religion : Non-conformist. Politics : Liberal.
SOMERSET, Violet (Mrs. A. O’Keefe), 20, Orrong Road,
Elsternwick, Victoria, and New Conservatorium of Music, 300,
Little Collins Street, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Hongkong, China ;
ed. Loreta Convent, Albert Park, Victoria ; dau. of Major and
Mrs. H. C. Somerset ; m. Aloysius O’Keefe (d. March 18th,
1930), grazier, son of Andrew and Elizabeth O’Keefe. Interested
in music, literature, art ; plays tennis ; fond of motoring,
theatre-going, travelling, riding. Member of : Lyceum Club,
Queen Street, Melbourne, Victoria. She is a singer. Started
her early training under Mrs. Doubleday, who at that time had
launched Amy Castles, but actually commenced her serious work
under Herr Rudolf Himmer. In 1919 she went to Honolulu
and gave three recitals there and one at Hilo —returning to
Melbourne. The following year she went to England and studied
under Plunket Greene and in Paris did interpretation with
Madame Vaucaire. Before leaving England she gave a very
successful recital at Leighton House, and returned to Melbourne
in 1922. On her return to Melbourne she joined the staff of the
New Conservatorium of Music, and occupied the position as
chief study singing teacher. In 1933 the founder of the Con-
servatorium left for England and Miss Winifred Lloyd (Mrs.
J. D. McKellar) and Mrs. O’Keefe took charge. When the
founder decided to stay in England, they purchased the Con-
servatorium and are still the directors. Has sung at all the
principal cities of Australia, Tasmania and New Zealand. Now,
her time is so taken up with the Conservatorium she is content
to give one recital a year and an occasional broadcast. Religion :
Roman Catholic. Politics : United Australian Party.
SPIVAKOVSKY, Erika (Mrs. T. Spivakovsky), 36, Sackville
Street, Kew, E. 4, Victoria, or C/o University, Melbourne ;b.
Nov. 4th, 1909, in Altona, Germany ; ed. grammar schools in
Altona and Buenos Aires ; dau. of the late Josef Lipsker, and
Mrs. Rosi Zarden, of Melbourne ; m. Tossy Spivakovsky, violinist,
son of the late David and Rahel Spivakovsky ; he was b. in
Odessa, in December, 1907 ; he was a child wonder, and his
first appearance in public had already been made at the age of
nine ; since then, his successes have extended to all the great
music-centres ; in Germany, England, France, Italy, Holland
and Scandinavia he has been hailed as one of the world’s leading
violinists ; when fourteen years of age he started to make


gramophone records for “ Parlophone,” which soon proved to
be outstanding ; at the age of eighteen he was “ leader ” of
the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra, being the youngest violinist
ever tc hold that post ; in 1933 he went on a successful tour of
Australia and New Zealand, being enthusiastically acclaimed.
Mother of Ruth Spivakovsky (b. June 15th, 1938). Interested
in charily, politics, economics, music, literature ; fond of reading
and travelling. Authoress of thesis on “ The Myth of the
Golden Age in the Pastoral Novels of Italy, Spain and France/’
Graduated as Doctor of Philosophy at Berlin University, 1933.
Appointed Instructor in Spanish at the Melbourne University
in 1936. Religion ; Jewish Faith.
STANG, Eleanor Margrethe (Miss), 14, Alexandra Avenue,
Claremont, Western Australia, Health Department, Perth,
Western Australia, and Karrakatta Club, Perth, Western
Australia ; V Victoria, Australia ; ed. Presbyterian Ladies’
College, Meltourne, and Ormond College and University, Mel-
bourne ; dau of Dr. Thomas Newbold Stang. Interested in
charity, literature, politics, and all matters pertaining to the
benefit of child life and maternity ; plays tennis, and used to
play inter-state hockey ; fond of theatre-going, and particularly
fond of motoring and travelling, roaming around the world by
car, of which she has done a fair amount, and hopes to do very
muck more. Member of : Karrakatta Club, Perth, Lyceum
Club, Melbourne, Women Doctor’s Federation, University
Women’s Club, and Women Writers’ Club. Holds an appoint-
ment in the Government Service ; is in charge and Director of
Infant Welfare work for Western Australia. Is also in charge
of the school medical work for the state. Lecturer in hygiene
at the University, Western Australia. Has given regular weekly
b'oadcasts for ten years, and writes regular weekly articles for
tie papers. Religion : Protestant.
STARKE, Margaret Mary (Lady Starke), 690, Toorak Road,
kalvern, Victoria ; b. 1878, in S. Kilda, Victoria ; ed. privately ;
cau. of the Hon. John Gavan Duffy ; m. The Hon. Sir Hayden
Jlarke, R.C.M.G., Justice of the High Court of Australia, son of
)r. and Mrs. Starke. Mother of Elizabeth Monica Starke, and
ohn Erskine Starke (barrister-at-law). Interested in literature,
)olitics, art ; fond of travelling, flying, theatre-going. Member
>f : Alexandra Club, Melbourne. Religion : Catholic.
STEVENSON, Frances Olive Brooke (Mrs. J. B. Stevenson),
1, Neringah Avenue, Wahroonga, N.S. Wales ; b. Nov. 2nd,
1884, in Hobart, Tasmania ; ed. private school, Hobart ; dau.
of Anne Chaffey Langdon ; m. John Bryan Stevenson, Rear-
Admiral (Ret.), R.A.N., son of John Stevenson, Esq., and
Eleanor Bryan ; he commanded H.M.S. Berrima in capture of
New Guinea, 1914 ; was member of Australian Naval Board,
1927-29 ; Capt. Supt. Naval Est., Sydney, 1929-31 ; C.M.G.,
1925, for services commanding H.M.A.S. Adelaide, Empire
cruise with Special Service Squadron. Mother of James Walter


Bryan Stevenson (Pilot Officer, R.A.F.), Alethea Noel Stevenson,
and John Philip Stevenson (Midshipman, R.A.N.). Interested
in charity, music, education ; plays bridge ; fond of entertaming,
motoring, travelling, theatre-going. Member of : Victoria
League, N.S. Wales (Ex. Com.), and Queen’s Club (Sydney).
Religion : Church of England. Politics : Nationalist.
STOPFORD, Emma Lucy (Mrs. A. E. Stopford), “ Arundel,”
North Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. Melbourne, Victoria ; ed private
schools and governesses ; dau. of A. F. W. Saunders, Esq.
(Arran) ; m. A. E. Stopford, Esq. (d. Sept. 14th, 1911), inspector
of Forests, N.S. Wales, son of the Rev. F. M. Stopford (Cmrtown) ;
he was an expert on forestry; discovered a new eucalypti, which
was named after him. Mother of Florence Margaret Stopford
(b. July 11th, 1888, d. June 2nd, 1889), Grosveior Francis
Stopford (b. Dec. 15th, 1889), and Eveleen Emma Stopford (b.
Aug. Bth, 1891). G. F. Stopford is a chaplain ir the British
Army. E. E. Stopford is a V.A.D., Red Cross worker (medal).
Mrs. Stopford was a Red Cross, etc., worker durirg Great War.
Religion : Church of England.
STREET, Evora Francis (Mrs. G. A. Street), Eildon, Lismore,
Victoria ; b. Jan., 1897, in Melbourne ; ed. Melbourne ; dau.
of Edwin Currie and Laura Grey Currie ; m. Geoffrey Austin
Street, grazier, son of John William Street and Mary Veronica
Street ; he has been M.P. for Corangamite seat since 1934,
Commonwealth Parliament; Minister for Defence since Nov.,
1938. Mother of Anthony Austin Street (b. Feb. Bth, 1926),
and Veronica Laura Street (b. Aug. 11th, 1929). Interested in
literature and politics ; plays golf and tennis ; fond of riding,
shooting, travelling. Member of : Royal Melbourne Golf Club,
Royal Sydney Golf Club, Alexandra Club, Melbourne, Gala Gdf
Club, and Barum Heads Golf Club. President of Lismore Branch
of Australian Women’s National League. President of Lismoie
Branch Baby Health Society. Member of Country Womeni
Association. Member of Victorian Ladies’ Golf Union Com
mittee. Captain of Associates of Gala Golf Club. Religion
Presbyterian. Politics : United Australia Party.
STREET, Jessie Mary Grey (Mrs. K. W. Street), 2, Greenoaki
Avenue, Darling Point, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. April 18th
1889, in Chota Nagpur, India ; ed. Wycombe Abbey Schools
Bucks., England, and University of Sydney, N.S. Wales ; dau,
of Charles A. G. Lillingston ; m. Kenneth Whistler Street,
Justice of Supreme Court of N.S. Wales. Mother of Belinda
Jessie Whistler Street (b. Feb. 15th, 1918), Philippa Lillingston
Whistler Street (b. Nov. 7th, 1919), Roger Kenneth Whistler
Street (b. Aug. 18th, 1921), and Laurence Lillingston Whistler
Street (b. July 3rd, 1926). Interested in literature and politics.
Member of : Macquarie Club. Foundation member and
President, United Associations of Women of N.S. Wales.
Foundation member and Vice-President, League of Nations.
Foundation member and Vice-President, International Peace


Campaign. Counsellor of The Women's College, University of
Sydney. Religion : Church of England. Politics : Non-party.
SWEET, Georgina (Miss), D.Sc., 64, Mont Albert Road,
Canterbury, Melbourne, E. 7, Victoria ; b. Jan. 22nd, 1875, in
Brunswick, Melbourne ; ed. Parkville Ladies' College, and
University of Melbourne ; dau. of George Sweet. Interested in
education, social service, religion, international friendship and
peace ; fond of travelling. Winner of Syme Prize for Research
(1911) and Mcßain Research Scholar (1898). Formerly Asso-
ciate Professor in Zoology and Lecturer in Parasitology, etc., in
University of Melbourne ; and on occasion Acting Professor
(till 1927) ; and then Honorary Lecturer in Zoology and Para-
sitology, University of Melbourne (till 1934). Has twice
undertaken enquiries abroad for the Commonwealth Government
—in 1913-14 and in 1925-27. Member of Council of University
of Melbourne from Dec., 1937, to 1942. Also : Member of the
Council and of the Science and Veterinary Faculties, University
of Melbourne. Sometime Member of the Australian National
Research Council. Was President of the Provisional Committee,
Women’s College, University of Melbourne (from inauguration
to 1934), and now member of its Council of Management and
Executive Committee. Ex-President, National Board of the
Y.W.C.A. of Australia (1927-34), and now Vice-President. Was
Chairman of the Australian Women’s Co-operating Committee
of Federal Organizations (Australian Joint Standing Committee
of Women’s Fed. Organizations) (March, 1929-34) ; now a
member. Was Chairman of the Australian Pan-Pacific Women’s
Committee (1929-33) ; now a member. Was President Pan-
Pacific Women’s Association (1930-34), and now Honorary Life
President. Vice-President of the World’s Y.W.C.A., Geneva.
Member of the Council of Mental Hygiene, Victoria. Member
of Board of Social Studies, Victoria. Member of Board of
Directors of Bureau of Social and International Affairs, Victoria.
Member of Executive of the Australian Institute of International
Affairs (Melbourne branch). Member of Executive of the
Institute of Pacific Relations (Victoria Branch) —Delegate there-
from to the I.P.R. Conference, Kyoto 1929, Banff 1933. Member
of the Pacific Science Association (Delegate to its conferences
in Australia and Japan). Was member of League of Nations
Union Council, Victoria. Proxy Council Member for Australia
at the International Fed. of University Women’s Council meeting,
Spain, 1928. Delegate from Australia to Conference of 1.F.U.W.,
Krakow, 1936. Invited as Observer to meeting of International
Committee of Committee of Intellectual Co-operation, Geneva,
1936. Foundation Member and Ist President of Society for Sex
Education, Melbourne, and almost continuously a member of its
committee for some years, and closely connected with the early
organizing of its training courses for teachers, welfare workers,
etc., etc. At one time Member of Council of the Victorian
Health Association. Religion : Christian.


SYME, Violet Addison (Mrs. G. Syme), Blythswood, Kew,
Melbourne, Victoria, and Seaforth, Mordialloe, Victoria ; b.
1884, in Clitheroe, Lancashire, England ; ed. at home ; dau. of
Tom Garnett, Waddow Hall, Clitheroe ; m. Geoffrey Syme,
Proprietor of Melbourne “ Age,” son of David Syme (who
established “ Age ” newspaper, 1856) and Annabelle Johnson.
Mother of Marjorie Garnett Syme (b. Oct., 1902), who m. Lt.
Com. Geoffrey Haggard, 1923 ; Hilaria Newstead Syme (b.
Sept., 1904), who m. Kenneth Peacock, 1925, and d. 1926 ;
Joan Syme (b. March, 1910), who m. John Hayne, 1934 ; Felicity
Addison Syme (b. Feb., 1914), who m. Dr. Maxwell Clemone,
1935, and Veronica Syme (b. Jan., 1928). Mrs. Syme is prin-
cipally interested in all literature ; her father was first cousin to
Dr. Richard Garnalt, keeper of books at British Museum, and
editor of “ Library of Famous Literature,” etc. ; plays bridge
(contract) ; fond of entertaining, travelling, theatre-going.
Member of : Alexandra Club, Melbourne, and Quamby Club,
Melbourne. Religion : Church of England. Politics : Liberal
(Protectionist).
TAYLOR, Louisa Stafford (Miss), Camberwell Church of
England Girls’ Grammar School, Canterbury, Melbourne, E. 7,
Victoria ; b. 1898, in London, England ; dau. of William Joseph
Taylor, mechanical engineer, A.M.I.E. Aust. Interested in
education, literature, music, religion. She is the Headmistress
of Camberwell Church of England Girls’ Grammar School.
Religion : Church of England.
THOMAS, Marga (Mrs. W. Thomas), C/o Australia House,
Strand, London, W.C.2 ; b. 1910, in England ; ed. London and
Switzerland ; dau. of Mrs. F. Leinart ; m. Wilfrid Thomas,
artiste, son of Mr. and Mrs. A. W. Thomas, Sydney ; he was
an early Australian broadcaster—as producer, singer, writer
and actor ; engaged by Melba—toured world as concert baritone ;
settled in London for 8.8. C. ; appeared in principal theatres
and concert halls, made gramophone records, was a television
pioneer ; joined International Broadcasting Co. ; toured
European radio stations ; collaborated with Dr. Julian Huxley
in zoological broadcasts. Mrs. Thomas is interested in ballet,
literature, art, cooking, physical culture, dress design, music ;
plays bridge and tennis ; fond of ballroom dancing, swimming,
cats, fair grounds, travel, theatre, entertaining, yachting,
motoring, mountaineering, flying. Studied dancing, singing and
dramatic art. Toured Continent with ballet. Appeared on
London stage with Robert Courtneidge, Jack Hulbert, Carl
Brisson and Jack Waller in important operettas and musical
comedies, at the Lyceum, Savoy, Adelphi, etc., specializing in
French and German parts. Successful in films, television and
radio. Has taught and arranged dancing, designed stage
costumes and sets.
THOMAS, Mary Theodora (Mrs. A. N. Thomas), Bishop's
Court, N. Adelaide, South Australia ; b. Nov. 24th, 1872, in


Upper Gornal Vicarage, Staffs. ; ed. Durham High School ;
dau. of Rev. W. A. H. Lewis ; m. Arthur Nutter Thomas,
Bishop of Adelaide since 1906, son of C. J. and M. M. Thomas.
Mother of Ursula Margaret Thomas (b. Jan. 20th, 1908), who
m. Rev. W. P. S. Johnson ; Mary Katharine Thomas (b. Aug.
16th, 1910), who m. Bishop Baddeley of Melanesia, and Christo-
pher Nutter Thomas (b. July 11th, 1912), priest. Religion :
Church of England.
THOMPSON, Freda Mary (Miss), Melbourne, Victoria ; b.
April sth, 1906, in Melbourne, Victoria ; ed. Toorak College ;
dau. of the late Frederick H. Thompson. Interested in Girl
Guides, free kindergarten, literature and music ; plays golf,
tennis, squash; fond of swimming, skating, riding, flying,
motoring, travelling, theatre-going. Member of : Quamby
Club, Metropolitan Golf Club, Kingston Heath Golf Club, Royal
South Yarra Tennis Club, and Royal Victorian Aero Club. In
1934 she purchased a De Havilland Moth Major in which she
flew home to Australia. Religion : Church of England. Politics :
United Australia.
THORBY, Vera Lynda (Mrs. H. V. C. Thorby), “ Kohinoor,”
74, Wrights Road, Drummoyne, Sydney, N.S. Wales, and
(country residence) “ Glangwilly,” Thorby Avenue, Dubho,
N.S. Wales ; b. Sydney, N.S. Wales ; ed. Dubho ; dau. of the
late Councillor A. F. Morley ; m. Hon. H. V. C. Thorby, J.P.,
M.P., Member of Commonwealth Parliament of Australia, son
of the late F. J. Thorby, of Essex, England, and Sydney, N.S.
Wales ; he is a farmer and grazier ; President of Farmers and
Settlers' Association, 1925, 1927 ; Minister for Agriculture and
Chairman of Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission,
1927, 1930 ; Member of Commonwealth Parliament, 1930, 1939 ;
Commonwealth Minister, War service Homes and Repatriation,
1934-35 ; Minister of Commerce, 1936 ; Minister of Defence,
1937-38 ; Minister of Works and Civil Aviation, 1938-39 ;
Chairman the river Murray Commission, 1938-39 ; Member of
Australian Delegation, London and Berlin, 1935 ; Deputy Leader
of Australian Country Party, since 1937 ; Member of Australian
Defence Council, 1937-39 ; Government Representative to
Singapore and Netherlands East Indies, 1939. Mother of Vera
Sylvia Thorby (b. 1917), and Betty Lynda Thorby (b. 1922).
Sylvia is President of the Far West Children’s Health Scheme
(Younger Set), and made her debut at State Ball, Parliament
House, Canberra, to Duke of Gloucester, 1934 ; she is engaged
to be married to Mr. Alan K. J. Beeman, only son of Mr. J. W.
Beeman, formerly of Kent, England, and now of Clifton Gardens,
Sydney. Betty was captain of a tennis team of her college for
four years. Mrs. Thorby is interested in charity, music, politics ;
plays tennis and croquet; fond of entertaining, horse-riding,
travelling. They were the first family to fly by flying-boat from
Sydney to Singapore, 10th Jan., 1939. Attended Jubilee
Celebrations of King George V. and State functions, 1935, in


London. Life member Country Women's Association. Religion :
Anglican. Politics : Australian Country Party.
THORNTON, Isabella Carmichael (Mrs. L. Thornton), Arthur
Circle, Forrest, Canberra, A.C.T. ; b. Ballarat, Victoria ; ed.
Ballarat, Victoria; dau. of Robert Porteous ; m. Leslie
Thornton, civil engineer ; he is Chief Civil Engineer in Common-
wealth Dept, of Works. Interested in interior decoration and
music ; fond of theatre-going, motoring, travelling. Member
of : Victoria League. Religion : Anglican.
TIE, Margaret May (Mrs. A. Tie), 24, Murray Street, Prahran,
Victoria ; b. Feb. 3rd, 1890, in Bendigo ; ed. Miss Emmerson's
Girls' College ; dau. of Alfred Burtonclay and Rachelle Burton-
clay [nee Fairbairn) ; m. Anthony Tie, wholesale fruit and
commission agent (retired), son of George and Gertrude Tie ;
he was Regimental Q.M., 19th A.L. Horse ; was in camp with
Lord Kitchener ; used to hold the batting average in Bendigo
district at cricket. Mother of Margaret May Tie (b. Jan. 22nd,
1909), Anthony Christian Tie (b. Sept. 24th, 1911), Kenneth
Stanley Tie (b. May 2nd, 1914), and Monica Isabell Tie (b. July
13th, 1919, d. Nov. 20th, 1920). Margaret holds all her dip-
lomas for elocution in the London College, and also in Trinity.
Anthony is a King Scout; went to England with the first troop
that went from Australia ; visited the King and Queen (then
Duke and Duchess of York). Kenneth is a professional dancer.
Mrs. Tie is interested in charity, literature, music, politics, art,
education ; plays cards and table tennis ; fond of entertaining,
travelling, theatre-going. Member of : Red Cross, Australian
Women National League, Charity Club, and Woollies Appeal.
In Bendigo she was President of Gravel Hill School; Organizing
Secretary of Stradbrokes Scouts ; was on Hospital Committee,
Asylum Committee, Charity Committee. During the Great War
she worked hard for comforts for the soldiers. Took concert
parties to the camps to entertain the soldiers ; all her family
eligible were in the Great War. When Sir Alfred Pickford
represented Lord Baden Powell in 1914, she had the pleasure
of being his hostess on behalf of the Bendigo Scouts. She was
on Mr. William Morris Hughes' committee when he was so
successfully returned to Parliament during the war ; he later
became Prime Minister of Australia. With her daughter
(Margaret) and son (Kenneth) she organizes concerts to entertain
the sick, aged and infirm. Religion : Church of England.
Politics : United Australia Party.
TIERNAN, Olga Adeline Olive (Mrs. W. P. Tiernan), 8, Carden
Avenue, Wahroonga, Sydney, N.S. Wales, or C/o Australian
United Press, 11c, Castlereagh Street, Sydney; b. Bathurst,
N.S. Wales ; ed. Bathurst, N.S. Wales ; dau. of Mr. and Mrs.
John Bayliss ; m. William Patrick Tiernan, journalist, manager
of Australian United Press, Sydney, son of Mr. and Mrs. James
Tiernan ; he was President of Australian Journalists' Association
for six years, and was awarded its gold honour medal; was a


lecturer on Journalism at Sydney University ; honoured with
medals from the late King George V. and King George VI. Mrs.
Tiernan sometimes helps charity movements, and is interested
in literature, music, religion, art; fond of entertaining, motoring,
travelling, theatre-going. Has written a few short stories, and
also some verse. Has painted a number of pictures in oils.
Religion : Anglican. Politics : Liberal.
TIMMS, Alma (Mrs. E. V. Timms), “ Yeronga,” Walker
Street, North Sydney, N.S. Wales; b. Jan. 15th, 1895, in
Balmain, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; ed. Sydney Girls' High School;
dau. of G. A. and J. Mcßobert; m. Edward Vivian Timms,
novelist and playwright, son of W. H. and B. Timms ; he was a
Lieutenant, Ist Battalion A.1.F., 1914-17 ; has had fourteen
novels published, historical and general, London and Sydney ;
foreign translations, film scenarios, and many radio serials and
plays. Mother of Jessie Margaret Timms (b. Nov. 10th, 1917),
George William Timms (b. May 11th, 1920), Edward Mcßobert
Timms (b. Jan. 9th, 1923, d. Jan. 26th, 1936), and Warwick
James Vivian Timms (b. March 16th, 1933). Jessie Margaret
has definite literary talent, and is taking Arts course at Sydney
University. George William is in the Ist Anti-Aircraft Battery,
and is taking Economics course, Sydney University. Mrs.
Timms is interested in charity, literature, all the arts, and
religion ; plays tennis, golf, bridge ; fond of travelling and
theatre-going. Member of : Gordon Service League, and Red
Cross Society. Has done journalistic work, and dramatized
children's book for radio. Particularly interested in children's
work, and keeping the home running smoothly for a very busy
family. Religion : Presbyterian. Politics : Liberal.
TONGE, Elsie Louise (Mrs. A. W. Tonge), Bellevue Gardens,
Potts Point, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. April 25th, 1874, in Sydney,
N.S. Wales ; ed. Dulwich, England ; dau. of James R. Love ;
m. Rev. A. W. Tonge, Priest in Holy Orders, son of Rev. George
Tonge; he was Chaplain of Eastbourne College, England,
King’s School, Parramatta, N.S. Wales, and Melbourne Grammar
School; Headmaster Trinity Grammar School; and now
Chaplain in Goulburn Diocese. Mother of Ethel Phyllis Tonge
(b. 1898), Janet Heathfield (Webster) (b. 1902), Mary Lynette
(Townsend) (b. 1903), Arthur George Tonge (b. 1907), James
Wystan Tonge (b. 1909), and John Iredale Tonge (b. 1916).
Interested in charity, kindergarten in poor districts, and Women's
Hospital (Crown Street). Has motored in all Australian states —
in England, Scotland, Europe and Java. She is working for
and is extremely interested in all pre-school children’s work —
chiefly the Golden Fleece Free Kindergarten, Chippendale, one
of Sydney’s poorest districts, where they fend and care for 120
children daily. She serves with the latter auxiliary for the
Women’s Hospital. This band of women (fifty in number)
makes and marks not less than 12,000 articles each year.


Religion ! Church of England. Politics : Conservative (United
Australian Party).
TRAILL, Mollie Helen (Mrs. J. C. M. Traill), Inchmarlo,
Warracknabeal, Victoria ; b. Sept. 22nd, 1900, in Cheshire,
England ; ed. Claughton College, and West Kirby High School,
England ; dau. of James Herbert Roche and Ann Hopley ; m.
John Charles Merrimar Traill, Representative of New Zealand
Loan and Mercantile Agency Co., Ltd., son of George William
Traill and Phebe Marshall Traill {nee Trew) ; he has travelled
extensively ; served in South African and Great War, 1914-18 ;
mentioned in despatches three times ; awarded D. 5.0., M.C. ;
wounded twice ; holds rank Lieut. Colonel A.M.F. Mother of
lan Justin Traill (b. Aug. 17th, 1929), and Charles Woodwick
Traill (b. May 26th, 1932). Interested in literature and educa-
tion ; plays golf, tennis, bridge ; fond of motoring and travelling.
Religion : Church of England. Politics : United Australian
Party.
TRIGGE, Gweneth Adele (Mrs. H. H. Trigge), King's College,
Kangaroo Point, S.E.I, Brisbane, Queensland ; b. Feb. 17th,
1904, in Brisbane, Queensland ; ed. Rockhampton High School;
dau. of Rev. Albert and Mrs. Taylor ; m. Hubert Hedely Trigge,
Clergyman and Master of King’s College within University of
Queensland, son of Mr. John Walter and Mrs. Trigge ; he holds
degrees of Master of Arts and Bachelor of Divinity ; served with
Royal Australian Navy on H.M.A.S. Sydney as Chaplain during
Great War ; Master of King's College (University) since 1924.
Mother of Ruth Kingsleigh Trigge (b. Oct. 9th, 1926), Patricia
Kingsleigh Trigge (b. March 17th, 1928), Hubert Paul Kingsleigh
Trigge (b. April sth, 1930), and Adele Kingsleigh Trigge (b. Sept.
23rd, 1931). Interested in music, literature, religion, education ;
plays tennis and bridge ; fond of entertaining, motoring,
travelling, theatre-going. Member of : University Staff Wives'
Club, and Brisbane Handel Society. Secretary Methodist
Ministers' Wives’ Association. Hon. Matron, King's College,
1927-38. Religion : Methodist. Politics : Liberal.
TYRER, Justine Agnes D6Rpine Kenyon (Mrs. O. C. Tyrer),
The Retreat, Merriwagga, N.S. Wales ; b. Sept. 16th, 1897, in
Melbourne, Victoria; ed. Presbyterian Ladies' College, Mel-
bourne, Victoria ; dau. of Mr. and Mrs. A. S. Kenyon ; m. Otho
C. Tyrer, farmer, son of Mr. and Mrs. Tyrer ; he was trained at
Hawkesbury Agricultural College, N.S. Wales. Mrs. Tyrer is
interested in charity and literature, women's movements, bush
nursing and agricultural education ; plays golf; fond of
motoring and going to the talkies. Authoress of : The Austra-
lian Aboriginal Word Book, and numerous newspaper articles.
Member of : Country Women’s Association, The Bush Nursing
Association, etc. Much interested in her dogs, cats, cockatoo,
goats and cow, as well as in fowls (Australorps), and in the
cultivation of flowers. Also in cookery. Religion : Presby-
terian. Politics : Liberal.


VICKERS, Lilias (Mrs. A. Vickers), The Residency, Port
Hedland, Western Australia ; b. 1909, in Rockhampton, Queens-
land ; ed. The Glennie Memorial School, Toowoomba, Queens-
land ; dau. of James L. Whitman, Cloncurry, Queensland ; m.
Dr. Allan Vickers, medical practitioner, son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Vickers, Albury, N.S. Wales ; he is Chief Medical Officer
of Australian Aerial Medical Services (Flying Doctor Service) ;
and District Medical Officer, Resident Magistrate and Mining
Warden, Port Hedland. Mother of Robert Allan Litton (b. Nov.
Ist, 1936). Interested in charity and women’s organizations ;
plays tennis, golf, bridge ; fond of dancing, travelling, theatre-
going. Member of : The Country Women's Association.
Religion : Anglican.
VILME-HAUTMONT, Lavinia Florence, Comtesse de, “ Sim-
la,” Snails Bay, Sydney, N.S. Wales, and “ The Cars,”
Canley Vale, N.S. Wales; b. Sydney, N.S. Wales; ed.
Sydney (private tutors) ; dau. of William Henry de Loitte and
Florence Lavinia Herbert (Adams) Comtesse de Vilme-
Hautmont; m. Howard Vernon (d. July 26th, 1921), actor,
great favourite of Australian stage, and creator in Australia of
most of the comedy parts in Gilbert and Sullivan opera ;
he was principal comedian under the management of J. C.
Williamson for many years ; toured many countries with his
own companies (grand opera, comic opera and Shakespeare).
Mrs. Vernon is interested in music, art, literature, charity ; plays
a little bridge; fond of entertaining, yachting, travelling.
Authoress of : Howard Vernon Recollections, Gilbert and
Sullivan Opera in Australia, 1879-1937, and several songs, musical
plays and sketches. Member of : Society of Women Writers
of N.S. Wales, Countrywomen’s Association, Racial Hygiene
Association, Animal Lovers, etc. She is known on the stage
as Vinia de Loitte ; also in the broadcast throughout Australia
and New Zealand. The title is female succession—special
creation to the Comtesse de Vismes (temp. Louis XIV.). Religion :
Church of England.
VOGAN, Iris Anne (Mrs. H. J. Vogan), 7,Want Street, Mosman,
Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. Essex, England ; ed. Essex, England ;
dau. of Chevreaux de Blois-Leach ; m. Harold James Vogan,
Acting Professor of Engineering, Sydney University, son of
Harold S. Vogan, England ; he holds degrees of 8.E., A.M.1.C.E.,
and is Hall Fellow in Engineering of Sydney University. Mother
of Arthur Gordon de Blois-Vogan (b. Feb. 20th, 1927, in Sydney,
N.S. Wales). Interested in music and politics; plays tennis
and bridge; fond of reading and needlework. Her father.
Chevreaux de Blois Leach, is a Freeman of the City of Oxford,
and keen politician and Mason ; recently received highest rank
in “ Grand Masonry ” a layman other than royalty can receive.
Religion : Church of England. Politics : Conservative.
WADDELL, Catherine (Mrs. W. H. Waddell), “ Barrone.”
233, Station Street, Fairfield, Victoria; b. May 13th, 1863, in


Bendigo, Victoria; ed. Ladies' College, Bendigo; dan. of
Richard Urand (deceased), formerly of Cornwall (England) ; m.
William Holms Waddell, Secretary, Victorian Provincial Press
Association, son of Robert and Margaret Holms Waddell (Paisley,
Scotland) ; he is Senior Partner of Mercantile Exchange;
Manager of Victorian Country Press Co-op. Coy., Ltd., since
1901 ; Secretary Victorian Provincial Press Association since its
formation in 1910 ; Member of Executive of Australian Provincial
Press Association ; Advocate in Commonwealth Conciliation and
Arbitration Court since Ist Provincial Award in 1924, for the
whole of the Provincial Press of Australia ; organized Victorian
Country Press on behalf of Government for war publicity, and
carried out voluntarily throughout Great War. Mother of
Robert Rowland Waddell (b. Jan. 3rd, 1886), William Ashley
Waddell (b. Sept. 3rd, 1889, d. April 18th, 1932, of wounds
received in the Great War), John Urand Waddell (b. Nov. 10th,
1891), Matthew Henry Vernon Waddell (b. May 11th, 1898),
and Norman Holms Waddell (b. Dec. 12th, 1900). Interested
in music. Member of : Methodist Ladies’ Guild. Religion :
Methodist. Politics : Australian United Party.
WAKELIN, Rachel Estelle (Mrs. R. S. Wakelin), Woolcott
Street, Waveton, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. Sydney, N.S. Wales ;
ed. St. Patrick’s Convent, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; dau. of W.
Henry Robinson ; m. Roland Shakespeare Wakelin, artist, son
of Richard and Mary Wakelin Wellington, New Zealand ; he is
a member of S.O.A. and A.A.A. Contempory Group ; pioneer
of modern art in Australia ; he is a direct descendant of William
Shakespeare. Is an artist of distinction, and is much written
of and much abused because of his modern trend in art. Spent
some time in England and Paris. Mother of Roland S. Wakelin
(b. Dec. sth, 1914), and Judith Mar6se Wakelin (b. June 2nd,
1926). Interested in art and music; plays bridge; fond of
entertaining and travelling.
WALDER, Elsie (Lady Walder), Deauville, Longworth
Avenue, Point Piper, N.S. Wales ; b. Millthorpe, N.S. Wales ;
ed. Orange ; dau. of William Blunt (deceased) ; m. Sir Samuel
Walder, merchant, son of Samuel and Mary Walder ; he was
Lord Mayor of Sydney, 1932 ; member of Legislative Council,
N.S. Wales. Mother of Samuel Walder, Junr. (b. 1921), and
Mrs. John Human (b. 1917), wife of John Human, ex-M.C.C., of
London ; now resident in Sydney, N.S. Wales. Lady Walder
is interested in the Church of England ; plays golf and bridge ;
fond of entertaining, motoring, travelling, theatre-going.
President of N.S. Wales Women’s Amateur Sports’ Council,
representing 2,000 sportswomen of N.S. Wales. Member of :
Queens Club, Royal Sydney Golf Club, and Committees of Red
Cross Society, Victoria League, Bush Book Club and Queen
Jubilee Fund, and various local charities. Religion : Church
of England. Politics : United Australia Party.


WALLIS, Myee Gertrude (Mrs. J. T. Wallis), “ Malton,”
Gerald Avenue, Roseville, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. Brighton,
Sydney, N.S. Wales ; ed. Cambridge, and Sydney Kindergarten
Training College ; dau. of Herbert Roseby ; m. John T. Wallis,
chartered accountant and chartered secretary, son of Francis J.
and Alice Wallis. Mother of Valerie Roseby Wallis (b. 1921),
Jocelyn Myee Wallis (b. 1925), and Audrey Helen Wallis (b.
1931). Interested in charity work in connection with the free
kindergartens ; plays golf and contract bridge ; fond of motoring
and theatre-going. Member of : Roseville Golf Club. Religion :
Church of England.
WAND, Amy Agnes (Mrs.), Bishopsbourne, Brisbane, Queens-
land ; b. March 22nd, 1883, in Watlington, Oxon. ; ed. Calleva
House, Wallingford ; dau. of William Wiggins, J.P. ; m. The
Archbishop of Brisbane, son of A. J. H. and E. A. O. Wand.
Mother of William Paul Wand (b. Dec. 7th, 1912, d. Aug. 23rd,
1934), and Kathleen Amy Wand (b. March sth, 1914). Kathleen
m. the Hon. Michael Addison, son of Lord Addison, of Stalling-
borough, on August 22nd, 1936 ; they have one daughter,
Eleanor Brigit (b. June 11th, 1938). Mrs. Wand is interested
in charity, literature, music, religion, art ; fond of entertaining,
motoring, theatre-going, and fine needlework. Member of :
The Moreton Club, Brisbane. Diocesan President of the Mothers’
Union. Patroness of the District Nursing Association, and of
the Women's Auxiliary of A.B.M. Vice-President of the Junior
Red Cross. Religion : Church of England.
WARDLAW, Daphne (Mrs. H. S. H. Wardlaw), Yaraan,
Mclntosh Street, Gordon, N.S. Wales ; b. Taralga, N.S. Wales ;
dau. of Walter and Lydia Munn ; m. H. S. Halcro Wardlaw,
D.Sc., F.A.C.1., university lecturer, son of Walter Ralph and
Katherine Wardlaw ; he is active in the scientific life of the
community ; Past President of Linnean Society of N.S. Wales,
President of Royal Society of N.S. Wales, etc. Mrs. Wardlaw
is interested in charity ; plays golf and bridge ; fond of enter-
taining, motoring, riding, yachting. Religion : Church of
England.
WARNES, Mary, M.B.E. (Mrs. I. J. Warnes), Wahroonga,
Burra Burra, South Australia ; ed. Misses Newman’s Private
School, Parkside, South Australia ; dau. of Jane Mears Fair-
brother ; m. I. J. Warnes, J.P., pastoralist; he is Chairman,
Hospital Board, Burra Burra Show Committees, and District
Council; member of South Australia Stock-owners’ Council;
Arbitration Representative for S.A.S.C. ; Council of S.A.
Agricultural and H. Show; Chairman of Directors of J. J.
Warnes and Sons, Ltd. Mother of Rex Clement Warnes (b.
March 31st, 1908), James Fullarton Warnes (b. April 9th, 1911),
and Thomas Murray Warnes (b. Feb. 18th, 1916). All three sons
are good polo players—eldest interstate, ethers state players ;
all keenly interested in land and stock, and all have their positions
—eldest managing director J. J. W. and Sons, Ltd., second


manager of the engineering on the stations, and youngest learning
the general station work ; all ed. at St. Peter's College, Adelaide.
Mrs. Warnes is interested in charity, literature, music, politics,
religion, education; plays croquet, billiards, and most card
games ; fond of motoring, riding, theatre-going, entertaining.
Member of : Queen Adelaide Club, Adelaide, South Australia.
State President, Country Women's Association of South Australia.
Member of National Council of Women of South Australia.
Member of Executive Council and Women's Council of Liberal
and County League (Political) of South Australia. President of
L. and C.L. Burra Women's Branch. Member Council of C. of E.
Day School Council. Member Council of V.A.D. and V.S.D.
Committee of South Australia. Naturally interested in all
women and children’s welfare. Member Leghton Women's
Guild. Member of Council of Victoria League and County
Representative. Has lived the forty years of her married life
on their sheep station. Born two miles from Adelaide. Travelled
extensively—world tour, and four trips to England and the
Continent. Made special study of conditions of women and
children throughout the vast areas of Australia, from the S.E.
of South Australia to Darwin, Northern Territory. Especially
interested in establishing transmitters in the far north for inter-
course for out-back people, and establishing the flying doctor.
Lives rather too far away to do any active work in church, but
helped to establish C. of E. day school and works on the Council.
Takes great interest in their sheep station, and is a director,with
her husband as chairman, and her three sons ; with their various
interests in the wool industry, which means so much study in
erosion and plant life, and animal disease. All of which has
meant study for her, too. Religion : Church of England.
Politics : Liberal.
WATSON, Gladys Elizabeth (Mrs. L. G. H. Watson), All
Saints’ College, Bathurst, N.S. Wales; b. Narandera, N.S.
Wales; ed. Presbyterian Ladies’ College, Croydon, Sydney,
N.S. Wales ; dau. of John Leitch and Patience Anne Leitch
(both deceased) ; m. The Rev. Lindsay George Herbert Watson,
Headmaster of All Saints’ College (Boys’ Boarding School), son
of The Rev. Thomas Watson and Mary Watson (both deceased) ;
he is a graduate of Sydney University, and represented both
University and State at tennis ; Headmaster of All Saints’
College since 1923. Mother of Heather Gladys Watson (b. Feb.
7th, 1918), Stanley Arthur Watson (b. Nov. Ist, 1919), and lan
Lindsay Watson (b. Aug. 12th, 1922). Interested in literature
and music ; fond of motoring and the theatre. Member of :
The Girls’ Secondary Schools’ Club, Sydney. She is keenly
interested in the Country Women’s Association. Religion :
Presbyterian.
WATSON, Phebe Naomi (Miss), M.8.E., “ Tarwell,” 344,
South Terrace, Adelaide, South Australia ; b. Adelaide ; ed.
privately, until entering training for S.A. Education Dept. ;


dau. of Edward and Sarah Watson (both deceased). Interested
in education, literature, music ; plays golf ; fond of swimming
and theatre-going (a first-nighter). Greatly interested in films,
and is advocate of British Films in Australia. Convener,
Cinema Standing Committee for National Council of Women of
Australia, and I.C.W. Editor, Children’s Magazine (Education
Dept.). Also editor and contributor to The Guild Chronicle
(educational paper), and contributor to various newspapers and
magazines. Member of : Adelaide Women’s Club, Lyceum
Club, Women Teachers’ Guild, National Council of Women of
S.A., and Vice-Chairman on board of N.C.W. of Australia.
Former Girl Guide Commissioner. Member, Ladies’ Committee,
Australian Broadcasting Commission in S.A. Received M.B.E.
after the S.A. Centenary year, 1936, for special services as Hon.
Secretary and Joint Organizer of women’s part in S.A. Women’s
Centenary Council. Co-editor in " Women in the First Hundred
Years,” the S.A. women’s centenary book. Religion: Anglican.
Politics : Liberal.
WATT, Marjorie Dymock (Mrs. R. D. Watt), 64, Wentworth
Road, Vaucluse, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. July 24th, 1889, in
Sydney, N.S. Wales ; ed. Sydney Church of England Girls'
Grammar School; dau. of the late John Forsyth ; m. Robert
D. Watt, Professor of Agriculture, University of Sydney, son of
John and Agnes Watt; he holds degrees of M.A., B.Sc. in Agric.
(Glasgow) ; formerly Chief Chemist, Transvaal Department of
Agriculture ; now President of the Australian Institute of
Agricultural Science and Deputy Chairman, Australian National
Research Council, etc. Mother of Mamie Forsyth Watt (b.
June 17th, 1922). Interested in charity, music, art, education;
plays tennis and contract bridge ; fond of entertaining, travelling,
motoring, theatre-going. Member of : Royal Sydney Golf Club
and Macquarie Club. Also a member of the Admission and
Visiting Committees of Burnside Orphan Homes, Council of the
University Women’s Settlement, Red Cross Society, and Society
for Crippled Children. Religion : Presbyterian.
WERE, Eva Marion (Mrs. H. A. Were), Parkwood Estate,
Hamilton, Victoria ; ed. Church of England Girls’ Grammar
School, Melbourne ; dau. of Dr. and Mrs. Leslie Davies ; m.
Hugh Arundell Were, grazier, son of Francis Wellington Were
and Isabella Macvean ; he was at the landing on Gallipoli on
25th April, 1915, with sth Battalion, 2nd Brigade, Ist Australian
Division ; mentioned in dispatches ; recruiting work ; Justice
of Peace ; grower of fine merino wool; on Council of Graziers’
Association. Mother of Clive Wellington Were (b. Feb. 27th,
1922), who was ed. at Geelong Grammar School; and Margot
Lynn Were (b. May 10th, 1926), who was ed. at Alexandra Girls'
School, Hamilton, and The Hermitage, Geelong, Victoria. Mrs.
Were is interested in charity, biography, and is a reader of all
good literature; plays golf, tennis, bridge; very keen on
entertaining, motoring, travelling, theatre-going. Member of :


Hamilton Napier Club, Country Women’s Association and Red
Cross Society. Studied music at Conservatorium, Melbourne.
Takes great interest in gardening, especially rose-growing.
Religion : Church of England. Politics : United Australia
Party.
WHISKARD, Cynthia Salome Caroline (Lady), Canberra
House, Canberra ; b. Jan. 12th, 1893, in London, England ;
dau. of Edmund Whitelock Reeves ; m. Sir Geoffrey Whiskard,
K.C.M.G., C. 8., High Commissioner for the U.K. in the Common-
wealth of Australia ; he was ed. St. Paul’s School, London, and
Wadham College, Oxford (Hon. Fellow, 1936) ; entered U.K.
Civil Service, 1911 ; served in Home, Irish, Colonial and
Dominion Offices. Mother of Mary Salome Whiskard (b. June
Ist, 1916), who m. William Sommerville in 1938 ; Richard
Geoffrey Whiskard (b. March 31st, 1920), who was ed. West-
minster School (King’s Scholar) and University College, Oxford) ;
and John Mason Whiskard (b. Feb. 28th, 1924), ed. Westminster
School (King’s Scholar). Mrs. Whiskard is interested in music,
water-colour painting, and needlework ; fond of entertaining.
Vice-Patroness of Victoria League, Y.W.C.A., and Mothercraft
Society, Canberra. Member of Board of C. of E. Girls’ School.
Canberra.
WHITE, Elizabeth (Mrs. H. L. White), Red Hill, Canberra ;
b. Dec. 16th, 1907, in Melbourne ; ed. Presbyterian Ladies’
College, Melbourne ; dau. of Richard Wilson ; m. Harold L.
White, librarian, son of Mr. and Mrs. James White, Canterbury,
Melbourne ; he has been Assistant Librarian, Commonwealth
National Library, since 1928 ; visited Europe and America,
1939, at invitation of Carnegie Corporation of New York .
Mother of David Ogilvie White (b. 1931), Judith Ogilvie White
(b. 1933), Christopher John Ogilvie White (b. 1935), and Kather-
ine Ogilvie White (b. 1937). Interested in literature, music, educa-
tion (particularly in nursery school development in Australia),
parent education, the need for leisure for mothers of young
children, and the responsibility of the community to fill that
need ; fond of dancing, swimming, walking with her husband,
and watching people ; but most of all likes to be quiet in a lovely
garden. Member of : Victoria League, and Y.W.C.A.
WHITE, Ethel (Lady), Woodnaggerak, Middle Creek, Victoria ;
b. Melbourne; ed. Faireleight, Alma Road, St. Kilda, Melbourne,
and private tuition ; dau. of Walter Henry Davidson (gentle-
man), Coliban Park, Elphinstone, Victoria ; m. Major-General
Sir Brudenell White, K.C.8., K.C.M.G., K.C.V.0., D. 5.0., etc.,
soldier, son of Mr. and Mrs. John Warren White, Brisbane,
Queensland. Mother of Margaret Clamina Brudenell (b. 1907),
James Edward Brudenell (b. 1910), Patrick Fitzmaurice Brudenell
(b. 1914), and Rosemary Joan Brudenell. Her elder daughter
was m. in Dec., 1934, to Mr. Theodore George Beggs, of St.
Marnocks, Beaufort, Victoria ; he died Dec., 1936, leaving two
children, a girl and boy. Elder son m. June, 1939, to Miss Mary


Jeanette Anderson, of Hobart, Tasmania. Lady White is
interested in literature, art, politics ; fond of gardening, needle-
work, riding, motoring, theatres. Member of : Alexandra Club,
Melbourne, Country Women's Association, Victoria, and A.W.N.
League, Victoria. By His Majesty the late King George V. she
was given the Coronation Medal and Silver Jubilee Medal, to be
worn in memory of Their Majesties' Coronation and Silver
Jubilee. Religion : Protestant. Politics : Liberal.
WIECK, Nellie (Mrs. G. F. G. Wieck), 1, Regent Street, Mt.
Lawley, Western Australia ; b. Sale, Cheshire, England ; ed.
Brisbane, Queensland ; dau. of Robert Steele Gannon (deceased)
and Mrs. E. Gannon (deceased) ; m. Lt. Col. G. F. G. Wieck,
D. 5.0., 0.8. E., Officer, Australian Permanent Military Forces,
son of Mr. G. J. H. Wieck (deceased) and Mrs. M. Wieck, Bris-
bane, Queensland ; he served in South African War, 1899/01,
and Great War, 1915/19 (Gallipoli, Egypt, Belgium, and France)
awarded D. 5.0., and mentioned four times in despatches ; four
years on staff at R.M.C., Duntroon ; for past fifteen years senior
administrative staff officer, sth Military District (Western
Australia) ; acted as State Marshal for Royal Visits in 1927 and
1934. Mother of Frederick Steele Wieck (b. Oct. 19th, 1908),
Muriel Wieck (b. Nov. 9th, 1910), Stanley Wieck (b. Jan. 24th,
1914), and Marjorie Catherine Wieck (b. Sept. 6th, 1920).
Muriel is a good pianist and elocutionist, and a sound art critic.
Marjorie is an officer of the Commonwealth Bank, and is deeply
interested in banking practice. Both are active members of the
Repertory Society, and both belong to the V.A.D. organization.
Mrs. Wieck is a Red Cross worker, and other interests are music
and art ; plays croquet and auction bridge ; fond of motoring,
riding, travelling. Member of : Mt. Lawley Croquet Club.
Religion': Church of England. Politics : Nationalist.
WILLIAMS, Constance Laura Akeroyd (Mrs. F. E. Williams),
Port Moresby, Papua ; b. Adelaide, South Australia ; ed. Sutton
High School, and Crofton House, Vancouver ; dau. of George
James Denness ; m. F. E. Williams, Government Anthropologist,
Papua, son of Mr. and Mrs. David Williams, of Adelaide ; he
was Rhodes Scholar of Adelaide University, 1915 ; War Service,
France; and Persia with Dunsterforce. Mother of Francis
John Denness Williams (b. Dec. Bth, 1927), who was ed. at
Worcester College for the Blind, Worcester, England. Mrs.
Williams is interested in literature, music, education ; plays golf
and bridge; fond of entertaining, travelling, the theatre.
Member of : Overseas Club, London, and Port Moresby Golf Club.
Has travelled a great deal, having been many times round the
world ; the Pacific ocean she has crossed a dozen times. Some-
times accompanies her husband on " bush " expeditions, and
is his secretary. Religion : Anglican. Politics : Liberal.
WILLIAMS, Phyllis Marion (Mrs. G. K. Williams), 380, The
Terrace, Port Pirie, South Australia ; b. Sept. 4th, 1900, in
Port Pirie; ed. Port Pirie ; dau. of Roland Bensley ; m. Dr.


G. K. Williams, metallurgist (Doctor of Engineering), son of Mr.
and Mrs. W. Williams ; received Distinguished Degree of Doctor
of Engineering at the Melbourne University (1934). Mother of
Clifford Douglas Williams (b. Dec. 3rd, 1928), and David Rex
Williams (b. June 21st, 1937). Interested in charity and
education ; plays golf, tennis, bridge ; fond of motoring and
theatre-going. Member of : Mothers and Babies' Health
Association, and Voluntary Service Detachment. Religion :
Church of England. Politics : Liberal.
WILSON, Dora Lynnell (Miss), 437, Glenferrie Road, Hawthorn,
Victoria; b. Newcastle-on-Tyne, England ; ed. Methodist
Ladies' College, Kew, Melbourne, Victoria; dau. of James
Wilson. Interested in art; fond of gardening, motoring,
travelling, theatre-going. Member of : Australian Academy,
Lyceum Club, Victorian Artists’ Society, Women Painters’
Society, and Independent Group. Has pictures in all the
Galleries in Australia—Brisbane, Sydney, N.S. Wales, Melbourne,
Victoria, Adelaide, S.A., Perth, W.A., Castlemaine and Bendigo,
Victoria, and has had one-man Exhibitions in all these states ;
also at the Beaux Arts Gallery in London, and exhibits at the
R. 0.1., London and Paris Salon. Paints in oils and pastels—
portraits, cities, still-life. Religion : Presbyterian. Her politics
consist of that which is for the general good of the country.
WILSON, Elizabeth Hornabrook (Mrs. K. C. Wilson), 79,
Tusmore Avenue, Tusmore, South Australia ; b. Jan. 25th, 1907,
in Adelaide, South Australia ; ed. Creveen Private School, North
Adelaide ; dau. of Sir Lavington Bonython, and grand-daughter
of Sir Langdon Bonython and the late Sir John Bray ; m. Keith
Cameron Wilson, solicitor, son of the late A. T. K. Wilson and
Mrs. Wilson, of St. Peter’s, S.A. ; he is a senator ; elected to
Commonwealth Parliament, Nov., 1937 ; one of the founders of
Young Liberal League, and Chairman of Committees, 1929-38.
Mother of lan Bonython Cameron Wilson (b. May 2nd, 1932),
Elizabeth Cameron Wilson (b. Jan. 23rd, 1934), and Andrew
Bray Cameron Wilson (b. June 3rd, 1936). Interested in charity,
politics, education ; plays tennis ; fond of entertaining, motoring,
travelling. Member of : Queen Adelaide Club. President of
Tusmore Women’s Branch of Liberal and Country League.
President of Adelaide Branch of the Young Liberal League.
President of Clayton Free Kindergarten. Member of Executive
Committee of the Victoria League in South Australia. Hon.
Secretary of Young Contingent of the Victoria League in South
Australia. Member of Executive Committee of St. Mary’s
Mission of Hope (children’s home). Member of the Publicity
Committee of the V.S.D. section of Red Cross Society. Officer
in charge of the Voluntary Service Detachment 17b. Religion :
Church of England. Politics : Liberal and Country Party.
WISHART, Jessie Helena (Mrs. J. W. Wishart), 11, Washington
Street, Toorak, 5.E.2, Melbourne, Victoria ; b. Victoria ; ed.
various schools in Victoria and Western Australia ; dau. of


James Couston ; m. J. W. Wishart, naval officer, son of John
Wishart ; he joined Royal Australian Navy, 1915, on completion
of engineering course at South Australian School of Mines.
Mother of Mary Helen Wishart (b. 1920), and John Alec Wishart
(b. 1922). Mary is studying architecture at Sydney University.
John is at school at Cranbrook School, Sydney, N.S. Wales.
Interested in literature and child welfare ; plays bridge ; fond
of motoring, travelling, riding, theatre-going, reading. Has
trained as a nurse at Adelaide Hospital; qualified and a charge
nurse at Adelaide Hospital, 1918. Holds Royal British Nursing
Association and Australian Trained Nursing Association Certifi-
cates. Joined military as nursing sister, 1918 ; resigned to
marry, 1919. Religion : Protestant. Politics : Democratic.
WOMERSLEY, Alice Spencer (Mrs. H. Womersley), 43,
Carlisle Road, Westbourne Park, Adelaide, South Australia ;
b. Burnley, Lancs., England ; ed. Burnley High School and
Teachers' Training College ; dau. of Alfred Spencer, of Burnley ;
m. Herbert Womersley, F.R.E.S., A.L.S., Entomologist at South
Australian Museum, son of Mr. and Mrs. F. Womersley, of
Warrington, Lancs., England ; he joined C.S.I.R. in 1929, to
investigate Lucerne Flea problem ; has published numerous
papers on Apterygota Insecta of England, S. Africa, Australia,
New Zealand and Antarctica ; also on the Acarina. Mother of
John Spencer Womersley (b. June 16th, 1920), and Hugh Bryan
Spencer Womersley (b. Nov. 19th, 1922), who are both studying
for scientific careers. Interested in education, literature,
nature study, radio, and helping people to help themselves ;
fond of entertaining (especially travellers and small children),
talking, walking. Member of : Executive of League of Women
Voters (formerly Women’s Non-Party Association of South
Australia). Until leaving England in 1930 was “ Rosa North ”
of the Bristol Times and Mirror’s Woman's Page. Also “ Uncle
Jack ” of the Children’s Corner and Cheerio Club. In Australia
has engaged in Nursery School Work, Broadcasting and Building
Society publicity. Secretary of and Lecturer in Child-craft
Course at The Home School, Adelaide. Religion : Practical
Christianity. Politics : Independent.
WOOD, Joan (Mrs. J. G. Wood), 9, Sprod Avenue, Toorak
Gardens, South Australia ; b. Oct. 27th, 1912, in New Brighton,
Cheshire, England ; ed. Presbyterian Girls’ School, Adelaide ;
dau. of Harry Hazel, Liverpool, Lancs. ; m. Joseph Garnett
Wood, Professor of Botany, University of Adelaide, son of John
Wood and Susannah Wood (nee Garnett) ; he was ed. Gonville
and Caius College, Cambridge ; Lecturer in Botany, Adelaide,
1927 ; Professor, 1935. Mother of Rosemary Anne Wood (b.
March 9th, 1934). Interested in literature ; fond of ski-ing and
entertaining. Politics : Socialist.
WOOLLARD, Mary Wilson (Mrs. H. H. Woollard), Tudor
House, Lanchester Road, Highgate, London, N. 6 ; b. Bowral
Rectory, N.S. Wales ; ed. Combe Down, Somerset, and Church


of England Girls’ Grammar School, Melbourne; dau. of Rev.
Stanley Howard, M.A. (Cantab.) and Melbourne University;
m. Prof. H. H. Woollard, M.D., D.Sc., F.R.S. (d. Jan. 18th,
1939), Director of Institute of Anatomy and Embryology,
University College, London ; he topped list of medical final,
Melbourne, 1911 ; Junior Hon., Melbourne Hospital ; Lieut.
Col. and Croix de Guerre ; Rockefeller Fellow, 1921 ; Prof, at
Adelaide then St. Bartholomew’s ; F.R.S., 1938. Mother of
Herbert Charles Vaughan Woollard (b. June 22nd, 1917), and
Christopher Stanley Woollard (b. March 25th, 1924). Interested
in literature, music, politics, religion, education ; plays chess and
lexicon ; fond of walking, swimming, travelling, entertaining,
theatres. Member of : University Women’s Club, London, and
National Council of Women. Graduate and diploma of educa-
tion, University of Melbourne. Religion : Church of England.
Politics : Liberal.
WOOLNOUGH, Margaret lima (Mrs. W. G. Woolnough), C/o
Dept, of the Interior, Canberra, and 8, Park Avenue, Gordon,
Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. June 18th, in Brisbane, Queensland ;
ed. Girls’ High School, Sydney, and Faireleight, E. St. Kilda,
Melbourne ; dau. of Rev. and Mrs. William Wilson ; m. Dr.
W. G. Woolnough, D.Sc., F.G.S., Geological Adviser to Common-
wealth Government, son of Rev. and Mrs. James Woolnough ;
he was Sir Edgeworth David’s chief assistant at Sydney Univer-
sity, then first Professor of Geology in Western Australia
University ; he has led several expeditions into Central Australia.
Mother of Walter Lyell Woolnough (b. March 10th, 1906),
Edgeworth David Woolnough (b. Feb. 7th, 1904, d. Sept. 15th,
1923), and lima Marion Woolnough (b. Feb. 25th, 1912). Lyell
holds degree of 8.E., Sydney University, and is married, with
one daughter. lima married Guy Bergersen, and has one son.
Mrs. Woolnough is interested in literature, music, politics,
Victoria League, Y.W.C.A., Canberra, and photography ; plays
bridge ; fond of motoring and travelling ; has been twice to
Europe, across Australia to Darwin, and right round
Australia. Has had various travel articles and photos published
in daily papers. Member of : Victoria League, Canberra, and
National Council of Women. In 1935 she travelled with her
husband to Alice Springs by train ; from thence, 1,000 miles to
Darwin by motor-truck, and back by sea to Sydney. In 1936
spent fortnight on Arlbunga gold-fields in Central Australia, and
had articles published on trips. Travelled by sea, 1939, round
Australia, stopping at Perth, Broome a fortnight, and Darwin.
Has travelled by air. Religion : Protestant. Politics :
Nationalist.
WYATT, Gladys Marion (Miss), 17 a, Thackeray Street,
Hamilton ; b. Christchurch; ed. Palmerston, N., and Wan-
ganue Girls’ College ; dau. of M. M. Wyatt. Interested in
education, Girl Guides, gardening ; plays contract bridge ; fond
of entertainment of intimate friends, and theatre-going. Member


of : Warkate Lyceum Club, and Hamilton Horticultural Society.
Religion : Church of England. Politics : National.
WYNES, Elma Constance (Mrs. W. A. Wynes), Barkly Crescent,
Forrest, Canberra ; b. Malvern, South Australia ; ed. Yooth-
amuna Church of England Girls’ School, Glenelg, South Australia ;
dau. of Hugh Watt Sutherland, late of Adelaide ; m. William
Anstey Wynes, LL.D., lawyer, now in Dept, of External Affairs,
Commonwealth of Australia, son of Mrs. and the late W. J.
Wynes ; he was admitted to South Australian Bar in 1929 ;
holds degree of LL.D. (Adel.) and Bonython Prize for legal
research, University of Adelaide, 1933 (aged 25 years) ; examiner
in law, 1934-38, and lecturer in legal subjects, University of
Adelaide, 1937 ; published “ Legislative and Executive Powers
in Australia,” 1935 ; gave up practice of law to enter Department
of External Affairs in May, 1938 ; lecturer, Canberra University
College, 1939. Mrs. Wynes is interested in literature, music,
art ; plays golf and bridge ; fond of motoring, riding, theatre-
going, gardening. Religion : Anglican. Politics : Conservative.
WYNNE, Nancye Meredith (Miss), 22, Holroyd Avenue, East
St. Kilda, Victoria ; b. Dec. 2nd, 1916, in Kew, Victoria ; ed.
Lauriston Girls’ School, Armadale, Melbourne, Victoria ; dau.
of Herbert Meredith Wynne and Gladys Wynne (deceased).
Interested in art and music ; plays tennis, golf, hockey, baseball,
and is fond of all card games ; fond of motoring, yachting, riding,
theatre-going. Member of : Lawn Tennis Association of Victoria.
Religion : Protestant.
WYNTER, Doris Elma (Mrs. H. Wynter), “ Tredowan,”
56, Cremorne Road, Cremorne, Sydney, N.S. Wales ; b. Dec.
20th, 1892, in Enfield, N.S. Wales ; ed. Leighwood Ladies’
College, Burwood, N.S. Wales ; dau. of the late J. T. Lawler ;
m. Henry Wynter, property investor, son of P. E. Wynter and
R. M. Wynter (both deceased) ; he served his country through-
out the last great war with distinction whilst a member of
Australian Imperial Forces, and is again with the military forces.
Mrs. Wynter takes a great interest in charity and religion, and
is also interested, to a like degree, in all forms of art, literature,
and music ; loves her home, and is fond of entertaining in it ;
devotes any available spare time to doing war work, Red Cross
and canteen work ; fond of motoring (drives her own car),
travelling, theatre-going. Religion : Church of England.
Politics : National.
YALDWYN, Frances Maud Alice (Mrs. L. V. Yaldwyn),
“ Gwandalau,” 12, Labassa Grove, Caulfield, Victoria ; b.
Stawell, Victoria ; ed. Queen’s College, St. Kilda, Victoria;
dau. of Robert Silby and Alice Victoria Bradley ; m. Lionel
Valentine Yaldwyn (d. Jan. 6th, 1922), bank official, son of
William B. and Henrietta M. Yaldwyn ; he was in the Union
Bank in Coolgardie, Western Australia, in the early days of the
gold-rush ; he volunteered for active service in the Great War,
but was not accepted, as he had heart trouble ; so he did home


service work in Australia. Interested in charity, politics, art,
etc. ; plays card games—bridge, for preference ; fond of enter-
taining, motoring, theatre-going. The Yaldwyns are a very
ancient family, and were seated at “ Blackdown,” in Sussex,
England, as far back as 1330. Oliver Cromwell was intimately
acquainted with the family, and often visited at “ Blackdown.”
In Lurgashall Church, are the vaults where many of the Yald-
wyns are buried—and also many brass tablets to their memory.
One of the family is believed to have married a daughter of
Edward 111. Religion : Protestant. Politics : United Australia
Party.
Made and printed in Great Britain for The Mitre Press, by Stanley L. Hunt,
The Printeries, Rushden, Northamptonshire,
122
Principal Women of the Empire :








