

* / t■/S? &c O




PRISON SKETCHES:
ONE WHO WAS THERE.
BEING
rrf §onu 0f €amdim Hub tol,
AND
Clothing, JM», &c-
PREVIOUSLY PUBLISHED IN SHORT ARTICLES BY THE LAUNCESTON
“ telegraph,” and revised.
SECOND EDITION.
THE FRONT YARD AND ITS BUILDINGS.
THE GENERAL EXERCISE YARD AND ITS BUILDINGS.
THE DAY BOOM.
THE CONDEMNED YARD AND PLACE OF EXECUTION.
TASMANIA:
PRINTED AT “THE MERCURY” STEAM PRESS, HOBART.




ADYE DOUGLAS, ESQ., M.H.A.,
LAUNCESTON, TASMANIA,
WHOSE ADVOCACY FOR THE REFORM OF GAOLS AND GAOL DISCIPLINE
RESULTED IN THE
APPOINTMENT OF A ROYAL COMMISSION
TO INQUIRE INTO THE SUBJECT,
THESE “SKETCHES.” ARE (WITH PERMISSION)
MOST RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED.


TO THE READER.
In presenting these Sketches to the public, I have been
induced by the hope that their perusal may tend to amelio-
rate the system in which the penal establishments of this
island has, for a lengthened period, existed ; that a proper
classification, in the future, may be adopted ; that children
of tender years may be provided with a better reforma-
tory place of correction than a common gaol; and that
cleanliness, which should be a distinguishing character-
istic of criminal abodes, be one of the main objects of
consideration.
And I beg here to tender my sincere thanks to both
the editor and proprietor of the Launceston Telegraph
for their kind considerateness in publishing, from time
to time, “ Prison Sketches.”
l one who was there.
Hobart, Bth February, 1883.


The Front Yard and its Buildings.
I LLOW me permission to escort my readers (in ima-
A gination) to the precincts of the Gaol, and try to
point out those different parts thereof which may
J afford either curiosity, interest, or consideration, as
the case may be.
We have now been admitted—the “ open sesame ”
spoken—by the gatekeeper, a tall specimen of a son of
Erin’s isle, and find we are standing between two stone
buildings of octagonal form. The one on the left is oc-
cupied by the gatekeeper as his lodge, the storekeeper as
his office, and the mess-room officer as his private apart-
ments. The sister building, on the right, is used as the
Gaoler’s office, a clerk’s office, and the apartments of
the receiving officer. Still further on, to the right, is
that portion of the prison called the Gaol, in contradis-
tinction to the buildings on the other side, which are
denominated the Male House of Correction, and are of
more recent creation. Immediately in front of us stands
the Gaoler’s quarters —a substantial two-storied stone
building with a wall running round it, enclosing a neat
garden stocked with flowers, cypress, and other orna-
mental trees ; while climbing up the left side of the
house is the edible passion-flower, and on the right is a
creeping variety of the rose order. And here, in keeping
with the place and its associations, is another house de-
voted to the detention of prisoners, called by some an


aviary, where little birds, dressed in their garbs of yellow
and yellow and black, sing, repiningly, for the loss of the
bright sunshine and sweet flowers that they see from
behind their bars. In front of the Gaoler’s house is
placed the belfry, containing two bells, which are used
to arouse the occupants to prepare for the coming toil of
the day, or to note the fleeting hours of the passing
night, marking, as on ship-board, the half and full hours,
which is responded to by the warders’ whistles as they
record the quarters. A passage on the right of the
Gaoler’s house conducts us to the several places set apart
for the blacksmiths, tinsmiths, and carpenters’ work-
shops, etc., and called the Old Stone Shed. Another
space, between the Gaoler’s house (to the left) and the
House of Correction for Males, is devoted to the use of
women prisoners, where they perform washing for the
General Hospital and other places in the city, and sew-
ing, the latter designated the needle-room. Having never
been a favoured individual I cannot introduce you to this
sanctum, so must leave that task to those who have been
more fortunate. The yard itself is formed of asphalte,
which, having been well done, answers all the purposes
of flagging, and always looks clean and neat,
A large gate, on the left of this yard, being opened by
an old and venerable-looking prisoner (who acts as gate-
keeper), admits us to another yard—the general exercise
yard of the House of Correction, which is about 180 feet
by 40 feet; and here is seen, mixed up in indiscriminate
companionship, the reprieved murderers with the first
offenders for drunkenness —the unnatural-crime offender
with the man or youth who is imprisoned for the smallest
crimes punishable. On the left of this yard is the dis-
pensary, the justice room (so designated by an engraved
semi-circular brass plate on the door), and clerk’s office ;
while the top story is set apart for the dining and sleep-
ing accommodation of the prison constabulary. Next
comes a flour store, the general cook-house (where very
large quantities of tea can be prepared with next to no
material at all), scullery, coach-house, and bake-house,
where all bread used by the prison, General Hospital,
Benevolent, and other charitable institutions is made,
and which is of good quality, the staff consisting of a
master baker, his assistant, and three prisoners. At the


back of these buildings is a narrow space dividing them
from the outer wall, where a fire-engine and other ap-
pliances are kept, but they are extremely rusty, and I
should say extremely ineffective. An armed_ warder is
always stationed in this passage when the prisoners are
“at home.” At the extreme end of the yard an effort
has been made by an official, who has charge of it, to
relieve the unsightliness of a rough wooden hoarding
or screen, which hides a common closet, by forming a
miniature garden, in which he manages with some care
to cultivate a few flowers and train a creeper of peri-
winkle.
The General Exercise Yard and its Buildings.
Having thus far seen the buildings on the left side of
the yard, we now turn our attention to those on the right,
beginning with the Gaoler’s store, so called because he
presides over anything issued from it, which consists,
principally, of prison clothing, and material for the use
of the tailors and shoemakers’ shops. The ground floor
of this portion of the building is the general provision
store of the establishment, where meat, very often hardly
fit for the canine animal much less for the biped one, is
cut up for food. Some argument being held one day
while I glanced in, relative to its quality, I was much
disgusted by seeing the Gaoler, who was present, descant-
ing on its good quality, and pointing out its several ad-
vantages by drawing his walking-stick over some pieces
and poking others with its end. I have no doubt he
considered his stick clean enough for such a purpose ; I
didn’t. Another amusing incident took place one day
while I was present. A prisoner engaged in the store
being detected purloining some sugar was about to be
searched, when, putting his hand into his pocket and
producing a large handful, threw it on to the lid of the
sugar-box, exclaiming, “ There’s your ****** sugar, take
it.” Strange to say, although he was brought before the
Gaoler, he was not punished ; while an old and feeble
man, for having a small piece of tobacco found on him,
received an addition to his sentence. Well, the ways of
the Gaol are wonderful! The next place which demands
attention (I use the word advisedly) is the mess-room.
This room is capable of seating 150 men, but not more
b 2


than 100 on an average dine here. Tables are placed on
each side of the room, 10 men to each table. At one
time it formed part of the place where the treadmill was
situated, and, until the last year or two, was in a very
dilapidated condition, owing to its non-effectiveness in
carrying off the rain-water —it is now, at least, weather
tight. Two notices are hung on the walls of this room :
one in reference to the conduct to be observed in it ;
the other relative to petitions of prisoners, in which it is
stated the Sheriff has absolute power to allow prisoners
to pefitkMV or not, no matter under what circumstances
the prisoner may wish to do so. In this case it will be
seen that the Sheriff has more power than the Executive.
The men have to ask his permission to allow them to peti-
tion ! The allowance of food provided is ilb. bread and
one pint of thin gruel for breakfast; |lb. bread, fib.
meat with bone (the bone predominating), |lb. potatoes,
and soup (the water the meat is boiled or steamed in),
and a small quantity of pearl barley and vegetables, for
dinner. The supper is the same ration as for breakfast.
On Christmas Day and Queen’s Birthday they are re-
galed with plum pudding, and receive a double allow-
ance of the usual ration. After the completion of one
year’s sentence prisoners are allowed one pint of tea for
supper in lieu of gruel. Independent of this some are
allowed tea in the morning—these are what are termed
“ billeted men,” “ public readers,” etc. The tea ration is
only allowed to prisoners who have completed the first
year of their sentences, and for the first month of their
confinement they only receive a half-ration dinner. After
dinner is over and they have answered to their names,
read by the muster-master, they adjourn to the yard to
enjoy a smoke, a quarter ounce of tobacco daily being
allowed them. At about five minutes to 1 they are
formed into their several gangs, answer theii names,
touching their caps at the same time, are searched, and
then marched off to their respective duties. When they
return in the evening they wash, have a short time to
indulge in a smoke, assemble to hear prayers, and then
proceed to their tea. Prayers are likewise read to them
in the morning, sometimes befoi’e, sometimes after they
have breakfast. On Sundays the meat and potatoes are
baked, but they get no soup. While I was there the


rations were frequently placed on the table short in
weight and bad in quality. The utensils, too, were often
found fault with for their general uncleanliness. In some
cases the plates having been made from old kerosene
tins, the unfortunate possessors of them had the taste as
well as the smell of kerosene with their food. The knives
and forks have the broad arrow deeply cut in them, and
these intersections were always clogged up with dirt, so
much so that you could pick it out with the points of
your fork ; while the spoons often made their appearance
so rusty that I have seen them soil the tablecloths when
wiped on them, and the pannicans from which they took
their tea so greasy as to slip in the hands holding them.
One prisoner had the impudence to request an Acting
Gaoler to allow him permission to clean his own pannican
and plate, on account of the dirty state he generally
found them in, but as he was the only one preferring
this complaint his request was not complied with. I
believe the gentleman did what he could to remedy this
state of things, but when he left (on the return of the
Gaoler) they relapsed into their former uncleanliness.
Many would, no doubt, have made similar complaints,
but for the fear of such militating against them —the
desire of avoiding the title of “a marked man,” and thus
becoming, for any simple breach of prison regulation,
liable to have their sentences extended when they were
permitted to sue for mercy. Again, I have known many
of the men to go to work without tasting meat for 24
hours, because they objected to weight, etc.; they got it
in the evening with their tea, but perfectly cold and
insipid. After tea (grace having been said before and after
each meal by an old and one-armed veteran prisoner), the
men proceed to their several sleeping places—some in
single cells, others in what are termed dormitories, and
distinguished by 81, 82, and the exempt ward. These
dormitories are divided by partitions and contain 24 beds,
B 2 being at the back of 81, while a staircase conducts
to the exempt ward. In the dormitories, at night, officers
and constables are stationed, whose duty it is to keep
order, the former recording the quarter hours as they
pass by pulling a wire, which knocks down the pegs of
a peg-clock, which is locked up in the mess-room, so that
it cannot be tampered with. Shortly after the men have


been seated, the muster-master (and Deputy Gaoler, ac-
companied by a night-officer, and sometimes the Gaoler)
appears, and calls the roll, each man answering’ by stating
his number, and with his hands resting on his knees.
This being over, a whistle is blown, and they then pro-
ceed to make down their beds, and one of them, acting
as “ reader,” perched on a kind of step-ladder, then com-
mences his task, which generally lasts from an hour and
a half to two hours, receiving, by way of indulgence, a
pint of so-called tea, which, often being cold and taste-
less, is considered sufficient reward for the time he de-
votes towards the preservation of good order, and the
instruction and amusement, they may derive from him.
This is quite voluntary on the prisoner’s part, and no
doubt prevents many being brought up for breaches of
prison regulations, which would arise from contradictions
relative to reminiscences of bygone penal associations,
or x’ecitals of former villainy, if their attention were not
taken up with the story or work under relation. I have
known a man sentenced to 48 hours’ addition for waking
a man who was such a continuous snorer as to be a per-
fect nuisance, although he had requested a “ shift ” to
another sleeping place ; and for three months he was
deprived of his usual allowance of tobacco (i ounce daily)
and ration of tea, in fact, never received it again ; and
others have been treated for some slight offence in the
same way. At a quarter-past 8 the_ silence bell is rung,
the gas turned down, and all the prisoners are supposed
to be in bed, except in the case of one “ privileged one,”
who was allowed to amuse himself or work in the clerk’s
office till past 9 o’clock, to be absent from all musters,
and dine in the constables’ quarters. Of course he had
made himself very useful, and received many indulgences
in respect to food, clothing, etc., for he had undertaken
the duties of assistant clerk, bookbinder, organist, dis-
penser, printer, etc.
At the back of the mess-room, on the same floor of the
B 2 dormitory, is the printing and bookbinding depart-
ment, where official forms are done as assistance to the
Government Printing Office ; but why the citizens should
be saddled with the expense of a second printing office
when they have to support the large building devoted to
that purpose, and which is supposed to possess every re-


quirement for doing work, I cannot say ; or how the
money for the purchase of type, etc., was granted; or
why the selection and supervision of the same was en-
trusted solely to one who was totally non-practical and
incompetent. Two staircases lead from B 2 : one takes
you to the tailors and shoemakers’ workshops and oakum-
picking room ; the other to the hospital ward, which is on
the same floor as the miscalled exempt w T ard, consider-
ing no exempts occupy it. In the former are to be seen
at work several prisoner tailors, presided over by a free
master-tailor, their work consisting of making clothes for
gaol officials and various benevolent institutions ; and the
same may be said of the shoemakers as regards boots,,
etc.; while others are engaged in picking oakum or mend-
ing shirts, blankets, etc. The second staircase leads you
through the exempt ward to the hospital ward, where the
sick are treated, in which the dispenser also slept in- his
sheeted bed. Touching the bedding, I may remark that
it consists of a sort of flock and a kind of flax bed, two
single blankets and a rug in summer, and in winter an
extra rug, called a “ parramatta.” Most of the beds are
provided with pillows, but both they and the blankets,
remain long unacquainted with water, and have often
been complained of as being inhabited by things not
human, nor agreeable to feel or see. It is wonderful how
clean an appearance a little whitewash and a wet rag
can impart to superficial observers. A lavatory at the
back of 82, in an open yard, is the place where prisoners
wash themselves. It contains 36 troughs, and the men
are let out in the morning, in given numbers at a time •
when these have washed they retire to the day-room, and
others take their places.
We now proceed to the cells, which can be approached
by three w r ays—one leading from the genei’al exercise
yard, one from 82, and one from the exempt ward. Those
on the ground floor are generally used as solitary cells,,
for the confinement of those found guilty of breaches of
prison discipline, the blind, and aged, and are a disgrace
to the colony—nearly totally dark. When a prisoner is
placed in one of these for solitary punishment he is pro-
vided with one blanket and a rug only, his diet being
lib. of bread, and water, daily. They are about feet by
2 feet 2 inches, the only utensil allowed him being a dis-


reputable pan. During the day his bedding is taken
-away. He is confined here for three days, after which
he is allowed an hour’s exercise every day. He is not
provided with either Bible or prayer-book (unless he ask
for them) ; in fact, the place is so dark he could not
read in the cell, but might manage so to do by putting
the book outside the grating of his door and holding it
in that position. The confined air in these cells is very
bad, and they are totally unfit for human beings to occupy.
Two rows of cells above these, and of the same dimen-
sions, are used for confining other prisoners who have
rendered themselves liable to separate treatment. These
are provided with the usual bedding, and they chiefly
use the cells at night. They may be described as a block
•of cells in three stories, 11 cells in each story. After
breakfast the prisoners are mustered in the yard, their
names called, searched, and then inarched off in separate
gangs to work, some outside the gaol, others to their
various occupations within ; while one, forming a gang
in himself, may be seen, unescorted, proceeding along the
street to perform his task as a servant to the Sheriff;
he remains away all day, returning in the evening to
sleep in the gaol.
The Day Room.
This so-called room, which is in size about 81 feet by
21 feet, was originally one of the prison yards, until a
philanthropic gentleman named Smith, commiserating
the exposure to inclement weather the prisoners were
subjected therein, agitated for the providing better ac-
commodation to suffering humanity. This was eventu-
ally done, and a large stove (the gift of the above-named
gentleman) erected. What this place might have been
before these improvements took place I am not in a
position to say, but at present it is in a most Avretched
condition. It is approached through a short but ex-
tremely dark, narrow passage, leading from the general
exercise yard, on the right hand of which is situated
6 dark cells. The room is floored with a kind of asphalte,
and is as hard as stone. Along one side and end is a
long continuous form or seat. A table, at which blind
and infirm prisoners take their meals, stands opposite
the entrance. Three parts up the room is placed the


stove, before mentioned, surrounded by an iron fence,
which, if painted black, would put you in mind of those
used in cemeteries. At the top end is a common closet.
The room is lighted by 14 skylights placed in a skillion
roof. These windows a few years ago were destitute of
bars, but, owing to the escape of three or four prisoners
by one of them, they are now adorned with three bars
to each window. At the lower, or entrance end, is an
elevated stage where a constable used to be stationed,
but lately this has been disused, ft was from the window
over this stage the men escaped. A constable now does
duty in the room itself. This is the place devoted to
boot-cleaning operations after the men have bathed (?).
This process is performed by means of a quantity of coal
slack, contained in a bucket made from a kerosene tin,
the left-off and worn-out clothing of prisoners being used
as brushes. Two notices are posted on the walls, one of
which intimates to the prisoners to be careful to make
themselves clean for inspection (?) by the Gaoler on Sun-
day morning muster, or else be confined to cells for the
remainder of that day. While on this subject I may
remark a little incident which took place one Saturday
<cleaning-up day). A quantity of rags (disused prison
clothing) were brought into the room to be used as
brushes. In order to provide themselves with a piece
each, several of them commenced tearing them asunder,
and, after having done so, discovered the rags to be
covered with vermin. I believe the affair was reported
and the rags shown to some of the officials, but no notice
was taken of the matter. So much for cleanliness ! The
means for conveying the rain-water from the roof being
anything but effective, it rushes down the walls in some
places, and in others forms miniature cascades, the conse-
quences being that the floor is partly inundated, while in
others the storm-water is carried off by several small sur-
face drains. The stove-piping, again, being non-effective
(the lower joints having to be stuffed with rags), dis-
charges large quantities of smoke so dense and stifling
as to be almost insupportable, and the prisoners have
often been compelled to seek relief in the exercise yard
in the rain. What with the water splashing down the
walls, streams running across the flooring, the stifling
feeling from smoke, and the babble of tongues, one could


not fail to recognise in it a miniature pandemonium-
well, such is a sketch of a portion of a prison and its
accommodation.
The Gao! and its Buildings.
We will now turn our attention to those buildings
called the Gaol, by passing through the front yard and
a large iron gate dividing it from those we have already
seen. All these buildings are situated on the left as you
enter, the first being the Deputy Gaoler’s office, and the
next that portion devoted to female prisoners ; but not
having been a Gaol barber, and for reasons before given,
must be excused for knowing anything about them, but
can refer my readers to an article relative to the Gaol,
which appeared in The Mercury some months back, de-
scribing their quarters as dirtier than the men’s. At the
rear of the female prisoners’ cells are the carpenters,
blacksmiths, tinsmiths’ and other workshops, where any-
thing can be supplied to Gaol officials, from the Sheriff
downward, in the shape of toy-wheelbarrows, rifle-cases,
carts, buggies, or any other thing they may order, either
for their own individual or Government use. Whether
things made there, other than for public works, interfere
with the artisan outside, or which should be encourage-
ment for him to remain in the colony to rear his children
and pay taxes, I leave for others to find out. The next
in rotation is designated as yards Nos. 3,4, and 5, which
are separated from each other by sloping walls having
broken bottles cemented on their tops, the front being
secured by open iron-work fencing. No. 3 yard contains
five cells on the ground floor and five above, approached
by a stone staircase, and the prison school-house, the
adoption of which originated from remarks made by a
prisoner while being tried for forgery. It has not been
built more than four years, and, having been found in-
adequate for its original purpose, is now used as a mess-
room. It was from this yard that a celebrated “ bolter ”
made his last escape. Being employed as a wardsman
lie was permitted to be in this yard constantly, and
noticing that the keys belonging to the doors of the re-
ceiving-room and passage leading thereto were always
placed on a nail in a watch-box opposite, one day, the
gate of the yard being left unlocked, he quietly walked


out of it over to the box, took down the keys, and by
unlocking some of the doors and forcing others made his
way to the street, not, however, without having time_ to
write a letter to the Sheriff, taking kindly leave of him.
He was heard breaking out of the Gaol quite plainly,
but having locked the doors after him, cut oft pursuit
until he reached the outside. He was only captured by
accidentally rushing into the arms of a constable of the
Gaol coming round the corner of the street to his duty.
It may seem strange for prison keys to be ordered to
be hung on a nail in a watch-box in hourly sight of a
prisoner; but as one of the warders was disrated over
the affair, and a stage built for the occupancy of an armed
guard at the rear of where he escaped, I suppose the
authorities were appeased, and the keys placed further
from reach. The occupancy of these cells is held by
those prisoners doing a probationary term therein prior
to being drafted to the House of Correction side, or by
those who by choice prefer remaining there. Nos. 4 and
5 yards are similar to the last (No. 5 containing only
eight cells, top and bottom), with the exception of having
open covered sheds in the centre of them, provided with
tables, where prisoners have their meals,
devoted to the accommodation of those awaiting trial.
Young boys, more fitted for reformatories than gaols,
are kept in a kind of open shed in the day time, close
to the Deputy Gaoler’s office, and under the supervision
of a grey-headed veteran prisoner, who likewise looks
after the mess utensils, the cleanliness of which does
him credit, when compared with those on the House of
Correction side. All the cells have what are called bed-
boards, which can be lifted from their supports, but con-
sidering the immense quantity of dirt and fluff allowed
to accumulate between them and the walls, it is to be
supposed it is not often thought necessary to disturb
them. There are plenty of bugs in these cells, and I
have seen the floors stained with their blood where they
have been killed. Prisoners are provided here with the
same amount of bedding they obtain elsewhere, and on
the doors of their cells, visible to the eye from the rising
ground by the High School, hang tickets recording their
crimes, terms of punishment, age, etc.
At the back of these cells is what is called the model,


where prisoners are placed for the first month of their
confinement, and for that time are only allowed a half-
ration dinner, and kept confined to their cells, excepting
for two hours each day, which are devoted to exercise ;
they are supposed to keep five paces from their com-
panions during their walk, and not to hold communica-
tion with them. Of course there are occasions where this
is, to some, made an exception ; to wit : three men were
tried at the same court a few sessions ago, and sentenced
to two years, eighteen months, and twelve months’ im-
prisonment (the one receiving two years being a second
time an offender for the same description of crime). The
first two were exempted from “model ” punishment and
placed at light labour, while the other, whose crime had
not been deemed by the Judge so bad as to receive as
much punishment as the others, had to do his month’s
“model” —no doubt the gaol authorities differed from
the Judge as to the amount of punishment he should have
received. A passage to the right of these yards conducts
you to the Court-house, which is entered by those for
trial by an underground way to the docks. Still further
on is the entrance to the prison chapel, which is of an
irregular circular shape inside, and capable of seating
about 200, the female portion of the congregation being
separated from the male by a semi-transparent curtain.
In the morning services are conducted by the Gaol Chap-
lain, and the afternoon is devoted to the Roman Catho-
lics. The prisoners are always well-behaved, and the
majority seem to pay all becoming attention to the
services, which are assisted by the aid of a harmonium
and singing choir. The harmonium used to be carried
to and fro on Sunday mornings from the chapel to the
mess-room, for the use of the Wesleyans, but that was
discontinued after two men had received sentences —one
for refusing to carry it on the Sabbath ; the other for
letting the end that he was carrying drop. Services are
likewise held in the mess-room on Sunday afternoons,
several gentlemen, and sometimes ladies, officiating. Still
uncleanliness is prevalent here as elsewhere, for it is
no uncommon thing to see vermin perambulating on
the man’s clothing sitting opposite you. Further along
this passage, after passing a thick, small grated door,
you come to a turning to the left, conducting to the


prisoners’ clothes store, receiving and bath rooms, leaving
on your right two cells which are called refractory cells,,
where prisoners are confined who are particularly noisy
and violent. The first portion of this place is a kind of
store-room for the free clothing of those who have been
convicted. Not the slightest effort is made for their
preservation. When a man takes them off they are in-
discriminately huddled up into a bundle, a ticket is put
on them, and they are thrown on to a rack shelf, Avhere
they remain for years undusted and uncared for. When
a man goes for his clothing he finds only a portion of
them, the best part having provided sustenance for the
moths and silverfish. In some cases clothes and other
property have not been forthcoming at all when wanted,,
and, excepting in one or two instances, where the officer
in charge of them has been called on to make missing
things good, no proper enquiry as to the reason of their
non-production has been gone into. Surely this is a very
lax manner of management, if not unjust—the place is
more fitting for cart-horse clothing than that of human
beings. It seems as if the Gaol authorities’ policy is to
turn men out, as far as they can, disreputable, so that
they may have a better show of coming back, rather than
put them in the Avay of appearing in the most decent
manner they can, so that they may have a chance of pro-
curing Avork. In one case the receiving officer wanted to
shave a man clean that only Avanted a week to become
free, although he had permission from the Gaoler to wear
his beard, and, because the man objected, this official had
him locked up in a solitary cell.* The next room is
where prisoners change their clothes and are bathed (?).
Much cannot be said of the cleanliness of this place, and
I believe one very high in authority is said to have re-
marked on opening a closet, while visiting this room, that
“it contained a quantity of rubbish to breed vermin !”
There are seven baths in this room that are used by the
prisoners, and seven men occupy them alternately. They
are alloAved about seven minutes in the bath, and are
then called out, often before they can dry themselves,
and if they do not happen to be the first batch down,
they haA r e to use cold water. It puts one in mind of
* This gentleman’s services have, since this was written, been dispensed
with.


running a lot of sheep through the soak. They com-
mence to bath about 3 o’clock, and by 5 are all “ run
through.” How is it possible for men working all the
week amongst dirt, such as quarrying, attending stone-
crusher, road-making, and trades, to get a clean wash in
the time ? Why not devote the whole of the Saturday
afternoon to cleansing operations, instead of keeping the
men out at work till 3 o’clock ? There can be no possible
excuse for uncleanliness in a place where there is plenty
of water, and men to use it. The bathing takes place on
a Saturday afternoon, and this is the place where the
men go to obtain fresh clothing, boots, etc., from the re-
ceiving officer, who had an extremely gentlemanly way of
replying to applicants. Prisoner : “ Please, sir, lam
badly in want of boots ” (showing them). Officer : “ Are
you? so am I.” Prisoner : “My trousers are very bad,
sir ; could you give me another pair ?” Officer : “ Well,
I suppose you had not a better pair when you were out-
side?” Of course, if the man is anyway touchy, per-
haps having occupied a better position than the officer at
one time, and answers back, he is liable to be locked
up by that functionary, and the prisoner has no redress.
I have known a man locked up and charged with in-
solence by this officer. The man received three days’
addition, although two constables the officer called to
support his testimony, and who were present in the yard
at the time, denied all knowledge of it; and, although
the man could have proved the charge false by several
witnesses, he was not allowed to call them because they
were prisoners. “What!” said the Gaoler, “prisoners !
you can’t have them as witnesses.” Where, then, is the
prisoner to get them from ? So much for gaol justice.
As far as visiting magistrates attending the prison to
hear complaints of prisoners goes it is a perfect farce.
They come there at intervals, it is true, but they do not
see the men en masse, for three-parts of them are out at
work, and those who are in do not know them from ordi-
nary visitors, never receiving any notice of their coming,
or how to apply to see them. Only once for over a space
of three years have I seen them present when the body
of men were together. No rules or regulations are posted
up, so that the men could read them • and when they are
read out of a Sunday are often read extremely unin-


telligible; one of the rules, stating a man must wash
his feet before putting on a clean shirt, would almost
imply he should put that garment on feet first. In the
other colonies, too, where a prisoner is tried before magis-
trates in gaol, the Press usually attend. A man received
14 days’ solitary confinement and one month’s addition
(besides being confined a close prisoner and placed on
short rations for a week before he was tried), for at-
tempting to send a letter to a friend complaining of
dirty and ragged clothing and blankets, mess utensils,
and other matters, among which was the absence of any
visiting magistrates. These complaints were taken no
notice of, but had there been a representative of the
Press there, there is no doubt they would. The Gaoler
opened the case, by saying he “would have dealt with
the matter himself, but for the letter stating that no
magistrates came to hear complaints, and you know,
gentlemen, that is a lie ” —but what the man stated in
his letter, in this respect, was corroborated by a leader
in The Mercury , which snowed that no notice of magis-
trates visiting the gaol was recorded.
The Condemned Yard and Place of Execution.
Leaving the receiving-room, and continuing to the ex-
treme end of the passage, we come to the doors which
admit us to the condemned yard, having two cells in it
(the condemned cells), where prisoners spend the few
days allowed by law previous to their final exit from this
world. Each cell is provided with a fireplace, table, etc.,
and gas jets are placed outside the grated windows. The
yard itself is paved, and the roof consists of a kind of
iron network, in order to prevent poisons or any imple-
ments which could aid escape being thrown oyer. A
door on the other side of the passage, immediately oppo-
site this yard, leads to the place of execution. A board-
ing is placed from the steps of one door to the other,
over which the culprit walks on to a gangway, p ainted
black, with chains running on each side, to the scaffold,
while a small stage at the extreme back, and fronting the
drop, is placed for the accommodation of those who are
witnesses of the execution. The scaffold itself is an ugly,
unsightly structure, strongly made and built of wood,
painted black, standing on another square-built brick


erection, so as to afford the fall necessary, the trap being
formed of two doors, upheld in the centre by a heavy
cross-beam, the whole supported and kept in position by
a strong iron bolt, in the shape of a hook with a hole in
the top end, for the insertion of a small iron bar. _ The
executioner inserts the bar, and either by pushing it
from or pulling it towards him, releases the support, and
the condemned is shot instantly into eternity. A yard
or two devoted to stable purposes, firewood, and fumi-
gating processes, complete the general arrangements of
this establishment. . .
I cannot conclude these Sketches without hoping that
those gentlemen who have been appointed to form the
Eoyal Commission will make a diligent use of their
power, so that a better system than has so long existed
in this Gaol and the penal arrangements of Tasmania
may be effected, not only as regards classification and
cleanliness, but in many other things which, no doubt,
will come under their notice. There are many who could
be found to bear out the truth of the assertions that
have been made in these Sketches, and it is from them,
and not from Gaol officials, that they may expect to re-
ceive unbiassed information.
hUbLXO
f 15&23
hi
Davies Bros., Printers, Hobart.




