



PRISONERS OF WAR
What the Red Cross Society does to help them and their
relatives and friends
The term "prisoner of war” includes not only members
of the fighting forces and of crews of merchant ships
who have been captured by an enemy, but also all civilians
detained in enemy internment camps.
QUESTION 1. If one wishes to enquire for the whereabouts and welfare
of a prisoner of war, or about the help given by the Red Cross Society
to prisoners and their relatives and friends, where can on© obtain the
latest and most reliable Information ?
ANSWER. Apply personally or by letter or telephone to the Honorary
Director of the Red Cross Enquiry Bureau (or office) in the capital city
of your State. The New South Wales Bureau is at Ocean House, 34
Martin Place, Sydney, telephone B 6374.
Each State Bureau has its own Hon. Director and staff, experienced in
receiving, answering and making enquiries about soldiers, sailors, airmen
and civilians on behalf of relatives and friends; and in giving up-to-date
advice to enquirers about sending parcels and letters to prisoners of war.
QUESTION 2. What kind of parcels are being sent to Australians in
European prison camps ?
ANSWER. They are of three distinct kinds, namely, (a) Red Cross
Parcels, (b) Next-of-kin Parcels (formerly known as Personal Parcels),
and (c) Permit Parcels.
QUESTION 3. What differences are there between these three kinds of
parcels ?
ANSWER. To answer that question clearly, each kind will be described
in turn. Red Cross Parcels are mentioned first, for two reasons. They
are always the first parcels to reach a prisoner after he has been placed
in a permanent camp; and, however long he may remain a prisoner, Red
Cross Parcels will reach him more regularly and much more frequently
than the two other kinds taken together. Probably not less than four of
every five parcels received by Australians in prison camps are Red Cross
Parcels.
QUESTION 4. Why are Red Cross Parcels so named ?
ANSWER. For several reasons. Firstly, each one of them is a gift
from the Red Cross to some un-named prisoner of war.
Secondly, Red Cross Parcels are the only ones sent to each and every
one of our imprisoned men, without discrimination on account of rank,
and without being addressed to prisoners by name.
Thirdly, and this is very important—they are the only FOOD parcels which
prisoners are allowed to receive from any outside source; that is, from
outside the enemy countries in which the camps are situated. How import-


ant it is that each imprisoned Australian should continue to receive his
weekly food parcel from the Red Cross, as an addition to the meagre and
monotonous rations provided by his captors, is perhaps not readily realised
by most of us in this country, where food has always been so abundant
and varied. Many hundreds of recent letters from Australian prisoners
could be quoted to show how keenly they appreciate the regular arrival
of their Red Cross Parcels, and how seriously they would feel their loss
if the supply were cut off or even reduced.
QUESTION 5. How often do prisoners of war receive their Red Cross
Parcels ?
ANSWER. One parcel per man per week,
QUESTION 6. Are Red Cross Parcels for Australian prisoners in Europe,
sent all the way from Australia ?
ANSWER. No ! They are packed mainly in England and in Canada by
the British and Canadian Red Cross Societies, but Australian Red Cross
pays for them. The distances, the demands on shipping space, the risk
of loss or damage and the costs are all greatly reduced under this arrange-
ment. With regard to parcels that will in due time go to our men who
are prisoners in Japanese hands, it is expected that these will be packed
in Australia. It is also likely that the Australian Red Cross will be
asked to pack parcels for other British prisoners who are held by the
Japanese.
QUESTION 7. How large Is the financial burden which this parcel service
imposes upon the Australian Red Cross ?
ANSWER. For the present war, expenditure up to May 30th, 1942, has
been approximately £237,997. At the present time (July, 1942) the rate
of expenditure is about £6,000 per week. Preparations have been made
also to give similar service to our men who have been captured by the
Japanese and this will commence as soon as the way is open for trans-
mission of parcels into Japanese occupied territory. This additional
parcel service may cost as much as £17,000 per week and even this figure
will be increased if any more of our fighting men are captured.
QUESTION 8. What does a Red Cross Parcel (food) cost, and what does
it contain ?. Are the contents of all parcels alike, or is there a difference
between one parcel and another ?
ANSWER. Each food parcel costs about £1 (Australian currency). All
food parcels are uniform or nearly so, in weight and contents. Each con-
tains about 10 lbs. of foodstuffs, assorted in accordance with a standard
list. From time to time it may be found desirable to make some small
changes in the assortment, but the following list is typical.
One box cheese, such as Cheddar, cheese and celery, Welsh rarebit, etc.;
one packet chocolate, milk or plain; one tin fish, such as herrings, sardines,
pilchards, salmon, etc.; one tin fruit, such as pineapple, peaches, fruit
salad, etc.; OR one packet dried fruit, such as dates, prunes, figs, etc; OR
one pudding, such as apple pudding, jelly, pancake batter, etc.; one tin
jam, honey, marmalade or syrup; one tin margarine or dripping; one tin
hot meat, such as steak and kidney pudding, beef stew, curried mutton,
minced steak, etc.; one tin cold meat, such as ham and tongue roll, pressed
beef, galantine of chicken, veal and ham pie, etc.; one tin dried milk; one
packet sugar; one tablet soap; one packet tea; one tin vegetables, such
as beans, peas, spinach, etc.; one tin special food rich in Vitamin C; AND
one or more of the following cocoa and milk powder; marmite, etc.,
custard powder (full cream milk), paste fish or meat, sweets such
as boiled sweets, maltesers, barley sugar, extra chocolate, etc.; one tin
sausages, or bacon or one packet dried eggs.


QUESTION 9. Do Red Cross Parcels contain anything else but food ?
ANSWER. By far the greater proportion of them —at least 9 out of
every 10 contain food only, but the Red Cross also sends medical parcels
and invalid food parcels, and as well clothing, tobacco, recreational and
educational supplies in bulk.
QUESTION 10. What does a Red Cross clothing issue contain ?
ANSWER. A supply of warm underclothing and warm woollen outer
garments, such as scarves, cardigans, pullovers.
QUESTION 11. By what transport channels do Red Cross Parcels go to
Australian prisoners of war in Europe ?
ANSWER. Mainly from London or Canada (where most of them are
packed see answer 6) by sea to Lisbon, thence by sea to Marseilles and
from there through unoccupied France to Switzerland. The last mentioned
country is of course, the home of Red Cross and the world centre of all
Red Cross organisations. In Geneva (Switzerland) the Prisoner of War
Agency of the International Red Cross, arranges and superintends the
distribution of parcels to prison camps in Germany and Italy, subject of
course, to such supervision and restriction as the enemy military author-
ities may see fit to exercise.
QUESTION 12. In the present war, about how many Red Cross Parcels
for Australian prisoners of war have been paid for by the Australian Red
Cross Society ?
ANSWER. Up to the end of April, 1942, approximately 205,000 parcels.
At the present time the supply required is at the rate of 6000 per week,
and this number will increase about fourfold as soon as it becomes
possible to send Red Cross Parcels to Japanese-controlled prison camps.
It can, Indeed, be expected that more and more parcels per week will
become necessary as long as the war continues.
QUESTION 13. Where does Red Cross get money to pay for all these
parcels ?
ANSWER. Entirely from voluntary contributions, large and small. No
direct monetary assistance comes from any Government or other taxing
authority. Substantial and encouraging governmental support of an in-
direct nature is, however, given in the form of certain exemptions from
taxation.
QUESTION 14. What about the two other kinds of parcels which can be
sent to prisoners of war ?
ANSWER. These are provided entirely by relatives and friends of the
prisoners.
A “Next-of-Kin Parcel” cannot be sent more often than once every three
months, and then only by the soldier’s next-of-kin (or nominee). It is
not allowed to contain any food except slab chocolate in tins that can be
easily opened for inspection and closed again; nor can it contain any
tobacco or cigarettes. Lengthy detailed lists (1) of articles permitted
(chiefly clothing, though not all kinds of clothing), and (2) of articles
prohibited can be obtained from the Red Cross Enquiry Bureau.
A “Permit Parcel” may be sent by anyone, as often as desired, within
reason. It, also is not allowed to contain any food. Its contents are
strictly limited to books, music, playing cards, games, sports equipment,
pipes, tobacco, cigarettes, and cigars, it can be packed and posted only by
some merchant firm holding (or willing to apply for) the required permit,
which is issued by the Controiler of Postal and Telegraph Censorship,


JAfp
<St u
AuS
Victoria Barracks, Melbourne. The firm acts on behalf of the sender,
who is not permitted to handle the parcel or any of its contents, nor to
have included in it any articles other than those ordered from the firm.
QUESTION 15. What assistance, if any, does Red Cross give in respect
of these two kinds of parcels ?
ANSWER. It gives verbal, written or printed information to thousands
of enquirers, to enable them to comply with the regulations which have
been drawn up by our Military Censorship and Postal authorities, and
with the requirements and restrictions enforced by enemy authorities in
regard to the kinds of articles which may or may not be enclosed in parcels
for prisoners in enemy countries. Red Cross also collaborates in very
important ways with our Censorship and Postal Departments in helping
to ensure that their war-time regulations, concerning such parcels, are
administered and fulfilled with the least possible friction and delay. The
purpose of this collaboration is to guard as far as possible against trouble
and disappointment on the part of the prisoners to whom such parcels are
addressed, and on the part of the relatives and friends who send them.
This honorary assistance is undertaken by Red Cross at the request of the
authorities concerned, by whom its value to all concerned is understood
and appreciated.
QUESTION 16. Apart from providing Red Cross parcels, and giving in-
formation and other help in connection with next-of-kin parcels and permit
parcels, is there anything else which Australian Red Cross does for Aus-
tralian prisoners of war and their relatives and friends ?
ANSWER. Yes, there is also the very important service it gives in
connection with the writing and sending of letters to our prisoners. In
this matter, no less than in that of sending parcels, relatives and friends
of prisoners are constantly being assisted by the Red Cross Enquiry
Bureaux in the capital cities, so that they may know just what kind of
news they may or may not put into their letters; how much note paper
can be used, postage charges; enclosures permitted or prohibited; method
of addressing, and so on. Here also, as in the case of privately despatched
parcels, Australian Red Cross collaborates with the Censorship and Postal
Departments in ensuring, with the least possible delay, that every letter
leaving Australia for a war prisoner conforms both to local and to foreign
requirements, and that it will therefore have the best possible chance of
being delivered to its addressee.
QUESTION 17. Does Australian Red Cross make a charge for any of
the above described services to Australian prisoners of war and to their
relatives and friends ?
ANSWER. No ! All such services are given free. To carry them on is
becoming more and more costly as the war proceeds, and cannot be
expected to become less costly until the war comes to an end.
QUESTION 18. What is the prospect of Red Cross being able to shoulder
this increasing financial burden, without any decrease in the help it is
giving to our war prisoners and their kinsfolk ?
ANSWER. The prospect will be satisfactory, provided that the present
appeal on behalf of prisoners of war brings the same satisfactory
response from the generous Australian public as similar appeals have in
the past.
Give freely to enable Australian Red Cross to continue the help it is
giving to Australian prisoners of war, and to their relatives and friends.
Radio Printing Press Pty. Ltd., 146 Poveaux Street. Surry Hills


IT costs the Red Cross Society £1 per week to send a parcel
a week to every Australian who is held prisoner-of-war.
By the time contact is secured with our men who are held
by the Japanese, the total cost to Australia for our prisoners
in all theatres of war will exceed £1,000,000 per year.
Th is huge task can be made light it every street will undertake
to find at least £1 per week until the men are released by the
victory of the British and allied arms.
Here is a simple method by which folk with the same ideals
of brotherhood can pull together in the interests of the greatest
compassionate Cause known to Humanity to-day—THE RED
CROSS.
It is unthinkable that any street in Australia would turn a deaf
ear to the appeal of a fellow "townie" in trouble in a foreign
land.
The hospitality of Australia is as famous throughout the world
as the valor of her fighting men. Surely we will not deny to a
fellow citizen in distress in an enemy camp, a measure of the
generosity that we so spontaneously offer to fit and well
passers-by in times of peace?
Many hands make light work! is there a street in the Common-
wealth that cannot afford £1 per week to keep a parcel a week
on the move to some poor digger who is suffering mental and
bodily anguish FOR OUR SAKES?
We want every Street in every
City and Town in New South Wales
to adopt and support an Australian
Prisoner of War


WILL VOU DO VOUR SHARE?
THERE is hardly a street in any suburb or town which is not
directly interested in some friend or relative who is at present
a prisoner-of-war in enemy hands.
He who walked so jauntily along your street on his way to work
in the piping days of peace, now paces ceaselessly behind the
barbed wire of an enemy compound—wondering how long it
will be before you will come to set him free; most likely worry-
ing for fear that you, his loved ones at home, are in danger
yourselves!
The quickest and surest way to set his mind at rest; to bring
him bodily comfort in his misery; to let him see that the wheels
of effort at home are still revolving day and night with the one
great end in view, is to SEND HIM RED CROSS PARCELS.
Vou have pride in your country; pride in your town* Show your
pride in your street —in his street—by hoisting the new Red
Cross signpost bearing the words: "THIS STREET SUPPORTS
AN AUSTRALIAN PRISONER-OF-WAR".
‘HEM 1$ THE PUN
The Red Cross Society, N.S.W. Division, appeals to every street
in the State to regularly find £l/-/- per week to maintain a
flow of one parcel a week to every Australian who is held
prisoner-of-war by Germany, Italy or Japan.
This has been decided upon as the simplest plan by which home-
dwellers may participate in the gigantic task of getting succour
to our boys who are suffering for our sakes in foreign prison camps.
The combined residents of every street which undertakes to
subscribe the requisite £1 per week, will be entitled to erect
a Red Cross Signboard in the street bearing the words: "THIS
STREET SUPPORTS AN AUSTRALIAN PRISONER-OF-WAR".
Even the shortest street should be able to find £1 per week.
The residents of longer streets may provide for more than one
prisoner. For every additional prisoner-of-war thus supported,
a star will be affixed to the signboard.
Every house which subscribes to the Street Prisoner-of-War Fund,
will be awarded an attractive house badge—to be displayed
on a front window—signifying that the occupier is a member
of the street group or a subscriber to the Street Fund.
Even if a street cannot fully support a Prisoner-of-War, it can
at least contribute to his support, and each contributing house
will receive a badge.


THIS IS WHAT YOU 00
All you have to do is to "get together". Call a meeting of the residents
of your street preferably at the home of one resident and form a
committee or group consisting of people—young or old—who reside in your
street. Elect a lady or gentleman as President; also appoint an Hon.
Secretary and an Hon. Treasurer.
The group then pledges itself to endeavour to raise at least £1 per week
from the street towards the upkeep of a prisoner-of-war. If the street «
big enough, or the residents vigorous enough, perhaps more than one
prisoner-of-war could be adopted under this scheme.
Your Street Executive Committee will be provided by the Red Cross Society
with an authority enabling them to raise funds by any of the many methods
legitimately available to organisers of patriotic campaigns, such as bazaars,
card parties, etc., etc.
Immediately your group is formed, consult your local Red Cross Committee
and ask for their help and co-operation. They want to help you. Th©7
will give you all the subscription books and other paraphernalia required.
Telephone Red Cross Appeal Headquarters (B 3385) at any time between
7 a.m. and 9 p.m.—week days or Sundc/ys—if you find yourselves in any
difficulty or doubt.
ORGANISE YOUR STREET


On the Road of Returning
Arranged by Rex Shaw. Words & Music by Keith Campbell.
CHORUS (with a lilt )
(Copyright)
Reproduced by kind permission of the composer, Mr. Keith
Campbell, and the publishers, Box 54, P. 0., Oxford St., Sydney.
Patterson & Beck Pty. Ltd. Print
