

V.— Reef in the Pacific.
1 A dangerous reef has been discovered in the Pacific Ocean,
among the Caroline Islands, the N.E. extremity of which is in
latitude 7° 36'N., and longitude 155° 18'E. It was found to
lie in a N.E. and S.W. direction, and is so extensive, that the
whole of it could not be seen from the N.E. extremity. It is
about fourteen miles in a W.S. W. direction from Island Borde-
laise, discovered in 1826.’
The discovery is due to the ship Larkins, W. Campbell,
master ; and, as here given, is extracted from her log, bearing
date 23d February, 1830.
Vl. —Private Letter from Governor Stirling (Swan River Settle-
ment) to Mr. Barrow.
‘ Western Australia, March 13, 1831.
‘ My dear Sir, —By a ship which arrived here a few days
since, I had the satisfaction to receive your very agreeable notes,
dated June and July last, in which I observe the expression of
that kind interest which you have always taken in the welfare and
establishment of this settlement. I shall be truly glad to send you
such a detailed account of its statistics as you seem to wish, and I
would forward it by this opportunity, if it were not necessary to
wait for the completion of a general map of the territory, which is
now about to be begun, as well as for a further account of the
weather, as registered during last year at King George’s Sound
and Garden Island, As soon as all the matters relating to a full
and accurate description of this country can be brought into
arrangement, I shall beg your acceptance of it.
‘ Through good report and evil report we have worked our
way nearly to the conclusion of the second year, and I am proud
in saying, that our prospects are brighter and better assured than
ever. Since I last wrote to you, we have been frequently on the
point of failing, from causes which I suppose are always to be
found in operation in similar enterprises. It was my business to
counteract these by further explorations of the country, of which
the general result has been that the future prosperity of the set-
tlement is now a point which no one is foolish enough to doubt.
To give you an idea of our progress in discoveries, I shall briefly
allude to them in the order in which they were made. Two
attempts to get beyond the mountains were unsuccessful; I
therefore took to the sea-coast during the wet and dry season.
*At Port Leschenault, in March, we found some good land ;
but before it could be occupied by settlers, 1 learnt that a good


station existed near to Cape Leuwen, In May I proceeded there,
and formed a small settlement in a beautiful and fertile situation,
three miles to the eastward of the Cape in Flinders’ “ Dangerous
Bight,” where now, however, there is no danger. About one
hundred persons make it a very contented and prosperous little
place, where ships may obtain excellent water , wood, and vege-
tables, at a few minutes’ notice.
c In August, the third in order of the attempts to get beyond the
hills was found to be successful. A young gentleman of the 63d
regiment, accompanied by Mr. Beachman, an excellent practical
farmer, penetrated to the farther side of the mountains, and found
that the almost continuous range from north to south, which they
form, is about thirty-six miles broad. Beyond this range, to the
east, there is an undulating variety of generally fair land. The
vallies, or plains, between the hills with which it is studded, are
always good, and covered with grass, and the soil, though variable,
presents a proportion of good land to the extent of one-third of the
first quality. The travellers were prevented from going farther to
the east than a few miles into this country, by a river flowing to
the north, which at the time was rolling down an impetuous flood,
caused by the rains of the season. After proceeding twenty miles
up to the south on its banks, they returned to Perth with the
agreeable news.
4 In October, taking Mr. Dale, the discoverer of the above-
mentioned country, with me, and several practical farmers, I pro-
ceeded across the mountains; and, having examined the country
for a few days, I selected a site for a future county-town, and
returned to my other tasks. I took the opportunity of sending
Mr. Dale and a few others to the eastward. They penetrated to
the distance of an hundred miles from the coast, directly east from
Perth, and returned with a most favourable account of the country
they had passed over.
4 ln December I again proceeded to the south coast. Our dis-
coveries were impeded by circumstances ; and, after paying a visit
to the Cape Leuwen settlement, we returned by the way of King
George’s Sound to Perth. About the time I sailed, an expedi-
tion, which I had long been preparing, set off coastward from
this to King George’s Sound, under the direction of Captain
Bannister. He and his party crossed the hills at the head of the
Canning, after having travelled about thirty-five miles among
them. He then passed for ten miles further through a country of
equal proportions of good and bad land. To these forty miles
succeeded the most beautiful country he had ever seen, and repre-
sented by him to be available either for pasturage or tillage. This
noble district he traversed for eighty-eight or ninety miles in aS.
by E. direction : at the end of which distance he came into a hilly


country, occasionally rugged, but frequently very good for stock
and farming. From one of these hills they thought they saw an
immense mountain to the east far above the clouds, and which the
surveyor who went with him estimated at ten thousand feet high.
In this hilly country they continued until they made the south
coast, near to Cape Chatham ; and, after enduring the extremes of
hunger, they reached King George’s Sound in February. The im-
portance of these discoveries will readily appear to you. The effect
upon the minds of the public here has been to remove all doubt
as to the success of the colony. The river mentioned beyond the
hills is, in winter, a very powerful stream, and the principal drain
of that country, as far as we know. Its source and ulterior course
beyond the small part of it seen by us is at present unknown, and,
1 may add, defies conjecture; for we know, by a recent exploration
of the coast to the south as far as latitude 28° 40', that no river or
inlet exists on it. This point of interest shall not be allowed to
remain much longer in obscurity.
‘ The little settlement at King George’s Sound being now made
over to this government, I am shipping off some of those who are
not prospering here to try their fortune there. The wish of my
heart at present is to get a bush road made over to that place,
passing through Bannister’s fine tract, and also the possession of a
few coasting vessels to keep up communication with the little settle-
ment on the coast.
‘P.S. We are just about establishing a botanical garden at
Perth, in which it may be hoped that, besides collecting and
arranging the plants of the country, experiments may be made as
to acclimating foreign productions.'*
VII.— Union of the African Association with the Royal Geogra-
phical Society of London. Extracted from the Minutes of
Council of the latter body, dated July 23, 1831.
‘At a meeting of Council held this day, a communication was
read from the Secretary of the African Association, intimating that
the Members of that Society were willing to make over the
balance of its funds in their hands to the Royal Geographical
Society, and thus unite the two Societies, on condition that such
of their number as were not already Members of the Royal Geo-
graphical Society, be received as such, without form of ballot, on
paying the usual composition for entrance money and annual pay-
ments. On which it was unanimously resolved by the Council
that this proposal be agreed to: that the following five Members
of the African Association, viz. Lord Clive, Henry Banks, Esq.,
Charles Hoare, Esq., H. H. Hoare, Esq., and John Motteux,


Esq., be accordingly admitted forthwith to all the privileges of
■Members of the Royal Geographical Society, they not being
already such, on their making payment as above; and that this act
of Council be communicated to the Society at its first ordinary
meeting, in November next, for its sanction and approval.’
VIII. — Account of the Volcanic Island lately thrown up between
Sicily and Pantellaria. Extracted from Reports made by the
British Cruizers to Admiral the Hon. Sir Henry Hotham,
K.C.8.; and communicated by John Barrow, Esq., F.R.S.
With a Plate.
The Neapolitan schooner. Psyche, appears first to have dis-
covered smoke on the water where the island is now situated on
the J2th of July • and from the 13th to the 16th, this continued
in three distinct columns, but without fire, as far as seen from a
Sardinian vessel becalmed in the neighbourhood. On the 17th,
the master of the brig Adelaide, from London, distinguished fire
also; and it is probable that at this period, for the first time, the
land rose to the surface. On the following day, as will be seen
by the annexed letter, it had already attained considerable dimen-
sions :
Report of Commander C. H. Swinburne, of his Majesty's Ship
Rapid, to Vice-Admiral the Hon. Sir Henry Hotham, K.C.B.
1 His Majesty’s Sloop Rapid, at Malta, July 22, 1831.
‘ Sir, —I have the honour to inform you that on the 18th of
July, 1831, at 4 p. m., the town of Marsala bearing by compass
E. half N. 9 miles, I observed from on board his Majesty’s sloop
Rapid, under my command, a high irregular column of very white
smoke or steam, bearing S. by E. I steered for it, and continued
to do so till 8, 15, p. m., when having gone about thirty miles by
the reckoning, I saw flashes of brilliant light mingled with the
smoke, which was still distinctly visible by the light of the moon.
* In a few minutes the whole column became black and larger:
almost immediately afterwards several successive eruptions of lurid
fire rose up amidst the smoke : they subsided, and the column
then became gradually white again. As we seemed to near it
fast, I shortened sail, and hove to till day-light, that I might ascer-
tain its nature and exact position. During the night the changes
from white to black, with flashes and the eruptions of fire, conti-
nued at irregular intervals, varying from half an hour to an hour.
At daylight I again steered towards it, and about 5 A. M., when
the smoke had for a moment cleared away at the base, I saw
