

PRIVATE JOURNAL
OP THE
SURVEYOR ATTACHED TO MESSRS. FRANK AND ALEXANDER
JARDINE’S
OVERLAND EXPEDITION
CAPE YORK.
Printed by Ot. Wight, “Guardian Office,” Brisbane.


1 .TJI rr n:.A •: . r? : ?
{ ) I


PRIVATE JOURNAL
We have been favored with special permission
to publish the following very interesting
journal, kept by Mr. Richardson, the Surveyor
attached to the expedition which, under Messrs.
F. and A. Jardine, lately performed the over
land route from Bowen, Port Denison, to
Somerset, Cape York ;
The Queensland Government having made
arrangements for forming a Settlement at
Cape York, it became necessary to adopt some
plan by means of which Cape York settlers
could be supplied with fresh meat, &c., &c.
Mr. Frank Jardine then agreed to take a mob
of cattle overland, to meet the wants of the
settlement, and at the same time to open up
the unexplored country of the peninsula,
without going out of his road. I was appointed
to accompany the party as surveyor; and a
grant of £l5O was made by the Government
to supply me with horses and necessaries
for the trip. A sextant, artificial horizon,
prismatic compass, Gregory-compass, and
barometer were also supplied. My duties were
defined in a letter from A. C. Gregory, Esq.,
the Surveyor-General. They were as follows: —
To keep a field-book of the route, and in it to
notice the nature of the soil, timber, grasses,
&c.; also the abundance or scarcity of water,
any suitable place for settlement', &c,; and to
plot up, from time to time, as occasion offered,
and while the incidents were fresh in the
memory : also, to keep a journal.
Our Departure.
The party left Rockhampton on the 14th of
May, 1864, under the superintendence of Mr.
M. U
OVERLAND EXPEDITION TO CAPE YORK.
I " 1 H
A. Jardine, and journeyed, by the old road to
Port Denison, as far as Macdonald’s station on
the Bogie River 5 then to a good camping
ground on the north bank of the river Burde-
kin, within twelve miles of Mr. Anthill’s
station, crossing that river at Hamilton’s
public-house. The party was then ten in
number, and consisted of the following persons :
Messrs. A. Jardine, Scrutton, Binney, and
Conderoy, and six blackboys —Euler, Peter,
Sambo, Barny, Charley, and Pluto. They
reached the camping ground on the 17th of
June, 1864. They had with them thirty-one
horses. Mr, Frank Jardine and I reached
Port Denison, from Rockhampton, in the
Diamantina, s. s., Captain Champion, having
touched at Port Mackay, about the 16th of
July. The leader then purchased five horses
for my use with the money which had been
granted for that purpose.
While in Port Denison, I became acquainted
with Mr. Cunningham, through his brother
Edward, from whom I bore a message. He
kindly invited me to accompany him to his
station on the Upper Burdekin—“ Burdekin
Downs” —and there to await the party. Our
leader, meanwhile, was endeavoring to purchase
cattle of him. Pleuro-pneumonia had shown
itself a little farther south, and it was essential
to procure good cattle, and to buy them as
near their destination as possible.
In a week’s time, agreeably spent by me at
Burdekin Downs, the party reached that
station. I then joined them, and we proceeded
to “Reedy Lake,” the station of Messrs.
O’Kelly and Keeve, and encamped there. The


weather being fine, two tents only were pitched,
•one to contain the provisions, and one for those
who desired to use it. Every one, however,
preferred sleeping in the open air. One of the
party (Conderoy) had, in consequence, a very
narrow escape. All were lying in various
positions round the fire, when a deaf adder,
attracted by the light and warmth, found its
way to Conderoy’s blankets, and was making
direct for his shoulder. He fortunately per-
ceived him in time. There was a great hubbub
for a few minutes, and the snake disappeared.
Our black boys soon found him, killed and
burned him.
As there was no telling how long it would be
before the cattle could be obtained, it was
arranged that A. Jardine, Binney, and I,
together with three black boys, Euler, PlutOj
and Sambo, and the packhorses, should go
forward as far as J. G. Macdonald, Esq., then
supposed to be on the River Lynd.
Shortly before leaving Reedy Lake our ad-
vanced party was enlarged by the addition of
two persons—Mr. Bode, a gentleman in search
of new country, and his black boy. His path
and ours being the same we journeyed on to-
gether. We left Reedy Lake on the 17 th of
August, 1864, and on the 24th reached the
station of Messrs. Firth and Atkinson, Upper
Burdekin, near which we encamped. I left a
tree at this camp, marked F.L. J. in square.
Aug. 26. —Travelled about 17 miles W. by S,
over broken ridges, lightly timbered with iron-
bark, moderately well grassed, but now very
dry. Encamped on the west border of a small
plain, without finding water.
Aug. 27. —Travelled about 16 miles W. by S.
At six miles from our last camp cros ed the
range dividing the water of the supposed Lynd
and Burdekin Rivers, both the ascent and de-
scent were very gradual. The remaining 10
miles undulating open ironbark forest, well
grassed, but no water until the end of our day’s
journey, when we encamped near some water-
holes, on the western side of a small black-soil
plain, the grass of which had been burnt. The
black boys, and others who were inclined, stirred
up the mud of one of the waterholes and caught
bout two bucketsfull of fish —a welcome ad-
dition to our supper.
Aug. 28. —Travelled about 14 miles W.N.W.
through what would generally be called good
country, although at this season very dry. On
our way we noticed small-leaved Bauhinia,
Myrtle, and Grevillea. Passed the homestead
of Mr. M'Kinnon, encamping about 3 miles
bejond, on the N.E. bank of a creek, then sup-
posed to be the Lynd River of Leichhardt.
Abundance of water in the creek, near our
camp, and immediately opposite a low basaltic
ridge, appears a few yards from the bank of the
creek, which latter is lined on both sides with
Melaleuca. In its bed are basalt and mica slate,
Fioodmarks 2 feet above the bank. Latitude*
18 deg. 55 min. 23 secs.
Aug. 29. —Travelled about 15 miles N.W., at
first stony ridges, timbered chiefly with ironbark;
afterwards the soil became more sandy, and we
noticed bloodwood, acacia, and apple gum, and
soma good grass. At 11 miles from the last
camp we crossed the creek, whose sandy bed is
there dry and shallow, 60 yards wide, having in
it masses of basalt and mica slate. At 4 miles
beyond the crossing-place we encamped near an
excellent waterhole in the creek. The adjacent
country to our left, while travelling this dis-
tance, appeared to be scrubby. The bed of the
creek is frequently filled with Melaleuca.
Aug. 30. —Travelled about 13 miles N.W.j
the creek running nearly parallel with us—open
undulating ironbark forest, tolerably well
grassed—soil sandy. At this distance from last
camp we reached the homestead of Mr. Yates,
then crossing the creek, which is there about 70
yards wide, sandy bed, with masses of mica
slate, and banks 15 feet deep, continued on ou r
journey, over a basaltic flat, lightly timbered
with box for one mile E.N.E., crossing and
encamping on the north side of an ana-branch of
the creek abovementioned, within a quarter of
a mile of the homestead of J. G. Macdonald.
Esq., our resting-place until the cattle are pur-
chased. Mr. Macdonald left 'soon after our
arrival, on his road to the mouth of the Albert
River. The persons he had with him were
Messrs. Robinson, Bowman, and a black boy,
They were provided witt 6 weeks provisions*
and their object was to find a good road to the
Gulf of Carpentaria, and a suitable place, when
there, for a large mob of cattle, at that time
on the road from Port Denison to the home-
stead, near which we are encamped.
Messrs. A. Jardine and Bode, with two black
boys, Euler and Barny, leave the camp, taking
with them a fortnight’s provisions. Their in-
tention is to follow down the creek, near which
we are encamped, supposed to be the Lynd
River, as far as its junction with the Mitchell*


observing which side of the creek was most
suitable for travelling. During their absence I
took seven sets of lunar observations, the result
of which gave a mean longitude 144 deg. 3 min.
30 secs. E. of Greenwich, in latitude 18 deg-
-37 min. 10 secs S., as the mean latitude
from several northern and southern obser-
vations. The variation of the compass
I found, by Theodolite (not a very
good one), to be about 6 deg. E. The
Prismatic compass with which I was provided
had no colored glasses nor any reflector.
August and September. —After being absent
for nearly three weeks, Messrs. A. Jardine and
Bode return, much puzzled with regard to the
course of the supposed River Lynd. They had
followed it down for about 180 miles, and say
that the last 60 miles they were travelling
nearly due west. Mr. Jardine plotted his
course roughly on a sheet of foolscap (120
miles of the distance I afterwards found to be
tolerab'y correct) ; and I gave it as my opinion
that we were on the main branch of the River
Gilbert. We afterwards found the river, shewn
in the map by a dotted line, as a branch of the
River Lynd, wms a new river, and is
probably the main branch of the River
Gilbert. We named it the River Einnasleigh I
ascended a hill about one mils to the N.E. of
our camp, and obtained several bearings of
adjacent mountains and ranges. The sur-
rounding country is mountainous on all sides
except S. and S.E , and the smoke of burning
grass is to be seen in all directions, occasioned by
the blacks. During our stay here, a small out-
station —a hut about 11 miles down the river,
belonging to Mr. Ya'es —was entered, during
the absence of the shepherd, by the natives,
who carried off some blankets, stores, &c.
They were followed next day by some people
■on horseback, but made their escape to the
mountains. Mr. Bode left us on his road to
Port Denison.
Oct. 6.—The cattle are here and start in a
few days —about 250 head. Our leader thinks
it necessary to reduce the party, and two black-
boys, Charley and Pluto, are to be left behind.
Leaves Macdonald's , the farthest-out station.
Oct. 11.—Commenced our journey to-day ;
weather favorable, and everyone in good splits
except Charley and Pluto, who longed to go
with us. Our party numbered ten persons
(before mentioned), 36 horses both pack and
saddle, and three tents, as well as provisions,
estimated to last us, with care, four months •
We travelled about 19 miles, our general course
being N.W. by N., the first four miles of our
journey being over basaltic flats, timbered
with box and apple gum. The remainder
ridges, both sandy and stony, tolerably well
grassed, and timbered with ironbark. En-
camped near the river in latitude 18 deg.
23 min. 59 sec. The mob of cattle had been
sent on ahead in charge of some of the party
who had mistaken the directions given them,
and who failed to reach the camp.
About a mile up the river from this camp
it is joined by a large creek from the S.E., and
five miles beyond its mouth the river is shut
in by a long rocky range trending S.W. The
river is here about 250 yards wide, and its bed
filled with huge masses of granite and basalt,
its banks sloping and rocky. Water good and
plentiful, but not running.
Oct. 12. —Shifted our camp one mile to the
N.N.E. to the bank of a small lagoon, within a
quarter of a mile of the river. The horses
enjoyed good grass, fresh and green, for the rest
of the day. Our leader, Mr. F. Jardine, with his
brother, returned for two or three miles, found
the cattle coming on our tracks, and brought
them to camp.
Box, Barringtonia, flooded gum, and Pan-
danus were the prevailing varieties found here.
Marked a gum tree F.J, 111. under, in
square.
Oct. 13. —Travelled about ten miles N.N.W.,
five miles sandy ridges, timbered chiefly with
box trees of small giith; the remaining dis-
tance the ridges became stony. Seven miles
from camp we passed a fine reach of water in
the river, which is there about 500 yards wide
and filled with masses of basalt. Some pro-
minent peaks rise from broken country to the
east; to the westward the rocky range, before
mentioned, continues to run nearly parallel
with the river, having a steep rocky bluff nearly
opposite our camp. I have named tjpS' Start-
well Bluff. Encamped on the bank of the
river, which is here broad and shallow; its
bed is filled with melalenca, and some excellent
water in rocky holes. Grass very dry.
A tree is here marked F.J., 1Y under,**in
square.
Oct. 14.—Travelled about 11 miles N.W. ;


irregular ridges, very rocky and difficult for the
horses and cattle, quartz, basalt, and a rock
full of large leaflets of mica. Across the river
the country is mountainous and broken, and
on this side the grass has been recently burned
by the natives. The river bed is broad, shallow>
and more sandy, and is joined by a deep, sandy j
dry creek 80 yards wide, coming from E.N.E.,
its banks steep and lined with immense
Melaleuca trees. We encamped on its north
bank near the river, and found water in the
creek by digging. Noticed bloodwood and the
Leichhardt tree and ironbark.
Tree marked F.J., V under, in square.
Oct, 15.—Travelled to-day about eight miles
N.W. by N. ; at first ironbark forest and
sandy ridges, basalt cropping up in places ;
afterwards basalt became more plentiful, and
made travelling difficult. The river bank was
intersected by deep gullies, and at four miles
from last camp, its bed narrowed to 150 yards>
one deep sandy channel, banks lined with
Melalenca. At about seven miles from last
camp we were compelled to leave the river,
whose bed i there filled with masses of rock,
it is also shut in on both sides by abrupt rocky
ranges. We then crossed a low basaltic ridge
and flat, and encamped near a large swamp,
on its western side, not deep. I ascended the
range to the north of our camp, and had a
capital view of the surrounding country. The
rocky range before mentioned, of which Start-
well Bluff is a prominent point, from thence
makes a great bend to the west, and then north,
running into the river a mile or two to the
north of our present camp. The country en-
closed by the range and river appears to be
level. To the east I saw nothing but rocky
ranges quite near us, but to the S.E. by W. my
view extended for at least 25 miles, enabling
me to note the bearing of a prominent peak at
that distance (Carl's Peak.)
While observing a star for the latitude I saw
something move near my left arm ; I looked
more intently and saw a yellow bellied snake
with head upraised ; I soon rolled out of his
way, then searched for him, but he had dis-
appeared. He had, perhaps, come out of the
swamp, and was attracted by the glitter of the
sextant in the moonshine. Latitude 18 deg.
2min. 7 sec. The mean of aN. and S. obser-
vation.
Tree marked F.J., VI, under, in square.
Oct 16.—Travelled to-day about 11 miles,
pur general course being N.N.W., passing
through a gap in the range about 2£ miles to
the N.E. of our camp. The remaining part
of our journey was difficult travelling ; basaltic-
flats and ridges openly timbered, and all the
grass burnt. We encamped on the eastern
bank of a creek which took its rise near the
range. The creek is connected with the river
by a channel near our present camp, it was
named Parallel Creek by Mr. A. Jardine, on
his previous exploration trip down this river,
although from this point it becomes an ana-
branch. We enjoy fine strong breezes from the
eastward, with fine clear weather. The
thermometer reading 73 deg. at sunrise this
morning.
A tree is marked F.J.,Y11. under, in square.
Oct. 17. —To-day our journey was much
shorter than usual, in consequence of the diffi-
cult nature of the country. We continued
our course for miles N.W. down Parallel
Creek, being frequently compelled to travel in
its bed, and as often obliged to leave it. It is
seperated from the river by a hi fe h ridge of
basalt, and its bed, when not filled with masses
of rock, is sandy and timbered with melalenca,
its N.E. bank is frequently very abrupt and
rocky ; some good grass grows amongst the
basalt, but much of it has been burned by the
natives. We encamped on the N.E. bank of
the creek, where not rocky, and where its
slope towards the creek is gradual. The
basaltic ridge immediately opposite our camp
is abrupt, and from 60 to 70 feet high. About
a quarter of a mile up the creek from camp,
the rocky bank on the N.E. side ends in a
sandstone cliff, worn into caves and hollows by
weather and time.
Latitude 17 deg. 51 min. 5 sec. A tree
marked F.J. YIII. under, in square.
Oct. 18.— Our journey to-day of about 10£
miles, a little to the N. of W.N.W., was per-
formed over country similar to that yesterday
described, but more rocky and difficult. Water
was more frequently found in the bed of the
creek, although near our camp it was not
plentiful. To the eastward broken country is
still apparent, but ranges and hills are becom-
ing less frequent. The ana-branch is hereabout
300 yards wide, and filled with tall Melalenca.
A tree marked F.J., IX. under, in square.
Oct. 19. —At about miles from last camp
the ana-branch joins the river, which is there
500 yards wide, and an immense sand-bed,
having in it immense masses of granite, por-
phyry sandstone. Our general course to-day
has been W. by N. about 8 miles. Prom the
junction downwards stiff sandy bank, openly
timbered with box and bloodwood, and travel-
ling much easier. Quartz ridges densely
clothed with scrub, are seen from the river
bank in a N.E. direction.
Latitude 17 deg. 45 min. 40 sec. A tree
marked F.J., X under, in square.
Oct. 20. —Continued our journey down the


north-eastern bank of the river for about 11
miles in a north-westerly direction. The first
seven miles exceedingly rocky ridges, in many
places running abruptly into the river, and
intersected by very deep gullies. We avoided
some of these by travelling at about a mile
from the river, beyond that distance there is
much scrub. The last four miles, low sand-
stone ridges, open forest on the river frontage,
and timbered with larger trees—box, blood-
wood, and gum ; soil very light and rotten, and
grasses very coarse.
At about 4 miles from last camp the bed of
the river is divided into channels by a high
rook, three-quarters of a mile in length. A fine
sheet of water is contained between this rock
and the N.E. bank; in this gorge I noticed
flood marks 30 feet above the bed of the river.
Could not get a good view of the neighboring
country, but caught a glimpse of some low
ranges to the westward. At our camp the
river bank is low, and the bed densely
timbered with Melalenca, and occasional
Leichhardt trees.
Encamped near a good but shallow water-
hole in the river, A tree marked F.J, XI
under, in square.
Oct. 21.—Continued our course down the
N. bank of the river for about 11 miles
W.N.W., the country beoming more open as
we proceeded. To our right low sandstone
ranges, partly covered with scrub, and having
abrupt sides, terminated at 200 or 300 yards
from the river—between the spurs and along
the frontage of the river. Box flats, openly
timbered, firm soil, and good g asses. En-
camped near a fine long water-hole in the
river, which furnished us with some excellent
cod, bream, and cat fish.
Oct. 22. —Travelled to-day about 10 miles
west; the country becoming still more open,
and the box flats more extensive, as well as
better grassed; gullies less numerous, and the
banks of the river low, the bed still wide, well
watered, and sandy. Encamped on the N.W.
side of a small creek, plenty of water in water-
holes in its bed, about half-a-mile from the
river, which is here three quarters of a mile
wide, sandy bed, filled with small Melalenca
trees, and having low banks.
Latitude 17 deg. 34 min. 32 sec. Box
marked F.L.J., R XIII under, in square.
It was the wish of our leader, Mr. P. Jardine,
to get on to the River Lynd, and to follow it
to its junction with the River Mitchell, con-
tinuing our course down that river as far
as would be thought necessary to avoid any
difficulty in finding water. Mr. A. Jardine
had previously mentioned this good camping
ground as a suitable place for the horses and
cattle, pending another advance exploration
trip they (Messrs. E. and A. Jardine) had in
view, to the northward.
I plotted up my couises, and said that 18 to
20 miles N.N.E, from camp, they ought to
strike the River Lynd.
Oct. 24.—The brothers taking with them
Euler and the necessary provisions, left us
to-day.
Oct. 27.—They returned to-day, and their
report was unsatisfactory. Following a N.N.E,
course, they came upon a creek, which I take
to be Turning Creek, running in the same di-
rection, and afterwards a large creek, which
should be the Lynd River. At the distance
above mentioned, Leichhardt’s d scription of
the neighbouring country does not at all
coincide with the sort of country on the creek.
Our leader and his brother say they were down
the creek for about 50 miles. The country
either densely timbered or clothed with tea tree
scrub, little or no grass, and water only to be
found in lagoons near the creek. Mr. A.
Jardine does not think it is the Lynd River of
Leichhardt. I do, for two reasons :—lst. Its
distance from our camp is what I expected it
would be; and 2nd. Its general course is the
same.
I know my starting point to be correct as-
regards latitude, and I think I have its position
east from Greenwich nearly right. We have
with us two maps, one a tracing furnished me
by the Surveyor General and the other “ Bux-
ton’s map of Queensland.” One places the
River Lynd about 30 miles east of the place
assigned to it in the other. I have assumed
the former to be correct —that is the tracing.
While at th's, our 13 camp, I ascended as
low range to the N.E., three-quarters of a mile
distant. To the North West and West low>
sandstone ranges, and one to the South, distant
about 15 miles. A low range also to the E.N.E.
18 miles elsewhere nearly level country. A
lagoon across the river about 3£ miles from
camp in Box forest, very open, and grasses very
dry, and several on this side of the river 5 or &
miles from camp, in one of these some very
large catfish were caught ; but ihe rocky bot-
tom was a great annoyance to the fishermen.
Near the camp there are box, bloodwood,,
acacia, apple gum. and the Leichhardt tee.
The blackboys have been very successful in
finding large quantities of the honey of the
native bee, and I have named the creek pear
which we are encamped Cooroora Creek in
consequence.
Oct. 29. —Mr. F. Jardine and his brother,,
with Euler, again leave us, intending to travel
northward until they reach the River Mitchell,
The remainder of the party are to follow a
marked tree line, and to encamp near the sup-
posed Lynd, on the bank of a small lagoon
there to await their return. Mr. Jardine has
requested me to name the river we are about
to leave “ The Einnasleigh.”
Oct. 31.—Leave our 13th camp. Horses in
good condition and cattle doing well, and
travel about 4 miles generally N. by E., en-


ejtmping on a creek or water course, running
31E., and holding a little dirty but drinkable
water in small holes. Flat box forest, and
very little grass.
Nov. I.—Travelled to-day about 14 miles
ItS.N.E,, encamping on the S.W. side of a small
lagoon about 200 yards from the supposed
ISiver Lynd. The first mile Box forest, and
remainder of the journey gently undulating
wsndy ridges, poorly grassed, but densely tim-
bered with tea tree, rusty gum, bloodwood,
airingy bark, acacia, and occasionally pandanus.
At about 8 miles from last camp we came to a
aaaall creek, dry sandy bed ; a little water was
Jcnsnd in it where sandstone was cropping up.
The bed was 4or 5 feet deep. About one mile
jbrth'T on we passed a spring, covering a small
Hat near the creek. From this point into camp
we passed some enormous ant hills, 8 to 10 feet
Aigh, and 20 to 30 feet in circumference.
sfear the camp grows a fine shady tree about
30 feet in height, branches sligutly drooping,
slid bearing an oval yellow fruit, pulpy when
ripe, with a rough stone inside.
Latitude 17 deg. 23 min 24 sec. Blood-
wood marked Lit. 17 deg. 23 min., over F.J.,
XT. under, in square.
Nov, 3.—Our leader and his brother re-
turned to-day, they report having been as far
rrorth as 56 miles from this camp through
wretched country. With a further prospect
anything but favorable.
• Nov. 4. —Travelled to-day about 5 miles N.,
crossing the River Lynd ataboutbalf amilefrom
list camp, and atthree-quariersofa milopassinga
small lagoon. Low Isandy ridges, little or no
grass, and densely timbered with tea tree, some
bloodwood, stringy bark, and a little box. The
Aver, where we crossed it, was about 100 yards
wide, several channels and bed scrubby, 8 to
32 feet deep. We afterwards found that the
viver here mentioned as the Biver Lynd was a
■branch of the Kiver Staaten. We have named
it “ Byei ley Creek.”
Encamped near a small waterhole in sand-
stone, a part of the bed of a creek 15 yards
wide, banks abrupt, bed generally dry and
sandy. We had only been in camp an hour
®r two when one of our horses showed symp-
toms of being poisoned ei her from eating some
poisonous herb, or bitten by a snake. We are
inclined to think the latter.
The mare died in the evening.
The Grass on Fire.
Nov. s.—Some of our horses not to be found,
winding even the search of our blackbpys, who
found another horse dead. Cause unknown.
Mr. F. arid A. Jardine with Binney, Euler,
wnd Barney, go forward taking the cattle with
them. The rest of the party with the pack-
&o: scs will follow when they are found. Peter
and Sambo are now tracking them.
This afternoon the long dry grass in which
we had unpacked caught fire, and defied our
efforts to put it out. We saw that no time
was to be lost, and by great exertion removed
the packs and saddles, and sundry scattered
articles to a large anthill to windward of the
fire, where the grass was much shorter. There
were only Scrutton, Conderoy, and I in camp,
and we worked like horses, beating the fire
down with blankets all round the anthill;
Scrutton even rushing to one of two packs
burning furiously, and rescuing some flasks of
gunpowder, the solder of the flasks running off
at the time. The heat was suffocating, and we
were all nearly leaving everything to its fate
several times, when finally a few billies full of
water prevented further danger. On examin-
ing the things that were saved, we found that
everv pack had been singed somewhere, and
many straps and surcingles spoiled.
Nov. 6 and 7. —Some horses still absent.
Nov. 8. —Found all our horses, and travelled
about 15 miles N. £ W; either barren or
very poorly grassed low sandy ridges, clothed
with tea-tree scrub and a kind of brigalow,
some stringy bark, acacia, and bloodw r ood.
Another horse—one of those purchased for my
use—unable to travel —poisoned, we think.
We were obliged to leave him behind. En-
camped near a small waterhole, in a sandy
dry creek, having sandstone in its bed.
Nov. 9.—Similar country t > that of yester-
day, very little or no grass, and no water in
the dry sandy ere ks, although some was found
by digging in their beds ; many pandann palms
grew on their banks. Our general, course
to-day was N. i W., 16 miles, when we joined
the advance party, who wondered what had
caused our delay, and were very hungry;
they had been confined to veal alone for their
food.
We encamped on the N.E. bank of a creek
(Cockburn Creek, a branch of Byerly Creek),
50 yards wide, coming from the E.S.E., after
running it down for half a mile from the cross-
ing place Its bed is much filled with sand-
stone and plenty of water. On its banks grow
Melaleuca and flooded gum. Floodmarks Bto
10 feet above the level of the bed. Latitude
16 deg. 56 min. 6 sec.
Tree marked F.J., XYIII under, in square.
Nov. 10.—Messrs. F. and A. Jardine, with
Euler, again leave us, with instructions to con-
tinue our course down the creek for three or
four days, should we find water, and there to
encamp and await their return. It would be
impossible to continue travelling northward
through this country and we think there is a
possibility of finding more open travelling
near the creek, as well as grass and water ; in
fact, this is the only course open to us.
Travelled to-day about 7 miles N.W., crossing
the creek near our last camp, and again near
our present one. It contains some fine water-
boles and a good deal of sandstone. Both


sides arc densely timb"red and poorly-grassed.
Encamped on the N.W. bank of the creek.
Nov. 11,—Continued our course down the
creek for about seven miles in a westerly direc-
tion —similar to that of yesterday water still
plentiful in the creek. Encamped on the S.W.
bank of the creek, with a forest of bloodwood
saplings behind us, and a little fresh grass.
Latitude 16 deg. 51 min. 31 sec.
Bloodwood marked E.J., XX under, in
square. . , ~
Nov. 12.—Continued our journey down the
creek for about six miles N.W. by W. Its_bed
becomes more sandy and full of trees Mela-
lenca, Nonda, and 'many others new to me.
Water less plentiful. Encamped near a small
waterhole in the creek. The appearance of the
country does not change. We met with the
green-tree ant here in large numbers, and the
bite not so painful as we expected.
Bloodwood marked E.J., XXI under, in
square.
Nov. 13.—Travelled to-day about three and
a-half miles N.W. by W., encamping near
some small lagoons within sight of the creek,
where a little water was also to be found;
half a-mile from creek low sandy ridges,
timbered with tea-tree. In the neighborhood
of this camp there is a little fresh grass.
Bloodwood, acacia, stringy bark, and gum, and
Nonda. _ ,
Latitude 16 deg. 46 min, 5 sec. Busty gum
marked F.J., XXII under, in square.
Nov. 14. —Remained in camp.
Nov. 15.—Our leader returns, telling us he
has seen the Mitchell River, but that the
country is wretched, and to the northward
worse, so that we must continue to travel near
the river.
Nov 16—Continued our course down the
creek for about 11 miles, N.W. by W. The
appearance of the country much the same—in
some places so densely timbered, and so much
undergrowth of trees and small saplings that
it is difficult lo see more than 100 yards in any
direction. Encamped in the sandy bod of the
creek, which has two channels, banks not
abrupt, 10 feet high, water plentiful, grass long,
dry and poor. Bloodwood, nonda, acacia,
and stringy bark —in creek, melaleuca, and
flooded gum.
Bloodwood marked E.J., XXIII under, in
square.
Nov. 17.—Travelled to-day about 11 miles
W.N.W., and at, 5 miles from last camp the
creek we have followed (Byerley Creek) joins
the Lynd River (?) which comes from the S.E.,
bed 200 yards wide, two channels, sandy, dry,
and banks low. We crossed it, and continued
our course down its S.W. side, which is quite
as densely timbered as the _ creek we have just
left. (Mr. E. Jardine desires me to name it
Cockburu Creek). Encamped in the bed of
the river, which there has several channels, &n£
is 300 yards wide.
Bloodwood marked E.J., XXIV under, it
square.
Nov. 18.—Travelled downtheN.E. bank of the
river Staaten about 4| miles, N.W. by N., afctl£<
point it joins a river coming from the E. by S_
300 yards wide, sandy bed, several channels,
water in holes, banks low, sandstone cropping
up in places. We encamped about 3| mile*
further on, in a westerly direction in the bed of
the river—which is broad, and timbered sM
across with Melaleuca—water only to bo found
in holes. A scrubby kind of brushwood grows
on its banks, 200 yards from the river on either
side. Flat country covered with tea tree, scrub*
and desert grass—no kind of use whatever for
pastoral purposes. Latitude, 16 deg. 32 mle-
on the N.E. bank, marked FA*
XXV under, in square.
Although the latitude of the junction of the
Lynd and Mitchell rivers differs slightly fans
the latitude of the junction we have just passed
the appearance of a broad river coming from tk«
same direction confirms me in the opinion £
held at the 15th camp, that we were on ike
River Lynd. The description of country,
however, differs widely from Leichhardt's
accounts of the country he saw on the Lynd,
and makes me doubtful, for I am not
certain that my longitude at Macdonald’s wa*
correct, though I cannot think it was eon -
siderah’y in error. The only course open to
us at present is to follow this river down-to
the coast, leaving it when the country opeae
sufficiently.
Nov. 19. —Travelled about 9 i miles W.|o,
about one mile distant from, and nearly paraM
with, (he river on its northern side, encamping
near one of the chain of lagoons on its nortk
side The horses and cattle get some picking
near the edge of the water, elsewhere the
grasses are dry and poor. The bed of tfce
river is here free from fallen trees, and has
some sheets of not deep water. The banks a«
scrubby, and in some parts are water-worn by
floods. We saw a little triodia, many kinds el
acacia, and handsome Nonda trees loaded with
fruit. A shower of rain from the west.
Bloodwood marked F.J., XXVI under, it
square.
Attacked by Natives.
Nov. 20.—Travelled about 9 miles due west
through tea tree forest, flat country. Encamp-
ing near the river bank in sand, to avoid a
shower of rain from the west.
In the evening we were startled by a shfltit
from one of our blackbrys, who espied about
20 natives coming up from the river batik.
The sun was nearly down, and they took eara
o have him at their backs. They were fulijr
rmed and painted; danced and shouted a
j-ttle while like maniacs, and began to thror’


their spear?. Two shot? from our rifles
scattered without touching any of them.
Fortunately none of the party were hit, although
a spear passed between Conderoy’s legs, quite
near enough.
Sterculia marked F J., XXYII under, in
■square.
Kov. 21.—This morning 13 of our horses
were missing ; so we packed all the available
ones, and walking ourselves, shifted the camp
to one of a fine chain of lagoons, about 3 miles
W. by S., one mile from the river on its north
side. At our last camp water was scarce.
Here we have abundance, and a little feed for
the horses and cattle. As far as we ourselves
are concerned, this is the best camp we have
had. The country is more open, and a decided
improvement in the grasses. A little box,
bloodwood, rusty gum, and farther from the
river tea tree levels.
Latitude 16 deg. 32 min. 45 sec. Bloodwood
marked F. J., XXYIII under, in square.
Nov, 27. —Up to this date we remained in
eamp, while the blackboys were searching for
the horses and some cattle that had also got
away. Recovered our horses this morning
and travelled about 8 miles W.N.W., follow-
ing tne chain of lagoons, which, lower down,
form a creek, encamping near the last. Coun-
try on either side, tea tree levels, near the river
scrubby, without a blade of grass, excepting
that found on the banks of the lagoons. The
river is distant from camp about 3 miles due
south, 150 yards wide, clear sandy bed, and
some sheets of shallow water. The banks are
not abrupt, but water-worn, in places laying
bare the sandstone.
Rusty gum marked F.J., XXIX under, in
square.
Nov. 28. —The chain of lagoons here breaks
into a creek, running W.N.W. iW. This we
followed for about 9 miles, and encamped near
a small water hole in creek—no grass for the
horses and cattle, except that growing on the
banks of the creek, and not much there. Soil
sandy and exceedingly poor,—sandstone crop-
ping up in creek.
Latitude 16 deg. 26 min. 53 sec. Bloodwood
marked F.J., XXX nnder, in square.
Nov. 29.—Cross the creek and travel about 9
miles SW.J W. Level country densely tim-
bered with tea tree, no grass, and many conical
ant-hills, about 3 feet high. Nearer the river
the country opened, and finally after passing
through a fringe of tea tree saplings, blood-
wood and stringy bark, open forest, fronting
the river, with plenty of grass and a prospect
of improvement in the country. Stiff clay soil,
sandstone cropping out here and there. Some
box, acacias, and nondas. The banks of the
river steep, water in many places.
Stringy bark marked E.J., XXXI under, in
square.
Nov. 30. —Travelled about 11 miles W.N.W.
along the N.E. bank of the river, over narrow
box flats fronting the river with a background of
tea trees. The river bed is 300 yards wide at 3
miles from last camp ; and at about 9£ miles
it is joined by the creek we left yesterday—
plenty of water in the river. Encamped on its
northern bank.
Bloodwood marked F.J., XXXII under, in
square.
Dec. 1. —Continued travelling down the same
side of the river, at quarter of a mile from camp
crossing a creek 150 yards wide—sandy bed,
sandstone cropping up, two channels ; it runs
into the river from the N.E. by E. At 3 miles
from last camp many lagoons have been filled
by recent rains. At first the country presented
the same desert-like and dry appearance that we
have been accustomed to; but about the
lagoons there was some short fresh grass. The
banks of the river are in many places water-
worn by floods ; and spinefex grows on them.
We encamped near the river, which is here one
channel, and one sheet of water 70 yards wide.
Floodmarks 14 to 15 feet above the level of the
water, or nearly to the top of the bank.
Bloodwood marked F.J., XXXIII under, in
square. Latitude 16 deg. 27 min. 26 sec.
Deo. 2.—Continued our course down the
river about 10 miles W. £S. The country be-
comes scrubby and spinefex plentiful. En-
camped near the river, which is 300 yards wide,
plentifully timbered with Melalenca, and some
sheets of water scarcely drinkable. In the
vicinity of the camp are some fine bloodwood
and acacias, Barringtonia, and rusty gum.
For some time since I have been much puzzled
to account for the large amount of westing we
have been making, and now think that the
Lynd and Mitchell Rivers of Leichhardt must
have been much to the eastward of us. The
latitude of last camp 16 deg. 27 min. 26 sec.,
together with my dead reckoning for longi-
tude, places it about 40 miles from the coast.
Tnere is a broad sandy creek described by
Leichhardt, nearer to the coast, and a little
further south. I believe that the river we are
on to be the same—named at its mouth by the
Dutch “ The Staaten.” We saw many ducks
to-day in some water holes near the river, and a
few native companions.
Bloodwood marked F.J., XXXIY under, in
square.
Dec. 3.—Travelled down the river Staaten,
our journey being shortened to 6 miles W. by
a heavy thunderstorm from the westward.
The country we came through to-day gradually
assumed a more cheerful aspect, is tolerably
well grassed, watered by some fine lagoons,
slightly undulating, and openly timbered with
large bloodwood, tea-tree, acacia, and box.
Encamped aboutquirterof a mile from the river,
which here widens to 500 yards, sandy bed,
water 30 yards, 2 feet deep at low tide, which


rises and falls from 1 foot to 18 inches, easily
fordable. The banks are low.
Nonda marked F.L, 35 under, in square ;
latitude, 16 deg. 26 min. 38 sec.
Dec. 4.—We remained in camp to-day until
4 o’clock j everything then packing up. We
shifted camp about 2 miles W.N.W.; at
miles crossing an ana-branch, and another near
camp. Plenty of grass at this as well as our
last camp.
The river has many ana branches, and
triodia in its bed. I bad not time to go down
■to its mouth. Acacia, bloodwood, fig-tree
(loaded with unripe fruit), and many others
unknown to me.
Acacia marked F.J., XXXYI under, in
square.
Leave the River Staaten.
Dec. 5. —Leave the Staaten, and travel about
12 miles N. £W. Much of the country we
passed through is subject to inundation. In a
shallow watercourse about 2£ miles from last
camp, the flood-marks were as high as 6 feet.
Encamped in a dry swamp—flood-marks 2 feet
on the trees, no water, and very little grass.
In the evening, one of the black boys came into
camp and reported having found water in a
small lagoon about 2 miles distant.
Box marked F. J., XXXVII under, in square.
Dec. 6. —One half the horses missing. In
the afternoon, packed up to shift the camp to
the lagoon before mentioned. While packing,
an accident occurred which at first sight would
indicate great carelessness. We had with us a
mule, a most useful animal—his pack one of
the heaviest. Immediately on being packed
he slipped off unperceived, which was the more
easy, as the country was so densely timbered.
He'could not have been gone 10 minutes when
his absence was discovered, and Sambo at once
sent on his tracks ; but the mule could travel
faster than Sambo could track him, and we
were obliged to give him up for that day.
Our 38th camp was pitched in open box forest,
flat country, near a small lagoon, which held a
little water quite green with vegetable matter.
Two similar lagoons are in the same creek, 11
miles up, and half a mile down, respectively.
The soil is very hard and dry, but full of crab
holes ; grasses poor and scanty.
Dec. 12.—A1l the horses but two (Lucifer
and Deceiver) —the mule also —were found.
Deceiver was found dead ; Lucifer, mad, in
consequence of excessive thirst, and drinking
salt water. Sambo and Barny were out three
days and nights tracking the mule, but were
finally obliged to give him up. There are here
box, bloodwood, acacia, stirculia, and nonda.
Up to this time I have used 6 deg. variation.
Here the variation of the needle is 4 deg. E.
Latitude 16 deg. 13 min. 45 sec. Box
marked F.J., XXXVIII under, in square.
. Dec. 13. —Left our 38th camp, and travelled
about 12 miles N. over some small brackish
plains, intersected by dry shallow water-
courses, and changing with strips of tea-tree
forest and scrub. At 8 miles from last camp,
we rested near a small creek running N.W.,
and holding a little water in holes, while Mr.
F. Jardine, and his brother and Euler, went
on ahead to seek water. Euler came back to
us with the news, and wo continued our course,
encamping qn the N. bank of Rocky Creek,
which has much sandstone in its bed, and
plenty of water, and is no doubt a branch of
the Rocky Creek mentioned by Leichhardt.
The general appearance of the country seems
to indicate that this has been a very dry season.
We have strong westerly breezes during the
day, falling off soon after sunset. Slight
easterly winds spring up at midnight.
Box marked F.J., XXXIX under, in square.
Dec. 14.—Travelled to-day about 14i miles
N.E. i E., slightly undulating country, tim-
bered with tea-tree and occasional patches of
box forest or stringy bark, bloodwood, and
apple gum ; grasses slightly improving, but very
dry. We were fortunate in finding a small
lagoon directly in our course, in a small creek
running W. by S. The floodmarks in this
creek were nearly on a level with the adjacent
country ; but the bed is so irregular, no height
above its level could be given. Latitude 15
deg. 56 min. 31 sec.
Box marked F.J., XL under, in Square.
Deo. 15.—The country opened to-day imme-
diately on leaving last camp, 3 miles of level open
box forest, grasses very dry, then passing through
a narrow belt of scrub we came to broken sand-
stone ridges, and at about 4 miles from last
camp crossed a deep creek nearly dry, 30 yards
wide, running W. by N. The banks for several
hundred yards on both sides much broken, and
rocky with small ana branches on its S. side.
Then came 17 miles of plains and patches of
open forest, box, bloodwood, acacia, apple gum,
and banhinia; soil, hard clay, much cracked
and dried up by heat, grasses on the plains
very dry, in the patches of open forest some-
times fresh and green. This country is, I
think, suitable for pastoral purposes, although
we found the grass much dried and ground
cracked by heat.
The horses having had a very long
day at 19 miles, we unpacked near a
dry swamp, and sent Euler on a-head to find
water, having seen none since leaving the deep
creek, and then a very little. He returned in
about an hour with the welcome news, when
we packed up, and shifted 2 miles further on
to a small creek plentifully watered running
W.N.W. Our general course was N.E. 21
miles.
Latitude 15 deg. 45 min. 30 sec. Blood-
wood marked F. J., XLI under, in square.


Natives attack some of the party while
travelling.
Dec. 16. —From the 13th camp it has been
customary for us to travel in the following
order : Messrs. F. and A. Jardine immediately
after breakfast rode on ahead and found a
camping ground ; the cattle then followed un-
der the care of Binney and one or two black-
boys ; the horses were then packed and fol-
lowed, the rest in charge of Scrutton, Conde-
roy, and one or two blackboys generally pass-
ing the cattle at sor 6 miles from camp. I
generally rode last of all, finding I could keep
the courses and distances better there than
elsewhere. We had scarcely left camp this
morning when we heard the report of fire arms
in front, and on riding up to a creek about a
mile from camp, found that our leader and his
brother had been attacked by some natives,
whom they soon put to flight. The creek just
mentioned held at the point of attack a deep
sheet of water 20 yards broad. A little higher
up we crossed it where th > bed was dry. We
travelled 5 or 5J miles N.E. flat country, open
forest, many shallow water holes quite dry,
grasses dense and much better than we had
seen lately. Encamped on a deep creek run-
ning N.N.W., its bed in some parts densely
timbered, the foliage rich and luxuriant, in
others there are fine sheets of excellent water.
Leichhardt’s melalenca, fan-leaved palm, and
fig trees, some of the latter bearing ripe fruit,
also vines and tropical trees unknown to me.
Bloodwood marked P.J, XLII under, in
square.
Dec. 17. —Crossed the ana branch to-day,
after cutting a passage through the vines, and
travelled about 7 miles N.N.E. over box coun-
try much divided and made very irregular by
numerous small ana-branchf s all subject to
inundation, drift in the trees and marks on the
trunks of the box and flooded gum from 2 to 6
feet above the levels of the flats. At about 4£
miles from camp we crossed the main stream
of the Mitchell Eiver, bed 500 yards wide,
sandy, and two channels, some water not run-
ning, banks low, and flood marks above them ;
the f liage of the trees on both sides is very
dense, and rich in various shades of green. The
latter par! of our journey bore some resemblance
to a deserted garden which hud contained many
choice plants and trees, acacia, banhinia Leich-
hardt, palm, the latter nu-
merous, also cedar.
Encarnpsu on a flo ded gum flat, grasses
plentiful, fresh, and green, but rather coarse.
This country seemed well furnished with
game—black, whistling, and burdekin duck,
Torres Strait pigeons, native companions, and
many wallabies.
Dec. 18.—Travelled about 7 miles over a
continuation of country subject to innundation
in consequence of the overflow of the water of
the Mitchell Eiver. Our general course about
N. by W.
About 5 miles from camp our leader with
his brother met us, saying that a number of
natives—7o or 80—had disputed their passage,
(they were following tire course of an ana
branch holding a sheet of running water 40 to
50 yards wide, endeavoring to find a crossing
place), throwing spears at them, some of which
came unpleasantly clo. e.
Ourrifles andammunition were soon in readi-
ness—we could hear the natives coining up
around us—when we advanced to the attack.
Many of them lost the numbers of their mess,
but none of our party were hit.
A short tim * afterwards a crossing place was
found higher up the stream, and we encamped
on the N.E. bank of a fine sheet of deep water
70 yards wide, crossing near its ISI.W. end,
where the bed was of sandstone and above the
level of the water. These ana branches are all
distinguished by a narrow belt of dense foliage.
The grass at our camp is very poor and
coarse.
Bloodwood marked F.J., XLIY under, in
square.
Dec. 19.—Travelled about 13 miles N.W. by
N., levying the river and coming on to it again
about an hour and a half before camping.
Flood marks 3 or 4-feet over most of the coun-
try we passed through. B.x and tea-tree and
mixed grasses, having a slight inclination
towards the river, whose banks are worn into
perpendicular walls by floods. No water except
in the river for three miles out. Encamped-on
the river bank after a very tedious day. On the
17th, at our 43 camp, I had the misfortune to
lose my Gregory compass. I had laid it together
with my fieldbook in a safe place at the trunk
of a tree, but in the morning it was gone. I
was very sorry to lose it as I had acquired such
practice—being able to read our course to half
a point while riding on, the needle remaining
perfectly steady.
I took Barney with me and rode back
to-day from our 44th camp.. We had
a long, but unsuccessful search ; now use the
Prismatic compass. At our present camp the
grass is all dry and poor, and the trees, chiefly
box and tea-tree, small ; s ail, very hard.
Latitude 15,deg. 26 min. Bloodwood marked
F.J., XLY under, in square.
Dec. 20.—Travelled to-day about 11 miles
N.N.W. for about 7 miies ; the surface of the
land was much worn into hollows by floods, as
the river here overflows its banks. The N.E.
bank is 20 feetlrgh and precipitous. At about
7 miles from last camp we crossed a deep creek
coming from the E.S.E 70 yards wide ; water
2 feet deep and running; the hanks on both sides
were a litTe scrubby. After leaving the creek,
we travelled through box and bloodwood open
forest, with occasional patches of tea-tree
scrub and spinifex in sandstone washes-


Wherever we find tea-tree, there' the
grasses become very poor and water
scarce, except jn large watersheds. Before reach-
ing camp, we were drenched by]a thunderstorm
from the N.W. The camping ground is a
bloodwood and stringy bark ridge, not within
sight of the river, some grass, not dense, and a
little water in a gully to our left.
Bloodwood marked E.J., XLYI under, in
square.
Dec. 21.—Heavy rains and much thunder
and lightning during the night from the N.W.
To-day the heat was very oppressive. Tra-
velled about 10 miles W.N.W. ; undulating
open box forest with small patches of tea-tree
scrub; tea-tree away to the N.N.E. The
grasses are fresh and green and tolerably good,
and the country is suitable for pastoral purposes
—should there be any extent of it. It appears
to m' 5 , however, to end in tea-tree’forest, and is
possibly confined to the vicinity of the river.
At about miles from last camp, crossed a
shallow creek, 100 yards wide, sandstone crop-
ping up in its bed ; not running. Encamped
near a lagoon, the river b ing distant from us
about one mile W.S.W. The bed is sandy,
quarter of a mile wide, shallow water nearly all
across, banks low; it comes from the S.E. by
E., and runs W.N.W. From its appearance I
should think that the bed extends still further
to the southward,
Could not ascertain the rise and fall of the
tide. Some small fan-leaved palms and man-
grove myrtle grow near its banks.
Leave the Mitchell River.
Dec. 22.—Just before sundown last night,
our black boys reported that some natives were
hovering about not far away, armed with
spears and watching our movements. In this
instance it was thought better to carry the war
into the enemy’s camp than to have them
throwing spears at us in the night. Most of
our party went after them, and an exciting
chase commenced, so close, that the natives
were obliged to throw away their spears, two
dozen of which were brought into camp. Some
are made of reed, and others of hardwood, and
most of them pointed with fish bones. No
one was hurt on either side.
To-day we left the River Mitchell, and tra-
velled about 16 miles N. %W. Marino plains,
poorly grassed and divided by patches of
tea-tree forest, sometimes bloodwood, Barring-
tonia, and acacia, or groves of the Pandanus
palm. Many melon holes. Wo encamped on
the N. side of a small creek, which holds a
little water ; its course is N.W. by W.
As there was no grass, watches were set to
keep the horses.
Latitude 15 deg. 2 min. 30 sec.
Dec. 23.—Travelled to-day about 12 miles
N.N.W. £N. Slightly undulating tea-tree
forest, nothing but desert grass. At about 7
miles from our last camp found a little water
in a small creek running W.N.W. Encamped
witliout water, and where the country was
densely timbered with -very little grass. Again
watched the horses.
Dec. 24. —Travelled about six miles N.N.W.,
encamping on a blood wood, stringy bark low
ridge, sandy, but fortunately a little grass. The
poor horses are looking very thin and hungry.
Dec. 25.—Christmas day.—Travelled N.N.W.
X. about thirteen miles; country slightly
undulating. Tea tree forest, in some parts a
little scrubby, in no part very open. Occa-
sional patches of bloodwood and st ingy bark
forest, in which we found a little grass. At
six and a half miles from last camp crossed a
creek, dry bed, running W., 150 yards wide.
We have called it Balourgah Creek, that, I un-
derstand, being the native name for mahogany,
its banks being lined with those trees. En-
camped on the south side of a creek holding
plenty of water in rocky holes ; much ironstone
in its bed, . This we have named Christmas
Creek.
Bloodwood marked E. J., LI under, in square.
Dec. 26. —Travelled to-day about twelve
miles N.N.W. ; country slightly undulating
and a little improved. Bloodwood and stringy
bark on the ridges. Tea tree in the hollows, some-
times scrubby and sometimes swampy, though
now dry ; a species of swamp oak grows there.
The soil is becoming more sandy. Encamped
on the south-east side of a fine sheet of ex-
cellent water, 80 yards wide, in a creek running
W.S.W. Mr. A. Jai'dino wishes it to be named
Ilersey Creek. Near the camp are acacia,
bloodwood, stringy bark, sterculia banksia.
We have rain now every d.<y ; not enough,
however, to prevent our travelling. Indeed
the rainy season seems to have set in.
Bloodwood marked E.J., LII under in square.
Dec. 27. —Travelled to-day about ten miles
N. Bloodwood and stringy bark more and tea
treeless frequent. Country slightly undulating.
In the Bloodwood Forest there is some good
grass—not much. Much underwood and vines
and creepers, Noudo, - and acacia. In the tea
tree country are some gigantic ant-hills, chiefly
of a conical shape, many of them like sections
of old mud walls, from ten to twenty feet high.
Encamped in a tea tree open flat, having found
a little water in a small sandy creek near us.
Dec. 28.—Travelled to day about eleven
miles N., the first five miles slightly undulating.
Bloodwood and stringy bark on the rises, and
tea tree in the hollows ; then crossing a dry
creed, 160 yards wide, sandstone in its bed,
which was of several channels. The remain-
ing seven miles box flats, which are more or
less subject to inundation, and are also much
divided by small watercourses and swamps.
Crab and turtle shells strewed the ground,
Pandanns, acacia, and rusty gum. Encamped


on a box flat, the water in a small creek near
us being brackish.
Box marked F.J., LIY under, in square.
Dec. 29.—We had scarcely encamped yes-
terday before a heavy thunderstorm passed
over us. The rain was a great boon, enabling
us to fill our billies and cans with good water.
It poured in torrents until midnight, and our
teats not being waterproof we all passed an un-
comfortable night.
We have hitherto been obliged to seek
water near the coast, but as it is now
to be found everywhere, we think of
trying the interior. We accordingly travelled
about 11 miles E.N.E.; at about 4 miles from
camp came to a stream 40 yards wide, ap-
parently deep water —tide rising—followed it
up for 1J mile where it rapidly diminished,
and where we crossed it without difficulty.
Box flats along its southern bank on which
were flood marks 6 to 8 feet high, the grass
being very rank and sedgy. The remaining
miles undulating, poor sandy soil at first,
timbered with bloodwood and stringy bark on
the rises, and tea tree in the hollows. The
grasses on the low bloodwood ridges much im-
proved. Encamped near a tea tree swamp.
Mahogany marked F J., LY under, in square,
Dec. 30. —Remained in camp. Heavy rain
again last night. I should have mentioned
that while at our 54th camp and during the rain,
some natives were observed by our blackboys
who came running into camp with the news
that they were frightening and driving the
horses. As at our 47th camp a chase had an-
swered our wishes in sending them away, it
was thought best to do the same here, and the
same result followed. The natives however did
not go quite so readily in this instance.
Leave the West Coast.
Dec. 31 —Our general course to-day was
about E.N.E. i N., 13 miles. At the distance
of nearly two miles, N.B. from camp —ridges
tolerably well grassed, timbered with blood-
wood and stringy bark. We came to a creek —
Kendall Creek —50 yards wide, steep banks,
and deep water all across. W e saw it up for
about 3 miles, and then crossed, without un-
packing. Continued our course through blood-
wood and stringy bark forest, alternating with
tea-tree. When about 12 miles from camp,
came to another creek—Sinclair Creek—2s
yards wide, deep, and apparently permanent
water —waterlilies; it was running W.N.W.
We followed it up one mile, and encamped on
the site of an old r ative camp. The tea-tree
hollows we pass through are now owing to the
recent rains becoming swamps and also very
boggy. The grass in them is always poor—oc-
casionally honeysu-kle is to be met with. The
first creek mentioned to-day, I have named
■*' Kendale Creek,” where we crossed the water
was 3 feet deep, running. The second, whose
bed is sandstone, and banks abrupt, but not
deep, I have named “ Sinclair Creek.”
Nonda marked F.J., LYI underj in square.
Commencement of good Pastoral Country.
Jan. 1, 1865. —We were fortunate to
find a crossing on Sinclair Creek, about
one mile N.E. from camp, the water
was there three feet deep, running,
flood marks 10 feet above the surface of
the stream, which is beautifully clear. Our
course was then N.E. # N., about 13 miles in
all, undulating bloodwood and stringy bark
forest, commencing with a little tea-tree. At
two miles from camp, near the top of the
ridge, noticed grass tree —at that point the
grasses were rather poor. Finally, encamped
on a small creek, only a few yards wide, very
much like a cut channel, coming from the
N.E., and running S. by E.
The appearance of the country has totally
changed, very much for the better —the grasses
are good, though not very dense —leaving, we
think, room for improvement, and the timber
is finer. More than all, however, we are glad
to be out of that tea-tree country, which has
been as sore eyes to us ever since we left the
River Einnasleigh. Near the camp are bank-
sia, grevillea, bloodwood, and stringy bark.
Jan. 2. —Soon after arriving in camp a heavy
thunderstorm passed over us from the N.E.,
which, towards evening, settled down into a
steady rain, lasting until midnight.
Travelled to-day about 15 miles N.N.E,, un-
dulating country, the ridges being very wide
and gently swelling; the soil firm, chocolate
color; the grasses good, and often dense ; the
timber chiefly bloodwood and stringy bark
forest, with much underwood and vines, sand-
stone cropping up in places. At about 11
miles from last camp the forest becomes dense,
with a multitude of small bloodwood and
stringy bark saplings; and at 12 miles the
ridge ended in a valley running N. A little
further on came to a small creek near its head,
—here were banksia, pandanus, some young
fan leaved palms; and round the edge of a
small waterhole in the creek, ferns, the first
we have met with. Following the creek down
for about li miles, we camped on the stony
rising ground to the westward near a waterhole
in the creek, which is elsewhere dry. Near
the camp are apple gum, acacia, bloodwood,
stringy bark, and mahogany.
Lat. 13 deg. 46 min. 46 sec. Bloodwood
marked F.J., LYIII under, in square.
Jan. 3. —Travelled to-day about 16 miles,
N.N.E. N., undulating country, the soil
changing several times so m after leaving camp,
becoming light sand', heavy travelling; and
asiain before reaching ihe next camp, firm.
The grasses varied both in density and quality.
At about miles from camp crossed a deep
creek running to the W.S W., bed sandy,


steep banks, small stream of good water run-
ning ; dense foliage and vines on the banks.
We have named this “ Kinloch Creek.” At
about 7 and 12 miles respectively, we crossed
two small creeks similar to cut channels, the
immediate bunks of which were boggy, in each
a clear stream of good water. These small
creeks which probably have their source in
springs, have a fringe more or less wide of
Banksia, and in them mahogany. The forest
is chiefly bloodwood and stringy bark, al-
though at intervals we noticed a little iron
bark, zamia, pines, and grass tree.
Latitude 13 deg. 35 min. 54 sec. Blood-
wood marked F. J., LIX under, in square.
A heavy thunder storm overtook us before
we reached camp, wetting everything through.
Jan. 4.—We made a shorter stage to-day
than usual —only six miles —N. 1 W., crossing
a deep creek, 100 yards wide, and several ana-
branches ; bed sandy, with sandslone cropping
up, —water not running, but plentiful; dense
foliage, and vines on the banks. Undulating
bloodwood and stringy bark as far as the creek,
which is five miles from last camp ; then box,
rusty-gum bloodwood ; all open forest. En-
camped, just in time to avoid a heavy shower
of rain, near a small creek, or ana-branch of
the last creek. Bloodwood marked F.J.,
LX. under, in square.
Jan. 5. —Travelled, to-day, about 14 miles,
IN’, by E. The first four miles, stony ridges,
tolerably well grassed ; timbered with blood-
wood and stringy bark; then, descending
rather ab ruptly into a valley, at five miles
crossed a river running, at that point, W. by
S., 200 yards wide ; dry, sandy bed, the banks
from 7 to 10 feet above the level of the bed,
and floodmarks 8 feet above the banks. I
believe this river to be the same as that one
named, at its mouth, the Coen, by the Dutch.
The banks are distinguished by a line of rich
foliage. Mahogany, very fine; some large
Metadenca also growing in the bed; the
Leichhardt, and many other fine trees unknown
to me. A box flat, about one mile in width,
with ana-branches extended along the north
side of the river; the intervening spaces
covered with long, coarse, dense grasses
and sweet-smelling herbs.* Continuing our
journey, at one mile from the river
passed a fine sheet of water, deep, and
apparently permanent, in an ana-branch. The
remaining part of the journey was performed
over undulating, gradually ascending country,
timbered chiefly with bloodwood and stringy-
bark, not of large size, sometimes box, acacia,
rusty gum.
At about 12J miles from last camp, I ob-
tained a peep at the surrounding country,
* Mr F. Jardine was anxious that the river above
mentioned should be named the “Archer.” For several
reasons I consideied it would be better to Idhve it an
open question.
which to the westward, level. To the S.W., a
short low range, or rather hia;h ridge, runs N".
and 8., to the X. andX.E. high ridges, but the
general view gives an idea of flat country, not
a prominent hill to be seen. Encamped near
a small waterhole, in a creek or watercourse
running S.S.E.
Though well grassed, the last 5 or 6 miles are
not well watered. Poplar gum marked E.J.,
LXI under, in square.
Jan. 6. —Travelled to-day about 16 miles
due N, Undulating, open box forest; some
iron bark, bloodwood, acacia, and stuculia.
Pandanus everywhere common. Small deep
creeks and heads of watercourses running to
the N.W. and W.N.W. At about five miles
from camp saw a short range to the eastward,
trending N. and S., distant six or seven miles.
The grasses are excellent; indeed, all the undu-
lating country we have passed through since
leaving our 56th camp, should it be found to
be well watered, may be said to be well adapted
for pastoral purposes. It is to be noticed,
however, that ice see the country under its
most favorable aspect. Encamped near the
head of a watercourse, holding, in a small
water-hole, a little water; the edges of the
hole dist'nctly show a stiff yellow clay.
Jan. 7.—Travelled to-day about or 5
miles N. i E. ; at H miles from camp crossing
a creek about 15 yards wide and 25 feet deep ;
clay bed, nearly dry, and not running: it
comes from the S.E., and half-a-mile lower
down is joined by a similar deep creek coming
from the N.E. by E., which we also crossed,
the banks of both being very steep, and covered
with dense, luxuriant foliage. Mahogany,
Leichhardt, metalenca, and many vines and
dense long grasses. The north bank of the
latter creek was a high sandstone ridge. Then
about 5 miles of level country, box and apple-
gum —many hollows and melon holes. The
remaining portion of the day’s journey was over
slightly undulating country—bloodwood and
acacia, open forest occasionally, a little tea-tree,
and once Banksia —faivleaved palm not fre-
quent, Pandanus, and box—grasses dense and
good, ferns, wild flowers, and creepers and vines
along the ground. Encamped on a small deep
creek coming from the S.S.E. and running
N.lf-W. —not much water,
Jan. B.—The rains continue every day, and
the nights too cloudy to obtain the latitude.
Fortunately we seldom meet with very heavy
travelling, the soil being firm, except in gum
flats. We are pushing very ha r d to reach the
settlements before the floods. We travelled to-
day about 18 miles a little to the E. of N. The
first 6 miles undulating, open box and blood-
wood forest, very pretty country —then one
mile gum flat; in these 7 miles there were
many hollows and melon holes. We then
passed over some higher ridges, on which grow
some fine ironbark and bloodwood trees —here


sandstone was cropping out. Latterly, undu-
lating open bloodwood and stringy bark forest,
changing with tea-tree and banksia, all toler-
ably well grassed. Encamped on a low ridge
(near a tea-tree swamp), timbered with rusty
and apple-gum, bloodwood, and acacia. It
rains while I am writing. Lat. 12 deg. 38
min. 2 sec.
Jan. 9.—Travelled to-day about 14£ miles
If., through undulating open bloodwood and
stringy bark forest, changing with tea-tree and
banksia swamps. At about 8 miles from camp
crossed a large deep creek —“ River Ratavia” —
coming from the S.E. by E., and running
N.W. by W., 120 yaids broad, sandy bed, 30
feet deep, water very clear and good, running
about 2 feet deep.
The banks were covered with den«e foliage
and vine scrub, in which grow some fine trees.
The remaining distance bloodwood and stringy
bark, changing with tea tree and banksia.
Encamped near Tea Tree Swamp.
Pomegranate marked E.J., LXY under, in
square.
Jan. 10.—Leave our Gsth Camp and travel
about 2J miles N.N.E. ; s< il very bogey, after
the heavy fall of rain. Ridges timbered with
bloodwood and stringy bark —hollows with
bloodwood and gum. The cattle had preceded
us, but many of them bogged when crossing a
shallow watercourse —the gently sloping banks
of which were very boggy—the w’ater knee
deep, running N.N.W. After unpacking the
horses we crossed them with some difficulty,
and succeeded in getting a'l the cattle out but
two —one a very fine fat bullock. These were
killed, the former serving us with meat, and
encamped on fine ground near the creek, to
cure what was not eaten—which was done by
jerking it.
Jan. 11.—Continued our journey to-day in
a N.N.E. direction, very heavy travelling. At
about 2 miles from camp we came to a creek
about 15 yards wide ; water, nearly bank and
bank; current very strong, running to the
N.W. by W. Crossed our packs and saddles
and other things by felling a tree, which did
not quite reach across, and obliged us to be
very quick as the water was rising rapidly.
In crossing the horses we had a rope tied to
the head of each horse, reaching across the
creek. Nevertheless, two of them —Jack, be-
longing to Mr. Jardine, and Blokus, a horse
provided for my use—w-ere drowmed, their legs
becoming entangled in the vines.
We then packed up and endeavored to con-
tinue our course, but we had scarcely left the
ridge forming the N.E. bank of the creek,
when a heavy storm broke over us. We were
now in a gum and bloodwood flat, and the
ground soon ankle deep in water —the clayey
soil became boggy, and many of the horses
sunk under their burdens and were unable to
rise—one, Nell Gfwyun, we were compelled to
leave, as after lifting her out of the bog, she
was too weak to stand.
Relumed to the ridge near the creek, and
encamped about half a mile above the ciossing
place.
Acacia marked F. J, LYII under, in square.
Poisonous grass or herbs at this camp; cattle
were not affected by it.
We did not see the Flinders poisonous plant
at any part of our journey.
Jan. 12. —Remained m camp to-day to dry
everything. This morning two of our horses were
found dead Rasper and Marion, occasioned, we
think, by poisonous grass or herb ; and in the
course of the day several other horses showed
symptoms of being attacked by a similar
disorder. Excessive sweat, blindness, and con-
traction of the stomach, and I think thirst as
all endeavored to reach the water.
Our efforts to g t Nell G-wyun out of her
difficulties were unavailing.
Jan. 13.—This morning discovered four more
horses dead—Snip, the best in the mob ; Junk,
a capital pack horse ; Stag and Bowen, the two
latter had been provided for me. Our horses
were now 20 in number, so that we were
reduced to the necessity of walking. So,
ridding the packs of a* much useless lumber as
possible, we packed all the- horses and pro-
ceeded on foot. It was found necessary that
one should ride with the cattle, that being
Binney’s duty. We walked through blood-
wood and stringy bark forests, intersected by
tea tree and Pandanus water-courses—in these
the horses frequently bogged, so much was this
the case on coming to a gum fiat, that we were
compelled to unpack everything and carry the
packs and saddles to a low ridge, having
travelled about 9* N.E. by N. While travel-
ling another good pack-horse —Button died,
and shortly after reaching camp Bandy.
Jan. 11—Walked to-day about seven miles
N.E. by N., undulating country intersected by
small watercourses, full of water, and running
generally about S.E. Sandstone crept up on
the ridges, which timbered with bloodwood,
ironbark, apple gum, and pomegranate. Some
zyamia, and the ground is everywhere covered
with ferns, and near the watercourses mosses.
The grasses are good, but not dense. Ihe
grass in this country are genera’ly known as
blue and Isaac’s grass. The hollows are boggy,
and the timber generally met with in them is
bloodwood, tea tree, gum, and Pandanus.
Bloodwood mai'ked F. J., LXiX under, in
square.
f Jan. 15.—We had a very heavy storm yes-
terday afternoon, commencing a little after
midday, and raining for three hours. Ihe
hardest rain we have had. Remained in camp
to-day to dry our belongings. The rain had
scarcely ceased when some 15 or 20 natives
came iiea* the camp. They were unarmed,
made a great noise, and talked, gesticulating


vehemently. They would not allow us to come
near—that is—on our reproach they retreated,
and finally getting their spears came up with
the intention of attacking us. Two shots only
were fired, some of our party then chased
them. The natives, however, soon outrunning
everybody. They use the wommerah to throw
their spears, which are pointed with fishbone ;
the shaft being made of hardwood.
Jan. 16.—Leave our 69th camp, and walk
about 154 mdes N. by 8., walking over some
high ridges, or one might almost say low
ranges ; there does not appear to be a distinct
range, merely a succession of gradually ascend-
ing ridges, which are not well grassed. The
forest is not open—bloodwood, and stringy
bark, apple gum, Grrevilea, young pandanns
and zamia. At about 5 miles from camp we
descended gradually into a valley and crossed,
the horses bogging a little; a smaller stream
of excellent water running to the west. A
little further on a deeper creek, bed sandy and
firm, water al-o running knee deep iu the same
direction. On the north bank of this creek,
which formed the slope of a high ridge, were
growing box, stringy bark, apple gum, blood-
wood, and acacia. The creek itself is probably
one of the heads of the Eiver Batavia.
About 54 or 6 miles beyond this point we
came to a deep creek with steep banks, the
water running slowly to the W. by N. We
found a shallow crossing, and passed over
without difficulty, floodmarks 20 feet above
the bed ; on the banks grow vines, melalenca,
and mahogany.
Next passing over a bloodwood and stringy
bark ridge ; many vine, much underwood, and
little grass. We encamped on the N. side of
a deep creek, 10 yards wide, water knee deep,
and running slowly to the westward ; banks
steep, and timbered with gigantic melalenca,
mahogany, s* aforthea palm, fruit, and other
trees unknown to me.
Bloodwood marked F. J., LXX under, in
square.
Termination of the good pastoral country .
Jan. 17.—Walked to day about 154 miles
N. at 24 miles from camp : crossing a deep
creek, banks steep, water knee deep, running
S.W., sandstone in its bed. At 44 miles from
camp, reached the top of a low range heading
S.W. by W. Our ascent commenced with the
day’s journey. Some of these ridges are stony
with poor grass, and some sandy, with much
underwood and vines, making wa king labor-
ious ; pa-sed some gigantic ant hills of bright
red earth, the color sometimes approaching
Vermillion, 25 to 30 feet high. The timber
chiefly bloodwood and stringy bark, with
grevillea, and occasionally apple gum. At
about 84 mdes from camp crossed a small
creek running to the westward flood marks not
high, and at 104 miles descended into a valley ;
from this point we saw a low range to the
N.E., distant about five or six miles,
heading apparently S.E. and N.W. En-
camped on the N.E. bank of a shallow
creek; clear excellent water, running to the
N.W. During the latter part of our walk the
soil became more loose and sandy, ending at
the descent into the valley, in white sand,
poor grass, Banksia ; near the creek, Pandanus,
and a palm tree, whose leaf is like a star,
radiating naturally from the stem, and not split
by the wind. While travelling, another horse
died —Kombo.
Jan. 18.—We found two other horses had
died this morning from the-effects of the poison
—whatever it may be—which they had taken
at the 67th camp. These poor brutes foamed
very much at the mouth, and were continually
walking round until they dropped. Our horses
now numbered 15, and we were obliged to
throw away two empty saddles. Walked
to-day about 114 miles N.N.E., crossing several
high ridges, trending generally N.W. by W.,
the creeks and watercourses between them
being deep and narrow ; some of
the ridges were scrubby, all densely
clothed with underwood and vines wherever
stringy bark was seen; all also either very
poorly grassed or barren. Eleven miles from
camp, the top of the ridge was free from trees,
and for ten miles to the no* thward nothing but
brushwood to be seen. Encamped near a deep
ere k in a ravine running generally W.S.W.;
water excellent. We passed to-day a great
deal of banksia, grass tree ; in the creeks, ma-
hogany, pandanus, tea tree, and the star-leaved
palm, and on a pitcher plant.
Latitude, 11 deg. 46 min. 36 sec.
The Richardson Range.
Jan. 19.—One of the horses we were obliged
to leave at the 67th camp was Neil Qwynn ; her
little filly, however, had continued to follow
the packhorses until yesterday, when its
strength failed. It was killed, and part of the
carcase brought into camp and eaten, there
being no other meat —the leader objecting to
kill even a small beast on the plea of wet
weather. I must confess it was rather repug-
nant to my feelings, not being accustomed to
.horse flesh ; however, “ hunger is a good sauce.”
Walked to-day about 8 miles N.N.B £ E.,
crossing many gullies, in every one of them a
stream of clear sparkling w r acer, cool and
excellent. No trees with the exception of
stunted banksia, except in the ravines—brush-
wood in white sand, no grass. At about 54-
miles from camp entered a bloodwood and
stringy-bark forest, very dense underwood and
vines ; a mile further on more open. Encamped
near a rivulet running N.E. By climbing a
tree to the eastward, on the top of the ridge, I
saw the coast line to the E. and S.E , distant
about 10 miles. The country lying between us


and the sea appears to be flat and covered with
brushwood. The coast line is marked by white
sand hills. There is some grass, not by any
means dense, in the neighborhood of the camp.
With regard to the small streams of running
water near the top of the range, their banks
were in all instances boggy and covered with
mosses and ferns.
Jan. 20. —On leaving camp to-day we en-
deavored to travel N., but were foiled at 2
miles from camp by a dense impenetrable
scrub, returning towards our yesterday’s camp
about half a mile, then about half a mile B.
to the eastern slope of the range. At this
point the sea was distinctly visible, a bay to the
S.E., the projecting point of land bearing
S.S.E. —Cape Grenville probably. It is diffi-
cult to tell the trending of the Richardson
Range. To the northward it appears to be
N.N.E.; to the southward its outline cannot
be seen. Continuing our course down a spur
of the range, which is very stony (ironstone),
we encamped near a small creek, running
water, to the eastward. The course of the
stream is marked by a line of small trees and
dense foliage. Erom a point on the spur of the
range, near the camp, I got the prismatic
bearing of Cape Grenville 117 deg.
Bloodwood marked F.J., LXXIY under, in
square.
Jan. 21.—The grass was good at the camp
we left to-day, and was much needed
by the horses and cattle. We walked
to-day miles N.N.E. in about hours,
crossing four deep and narrow creeks running
generally east, and between them spurs of the
coast range, or rather dividing range. Every
one of these creeks is full of dense vine scrub,
and through which we were obliged to out a
path. The scrub in some places quite im-
penetrable. One vine in particular, the long
fine tendrils of which were covered with
hooked thorns, was most annoying. The
foliage of the trees, which are tall, has a very
tropical appearance—some fruit trees, seafothia
and star-leaved palm. The spurs of the range
are either stony or of white sand—in the former
instance not badly grassed, in the latter, with-
out grass, and covered with brushwood,
mahogany, Banksia, pandanus frequent, tea
tree occasionally.
Mahogany marked F.J., LXXY under, in
square.
Jan. 22.—Walked to-day about 10 miles N.,
about 2 miles from camp. I ascended a bluff
spur of the range, and saw the sea quite plainly
at about 8 miles distant—to the north a short
range tending east and west, distant from 14 to
18 miles. All the country we can see from
this point, included between the N. and S.E.
points, appears to be either scrubby or covered
with brushwood.
We only had to cut paths through 4 or 5
creeks to-day, and at about 4 miles were off the
range, which sails out towards the N.W. very
gradually. The soil is white sand, and grass
rare—forest country, with dense underwood
alternating with more open ridges, covered
with brushwood or grass tree, Banksin Pan-
danus. We were twice pushed out of our
course to the westward, by dense pine scrubs.
Water is plentiful; every creek on this side of
the range has a stream of cool, clear, running
water in it. Encamped amidst some open
brushwood near a small creek running east —
rocky bed; not in time to avoid a heavy shower
of rain from the eastward.
Jan. 23.—Walked to-day about 91 miles
N.W. by N.; fewer creeks —otherwise the
country is similar to that of yesterday. Some
of the underwood very dense and difficult to
walk through ; grass trees very plentiful. Pine
scrub to our right, at about 5 miles from camp,
stretching away to the eastward. At about
9 miles from last camp emerged out of some
very dense brushwood into undulating forest,
with grass enough for a camp. We therefore
pitched our tents near a tea-tree watercourse,
similar to those we saw on the western water-
shed. We passed to-day pines, mahogany, a
species of oak, rough leaved fig, and other tro-
pical trees. Many ferns and mosses in the
creeks.
River JarcUhe.
Jan. 24. —Walked to-day about 4£ miles N.
At 3£ miles from camp, came to a creek 10
yards wide, 8 to 10 feet deep, banks abrupt, bed
of white sand, water two feet deep, running.
Soon after skirting this creek, which runs N.
by W., the country—which had previously
been scrubby, or covered with brushwood—
improved. The soil —before white sand —be-
came richer, and of a chocolate color; the
grass dense and good. While travelling, a
very heavy thunderstorm caused the creeks to
rise very rapidly, preventing us from continuing
our journey.
Pomegranate marked P.J., LXXYIII under,
in square.
Jan. 25. —Walked about 10 miles N. 16 deg.
W., crossing several deep and narrow creeks,
each distinguished by a dense vine scrub. At
3 miles from camp, the soil again changed to
white sand; and again we walked through
heath, brushwood, and scrub, the latter part of
the day’s journey being performed in heavy
rain. Encamped on a gently-sloping sandy
ridge, timbered by a few stunted trees —
Banksia, grass tree, Pandanus; not much grass
either for horses or cattle. A small water-
course to the southward and near the camp —
runs eastward.
Jan. 26. —Leave our 79th camp and travel
about 10i or 11 miles N.W. by W., at a mile
and a half from camp, coming to and following
the course of the River Jardine which, I think,
is the escape. It enlarges very rapidly, many
creeks coming into it from the southward; the


N.E. bank is lined for several miles by a dense
scrub, the S.W. bank being densely timbered—
oaks, tea tree, heath, and brushwood;
in some places much underwood and Pandanus.
Walking is tedious and difficult. We all
suffer from sore feet. Various methods are
tried to walk comfortably ; some have boots ;
some are barefooted ; others use pieces of
blanket; then, again, a kind of sandal was in-
vented, and found to answer very well. Al-
though much hindered by the scrubby creeks,
we endeavor to push on, in rain or sunshine.
Encamped on a large stream, 40 to 50 ya ds
wide, coming from the S.W. byS., and joining
the river half a mile below our camp. The
river is here 60 yards wide, swollen by the
recent rains, although yet 8 feet below the top
of the banks, which are very irregular, and
broken by small tea-tree creeks coming in from
the S.S.W.
Jan. 27. —Found a shallow crossing place of
the creek, near which we encamped, and were
able to carry everything over safely, swimming
the horses and cattle. We then continued
our course about fivo miles N.W., through
country partly scrubby, partly forest, tolerably
well grassed. The ground everywhere much
covered by vines, ferns, and herbs. Crossed
two scrubby creeks near their junction with the
river. Higher up the scrub continued for a
mile beyond these creeks. Encamped near the
river on the south bank of a narrow deep
creek coming from the N.W. by W. The river
widens rapidly, being here 100 yards wide,
banks abrupt, and not heavily timbered. The
vine creeks we have crossed have in their
scrubs many wild and some luscious looking
fruits, many eatable and good. These would
no doubt improve with cultivation. More
game to be found here than we have seen for a
long time ; kangaroo, wallaby, scrub and plain
turkeys, pheasants, black cockatoos, parrots, and
many pigeons,
Jan. 28.—Our course to-day was very wind-
ing, generally about N.W. by W., distance
about 12 miles. The river ran very much to
the eastward, and had a very scrubby frontage
to its N.W. bant. About 3 miles from camp
we came to an open health extending
to the N.E., the country 'being still a
succession of ridges, some of which are toler-
ably well grassed ; on others there is much
underwood, sometimes heath and brushwood.
It may be said in a general way of the country
we have seen on the east coast, that it is com-
posed of sandy ridges, not often grassed, but
clo'hed with heath and brushwood, or scrubby.
The rains are heavy, and commenced always
about mid-day, the nights being now fine and
clear. This day’s journey seemed to be very
heavy for the horses, several of them knocked
up on the road and were left behind.
Encamped near the river, the last li miles
of the journey being more open. It is the
stated intention of the leader to wait here a
week to rest ourselves, as well as the cattle and
horses.
Blood wood marked P.J., LXXXII under, in
square.
Jan. 30. —Mr. Frank Jardine, his brother*
and Euler leave us, and go on a head to find
the settlement. My dead reckoning places our
present camp about 19 miles S. from Somerset,
and 8 miles from the mouth of the Escape-
River, as shown in the tracing.
Feb. 2.—Our leader returns. His report ia
as follows :—“ He followed the river down,
having travelled 30 miles west and 20 miles
N. He then turned back, believing it to bo
the western waters. The river, whose width ia
here 100 yards, he tells us is 300 yards wide j
30 miles lower down another branch coming in
from the southward, that the main stream
makes a great bend to the west and south-west,
in one place running S.S.E. He would not be
surprised if it is the Batavia.” This proves at
any rate that my estimated distances are in-
correct, that is, since w e have been obliged to
walk.* This is not to be wondered at when it
is remembered that we have bad a difficult
country to walk through, that our stoppages
were frequent in consequence of the horses
bogging and being dragged out, having also to
cut roads through most of the scrubby creeks
in our way. Ido not think the error in lati-
tude more than 15 miles. For many camps I
have been unable to obtain the latitude. The
sextant has been shaken out of adjustment or
the run injured, and no opportunity has yet
offered of putting it into order. We
do not see the sun, both days and nights
being now rainy—not heavy rain, but
continuous. The river has not risen more than
one foot since we have been encamped here;
at its lowest, the depth of water above "the
level of the bed, was about 5 feet. It is now
rising rapidly.
Feb. 5. —On the night of the 4th, I was
enabled to obtain the true latitude of this
camp, having previously adjusted the sextant as
well as possible. Ifo md the plate at the back
of the horizon-glass broken. Latitude 82nd
camp, 11 deg. 11 min. 39 sec., or about 33
miles south of Cape York—probably 26 miles
south of the settlement. Mr. F. Jardine, his
brother, and Euler cross the river, and again
leave us to seek the settlement. We expect to
see them on Saturday or Sunday next.
Feb. 6.—A most lovely, clear, fine day. We
hope the weather is breaking.
Feb. 7. —Heavy thunderstorm from the N. W.
Feb. 8,9, and, 10,—Fine days, thundering a
little in the afternoon; the river going down
rapidly; the bed is sandy, many snags, and
♦ I afterwards found that these distances were in-
correct, the true distances west and north respectively
from the 82nd camp to the point in our track, where
the leader turned back, ate about 24 W and 7 N.


the banks abrupt, not deeper than 15 to 20
feet, lined with melalenca and mahogany. The
immediate frontage to the river, say 200 to 300
yards, is more or less well grassed and timbered,
with nonda, bloodwood, and tea tree. To the
westward, beyond that distance, the country
is undulating, white sandy soil, no grass, partly
open heath, with banksia, brushwood, and pan-
danus, partly scrubby, and appears to be the
same as far as one can see. I am told by one
of the party, a native of Sydney, that this
country and that in the neighborhood of Sid-
ney are exactly similar.
Feb. 11. —Our leader returns a second time
unsuccessful; he tells me that he proceeded in
a direct line N.N.8., intending to strike the
coast and follow its bends until he reached
the settlement. He was on the coast
near the mouth of the Escape Eiver ; saw
Newcastle Bay and Mount Berner could not
cross the river, so many mangroves—so much
mud and other disagreeable things. He further
says that the river is more than one mile wide
at the mouth, from which point he followed it
up towards its source for 53 miles,* it was there
300 yards wide, unapproachable by reason of
mangroves and mud. Their horses knocked up
the second day after they left us, and they were
oblig d, they tell us, to walk back, after being
almost within sight of the place of our destina-
tion. They describe the country as wretched,
compared with which that we have passed
through was a paradise —that we know was bad
enough. They found nothing but scrub and
brushwood —no grass whatever —near the coast
mangroves ad libitum.
Our opinions are now changed ; thire is no
doubt that the river, near which we are dr-
camped, is the Escape, and our best plan is to
follow it until it bends to the eastward.
All our provisions are now gone with the
exception of 10 lbs. of flour. The sugar lasted
up to this camp. Most of the tea was burnt at
the 16th camp, the nranant that was saved
there would hu e lasted some time with care,
but even that was lost with the mule at the
37th camp; from that point wo boihd the
sugar and water together and drank it instead
of tea. Now we are reduced to jerked meat
and water.
Feb. 14.—1 t was finally resolved to continue
our journey down the river as far as the head
of the tide. The horses are looking wretched,
and are evidently almost worn out, w T e are
therefore obliged to leave several p icksaddles
and other rubbish. Walked about 8i or 9
miles W.N.W. The course of the river is very
tortuous, the banks 10 to 12 feet average
height above the surface of the stream which is
quite free from fallen trees, although an occa-
sional snag is seen in the shallows. Tea tree
* I see in the account of Mr. Kennedy’s expedition
the Escape River is about 16 or 17 miles long.
swamps run parallel with, and. are only divided
from, the river by its bank. The country is
nowhere open nor well grassed, sometimes
scrubby, often much underwood and brush-
wood. Floodmarks 10 to 12 feet above the
water. Encamped on the river bank.
Feb. 15. —Walked about 7 miles W. by N.,
leaving the river bank at about one mile from
camp to avoid a scrub, and travelling through
country very poorly grassed—Banksia, heath,
and brushwood undulating—white sandy soil,
not boggy, although recent heavy rains have
made it very wet. Near the river the soil is
sometimes much richer, and there are occa-
sional patches of better grass. The river timber
is Melalenca, and mahogany, white bloodwood,
nonda, tea-tree, grow in its immediate neighbor-
hood. Encamped on the bank of a creek, 15
yards wide, immediately after crossing it near
its junction with the river. It has a sandy bed,
water running two feet deep—bank 3 abrupt,
but not deep.
Bloodwood marked F. J., LXXXI V. under,
iu square.
Feb. 16. —Continued our journey from camp
84, walking about 9a miles W. The whole
river frontage is not by any means open; yet
we were compelled to follow its windings—so
many swamps run parallel with it, sometimes
forming a permanent lagoon, and sometimes
running in' o the river by a shallow gully. At
eight miles from camp, crossed a large creek 30
yards wide, sandy bed, sandstone cropping up.
We unpacked, and carried everything over at
the shallowest place wo could find, where the
water was running beautifully five feet
deep. At some points the ground is covered
by dense grass and vines, bloodwood, nonda,
mahogany, tea-tree, and banksia. Encamped
on the river bank.
Nonda marked F.J., LXXXY., under, in
square.
Feb. 17.—Walked to-day about 8i miles
W.N.W., keeping close to the river for about
five miles, when a boggy swamp obliged us
to leave the river bank. It was at this
point that our leader and his brother turned
back, concluding that this river ran into the
west coast, without having seen anything
definite. As before mentioned, they told me
they had travelled 20 miles N., and 30 miles
W. —a glance at the sheet No. 14 will show
this to have been an error. The next three
mil s we walked through wretched country,
heath and brushwood, banksia and scrub,
pandanus frequent. Our path was about one
mile from the river from which we were
separated by a densely timbered swamp. The
last half-mile following a ridge which brought
us down to the river, and better grass, this
b ung a good camp for the horses and cattle.
The river here overflows its banks, more
particularly the north-eastern one, during
floods.


Mahogany marked F.J., LXXXYI under, in
square.
Feb. 18. —Walked to-day about nine miles
N., almost at starting we crossed a creek 15
yards wide, water running six feet deep, its
bed is sandy, sandstone cropping up, and it
comes apparently from the southward.
After crossing the creek, we continued travel-
ling near the river', having a high ridge, tim-
bered with bloodwood and stringy bark, on
our left hand; it was also clothed with many
vines and much underwood, and extended for
one mile due north. After this, the features
of the country were similar to those previously
mentioned—a mixture of swamp and scrub,
brushwood and underwood. Encamped quite
close to the river, whose waters appear to be
affected by the tide —a slight rise and fall being
perceptible at intervals. We have been ex-
pecting the river to turn to the eastward lat-
terly, and are somewhat doubtful, now, where
it will run. My dead reckoning places our
present (the 87th) camp about 7 or 8 miles
from the coast, and 32 miles, in a direct line
S.W. by W., from the settlement.
Bloodwood marked F. J., LXXXYII. under,
in square.
Feb. 20. —After staying at the 87th camp to
kill and jerk some beef, we continued our
Journey to-day, walking about six miles N.W.
The swamps became less frequent, and the
grass improved. We were much disappointed
to find the river turning to the westward,
being finally brought to a standstill by a creek
15 yards wide, coming apparently from the
south. Here we see mangroves and a tidal
mark, showing a rise and fall of three feet; here
we encamped. From the top of a ridge on the
other or western side of the creek, one of the
Jardines, by climbing a tree, saw the mouth of
the river, at the distance of two miles. He tells
me he saw Prince of Wales Island quite
distinctly, and that the river-mouth is one mile
wide. This is conclusive, and we must now
retrace our stops and cross the river. Had not
our horses been so low in condition —some of
them being scarcely able to walk —some one
would have gone ahead and prevented the
whole party travelling so far out of its course.
Latitude, 10 deg. 56 min. 14 sec.
Feb. 21.—Returned to the 87th camp.
Feb. 23,—Heavy rains ; the river rising
rapidly.
Mr. F. Jardine and his brother, with Euler,
swam across the river taking with them five
horses, and start on another excursion to find
the settlement.
Feb. 24 to 28. —Heavy rains continuing night
and day almost without intermission. River
has risen to within one foot of the top of the
bank at camp, having overflowed its banks in
many places, both up and down the river.
March 1. —Shifted camp on to a low ridge,
about one mile down the river. Rains cease.
One of the weak horses, Lady Scott, died.
March s.—The Messrs. Jardine return [with
good news. They had no difficulty in finding
Somerset, having met with two of the blacks
who guided them. They tell us they accom-
plished the distance in from 35 to 37 miles.
Every one very glad to see them, as we were
beginning to feel the effects of hying on jerked
meat and water.
Crossed the Elver Deception.
March 7. —Made a punt by covering a frame
with bullock hide, and crossed everything dry
but the last load, which consisted of pack
saddles. Encamped on the east bank of the
river, which had fallen 7 feet.
March 8. —Leave ourlast camp in much better
spirits than we have enjoyed latterly, walked
about 10 miles N.E. by B. The first 3 miles
a mixture of swamp, brushwood, and heath,
white sandy soil, Banksia, and tea tree. Then
7 miles undulating country, the ridges of
chocolate colored soil, grass tolerably good,
vines and underwood, timbered with bloodwood
and stringy bark.
In the valleys the soil is white sand, grasses
poor, banksia and tea-tree. About 4* miles
from last camp we unpacked everything and
crossed a creek 6 yards wide, running five feet
deep, coming from the south; bed, level, of
sandstone ; banks low and abrupt. On cross-
ing the creek, one of the weak horses could not
stand, and we were obliged to leave him to his
fate. Had not five horses in good condition
been brought out from the settlement, we must
have left most of our goods and chattels
behind.
March 9. —Walked to-day, about 9 miles
N.E. by E. High ridges tolerably well grassed,
and crowded with dense vine scrubs. Swamps
in the hollows, sometimes hidden by dense
brushwood. Water everywhere plentiful.
Encapmed on the south-eastern slope of a
well grassed ridge, having a swamp beneath,
and a small vine scrub above us.
March 10. —Some natives came to the camp
during the morning, and were sent away to
bring some fish in exchange for tobacco. Five
of them returned in the evening, each bringing
his supply of shell fish, receiving some tobacco,
of which they are all very fond, in return.
They smoked the leaf by inhaling a long
draught from a piece of bamboo, which is
previously filled by means of a tube made of a
large green leaf, in which a leaf of the weed is
rolled, lit, and the smoke blown into the
bamboo. This singular method of smoking
had great effect on them, making them very
stupid.
March 11. —Walked 7i or 8 miles N.E. byN.
Undulating country, bloodwood and strir
bark, moderately well grassed—sometu


vines, underwood and ferns, occasionally
scrubby. Encamped on the slope of a ridge
overlooking a small lake to the southward, it’s
native name is Chapelgwynya, pronounced as
spelt. Alligators have been seen in the lake;
Noticed Noda, Moreton Bay ash, tea tree, and
mahogany. Passed many old native camps,
the ground being covered with shells.
'Reach Vallach Point on the east coast, about
2 miles from Somerset,
March 12.—Walked to-day about 7\ miles
N.E.; alternately scrubby and open forest,
high ridges timbered chiefly with bloodwood,
tolerably well grassed. In the Yalleys, white
sandy soil, tea tree and banksia, and poor
grasses ; water everywhere plentiful. At about
4 miles from camp we rested on the N. bank of
a larger lake than Chapegwynya, named
Boronto. Here Mr. Jardine met us. He had
just ridden out from Somerset, and seemed glad
to see us. He had selected a good camp near
the coast, about 2 miles from Somerset, at
Yallack Point, which we reached in the
evening.
The scrubs abound with turkeys and
wallabies, and occasionally megapodii are met
with.
SOMERSET.
ERRATA.
Under dates Dec. 1,2, and 20 :
For “ Spinefex” read triodia.
Under date January 7:
For “ 14>i or 5,” read or 15.
In the hurry of going to press a few mistakes have crept into the preceding pages.
For “melalenca,” read " melaleuca.
For “ banhinia,” read bauhinia.
Under date January 26 : “ escape” should have a capital E.
The site of the town seems to be admirably
selected on the S.W. side of a channel, averag-
ing perhaps 800 yards width, which divides
Albany Island from the main land. The coast
line is very irregular. Eidges, 100 to 150 feet
above the sea level, end abruptly in the
channel, separating small sandy or muddy bays,
the shore of Albany Island also presenting
similar indentations and projections. The
ridges are generally clothed with scrub,
although on the S.E. side of the town, the
slopes are bald. The land between the ridges
slopes down gently to the beach of each bay,
being in some instances more openly timbered.
Small fresh water streams or rivulets find their
way slowly to the sea. G-ood water is also to
be found by digging a few feet deep in the
hollows. The soil is very poor white sand,
although vines and shrubs grow very luxu-
riantly in the scrubs which cover much of the
neighboring country. On the ridges the soil
is very thin, ironstone frequently cropping out.
Sandstone, too, is laid bare, by the weather and
time, immediately above high water mark.
The views are picturesque from any point, and
a great relief to the eye after travelling for five
months through nothing but forest.


UAff
W EI6L(O
W7
]
>
i IpS*
z JAN 1993 'C,
O r*>


®hf dttHrdian
(Published Daily,)
Is Independent of every party or clique;
Exposes fearlessly Jobbery wherever detected;
DISCUSSES fairly every question of Colonial
interest;
Furnishes the fullest and best Telegrams
every morning j
Provides the latest and most accurate Ship*
ping and Commercial Intelligence;
and
Presents all the news of the day.
Advertising Scale :
Two lines
Four lines ... ... ... ••• 2s.
Six lines ... ... ••• ••• 2s.
Eight lines ... 4s*
Every additional line, 2d.
Publishing Office, -Queen-street, Brisbane.
werag-
>ides
a tho
<v bays,
-ting
.'he
Ib a Paper for the Family, the Far 1 '
the Bush. It consists of
TWENTY PAGES
and enjoys by far the
LARGEST CIRCD7
J
.nark.
of any Journal in the colony,
advertisements regardng Stations
Queensland appear in i« pages.
Price, 265. Per Annu>.
Advertising Scale ;
2 lines and under
4 ~ it
6 ,1 II
8 ~ it ••*
Every additional line
"■‘"'capital E.
Publishing Office Qu«v
