

PUBLIC FUNERAL
OF THE LATE
WILLIAM CHARLES WENTWORTH.
TUESDAY, 6TH MAY, 1873.
SYDNEY: THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1873.




PUBLIC FUNERAL
OF THE LATE
WILLIAM CHARLES WENTWORTH.
TUESDAY, 6th MAY, 1873.
SYDNEY : THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1873.
A




In a matter of so much interest as the first Public
Funeral which has taken place under the Resolutions
of Parliament, it is considered desirable that the various
documents 'which show the origin and progress of the
arrangements adopted, should be gathered together
and preserved in the form of a pamphlet for more
ready reference.
The Commissioners ,
io June , 18 73.
B




Although the most earnest hopes of the many friends, and still
more numerous admirers, of the distinguished colonist, William
Charles Wentworth, could hardly have led them to anticipate
that in the course of nature his life would be spared many
years longer, the intelligence of his death was received with
profound emotion and general sorrow. For years past his familiar
presence and well remembered voice had not been seen or heard in
his habitual haunts, but the vivid recollection of them remained,
and he was as little forgotten on account of his absence in
England, as if he were still near us, if not indeed amongst us.
The characteristic personal appearance and manner thousands
remembered and could describe : there was no mistaking him,
and no forgetting him. His was a conspicuous individuality both
in body and mind. Assured strength and resolute self-reliance
and unmistakeable manhood were his; and yet those who knew
him best will tell you that he was full of tender and kindly
feelings. In the hearts of the people there was an earnest desire
that the lifelong services of Mr. Wentworth should be nationally
recognized, and in both Houses of Parliament distinguished
Members gave to this great public desire, form and eloquent
expression.




PUBLIC FUNERAL
OF THE LATE
WILLIAM CHARLES WENTWORTH.
SPEECHES IN THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY.
[From the Sydney Morning Herald of *7th August, 1872.]
THE LATE WILLIAM CHAELES WENTWOETH.
Sir James Martin (who, on rising, was received with cheers)
moved : “1. That this House is of opinion, that in order to manifest
its deep sense of the eminent public services of the late William
Charles Wentworth, the honors of a Public Funeral ought to be
accorded to his remains, as soon after their arrival in the Colony as
suitable arrangements can be made for the purpose. 2. That Mr.
Speaker transmit a copy of the foregoing resolution to Mr.
Wentworth’s widow, with a request that she will inform the House,
through him, whether she and her family approve the intended
honor.” He said : I feel persuaded that there is no Member of that
House, whatever his political views may be, but will be of opinion that
the motion I have now submitted is one which ought to have the
unanimous approval of this House. (Cheers.) There are amongst
those who constitute this House honorable Members who knew Mr.
Wentworth in his early days (hear, hear), and there are some who
knew what manner of man he was. It may not be unnecessary to
re f er — no t at very great length—to the extent of the services which I
am of opinion, and I believe the House and the Country will be of
opinion, will justify the course I have invited the House to take upon
this occasion. Mr. Wentworth was for very many years the most
conspicuous public man not only in this Colony but in this part of the
World (cheers), and was longer before his countrymen as a public
man than any other we have had experience of. He was born, I think,
in 1790, and had all the advantages he could derive from instruction in
the Schools and Universities of England. As a boy he was sent
Home, and remained there for some years, coming back to the Colony
still a lad ; and the first service he rendered to the people of the Colony
was a service rendered at a time when the young men whom he had
left in England were still studying at the University. In 1813 he was
associated with Messrs. Lawson and Blaxland in a successful attempt
to explore a route over the Blue Mountains. Up to the time when
these gentlemen discovered the route over these mountains, the Colony
of New South Wales was for all practical purposes confined within


the river Hawkesbury. Tlierp is a book in the library of the House
containing a map of what was termed the Colony of New South Wales.
This was no other than the Comity of Cumberland. (Hear, hear.)
That map was published in 1810. Of course, at the present period we
are scarcely able to understand the difficulties which arose in the way
of an exploration of this character. This exploration was however
carried on with great ability and perseverance, and it resulted in the
discovery of Bathurst Plains, and of the outlet to what now com-
prised the finest part of New South Wales, the Great Western
interior of the Colony. Well, that was the first service he had an
opportunity of rendering to the Colony, and for that service he was
rewarded by a grant of land. He himself once told me (Sir James
Martin) it was the only grant ever made to him. (Hear, hear.) This
was the grant of Mount Yernon, in the Camden District, which still
belongs to his family. Well, Mr. Wentworth after his trip to the
Western interior was sent to England, and studied at the University
of Cambridge for some time; and he there distinguished himself by
writing a prize poem, the subject of which was “Australia.” His
competitor upon that occasion was a gentleman who afterwards became
very distinguished; and although his poem was pronounced a better
one than Mr. Wentworth’s, the poem written by Mr. Wentworth was
one which had been often quoted, and which he had no doubt had
considerable effect in those early days, coming as it did from a native
of the Colony, and must have attracted considerable attention to these
shores. After a distinguished University career he was called to the
Bar, and came to the Colony at a time when the late Francis Forbes
held the position of Chief Justice, in which capacity he displayed an
amount of ability, love of liberty and impartiality, which eminently
fitted him in all respects for such an important office. Mr. Wentworth,
therefore, had to practise before a tribunal which was in every way
fitted to bring forth any powers he might possess. There are none of
us at this moment who recollect, or at all events who recollect suffi-
ciently to be able to form an opinion for ourselves, as to the ability
with which he conducted himself in those days; but there could be no
doubt, from what we had heard from competent Judges of forty or
fifty years ago, that he was one of the most able advocates of the
English Bar. There could be no doubt that had he remained in
England the highest professional honors would have been within his
grasp. (Hear, hear.) It must have been a piece of singular good
fortune that the people of the Colony obtained the services of an
advocate like that. (Cheers.) It might naturally be supposed that a


gentleman, of Mr. Wentworth s ability and bigb legal acquirements
would be irritated at finding bimself settled in a community wbicbhad
no kind of free institutions, wbicb was governed by a sort of paternal
despotism —the Governor, tbe Queen’s representative, having almost
absolute power. One might suppose that a spirit like Mb. TVbntworth s
would chafe under the restraints such as existed in those days. (Hear,
hear.) We could hardly realize what the state of his mind must have
been to have to be subject to a domination of this sort. Accordingly,
we find that Mr. Wentworth, from the very earliest period, when there
were not more than 20,000 or 30,000 inhabitants, began to struggle for
the concession of the rights which we now enjoyed. (Cheers.) We didnot
know what these struggles were, and what they had cost him and other
persons engaged in them. It was then that Mir. W'bntworth made the
name that was so dear in after times. Then we had no trial by jury.
Persons were tried for all kinds of offences by military juries. Criminal
law was administered in the most arbitrary manner. We had no trial
by jury at all, and we had no right to elect persons to make laws for us,
the Governor for the time, being almost absolute. W ith other gentlemen
Mr. Wentworth started an agitation to secure the right of trial by jury.
He had to struggle for that right year after year before it was conceded.
The persons who struggled with him were, some of them, men of no
mean mark, and of great ability, and have lived to very recent times.
I refer to Dr. Bland, Mr. Sydney Stephen, and numbers of others whose
names will be familiar to those whom I now address. With these
gentlemen Mr. Wentworth commenced an agitation for trial by jury,
and he was assisted as far as he could he assisted in an agitation of
that sort by Sir Francis Forbes. In the struggle for Constitutional
rights, Mr. Wentworth distinguished himself. He was a man opposed
to tyranny of every sort. He had an instinctive horror of any exercise
of arbitrary power. In proof of that I refer to the case of Sudds
and Thomson, two men discharged from the Army, who committed
some crime which brought them within the cognizance of the tribunals.
The Government of the day determined that some exceptional punish-
ment should be inflicted. But they rather overstepped the mark by
placing the men in irons of a character calculated to deprive them of
their health. This arbitrary conduct, which concerned Mr. Went-
worth no more than anybody else that had a hatred of tyranny, caused
him to take the part of the men against the Governor ; and during the
whole of that gentleman’s administration he was his determined
opponent, not from personal antipathy, but because he had done an act
which he thought un-English, which called for the condemnation and


reprobation of all lovers of liberty. (Cheers.) Many persons blamed
Mr. Wentworth for the energy he exhibited in this matter, and it was
thought he had overstepped the bounds of moderation. But when we
bear in mind that he did this on behalf of persons who had no means
of defending themselves at that period of our history, we can enter-
tain but one opinion—that he acted an honest, conscientious, and
independent part. (Cheers.) After the struggle for the concession
of the right of trial by jury, he took part in an Association called the
Patriotic Association, the object of which was to win for himself and
his fellow-colonists the power of making their own laws. That to us
seemed a simple thing to ask for. But it was asked for year after year
in vain. Not only were there writers of great ability, but large sums
of money were paid, not by the Legislature but out of the pockets of
the parties who were struggling to enable them to pay a party in the
Legislature of the Mother Country to advocate the claims of this
Colony to this right. Of that Association Mr. Wentworth was perhaps
the leading member ; he certainly was the ablest. » Though I was only
a very little boy at the time, I remember hearing him speak, and he
displayed an animation and energy which we all know he displayed at
a later time. The struggles to which I have referred extended over a
period of somewhere about twenty years, from 1823 to 1843. Although
in that period there was a Council to advise the Governor in making
the law, and although that Council consisted of men of great respect-
ability, yet it never occurred to any Governor, or to any Secretary of
State for the Colonies, to offer Mr. Wentworth a seat in that House.
It never occurred to any Governor to make him even a Justice of the
Peace until 1838. These two facts are enough to show the kind of
combination to which the Colony was subjected in those days—when
a man of Mr. Wentworth’s ability, education, and. standing, was not
even offered a seat in the Council of his Country, and was not even
put into the Commission of the Peace until a late period. We may
therefore judge what these people had to struggle against. In 1842
the old City Council came into existence, and so desirous were the
people of this Country to take part in the representation of their
fellow-citizens, as one of the highest privileges, that some of the first
men in the Country were elected to the City Council, or endeavoured
to get elected, and the contest for seats in that body was something
surprising. It is much easier to get into this Legislative Assembly
now than it was to get into the City Council then. Mr. Wentworth’s
aim did not lie in that direction. But in the following year Mr.
Wentworth became a candidate for a seat in the old Council, of which


two-thirds were nominated and one-third were elected by the people.
The constituency he sought to represent was the principal one in the
Country. I can very well recollect that struggle. I was one who took
an active part in canvassing the city (hear, hear) from door to door on
that occasion, and there was not a house left unvisited. There was an
opposition to which I will not refer, further than to say that there was
one life lost and some others were endangered. Mr. Wentworth was
returned at the head of the poll. His field of exertions then became
changed. He then found himself, rather late in life, in a position in
which he could display his abilities more to the advantage of his Country
than he could have done previously to that. He then had an active share
in making the laws of the Country. From the opposition benches he
exerted himself to reform the abuses of Government and injustice
wherever it might appear to him. In that Legislature he remained
somewhere about ten years. The history of the legislation from 1843
to 1848 was a history of one continued struggle against illegality and
unconstitutionalism from the first to the last. (Cheers.) It was in
that early part of Mr. Wentworth’s career that he was brought into
antagonism with the Governor of the Colony, Sir George Gipps, a most
well-meaning man, but who looked upon everything from an Imperial
point of view. His sympathies were not with the colonists, but with
those who sent him here. Well, Mr. Wentworth had many battles
to fight in resisting, what appeared to him to be unconstitutional views
of the Ministers in the Mother Country and the unconstitutional way
in which they were bound to be carried out by the Governor here. A
reference to the proceedings of the House will show that hardly a week
passed in which Mr. Wentworth was not compelled to bring forward
some grievance or other. Grievance Committees were appointed, and
the grievances were of a class not heard of since the time of the Long
Parliament. Among other things, one of the greatest grievances we
laboured under was that the youth of this Country had no chance of
getting into any of the important offices in the land of their birth.
Persons were sent out in many cases totally unfit in education and
ability, and thrust into offices of all kinds. What should we say to
that kind of thing now ? It is almost incredible, but the Secretary of
State sent out Police Magistrates, Clerks for the Custom Houses, and
other departments, to receive high salaries, while our own youth had
not the slighest chance of getting into even the most inferior places.
Mr. Wentworth was one of those who struggled more manfully than
any one else against grievances of this sort. (Cheers.) In this Consti-
tution under which this old Council sat there was a large amount of the


revenue kept from the control of the Legislature. In granting this
right to impose taxes and to make laws, the British Parliament granted
it in a very grudging way; they reserved to themselves the right of
taking a certain amount of money to pay a number of inefficient officers
enumerated in an Act of Parliament. At first there was no one to
deal with this, but after a time the money which Parliament set apart
was not sufficient for the purpose, and the Government was compelled
to come down and ask for an addition. Then a struggle ensued, and
Mr. Wentworth prominently urged that there should not be a grant
of a single penny unless there could be shown to be a necessity for the
addition. The battle lasted for several years before it was finally
settled, and the administration of the Country was from time to time
thrown into very great difficulty by the supplies not being voted for
necessary purposes. At this time, a barrister, who held a very high
office with a large salary, had to go without that salary because of
what took place; and it was a proof of that inherent generosity of
Mr. Wentworth’s nature that, while he was carrying on this struggle,
a proposal was made by him to those who took part with him to vote
something for those who he said would otherwise starve ; but he was
told that he was departing from the principle for which they were
struggling. He was thus not unmindful of the miseries that might be
brought upon individuals while he was struggling for the general
rights of the community. But to give a history of all that Mr.
Wentworth did during the ten years of his Parliamentary life would
occupy too much time, and was unnecessary. When Mr. Wentworth
started in his Legislative career in 1843, he was unquestionably the
most popular man in this Country; but in the course of a few years, from
causes to which I need not particularly refer, that popularity waned;
and at the second general election he was opposed by no less a person
than Mr. Lowe, now Chancellor of the Exchequer. On that occasion
a very fierce struggle took place for the representation of Sydney ;
and Mr. Wentworth then justified, by the remarkable eloquence and
independence which he’ showed, the eulogium of his friends. Up to
that time it was said that he had been too careless to display his
powers ; but on that occasion Mr. Wentworth did display his talents
and his independence, and he showed that he possessed abilities of the
highest order. (Cheers.) On that occasion Mr. Wentworth made a
speech which, if it had been made in the Mother Country, would have
been cited as one of the choicest pieces of oratory. (Hear, hear.) I did
not hear that speech. I was at Hartley, seeking my own election, at the
time ; but I remember that when the report of the speech was brought


to tlie Court House at Hartley tlie polling was deferred for two hours,
with the consent of the Returning Officer and the unanimous consent
of all the parties, until that speech was read. lam sure the House
will forgive me w hile I read one or two sentences from that speech, in
order to show what manner of man Mr. Wentworth was. (Hear, hear.)
Towards the conclusion of that speech he said, “I will not detain you
much longer. When, five and twenty years ago I devoted myself to
public life, I knew full well the vicissitudes of public opinion to which
it was exposed, and I was prepared to encounter them. I knew the
proverbial inconsistency of the popular gale ; that the breeze which filled
my flowing sheet to-day might become a head wind to-morrow. I had
learned from the unerring history of the past, that whilst the misdeeds
of public men are graven on brass, the record of their virtues and ser-
vices are traced on sand. (Cheers.) I had been instructed by the same
stern teacher, that the lauded patriot of to-day, the benefactor of his
country and bis kind, might be the despised exile of to-morrow. I fore-
saw, too, that in a shifting population like this, where circumstances and
interests were in a state of rapid transition, that I should be particularly
obnoxious to events of this description. Butwith all thisknowledge of the
fate to which public men are so often subjected, I now fearlessly submit
myself a second time to the ordeal of your opinion.” (Cheers.) On that
occasion Mr. Wentworth was associated with his venerable friend and
fellow-labourer for a quarter of a century, —Dr. Bland. (Hear, hear.)
Neither Mr. Wentworth nor his friends at any time had any doubt
but that he would be returned, but he had a chivalrous desire that,
whatever might happen to him, his friend William Bland might not be
overlooked (hear, hear), and towards the close of his speech he urged
that if they rejected him they would at all events elect his friend. He
said : —“ From that tribunal I know there is no appeal; but lam con-
tent to rely upon the merits of my public life. If you consider that
life has been devoted to your service, if you consider my labours have
not been unfruitful of good, to this our native and adopted Country,
you will not on this occasion leave me in the lurch. (No, no.) But
whatever your verdict may be with regard to myself—if it be the last
public service lam to render to you—l charge you never to forget
your tried, devoted, indefatigable friend, William Bland. (Cheers.)
No man has ever served a Country in a purer spirit of patriotism —no
man ever more deeply deserved the gratitude of a generous people
than he has. (Cheers.) You may cause it to be written on the tombs
of my friend and of myself—‘ there lie the rejected of Sydney’; but
I will venture to prophecy that, in juxtaposition with these words,


posterity will add : ‘ Who gave to those who deserted them, the Liberty
of the Press, Trial by Jury, and the Constitutional Eight of choosing
their own Eepresentatives.’ ” (Cheers.) The man who could justly
utter that, and utter it in such eloquent terms, must be deserving of
the honor which lam now asking this House to confer. (Hear, hear.)
There is not a word there respecting his public services which wa s
not strictly and accurately true. The very distinguished man who
w T as opposed to Mr. Wentworth at that time succeeded in being
returned, and Mr. Bland was rejected; but I think that Dr. Bland
might feel some degree of consolation that it took a man like Mr.
Lowe to beat him, for even in those days we were aware that Mr.
Lowe possessed the abilities which he has since displayed in the Im-
perial Parliament. I myself have listened to speeches made by that
gentleman here ; and, judging from the reports of his speeches else-
where, those which he made in this Chamber were very much abler
than any he has delivered in the Mother Country. He displayed all
those remarkable powers here, and therefore that Dr. Bland should
have been defeated by a gentleman of such eminent ability must, at
all events, have afforded him some degree of consolation. After that,
Mr. Wentworth was instrumental in rendering a great many services
to this Colony. He took a leading part in the establishment of the
Sydney University. Some people thought at that day—and there may
be some who think now —that that institution was a little in advance
of the requirements of the Country. I do not think so. (Cheers.)
Unfortunately, there are many of the youths of the Colony who have
failed to avail themselves of its benefits to the extent which we had a
right to expect. In a community of half a million, containing many
persons of great wealth and many of moderate means, one would have
supposed that more than fifty or sixty students would have made their
way to that institution. It has not so happened ; but the standard of
education has been raised, and we hope that in a very short time a
much larger number of students will go there. Ho one can tell the
advantages which have resulted from even forty or fifty educated young
men going out from the University into the community every few years ;
and Mr. Wentworth I think is entitled to gratitude for having placed
within the reach of the youth of this Country opportunities quite equal
to those which they can obtain elsewhere. Another service which he
rendered was in the framing of the Constitution Act. Mr. Wentworth
had a singular knowledge of Constitutional principles. He was well
read in the Constitutional history of the Mother Country, and par-
ticularly in that period in which the foundations of its liberties were


laid. He might be regarded as the compeer of men who were con-
spicuous in the Long Parliament—of such men as Hampden and Eliot.
Mr. Wentworth was a man of their stamp. He went back to first
principles as they did, and spoke of them with as much Anglo-Saxon
eloquence as any of them could have given utterance to. His desire
was to give us as much liberty here as we could enjoy if we were in
the centre of the Empire ; and with that freedom, to which every one
was entitled, he sought to combine those checks and counterpoises
without which freedom degenerated into license. He may have been
mistaken ; but he wished to prevent anything like an opening to
tyranny, either on the part of the people or their rulers. In the
course of his senatorial career there were, as one might suppose, many
occasions which called forth his indignation; and I remember one
particularly, when a struggle was going on which required that all the
friends of Constitutional reform should be united. In those days there
were six gentlemen who sat up here for what was then called the
province of Port Phillip, now the Colony of "V ictoria. The most con-
spicuous was Mr. Benjamin Boyd. Although Mr. Boyd was at the
head of a very large concern, having the disposal of hundreds of
thousands of pounds in the course of years, he was what might be
called a local politician. He thought it was his duty to struggle for the
local interests of the district which sent him here ; and he moved on one
occasion that all the revenue realized in Port Phillip should be spent
there. Those who were associated with him here did not think fit to
concede that; and he was then unwise enough to threaten that he and the
other Port Phillip Members would go over in a body to the G overnment,
and vote with the Government as they desired. Mr. Wentworth com-
bated this view ; and towards the close of his speech on that occasion he
denounced this conduct in terms that he had heard described almost
with enthusiasm by a gentleman who had had the opportunity of
hearing some of the greatest speeches in the House of Commons.
I did not hear that speech myself, but I had a conversation about it
with Mr. (now Sir) Roger Therry, and he told me that he never heard
anything in his life that stirred him more than that. In those days
we had no shorthand reporters ; but notwithstanding that, the reports
of the speeches were tolerably good. I have taken the trouble to seek
out a few passages in that speech to which I refer, and I hope the
House will bear with me while I quote a few sentences from it. (Hear,
hear.) I quote them to show not only the vigorous nature of his
intellect, but the thoroughly sound English he was wont to employ
when his energies were called forth. I quote from the Sydney Morning


Herald of the 14th December, 1844: —“ As to the threats which have
this night been nttered, I regret that they should have been uttered
before he House—before the World. I, for one, should be ashamed
to have given public expression to them. If such a negotiation as
suggested could have been entered upon by honorable men, then it
should have been entered upon in private ; and honorable gentlemen
who could propose it should not have outraged the feelings of others,
or risked outrage on their own, by such an open offer as has been made.
I will not say that no honorably-minded man could make such a pro-
position ; but I will say that no honorable man could accede to it. So
far from such threats influencing me to vote in favour of the proposition
before the House, it will confirm me in my opposition to it. It has
been said that the battle that has been fought by me and others in this
House has been a battle of personal feeling. I deny it. I have fought
the good battle for my Country,—for posterity. If I and those who
have fought with me are now menaced with desertion; if honorable
members—if the constituents of honorable members—are base enough
to act in such a way, on them be the consequences. If they will choose
the peril which must follow conduct so base, let them do so. If lam
again reduced to the trammels I have formerly endured, and confined
in the political dungeon which I and my countrymen have known, I
shall know that the act was not mine—l shall have the consolation of
knowing that I have done my duty. Those who will share this degra-
dation will know that they have merited it, that they have brought it
on themselves and on all around them. But what can the miserable
authors of such a proposition expect from it ? Do they think that the
Colonial Secretary, in whose hands they threatened to place the nomi-
nation of six Members of the House —do they think that he, who has
told them that their cry for separation is ‘ bunkum’, do they think that
honorable Member will ever, on any terms, get up in this House, at
any time, however distant, and support a motion for separation ?
However regardless other honorable Members may be of decency, I
know the honorable gentleman too well to believe him capable of such
an act. The very hope in which this base surrender of our hard-gained
rights is tendered is futile—it is to be degraded without achievement
of that thing wished. Whatever the consequences may be, the threat
will not intimidate me. I have had but one object in view—the benefit,
the liberty of the constituents of the Colony; and if those who have
hitherto supported me and my friends choose now to desert us because
we will not truckle to their selfishness, their local prejudices and pur-
poses, —why, let them do so, let the gratification of desertion be theirs.


lam convinced that ignominy and dishonor would be theirs also now
and for ever.” Well, Mr. Roger Therry more than once spoke in the
highest terms of that particular passage; and many of us will remember
that it was no uncommon thing for Mr. Wentworth to deliver himself
at times as energetically as he spoke on that occasion. He was a man
of that stamp that he was capable of going to the front in the largest
arena; and he must to a certain extent have felt himself trammelled
in a sphere which would be looked upon now as a kind of parish busi-
ness. But parish business it was not —(hear, hear)—because small as
our numbers were, they were the beginning of a very great nation, of
what was already a most important community—(hear, hear) —and the
same questions which agitate a people consisting of two or three
hundred thousand will in a Constitutional and large point of view be
as important as the same questions agitating the minds of millions.
(Hear, hear.) Mr. Wentworth had not the same spur to his ambition,
not the same incitement to put forth his intellectual powers which he
would have had had he been placed in the House of Commons. If
he had been there in early life, with all the aids to information, all the
spur to emulation, and all those excitements which at times make a
person even surpass himself, he would have been perhaps in the eyes
of the world at large very different from what he has been. Hot in
our eyes, because we saw him, and know what he was capable of. It
is because we have had a man among us of this character that I think
we are called upon now, as a duty we owe to ourselves and the Country
we represent, to step out of our way —for it is stepping out of our
way —and receive his remains with all the honor we can accord to
them. (Hear, hear.) In this place where I now stand all his Parlia-
mentary speeches were delivered. We can remember how he stood in
his old grey suit of tweed (for he always encouraged local industries)
in sometimes an ungraceful attitude, but at all times showing the
powers he was possessed of, and I think it is proper for us in this room
that we should now, on hearing of his falling to the grave in the fulness
of his years and honors, crown the edifice, as it were, by receiving in
a national kind of way his body, and accompanying it to its last resting-
place, so that it may not be said that we are unmindful of our duty to
the greatest of Australia’s sons. [The honorable Member was warmly
cheered at the conclusion of his speech.]
Me. Pakkes said: It affords me sincere gratification to be permitted
to second the motion which has been made by the honorable and learned
Member with so well-considered a statement of the services and
character of Mr. Wentworth. It never was my privilege to come into


personal intercourse with him. I never, to the best of my recollection,
exchanged a word with that gentleman in my life; but I nevertheless
may be permitted, perhaps, to bear some testimony to his great
character, and to the great services which he rendered to this Country.
And perhaps this humble testimony from me will not be the less accept-
able if I state, as I feel bound to do, that, so far as I could see in my
humble way, I saw cause to dissent from many acts of Mr. Wentworth’s
life. I was permitted to hear the noble speech to which reference has
been made, which he delivered on the occasion of his election in 1848 ;
and I heard that speech from the position of an opponent, as I was
closely identified with the success of the gentleman who was elected as
his colleague on that occasion—l mean the present Chancellor of the
Exchequer. I was on many occasions, to which it is not necessary to
advert, drawn into a course of opposition to Mr. Wentworth’s public
life, but even in those days, with my more limited information, with
my more limited means of judging of his character, I think I always
appreciated the greatness of that character, and I think I cannot charge
myself with any recollection inconsistent with a just estimate of his
services to this Country. I shall not weary the House by dwelling upon
those various speeches to which the hon. and learned Member has so
powerfully alluded, but I have always thought—in common, I believe,
with other reflecting men in this Country—that the early services of
Mr. Wentworth were of a priceless character in repelling arbitrary
power. (Hear, hear.) Ido not think—and I myself sympathise with
the sentiments of the honorable and learned Member in this respect—
Ido not think it is possible for us to realise the times which have been
rapidly passed over in the speech we have just heard, and it was a
priceless blessing to this Country that we had a man of his powerful
intellect, of his high moral courage, of his resolution to pursue the
course which he believed right, and of his determination to remain
erect upon the path of duty in resisting the domination of persons who
had in their hands the sole power of the Country in those days. It is
impossible for us to conceive what we owe to the high and noble
example set by Mr. Wentworth, which lives in scores and hundreds of
the native-born children of the Country. Among the various services
which he rendered I concur, of course —and we all concur —in the
blessing conferred upon the Country by the establishment of that great
educational institution, the University. Whatever may be the opinion
of the most utilitarian as to the comparative failure of that University
up to this time, we all look forward with the highest hopes to what it
may do in raising the educational character of future generations. It


is utterly impossible for an institution of that kind to achieve its real
ends under a considerable lapse of time. It is altogether too much to
expect that the efforts of a great institution o i that kind will be
apparent in the development of the Country until a considerable number
of years have passed away ; but it is not the less a monument to the
sagacity of the founder of that institution that he saw so soon before
the rest of us the great moulding influence which it would wield in
consolidating the liberties and building up the character of the Country.
Of his labours in the Constitution perhaps I may be permitted to say
that I have lived long enough to see the error of some of my feeble
opposition to those labours. I have lived long enough to know that in
that Constitution he was careful, with the painstaking care of a man
having a fatherly regard for his Country, to make broad the foundations
of it. I think the course proposed by the honorable and learned
Member is the right course for a free Country to take in doing honor
to its greatest men. It is perhaps the best course that can be taken
by this Parliament to accord, as I have no doubt we shall by unanimous
assent, the honors of a public funeral to Mr. Wentworth. To erect
monuments, or to testify in this manner by the highest authority in the
land, the honor in which we hold them, is all we can do in recognition
of the services of those who have passed away. Perhaps I may say,
also, that I have felt it was scarcely a proper course for Parliament to
take to adjourn itself upon the decease of any distinguished person,
and I trust that after the adjournment of the Parliament upon receiving
the news of the death of Mr. Wentworth, Parliament will never
adjourn on an occasion of the kind again; but if the person who is
departed has rendered such services as Mr. Wentworth rendered, such
a course as this will be taken—a course that gives the highest honor
we can pay, and is perfectly consistent with the character of Parliament.
For Parliament to suspend its business upon an occasion of this kind
was scarcely consistent with the character of Parliament itself. And
I do not think, so far as my knowledge extends, that the English
Parliament has ever adopted this course of recognizing the death of its
most distinguished public men. Ido not recollect that even on the
death of the most distinguished statesmen the English Parliament has
ever adjourned its proceedings. But Parliament can do this, and it
is an honor peculiarly fitting—the most marked and enduring in the
memory of those who witness it, and it can be done consistently by
Parliament without in any way impairing the greatness of its consti-
tution by adjourning its proceedings. I second the motion, with the
sense that there is no other man that has ever appeared amongst us
who is so entitled to the distinguished mark of honor intended to be
paid to him ; and that perhaps there is no other man who is so able,
e


and certainly none better able, than the honorable and learned Member
to do justice to the character of the gentleman whose departure from
amongst us we all so much regret, and whose memory we are all so
disposed to honor. (The honorable Member was warmly cheered at
the conclusion of his speech.)
Me. Stewaet wished to call attention to a point which seemed to
have been lost sight of. He entirely concurred in all that had been
said of Mr. Wentworth, but there was another question. If he knew
anything of Mr. Wentworth, he should think he would be yery much
against this sort of thing. He was a man who detested anything in
the shape of adulation, shams, or pomps and vanities of all kinds.
Numerous acts of his life testified this. He had more than once
refused a title from the Crown. If this were to involve a large expen-
diture for sham arches and carriages, and a good deal of self-glorifica-
tion, he objected to it simply because Mr. Wentworth himself would
have objected. But there was another objection. Mr. Wentworth’s
remains would receive a very handsome public funeral by the sponta-
neous action of the people themselves. After the tribute, which had
been paid to the late Mr. Wentworth, he thought it would be better to
leave it with the public. [Reference had been made to the part taken
by Mr. Wentworth in the foundation of the University. That insti-
tution had proved almost a failure, but not through any fault of Mr.
Wentworth, but in consequence of its having fallen into bad hands.
It had fallen into the hands of men who did not know the wants of
the Colony. He did not intend to oppose the resolution before the
House, but he hoped the funeral would be managed properly and
discreetly.
Me. Deivee said he had hoped that this motion would have passed
the House on the speeches of the honorable and learned Member for
East Macquarie and the Honorable Colonial Secretary. As the honor-
able Member for Kiama was continually finding fault, he would suggest
that when the funeral did take place, the Government should invite the
honorable Member to become master of the ceremonies. The honor-
able and learned Member for East Macquarie had, he thought, failed
to quote the best passage from Mr. Wentworth’s speech on the meet-
ings in 1848. He well recollected listening to that speech; and on
leaving the hustings, accompanied by the late Mr. Nichols, that
gentleman asked him what he thought of the speech. He said he
thought it was the best speech he had ever heard. Mr. Nichols
placed his hands on his shoulders and said, —“Yes, my boy, if you
live to be 100 years old, you will never hear anything like it.”


He liad not lived to be 100 years old, but be could safely say that be
bad never beard anything equal to tbat speech. Mr. Wentworth
distinctly stated tbat be could truly say tbat the love of country bad
been the strongest passion of bis life. All who knew Mr. Wentworth,
especially those who knew him as the honorable and learned Member
for East Macquarie did in those days, must have felt the truth of tbat
statement. In no single instance bad we bad a gentleman in this
Colony whose patriotism was so great as tbat of the honorable
gentleman whose memory we were now asked to commemorate. And
the honorable Member for Edam a, with a full knowledge of tbat fact,
might have allowed the motion to pass with the unanimous assent of
the House.
The motion was then put and carried, every honorable Member
standing up whilst it was read by Mr. Speaker.


SPEECHES IN THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
[From the Sydney Morning Herald of 13 th August, 1872.]
THE LATE W. C. WENTWOETH.
Me. Samuel moved: “1. That this House desires to join with the
other branch of the Legislature in expressing its opinion, that in order
to manifest its deep sense of the eminent public services of the late
William Charles Wentworth, the honors of a public funeral ought to
be accorded to his remains, as soon after their arrival in the Colony as
suitable arrangements can be made for the purpose. 2. That the
President transmit a copy of the foregoing resolution to Mr. Went-
worth’s widow, with a request that she will inform the House, through
him, whether she and her family approve the intended honor.” He
said that he had no intention of moving the resolution before Friday
night, when the President reported that he had received a letter from
the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, intimating that a resolution
similar in character had been adopted in the other branch of the Legis-
lature. He felt that this duty would have been more fittingly per-
formed by some honorable Member of this House who had been more
intimately connected with Mr. Wentworth in public life than he had,
but at the same time he would give way to no man in his admiration
for the character and the great services of that eminent man. He
recollected in 1860, when Mr. Wentworth took his seat as President
of the Legislative Council, how carefully he watched the appointments
to this body, lest the Constitution should be endangered in any way by
the appointments which might be made. It had been said that the
Constitution of which Mr. Wentworth was the author was not adapted
to this Country, and had not been a success. He, however, thought
that the Constitution had been a great boon to this Country, and looking
at the severe ordeal through which it had to pass at the initiation of
the present state of things, he thought that the change was satisfactory,
and had stood the test of experience. In 1819 or 1820 Mr. Wentworth
published a book on this Colony, which in 1824 reached a third edition.
That work was written by Mr. Wentworth entirely with a view to
promote the interests of the Country ; and at that early period he seemed


to have anticipated the greatness which, it was destined to achieve.
“ His only aim,” he stated in his preface, “ in obtruding this hasty
production on the public, is to promote the welfare and prosperity of
the Country which gave him birth, and he has judged that he could in
no way so effectually contribute his mite towards the accomplishment
of this end, as by attempting to divert from the United States of
America to its shores, some part of that vast tide of emigration which
is at present flowing thither from all parts of Europe.” Mr. Went-
worth was most solicitous about the character and comfort of those
who emigrated to this Colony; and though a man of rough exterior, he
was of a generous heart, and his hand and purse were open to those who
stood in need of his assistance. Mr. Wentworth returned to the Colony
in 1824, when he was accompanied by Dr. Wardell, and he brought
out with him the plant of a second newspaper, which was started under
the designation of the Australian. There had been only one newspaper
published up to that time, and it was entirely under the censorship of
the G-overnment. After the passing of the Constitution Act, Mr.
Wentworth and his honorable friend Mr. Deas Thomson were appointed
a deputation to proceed to England to watch the progress of the Bill
through the Imperial Parliament, and well did those gentlemen perform
that duty. Both of those gentlemen were presented with an address,
and subscriptions were raised to present them with some suitable tes-
timonial for their valuable services. The address to Mr. Wentworth
was presented to him in the presence of a large concourse, who assembled
to accompany him to the ship. The address, which was read by Sir
James Macarthur, came from the subscribers to the testimonial fund.
The address expressed the high sense entertained of the public services
rendered by Mr. Wentworth to the Country, and assured him that they
were desirous of placing those services on record. Reference was made
to his early and courageous struggles for those Constitutional rights
to which, as British subjects, the people of the Colony were entitled,
and also to his untiring and valuable exertions in the Council from the
first institution of that body, particularly to his successful efforts to pass
measures for legalizing liens on wool, for the foundation of the Univer-
sity, and lastly, for the formation of a new Constitution for the Colony.
Mr. Wentworth, in reply, said that although their kind tribute greatly
exceeded his merits, yet it might be useful in stimulating others to zeal
in the public cause. He solemnly declared that in all his public efforts
he had ever the welfare of his Country at heart, and especially in the
formation of the new Constitution he had studied her dearest and most
lasting interests. Though the principles on which he had acted in


reference to this measure were not shared by the whole community,
yet he rejoiced to believe that they were entertained by a very large
portion of the people, and the recently altered tone of the remaining
portion clearly indicated that they, too, would gradually acknowledge
the soundness of his views. He was quite satisfied that the political
course had been approved by those who, from having had opportunities
of watching his career, were best qualified to form an opinion. In con-
clusion, he said, that although he was about to depart for England,
Australia would still be his home, and he hoped soon to return with his
family, and employ his last energies in his Country’s service. He felt
that it would be needless for him to dwell upon the eminent services
of Mr. Wentworth in the presence of so large a number of gentlemen
who had been associated with him, and still less was it necessary, when
he remembered that that had already been ably done by Sir James
Martin in the other branch of the Legislature. He felt that he could
not adequately express the admiration he felt with regard to this
lamented gentleman, but notwithstanding that, he had no doubt but
that the resolution would receive the unanimous assent of the House.
When Mr. Wentworth introduced his Liens on Wool Bill it was
denounced in many quarters as being a most selfish measure, and
intended only for his own benefit. Indeed, it was impossible for Mr.
Wentworth to move in any measure of legislation without exposing
himself to that aspersion. It was also predicted that the Bill was so
contrary to the principles of law that it would never receive the assent
of the Imperial Government. The Bill, however, did pass, and proved
most beneficial in its operations. Mr. Wentworth’s request was that
his body might be sent to this his native land for its last resting-place ;
it was the natural wish of one who had devoted so much of his life in
the interests of his Country, and it now remains for us to show that we
do not forget his great talent and his great services, and to acknowledge
these in the only way now in our power, by following to the grave the
remains of this eminent man, who although departed from this life
must ever live in the memory of the people of this Country.
Me. Deas Thomson could not allow this opportunity to pass in
silence without doing honor to the memory of his departed friend,
Mr. Wentworth. He was happy to be able to second, to the best
of his power, the movement made for that purpose. As one who
was long associated with Mr. Wentworth in the Legislative Council,
he had especial opportunities of seeing the indefatigable zeal and the
great statesmanlike talent which ruled every action of his in con-
ferring a Constitution on this Colony. He was associated with Mr.


Wentworth as one of the members of the Committee which prepared
the Constitution, and of that Committee also the President was a
member. In his early life he had been accustomed to attend the
debates in the House of Commons, but in all his long experience he
never met a more powerful debater than Mr. Wentworth. His argu-
ments were also of the most logical and cogent kind. There were
many debates in which another great orator of the day took part; he
alluded to Mr. Lowe, the present Chancellor of the Exchequer; but
Mr. Lowe, although fluent and eloquent, was not nearly so powerful
and impressive a speaker as Mr. Wentworth. In those days great
orations were delivered by Members of the Legislative Council, and
they called from the present Lord Grey such encomiums as were highly
creditable to the talents and oratorical powers of some of the great men
who then composed that body. That gentleman said that the Council
was far superior to any other Colonial Legislature, and was second
only to the House of Commons. That, no doubt, arose from the fact
that we had many great debaters at that time, and there were many
important public questions which came on for discussion. The great
distinguishing character of his revered friend was that of being a con-
stitutional lawyer. His erudition in that branch of law was quite
remarkable. Mr. Wentworth and he were associated together to watch
the passing of the Constitution Act through the Imperial Parliament.
That was a great duty, and they endeavoured to perform it to the best
of their ability. They had numerous interviews with the Secretary of
State for the time being (Lord John Puss ell). They had interviews
with many other Members of the House of Lords and the House of
Commons. Amongst others, they had a long and most interesting con-
versation with Lord Elgin, who had recently returned from Canada,
where he had obtained great Colonial experience. They also attended
the House of Commons, and had a long conversation with Sir Evelyn
Denison, who was afterwards Speaker of the House of Commons, and
they met there a great number of the most distinguished Members of
the House of Commons, and they had a long and interesting conversa-
tion with them respecting this matter. It was Mr. Wentworth’s most
anxious desire that the Constitution Bill should be passed in its integ-
rity ; that it should contain the clauses which he had prepared with so
much consideration and care. But it so happened that Lord John
Pussell took a different view. His honorable friend opposite (Mr.
Samuel) had spoken of the great success of Pesponsible Government.
He (Mr. Deas Thomson) believed it would have been doubly successful
if those alterations had not been made. There was a power to make


alterations upon a mere majority of both Houses, and that, he thought,
led to alterations and innovations which had not tended to make
Responsible Government so thoroughly successful as it otherwise
would have been. He admitted there was a strong feeling in the
Colony in favour of those alterations. And although Lord John
Hussell, in submitting the Constitution Bill to the House, warned the
Legislature against sudden and cardinal changes in the Constitution,
that was not sufficient to prevent an immediate alteration of the law
as soon as the power to alter it was received in the Colony. Allusion
has been made to the passing of the Lien on Wool Act. That measure
was first suggested to Mr. Wentworth by a gentleman who came from
the West Indies ; it was founded upon a law which had obtained
there for many years; it was a law which allowed a crop of sugar,
or other crops, to be mortgaged for certain sums whilst in progress
of growth. That law was the foundation of the Lien on Wool Act.
Mr. Wentworth, with an ability which no other man in the Colony
possessed, succeeded in producing the measure. But it met with
the most strenuous opposition on the part of the Home Govern-
ment. It was thought that it would give too great a facility to
credit, but it turned out to do quite the reverse. And he might take
credit to himself to say that he supported Mr. Wentworth in his
endeavours to get that Bill passed into law. Instead of giving too
great facility to credit, it gave a substantial security which otherwise
could not have been obtained. There was not only wool, but sheep,
horses, cattle, and other stock that represented a certain value, whereas,
previous to the passing of the Act, there was only a piece of paper,
signed by two individuals, and the agreement was often not worth the
paper it was written upon. The Act was found to be most beneficial,
and it was a great accommodation to many of the settlers of this
Country. With respect to the question which now more immediately
engaged the attention of the House, he might say that he heartily and
cordially concurred in any honor that might be done to his late
honored friend. In the early days of the old Legislative Council
they no doubt were frequently elected in opposition to each other; and
he had to acknowledge, with the greatest satisfaction, that no one could
be more considerate and courteous than the late Mr. Wentworth upon
nil occasions. There were occasions when he (Mr. Deas Thomson) was
unable to carry matters contrary to what Mr. Wentworth suggested—■
he especially referred to some matters connected with the Constitution
Act—and he dared say that Mr. President recollected that such was
the case ; but they afterwards worked together with one common end


in view—the absolute and most permanent benefit of the Colony of
New South Wales. Mr. Wentworth’s anxiety was to make the Con-
stitution of this Colony as similar as possible to the English model,
and to give it all the liberty and all the security and all the benefits
which flowed from the admirable Constitution of England; and it was
well-known that, although many changes had taken place, Mr. Went-
worth’s patriotism to the Colony continued to the end of his days. He
greatly admired Mr. Wentworth’s abilities and his desire to forward
the interests of the Colony. He therefore joined, without hesitation,
in doing every possible honor to the remains of their friend who had
now passed away from us, and whose reputation for all time, to come,
as the greatest son of Australia, would last as long as the Country
itself lasted. (Cheers.)
Mr. C. Campbell said that in speaking to the motion as one of the
surviving colonists who strenuously opposed Mr. Wentworth when he
was violently struggling to obtain prematurely, as they conceived, a
Constitution for this Colony similar to that of the Mother Country,
he (Mr. Campbell) might be permitted to say that, whilst admiring
Mr. Wentworth’s energy and talent, he was still of opinion that his
wisdom as a moralist and a statesman was very questionable. But de
mortuis nil nisi honum. He had great pleasure in expressing his con-
viction that Mr. Wentworth was passionately attached to Australia, and
that he displayed much far-sighted wisdom in calling into existence
the Sydney University. Although at present that institution was
comparatively a failure—as any high educational institution must
necessarily be in a new Colony, where a utilitarian or mere animal life
policy was the policy of a majority of the Colonists—yet, as years
glided away, as the Colony gradually developed itself into a Nation, the
beneficial influences of such an institution on the future Australian
character would widen and widen, and when the petty ephemeral
political feuds and animosities of to-day should have been lost in
eternal oblivion, generation after generation of the sons of the soil
would have their intellectual and moral aspirations revived and purified
by the recollection that he whom their fathers had taught them to
regard as a great Australian patriot was a classical scholar of high
degree, and that to him they owed their University, and that his last
gift to this city of Sydney—this fair city, whose beauties in the poem
of his youth he had so warmly eulogised—that his last token of
affection to it was a costly Communion Service for the use of its
Cathedral. He cordially supported the motion.
The motion was put and unanimously agreed to.


The Resolution in both Houses of Parliament were duly communi-
cated by the Honorable the President and the Honorable the Speaker,
and were duly acknowledged.
[From the Votes and Proceedings of the Legislative Assembly, 6th August, 1872.]
The late William Charles Wentworth: —Sir James Martin moved,
pursuant to Notice No. 2, —
(1.) That this House is of opinion, that in order to manifest its deep
sense of the eminent public services of the late William Charles
Wentworth, the honors of a public funeral ought to be accorded
to his remains, as soon after their arrival in the Colony as suitable
arrangements can be made for the purpose.
(2.) That Mr. Speaker transmit a copy of the foregoing resolution
to Mr. Wentworth’s widow, with a request that she will inform the
House, through him, whether she and her family approve the in-
tended honor.
Mr. Parkes seconded the motion.
And Mr. Stewart and Mr. Driver having respectively addressed
the House, —
Question put, and agreed to unanimously,—the House standing
while the Speaker put the Question.
[From the Votes and Proceedings of the Legislative Assembly, 6th August, 1872.]
The late William Charles Wentworth :—Sir James Martin
(with the concurrence of the House ) moved, without Notice, —
That a copy of the Resolution respecting the public funeral of the
remains of the late William Charles Wentworth, be transmitted by
Mr. Speaker to the Legislative Council, in order that the Council
may be informed of the steps taken by the House in the matter.
Question put and passed.
Resolution transmitted accordingly.
[From the Minutes of the Proceedings of the Legislative Council, \2th August,
1872.]
The late William Charles Wentworth :—Mr. Samuel moved,
pursuant to notice, —
(1.) That this House desires to join with the other Branch of the
Legislature in expressing its opinion, that in order to manifest its
deep sense of the eminent public services of the late William
Charles Wentworth, the honors of a public funeral ought to be
accorded to his remains, as soon after their arrival in the Colony
as suitable arrangements can be made for the purpose.


(2.) Tliat the President transmit a copy of the foregoing Resolu-
tion to Mr. Wentworth’s widow, with a request that she will
inform the House, through him, whether she and her family
approve the intended honor. v
Debate ensued.
Question put, and passed unanimously.
[From the Votes and Proceedings of the Legislative Assembly, YZ>th August, 1872.]
The late William Chaeles Wentworth: —The Speaker informed
the House that he had forwarded to Mrs. Wentworth, by the Mail
which left Sydney on Saturday last for England, a copy of the
Resolution agreed to by the House on the 6th instant, in reference
to a Public Funeral on arrival in the Colony of the remains of
the late Mr. Wentworth, and requested that she would inform him
if the proposed honor would be agreeable to herself and family.
[From the Minutes of the Proceedings of the Legislative Council, 18 th
December, 1872.]
The late William Charles Wentworth :—The President stated
that he had, on the 29th August last, addressed a letter to Mrs.
Wentworth, communicating a resolution, unanimously agreed to by
the Council, in reference to a public funeral to the remains of the
late William Charles Wentworth, and had this day received thereto
a reply,—and read the same to the House, viz. :
“ Legislative Council Chamber,
“ Madam, “ Sydney, August 29th, 1872.
“ It is my mournful duty to transmit to you herewith a copy
of a Resolution which was unanimously adopted by the Legisla-
tive Council of this Colony on the 12th instant, on the motion of
the Honorable Saul Samuel, the representative of the Govern-
ment in the House, —and I have the honor to request that you
will be good enough to inform the Council, through me, whether
your family and yourself approve of this mark of respect’s being
accorded by the Government of this Country to your late hus-
band’s memory.
“ I beg you will permit me to add the sincere expression of
my personal sympathy with you and yours under the affliction
you have sustained, —a sympathy the greater from my long asso-
ciation with Mr. Wentworth in public and in private life.
“ I have the honor to be, Madam, with the greatest respect,
“ Your most obedient Servant,
“ T. A. MURRAY,
“ President of the Legislative Council
“Mrs. W. C. Wentworth, of Hew South Wales.
“ Wimborne, Dorset, England.”


“Merly House, Wimborne,
“ October 31, 1872.
“ Sir,
“ I bave tbe honor to acknowledge the receipt, via Brindisi,
of your letter of the 29th August last, enclosing copy of the reso-
lution unanimously agreed to by the Legislative Council, ‘ That in
order to manifest its deep sense of his eminent public services,
the honors of a public funeral ought to be accorded to the remains
of my late husband as soon after their arrival in the Colony as
suitable arrangements can be made for that purpose.’
“ Iu consequence of a communication addressed to me by the
Honorable the Speaker of the' Legislative Assembly, conveying
the desire of that House to accord the honors of a public funeral
to my husband’s remains, I had already consulted the members
of my family in England as to their feelings on this subject, and
I am therefore enabled to inform you that they coincide with
myself in desiring that the wishes of the Country, as unanimously
expressed by both Houses of Legislature, should be carried out;
and I beg that you will be kind enough to inform your Honorable
House of this decision, and to convey to them my own and my
family’s very deep sense of gratitude for the honor and respect
shown by them to my late husband’s memory. They also join
with me in thanking you for your personal expressions of sympathy
in the bereavement we have sustained, and for your kind and
graceful allusion to your long association with my husband in
public and private life.
“ The remains of my husband will leave England by a sailing
vessel in December next.
“ I have the honor to be,
“ Your obedient Servant,
“ SARAH WENTWORTH.
“ The Honorable Sir T. A. Murray,
“ President of Legislative Council of
“New South Wales.”


[From the Votes and Proceedings of the Legislative Assembly , 18 th
December , 1872.]
The late William Charles Wentworth :—The Speaker informed
the House that he had received a letter from Mrs. Wentworth,
acknowledging the receipt of a copy of the resolution adopted by
this House on 6th August, 1872, in reference to a public funeral
on the arrival in the Colony of the remains of the late Mr.
Wentworth.
The Speaker then read the letter to the House.
Sir James Martin moved, and Mr. Parkes seconded the motion,
That the letter read by the Speaker be entered on the Votes and
Proceedings of the House.
Question put and passed.
“ Merly House,
“ Wimborne, Dorsetshire,
“ 22nd October.
“ Sir,
“ I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
enclosing the resolution unanimously agreed to by the Legis-
lative Assembly on the 6th of August last, ‘ That a public funeral
should be accorded to the remains of my late husband after their
arrival in the Colony.’ I have submitted this resolution to the
various members of my family in England, and they all concur
with me in their wish to give effect to the above resolution.
They also join with me in desiring that you will convey to the
honorable Members of the Legislative Assembly their great
appreciation of the proposed honor, as well as their deep grati-
tude for the great mark of respect shown to the memory of their
late father.
“ My husband’s remains will leave England by a sailing vessel
in December next.
“ I have the honor to be,
“ Your obedient Servant,
“ S. WENTWORTH.
“ The Honorable the Speaker
“ of the Legislative Assembly.”


On tlie arrival of the remains of the late William Charles Wentworth
on board the “ British King,” the Government, without loss of time,
appointed Messrs. Hill, Halloran, and Fosbery, with plenary powers to
carry out, in a suitable manner, the resolutions of Parliament, and the
following reprints of documents will fully record the measures adopted
for the first public funeral, authorised by the Representatives, which
has taken place in the Colony.
[From the Sydney Morning Herald, 29th April, 1873.]
PUBLIC FUNERAL.
The public funeral of the late William Charles Wentworth will take
place on Tuesday next, the 6th proximo. The day will be observed as
a public holiday in connection with that event. His Excellency the
Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council, has been pleased
to appoint Mr. Richard Hill, M.P., Mr. Henry Halloran, Principal
Under Secretary, and Mr. Edmund Fosbery, acting for the Inspector
General of Police, to make and carry out the necessary arrangements
in connection with the public funeral of the late William Charles
Wentworth.
[From the Sydney Morning Herald of 29 th April, 1873.]
THE LATE W. C. WENTWORTH.
The remains of the late William Charles Wentworth arrived in the
harbour of Port Jackson, by the “British King,” on Saturday ; and it
is expected that they will be privately removed to the residence of a
friend of the deceased gentleman’s family to-day.
As our readers are aware, a public funeral is to be accorded to the
remains of the deceased patriot, and Mr. Richard Hill, M.L.A., Mr.
Henry Halloran, the Principal Under Secretary, and Mr. Edmund
Fosbery, the Secretary to the Police Department, have been appointed
a Commission to make all the requisite arrangements for the funeral.
It is expected that the remains will be interred on Tuesday, the 6th
of May ; but this and other matters will probably be definitely deter-
mined upon in the course of to-day, when the Commissioners hold
their first meeting. A very handsome mausoleum is being prepared at
Vaucluse, Watson’s Bay, for many years the residence of Mr. Went-
worth ; and some marble sculptures for its completion are on board
the “ British King.” The site selected is most appropriate, and is
singularly picturesque and beautiful.


The place of burial will be consecrated by the Bishop of Sydney,
who will probably deliver a short address on the occasion of the inter-
ment. The burial service for the dead having been read over the
remains in England, will not, it is said, be repeated at the funeral.
The following members of the late Mr. WFntwortli s family are now
in Sydney:—Mrs. Wentworth, Mr. Eitzwilliam Wentworth, Mr.
Darcy Wentworth, and Miss Wentworth.
We may mention that the Communion Service presented by the
deceased gentleman to St. Andrew’s Cathedral has, by a remarkable
coincidence, been sent out to the Colony in the “ British Xing.
[From the Government Gazette Extraordinary, 29 th April, 1873.]
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 29th April, 1873.
PUBLIC FUNERAL OF THE LATE WILLIAM CHARLES
WENTWORTH.
The Parliament of New South Wales having passed resolutions,
“ That in order to manifest its deep sense of the eminent public
services of the late William Charles Wentworth, the honors of a
Public Funeral ought to be accorded to his remains as soon after their
arrival in the Colony as suitable arrangements can be made , the
Government hereby notifies the following arrangements which will be
made for giving effect to the above resolutions :
The Funeral to take place on Tuesday, the 6th of May next; to
leave St. Andrew’s Cathedral at 11 o’clock in the forenoon, and to
proceed thence, in the order hereafter to be notified, to Vaucluse,
where the remains will be interred.
The Government, with the desire of giving the fullest effect to the
intentions of Parliament, invite all Public Bodies, Civil Officers of the
Government, and the public generally, to take part in this national
tribute of respect.
All Public Bodies, and others, desirous of taking part in the pro-
cession, on foot or otherwise, are requested to signify their intentions
to the Commissioners, at the Colonial Secretary’s Office, at their
earliest possible convenience.
HENRY PARXES.


[From the Sydney Morning Herald of 30 th April , 1873.]
THE LATE W. C. WENTWORTH.
The Commissioners (Mr. R. Hill, M.L.A., Mr. Halloran, and Mr.
Fosbery), appointed to make arrangements for the public funeral
ordered by Parliament for the remains of tbe late William Charles
Wentworth, met yesterday, at the Colonial Secretary’s Office. They
arranged that the funeral shall take place on Tuesday, the 6th of May,
and that day will be proclaimed a public holiday. The funeral will
leave St. Andrew’s Cathedral at 11 o’clock a.m. for Yaucluse; and the
Government have invited, by Proclamation in the Gazette, all public
bodies, Civil Officers of the Government, and the public generally, to
take part in the ceremony.
[From the Government Gazette, 2nd May, 1873.]
New South Wales, Proclamation by His Excellency Sir Hercules
to wit. 3 George Robert Robinson, Knight Comman-
der of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint
(1.5.) Michael and Saint George, Governor and
Hercules Robinson, Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of New
Governor. South Wales and its Dependencies, and Vice-
Admiral of the same.
Whereas it is intended that the Public Funeral of the late William
Charles Wentworth shall take place on Tuesday next, the 6th instant:
Now therefore, I, Sir Hercules George Robert Robinson, the
Governor aforesaid, do, by this my Proclamation, issued with the
advice of the Executive Council, appoint that day to be observed as a
Public Holiday, in connection with that event.
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House,
Sydney, this first day of May, in the year of our Lord
one thousand eight hundred and seventy-three, and in
the thirty-sixth year of Her Majesty’s reign.
By command,
HENRY PARKES.
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN!


[From, the Sydney Morning Herald, 2nd May, 1873.]
The case containing the remains of the late W. C. Wentworth was
landed from the ship “ British King” yesterday morning (Ist May,
1873.)
[From the Sydney Morning Herald, 5 May, 1873.]
PUBLIC FUNERAL
OF THE LATE
WILLIAM CHARLES WENTWORTH,
Tuesday, 6 May, 1873.
The Commissioners appointed to make and carry out the necessary
arrangements in connection with the public funeral of the late William
Charles Wentworth, hereby notify the following order of procession,
and other arrangements to be observed upon the occasion.
The procession, to be formed in the following manner, to move at the
conclusion of the service to be held in St. Andrew’s Cathedral at 11
o’clock, a.m., by Park and William Streets, and New South Head Road,
to Vaucluse.
All on
foot,
eight
abreast.
Mounted Police. \
' Permanent and Volunteer Forces. ,
Commandant and Staff.
Manchester Unity, Oddfellows.
Orders of Foresters.
Australian Holy Catholic Guild.
, Protestant Alliance Friendly Society.
) Sons of Temperance. i
. Hibernian Catholic Benefit Society.
Insurance Fire Brigade.
No. 1 Volunteer Fire Brigade.
No. 2 Volunteer Fire Brigade.
Other Friendly Societies who may attend.
To fall in in George-street, opposite
Cathedral and Town Hall, east side.
Ditto, ditto, west side.
Mounted Police.
The Hearse.
Mounted Police.
Family Carriage.
Mourning coaches of relatives.
His Excellency the Governor’s carriage and Suite. \
The Bishop and Members of the Chapter. i <
The Commodore. I
The Executive Council. /
Carriages to assemble at the west door
of the Cathedral.
The President and Legislative Council. “J
The Speaker and Legislative Assembly.
The Judges and the Bar. >
The Chancellor, Senate, and Members of the University. I
The Consuls. J
Carriages to take position in single
Mine in Bathurst-st., from George st.
westward ; horses’ heads to east.
The Mayor, Aldermen, and Corporation of Sydney. \
The Mayors and Aldermen of Suburban Municipalities, f
Heads of Government Departments. j
The Clergy of the various denominations. /
Carriages to take position in single
line in Bathurst-st., from George-st.
eastward ; horses’ heads to west.
Officials and other gentlemen not belonging to public bodies
intending to take part in the procession.
/ To take position in George-st., south
j of Bathurst- st., to barrier, Campbell-st.
j If on foot, to form eight abreast on the
l west side. Carriages in line, east side.
D


The Cathedral doors will he opened at half-past 10 a.m., hut no
person will be admitted to the building or its enclosure without a
ticket, to be presented at the gate either in George-street or Batliurst-
street.
Cards marked “ Choir” to he shown in the interior of the building.
The Commissioners will distribute such tickets as far as the limited
number available will allow. Gentlemen only admitted.
Public bodies following on foot, or others not desirous of proceeding
the whole distance to Vaucluse, are requested to leave the procession
at the top of William-street.
A steamer will be engaged to proceed to Yaucluse Bay to bring back
to Sydney persons attending the funeral on foot, dressed either in
mourning, or uniform, or wearing the badge of any public body.
No omnibus will be permitted to follow in the procession, or travel
on the route while the procession is in progress.
The Commissioners express an earnest hope that gentlemen taking
part in this public ceremonial will co-operate with them in carrying
out the arrangements, and not deviate in any respect from the positions
assigned.
HENRY HALLORAN.
RICHARD HILL.
EDMUND FOSBERY.
[From the Sydney Morning Herald of 6th May, 1873.]
FUNERAL OF THE LATE W. C. WENTWORTH.
The funeral of the late William Charles Wentworth will take place
to-day. The remains were last evening deposited in St. Andrew’s
Cathedral, where service will be held at 11 o’clock this morning.
George-street, between Market-street and Campbell-street, will be
closed against vehicle traffic from 10 o’clock a.m., until the procession
has left the Cathedral, and in like manner the streets intersecting
Park-street will also be closed. No omnibuses will be allowed along
the line of route —Park-street, William-street, and the New South
Head Road—which will be reserved for persons taking part in the
ceremonial. The following is the order of the procession as finally
arranged by the Commissioners :—Mounted Police, Permanent and
Volunteer Forces, Commandant and Staff, Manchester Unity of
Oddfellows, Orders of Foresters, Australian Holy Catholic Guild,
Protestant Alliance Friendly Society, Sons of Temperance, Hibernian
Catholic Benefit Society, Insurance Fire Brigade, No. 1 Volunteer
Fire Brigade, No. 2 Volunteer Fire Brigade, other Friendly Societies


who may attend, all to go on foot and walk eight abreast. Then will
come the hearse, with detachments of mounted police on either side.
After the hearse, the following will be the order of the procession:—
Family carriage, Mourning coaches of relatives, His Excellency
the G-overnor’s carriage and suite, the Bishop and Members of the
Chapter, the Commodore and Naval Officers, the Executive Council,
the President and Legislative Council, the Speaker and Legislative
Assembly, the Judges and the Bar, the Chancellor, Senate, and
Members of the University, the Consuls, the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Corporation of Sydney, the Mayors and Aldermen of Suburban Muni-
cipalities, heads of G-overnment Departments, the Clergy of the various
Denominations, officials and other gentlemen intending to take part in
the procession. Public bodies following on foot, or others not desirous
of proceeding the whole distance to Yaucluse, are requested to leave
the procession at the top of William-street. Four steamers have been
engaged to proceed to Yaucluse Bay to bring back to Sydney persons
attending the funeral on foot, dressed either in mourning, or uniform,
or wearing the badge of any public body. The outer coffin, in which
the remains were originally placed, has been removed by the under-
taker (Mr. Curtis, of Hunter-street), who has supplied in its place a
massive coffin made of cedar. It has been French-polished, and the
Only mounting is a small silver shield, bearing the following inscrip-
tion :— “William Chaeles Wentworth: Born October 26th, 1793 ;
died 20th March, 1872.” The ground about the vault at Vaucluse will
be kept by Yolunteers. Sir James Martin will deliver an oration at
the vault; and the Bishop of Sydney will also deliver an address on
the ground. The Cathedral Choir will sing the anthem.


[From the Sydney Morning Herald of 6th May. ]
WEirmOETH.
In Memoeiam.
Back to the land he loved, from Britain’s shore
The patriot’s honoured dust his friends restore;
That even in death its presence may impart
To those who hear his name the manlier heart, —
To those who mark his tomb above the wave
His scorn alike of Tyrant and of Slave, —
That in the land he loved and served so long,
No man, tho’ poor or weak, should suffer wrong.
Thro’ the long vista of departed days,—
The half a century —my memory strays,
And on its furthest limit I behold
Tbe forms of actors quick and manifold, —
Full of the passionate hope, the eager breath,
Now tranquil in the dreamless realms of death.
So comes to all the end —whate’er the span—
The aims, the struggles, the success of man.
With ardent look amidst the foremost throng
The poet scholar boldly moves along,—
His mind replete with all the classic stores,
Which Cambridge on the resolute suitor pours,—
With manly presence, and with fearless tongue
He charms the aged, and captivates the young ;
And even then the name of Wentworth grew
A name of coming power —a name of terror too.
The azure heaven is blurr’d with many a cloud ;
All is not sunshine in the moving crowd;
For tyrannous hearts or cruel hands prevail,
And Justice scarce can hold an even scale;
A want is felt that some one, without fear,
Should speak aloud, —and Wentworth’s voice they hear.
The Bar he raises, quickens, and inflames,
Where Forbes presides, and Bannister declaims —
Where Wardell, smiling, sped his quivering shaft —
Where Kowe so loudly storm’d, and Norton laugh’d,
At every sophistry his glance laid bare,
In those who chanced his fiery scorn to dare.


From off the Press, so prone and fetter’d then,
He rent the shackles with his potent pen;
Her freedom claiming as a right withdrawn, —
The harbinger of light —the sunburst of the dawn.
The soldiers’ cause, so crushed in law’s despite,
He boldly pleaded, frown or smile who might,—
And poured his dread appeal in menace strong,
Altho’ his Sovereign’s satrap did the wrong.
A wiser ruler followed, —matchless Bourke ;
And Wentworth aided in the goodly work, —
To sink the jealousies of sect and clime,
Which fill a land with feud and blood and crime,
Which sap its strength and mar its social frame,
A nation without heart, or power, or fame.
Now pleads he banded with compatriots true, —
(Bland, Blaxland, Jamieson, I turn to you)
For wider rights to loyal freemen due :
Now in the Senate of his Country stands,
Still pleading for her rights, with upraised hands, —
Hands that had grasp’d, had there been need of such,
What Hampden did not hesitate to touch;
With eloquence alike to fire or freeze,
And vehement will that hardly stoop’d to please,—
And yet that seemed at times Demosthenes !
With reasonings whose massive potence rent,
And cast to earth each adverse argument;
Or in continuous gripe, before he fell’d
The gasping sophistry, long strangling held,
Or by a sudden backward stroke would show
At once his scorn and conquest o’er his foe, —
Or in a loftier pleading bear along
The hearers’ hearts against the stated wrong,—
Flooding the whole with ominous flashes bright,
And mutter’d thunders of a fiercer fight.
We owe the framework under which we dwell
To what he did as happily as well; —
The Constitution, giving unto each
All he can fairly claim or boldly reach :
Giving a measure, almost piled too high,
To those who own no power to 6elf-deny :
Better the surfeit than the stint, he thought,
Of that so long desired so dearly sought,
Leaving his followers, by experience wise,
To modify as prudence should advise,


That thus the hounds of Freedom we should gain,
With ample power wild license to restrain.
His name shall echo in remoter years
Where Woolley, honor’d shade ! no more appears :
Australian youth, as once he burn’d, shall burn,
As lingering fingers charmed pages turn, —
Homer or iEscliylus attracting now
The radiant eye and thought-illumin’d brow ;
Newton, or Herschel, or La Place shall fill
Their pregnant minds with ampler wisdom still;
And many an ardent spirit, brooding here,
Boused, as from dreams, shall trace a bright career ;
In Field or Senate winning deathless fame, —
Fired by our Wentworth’s hope-inspiring name !
I ask ye, friends ! who join in decent woe,
And mark the long procession onward flow,
To where above the wave the rock shall tell,
That he who bravely toiled, now sleeps so well; —■
I ask ye, of whatever land ye be,
Who share the pride and safety of the free, —
To make this land —his land, —a nation bright,—
That can discern, and dare uphold the right;—
That knows no fear, —tho’ peril’s path he trod, —
But keeps it’s faith, and leaves the rest to God.
HENEY HALLOEAN.
sth May, 1873.
[From the Empire of 6th May."]
WILLIAM CHAELES WENTWOETH.
Patriot and Statesman.
W hatever realms of light thy soul may roam,
Wentworth ! —thy patriot dust we welcome Home
To it’s long rest, from long life’s troublous days,
With all a people’s gratitude and praise,
And reverent lay thee in earth’s quiet breast,
Beneath the turf thy manhood’s foot hath prest,
And where thy busiest hours of life once sped
We yield thee over to the “ Mighty dead” !
“ Ashes to ashes! —dust unto the dust” !
Thy earth to earth! —thy soul unto the just!
Thy memory —in our memories long to dwell
Thine Epitaph!
He sleeps in death—’midst those his life serv’d well.


Sons of the soil! —Australia’s greatest son
Here rests from toil! — his life’s last work is done,
Whose stubborn struggle fought out freedom’s cause,
And won us liberty and equal laws,
And curb’d the despot’s “ right to govern wrong”
In days when men were weak and tyrants strong!
Oh, sacred Liberty! great gift of Q-od!
Man’s right by birth, whatever soil be trod;
Accurst be he who forges slavery’s chain,
And blest be he who shatters it in twain!
To one, a people’s hate and scorn is given,
The other, claims their praises next to heaven ;
And shrin’d within their hearts, his name thro’ time,
As martyr, or as patriot, lives sublime !
The craven spirit that can live a slave,
When his right hand can dig his tyrant’s grave,
Or fill his own! Let him, oh Fate ! expire,
Without one servile child to hail him sire !
And blotted from men’s memories, yield his place
To freemen, fathers of a manlier race !
For slavery’s shadow, like the upas tree,
Deadens all virtue into lethargy.
In freedom’s sunshine, hope with action blends,
And wakes the world to work out noblest ends,
And liberty—like light, air, sea, or sod —
Is all men’s right as freeholders from Ood !
Through the dim centuries that roll between
The past and present ceaselessly serene,
Like growing radiance of a rising star,
The light of knowledge streams to us afar,
Its gathering gleam throughout Time’s cycles fed,
By every age’s intellectual dead.
Till all the added brilliance of each mind
Is blending in a sun-dawn —where mankind
Shall see through ignorance and ancient wrong,
And know true virtue as its sight grows strong.
Knowledge ! thou earth-bent ray of light from high!
Man’s lonely lode-star in Time’s unknown sky—
Giod-given as a guide thro’ earth’s dim ways,
To lead him higher with its heavenly rays,
With Thee to guide him he may reverent reach
The altar steps, where angels stoop to teach
How higher life by lower life is won,
When earth’s dull servitude is duly done.


Knowledge! all honor to the princely hand
Whose guerdon rears thy temple in the land,
Whose generous heart and massive brain combin’d,
Endows the schools that civilize mankind !
And where the lurking savage stealthy trod,
Spreads light and truth, and lifts man nearer God.
Wentworth ! our University’s thine own,
Most fitting monument! Each sculptur’d stone,
From solid base to fretted pinnacle,
Thro’ ages yet to come shall greyly tell
Of him whose patriot wisdom rear’d its pile,
The first and grandest in our giant isle ;
And students yet unborn shall bless the name
Of Wentworth, as they emulate his fame !
Happy the land where law with freedom reigns—
Where Christ’s self-sacrifice its people trains ;
Whose children, taught by kindness, dread no blow,
And merciful, as strong, to manhood grow ;
Their hearts expanding with each ripening thought,
To practice all the Christian virtues taught—•
“ Self-reverence, self-knowledge, self-control,”
Moulding an earthly frame with heavenly soul;
In action strong, in Council gently wise, —
Earth’s vintage ripening for celestial skies.
Such was his dream—whose sleep is dreamless now —
For this, his Country ! Oh, Australia, thou
Cans’t, if thou wilt, his visions realize,
Of happier people, under happier skies
Than all earth’s ancient Governments can show
Where wealth breeds wealth— whilst leant's increase is woe !
Australia—where redemption’s cross o’er head,
Becals the teaching of the Sacred Dead ;
In solemn splendour—in the midnight heaven —
Be thou this Nation ! let our Wentworth’s leaven
Of patriot effort actuate thy soul
To be the vanguard in Time’s muster-roll
Of nobler nations—where no longer wealth
And force shall be sole rulers ; but the health
And happiness, and virtue of mankind,
Be the sole aim of every master-mind ;
’Till noble deeds and speech renew the old,
Grand, golden age —in this new age of gold 1
And Australasia—honor’d, great, and free,
Fulfil great Wentworth’s youthful prophecy !
6th May, 1873. B. A.


[From the Sydney Morning Herald of Ith May. J
SYDNEY, MAY 6, 1873.
Spirit of Freedom! since the world began,
Thy task hath been to rescue man from man,
From great or meaner pests the earth to purge,
The fell invader’s mace, the planter’s scourge —
Or when the tyrant hides his ravenous paw,
In civil mummery and the masque of Law.
When Judgment sit the parasite of power,
And Arms uphold the minion of the hour;
When Sloth and dreed are like a clinging rust,
That eats the sacred bands of mutual trust,
And selfish tolerance of public wrong
Unnerves the thrall and makes th’ oppressor strong,
Thou find’st some Heart amid the cow’ring fold
Of royal temper and Titanic mould,
Bidst him now form his band, now stand alone,
Now seek the tyrant’s breast, now bare his own,
Now stem with life-long constancy the tide
Of grasping Privilege, or sullen Pride,
Or smile at Slander, or consort with Shame,
Or face the threatening mob with eyes of flame.
Spirit of Freedom ! should the Fates ordain
Some baser master and more loathly chain,
Lives there the man amongst us now to wield
Thy flashing sword and adamantine shield,
For Right’s own sake who dares the Right defend ?
Or is thy tale of Heroes at an end,
And thou retiring to that unseen shore,
Dwell’st ’mid the Mighty that return no more ?
Spirit of Truth! who from our baser selves
Dost save us, when the mind is sick, and delves
Its own dark prison filled with evil sights,
Bred from the vapours of unwise delights,
Nor Pleasure’s lure nor Superstition’s spell
Comes near thy azure-vaulted citadel.
Nor less thou bid’st thy votary disdain
The life of blear-eyed prowlers after gain,
To bask in realms of scientific lore,
Or ’mid the visions of the seers of yore.


Thou also hast thy Heroes ; iren that lead
The student’s life to win the Martyr’s meed,
Who, strong thro’ thee, contemn the leaden rule
Of the self-deified self-blinded fool.
They, too, are thine whose patriotic hand,
Flings a broad shelter o’er the studious band,
Who prompt to rear th’ inviolable faue,
And as thy minister bid Learning reign,
And touch with hallow’d fire the heart of youth,
To guide his steps to Honour and to Truth.
Spirit of Truth ! are all thy followers cold ?
Glows there no relic of the days of old ?
Hast thou for ever and for ever fled
Back to the past, to dwell among the Dead ?
Freedom and Truth, to you this day belongs !
Around your shrine a mourning people throngs.
Deign, deign ye to behold the youthful band,
The destined heirs of our Australian land :
Breathe on them that which marks the chosen seed,
Who toil for others, and for others bleed ;
And let your presence radiate through the gloom,
As ye descend to gaze on Wentworth’s tomb !
CHARLES BADHAM.


PUBLIC FUNERAL
OF THE LATE
WILLIAM CHARLES WENTWORTH.
[From the Sydney Morning Herald of 7th May, 1873.]
The public funeral of the late William Charles Wentworth took place
yesterday. A large concourse of persons had assembled outside of
St. Andrew’s Cathedral, in George-street, by 10 o’clock in the forenoon,
and by 11 o’clock every avenue of approach was densely crowded with
spectators, who lined the footpaths and the sides of all the thorough-
fares. Men and boys were perched on the most out-of-the-way places
—as on the top of drinking-fountains, gate-posts, verandahs, and roofs.
Scores of heads were bursting through the open windows of every
house in the vicinity, and long rows of legs dangled from every parapet.
The scaffolding and other portions of the new Town Hall also afforded
foothold for a large number of sight-seers ; and in whichever direction
the eye turned, there were long lines of vehicles and dense masses of
people. The traffic along George-street was suspended, barriers being
erected at Market-street and at the Haymarket; and as soon as the
procession began to move from the Cathedral, the traffic along all the
streets which intersected the line of route was also interrupted until
the funeral had passed. The Commissioners for the Ceremonial
(Mr. Richard Hill, M.L.A., and Mr. Henry Halloran) had charge of
the arrangements in the interior of the Cathedral; and the other
Commissioner (Mr. Edmund Eosbery, Secretary to the Police Depart-
ment), acting in conjunction with Inspector Read and the other principal
Officers of the City and Mounted Police, had charge of other arrange-
ments. The officers and men of the Police Force acted with wonderful
tact and discretion, and excellent order was preserved.
The thoroughfares surrounding or near to the Cathedral were
reserved for the accommodation of the innumerable vehicles, for
persons who intended to walk in the procession, and for the formation
of the procession. The Volunteer Forces fell in in George-street,
opposite the Cathedral and Town Hall, on the east side —the Odd-
fellows, Foresters, and other Friendly Societies occupying the western
side. The hearse was stationed in Clarence-street, immediately
opposite the western door of the Cathedral. In the same street were


the family carriage and mourning coaches of relatives, the Governor’s
carriage, the carriage of the Bishop of Sydney, and the carriages of
the Executive Council. The vehicles occupied by the Members of the
Legislature, the Judges and the Bar, Chancellor, Senate, and Members
of the University, and the Consuls, were drawn up in Bathurst-street,
west of George-street. The carriages conveying the Mayor and
Aldermen of Sydney, the heads of the Government Departments, and
the Clergy of various Denominations, took up position in line in
Bathurst-street, east of George-street. Officials and the general body
of the public drew up their vehicles in George-street, south of Bathurst-
street. The above arrangements were closely adhered to, and any-
thing like confusion was avoided.
The Cathedral doors were thrown open soon after 10 o’clock, persons
being admitted to the edifice and to its adjacent enclosure by tickets.
Gentlemen only were admitted into the church. There was a large
number of persons present, but the edifice was not inconveniently
crowded.
The interior of the Cathedral was (by Messrs. Farmer and Company)
everywhere hung with festoons of black cloth. On the vestry screens,
on the choir-desks, on the lectern, pulpit, gasaliers, finials, and organ
loft these sombre trappings were to be seen, contrasting strongly with
the rich colours of the stained glass windows, and with the robes of the
Cathedral Clergy, and the brilliant consular and military uniforms.
Still the preponderating colour was black, for every person not in
uniform or specially habited was dressed in mourning.
The body, in its handsome coffin of polished cedar, with silver handles
and shield, &c., was found to be resting near the baptistry, when the con-
gregation began to assemble, prior to the ceremony. The coffin was,
under the direction of Mr. Charles Moore, of the Botanical Gardens,
festooned with wreaths of funeral cypress ; and on the lid rested two
wreaths of immortelles and other plants, mostly indigenous to Yaucluse.
The relatives of the deceased were seated in the choir of the church, near
the pillar at the south-eastern end of the northern transept. The
Ministers took their places on the north side of the choir, and near them
sat the Members of the Legislative Council who were present. On the
opposite side of the choir sat the Chief J ustice and Mr. Justice Hargrave,
Commodore Stirling, Colonel Bichardson, Captain St. John, A.D.C.,
Mr. de Bobeck (Private Secretary to His Excellency the Governor),
the Mayor of Sydney, the Foreign Consuls, and some of the officers of
the Sydney University. Most of the Aldermen of the City sat in the
south aisle of the choir, or eastern end of the church. The Ministers


present were : The Hon. Henry Parkes, Chief Secretary and Premier ;
the Hon. E. Butler, Attorney General; the Hon. S. Samuel, Postmaster
General; the Hon. G. A. Lloyd, Colonial Treasurer; the Hon. J. S.
Farnell, Minister for Lands ; the Hon. J. Sutherland, Minister for
Works ; and the Hon. J. G. L. Innes, Solicitor General. The Members
of the Legislative Council, sitting near to the Executive, were the Hon.
John Campbell, the Hon. Henry Moore, the Hon. E. D. S. Ogilvie, the
Hon. Alexander Campbell, the Hon. John Hay, the Hon. Bourn Bussell,
the Hon. John Blaxland, the Hon. Bobert Owen, and the Hon. William
Busby. With the Members of the Legislative Council sat the officers of
that House—the Clerk of Parliaments, Mr. John J. Calvert, and the
Clerk Assistant, Mr. A. P. Clapin. The Hon. Joseph Docker and the
Usher of the Black Bod (Captain H. J. T. Shadforth) sat opposite, near
His Honor Sir Alfred Stephen, Kt. C.B. (Chief Justice), and Mr. James
Merriman, the Mayor of Sydney. The Consuls present officially were
Mr. E. O. Smith, the Vice-Consul of Portugal; Mr. W. Wolfen, the
Consul of Sweden and Norway ; Mr. F. Macnab, the Consul for the
Netherlands; Mr. E. M. Paul, Vice-Consul for Bussia; Mr. A. S.
Webster, Hawaiian Consul; Mr. Sahl, Consul for Germany; Mr. George
King, Consul for Italy; Mr. E. Simon, Consul for France ; and Mr.
Coutin, the Chancellor of that Consulate. The Fellows of the Senate of
the Sydney University present were the Hon. E. Deas Thomson, C.B.
(Chancellor); the Hon. Sir William Manning, Q.C., the Hon. Sir James
Martin, Q.C., the Hon. Sir William Macarthur, the Bev. Canon
Allwood, Mr. Christopher Bolleston, the Hon. W. B. Dailey, and
Professor Charles Badham. D.D. A large body of graduates and under-
graduates were also in attendance at the funeral—between forty and
fifty in all—but not many of them were in the church. Amongst the
other gentlemen present were the Hon. Thomas Holt, M.L.C.; Mr. H.
Halloran (the Principal Under Secretary), Mr.Bichard HiII,M.L.A. Mr.
Edmund Fosbery, Mr. George Hill, Mr. K. A. Hunt, Mr. James Barnet
(the Colonial Architect), Mr. Fairfax, Mr. A. Gordon, Mr. J. Barker,
Mr. Chadwick, Dr. Moffit, Mr. M. H. Stephen, the Very Bev. Dr.
Forrest, Mr. Henry Lumsdaine, Mr. Colyer, Mr. W. Boberts, Mr.
Sedgwick, Mr. Def Fell, Mr. Dutruc, Dr. Tucker, Mr. Charles Moore
(Director of the Botanic Gardens), Mr. Alderman Charles Moore, Mr
J.F. Hourigan, Mr. William Wallis, Mr. John Bae, Mr. B. C. Walker,
Mr. H. Prince, the Bev. William Lumsdaine, the Bev. Mr. Fidler,
the Bev. B. Chapman, the Bev. Mr. Johnston, the Bev. Mr. Sellors,
the Bev. Mr. Bobinson, the Bev. Dr. Steel, the Bev. Adam Thomson,
Mr. S. C. Brown, M.L.A., Mr. W. A. Duncan, Mr. Thorne, the Bev.


Mr. Milne, Mr. T. Hale, the Rev. W. Ridley, Captain Scott, P.M.,
Dr. Sly, Mr. G-. F. Wise, Dr. Hogg, Mr. W. Day, Mr. B. Palmer,
Mr. W. G. A. Fitzhardinge, Mr. G. Fitzhardinge, Mr. Fitzhardinge,
Mr. Alderman Chapman, Mr. Alderman Linsley, Mr. Alderman
Macintosh, Mr. Woolcott (Town Clerk), Mr. S. Cook, Mr. F. C.
Brewer, Mr. Eyre Gr. Ellis, Mr. Goddard, Captain Eldred, Mr.
Hemming, the Rev. Dr. Stanley, Mr. Edward Flood, Mr. O’Brien, Mr.
Kippax, Captain Baynes, Mr. E. L. Montefiore, Captain Campbell
(Duke of Edinburgh Highlanders), Dr. Sydney Jones, Mr. Hugh
Kennedy, Dr. Muller, Dr. Milford, Mr. Lord, Alderman Steel, Mr.
Edward Knox, Mr. O’Reilly, Mr. Alexander Stuart, the Rev. Mr.
Curnow, the Hon. Mr. Barlee, of Western Australia, Mr. Hannell,
M.L.A., Mr. John Lucas, M.L.A., Mr. W. C. Windeyer, Mr. W. H.
Suttor, the Rev. Dr. Lang, Mr. W. Billyard, Mr. W. Bowman, Mr.
Hordern, Dr. Wright, Dr. Taylor, Mr. A. Thompson, Mr. Levey, Mr.
J. L. Montefiore, Dr. J. C. Cox, Mr. G. A. Mansfield, Mr. A. Dodd,
Rev. Mr. Lloyd, Rev. Mr. Paterson, Rev. Mr. Hurst, Rev. Thomas
Hayden, Rev. Mr. Shephard, Rev. W. Bradley, Rev. Dr. Fullerton, Rev.
G. Martin, Rev. R. Morris, Rev. Mr. Galloway, Rev. G. Sutherland,
Rev. J. C. Kirby, and many others. In the congregation there were
also several Volunteer and Naval Officers, whose names were not to be
readily ascertained.
At 11 o’clock the Metropolitan Bishop, with the Dean and the
Cathedral clergy, proceeded from the front of the Communion Table to
the west end of the centre aisle—the voluntary on the organ being
Beethoven’s Funeral March in A flat minor, very ably performed by
the organist, Mr. M. Younger. The coffin was then raised and borne
up the church after the clergy, the Bishop, in clear and sonorous tones,
repeating the sentences at the commencement of the burial service ap-
pointed for use by the Church of England. This time the Bishop, pre-
ceded by his apparitor, led the procession. He was followed by his
chaplain (the Rev. Canon R. L. King), the Dean of Sydney, the Rev.
Canon Allwood, the Rev. Canon Vidal, the Rev. Canon H. King, and
Minor Canon Rich. The “ sentences” having been repeated, the Bishop
and the officiating clergy went to their respective seats, the coffin being
placed on trestles, in the middle of the church, under the great eastern
arch of the nave.
The 39th and 90th Psalms (Dixi custodiam and Domine refugium)
were next chanted by the choir, to Gregorian tones in G minor. The
Dean then, at the lectern, read the lesson, which was taken out of the
15th chapter of St. Paul’s First Epistle to -the Corinthians, beginning
at the 20th verse.


The following anthem (the Dies Irce in English), taken from “ Hymns
Ancient and Modern,” was then very impressively sung by the choir: —
Day of Wrath! O day of mourning !
See fulfilled the prophet’s warning,
Heaven and earth in ashes burning !
Oh ! what fear man’s bosom rendeth,
When from Heaven the Judge descendeth,
On Whose sentence all dependeth.
Wondrous sound the trumpet flingeth,
Through earth’s sepulchres it ringeth,
All before the Throne it bringeth,
Death is struck, and Nature quaking,
All Creation is awaking,
To its Judge an answer making.
What shall I, frail man, be pleading,
Who for me be interceding,
When the just are mercy needing ?
King of Majesty tremendous,
Who dost free salvation send us,
Fount of Pity, then befriend us!
Thou the sinful woman savedst;
Thou the dying thief forgavest j
And to me a hope vouclisafest.
Worthless are my prayers and sighing,
Yet, good Lord, in grace complying,
Rescue me from fires undying.
With thy favoured sheep 0 place me,
Nor among the goats abase me ;
But to Thy right hand upraise me.
While the wicked are confounded,
Doomed to flames of woe unbounded,
Call me, with Thy saints surrounded.
Low I kneel, with heart-submission j
See, like ashes, my contrition ;
Help me in my last condition.
Ah ! that day of tears and mourning !
From the dust of earth returning,
Man for judgment must prepare him ;
Spare, O God, in mercy spare him!
Lobd, all-pitying, Jesu blest,
Grant us Thine eternal rest. Amen.
The Collects for Easter eve and Easter day, with the Lord s Prayer,
were then said by the Precentor (the Pev. J. C. Corlette), the lay clerks
of the choir responding.


The concluding benediction was given by the Bishop, after which the
body was removed from the church, the organ playing the “ Dead
March in Saul.” As the wailing sounds of the organ ceased, the same
solemn strain rose from the military band stationed outside the south-
west door of the Cathedral with a sudden and almost startling effect.
The Procession was then formed in the following order :—-
Mounted Police.
Yolunteer Force.
Commandant and Staff.
Manchester Unity Odd Fellows.
Orders of Foresters.
Australian Holy Catholic Guild.
Sons of Temperance.
Hibernian Catholic Benefit Society.
Insurance Fire Brigade.
Ho. 1 Yolunteer Fire Brigade.
Ho. 2 Yolunteer Fire Brigade.
Other Friendly Societies.
Hative Australians.
Mounted Police.
Mounted Police.
Family Carriage.
Mourning Coaches of Eelatives.
His Excellency the Governor’s Carriage.
The Bishop and Members of the Chapter.
The Carriage of the Archbishop (empty).
The Executive Council.
The Legislative Council.
The Speaker and Legislative Assembly.
The Judges and the Bar.
The Chancellor, Senate, and Members of the University.
The Consuls.
The Mayor, Aldermen, and Corporation of Sydney.
The Mayors and Aldermen of Suburban Municipalities.
Heads of Government Departments.
The Clergy of the various Denominations.
Officials and other Gentlemen.
The Procession was headed by the Yolunteer Band, playing the
“ Dead March in Saul.”


The various Arms of the Volunteer Force, having assembled at
their respective mustering-places, were marched to George-street,
where they formed in line of quarter columns on the eastern side,
facing the Cathedral. The men were paraded in full-dress with waist-
belts and side-arms, and mustered in good force. Upon the procession
being formed they headed it in column of sections, led by Captain
Baynes (acting Major of Brigade), after whom came the Brigade
Band under Lieutenant Callen, and the Volunteer Artillery Band under
Mr. Cork, their bandmaster. These were followed by the Volunteer
Artillery, of whom there was a good muster, the batteries marching
as nearly as possible according to seniority. According to military
custom at funerals the non-commissioned officers of the brigade fol-
lowed in a party by themselves, and the commissioned officers, also in
a body, brought up the rear. Major Shepherd, Major Wilson, Cap-
tain Cooper, and Captain Lett (adjutant), who were mounted, came
last. The Engineers, under Lieutenants Bowe and Arnheim, followed;
then came the Sydney Battalion Volunteer Bifles marching in the
same order, and with the Grammar School Cadets. The senior officers
were Major Eaymond and Major Eichards—Lieutenant Cavanough
acting as Adjutant. The cadet officers were Captain Weigall and
Lieutenant Anderson. The Suburban Battalion came next, headed by
their Band, and under Major Jaques. Finally marched the Naval
Brigade under Captain Hixson and Commander Irwin, also preceded
by their Band. The Commandant (Lieutenant-Colonel Eichardson)
and Major Airey (N.S.W. Artillery) closed the military portion of the
procession. The N.S."W. Artillery were not present.
After the Commandant and his Staff came the Friendly and other
t Societies, dressed in black, nearly every one wearing, mourning, and
bearing besides, some of the quieter-looking of the insignia ot their
Orders. The members of these Societies mustered in all some 800 or
900. They comprised the Oddfellows of the Manchester Unity, the
Foresters, the Members of the Catholic Guild of St. Mary and St.
Joseph, the Sons of Temperance, and the Members of the Hibernian
Catholic Benefit Society. Among those most numerously represented
were the Oddfellows, the Foresters, and the Sons of Temperance,
although it cannot be said that the other Societies were inadequately
represented. After them came the Insurance Fire Brigade, followed
by the Members of the Nos. 1 and 2 Volunteer Fire Companies.
There was a large muster of the firemen of each Company, and all
were dressed in full uniform, their dresses contrasting forcibly with
the sombre look of those worn by the members of the Benefit and
E


Friendly Societies who had preceded them. After the firemen walked,
eight abreast, to the number of between 300 and 400, the natives of the
Colony, who, except in a few isolated instances, wore mourning,
including crape bands round their hats and rosettes of blue ribbon
and crape. Much amusement was caused by the appearance of some
half-dozen aborigines, following in procession in the footsteps of the
white natives of the Colony. They were barefooted and barelegged,
and their dresses were quaint and motley enough. The spectators
were highly amused at the appearance of an item of which no mention
had been made in the programme ; but it is questionable whether this
amusement was shared by the white natives of the Colony, whose
claims to figure in the procession as “ the natives ” were thus publicly
disputed.
The Legislative Council were represented by the Honorable Joseph
Docker (acting for the President, who was too unwell to attend), Mr.
J. J. Calvert (Clerk of the Parliaments), Mr. Clapin (Clerk Assistant),
Mr. Shadforth (Usher of the Black Bod), the Honorable George Allen,
Honorable William Busby, Honorable William Byrnes, Honorable
John Campbell, Honorable Alexander Campbell, Honorable Charles
Campbell, Honorable W. B. Dailey, Honorable F. M. Darley, Honor-
able S. D. Gordon, Honorable John Hay, Honorable Thomas Holt,
Honorable Sir William Macarthur, Honorable Sir William Manning,
Honorable Henry Moore, Honorable E. D. S. Ogilvie, Honorable
Bobert Owen, Honorable Bourn Bussell, Honorable Saul Samuel
(Postmaster-General and Yice-President of the Executive Council),
and Honorable E. Deas Thomson, C.B.
The Legislative Assembly were represented by the Honorable
William Munnings Arnold (Speaker), Mr. Stephen William Jones
(Clerk of the Assembly), Mr. Webb (Clerk Assistant), Mr. Yivian
(Third Clerk), Mr. L. J. Harnett (acting for the Sergeant-at-Arms),
and the following honorable Members: —Mr. B. P. Abbott, Mr. G.
W. Allen, Mr. J. Booth, Mr. S. C. Brown, Mr. J. F. Burns, Honorable
E. Butler (Attorney General), Mr. J. Campbell, Mr. J. A. Cunneen,
Mr. T. G. G. Dangar, Mr. B. Driver (Chairman of Committees),
Honorable J. S. Farnell (Minister for Lands), Mr. M. Fitzpatrick,
Mr. E. Greville, Mr. J. Hannell, Mr. J. Hurley (Narellan), Honorable
J. G. L. Innes (Solicitor General), Mr. J. Lackey, Honorable G. A.
Lloyd (Treasurer), Mr. G. W. Lord, Mr. J. Lucas, Mr. J. Macintosh,
Honorable Sir James Martin, Q.C., Mr. J. H. Neale, Mr. H. L.
Nelson, Mr. J. Nowlan, Mr. G. Oakes, Honorable H. Parkes (Colonial
Secretary and Premier), Mr. J. G. Baphael, Mr. J. Bobertson, Mr.


T. Robertson, Mr. J. D. Single, Mr. R. B. Smith, Mr. J. Stewart,
Honorable J. Sutherland (Minister for Public Works), Mr. H. Taylor,
Mr. W. Tunks, Mr. J. Watson, Mr. J. Wearne, and Mr. T. H. West.
Their Honors Sir Alfred Stephen, Kt., C. 8., Mr. Justice Hargrave,
Mr. Justice Cheeke, Mr. Justice Faucett, Mr. District Court Judge
Simpson, Mr. District Court Judge Dowling, represented the Bench
of the Colony ; and there were also present many members of the Bar.
The Attorney General and Solicitor General were of course with the
Ministry. Sir William Manning, Q.C., attended in his capacity of a
member of the University, holding the degree of LL.D.
Among the Government officers present were Mr. Henry Halloran
(the Principal Under Secretary), Hon. Geoffrey Eagar (Under Secre-
tary to the Treasury), Mr. W. W. Stephen (Under Secretary for
Lands), Mr. John Rae (Under Secretary for Works), Mr. Plunkett
(Secretary to the Law Department), Mr. John Williams (Crown
Solicitor), Mr. Duncan (Collector of Customs), Mr. G. H. Deffell
(Commissioner of Insolvency), Mr. Harold Maclean (Sheriff), and Mr.
Christopher Rolleston (Auditor General).
The most favourable locality for obtaining a good view of the pro-
cession before it was likely to lose any of its component parts was
along Park-street, and thence to the high ground at the top of William-
street. The latter thoroughfare was from an early hour quite alive
with excitement. All the places of business were closed, and the
inhabitants with their friends lined the windows and roofs of the
houses. Crowds of well-dressed persons patrolled the streets from
about 10 o’clock ; and by half-past 10 there was a fringe of spectators
extending from opposite the Museum to the Woolloomooloo omnibus
stand, at the extreme end of the road. This gradually increased in
density, and at 11 o’clock the aspect presented to the looker-on from
the top of William-street was not a little imposing. Masses of people
elbowed one another for room upon the slopes in Hyde Park over-
looking the thoroughfare which intersects it from Park-street. The
triangular piece of land between the Museum and the waste ground
opposite St. Mary’s was packed with spectators. From thence, along
William-street, the populace crowded the pavement on either side;
nor were the strict rights of private property respected by the more
curious and headstrong, who, with little ceremony, took possession of
verandahs, &c., abutting upon the street, and from which a favourable
view of the funeral cortege was to be gained. The utmost decorum
was however observed, and the noisy hum of conversation was
immediately stilled upon the approach of the procession. The windows,


roofs, upper verandahs, &c., were all occupied. At 11 o’clock the hells
of St. Mary’s commenced to toll forth their funeral knell, which was
continued during the following two hours. About twenty minutes to
12 the monotonous stroke of the drums chiming in with the dead
march, announced the approach of the procession to those at the upper
end of William-street. Of this an excellent view was enjoyed ; indeed,
before it had passed, the patience of the beholders was well-nigh
exhausted. Long after the leaders had disappeared over the top of
William-street, the main body of the procession had still to appear in
sight, and it stretched along the entire length of that thoroughfare and
Park-street. Progress was necessarily slow, but it was rendered more
than ordinarily so by the frequent stoppages occasioned by temporary
impediments of various kinds. It was within a few minutes of 1
o’clock when the closing party of police gained the summit of the hill.
Here, however, many of the Volunteers, members of the Friendly
Societies, and others fell out, not caring to face the lengthy tramp to
Vaucluse, even with the prospect of a return by steamer. After the
procession had become lost to sight, William-street was, for some
quarter of an hour or so, overrun with the myriads retracing their
steps, and who swarmed across the whole extent of the road.
The vault is hollowed out in a very remarkable rock on the north
side of the Vaucluse Bay, but rather inland, and lies about E.N.E.
from Vaucluse House, distant nearly half a mile. It is hollowed out
of the solid rock, the main chamber, that immediately under the
opening, being about 14 feet by 14 feet and about 6 feet high, with
room, owing to a shelf running round it, for ten coffins. Besides this
main chamber there is a second chamber, arched, and of smaller
dimensions. The roof of the vault is secured by wrought-iron
girders, filled in by wrought stone, and cemented, so as to be imper-
vious to wet. The opening will be slabbed over by a heavy slate
covering, which, being cemented down, will prevent any surface
moisture from entering. The vault itself was entirely dry, and free
from moisture of any kind.
A large body of police kept the ground; and, owing to the published
prohibition to landing on the estate, as well as to the constant vigilance
of the Water Police, who were constantly rowing round the water
boundary, only very few persons were present before the arrival of the
procession. Police were sent on in advance of the procession, in order
to secure order on the ground at Vaucluse.
As soon as the head of the procession showed upon the crown of the
hill leading to the Vaucluse grounds, the police removed all visitors


to a distance, and formed a cordon round tlie vault. As tlie procession
came up, tlie Artillery and Engineers were formed in close column at
the northern part of the eastern side of the vault, the Sydney Batta-
lion of Volunteers next to them, and then some of the Friendly
Societies. On the western side were the Highland Company, the
Suburban Battalion of Volunteers, the Naval Brigade, and some
Friendly Societies. The natives of the Colony, who marched in
procession as such, were drawn up immediately south of the massy
rock in which the tomb has been scarped out. The Bishop of Sydney,
with his clergy, took his place at the north side of the tomb, imme-
diately opposite its opening, whilst to the north of the opening Sir
James Martin and the other Members of the University took up their
position, the intervening space being filled up by the mourners, the
Judges, Members of both Houses of Parliament, City Councillors,
Members of the Bar, private gentlemen, Volunteer Officers, &c.
As soon as the positions had been assumed, the petition for the
consecration of the ground was read by the Registrar, Mr. Barker.
The Bishop said: *' The glorious majesty of the Lord our God be
upon us. Prosper Thou the work of our hands upon us. O prosper
Thou our handiwork.”
The sentence of consecration of the ground as a burial-place, under
the seal of the Bishop, was read by the Chancellor, Mr. Gordon, and
was handed to the Registrar by the Bishop to be registered.
The Rev. Canon King read the first lesson from Genesis 1., 1 to 14.
The second lesson was read by the Rev. Mr. Vidal, from Ist John,
v. 19 to 30.
The following prayers were read by the Bishop
“ Grant, O Lord, that they who shall bring forth their dead into this place
toay he so strengthened and comforted hy Thy Grace, that they may not be
sorry as men without hope for them that sleep in Thee, but may render unto
Thee hearty thanks for their brethren whom it hath pleased Thee to deliver
out of the miseries of this sinful world; and, believing in Thy Son Jesus
Christ, may commit their bodies to the ground in sure and certain hope of
the resurrection to eternal life, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.”
“ Grant, O Lord, that they who shall here lay the bodies of Thy saints to
rest, in hope of the blessed resurrection, may evermore steadfastly believe in
the fellowship and communion of Thy saints living and departed, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.”


“ Grant, O Lord, that all -who at any time shall visit this sacred ground,
and walk amidst the graves of the departed, may he enabled, by Thy Grace,
to occupy their minds with solemn thoughts, and seriously to consider their
latter end ; and so, meditating devoutly upon the world to come, and praying
to he fitted for the same, they may he raised from the death of sin unto the
life of righteousness, and may have their part in the glorious resurrection to
eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.”
The Psalm was then sung by the choir as follows :
“ O Lord, my heart and will incline,
To bear in mind always,
How frail it is—this flesh of mine,
And I how few of days.
My term of years has been by Thee
Contracted to a span ;
Yes, and how high so e’er he be,
How vain a thing is man !
Disdain not, then, the flowing tear,
But hear my mournful cry;
My fathers were but strangers here,
And as they were, am I.
O spare me that brief space, which may
My wasted strength restore,
Ere from the world I pass away,
And then be seen no more.”
The Bishop of Sydney said: The service of to-day requires little to
be said in its behalf either in the way of commendation or defence.
The examples which the Scriptures afford, and the natural feelings of
affection, warrant us in dedicating a portion of the Lord’s earth to the
purpose of preserving the remains of His redeemed and immortal crea-
tures in safety, until the restitution of all things at the coming of the
Son of G-od. It is reasonable that we should consecrate the ground thus
set apart by prayer and benediction, and should endeavour to secure
it to those pious uses for ever, by all the means which human authority
can supply. But the present is, in an especial manner, an occasion of
deep interest to us all. In it history repeats itself. More than 3,500
years ago a great company of mourners were gathered together for a
purpose similar to our own. A great man —as the Lord counts great-
ness —had died in Egypt; and, in obedience to his last commands, his
sons had brought the remains of their father Jacob to place them in
the land which the Lord had given to him and to his fathers, and in
the place which Abraham had chosen for the burial of his dead.
There was the patriarch laid in honor, and in peace, and in hope—in
peace amongst his own people, in hope of the fulfilment of the pro-


mises of God. Our circumstances are not dissimilar. The remains
of one whom his countrymen delight to honor are brought by his sons,
in compliance with their father’s will, to be laid in his own grounds, to
rest with others of his own kindred until that summons goes forth
which will gather the saints from ancient Syria, and the multitudes
from the newer world, to meet the Lord and Judge of all. Of him
whose name is at this time on every lip it is not within my province,
nor is it in my power, adequately to speak. The deeds and words
which made him famous had passed away before my arrival in this
Country. For the liberty of this Colony he toiled with an earnestness,
ability, and success, which the future historian may narrate, or upon
which the eloquence that can speak of the things it has seen and
heard, and in which it played no unimportant nor unequal part, may
dwell. One observation I may be allowed to make. Many and great
changes have passed over this Country since the fervid eloquence of our
great orator was heard; evils he denounced have been removed ; the
good he desired has been attained ; and if in the apprehensions of some,
the followers have carried the principles of their master beyond the
limits his matured experience would set, we are for the present at least
delivered from the fear of evil consequences by the prosperity of the
land he loved so well—even as the voices of contending parties are
hushed and silent by his grave, and a united Country joins in paying
this last act of homage to the memory of one of the greatest of her
sons. We rejoice in the freedom, the peace, the well-being of the land;
let us be grateful for the noble gifts which he ever used to secuie these
blessings on our behalf.
In the ceremony of this day we have a touching evidence of the deep
affection the dying statesman felt for this, to him, his all but native
land. Where his strongest ties had been formed, there would he be
buried, in the midst of a people who he believed would appreciate his
life and labours on their behalf, and in this spot so beautiful and
appropriate, chosen by himself.
In the later portion of his life, being far removed from the stirring
scenes in which his earlier years had passed, the time and opportunities
were afforded to him of reflecting upon those great subjects which
belong to our future state, and the consideration of which no reasonable
and responsible being will avoid, and took occasion to declare his
undoubting belief in the Word of God. Those who loved him best
have the consolation of knowing that the close of his life was a fitting
preparation for one about to appear before an unerring Judge.


One obvious reflection is forced upon us all—tbat however great,
noble, and successful a man’s career may be, the grave is its inevitable
close.
What man is he that liveth and shall not see death ? What man so
wise, so learned, and so powerful as to deliver his soul from the grave ?
To one, and to one only of the sons of men, has it been given to over-
come death. From this tomb, opened to receive a son of Australia, we
look back to the sepulchre at Jerusalem hewn out of the rock in the
garden of Joseph of Arimathaea, prepared for the body of our Lord.
From that tomb it was announced that the Son of God had risen ; and
when we by faith unite ourselves to the living and ascended Saviour,
then in us may the prophet’s word be fulfilled: “ Death is swallowed
up in victory”; then may we join in the Apostle’s triumphant chal-
lenge : “ O death, where is thy sting ! 0 grave, where is thy victory!”
and raise again the song of grateful praise : “ Thanks be to God, which
giveth us the victory through Jesus Christ our Lord.”
Sie James Martin, who wore the costume of a member of the
Senate of the University of Sydney, delivered the following address
It has been deemed fitting that, before the remains of William
Charles Wentworth are deposited in their last resting place, a com-
memorative address should be delivered. When both Houses of
Parliament ordered this public funeral to take place, some mention
was made of the services which seemed to call for and justify so con-
spicuous a recognition. At a still earlier period, and during Mr.
Wentworth’s lifetime, when the statue erected by his fellow-colonists
was unveiled, the reasons which led to the conferring of so singular
an honor were publicly set forth. There is, therefore, little or no
necessity, so far as regards Mr. Wentworth’s renown, that the people
who have thus shown such a marked appreciation of his merits should
be again reminded of them. But it has, nevertheless, been thought
right that on this most solemn occasion, and in the presence of this
vast concourse, those merits should be once more recorded. To those
who are to follow us, this record, however imperfect, will not, perhaps,
be without its value, if it serves only to remind them in what way a
Hation’s gratitude may be won.
William Charles Wentworth was one of the first-born of the first
generation of native Australians. As a boy, and as a man, he had the
advantage of an English education. He commenced life, therefore,
with such aids as in a wider arena would have enabled him to hold his
own with any of his contemporaries. A sound lawyer, well versed in


constitutional learning, and with ample experience of the cultured,
social, and the free public life of England, he came back in early
manhood to his native Country. That Country was then little better
than a large prison. It was without free institutions of any kind.
Its Press was shackled; its Legislature consisted of Crown nominees
with limited powers ; its criminal Juries were formed exclusively
of naval or military men. Its Civil Officers and Magistracy were
comparative magnates ; its people were comparative serfs. The
Secretary of State exercised over all an Imperial control. In such
a state of things oppression and injustice might naturally be expected
to prevail, and they did prevail. Mr. Wentworth’s means, culture,
position, and ability, marked him out as one to whom it would
have been more agreeable to ally himself with the governing classes
than with the governed—with the depositaries of power, and the
possessors of education, rather than with the weak and ignorant. To
his own great personal inconvenience, he preferred to take the part of
the oppressed, and his first public effort was on behalf of humble
persons who had no other claim upon his attention than that which
arose from their subjection to a treatment alien to the spirit of British
law. Of that law the right of trial by a jury of one’s fellow-citizens,
in criminal cases, he considered to be the most important part. He
commenced, and perseveringly carried on, a struggle for its concession.
Forty years have elapsed since that struggle was crowned with success.
The generation that has since grown up, having no actual knowledge
of the evils in the administration of criminal justice which previously
existed, can scarcely realize the greatness of the benefit conferred on
that occasion, but by those who lived in this Colony at that time this
service was justly regarded as one entitling Mr. Wentworth to the
lasting gratitude of the community. Of almost equal value was his
opposition to the enforcement of laws designed to abolish the freedom
of the Press. The right to publish adverse criticisms upon the acts
of Government was sought to be abridged by the most arbitrary enact-
ments, and men were fined and imprisoned for giving expression to
their opinions in language far more temperate than that now commonly
used in the discussion of public questions. Against this most odious
form of tyranny Mr. Wentworth, and others, as independent and out-
spoken as himself, manfully and successfully contended. That Mr.
Wentworth, and the mass of his fellow-colonists, should be as un-
willing then as we should now be to have laws made and taxes imposed
by the Governor and a Council of nominees, we may well regard as a
thing of course. But less than half a century ago men in power thought


otherwise. The Colonies then were looked upon by British statesmen as
convenient fields for the exercise of patronage ; and although some of
them had Legislative Councils and elected Assemblies, none of them
had the right to govern themselves. Able and educated men, whether
Colonial-born or not, chafed under a sense of injustice, when they
contrasted the position which they held as residents in a Colony with
that which they would hold as residents in the United Kingdom.
From time to time there were strong expressions of discontent, and
efforts were often made to remedy this injustice. In this Colony
the first constitutional struggle was one for the power of electing
Representatives to the Legislature. For the accomplishment of this
object an Association was formed, the principal member of which was
Mr. Wentworth. At the meetings held to promote the objects of this
Association, his masculine eloquence was frequently displayed. There
are many present here to-day who had the privilege of listening to those
nervous and commanding addresses in which constitutional claims
were put forward in language as vigorous as any ever heard in that
Long Parliament by which the foundations of English liberty were laid.
Many of the leading colonists of those days shared with Mr.
Wentworth the labours of that agitation, and with them was always to
be found one —never I hope to be named among our public men without
respectful recognition—-I mean William Bland. Here, by the grave
of his life-long friend and associate, this passing reference to him may
not be considered inappropria* e. It will not, I think, be saying too
much if I venture to assert that Mr. Wentworth’s utterances had some
share in bringing about that more liberal treatment of the Colonies
which has of late prevailed. The Canadian Rebellion first opened the
eyes of the Imperial Government 1o the impropriety of treating
British subjects resident in the Colonies as belonging to inferior com-
munities. That rebellion was the means of obtaining a more attentive
hearing for those Colonial patriots who, like Mr. Wentworth, were
claiming that their Colonies should be treated as integral portions of
the Empire. The appeals so often made by Mr. Wentworth and those
associated with him were at last successful. In 1842, the Act of
Parliament was passed which first introduced the elective principle
into our Legislature. For this great concession we were unquestionably
mainly indebted to the man around whose remains we are now standing.
Mr. Wentworth was returned at the head of the poll at the first
General Election, in 1843, for the City of Sydney, and William Bland,
as was most fitting, was his colleague. With his advent to the
Legislative Council a new career of public usefulness began. A


vigilant examination of tlie various departments was immediately
undertaken ; offices considered to be unnecessary were abolished ;
the exercise of patronage was questioned; greater economy in the
public expenditure was insisted on ; and generally a vigour before
unknown was introduced into the administration of affairs. In these
transactions Mr. Wentworth took the chief part, and he brought to the
discussion of questions in the House all that constitutional knowledge,
clearness of comprehension, logical power, and force and accuracy of
expression, by which, in his earlier days, he had been distinguished.
Among the many useful measures which he either initiated or
supported, two only need be referred to on this occasion. The first
was the Bill to establish the University of Sydney. He was too
well instructed himself not to know that the gift of free institutions
to a people without intelligence to comprehend, or ability to use
them, might prove a curse instead of a blessing. He was aware that
no Country had ever yet arrived at greatness in which the cultivation
of the mind had not been carefully attended to. He recognized the
difficulties arising from distance, and consequent expense in the way
of any of his countrymen obtaining the benefits of a University educa-
tion, and he considered that those difficulties could be met only by the
establishment of a University of our own. This measure, thought by
some at the time of its introduction, to be too large and too ambitious,
has since received the stamp of public approval. Year by year there
have come forth from this University, of which he may be regarded as
the founder, graduates who may be fairly classed with the graduates
of those ancient and famous seats of learning which are the ornament
and pride of the great Country from which we have sprung. It will
not be too much to expect that, as their numbers increase, they may
have as large a share in the government of this Country as the members
of Universities have in the government of England. The second measure
to which I shall refer is the Constitution Act, under which, with some
alterations, we are now ruled. By this Act Responsible Government
was established, and as complete a control over our affairs was conceded
as is compatible with the Imperial connection. This large concession
Mr. Wentworth, by petitions and representations emanating from
Committees of which he was the Chairman, was instrumental in pro-
moting, and he himself drew and carried through Parliament the Bill
which gave us that full legislative freedom which we now enjoy.
These are the services which have elevated him into the position of
our first and most distinguished public man. For these services we
placed his portrait during his lifetime on the walls of our Legislative


Assembly. For these services also during his lifetime we placed his
statue in the Great Hall of our University. For these services, after
his decease, we are now met, at the instance and by the unanimous
vote of that Parliament of which he was the father, to honor his
memory by the first public funeral which this Colony has witnessed.
Political merit ought not, more than merit of any other kind, to be
estimated in proportion to the largeness of the field on which it may
have been displayed. The statesman who has achieved the freedom,
extended the power, advanced the prosperity, secured the peace, or
added to the renown of millions, is not really more worthy than one
who has done the like for thousands only. There may have been the
same labour, the same ability, the same patriotism in the one case as
in the other. It was the lot of Mr. Wentworth, while his former com-
panions at school and at College were enabled to display their talents
before great nations, and to contend for and win the prizes which in
old Countries are set before the ambitious to stimulate them to exertion,
and reward them when successful, to become the citizen of a small and
remote dependency, the constituent elements of which, led to its being
governed by peculiar laws, inconsistent with constitutional forms, and
opposed to constitutional principles. Loving freedom, and understand-
ing the safeguards necessary to secure it, he brought to the small arena
into which his fortune had cast him—that proud spirit which leads every
Englishman to rise against oppression, and insist upon the exercise of
those rights which he knows to be his inheritance. What he claimed for
himself he claimed also for others, and so while contending for a free
Press, for Trial by Jury, and for a share in the making of the Laws by
which he was to be governed, he fought the battle of the humblest as
well as of the highest. He knew no valid reason why he, who could
have contended on equal terms with the most distinguished men in
England, should be subject to arbitrary power in New South Wales,
and at the commencement of his career he began that vehement and
manly struggle for his Country’s freedom, which he, through much
obloquy, under many discouragements, and at the cost of his own ease,
continued, until every reform that he fought for was accomplished.
Then, and not till then, was the magnitude of the task which he had
undertaken, and the singleness of purpose which actuated him in its
performance, generally recognized. Many who had before held aloof—
some who had denounced him as a firebrand —more who had regarded
him as a dangerous revolutionist—others who had vilified him as a wild
disturber of society—all gathered round him at the successful termi-
nation of his career, and recognized him as a great public benefactor.


He Lad. tLe gratification of living down tLe hostility and even the
hatred with which he was by many of his opponents at one time
regarded, and his departure from the Colony, and his subsequent return
to it, were so attended as to prove that men of all classes and of every
variety of opinion had with one accord agreed that he had done the
State some service. It has often been remarked that among our early
settlers there were many men eminently fitted for the work of coloni-
zation, and who in enterprise and skill have not been surpassed by any
of their successors. This of itself is sufficiently singular; but still
more singular is it that our earliest conspicuous public character should
have been a man of Mr. Wentworth’s stamp. He had every quality
necessary to fit him for high political position. His stature was above
the average —his voice was powerful, his manner vehement, and when
fully aroused his eloquence carried his hearers away, not so much by
its fluency as by its force. To all this was added an acquaintance with
the British Constitution, and the principles of the common Law, greater
than has been possessed by most men who have made the Constitution
and the Law their study. He was warmly attached to the Mother
Country, and he gave no countenance to those who desire the severance
of the ties which bind her and her Colonies together. Colonial privi-
leges he thought to be in no way opposed to Imperial rule ; and a great
and united Empire, with a flag borne upon every breeze and havens in
every sea, had a greater hold upon his affections than any vision of
Colonial independence. Manly and outspoken on all occasions, he was
the first to teach his countrymen the value of political rights, and
the duty of maintaining them. Under an occasionally rough manner
he bore a warm and generous disposition. Strong in his resentments,
he was ever ready to forget them. Nothing so roused him to indig-
nation as any exhibition of tyranny or injustice. His vocabulary
was full of those Anglo-Saxon words which give such force to the
best examples of English oratory, and he seems to have taken the
great men of the Commonwealth for his models. His countrymen,
justly proud of his abilities, have at all times regarded him with
affectionate respect, and the extent of the general admiration of him
is shown by the large attendance here to-day. I see around me the
representatives of three generations of his countrymen and fellow-
colonists. There are those who grew up with him from boyhood to
manhood —who witnessed all his struggles, and joined in the earliest
congratulations on their success. There are those who were children,
when in the full maturity of his powers he was battling for their
liberties, and who learnt under him how to discharge their duty to


their Country. There are those who, too young to have been either his
companions or his disciples, have yet been able to estimate his character
and services by the teachings of their fathers. Of the first but a small
number now remain. They, best of all who hear these words, can
understand how well he deserved the public honors which have been
conferred on him. Of the second there are many, and to them is, at
this moment, committed the destinies of their Country. To their
keeping is now confided the Constitution which he gave them. They,
for the most part are our rulers and our legislators, and they have
shown by this day’s proceedings that they are not unmindful of the
example which he has set them. If in their public conduct, whether
in the Senate or in the Cabinet, they evince a love of liberty, guarded
by those checks without which liberty can never be safe, they will do
much to fulfil his expectations and carry out his wishes. He had a
strong faith in his Country’s future. On them in a great degree will it
depend to prove that that faith was not without foundation. Of the
third generation, the most numerous of all, the hope may be expressed
that in the pursuit of wealth and the love of ease, those best qualified
may not, by a disinclination for the labours of public life, leave in
unskilled and inferior hands the guardianship of their interests. Ho
such lesson is to be gathered from Mr. Wentworth’s career. His time
was as fully occupied with his private affairs a 3 any man’s time could
have been. He was largely interested all his life in a variety of
pursuits, and yet for half a century he took a leading part in the
management of public affairs.
Twelve years ago, on one of our sunniest days, our harbour was gay
with crowded steamers, bands of music, and many-coloured flags.
Mr. Wentworth was then coming back to his native land, after a
sojourn in England, and thousands went forth to greet him on his
return. This day is not like that, the witness of a great ovation. He
comes not now to shake the hand and hear the welcome of old friends
and old companions. Like “ the Spartan borne upon his shield,” he
has been brought back dead to receive that solemn but significant
recognition which proclaims that the ashes of a patriot are being
carried to their last home. We have no Westminster Abbey in which
to place the bones of our illustrious dead; but here, under the bright
Australian sky, and by the shores of the broad and blue Pacific, and
in a corner of one of Nature’s loveliest landscapes, we are about to lay
his remains, where it was his own wish that they should repose. No
fitter burial-place could be found for him. Hndistinguished by those
royal honors which he merited more than any of the Australians who


have received them, this monument will he a lasting and conspicuous
memorial, visible to all who enter and to all who leave our port, of one
on whom the people have conferred the greatest honor in their power
to bestow. Hereafter, in the not far distant future, when these
Colonies shall be the abode of many millions, living under English law
and speaking the English tongue—when the education of their sons
shall be more widely diffused and their intellect more fully developed
the best and the ablest of them all may gather lessons from the life of
William Charles Wentworth, and catch, perchance, some inspiration
from his tomb.
The Bishop read the sentences from the Burial Service, and the
coffin was lowered into the vault.
When it was finally put into its resting-place, with chaplets and a
handsome cross of white camellias, Sir James Martin descended the
vault and placed on the coffin —where Mr. Wentworth’s two sons had
already placed flowers —a final chaplet of flowers. The Bishop
pronounced the apostolic benediction, and the religious ceremony
terminated.
Sydney : Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lB73.




