

THE PEESENT CONDITION AND EUTUEE PEOSPECTS
OF THE
INDUSTRIAL RESOURCES OF NEW ZEALAND,
AND THE
BEST MEANS OF FOSTERING THEIR DEVELOPMENT.
AN ESSAY; BY WILLIAM REEVE HASELDEN.
“Press onward.”
INTRODUCTION.
The Lope of reward sweetens labour, but tbe material reward
offered for tbe successful essay will not be so valuable as the
benefit that must result to all those who make themselves suffi-
ciently acquainted with the subject in hand to enable them to
write reasonably and at length upon it. I launch this essay
believing that the best reward will be found in reducing into a
comprehensive form the knowledge acquired in preparing for it.
There is no need to detail the various sources of information
which have been drawn from in order to describe the industries
now existent and which may be expected to shortly exist in
these wondrous islands of the Southern Seas; which, in one
generation, have risen from almost primeval savagedom to power
and civilization. The power of development is the strongest
power a people or nation can possess, and the potentialities of
New Zealand in this respect is the theme on which I write.
A RETROSPECT.
This is unavoidable. We must briefly look back over the
lines traversed already in order to realize our position at the
present day, and mark the directions in which the surest pro-
gress can be made. Within the memory of men who are still


able to work. New Zealand produced and exported whalebone,
timber, oil, kauri-gum, flax, greenstone, preserved human heads,
and a very small quantity of gold. This was the catalogue of
exports : the value of the total was insignificant, and the per-
manence of the supply was considered as precarious for the
whalebone and oil steadily decreased in quantity; the timber
was irregularly prepared; the true use and value of the kauri-
gum had not been recognized; the flax involved hand-prepara-
tion, which prohibited a large quantity being obtained; while
the greenstone and heads were but “ curios” of savage lands where-
with to amuse the people at Home. This was our position less
than fifty years ago. Fifty years hence we may be the richest
and strongest of the Australasian Colonies —truly a bold pre-
diction ! but one believed in by many cool - headed though,
perhaps, sanguine men. So rapid has been our progress as a
people that individuals are sometimes tempted to ask, “Is
there any use in ever climbing up the climbing wave ? ” The
colony is enriched, but are we, as individuals, any better off ?
Fortunately for the sake of advancing knowledge and growth,
these people cannot very well help themselves in being forced
forward with the mass; they have only the choice of becoming
inert altogether, or of putting forth the necessary additional strain
to keep pace with their fellows. Still, although the aim of our
statesmen is to make the greatest happiness of the greatest
number, it is possible for them to fall into the error of over-
forcing—of making a perfect workshop without establishing the
necessary business connection to support it—of creating an
insatiable hunger for employment, which grows in proportion to
the supply with which it is fed. But the surest preventive of
great ill-fortune befalling us in this respect lies in the multi-
farious nature of our_ industries, and the absence of any one pre-
dominating interest among the Islands of New Zealand. As is
only too well known to those who were in the colony from 1840
to 1865, our progress during that period was very slow. Wool,
gold, borrowed money, and a lavish war expenditure kept us in
a state of activity; but farming languished, especially in the
North Island, and the people who had settled under the land-
grant system were in a terribly impoverished condition. There
cannot be a doubt that the enormous quantities of capital pro-
duced from the gold-mines of the colony gave it the required


impetus to fairly start it upon its road to prosperity ; and that
without the universally - marketable commodity of gold New
Zealand would still be a distant colony, of interest to the geo-
grapher and ethnologist, and, perhaps, still affording an asylum
to the world-weary man; but it would not have been the great
and glorious country of to-day, with its illimitable vistas of the
possible opening widely before it. Deeply, then, as we are in-
debted to the wealth of our gold-mines, they cannot be regarded
as forming our true wealth for the future; they will doubtless
be a factor in making up the sum of wealth; but the true and
permanent wealth will not lie in them, but in the various other
industries, which in the aggregate will produce a teeming popu-
lation of almost every industrial pursuit known to mankind.
Wbat those pursuits and industries are and will be, and how
they may be promoted and developed, it will be our object to
define.
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.
From mere lack of space New Zealand can never attain to
greatness from pastoral or agricultural operations alone; but
from her mineral wealth, her enormous extent of seaboard com-
pared with her area, from her magnificent harbours, her climate,
and moderate fertility of soil a combination has been and is
forming which justifies her boast of being the Britain of the
South. She is the natural birthplace and training-school of
seamen, and of seamen of the very best kind, men able to take
their vessels anywhere upon the seas, and gifted with a mer-
cantile shrewdness engendered by constant communication with
traders and cultivated by habits of self-control and .command of
others. In the mosquito fleet of New Zealand there are
hundreds of men who are the equal of the adventurous pioneers
of old, and who lack but new worlds to explore to atkiin to
equal fame with their forerunners. Allied with our seamen are
our shipwrights, who have built the mosquito fleet, and are now
turning out moderately-sized steamers in every seaboard city in
New Zealand, besides every description of smaller craft. Our
runholders and squatters have taken up nearly every acre
of Native grasscd-land which will support sheep or great cattle,
and must be prepared to surely, if slowly, give way to the denser
population-supporting industry of agriculture, which in its turn


may be pressed upon by the demand for land for more valuable
purposes from a revenue-producing point of view. Our gold-
mines are still keeping up a good total return, while our coal-
fields are at last being systematically worked and appreciated,
though how grievously we fail in fully utilizing them the sequel
will show. On all sides factories are springing up, and from
every quarter of the colony specimens are shown of skill and
power of production in numberless ways, which all point to a
speedy future of greatness. Still more encouraging is the trade
that is being developed with other lands, and the high commercial
standing of our merchants, for at the outset we must admit that
our true destiny is to be factors and manufacturers for others,
and that—while we might support a limited population from
within, so bounteous has Nature been in the variety of her gifts
to us —we can only become a populous country by becoming
closely allied with other lands, and by conserving our forces to
the highest possible degree. For instance, in the timber trade,
at the present rate of export of baulk timber our supply will
speedily become exhausted; but by working timber up in the
colony and exporting it in a manufactured state it will last
indefinitely, and will give a hundred times the advantage it
otherwise would to us as a colony. In almost all other products
the same principle applies, and it will be endeavoured to be
shown that the development of our industries is best achieved by
working up our natural products to the highest state of efficiency
before parting with them to the merchant or consumer.
It will be convenient to divide our subjects into three main
heads : First, products ; second, the manufacture of products ;
third, the manufacture of articles for which the material must
be imported; fourth, the means of extending these three to the
best advantage.
Hard-and-fast rules by which to attain these ends cannot be
laid down —the subject is so many-sided, there are so many
conflicting interests to consider, and so many debatable political
theories involved, that it would be impossible to frame a mere
code which would find even moderate acceptance. The answer
to the question, “How shall a young and healthy child be
developed into a powerful and sagacious man?” would almost
answer the question involved in our subject, yet who would
lay down an iron rule for this with any hope of finding general


approval. The race from which the child sprang, its environ-
ments, and its personal characteristics would all have to be
considered; and so it is with our colony. But, while compelled
to admit that certain and specific measures cannot be prescribed,
we shall be careful to avoid abstract principles or mere theo-
retical or political discussion.
Taking, then, the products in the order in which they are at
the present time most important, in a monetary point of view,
we treat first of all of
Wool.
Wool is the principal export of New Zealand, yet it seems
to be less a subject for this essay than almost any other
product.
This may seem a paradox, but the reason will shortly appear.
In 1883 there were 13,381,075 sheep in the colony. The value
of the wool exported in 1883 was £3,014,211, against £3,118,554
for 1883 —a decrease of £104,343; yet the quantity exported
in 1883 exceeded that of 1883 by 3,826,7231 b., the difference in
value being occasioned by the fall in price. In 1883 the weight
of wool exported was 68,149,4301 b., against 48,848,7351 b, in
1874 —an increase of 21,300,6951 b. Besides these large
quantities must be added 2,000,0001 b. utilized per annum at the
woollen manufactories ; and it is in connection with these latter
industries that the wool product is of the chief importance to
our subject. As a mere matter of expoi’t wool provides less
employment to population, in proportion to the money returns,
than almost any other industry. A few shepherds tend many
thousands of sheep; a migratory class of shearers perform the
annual clip. With railway communication the labour of transport
is reduced to a minimum; enormous areas of land are desolate
of life, save sheep life; it becomes a question of mere interest
on capital. And in too many cases for the true welfare of the
colony the real proprietors and beneficial owners are absentee
capitalists and financial institutions. In the course of a few
years the richest provinces of* the colony—namely, the wool-
producing ones—will be the poorest from a practical population-
supporting point of view, unless the changes mentioned before
take place in proportion to the growth of the rest of the colony.
Magnificent as some of the Canterbury runs and flocks un-


doubtedly arc, the want of space can never enable New Zealand
to compete with Australia as a wool-producer. Still, much can
be done to utilize her exceptionally-favourable climate and land
by careful production of superior breeds, and by making up in
quality what is lacking in quantity. For many years to come
the supply of wool must far exceed the quantity required for
home consumption, and our growers must depend upon the
world’s market for their prices; and they have fortunately long
since obtained the highest reputation for their wool, and
especially for articles of American manufacture, and for articles
requiring bright and fast colours. The great improvement
effected in breed has had a most favourable effect; and the
breeding of stud rams is an important factor in the flockmaster’s
profits. Still, if it be true, as has already been assumed, that
as population increases sheep-farming will not extend in pro-
portion, but will rather have a tendency to lessen, and consider-
ing that the industry can only now be carried on by those who
have acquired the right to the land, and have the command of
the necessary capital, and that, practically, it is not an occupa-
tion of the people of New Zealand, it will be admitted that the
product of wool pure and simple is not by any means the most
important of the industrial resources of New Zealand. The
topic involves the most important political question of the land
laws ; but full discussion of the point would necessarily compel
the introduction of matter foreign to this essay. Still, it cannot
be altogether ignored, and in treating practically of our industries
we must look to the near future, when the leases at present
existing in Canterbury and Otago will have expired, and the
momentous question to the runholdcr will have to be considered,
whether sheep-farming will pay on privately-bought land. We
must remember that sheep-farming in New Zealand commenced
with colonization, and developed rapidly, because the natural
grasses afforded immediate feed, and the land was then other-
wise worthless; but every day the mere surface area becomes
more and will require to be utilized fully in order to
make the result profitable; and with respect to sheep-farming
this can*only be done by the introduction of English grasses,
which generally thrive admirably and repay the outlay. Land
surface is becoming too valuable to allow of three or four acres to
a sheep; the change must be made to three or four sheep to the


acre. Labour must take the place of scignorial rights over
immense tracts of country. The necessity for cultivating grass
of the best description will entirely alter the mode of sheep-
farming ; labourers will be multiplied tenfold ; there will still
be great proprietors, but they will, be more than lords of sheep :
they will be large employers of human labour. “ The land
question ” —says Mr. Stout, in the debate on the Land Bill —“ is
the great question of the future.” It is too large a question to
enter into here, and we must fain leave it to be settled in
the stormy arena of politics; but in the meantime let our flock-
masters remember that their legitimate and best market should
be at home, and that, by combining with manufacturers for the
production of woollen fabrics for home consumption and for
export to countries where a flourishing trade may yet be esta-
blished, they will render their occupation a perpetual necessity
to the colony and a perpetual source of profit to themselves and
to thousands of factory hands.
I venture to quote the lines of the American poet Emerson —
And what if trade sow cities
Like shells along the shore,
And thatch with towns the prairie broad
With railways ironed o’er ;
They are but sailing foam-bells
Along Thought’s causing stream,
And taka their shape and sun-colour
From Him that sends the dream.
Gold,
There are two great causes tending to make the gold product
of New Zealand a peculiarity in itself, and to distinguish it
from all other products. The first is that, in the early history
of all goldfields—at all events, all goldfields in these colonies—
individuals are able to profitably engage in it, and that the cream
of the field is gathered by men working almost alone, and with
the rudest appliances, having no hope or desire to remain per-
manently in the country or occupation; and who seek to gather
as much as possible in order to convey it to other lands. The
second great cause is, that the spirit of speculation is more easily
excited in.this than in any other occupation; and the market
price of scrip and the chances of selling at a profit are the
objects of attention, rather than the actual returns from the
mines themselves. The first relates almost exclusively to
alluvial mining, the second to quartz mining.


What has gold-mining done for New Zealand ? It has
mined thousands of people, and wasted thousands of lives in
profitless toil; it has promoted a spirit of restlessness and haste
to get rich —so say many. Put the evil it has done first, and
then the good. It has brought to our shores the flower of the
working population of Australasia and California, if not of the
whole world; it has produced a wealth of currency, which has
assisted our producers of kind to obtain a better market; it has
peopled waste and desolate coasts, which, but for the gold,
would have been judged to have been totally uninhabitable,
but which will probably be the richest parts of the colony
long after the gold has been practically exhausted. From
Okarito to Karamea, on the west coast of the Middle Island,
there is a bleak, inhospitable coast, without a decent harbour,
with hardly a hundred acres in a block of cultivatable land—a
tract of country which was almost untrodden by white men
twenty years ago, and which, but for the amazing richness of its
gold deposits, would be still a terra incognita. There are thirty
thousand people settled there now—less, it is true, than formerly,
but a people who are now again increasing in numbers and im-
portance—harbours have been made and are being made, coal is
being worked out of these harbours, other minerals are being
discovered; and, aided by the impetus acquired by gold, the
whole district is acquiring an importance second to none in the
•colony. True it is that coal is taking the foremost place now,
which gold formerly occupied; but the coal would not have been
developed in this generation but for the population brought by
gold. Yet there are towns in New Zealand in which people
speak deprecatingly of goldfields, who declare, with the innocence
of ignorance, that the colony would be better without them,
who lament over the supposed wickedness and disorder which
reign there, and who have never heard of “ boiling down ” being
a godsend to sheepowners, because “ boiling down ” has not
had to be resorted to while a goldfield was within driving or
carrying distance. Otago can show the same results, and Auck-
land is now opening up country which would possess no attrac-
tiveness were it not for the gold.
Reference has been made to the rude appliances with which
the gold-miner works at first, and to his simple mode of extract-
ing the precious metal. The different kinds of mining may be


classified in an order showing pretty well how they succeed each
other in the history o£ each goldfield : 1. Simple stripping and
washing with a cradle or small sluice-box, either on alluvial or
heach. 2. Ground-sluicing with extended tail-race and water-
power. 3. Cement-crushing with pulverizing mill and amalga-
mating tables and appliances. 4. Deep alluvial workings,
employing heavy outlay for pumping gear and raising. 5. Diver
claims. Next quartz-mining, with its expensive crushing bat-
teries, saving and amalgamating appliances, its innumerable
inventions for dividing the gold from dross and grosser metals,,
its high-raised hopes, and its frequent failures. It must be on
a virgin field that much success can be realized by the “ hatter”
—the cream is soon skimmed, and the residue must he syste-
matically worked, without waste, to insure a profit. The best-
off: “ hatters ” now are the “ fly-catchers,” who place as many
tables or boxes as they can get registered sites for in the bed of
a stream into which the tailings of miners working above have
been poured, and these tailings are washed over and over again
on the tables of the “ fly-catchers,” each washing or passing
over the tables leaving some small quantity of gold in the
process, and demonstrating how futile have been the attempts,
on the part of the previous workers to extract all the gold from
them. Ground-sluicing is still carried on extensively, and will
continue for many years, because only a certain quantity can be
worked each year, according to the supply of water; and those
who own the water command the ground : it lies idle until the
man with the water-supply is ready for it.
But great work has been done by the large races constructed
by Government, and by private enterprise; and ground that
otherwise could not have been tested for years is being profitably
worked. To the alluvial miner the best practical aid that can
he given is in the form of water and roads; if he has
given him in return for the gold duty, it is not an unjust tax;
hut, unless it is expended on the particular industry it is raised
from, it is as unjust as if sheep-farmers had a poll-tax levied on
them, and no others were so inflicted. With the quartz-mining
branch roads are the chief aid that can he given. So tardy, some-
times, has been the recognition of the value of a field that ten
times the cost of a good road has been spent in packing on
horses and parbuckling up river-beds before a chain of dray-
road has been constructed; but next to this practical aid, which


has been so much ignored, is the regular instruction in scientific
modes of extracting gold from quartz, sand, tailings, and blanket-
ings. Practically, the method is as rough as it was a score of
years or more ago. In his recent tour Professor Black did some
good work in establishing schools of mines ; but it has not been
followed up, and requires vigorous development, and the pro-
fessors themselves want practical experience to aid their theo-
retical knowledge.
The monetary value of the gold exported annually is startling,
though it does not come up to that of wool. In 1884 246,3920 z.,
worth £988,953 were exported. The highest yield in any one
year was in 1866, just after the Hokitika rush, when gold worth
£2,844,517 was exported. What this money has done for the
colony can be better imagined than described; but up to March,
1885, gold worth £41,634,507 has been sent out of New Zealand.
No doubt a very high percentage of the advantage such a pro-
duction might have done the colony has been lost; but still, an
enormous benefit has remained: as much, probably, in the
stimulus and credit it has given as in the direct form of capital
stored in the colony.
It is impossible to give a practical treatise on gold-mining or
on any other industry, but the practical suggestion is contained
in the recommendation —roads and water for miners, and in-
struction and invention in order to prevent loss of gold and
waste of labour; rewards for the discovery of new goldfields
are now. offered;’ and bonuses for really valuable gold-saving
inventions would be o£ practical value, as the quantity of gold
lost by the present imperfect process often represents the differ-
ence between success and failure; a thorough revision of the
mining laws, which, combined with official lethargy, constantly
impede the miner, harass the mining prospector, and involve all
in occasional but expensive law-suits ; a regular code of mining
laws framed on established decisions would be a godsend. As
it is, no one knows the view a Warden will take; and, when
they have found out the Warden’s idea of the law, the District
Court too frequently finds the exact contrary, or that some
different mode of proceeding should have been instituted.
There need be no hurry to exhaust the goldfields : they are not
limitless, and will not replenish when once depleted; but the
anxiety should be to avoid useless labour and provide against
loss of gold. What the people can do to legitimately aid


developing gold-mining is to abstain from wild speculation, to
look for their returns from the mine itself and not from market
“ spurts to refuse steadily to take up' outside “ shows to
remember that none of the famous mines were ever worth the
highest priqe their shares have reached, that only a small
percentage of money invested has been spent on the mine itself,
that with ordinary prudence gold-mining will pay, and that
losses need be comparatively small; but that, with an army of
scrip-dealers with “ quartz on the brain,” and revelling in a short
<( burst ”of paper prosperity, the soberest may be misled; that
small South Sea bubbles are raised over every mine that has a
hundred tons of quartz to crush; and, lastly, that it is the
business of speculators to blow these bubbles, and the business
of intelligent persons to avoid being led away by the beauty of
the prismatic vision.
For the last year the statistics show that there were 13,120
men employed in the colony as miners, at an average wage per
man of £76 10s. 5d., reckoned on the gold produced for the
same period. Of this number there were 3,443 Chinamen.
This appears a very low rate, but it must be remembered that the
gold-miners’ earnings include cost of machinery, tools, and water
for sluicing, and are accordingly considerably reduced. In
Great Britain the average earnings of artisans, reckoned in the
same way, is only £4l 14s. During the year ending' the
31st March, 1885, £34,797 was authorized by Government to be
spent on works to develop the goldfields. This, with the autho-
rities for expenditure of the two previous years, gives a total of
£127,549, of which two-thirds are for roads and tracks, and one-
third for water-supply, prospecting, and sludge and drainage
channels. The estimated value of the plant employed in alluvial
and quartz mining was £452,465.
The gold duty for 1884 is shown as under : Auckland,
£3,608 15s. 3d.; Wellington, £lO Is. 7d.; Nelson, £4,354
14s. 6d.; Marlborough, £lO7 19s. 5d.; Canterbury, £2 Bs. 2d.;
Westland, £7,036 os. lOd. ; Otago, £7,880 6s. 6d. : total,
£22,900 6s. 3d.
The dividends paid in 1884-85 by five mines in the Thames
District was £16,882 10s.; Coromandel, one mine, £450; and
Te Aroha, two mines, £3,500. In Beefton £35,000 was paid in
dividends from five mines. In the Invincible Mine, Ilees Valley,
Otago, £2,915 was paid in dividends.


Return of Receipts, Expenditure, and Collateral Advantages derived by the working of Water-races constructed and maintained
by Government during the Year ending the 31st March, 1885.
Name
of
Water-race.
Receipts.
Maintenance.
Profit
or
Loss.
Cost
of
Construction.
Total Cost
of
Construction.
Percentage
on Capital
invested.
Number
of Men,
employed.
Approximate
Amount of
Gold
obtained.
Value of
Gold
obtained.
Average Earn-
ings of Men
after deduct-
ing Sales of
Water.
£ B. d.
£ e. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
Oz.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
Waimea
1,664 1 1
1,352 3 5
*311 17 8
118,575 15 2
)
Kumara
9,311 16 4
1,656 0 1
*7,655 16 3
37,400 2 11
I 173,176 10 7
About $%
371
16,971
64,914 1 6
138 7 0
Kumara Sludge
Channel
1,732 15 1
6,161 14 7
t4,428 19 6
17,200 12 6
)
Nelson Creek..
. 990 68
811 10 5
*178 16 3
• •
89,833 19 7
About
36
1,704
6,517 16 0
153 10 10
Argyle..
476 13 6
447 19 7
*28 13 11
••
12,843 16 9
About
15.
500
1,912 10 0
95 16 6
Mikonui
100 0 0
Nil
.*100 0 0
’•
22,018 12 4
In construc-
tion.
••
••
••
Totals
14,257 12 8
10,429 8 1
3,842 4 7
173,176 10 7
297,872 19 3
1J nearly.
422
19,175
73,344 5 6
138 2 6
• Profit,
t Loss,


In the Inangahua the calls made by mining companies
amounted to £29,333 6s. Bd., and the dividends to £34,100.
The quantity of quartz crushed was 34,349 tons, yielding
23,9970 z. of gold, valued at £93,842 7s, Id. The difference in
the figures as to dividends is in the Wardens' and Secretary for
Goldfields’ reports. These figures, it is supposed, will he suffi-
cient to show the nature of the gold-mining industry as a reve-
nue- and population-supporting one; but for more detailed
returns recourse must be had to statistical tables. It will be
noticed that the number of Chinese engaged in gold-mining
amounts to one-fourth the number of Europeans; and this is a
very serious matter, which sooner or later will breed trouble, as
ground which was formerly contemptuously left for “ a Chinaman
to work ”is now covetously longed for by the European. Small
as the average wages of the gold-miner appear to be, the life
has many charms to a working-man; .and bare wages earned in
one’s own claim is infinitely preferable to those earned for an
employer. ,
On the Ist September, 18.85, a new code of regulations for
apportionment of rewards for the discovery of new goldfields
was recommended by the Goldfields and Mines Committee to the
House of Representatives, the chief feature of which is, that
for the discovery of a new goldfield three miles from any work-
ings there shall be paid, at the expiration of six months from the
date of discovery, a reward of £lOO per one hundred miners,
up to £5OO for five hundred or more miners so employed; and
for the recovery of a lead in proximity to the place where a
lead has been lost, and- has not been worked for a period of six
months, a reward equal to one-half of the above rates; and for
the discovery of a payable diamond-field, lodd of silver, or lode
of tin, for every one hundred miners profitably employed thereon
at the expiration of six months from the date of discovery, t?!ere
shall be paid a reward of £lOO, up to £5OO for five hundred or
more miners so employed.
Coal.
Here is the mighty force that is to work the greatness of our
land. Without it we might struggle nobly, but we could not
overcome; with it we can do all that is required to attain our
ambition, if that ambition is only set upon what is the true
4


destiny o£ tlie colony, and not upon what some may fancy it
should be. The object of this essay is to show that our true
destiny is to he the carriers, manufacturers, and traders of the
Southern Seas; at the same time producing so large a supply of
our own requirements as to command the maximum of other’s
capital at the minimum of our own. Without coal we cannot
attain this, but Nature has been generous, and given us this all-
sufficing force. The cry is not “ Where is coal ? ” but “ Where
is it not?” Both Islands contain large supplies of various
quality. Kaitangata and Tokomairiro have sixty square miles of
area, containing 768,000,000 tons ; Nightcaps, 100,000,000 tons ;
Green Island, about the same, hut this coal is non-bituminous,
and cannot he classed as the article we really want. In the
Buller and Grey coalfields are contained 240,000,000 tons of the
best bituminous coal in the world, the Grey taking the palm for
gas-producing and the Buller for steam purposes. At Kawa-
kawa and Kamo there are large deposits of good steam coal.
Deposits of brown coal are found throughout the colony. At
Brighton, on the West Coast, the Warden’s house was on a ter-
race, and the servant was accustomed to hew the coal out of her
private coal-mine by the scuttleful. In. Charleston about the
same thing occurs to this day. In the Inangahua the leading
gold-mines have also coal-mines almost alongside; but it is only
when a first-class coal has been found in an available position for
export that the importance of the discovery at present commands
our attention. With all this coal at home,, we imported in 1884
157,783 tons, worth £191,994.
The demand for coal for steamers is daily increasing. The
Westport coal, being most in demand, brings the highest price,
yet, so far, the mine has not been profitable to its owners. The
causes of this are not far to seek—first, the shallowness of the
bar, which prevents large ships being employed; second, the
difficulty of working the enormous incline down which the coal
is lowered; third, the difficulties in obtaining colliers and the
strikes which have taken place. All these causes can be reme-
died. The harbour loan of £500,000 has been authorized, and
£150,000 raised- in London at 5 per cent. Extensive works
from the designs of Sir John Goode are commenced, increased
facilities for lowering coal are being gradually acquired, and,
when these two difficulties are overcome, it is to be hoped that


the last will be removed. Still, the sudden importation of a
distinct class, and the necessity of keeping them almost unmixed
with the rest of the colonials, naturally creates a difficulty. The
men lack the pride of colonials, they have lower ideas of life,
their morals are inferior, and their prejudices are stronger than
are to he found amongst the general population. An attempt
to work the mine with unskilled miners did not prove satisfac-
tory, and the company have virtually submitted to be ruled by
their imported miners, who are strong unionists, and who con-
centrate all the loyalty ordinarily shown by colonists to their
adopted country in protecting the sacred rights of labour against
the demands of capital. In Grey mouth some of the mine-owners
have reaped a large reward. The coal is raised in one mine and
run out from the mine level in the other, instead of being
lowered as at Westport —in other words, at Greymouth it is
beneath or level with, in Westport it is above, the railway. But
the same difficulty exists as to shipping in Greymouth, and a
loan of £350,000 was also authorized for the Greymouth Har-
bour, and £IOO,OOO raised on the same terms as the Westport
loan, with the result that the harbour works, on which already
£120,000 had been spent,- are being rapidly pushed forward, with
very encouraging prospects of ultimate success.
The East and West Coast Railway has been shelved for the
present, and has become a question more of party politics than
one of political economy. No doubt it will be eventually car-
ried out, when coal carriage- by land will vie with water trans-
port. It is a serious question whether carriage of coals by land
over such a line will pay ; but coal is but one factor in the sum,
and the subject of the railway, though hardly to be avoided-
altogether, is one of such importance, in so many various aspects,
that it cannot be treated of fully. It is only a question of time
when the railway will be made, hampered by the question on
what terms it is to be made. The result cannot fail to be such
an union between the East and West Coasts as to make them
really one district, each supplying the other with needed staple
commodities of life, and each contributing to the other’s welfare.
At the present time the demand for shipping purposes alone for
coal from these mines far exceeds the supply; but, when the
mines are fully developed and the coal. can be carried in large
vessels, the markets open for it are boundless—Australia, New


Caledonia, Fiji, New Guinea, East Indian Islands, India, Ceylon,
Mauritius, the Cape, China, California, Peru, Bolivia, and Chili.
In San Francisco the coal from the Pennsylvanian Anthracite
mines, which is only I 2 to 2 per cent, superior to the Westport
steam coal, brings as high a price as £2 4s, to £2 55,, and this
affords an ample margin for profit.
The aid given by Government to develop this magnificent
means of wealth and motive-power to all other industries has been
slowly given. Railways have been made, and last year the West-
port and Greymouth Harbour Bills were carried ; hut for ten
years the field has been practically neglected, nor was the colony
at large awakened to a sense of appreciation of the real im-
portance of these coal deposits. During that time the com-
panies have been impoverished, and more than one has been
forced to liquidate.
But, “ putting away the things that are behind us/’ Avhat
can be done for the future ? The question of a protective duty
on coal has been raised and discussed ; but this is a poor help. If
we wanted to conserve our stores, as some day we may have to,
it might be right from a national point of view; but at present
it would be more loss than gain. Direct aid to the companies
in the shape of remission of royalties and carriage would meet
with much disfavour in the House, and could hardly be carried.
Still, the enormous sums invested by the companies have greatly
tended to clear the way for future success —to be achieved,
perhaps, by those who at present have not a shilling invested ;
and deserves, if possible, encouragement and recognition. On
the other hand, the “ shepherding ” of coal-mines should be
sternly suppressed, and unworked leases cancelled, to be handed
over to responsible persons or corporations who could guarantee
to work them. The most profitable use for the coal at home
will probably be found to be in smelting iron, tin, and copper.
New Plymouth has her ironsand, Nelson her copper, and
Northern Buller her tin. If, in a small.way at first, smelting
furnaces were erected near the coal-mines, vessels could bring
the ore and carry away metal and coals. The earning of double
freight will cheapen the cost of transit, and lay the foundation
of larger enterprise. Had this essay been written last year
much would have had to be said as to the neglect shown in
developing or fostering the coal industry; but, in face of what


has been done by Parliament in the session o£ 1884, it cannot
be said that reasonable means are not being taken tq do justice
to this important industry. Regret, no doubt, will be felt that
through delay much private capital has been lost, and that
investors are discouraged; but let the dead past bury its dead.
dead past bury its dead.
and we look forward hopefully, believing that never again in
our history will our coalfields be forgotten or neglected.
The quantities of coal produced from the different mines in
the colony are as follows :
Total Output
to 31st December,
1884.
•Kawakawa
Kamo
Waikato ..
Taupiri
Banbury (Westport)
Brunner (Grey)
Coal-pit Heath (Grey)
Homebush (Malvern)
Pern-hill (Green Island)
Wal toil Park
Kaitangata
Nightcaps..
Tons.
30,274
19,395
10,764
35,470
74,187
78,368
18,989
10,453
13,985
30,250
43,821
13,310
547,455
83,444
60,847
167,687
189,412
372,904
113,616
63,274
34,997
270,199
242,103
32,990
The above twelve returns only include those producing over
10,000 tons per annum. There are ninety-four mines men-
tioned in the Statistics for 1884, giving a total output for the
year of 480,831 tons, and an approximate output to the 31st
December, 1884, of 3,007,198 tons.
We imported from Newcastle, New South Wales, during the
year ending the 31st March, 1885,144,442 tons of coal, valued at
.€170,830, the total import from all parts being 148,444 tons.
There seems to be every prospect of being able to reduce this
import steadily down to zero. In the report of the Secretary
for Mines he says, “ An inspection of the returns shows that
the increase in output is mainly from the bituminous coals of
Westport and Grey mouth.. This is important, as it is in the
development of these coalfields that New Zealand has to depend
to become self-supporting in the supply of steam and smithy
•coals. An essential factor in this development is the improve-
ment now begun of the bar-harbours of Westport and Grey-
mouth. In the success already attained at Greymouth there is


good promise of that most desirable object being obtained there,
for the depth of water on the bars determines the class of vessel
that can be used as colliers. At Greymouth only about three
years ago vessels carrying 200 tons had difficulty in crossing
the bar; whereas now vessels carrying 600 tons can as easily be
employed. The steamer ‘ Taupo ’ recently left with 900 tons.
In contrast to this, the colliers from Newcastle load up to 3,000
tons or more, and there are much greater facilities there for
loading, as well. All thig clearly shows the importance of im-
proving as rapidly as possible the harbours and appliances at
Greymouth and Westport, so as to enable a much larger class of
vessels to be engaged in the trade, as it is the quantity carried
on the same bottom, and the facility of despatch, that lessens
the cost of distribution. At present a ton of coal can be
delivered at Port Chalmers or Lyttelton by the class of vessels
engaged in the Newcastle trade about as cheaply as from the
West Coast.”
By bringing the facts relating to our coal prominently for-
ward, so as to obtain the attention of those possessed of skill and
capital, and by this means inducing systematic and scientific
working, the coal resources of New Zealand may be assisted in
development, and employment found for thousands of honest
workers. The Department for IVlines has taken steps to have
the mineral resources of the colony adequately represented at the
forthcoming Colonial and Indian Exhibition in London, and it
is believed that much good will result from such an attempt to
make our mineral wealth more widely known.
Meat and Cattle.
The enormous advantage to the sheep-farmer of having a
remunerative market for his carcasc-mutton is easily compre-
hended ; and the rapid development of the frozen-meat trade has
excited the envy and admiration of our neighbours. In 1884
252,422 cwt. of New Zealand mutton, worth =£342,476, was ex-
ported to the United Kingdom, besides 1,644 cwt. of beef, worth
£3,605; and a total export to all countries of 27,711icwt. of
potted and preserved meats, worth £59,224. In 1882 the
quantity of frozen meat exported was valued at £19,339, or
15,224 cwt.; and 26,016 cwt. of canned meat, worth £54,397.


This will give some idea of the increase since the trade first
became established.
To the New Zealand Land Company belongs the credit of
first instituting the export of frozen mutton. On the 18th
February, 1883, they despatched the “ Dunedin,” a sailing ship
of about 1,350 tons, from Port Chalmers, with a cargo of five
thousand frozen sheep, weighing an average of 851 b. each. The
greatest care was taken in preparing the sheep, freezing, and
packing them. The ship arrived in London on the 34th May,
1883, after a voyage of ninety-eight days; the mutton was
landed in excellent condition, and sold readily at per lb.
Since then the New Zealand Shipping Company bave fitted
up their steamers for shipment of meat, and so have the Shaw-
Savill line.
The New Zealand mutton commands the highest price in the
market for frozen meat, and practical proof has, been given of
the colony’s capacity to beat all competition in the production
of first-class mutton. There were a good many difficulties to be
met with, partly in combatting the reluctance of well-to-do cus-
tomers to openly prefer imported mutton, and partly in defeating
the sharpness of the wholesale dealers in palming off New Zea-
land mutton as best Welsh and Southdown. But the success of-
the trial has been so conspicuous and notorious that these
difficulties are fast disappearing; but the danger has arisen of a
want of reliance to be placed on every shipment, and this has
been owing to the failure, or partial failure, of several cargoes.
There has been carelessness or accident somewhere——it is difficult
to exactly apportion the blame —and not only has heavy mone-
tary loss been incurred, but great damage has been inflicted on
the trade generally. As a straw indicates the direction of the
wind, so may the following circumstances, which have come
under the writer’s own knowledge, serve to point out the fault:
Sheeps’ tongues, tinned, used to be a favourite dish, and they
turned out clean, sweet, and so properly cooked that they would
peel without the slightest difficulty. Since the firm which sup-
plied them so satisfactorily has been turned into a joint-stock
company several tins have been obtained at different times, and
they nearly all turned out unsatisfactorily. There were traces
of black around the fat; there was a stale flavour about the
whole, and the cooking was unequal, some being overdone, some


hardly cooked at all. If any carelessness or want of cleanliness
like this occurs in freezing the carcase mutton no wonder there
has been failure.
It is said that the method adopted of freezing is not the
best, and that the American process has greater advantages. It
is described as consisting of a freezing chamber with double
walls, between which is a current of air, and also a supply of
asbestos haircloths or other non-conductors. Above the chamber
is a reservoir of ice, or some other cooling agent, with an ad-
jacent pump. Cylinders are placed at suitable intervals in the
chambers. From the reservoir a pipe runs to the nearest cylinder
and enters it at the bottom. Another pipe runs from the top
of this cylinder to the bottom of the next, and so on throughout
the series. A return pipe connects the cylinder with the reser-
voir. The cooling liquid follows the course indicated. From
the reservoir it is thrown by gravitation, displacing the warmer
liquid therein and forcing it up and over into the bottom of the
next cylinder, and so on to the last, whence the pump lifts the
warmer liquid back into the ice-reservoir. The cylinders being
air-tight, there is no contact with the cooling liquid, and the
atmosphere in the freezing chamber may be kept at any tempera-
ture. Besides the utmost carefulness in having an efficient
freezing-chamber, it is necessary that the sheep should be killed
while cool, or “ with the bloom on; ” and that care should be
taken in having the wrappers clean and well made, and that the
original form of the carcase should be preserved. On arrival in
London a proper receiving store is requisite, in order to obtain a
gradual thawing of the mutton, and the removal of any unsightly
marks or mildewed appearance.
This trade has sprung up with wonderful suddenness, and
has been carried on with a wonderful success : it despises ques-
tions of protection or free-trade; it has hardened the price
of meat within the colony, but it has not increased it to the
regular customer; it only requires a continual supply of material
to be not only profitable in itself, but to be the means of pro-
longing the sheep-farming industry of New Zealand on a large
scale to an indefinite extent. Still, the trade requires to be
watched with care, as the following extract from a London cor-
respondent's letter will show : “ The present state of the frozen-
meat market is discouraging in the extreme. Never before has


there been a more striking illustration of the necessity for some
system in the regulation of the supply. During the month now
closing very nearly one hundred thousand carcases of frozen
mutton from Australia and New Zealand have been shot into
London, with the results that might he anticipated. Besides the
two regular fortnightly Orient steamers, the f Opawa,’ ‘Oamaru,’
* Wellington/ ' Elderslie,’ and f Lady Jocelyn' have brought in
immense cargoes from New Zealand ; and, what with the weather
—which has been almost semi-tropical in its severity—an unusual
abundance of fish at an unusual lowness of price, and these un-
timely arrivals, the supply is utterly in excess of the demand. The
price of mutton has reached 4d. per pound, and the sale even at
that has been exceedingly slow. It is evident that much has yet
to he done by producers and shippers before this trade is placed on
a satisfactory footing. On the other hand, it cannot be denied that
New Zealand mutton is continuing to win for itself popularity far
and wide in the provinces. I have just heard a little incident
that will be of interest to those who anticipate high results in
the future of the trade. A prominent medical practitioner in a
cathedral town has stated to my informant that he uniformly
prescribes New Zealand mutton to his patients, and that he finds
they can use it with safety at an earlier stage of their convalesc-
ence than any other kind of fresh meat." Agencies will require
to he established in other cities besides London, in order to insure
a quick and certain sale, and it will probably be found that
closer combination of interest between the ship’s owner and the
shippers will be necessary to .effect the needful change for the
better. Instead of depending upon ordinary agents at Home,
an extended agency, with powers to extend the ramifications of
the business, would help in a great measure to overcome such
dangers as at present menace the trade—it is simply a question
of good or bad management.
So far, experiments with beef have not been successful,
and the trade can be said to be now confined to mutton. This
is, from a general standpoint, to be much regretted, and in
some parts of New Zealand, notably in Wanganui, a regular
market for surplus large stock would be a godsend ; the breed-
ing of cattle there at times is overdone, and is therefore unprofit-
able. There is a danger of unsuccessful attempts being made to
establish meat-freezing factories where circumstances do not


warrant it. When cattle have to be brought long distances by
sea it is unadvisable to establish freezing factories; and it is not
because they have been successful in some parts of the colony
where local surroundings are favourable, that every city in New
Zealand can maintain the industry. Wellington, Dunedin, Auck-
land, and Christchurch -will each be the headquarters of special
industries, and it is useless for them each to attempt all. Let
a generous emulation exist; but let it be guided by knowledge,
and a national feeling that the sum of New Zealand’s greatness
is the aim to be looked to.
Canned Meat.
In 1878 the export -of canned meat reached the value of
.£356,280; but it gradually decreased, until, in 1881, it was
£107,476. In 1882 it rose to £261,105. In 1884 it sank to
£59,224. The falling-off is doubtless attributable to the growth
in the export of frozen-meat trade; and for the future it may
be considered that only what are termed “ small goods ” will be
canned or potted. There is no cause for regret in this; for, if
the carcase sheep js exported whole with a profitable result, and
the smaller edible portions canned, the total profit will be the
more satisfactory. There is also a very considerable quantity of
canned meat used in the colony, of which I am unable to pro-
cure the returns; but on gold- and coal-fields the consumption
is very considerable, while there is always a steady demand going
on generally for well-canned tongues, sausages, brawn, pressed
beef, mutton, &c. Of course the. less waste of any portion of
the animal the more profitable the result. In Chicago, it is said,
no portion of the animal is lost. The blood is dried and made
into a fertilizing agent, horns and hoofs are taken by glue and
comb manufacturers, the hair is used for felt, plastering, and
various other purposes, the bones are broken for boneduSt, and
so on. In New Zealand there is not yet this perfect utilization
of the whole body, but in a very little while it may reasonably
be expected to develop itself. The process of canned-meat-pre-
serving is well understood in New Zealand, and some of the
factories erected in Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch, Dun-
edin, Oamaru, Napier, and other towns are very complete,
comprising factories for the manufacture of the tins, printing
labels, and soldering.


Cattle.
Many causes have combined to improve tbe cattle o£ this
colony, and they will probably compare favourably with any
large quantities of cattle in the world for breed. The number
in the colony in 1881 was 698,637 (no more recent figures are
available). Auckland had 158,181; Taranaki, 51,846; Welling-
ton, 140,951 ; Hawke’s Bay, 36,213 ; Marlborough, 9,919; Nel-
son, 31,620; Westland, 7,944; Canterbury, 111,155; Otago and
Southland, 150,150. About 40 per cent, consist of shorthorns,,
and the remainder of Jerseys, Devons, Ayrshires, Normans, and
mixed breeds. The New Zealand Stock and Pedigree Company,
Auckland, have done wonders towards improving the breed of
cattle; and the annual exhibitions in Auckland bear testimony
to the good effects produced by a generous emulation among
breeders. Breeders from San Francisco and elsewhere have
purchased largely from Auckland, and the reputation of New
Zealand as a producer of pure stock is rising surely. One
great cause for this success is the immunity New Zealand has
enjoyed from pleuro-pneumonia. There have been many scales,
and prohibition of imported cattle has been several times pro-
claimed ; but the belief is now gaining ground that the disease
cannot exist or spread in a climate such as that of New Zealand.
On the whole, it is considered that no specific can be given foi
the greater development of this industry, other than the utmost
vigilance and scientific care to prevent disease, the continua-
tion of the present laudable ambition to produce prize stock,
the careful choice of grasses best suited for the grazing lands,
and the ordinary precaution to avoid over-production a danger
which will continue to exist with regard to large cattle until the
art of freezing them for export has been perfected.
Woollen Manufactures.
This is at present probably the most important manufacture
in our colony; but, as there has been comparatively no export of
manufactured woollen material, it is difficult to arrive at a
correct conclusion as to the actual state of the industry. In
1884 the export of woollens and blankets together only amounted
to £1,610; the imports amounting to £75,151 for woollens and
£25,370 for blankets, the duty charged being 15 per cent, ad
valorem. In 1882 the amount for both was £155,314; but it


must be remembered that tber consumption in the colony of New
Zealand woollens and blankets is very large, and is rapidly in-
creasing as the superior quality of the fabrics is beebming
known, and this seems proved by the above figures. The chief
woollen mills are the Mosgiel, the Roslyn, and the Kaiapoi; and
in 1883 (the last return available) they consumed between them
3,000,0001 b. of wool. For some time after these mills’ were
established the returns were not considered satisfactory by the
proprietors ; but excellent management and determined perse-
verance to produce really superior work has had a most bene-
ficial effect: and these mills are now, it is believed, highly
remunerative, though, from many inquiries made, it is found
that there are many drawbacks, to perfect success. In a joint
letter from the above-mentioned companies to the Royal Com-
missioners on Colonial Industries, dated the 16th April, 1880,
they say, “We do not advocate any addition to the existing
rate of Customs duty, namely, 15 per cent, ad valorem upop
woollen goods, as we consider this a fair enough set-off against
(1) the high rate of colonial interest; (3) the high rate of colo-
nial wages ; (3) the cost of bringing out to the colony the neces-
sary machinery, dye-stuffs, and other articles necessary in carry-
ing on the business of a woollen factory. Secondly, we are of
opinion that the direction in which your Commission might most
materially assist us as woollen manufacturers is by recommending
to the Legislature the relaxation of the Employment of Females
Act, known as Bradshaw’s Act; and we would urge this on
your most favourable consideration.” They then give reasons
at length for being permitted to work their mills longer than
eight hours out of the twenty-four. On the whole, it seems
they must have been pretty well content then, if this is all they
had to complain of. The Factories Act they refer to is still in
force, and, Avhile deeply sympathizing with all efforts to make
manufactures a success, we can never be forgetful of the over-
whelming evil attendant upon working women and children long
hours, and the necessity of legislating in order to protect these
helpless ones. Not even the establishment of gigantic factories
would compensate for the introduction of evils which the Englisli
•Factories Acts were designed to suppress. In another letter
Messrs. Ross and Glendinning urge that coloured yarns used in
•weaving should be admitted free of duty, as they are a special


line of manufacture, and would not pay to produce in the-
colony. But this view is opposed by the manager of the Mosgiel
Company. On the whole the suggestion on which greatest
stress is laid is, that the Employment of Females Act is unjust
and needless.
It appears, then, that at present the mills in existence are
having a speedy sale at profitable prices for all their manufac-
tures ; but no doubt their success will lead to the establishment
of other mills—indeed a woollen company has been started lately
at Wellington; and that, when they have produced sufficient for
home requirements, they will require a larger market; and I hope
to show, in the section on trade, how that market is to be obtained.
At present it is a matter of great congratulation that this manu-
facture has been so far a success, and that the goods arc so
generally admitted to be superior in quality to the imported
article of equal price : a strict protective duty would rather tend
to impede than assist its legitimate development, and it is not
likely to be imposed. We must always bear in mind that to-
double the cost of necessaries is to perpetuate high wages, to
the loss of the employer, without advantage to the labourer.
The woollen manufacturers are now turning their attention to
the making of clothing, and there cannot be a doubt as to the
superiority of their make over ordinary imported goods. Great
care is taken as to style, cut, and finish; and it is hard to distin-
guish some of their goods from tailor-made articles. In boys’
suits especially their goods are infinitely superior to what can be
ordinarily purchased; and, if the retail buyer could only purchase
at a fair advance on factory prices, there would not be a suit of
imported goods sold. In order to overcome the difficulty with
retail dealers the New Zealand Clothing Factory have retail
shops in most towns. But the woollen manufacturers could not
do that well, and at the same time sell largely wholesale. Still,
the retail dealers should learn, or be taught, that their real inter-
est lies in promoting the sale of New-Zealand-made goods.
The woollen exhibits in the Exhibition command the admira-
tion of all, and-the writer’s attention was &t once taken by the
beautiful softness of the material, the good taste displayed in
colours and patterns, and the variety of articles manufactured
by the New Zealand Clothing Factory. The same remarks apply
to the Mosgiel Company’s exhibit, where coloured yarns and


tropical tweeds formed the specialities. For beauty, usefulness,
and interest combined I think these exhibits take the premier
position in the Exhibition. I was glad to notice quite lately the
declaration of 10-per-cent, dividends by some of the woollen com-
panies, which is the best practical proof of their success. The
writer travelled a long distance to Wellington for the special
purpose of obtaining the advantage of a visit to the Exhibition,
in order to see the things about which this essay is written, and
felt fully recompensed for his trouble in so doing.
Boots and Shoes.
Naturally following woollen fabrics, boots and shoes come in.
In all the large cities there are boot and shoe factories, and the
work turned out, though differing in excellence, is generally most
satisfactory. The manufacturers have endeavoured to give a
workmanlike finish to their productions, and for neatness and
elegance, especially in men’s boots, the colonial production
compares most favourably with the imported article. Like the
woollen manufacture, the boot industry does not appear now to
require a higher protective duty, and is rapidly expanding, though
in 1880 the manufacturers were almost unanimous in demanding
a protective duty of from 20 to 40 per cent. The chief point to be
observed is the quality of New Zealand leather, which sometimes
'appears softer and not so durable as imported leather, probably
because of haste in tanning; but for price, finish, and workman-
ship New-Zealand-made boots are not surpassed anywhere.
Connected with this subject is the question of tanning, and
it appears, from the evidence of Mr. Charles Coombes, of
Dunedin, tanner, that the native bark of New Zealand is
excellent for tanning, but that it is not to be procured, though
in the forests on the West Coast there are thousands of tons of
fine bark for the mere labour of getting it, the bark of the
birch, the hinau, and the rimu being excellent for tanning. It
is worth £o a ton at the mill. It certainly does appear strange
that native bark is not used when procurable in abundance, and
that the saw-mills should desregard this means of profitably
utilizing their bark.
In 1881 there were thirty-one boot factories in operation,
employing about thirteen hundred people, and producing 280,000
pairs of boots and shoes. Since that time the number has


greatly increased, and the import of hoots and shoes is steadily
decreasing. In 1884 we imported hoots and shoes to the value
of £143,840; in 1882 the value was £196,140 —which shows
satisfactory progress in home production, when- taken in con-
nection with the increase of population. The islands will, or
ought to, furnish a good outlet for surplus production, when we
have taken up our proper position in regard to the trade to he
done with them. In the meantime New-Zealand-made hoots
and shoes are fighting the imported article with fair success,
and there is no doubt will he victorious in the end.
The shoe leathers, bookbinders’ leathers, hat leathers,
furniture leathers, and manufactured hoots and shoes at the
Exhibition are very good, and, so far as it is possible to judge,
are equal if not superior to any imported goods. Not having
an opportunity of handling or wearing the exhibits, of course
appearances were perforce our only guide.
Agriculture.
From a population-supporting point of view this industry is
tne most important in the colony, as the following figures will
show: Persons engaged in agricultural and pastoral pursuits,
54,447 ; in mechanical pursuits, 17,602; in working and dealing
in textile, fabrics, 11,930; in working and dealing in food and
drink, 7,063; in animal and vegetable substances, 4,872; in
minerals, 22,710; in undefined labour, 17,822: total, 136,446.
The foregoing figures combine the pastoral and agricultural
occupations, and I can get no separate returns. Still, I think it
is sufficient for our purpose. Grain is the chief article of
export that gives statistical importance to agriculture. In 1867
we imported wheat and flour to the value of £145,959 more
than we exported; and in 1882, fifteen years afterwards, the
exports, exceeded the imports by £839,297. In 1884 we
exported £436,728, and imported only £l,lOO. A duty of 9d.
per 1001 b. has heeri. imposed since 1879. Nearly the whole of
this quantity comes from Canterbury and Otago (see Table).
Of oats, we exported in 1884 £267,286 worth, the supply coming
from the same provinces ; and the import was only £74.
These returns are truly magnificent, and would lead one
naturally to believe that agriculture, especially grain-growing,
is the truest and best industry of the colony. But, while it is a


matter for congratulation that the colony should he producing
the whole of its breadstuff?, and exporting so largely of its
surplus production, it is hardly true of the colony generally that
agriculture is a profitable or favourite occupation for the native-
born youths and men. In Canterbury and Otago soil,- climate,
and accessibility assist the grain-grower, railways carry his
grain, and the‘land is easily brought under crop. Elsewhere,
but especially in the North Island, the complaint is general that
farming does not pay. The want of means of transit to market
prevents the small farmer from making the same profit from his
labour that the other toilers do, and there is not the natural
facilities for farming on a large scale that thel-e is in the South
Island. It is a fact that in the North the native-born youths arc
averse to farming, and prefer to get near the towns if possible.
Nor are they at all to be blamed for this, but rather praised; for,
brought up on a farm, they grow up in ignorance, which they
bitterly feel when brought into contact with those from the towns.
Their, eyes are then opened to the easier and more money-
commanding life that others : with the result that they centre
towards, towns at the first opportunity. Moreover many parents
encourage this feeling, and evince great repugnance to bringing
up their sons to the hard life they have themselves endured.
It is difficult to conceive a life more miserable to an intelligent
youth than the drudgery of an unprofitable farm.
Unfortunately many of the farms in the northern portion
of the Auckland Province must be classed as unprofitable, and
are only occupied because the owners do not know where else to
go to and make a fresh start. • After an absence of nearly twenty
years I rode the other day from Mahurangi to Mangawai, and
the district had actually retrograded from the condition it was
in after the first two years of its settlement. There were no
roads passable for drays in wet weather, places where former
settlers had tried to make homesteads Avere deserted, the num-
ber of settlers had actually decreased, and, were it not for the
money circulated by the gum-diggers, and some timber export,
the whole country would have been desolate. Near all the
towns there are splendid evidences of good farming, carried on
in an apparently successful manner, and where dairy produce of
all kinds finds a ready sale at remunerative prices. The failures
so far have chiefly been where the attempt has been made to


settle in “ the bush/* where, from distance and want of means
of transit, what was grown could not be sold at prices that would
pay. The great fact, however, remains that, except perhaps in
Canterbury and Otago, the population will not prefer husbandry
while they can get anything better; and that “ better ” will he
afforded by the development of manufactures, trades, and trading.
There will always he a sufficiency of farmers; but, if New Zealand
fulfils her destiny, the proportion of agriculturists will he less
than it is at present.
Outside the large grain-growers the most successful farmers
are the makers of dairy produce ; and evidence is not wanting
that systematic improvement in this department is being made.
The dairy factories of New Zealand are increasing in number,
and the meat-preserving companies are offering inducements to
dairy farmers to send their produce to them. Ashburton and
other New Zealand cheese is worth £65 a ton in London, while
it has fetched as high as £3 11s. 6d. per cwt. At Edendale,
Ashburton, Wanganui, Grey town, Carterton, Woodville, and
other places cheese factories are in full operation. Butter
factories are also springing up, with, so far, satisfactory results.
The great aim should he to produce, a really first-class article,
and allow no temptation of present gain to encourage the export
of second-rate goods. The skill and attention this branch of
farming is receiving is shown by a perusal of the weekly pro-
vincial papers, in which a large space is devoted to the subject,
and valuable hints and suggestions constantly thrown out.
Of course successful dairy-farming is, like other branches,
dependent upon means of access to markets or agencies, and it is
by opening up the country by railroads and other means of cheap
transit that this industry can be encouraged and developed,
“ Had I not been a helpless cripple,” says Sir Julius Vogel,
“ I would have preached the doctrine of railways from one end
of the Island to the other.” But railways, politics, and theories
are inseparable, and the stern condition against importing such
subjects into this essay deters me from following the subject
further. Fortunately, however, the struggle is not whether
railways shall be made, but merely how they shall be made and
financed. One thing seems to be certain, that farming lives
where railways or even good roads are, and that it languishes
and is avoided where they are not. The proportion of farmers


in New Zealand paying rent for their farms is not large; but the'
number who are paying rent in the shape of interest on mort-
gages is comparatively enormous, and the high price of money
tells upon the farmer with great severity. When the New
Zealand Trust and Loan Company can report that they have
£1,473,376 lent on freehold land in New Zealand, and can pay
a dividend of 20 per cent, per annum to their shareholders, most
of whom reside outside the colony, some idea can he formed of
the drain that is going on from the colony. To pay 10 per cent,
for money is a life-killing tax to the farmer; for, although
the nominal rate of interest may he 2 or 3 per cent, lower,
charges for obtaining loans, renewals, transfers, and releases
bring up the average rate to quite 10 per cent. Yet, in these
days of high-class farming, it is seldom the smaller farmer can
do without borrowed money; and even with its aid they can
hardly cope with the large farmers, who, from the extent of
their acreage, can purchase labour-saving machinery extensively.
A now famous author says, “ One invention after another has
already given the large farmer a crushing advantage over the
small farmer, and invention is still going on. And it is not
merely in the making of his crops, but in their transportation
and marketing, and in the purchasing of his supplies, that the
large producer in agriculture gains an advantage over the small
one. To talk as some do about the “ bonanza ” farms breaking
up into small homesteads is as foolish as to talk of the great
shoe factory giving way again to journeyman shoemakers with
their lapstones and awls.” The result of this will he seen when
the struggles of the small farmer cease to he able to provide the
interest on his mortgages, or his direct rents, as well as neces-
sary sustenance. Then will the capitalist call in his mortgages,,
with the result of merging many small farms in one large holding;
and the agriculturists will only be composed of the two classes —
the capitalist farmer and the farm-labourer. On the one hand
we have our statesmen striving to protect the smaller men from
the maw of the land swallower; on the other, the constant cry
that produce can he obtained more cheaply by concentration of
small holdings into one than by allowing the small holdings to
continue. This is the point where the interests of capital and
labour diverge : when capital cries out for more hands, but
strives at the same time to reduce the rate of pay, and looks


only to the percentage obtainable from capital invested, where it
denies to labour any profit but only actual earning. The small
farmer may hope for something more than daily wage, though
too often this hope is never realized. The large farmer says,
“ My profits shall increase year by year, though wages, or the
recompense of labour, shall not increase—brains and money must
triumph in the end over unskilled labour.” This is the problem
for which no final solution can be expected, now or at any other
time. The solution lies in the education of our masses in habits of
sobriety, in obtaining the political power, and in wisely wielding
that power when obtained. The struggle must ever go on —which-
ever side sleeps will he defeated —hut the victory will fall to the
bravest, most enduring, and liberal-minded. Not in strikes or
violence, not in desperation or sullenness, will the working-
classes find their best weapons, hut in endeavouring to under-
stand where their best interests lie, and by electing representa-
tives who will maintain those interests. If the desire of our
rulers is to promote and secure the greatest happiness of the
greatest number, every endeavour will be used to check the
tendency to create but two classes —fhe rich and the poor. No
specific can he given, hut by constant vigilance and a liberal,
whole-hearted policy the small farmer can be kept alive for many
years.
If the system of only making roads where the present traffic
will pay for them is persevered with, farming in many districts
■where it is at present carried on will languish and fade away.
I give one instance. The Karamea Special Settlement was
founded about twelve years ago by Government at a very large
expense ; men were landed there, supported, and encouraged for
years; many of them were quite inexperienced in the work, and
many left the district before very long. The residuum have
profited by hard, experience, and there are at present in- the
district a number of farmers, who, if they had any opportunity
of selling their stuff, would be comparatively prosperous; yet, as
a fact, they are absolutely without a road in or out of their
settlement, and cannot drive a beast overland to any market.
A steamer calls at irregular periods about once a month, and
that is all the communication they have with the outer world.
There are many settlements in the North Island in just the
same condition. Where we have railroads, open land, and.


easy shippings there the small farmers will he squeezed out by
the capitalist farmer; where the small farmers would not he so
squeezed out, they have to contend with the absence of roads of
any reasonable kind. The small farmer is not much represented
in Parliament, nor are his brains, as a rule, active enough to
make sufficient stir to cause his grievance to be removed; hut
when he is annihilated his loss will he felt to the whole com-
munity. The establishment of a State Bank which would make
prudent advances to the farmer at a low rate of interest, without
heavy legal charges, w r ould do much ; hut there are enormous
difficulties in the way of doing this, and it is feared that at
present there is not much chance of its being done. Agricul-
tural colleges may serve to induce native-born youths to learn
the business of farming; hut roads and bridges are the greatest
necessities in order that the waste places may be made fertile
and peopled, and the race of farmers an increasing and pro-
sperous one, for many years. But in order to provide cheap
labour immigration is another necessity for the farming industry.
The native-born are. not averse to shepherding, shearing, and
stock-riding; hut they have too much faith in themselves to
become agricultural labourers. The lot of an agricultural
labourer is superior in the colony to what it is at Home; but the
sons of the colonial labourer strive to take a still more onward
step and rise superior to their parents’ position. Whether
immigration on a wholesale scale is a good thing for the colony
is a many-sided question. Por my own part I would prefer that
the population of New Zealand should he produced by itself,
with such a leaven as unassisted immigration will give; and the
wholesale importation of the inferior portion of the population
of all countries will not tend to raise us to a high standard as a
people. The class of immigrants required for our agricultural
interests is the small capitalist farmer, or rather the practical
farmer having a moderate amount of capital at command.
These are at present being attracted to Manitoba and elsewhere,
and very few are coming to New Zealand. These are the men
who will invigorate our farming interests both by example and
by infusing well employed capital into the colouy. The intro-
duction of particular clans to settle in one locality is not
successful or desirable, for they remain too long as strangers to
the rest of the population, and intensify their prejudices and
predilections.


Table of Wheat, Oats.
and Barley, raised in
Provincial
District
for the Year 1884-85,
Wheat.
Barley.
Acres.
Bushels.
Acres.
Bushels.
159,093
106,950
Acres.
Bushels.
15,198
Auckland
Taranaki
157,745
43,967
26,210
184,687
Hawke’s Bay
Wellington
Nelson ..
Marlborough
Canterbury
Westland
82,585
306,887
30,199
12,609
2,050
53,436
68,976
108,930
157,766
105,955
141,655
557,443
61,747
182,560
64,071
4,459,677
1,879,308
129,133
19,450
Otago
196,120
7,369,263
10,815
331,018
Timber Trade and Kauri Gum,
In this trade Auckland has naturally the lead. The mag-
nificent kauri forests, which belong to her alone, give her this
supremacy. Dr, Hector states that the forests of New Zealand
cover an area of twenty million acres. But the waste that is
going on has aroused the anxiety of our statesmen, notwithstand-
ing this enormous supply. The annual report of the Auckland
Timber Company for 1885 shows upon how large a scale their
operations are conducted : their assets are reckoned at £232,083
2s. Bd, In the Chairman’s report he says, “ Our stock of round
and squared timber now amounts, in round numbers, to twenty-
eight millions on tidal waters and creeks,” The annual output
of kauri timber from Auckland is about 110,000,000 ft., and
the highest estimate of the amount of timber in the kauri
forests is 23,000,000,000 ft. Bush fires destroy great quanti-
ties of standing timber annually, though the loss is not actually
so great as might he supposed, as the larger trees are not con-
sumed by the fire sweeping through the forest, and a large-
sized tree that has been circled and killed by fire affords the
most durable wood; but smaller and growing trees a*e de-
stroyed, and the future generation will suffer for the waste and
carelessness of the present. From Kaipara—the port of the
largest kauri-timber district in Auckland—comes this complaint
and suggestion : “ The kauri timber is disappearing very fast, as
it is not only being sawn up in the district, hut very large
quantities of baulk timber are now being sent away : ships are
loading here for Melbourne and Sydney -with baulk timber.
Large quantities of kauri rickers are now being cut down and


sent to Auckland for spars. In our opinion this should not be
allowed ; no timber should be cut under a certain measurement.
Bush fires are also doing great damage to the forests here, and
severe penalties should be enforced on all persons setting fire to
the bush by carelessness or otherwise. As, however, in spite
of all precautions, the country is sure to be gradually dis-
forested, new plantations should continually be made, and care
taken that only suitable trees be planted. Many millions of
feet of kauri timber have been wasted in opening up the tidal
bushes on the Wairoa by using it for making tramways, when a
light iron rail laid down on the kahikatea Would have done as
well. We think an export duty should at once be placed on all
baulk timber leaving the country/’ With regard to kauri gum,
the writers of the above say, “ If varnish could be manufactured
in New Zealand a considerable amount of money would be
saved. We would suggest offering a bonus for the manufacture
of varnish.”
Besides kauri, the totara, kahikatea, rimu, and silver pine
are most valuable for general purposes. Bata makes admirable
knees for ship-building, and is too often used for firewood.
There are, altogether, about sixty-six different kinds of useful
woods, and about half these arc reckoned as adapted for general
purposes. The mottled kauri is the most valuable of all, and is
getting scarcer every day. We imported in 1884 about twenty-
two thousand pounds’ worth of timber, chiefly in logs, from New
South Wales, and Tasmanian posts, palings, and rails. In 1882
the return gives £62,881 as the value imported —a very con-
siderable and satisfactory falling off. Nearly all the imported
timber is for the purpose of being worked up into valuable
articles. There is a duty of 2s. per 100 ft. on undressed and 4s.
per 100 ft. on dressed timber, which is prohibitive except for ex-
ceptionally valuable kinds. Much of the timber sawn is used
in the colony; but our export for 1885 was £140,000. The
subject of bark for tanning has been referred to in the section
on leather manufactures, and is well worthy of serious con-
sideration. To Sir Julius Vogel bolongs the credit for having
attempted seriously to rouse the colony to the necessity of con-
serving our forests ; but, so far, the effort has not had much
practical success, and the matter is being discussed in the
present session of Parliament, sitting while this essay is being


written. The Crown forests of the colony are estimated at
ten million acres, and over this estate Government can exercise
its control at least, and set a good example. By planting on
Government reserves in the neighbourhood of railways with
various kinds of exotic trees, the products of which enter into
the economy of many industries already established, or capable
of being profitably pursued, in this country, much good may be
done. The blue-gum, wattle, hickory, ash, oak, cork, and elm
would do well, if proper attention is paid to them at first. It
is said that olives and mulberries might be planted in situations
where they can be easily looked after, by way of experiment
with a view to the introduction of the olive and silk industries
by private enterprise in the future {vide report of Royal Com-
mission) .
There is an immense quantity of woodware manufactured
in the colony. The Union Sash and Door Company, as their
name implies, produce great quantities of sashes and doors of
various kinds, besides mantelpieces and general house-building
furniture. The Dunedin Iron and Woodware Company produce
more miscellaneous goods with success. Besides these there
are woodware steam-mills in every city and town, where timber
is turned out in all states, from the rough weatherboard and
scantling to the polished table and chiffonier. Furniture-mak-
ing in the colony has reached a great state of perfection, and
the high duty of 17 per cent, ad valorem has given it as much
protection as can safely be afforded without declaring for pro-
hibitive duties. The industry is furnishing much employment
for lads and youths, many of whom are showing great skill in the
work. There is, of course, a desire amongst many -well-to-do
people to have English furniture, and it is but fair that they
should pay for the luxury of indulging their tastes in this
respect. This industry will be promoted, along with maaay
others, by finding an outside market, and so proving to New
Zealanders that their wares are appreciated by others, and that
they need not be at all ashamed of using them themselves.
Where that market is I hope to be able to show by-and-by.
Kauri Gum. —In 1883 we exported 6,518 tons of this
article, worth £336,605. I am afraid those engaged in the
occupation of digging the gum have acquired a very poor repu-
tation, it being generally supposed that only the outcasts from


society engage in it. There are at the present time over two
thousand persons —white and Maori—engaged in gum-digging.
Why it should he written of gum-diggers, “It is generally sup-
posed that a European who resorts to gum-digging is unfitted
for any other occupation,” Ido not know; nor why “ All the
finer feelings of his nature become blunted, and he falls to a
lower depth than the savages with whom he makes his home.”
Having been at one time of my life engaged in buying gum, I
know something about the work, and know that, with fair luck,
good wages can he made in an independent kind of life, with
no greater hardship than most gold-miners endure cheerfully.
Yet the gold-miner is respected, the gum-digger despised.
Nearly fifty thousand tons have been exported since 1871, and
over two-thirds goes to the United States. It comes hack to the
colony in the shape of varnish. When we have mastered the
secret of its conversion from gum into varnish the two freights,
and intermediate profits, will be saved to the colony. The supply
of gum is, however, being sensibly diminished, and with the
diminution of the kauri forests will sink in importance.
Hemp, Rope, Twine.
The indigenous plant, Phormium tenax, naturally attracted
attention to these manufactures. The beautiful flax mats pre-
pared by the Natives were exhibited in London amongst the
first trophies of the explorers of New Zealand. Dressed flax,
prepared by the Natives, was an article of export for many
years; hut it has not kept up in quantity, partly because the
Natives find other more remunerative employment. Large sums
of money have been spent by Europeans in providing flax-
dressing machinery, but, as a rule, loss has been the result. In
1870 the value of dressed flax exported was £132,578, and in
1873 it rose to the maximum of £143,799. In 1882 it sank to
£41,955, and in 1884 to £BOO. There are, however, forty
hemp mills and eighteen rope and twine works in the colony,
employing upwards of four hundred hands; hut the majority of
the raw material used is Russian hemp and Manila. A con-
siderable quantity of phormium cordage is made and used in the
colony. In 1873 it was £4,001, hut since 1876 it has not
reached £I,OOO a year. The difference in the price of labour
between New Zealand and, say, Manila is sufficient to account


for the industry not taking very firm hold, and indeed it can
scarcely be expected or hoped that the colony will compete with
countries where labour can be had for threepehce a day or even
less. The exhibits of the Auckland Fibre Company and of Hale
and Throp appeared to the writer to be all that could be
wished for.
Tobacco,
There has been so much written and said about growing
tobacco in the colony that the subject naturally finds a place in
this essay, although at present it cannot be said that the at-
tempt to grow and manufacture tobacco has met with very signal
success. Yet it seems to have been sufficiently demonstrated
that tobacco of the finest quality can be grown io Auckland,
and that there is no reason why the whole of the tobacco used
in the colony should not be grown in it, unless the revenue
steps in and finds, as it did in the distillation of spirits, that
the manufacture within the colony entails too great a loss to the
revenue. At the present moment the duty on imported tobacco
ranks next to that on spirits. The intrinsic worth of the article
may be gathered from the fact that a single acre will produce
between 1,5001 b. and I,Boolb. weight. The duty at present is
3s. 6d. per pound, and in 1884 the gross amount of duty re-
ceived was £200,884, which would be about 921,0001 b. Of
cigars, 69,2951 b. were imported, at a duty of 65., giving a revenue
of £21,985, and of cigarettes, 23,3111 b., duty 65., giving £6,310
16s. Bd. New Zealand grew, in 1884, 4,7761 b. of tobacco, and
manufactured 1,4511 b. of cigars and 1,3481 b. of cigarettes, the
duty on home-grown tobacco being Is. a pound. The Royal
Commission of 1880 reported that the Tobacco Act of 1879 had
destroyed the tobacco-growing industry, and that that was the
intention of the framers of the Act, and the tendency of the
policy recommended by the Customs Department and adoptecTby
the Government. The Commissioners say no compromise is
possible, and that, if the Customs revenue is held to be of para-
mount importance, as it unquestionably is at present, then the
growth of tobacco ought to be prohibited, as it practically is by
the Act of 1879. If this is still the feeling, there is little use in
printing long papers on the growth and cultivation of tobacco.
Better far to accept the inevitable, and admit that, for fiscal
purposes alone, we must exclude tobacco and distillation from


the list of our home industries. It will he observed that a few
hundred acres would grow all the tobacco at present needed in
the colony; that the value of the tobacco is low, were it not for
the duty ; and that, until we are in a position to export tobacco
to new countries, the advantages of growing our own supply may
he easily outweighed by the inconveniences arising to the fiscal
necessities. It certainly is hard upon the smoker, to whom, per-
chance, tobacco is the one luxury, that he should have to pay
so much for his innocent enjoyment; hut he gets off more lightly
than the spirit-drinker, avlio has to pay 14s. a gallon, or 2s. 4d.
a bottle, on every drop of liquor he consumes. The value in
sterling of total imports of tobacco is worthy of notice and com-
parison with the duty received, omitting shillings and pence :
Value. Duty.
£ £
Tobacco unmanufactured ..' .. .. 1,605 .. 1,940
„ manufactured .. .. .. 64,246 .. 200,884
Cigars .. .. •• •• 23,119 .. 21,985
Cigarettes .. .. • • • • 7, 910 .. 6, 310
£97,880 £231,119
Comparing this with the duty on spirits, brandy to the value
of .£77,104 produced in duty £103,774. The total value of spirits
was £315,411 —duty, £380,326. This is without spirits of
wine. The value of the tea imported was £180,301, and the
duty (4d.), £73,196. But, although there may he such strong
reasons against encouraging the growth of tobacco, these do not
weigh equally against the manufacture of the imported leaf;
and there are strong hopes of this branch developing into one
outlet, at least, for colonial labour, and perhaps favourably
affecting the exchanges.
Sugar.
Let us begin by stating the figures represented in this article
if the statistics for 1884. We imported that year raw sugar
worth £189,931, paying a duty of £19,535, and refined sugar
worth £504,667, paying a duty of £87,953. Here are figures
that well cause those who arc in search of payable home
industries to ask if we cannot produce our own sugar. Mr.
Vincent Pyke, M.H.8., says beet sugar spoiled his tea, his
whiskey, his pudding, and everything else he used it for; yet
there are many facts to make us believe that beet sugar can he
profitably produced in the colony. I saw in a recent newspaper


that specimen beet roots grown at Waverley, and forwarded to
Dr. Hector for analysis, only yielded from 6'4 to 3‘2 per cent,
of sugar. But in other trials 15 and 20 per cent, has been
obtained. In France and Belgium some years ago only 9to
10 per cent, was obtained; but careful cultivation and selection
of seed has raised this average to 15 to 18 per cent. That the
climate and soil of New Zealand is suitable for growing beet
there seems ample proof. The main question is one of labour,
which still remains high; and, until the questionable advantage
of cheap labour is obtainable in the colony, many people doubt
whether the industry would pay. It has already been explained
that the native-born population of the colony do not take kindly
to agriculture, and root crops would be a department in agri-
culture especially distasteful. Still, looking forward to a
rapidly-increasing population, this industry may well employ-
many men, boys, and girls in a useful, honourable, and profitable
occupation ; and certainly an occupation which, if not so brain-
stimulating as others, is infinitely more healthy than factory
work. The Beet-Root Sugar Act of 1884 provides that there
shall be a difference in favour of the locally-produced article of
2d. per lb. in the tariff on sugar, and offers a bonus of id. per
lb. on the first thousand tons of sugar from beet-root produced
in the colony. A good deal of information has been gathered
on the subject by Sir Julius Vogel, and is embalmed in the
State papers and in Hansard. The industry may not rise to
prominence for some time, but eventually there is little doubt
that it will be an important one in the colony.
Fisheries.
Scarcely any country is better supplied by Nature with
fish than New Zealand, yet it can hardly be said that the
fishery industry is established on a satisfactory basis, TheTe
is a very large importation of preserved fish into the colony
both from America and England. In 1884 we imported dried,
pickled, and salted fish to the.value of £8,613, and potted and
preserved fish to the value of £42,473. The duty on the
former is 2s. per cwt., and on the latter. Id. per lb. Our export
of New Zealand fish in 1884 was insignificant, reaching only a
total of £299. Yet frozen fish have been successfully carried
to London, and great hopes were raised that a market might be


found there. If it he true that all the weight and influence-
which was brought to bear in establishing the Fisheries Exhibition
in London, and in endeavouring to break down the monopoly of
the London Fishmongers, extending over the whole kingdom,
was unsuccessful in effecting its object, then I fear we cannot
hope much from a fish trade with the United Kingdom. The
acclimatization of salmon has been many times attempted, with
partial success; hut the result so far'should not he discouraging.
The Secretary of the Auckland Acclimatization Society says,
“ From what is known of the habits of the Californian salmon
it is certain that the young fish make their way down to the sea
shortly after hatching, and remain in the sea or estuaries for
several years; sometimes, however, making short runs up the
rivers. They do not appear to he fit for reproduction until
about four years old, when they proceed up the rivers to deposit
their ova. From this it is obvious that for four years after
the hatching of the ova we could hardly expect to see much of
the fish. Again, although the fish hatched from seventy or a
hundred thousand ova might amount to a good round number,
yet, when we consider the enemies which, like the fry of all
fish, they would have to contend with, first in the fresh water
streams and later when they reached the sea, there can he no
doubt that the number spared to reach maturity would be small,
perhaps so small that they might proceed up a large river
without being observed. It must also be remembered that any
number of young fry might go down the river to the sea without
attracting much attention, as they would be confounded with
the whitebait and other small fish so common in our rivers.
But when the adult fish ascend the rivers then we may expect
to hear something of the salmon. Taking the breeding age of
the Californian salmon at four years, this would not be until
eight years after the importation of the ova. It is well to
mention that the facts relating to the importation of the British
salmon into Tasmania strongly corroborate this view. Salmon
ova were brough from Britain, hatched in a suitable establish-
ment on the Derwent Biver, and turned out into the stream.
For years nothing was heard of the fish, and most people
believed the introduction a complete failure. After the lapse of
ten years a few grilse were caught in the lower part of the
river. The next year they were abundant, and have been


steadily increasing ever since. Evidently the mature fish from
the original ova had passed up and down the river unnoticed,
and it was not until their progeny became mature that the fish
were observed.” There are, altogether, 192 different kinds of
fishes found in New Zealand waters, some of them very rare
and only described from single specimens. Of 140 species
enumerated by Dr. Hector, sixty-seven are peculiar to New
Zealand, seventy-five are common to the coast of Australia, ten
are found in New Zealand and other places but not in the
Australian seas.
The following is a list of the various kinds of fish found in
the New Zealand market, taken, with some remarks, from the
able work of the American Consul, Mr. Griffin, and from Dr.
Hector’s report : Hapuku, kahawai, red schnapper, schnapper,
tarakihi, trumpeter, moki, frost-fish, barracouta, horse mackarel,
trevally, kingfish, John-dory, boarfish, warehou, mackarel, rock
cod, gurnet, mullet, sea mullet, wrassy (spotty), butterfish,
haddock, red cod, whiting, ling, turbot, brill, flounder, sole,
garfish, grayling, smelt, hokopu, minnow, sand-eel, anchovy,
pilchard or sardine, sprat, eel (tuna), black-eel, conger-eel,
silver-eel, leather jacket, smooth-hound, stingaree, skate.
Of these fish, the hapuku is always a great favourite. It
bears a striking resemblance to the celebrated Murray cod, of
the rivers of Australia. The hapuku, however, never enters
fresh, water, but is a deep-sea fish, although often captured near
the coast. Its average weight is about 451 b. Specimens have
been caught weighing 1301 b. The head and shoulders are
described as being very delicious. The kahawai, often called
the native salmon, afford great sport to anglers. They some-
times weigh between 71b. and 81b.; but the meat is dry in the
large size. In the early stage of their growth they are spotted
like the trout. The schnapper is another very valuable fish. It
frequents shallow water, and is caught with hook and line. Its
average weight is from 41b. to 51b., in some parts running to
101 b. and 151 b. in weight. It is remarkable for its abrupt
profile, and the brilliant metallic lustre of its scales. The
trumpeter is the best flavoured of all the New Zealand fish,
and is very abundant. It is also found in Tasmania and
Victoria. The frost-fish is often met with in the market.
It is not obtained by fishing, but is found, after cold frosty


nights, cast up on the shore by the long roll of the ocean-
swell. The harracouta is so called from its resemblance
to the barracouta-pike of the tropical parts of the Atlantic.
There are three or four kinds of flat-fish, all of which are
of fine flavour. The patiki, one of these, is very common.
The Maoris spear them in clear shallow water. The flesh
is tender and delicious. There are some excellent fresh-
water fish, such as the upokororo (the Native name of the gray-
ling), the kokopu, the family of Galaxidse, Mangawai smelt, and
others. Dr. Hector, in his report on the food-fishes of New
Zealand, says of the kanae (.Mugil perusii) , grey mullet: “ This
mullet excels all other New Zealand fishes in richness, and is now
dried and smoked in large quantities for sale in Auckland, where
several extensive establishments also exist for tinning this fish.
In this form it is highly esteemed, rivalling the American dinned
salmon in the market.”
The Bill now before the House provides bonuses, namely, for
the first 200 tons weight of colonial cured and canned fish. Id. per
pound, and in respect of every extra ton over the first 200 tons, a
bonus of id. per pound. The Bill also provides for setting apart
land on the coast-line as sites for fishing-vallages; and for con-
ferring certain privileges upon persons entering into the fishing
industry. This Act passed, and is now law.
An excellent letter on the subject has just appeared in the
New Zealand Mail, from the pen of Mr. A. J. Rutherford, in
which he gives returns of the value of the United States fisheries,
as under: Oyster fishery, $13,439,000; cod fishery, $4,000,000;
Pacific salmon fishery, $3,300,000 ; whale fishery, $2,636,000 ;
Menhaden fishery, $2,117,000; Alaska, for seal, $1,541,000;
mackarel, $1,501,000.
Mr. J. McKenzie, who was commissioned by a Scotch firm
of merchants, states “ that he found plenty of firm, delicate fish
in the Firth of the Thames, near Auckland; northwards he found
schnapper, mullet, kahawai, and bream of fine quality. Kai-
para Harbour was swarming with the largest and finest mullet
in the world. On the coast-line between Kaipara Heads and
New Plymouth large shoals of schnapper, mullet, and kahawai
are to be found during some portions of the year. Off Kapiti
and Main, near Wellington, groper, mold, rock-cod, crayfish,
kelp-fish, and butter-fish were found. At Picton Sounds fish


were in teeming myriads. The most abundant fish is the Picton
herring, which is not a true herring, neither is it a true pilchard;
but it is a good fish, and adapted for tinning and curing; and, as it
is found here in immense quantities, it could be so cheaply pro-
cured that the export trade in this article alone should rival in
a few years the herring trade from the north of Scotland. Of
course, this fish, as well as the herring tribe, is migratory; but
fishermen would soon find out its habits, and follow it round
from station to station, as is done with the Scotch herring.
Groper, moki, ling, and crayfish were also found near to Cape
Farewell on the west side. From Martin’s Bay to Oamaru fish
was in such numerous shoals, in-shore and off-shore, that millions
of tons of fish could be caught yearly. It is simply a question
of proper appliances, and finding out the best and quickest modes
of catching the fish; for the fish are there in countless millions,
and natural harbours abound from Milford Sound to Oamaru.
The Sound swarms with blue cod, moki, trumpeter, rock-cod, and
crayfish; and off-shore are great quantities of ling and groper..
Ruapuke Isles, off Bluff Harbour,.in Foveaux Strait, swarms with
moki and trumpeter. Chasland’s Mistake, on the mainland,
commands splendid moki fishing-grounds, and also blue-cod,,
rock-cod, and trumpeter fishing. And here barracouta were
met with all the way northwards to off Oamaru; but off Cape
Saunders and Otago Heads seems to be a general gathering-
ground. The kinds of fishes that can be obtained in large
quantities cheaply and fit for export trade tinned, wet- and dry-
salted, and smoke-dried are —Picton herring, in Cook Strait;
groper, ling, barracouta, crayfish, cockles, flounders, trevally,
silver-fish, mullet, kelp-fish, gurnet, and about twenty other
varieties, including a kind of mackarel, abound on the coast of
both Islands; and tinning and curing factories would use all in
their season, if ever established. But the other kinds, along
with schnapper and large mullet of the North Island, are kinds
to make the large trade with; and no other country in the
world has such a variety, and distributed round its coasts so well.”
It is proposed to establish fishing stations at Pelorus Sound,
Queen Charlotte Sound, and Port Underwood; and certainly
no lack of consideration of the important subject of fisheries can
be attributed to the Government of the colony. Whether the
onsideration has taken a practical form is another matter.


Four species of oysters inhabit the coasts of New Zealand. Of
these, the most important is the common rock-oyster, confined
almost to the northern half of the North Island. These are
largely sent to the southern ports of the colony ; and the amount
consumed in the district of Auckland would probably not equal
that shipped to the southern districts. There have been several
Acts passed for the conservation of the oyster fisheries, from
1866 to 1874; but, while all deplore the reckless way the oyster-
grounds are depleted, no systematic endeavour has yet been
successfully made to regulate the taking of oysters.
Whaling was, in the early days, an important industry to the
colony ; but it has so decreased and given way to other branches,
and is so unlikely to be revived to any extent, that it does not
call for much notice. In 1871 the highest return for whalebone
and oil seems to have been reached, when £21,700 worth was
exported; in 1882 the value was £4,541; in 1884 it rose to
£7,414.
Whitebait is a delicious little fish, found in almost unlimited
quantities on the west coast of the Middle Island, and in some
rivers on the East Coast. It was at one time taken in such
profusion that it was used for manure. But this barbaric waste
has been stopped, and it is doubted whether the supply is not
diminishing. A good deal is sent away by steamers to people
residing in the North Island, and an attempt has been made to
preserve it, but not with any great success, so far as finding a
remunerative sale is concerned. No doubt much information
been collected by the Government upon this important sub-
ject of fisheries ; and it rests with them, or local governing
bodies, to stimulate enterprise by practical assistance, by aiding
in the importation of salmon and trout ova, and by providing
the necessary skill in promoting its preservation and development.
Mr. McKenzie says, in his report, “As a central station for
fish-curing and fish-tinning, Stewart Island seems to me to be
one of the most suitable places in the world. It commands the
best in-shore and off-shore fishing-grounds in the colony. Saw-
dust, the proper ingredient for smoking, can be obtained in
abundance, for taking it away. There is plenty of timber and
water. All that is wanted is population to supply the labour for
tinning and curing factories, and a market for the preserved and
-cured fish. If capital, aided by Government subsidy, will start


operations here, Stewart Island will he one of the wealthiest
provinces of the colony.”
Shipping and Trade.
Auckland takes the lead in shipping, and it is said that 140
men are regularly employed in the building of wooden steamers,
sailing vessels, and boats. The models or the Auckland-built
sailing vessels are very beautiful, and it is somewhat surprising
that the trade has not extended more than it has done. Welling-
ton has also done good work in building and reconstructing iron
steamers : the latest iron steamer built there is the “ Maitai,” a
credit to the colony. The kauri timber of Auckland is well
adapted for ship-building, notwithstanding its tendency to shrink
all ways after each dressing. There have been eighty-five
steamers, altogether, built in the colony, and, with few exceptions,
their machinery has been locally made. In 1884 the number of
sailing vessels cleared outwards coastwise was 5,316; tonnage,
343,339; crews, 18,667. Steamers, 11,595 ; tonnage, 2,583,383;
crews, 203,510: total vessels, 16,911; tonnage, 2,924,732 ; crews,
221,177. The inward clearances show almost the same figures.
In sailing vessels Auckland claims 2,253, and the next highest
in the list is Lyttelton, with 552 —showing clearly where the
sailing coasting trade chiefly lies. The magnificent vessels of
the Union Company and the New Zealand Shipping- Company
form fleets of which we have reason to be proud, and travellers
and globe-trotters asseverate that for comfort and efficiency they
are equal to any lines in the world. With a development of the
island trade, and possibly with federation and annexation, ship-
ping in New Zealand must come greatly to the front; and before
long it will be seen that Nature has made New Zealand supreme
as a maritime colony. An attempt was made last session (1885)
to give to our seamen votes, so that they might obtain special
representation in Parliament, but without success. This was
not from any want of sympathy with cither seamen or the ship-
ping interest, but from the inconveniences and possible dangers
which would arise from such a special qualification.
Before long we trust that ships from our colony will no
longer be confined to old beaten tracks, but will strike out for
ports now seldom or never visited by our ships. In so doing
they will extend the trade of our colony in a thousand various


ways, and draw together the threads which are required to com-
plete our commercial web. Attention has been lately called to
the Brazils. The New Zealand Shipping Company’s vessels are
now touching fortnightly at Bio, on their homeward voyage; and
by this means a footing might he secured for the Brazil and
West Indian trade. Here is a market where the purity of our
New Zealand textile fabrics, and the freshness and unadulterated
nature of our products would he appreciated; arid, with combina-
tion between manufacturer and shipping owner, we could land
our goods at a price that would safely compete with other foreign
shipments. At first the ship must be content with low freights,
but, the trade once established, profit to all would be the un-
doubted result. Within a voyage of twenty days we have
countries containing twenty millions of inhabitants, who are
ready to purchase woollen fabrics and clothing, hams, bacon,
cheese, and salt butter, frozen fresh butter, fish, game, fruits,
preserved fruits and jams, smoked fish, sauces, pickles, candles, and
soap, saddles, boots and uppers, colonial jewellery and greenstone
and kauri-gum ornaments, ropes, twine, coal, timber, doors,
sashes, and mouldings, paper, ornamental ironwork, carts and
drays, potatoes, flour, biscuits, colonial wines, bottled ales and
whiskey, pottery and tiles, cement, Mahurangi hydraulic lime,
colonial furniture and kauri joinery, hats, rabbit fur, &c. The
chief staples of Brazil are sugar, cotton, rum, molasses, coffee,
tobacco, and bullion. There are also native cloths, diamonds,
hammocks, pearls, cordage, preserved tropical fruits, and nuts.
There are vast possibilities from the introduction of raw cotton
into New Zealand, imperilling, perhaps, the purity of our woollen
fabrics, but bringing into existence the cotton manufacturer (see
paper by Mr. H. Cowper).
This matter of the trade with Brazil has already called forth
several capital papers; and it is sincerely hoped that the prac-
tical outcome will be a co-operative combination, in order that a
successful opening may be made. Then will the present numbers
of our ships and seamen be multiplied, and the demand outside
the colony for our goods will stimulate our own appreciation of
them. The danger to be avoided is local competition, which
may at the outset flood the selected market with New Zealand
goods, and' cause so discouraging a loss to the shippers as to pre-
vent a continuance of the experiment. This can be easily avoided


by the formation of a mercantile co-operation, or export shipping
company, which will he enabled to send out suitable selections,
and time the periods of the arrival of each. Something like
this has been begun in Canterbury, with fair success ; but the
movement might well be extended more vigorously than at
present. The Auckland merchants have obtained an exhaustive
report on the island trade; and, provided that the requisite
number of men will sacrifice a good deal of their energies at
first, and invest capital in it, there is no doubt that the requisite
opening will be found for the expansion of our trade. There is
not much fear of our merchants failing in this enterprise. The
time of development may seem long to those watching it, but in
the history of nations it will be seen phenomenally short. A
nation of traders we are sprung from : it is still in the blood;
and we cannot refuse to act up to instincts, even if we would.
There is at present every opportunity of our colony being able
to acquire Samoa, and buy out German interests for a com-
paratively small sum. This is one direction in which energy
must be shown in order to make our manufactures successful;
and, although unable to go fully into the question, it is looked
upon as being of the first importance. The Government must
be on the alert, and willing to expend the necessary funds at the
proper time, and the people must be ready to support and back
up the action of their rulers. Look at the possibilities with
regard to New Guinea. Annexation has been delayed for the
present. Germany is jealous again, but the fit will go off, and
a few dollars at the right time will probably settle the question.
But, putting aside the difficulties of annexation —which, from
a perusal of the parliamentary papers, appear to be great —and
the question of the rights of the natives, a great trade might be
developed with the present native possessors of that vast island.
They raise large quantities of tropical produce, and have shown
themselves willing to exchange their productions for European
goods. The products known to exist at present are spices,
camphor, gums, sandalwood, ebony, tobacco, sugar, vegetable
ivory ; besides which, birds of paradise, pearls, tortoiseshells, and
other exotic products are to be met with in abundance. There
is also evidence of the existence of gold, iron, tin, copper, and
other minerals. In the high lands of the interior are plains
suitable for breeding cattle and sheep. In exchange for this we


can give the New Guinea-ites all the products o£ civilization, of
which they will not he slow to learn the uses. We shall pro-
bably demoralize them to the extent of changing some of their
present vices to those known to ourselves ; but we may amelior
rate their condition in other respects.
While we have been busy at home it is but natural that we
have neglected to look much abroad; but the moment that we
can spare time from pressing home calls we should cast our eyes
far afield, and throw out our advance posts, to occupy before our
neighbours.
Towards Fiji we .have looked for some time with annexing
-eyes. In May this year the Imperial Government declared that
they would not entertain the idea; but even since then there are
tokens of modification of this view. Looking at the question
only in its commercial aspect, and as it affects the development
of New Zealand industries, its great importance is apparent.
Trade follows the flag, and annexation or federation will become
a more burning question than it is at present. The Fijians
themselves appear willing and more than willing to join New
Zealand; but there has been a feeling with the Home Govern-
ment to put the drag on her too-enterprising young ■ colonies,
and to interpose with difficulties, perhaps, to test their sincerity
and earnestness. I say nothing about federation with Australia
—it is too purely political; but the Fiji and other island trade it
is our right to secure, and, if we are in earnest in our endea-
vours to make ourselves a premier position as traders and
manufacturers, we must allow no rival to beat us in the race,
but must use all lawful means to secure the prize ourselves.
Our trade with Fiji is at present insignificant; it ought to be of
first importance. Let us trade with them in everything we deal
in. The time would soon come when articles of our own manu-
facture would take the lead.
Indian Trade. —The opportunity afforded by the Bombay
International Exhibition to introduce New Zealand meats and
clothing into India is not likely to be neglected. It is proposed
to open the Exhibition in Bombay in December, 1886. The
New Zealand woollen goods are at present not known. Their
lightness, warmness, and softness would recommend them; but
of course there would be fierce opposition from the traders in
established British stuffs, and price would be a difficulty until


the real value of the goods became known. The trade in frozen
meat would he confined to European consumers, as the natives
will not touch any kind of meat slaughtered or handled by
Europeans. Sir James Fergusson, writing from Bombay, says,
“ As a rule, the meat supplied in the market is poor compared
to Australian and New Zealand meat; but very good meat can
he obtained by the larger consumers, and generally that supplied
to Government House is little, if at all, inferior. A great many
Europeans would pay a somewhat higher price for a really good
article, say 6d. to 7d. per pound instead of 3d. or 4d. Some of
the Parsees would eat imported meat .” The Indian market is
more accessible for our woollens, then; and it is to be hoped that
the forthcoming . Indian and Colonial Exhibition, to be held in
London, will do something to open the trade, and that it will be
followed up by the Bombay Exhibition.
Industries for which the Raw Material is imported.
The fairest and best way of promoting the manufacture in
the colony of various kinds of merchantable commodities is by
admitting the raw material duty free. The Customs Act of
1882 provides that certain specified articles and materials (and
others, as may from time to time be specified by the Commission),
which are suited only for and are to be used and applied solely
in the fabrication of goods within the colony are admitted free.
In many cases this has been found to be sufficient to establish a
manufacture in the colony. For instance, in writing papers,
there are several firms in the colony supplying writing papers at
English prices, plus the freight and duty; and they are enabled
to do so because they can import “ writing paper of sizes not
less than the size known as demy, when in original wrappers
and with uncut edges, as it leaves the mill,” duty free ; and the
duty on manufactured paper is 15 per cent, ad valorem. Again,
bookbinders’ materials are admitted duty free. Indeed, the
following may be taken as a general list of manufacturers’
imports admitted free: Aerated-water makers’ material, con-
fectioners’ material, blindmakers’ material, bookbinders’ ma-
terial, bootmakers’ material, brassworkers’ material, brushmakers’
material, carriage-builders’ material, dairy utensils, ropemakers’
material, copperworkers’ material, cotton - clothiers’ material,
farm implements, hatters’ material, saddlers’ material, printers*


material, builders' (nearly all free) and contractors' material,
machinery for agricultural purposes, machinery for brick- and
tile-making; machinery for planing, punching, sawing, shearing,
turning, and quartz-crushing ; machinery for mills and looms,
machinery for steam vessels, machinery for wool- and hay-
pressing, manufacturing chemists’ material, painters’ material,
millers' material, shirtings in piece, workmen’s tools, staymakers'
material, tailors' trimmings, tinsmiths' material, upholsterers'
material, and zincworkers’ material.
The above list also points out pretty well what manufactures
are established in the colony, and most of these are progressing
fairly. Why perambulators should be admitted free,. seeing
that there are makers in the colony, I cannot explain, except it
is to encourage reproductiveness, and take off one of the many
burdens of the parents of the occupant of the perambulator.
But, with a long list of manufactures which can be made in the
colony, the difficulty is to get them known outside the particular
district in which they are made. Not long ago I was shown in
the South Island a couple of wooden tobacco-pipes made in
Auckland. These were of a very superior finish and make, and
the price was certainly not more than that of imported articles
of the same value. But it cost my friend 3s. 6d. for freight on
these two pipes, and I have not seen any others since, though
I have no doubt they are on sale in some parts. If the oppor-
tunity was taken at this Exhibition time, when people's attention
and sympathy are attracted to colonial industries, to vigorously
and systematically push the sale of colonial goods, by means
of travelling agents, who would combine many lines in their
commission, and who would perhaps imitate insurance agents,
and give entertaining and instructive lectures upon- the necessity
for the people supporting colonial industries, much might be
done. It is useless to expect importing houses to bother them-
selves with local manufactures; they may be neutral, but that
is as much as we can expect of them, inasmuch as it pays them
far better to import direct from large houses at Home rather
than to collect from local makers; while the endeavour to be
both maker and retailer in a simple shop or store will only be
successful as a demonstration of the possibility of making a
particular article in the colony, but will not establish it as an
industry.


Other Industries.
The manufacture of soap has been attended with success in
the colony, and has fairly driven out the imported article, except
in fancy kinds. Messrs. Kitchen and Son and Messrs. McLeod
are, I believe, the largest manufacturers in the colony; and the
exhibits of the former firm at the Melbourne, Christchurch, and
New Zealand • Industrial Exhibition have excited universal ad-
miration. The same outlet for production over home demand
is to be found, as for other manufactures, by looking after new
markets, as pointed out in the section on trade and shipping.
It is estimated that the value of the soap and candles produced
in the colony is about £120,000. In 1884 candles to the value
of £74,452 were imported, at a duty of lid. per pound. The
value of common soap imported was £1,836, and of fancy soap,
£3,696. We are hardly likely to reduce the quantity of im-
ported fancy soap materially, because those who use toilet soaps
will generally pay large prices for special brands, such as Pears,
Rimmel’s and other celebrated makers. With the manufacture
of soap and candles is connected the manufacture of sulphuric
acid and artificial manures. One by-product of the candle
industry finds a use, and a ready market in the woollen
factories engaged in making tweed, blankets, hosiery, &c.,
taking the place of the expensive oil of Gallipoli; while the
fatty acids from these factories is reconverted into stearine, fit
for soap- and candle-making. A further outcome from sul-
phuric acid and tallow might be the manufacture of glycerine,
with its possibilities in relation to dynamite, gas-meters, paper,
ink, leather, &c. The raw material for the manufacture of
sulphuric acid is plentiful within the colony, yet it is at present
brought from Victoria, though the value of the whole import
for 1884 only amounts to £157, and it is admitted free of duty.
The plant for its manufacture is said to be very expensive, and at
present it appears wisest to import it. The question put to Mr.
McLeod, to this effect, “Is there anything which can be done
by amendment of the law which would in any way further your
trade ?” was answered, “ I think not.” Mr. Kitchen’s evidence
before the Royal Commission of 1880 was that the candle duty
should remain as it is.
Biscuits. —The total value of plain and fancy biscuits im-
ported in 1884 was £I,OOO, so that it may fairly be said we


make our own biscuits. We also exported, during the same
year, five thousand pounds* worth, chiefly to Fiji and South Sea
Islands.
Beer . —We ought to do a larger export trade in beer than
we do; the climate and water of the colony is specially favour-
able to brewing, and our brewers can turn out an article equal
to any beer in the world. That they do not do so always, but
rather turn their attention to brewing cheap “ swipes,** is the-
fault of the conditions under which they brew. In 1884 we
exported 5,349 gallons of colonial draught ale, worth £535, and
a very small quantity of bottled beer. In that year we imported
bottled beer to the value of £80,715, at a duty of Is. 6d. per
gallon, and beer in bulk to the value of £4,701, at a duty of
Is. 3d. per gallon. The duty on colonial beer is 3d. per
gallon. Surely this must be an exception to what protective
duties would do. Yet the duty is not looked upon by the
Customs as a protective duty; for, if it had a prohibitive effect,
it would either have to be reduced for fiscal purposes, or a
corresponding increase placed upon colonial beer. There are
100 breweries and thirty-four separate malt-houses in the
colony, employing about six hundred men, and producing five
million gallons of beer annually. The hop-growing industry is
chiefly centred in Nelson and Marlborough, and a goodly
quantity is grown —how'much exactly it is impossible to say,
but the value of the hops imported in 1884 was £5,081; in
the year before it was £18,138, a very satisfactory decrease.
We exported in 1883 3,985 cwt. of hops, worth £62,861; in
1882, 704 cwt., worth £11,049.
Confectionery is largely made in the colony, and fully two-
thirds of the total consumed may be said to be of colonial
manufacture. In ten years the import of confectionery
decreased from £19,178 to £10,190; and this in the face of
a largely-increased population, and without the slightest ground
for supposing that the “ sweet-tooth ** of childhood, and of
many grown persons, has lost its keenness. In 1844 the value
of confectionery imported was £9,845, against £10,190 for
1883. The duty is 15 per cent, ad valorem.
Jam is now being made extensively in the colony, of good
quality, though some manufacturers are accused of mixing
pumpkin, turnip, and melons with their jam. Certainly jam


made in a certain .part of New Zealand, and much advertised,
is a very tasteless compound. Considering the splendid fruit
which can he grown in the colony, especially in the North, it is
strange that fruit-preserving has not taken a more prominent
place. Hobart Town jam has a good reputation in all the
colonies, and a large quantity is imported from there : half the
quantity which comes is from the United Kingdom. The value
of jam imported last year was £10,553, of which £6,094 came
from the United Kingdom and £3,409 from Tasmania. In
1883 the value im’ported altogether was £23,923, which tells a
favourable story of the development of the manufacture within
the colony. The duty is per lb.
Fruits. —Fruit-growing is an industry for which New Zea-
land is said to be singularly well adapted. Peaches, apricots,
nectarines, plums, melons, and grapes grow luxuriously in the
North Island; while apples, pears, and other fruit thrive
especially well in the Southern. Yet the retail price of fruit is
ridiculously high, and can only be accounted for by the high
price of labour, and the demand for a large profit on the part of
the retailer. All the reports seem to agree that fruit-growing
should prove highly remunerative; and all have to impliedly
admit that so far it is not on a satisfactory footing. What
is required is systematic cultivation, and proper business ar-
rangements for the disposal of the produce. An irregular
supply can never command a profitable market, and a few" failures
discourage the grower. Fresh fruit preserving, especially
peaches, by means of sealed cans, has been established at the
Thames; but the article produced cannot yet be said to vie with
that of such Californian firms as Cutting and Co,, consequently
it does not command the same price in the market.
In Aerated Waters and Cordials a large manufacture goes
on within the colony, there being seventy-nine factories,
employing 228 hands, with an invested capital of £66,900, and
making about 650,000 dozen of the various drinks coming under
the head of aerated waters and cordials. The value of the
aerated water imported in 1884 was £2,481. There is no duty,
presumably, because the import is chiefly made for the sake of
the bottles, which are retained and used by our manufacturers.
Linseed, Rape, Canary, and other Oil-producing Seeds. —The
growth of linseed would be of great value, and bonuses have


been offered for the manufacture of linseed oil. It should be a
very remunerative crop, as it takes less time from seed-time to
harvest than almost any other crop, and will grow thirty
bushels to the acre, on well-farmed land. Its price in London
varies from £2 16s. to £3 2s. per quarter, and it is principally
imported from Russia. The development of linseed cultivation
would lead to the establishment of mills for the production
of oil and the manufacture of paint and other oils, of which an
enormous value is annually imported. In 1884 143,989 gallons
of linseed oil, worth £16,869, was imported.
Paints. —A great manufacture of paints is possible to the
colony. New Zealand is rich in such requisites as manganese,
hematite, copper, ochres, silicates, and kauri gum. Hematite is
manufactured at the Thames and Nelson; and is largely used.
Our kauri gum comes back to us in the shape of varnish, and
might be made at home.
Mimosa Bark. —This is imported largely into the colony,
although it could be grown here upon any ordinary soil. There
is an unlimited demand for the article in Europe, and the price
is increasing. In Victoria mimosa plantations yield a net
return of £4 to £5 an acre. The best kinds to grow are the
Acacia decurrens , the Acacia pycuantha, and the Acacia saligna.
A valuable gum, which has become an article of export from
Australia, is obtained from these trees.
Quinine can be grown in open fern-tree gullies to the north
of the Auckland Isthmus; and large returns might be looked
for from a systematic and careful cultivation of this valuable
medicinal plant.
Opium could be grown with profit, and in Victoria careless
cultivation has resulted in a profit of £3O an acre. The kinds
recommended for this colony are Papaver somnifera and Alpha
glahratum. On ordinary soils the plant is of very easy cultivation.
It can be sown broadcast and thinned out, or sown in a seed-bed
and pricked out. Three or four days after the petals have
fallen the capsule is scored with a small knife, and the juice
that exudes is scraped off and formed into balls. This is the
whole process for preparing the product for market. The
Indian exports of opium alone are valued at £13,500,000. The
walue of Chinese-grown opium is fully equal to that of Indian.
Common Hemlock —Digitalis (Foxglove). —These plants are


naturalized in New Zealand, and could be grown as articles of
commerce.
Carroway. —This could be easily grown here. It is used in
cousiderable quantities. The same culture that suits common
parsley would suffice for the carroway.
Santonine (Worm Medicine), Henbane, Belladonna, Camphor,
Laurel and Sassafras Laurel, Liquorice, and Saffron. —These could
be all grown and manufactured in the colony. Henbane and
belladonna were introduced into Auckland some years ago, and did
very well in the gardens. They are of easy culture, especially
henbane, as it might be grown by the acre more easily than
turnips. The leaves, stems, and seeds of the plant are used.
Liquorice is cultivated in Nelson to a small extent. It belongs
to the pea family: its cultivation is simple : the root is the
portion used. Spanish liquorice is simply the inspissated sap of
the root.
Perfumes could be produced from flowers with great advan-
tage, the Oamaru district being admirably suited for the growth
of perfume flowers which are not affected by frosts, such as
lavender. I understand that the perfumes exhibited by Messrs.
Mason, of Auckland, and which make an elegant appearance, are
manufactured from perfumes imported in fat, and distilled in
Auckland.
Peruvian Bark (Cinchona Officinalis) could be cultivated in
parts of the Auckland Province, and should prove highly
remunerative. Some very valuable papers have been written by
Mr, Thomas Kirk, F.L.S., on this subject, and on the economic
plants which might be cultivated in this colony, from which I
have drawn information. Mr. Kirk gives a considerable list of
drug-yielding plants suitable for local cultivation, the perusal of
which would afford valuable hints to those desiring to add to
their profitable crops.
Wattle Bark might be produced with profit in this colony.
The wattle flourishes on poor land, and might be grown exten-
sively. The age at which the trees may be stripped with the
best advantage has been determined at from five to ten years.
The three species from which the bark is derived are the Acacia
pycuantha, or the broad-leaf golden-and-green wattle; the Acacia
decurrens, or black wattle; and the Acacia dealbata, or silver
wattle. The first-named is superior to any other, but is


smaller and of slower growth than the black and silver species.
The silver wattle is not used generally ’for tanning purposes.
The black wattle is of vigorous, robust habit, and for commer-
cial purposes is equal to the broad-leaf. The wood of the
wattle is of considerable value for cask-staves, axle-spokes, axe-
and pick-handles, and many other articles requiring wood of
tough, durable grain. It makes the best firewood for ovens and
furnaces. It is also good for fencing-rails. A good profit may
also be derived from the sale of the gum which exudes from the
trees. The seed can be purchased at 10s. per lb. On loose,
sandy soil it can be sown broadcast; on hard soils a plough-
furrow should be made, at intervals of sft. to 6ft.
Cement. —In 1884 we imported 68,510 barrels of cement,
worth £38,708, with a duty of Is. per barrel. In 1883 the
value was £68,837, not including damaged cement, on which no
duty was paid. There is a satisfactory decrease in these figures,
and points to the use of Mahurangi lime and other equivalents
for Portland cement. Messrs. Wilson and Co., of Mahurangi,
have now eighteen kilns at work, and are able to turn out
300,000 bushels per annum. They say the supply of raw mate-
rial is unlimited, and the works can be increased to any extent
required, and that they ask no bonus, no protection; but
simply that the Government will give them some practical
assistance by using their lime in all public works for which it
may be adapted. It is now admitted on Government works,
and is used extensively by private firms. There seems to be
good ground for saying that there are large deposits of lime-
stone throughout the colony. On the west coast of the Middle
Island it is found very extensively, though not of first-class
quality. At Timaru, Oxford, Selwyn, Dunedin, Thames, and
other places limestone and chalk are found, and on a small
scale lime-burning goes on. So far, the Mahurangi ground
hydraulic lime is almost the only Colonial lime fairly in the
market, except that which is locally produced for local consump-
tion.
Fungus. —This curious article of export deserves passing
notice. The export has risen from fifty-eight tons, value £1,927,
in 1873, to 400 tons, value £18,939, in 1882. The whole sup-
ply is sent to China by way of the Hawaiian Islands or San
Francisco. Only one kind is used—namely, that known as


Himeola polytricha, easily distinguished from other fungi by
its greyish colour outside and reddish-brown interior when
dried.
Rabbit - skins. —One of the greatest pests known in the
colony —the rabbits —produce an article of export which deserves
a place in our list. In 1883 the value of rabbit-skins exported
by us was £88,725. Granted that the colony would willingly
be without a single rabbit, these figures mean employment for
many men. In 1883 the value was £100,955 ; in 1884 it was
£107,514.
Pottery, Earthenware, Patent Bricks, Tiles, Brain-pipes, Fire-
bricks. —This industry is well-established, and the exhibits in
this department at the Exhibition were among the most interest-
ing. Considerable artistic taste has already been shown, but
improvement in this respect can be almost boundless. Filters,
ornamental jars, tea-pots, flower-pots, cisterns, and mosaic tiles
are all exhibited, besides abundance of drain-pipes and coarser
wares. Considering the heavy freight on these goods, and the
danger of breakage in transit, the colony ought to produce all its
own earthenware. Until my visit to the Exhibition I had no
knowledge that such things were to be procured of colonial
manufacture, and I have no doubt many others were equally
ignorant.
The workings in metal were especially noticeable, Messrs.
A. and J. Burt's and Messrs. Scott Brothers' exhibits being most
attractive. There is a good trade being done now in iron and
brass workings, as well as in machinery generally; and in all the
large cities there are foundries which reflect credit upon the
owners, and are rapidly expanding with an increasing trade. But
the complaint is general that the Government railway workshops
compete unfairly with private enterprise.
Carriage-making appears to be making good head-way ; and,
with improved roads and increasing wealth and business develop-
ment, the trade in carriage-making should prosper exceedingly.
The specimens at the Exhibition seemed to be admirable examples
of the carriage-builder's art. Wagonette, sulky, spring-trap, and
double and single buggy were really equal to anything I have seen
in the same lines. Whether the price was also able to compete
with foreign makers I was unable learn. Why railway carriages
should not be now constructed in the colony is a question which


I hope will be answered by encouraging the manufacture of them
here at once.
Paper-making has been established, and rough papers are
exhibited. The total value of paper imported was £112,000.
Of course much of this will continue to be imported for a long
while; but there is printing paper imported to the value of
£63,000 which might well be made in the colony, although the
fact of its being admitted duty free will militate against the
colonial industry being successfully carried on.
Glass. —Two or three glassworks are already established, and
make bottles, lamp-glasses, chimneys, &c. The raw material for
glass-making abounds, but it has, so far, been found more profit-
able to collect broken glass for re-smelting. I did not notice
any exhibit of glass at the Exhibition, but a company has re-
cently been started at Kaiapoi for the manufacture of glass.
The import of glass for 1884 is as under: Bottles, £7,020;
plate, £5,268; window, £14,204; glassware, £13,203.
Marble , Slate. —Marble is shown at the Exhibition from
Caswell Sound Quarry; and, though it cannot be said to be as
fine as Parian, it seems a fairly marketable commodity. Con-
siderable expense has been gone to by the company, and it is to
be hoped that the trade will develop into a large and successful
one. Slate is to be found in the Kakanui Range, but lam not
aware that it has yet been utilized, nor what prospects there are
of successfully producing roofing-slates within the colony.
Iron. —So far iron smelting has not been successful, though
large sums have been spent, and vast deposits of iron ores exist
in the colony. There are very extensive works at Onchunga,
but it is too soon to speak positively about them. A large quan-
tity of hematite paint is manufactured from the Parapara hema-
tite ore, and is the most approved paint for covering iron build-
ings with.
Petroleum. —There seems to be good hope that, before long,
this most useful article will be found in payable quantities. In
Gisborne works have been going steadily on for a long time;
and, though so far no signal success has been met with, there
still appears to be good prospect of the shareholders “ striking
ile” to their own and the colony’s advantage.
Lengthy as is the list given and treated of above, it does not
cover nearly all the ground that might be gone over, as will be


seen on reference to the catalogue on the following pages. Taken
together the pages written should serve to show the multiplicity
of the industries which are already started and doing fairly well,
and only require wholesome support and encouragement to further
develop themselves. If the result of the Exhibition and this
contest of essays incites to a study of the question of our indus-
tries generally, and to a strong desire to further them by using
our own productions as much as possible, a great end will have
been achieved and great good must result.
Some noticeable branches of colonial manufactures, „ well
established, and easily procurable in the colony by those who
know where to send for the article required—taken from inspec-
tion at the Exhibition, and notes made thereat : Woodware of all
kinds, wickerware, turnery; wooden pipes, holders, &c.; con-
fectioners’ and carvers’ and gilders’ moulds; veneers, coopers’
ware, billiard balls ; medicines, and druggists’ goods; pottery—
ornamental and otherwise, coal; brasswork and ironwork, pre-
served meat, tallow, neatsfoot oil and trotter oil, lime; soap—
common and toilet; candles and oil-cake, blacking, hematite
paint, glue, leather of all kinds, bonedust and artificial manures,
barbed wire and fixings, farm implements generally of all kinds,
cooking-ranges and stoves, steam-engines and pumps; tin-, gal-
vanized, and japanned ware; safes, machine tools, furniture of all
kinds, bookbinding and engraving, lithography, wrapping paper,
cardboard boxes, violin strings, carriages, buggies, carts, sulkies,
&c., harness and leather-work, bricks, lime, cement, rope and
cordage, woollen fabrics of all kinds, yarns, boots and shoes,
wigs, clothing, taxidermists’ goods, jewellery; flour, oatmeal,
barley, peas, seeds, and cereals; malt, hops, ham and bacon,
biscuits, confectionery; preserved fish, soup, and meats; pre-
served fruits and jams; sauces, aerated waters, beer, coffee, and
spices.
Industries Generally.
In an address to the New Zealand Manufacturers Associa-
tion the lecturer points out that, taking our imports roughly at
six millions, one and a half millions is for articles which could
be produced in New Zealand by merely extending the industries
already in existence —that is, for articles which we make our-
selves, but do not make enough of; one and a half millions is.


for articles that could readily be produced by establishing new
industries the conditions for which are favourable; one million,
for articles that could be produced when the resources of the
colony are fully developed; and two millions for the products of
tropical countries, and manufactures, which there is no chance of
superseding by local supplies. It is thus possible to produce
and make three-fourths of the goods we buy from other coun-
tries. Now, if the people of the colony were fully employed as
it is, it would be plain that no anxiety need be felt because of
this neglect to produce all we might; it would be merely proof
that we were otherwise so profitably engaged that we had not
time to grow these things for ourselves, and could, with less
labour than it takes to produce them, produce other articles
which, being intrinsically more valuable, will more than pay for
them just as a skilled labourer or professional man can by his
earnings command the labour of several or perhaps many other
lesser skilled men. But, unfortunately, we are not all so
profitably employed: there is distress among agriculturists,
palpably because they are not growing that which will pay them
Best; there is dullness in building, because unless there is
constant progress in trade building naturally languishes.
Manufactures make cities, wool and corn make lords and
labourers. Much as we love our Mother-country, we are not to
take for gospel all her doctrines of free-trade and open ports.
Grow wool, grain, and meat for us, and we will send you our
manufactures in return !” they cry, in a burst of patriotic and
liberal generosity. What could be a fairer exchange than this ?
But we say, “ No, though the higher aim may be more difficult at
first, and may not be so clear in Cobden-like logic, we prefer
the task of creating a compact nation in ourselves, a hetero-
geneous whole, which will have a more glorious and in the end
more protecting influence than the arcadian simplicity you
so strongly recommend.” The discussion on federation has
done much to open our eyes to our real position among the
colonies, and to the really good work that has been done
amongst us, and the openings already made in various industries ;
but, above all, to the natural advantages we possess from our
insular position; and how, if we only push on, we shall be able to
carry trade ahead of other colonies or nations, not by unfairly
driving them out of what legitimately belongs to them, but by


simply appropriating to ourselves that work whicli we can best
do, leaving to others that which is best suited to them. In all
history, has there ever been a great undertaking carried through
without some checks or disasters at first ? Britons are no-
torious for requiring a reverse to stimulate them to victory,
and refuse to know when they ought to acknowledge a defeat,
and so turn many a disaster into a success. The saddest of all
sights has been when Britons have divided among themselves
in face of a rival or foe ; and this was conspicuously the case
when the Auckland merchants were competing for the island
trade against the German connection. Combination amongst
themselves would have carried them through easily ; but local
rivalries prevented this occurring : and, though satisfactory pro-
gress is being made in this trade, the struggle for supremacy is
prolonged, when it might have been over and the game jn our
own hands. Many of our industries are now being worked by
joint-stock companies satisfactorily; but the institution of a
joint stock company is always a delicate operation : if any icy
breath comes upon it when in swaddling clothes it is either
killed or rendered sickly, and will have from the beginning the
seeds of decline in its constitution. If the fates are propitious
it has to meet, then, the attacks of the speculator, the fluctua-
tions of the market, the criticisms of the public, or, perhaps
more fatal than all, the overwhelming confidence of the public
in sending its shares to a premium, then the risks of infcrioi
management, the changes of management, until at last it either
succumbs, or else grows so strong as to resist all such attacks,
to become a great institution, wielding perhaps political power,
or, what is in the end much the same thing, believed to wield
political power, with only wealthy men on its proprietary, and
consequently no longer in any true sense a co-operative associa-
tion, making it a still harder task for the next company in the
same line to blossom into life and arrive at maturity.
On the other hand the private manufacturer has to contend
against insufficiency of capital, trade jealousy, and, above these,
with the difficulty of getting his goods into the market. A
general trader finds it inconvenient to trade with Auckland for
sugar, cement, or hardware, with Dunedin for woollen fabrics,
with Wellington for preserved meat; and still more inconvenient
to deal with A, a small maker of tinware; B, a small brush-


maker; and soon. The temptation is to give as large a general
order as possible to the representative of an importing house,
who can supply many hundred different lines on one invoice.
For instance, a man would be likely to buy Portland cement
from a local merchant, rather than incur the delay of sending
for Mahurangi lime ; but if there was a local agent for the lime
he might exercise a free choice. The New Zealand Clothing
Factory are setting the example of opening retail shops for the
sale of their goods in almost every town in the colony, and
success appears to be attending the experiment. Should the
woollen factories do likewise a great step will be obtained. As
communication becomes more and more cheap, regular, and
•expeditious, so will interprovincial trade increase; and the
admirably-conducted weekly journals published in the chief
towns are doing much to promote interchange in trade, and to
•encourage and foster the development of colonial industry,
and nearly every week there appears the material for a prize
essay on one or more branches of the subject. What they are
unable, however, to do is to find the capital for the manu-
facturer or the roads for the agriculturist : the first must be
found by combination, the second by the Government of the
•country.
Education.
We are now spending half a million a year on education,
and he is a bold politician who would dare to advocate a
reduction. This is the one sure and certain thing the working-
classes have in return for their taxation; and how they value it
may be tested by proposing a reduction of the vote. “ Education
—free, secular, and compulsory ” is the system which, after many
a fierce conflict, has obtained the support of the many. That
some of our fellow-colonists are conscientious enough to refuse
to avail themselves of State education, on religious grounds is
no objection to the system, though it does credit to those who
are willing to pay twice in order to avoid a compromise with
their religious convictions. We arc training up a generation of
thinkers, and we may be certain that a large percentage will be
able to show that the opportunities afforded have enabled their
natural ability to shine out beyond their fellows. This uni-
versal education will* undoubtedly tend to make mere unskilled
labour scarce; for it must be the veriest dullard in the school-


class who will be content with a labourer’s lot. Here, then, is
another reason for providing industries requiring intelligence, if
we wish to keep our youths in the colony. The industrial
'exhibition has shown admirable examples of inventive and
mechanical skill among our young people, and this should be
•encouraged in every possible way, so that we may rival the
unique faculty of the Americans for labour-saving inventions.
I do not -pretend that America can claim the palm for scientific
•discovery or invention, or for artistic skill; but for mechanical
appliances, for neatness of workmanship, for elegance in com-
mon working tools she has shown the way to all others. And
what are the characteristics that have tended to produce this ?
General education, quickness of perception, the apprehension of
the situation that, where labour is deal-, the most that can be
got from an implement is the thing to be desired; and the
result is that, in tools and implements, the American models
stand as things of beauty alongside the uncouth British articles
with which people have been content for generations. It is true
the British manufacturer has not been slow in noticing and
••copying what his American competitor has done, but the ciedit
belongs to the Yankee.
This, then, is the function of education —to diffuse cultivated
intelligence among the masses, so that genius, wherever found,
may have its fair chance. The present system may be supple-
mented more than it is, by instruction in the principles of
mechanics and physics, and by paying particular attention to
directing the pupils’ minds to the study of what has been done
before in the way of inventions, arts, and industries; by demand-
ing higher and higher qualifications for the teachers : until the
industry of education —which is already highly remunerated in
•comparison to what it was a few years ago —shall rank among
the most elevated occupations in the land.
That nation is in no danger of falling to the rearward
which is constantly examining itself, and comparing its progress
with that of others, A nation of grumblers is generally a
nation of progress. We grumble, but we also exult. “Well,
what do you think of the Exhibition?” said Ito a friend. “ I
am proud,” said he, “to belong to a colony that can produce
such a display of its own industry.” The remark was not,
perhaps, original —I had heard something like it a good many


times ; —so much the better. The more that feeling is diffused
the nearer has the attainment of the object of the Exhibition
been achieved. Let it be known that three years hence a still
grander Exhibition will be held, and if the colony paid the whole
expenses it would have a good bargain in the result. The
credit gained now by our youths will incite scores of others to
work and to give their wits fair play. The knowledge of what
can be done in the colony will secure customers by the hundred
to our manufacturers —a livelier feeling of what is due by our-
selves to ourselves will be, as it has been already, engendered.
The present enterprise excites more national feeling than
previous Exhibitions, especially more than those adventured by
private speculators —though all thanks to those private persons
who taught us a practical lesson in the art of Exhibition-holding !
The profit to exhibitors is not so direct as where they can sell
their goods while on exhibit, but it is none the less sure. We
shall be none the more inclined to put up with poor work
because it is colonial, but we shall more eagerly seek for excel-
lence in the colony, and gladly be consumers of colonial pro-
ducts in preference to those imported but which possess a
greater intrinsic merit.
A humble suggestion may here be made that a complete
catalogue should be printed in large quantities, showing the
exhibits, and the judgment passed upon them, the names of
exhibitors, and their addresses ; and that these catalogues should
be distributed throughout the colony, and circulated as largely
as possible. This would enable the good effect of the Exhibition
to be sustained as long as possible, and probably it would then
endure until the time came round for another gathering together
of industries. The catalogue should be bound as serviceably as
circumstances permitted, and a price fixed which, while securing
the Committee from loss, should be low enough to secure a wide
demand. Thousands who have been unable to leave their homes
would gladly purchase these catalogues, and would avail them-
selves of the information afforded to aid as far as they could
New Zealand industries by purchasing within the colony. People
will not buy inferior articles at a high price because they arc
colonial ; but, all other things being equal, I have still faith
enough in my fellow-colonists to believe that they will give their
own country the preference.


Conclusion.
I part with this essay with reluctance, conscious of many
defects, and feeling how much better it might have been, con-
sidering the greatness of the subject. It is, however, some
satisfaction to find, in looking over the pages written, and com-
paring them with the remarks of His Excellency the Governor
at the closing of the Exhibition, that the same idea is conveyed
throughout—namely, that not in sudden, desperate efforts to
achieve a position as a great manufacturing country, hut rather
in a constant pressing onward, is the desired end to he achieved ;
and that the retrospect of the last twenty years gives us the
/greatest possible encouragement for the future.
Let us, then, be up and doing,
With a heart for any fate;
Still achieving, still pursuing,
Learn to labour and to wait.


Gold.
Quantity.
Value
Oz.
£
10,436
40,442
13,583
52,443
7,336
28,427
4,538
17,585
194,234
752,657
410,862
1,591,389
628,450
2,431,723
480,171
1,857,847
574,574
2,226,474
735,376
2,844,517
686,753
2,700,275
637,474
2,504,326
614,281
2,362,995
544,880
2,157,585
730,029
2,787,520
1,730,992
445,370
505,337
1,987,425
376,388
1,505,331
355,322
1,407,770
318,367
1,268,559
366,955
1,476,312
311,437
1,244,190
284,100
1,134,641
303,215
1,220,263
996,867
250,683
230,893
921,664
222,899
892,445 |
. I iiliiiiisi§iSiiSSssilsSS3p.s|ii
| I -SS3SS3S35BiiSS3i gg§239lBl§SSS8S
5 O *o*o*'*'#'#** Co'oOQOCOOQOQOCOt-COt-
H - _
s‘s *■§ | §§SS§S S ” S o 8 S9S 3£"SS So rn * ■* ** « «« .
o 2-5.2 t> ««coo io oo oico rH oTaToo cq o coco ofco o S 3 |2 SE £S£§o o o S
ftfc« z ' , 3 cq cd in co co cq m>o oocnt-egotht-ot-ot-® t- co to o to o «g
« « © ts h o i h t
® 2 N o h ■# >o o’a o« 0000 o o o
sii”
Q CO JO CM 05 OOSOCOO O CO CO CO
43 OJ.h O £ Caj r-T p-T (-a rQ cOiOOO'MHCOHO)‘O^Ot>CS>OCO^)CO^Ob-OCCO'^jOOO
Sjp« £ O * O ® co SSSS«JoSSSoSSS3J3IoS>o
5".2 £ I-I rH rH rH 1-1 Cq
?r !> O • . '
i _u —u —j (“I pti cO r— l CD t> I> O O Ol rH CO t> rH CO t— CO CO CO rH CO O O L— CO 05 O
£§3gS§£S§BS§S§S33S£§ aSSS S S S S Sl£ BJI
"a a ■*3 ssa®®asBsgesag g § 8 e s s s s g || s |
h
S
d
M
|
O
’-+-»
a
a
0
o*
,o)OoOHOOfflonooot;owooHM|Hcomo®MOMwoMffl
aSc«3SmoomH°«SSo oSMOoocowNffl^o^®^^ 1 -!
§ rJ rH Cq i-T CT rH rH rH Cq~ rH CM~ Cq~ of Cq~ -# 0~ rH of ffT CO Cq~ CO CO CO hH OVS CO
. I cOCOH^O^COOmHHOOOOhO^HOgO^OOHL-OIOH
a § I SSSJgEIgSS^SS^^SSaSSSSgiS^SSSfeSSSS
•a I I *** *** '•*!B§fBBSS;SSSS fc -SSB^S
J-< • 1 rH
o
£
©
G
©
o
*3
c
H
Ph
| I _ij | f*o r*f\ o*\ t'. co tH CO tH CO JO ' CO Ot*COCl lO x)l CO CO
£ 3 ; Sg§^2Sg!Bg§SSS3SBSS
cs I § 2 * oq~ o rjT cc (D cq >h rn cn cq
S a
m I O* !
t-CCH(OC)(MOIINOOtDIOI>H«CO®OH]H[2iiSir2Som§SnH
'. —i Ir- N- rvi hr— CT) CM CM G 5 Ot) CO ‘O O CO -Hi tH L- kjj 1.. tH CO 0-5 CO j -J ' '
SSrH to wwro rH c» hh orH <» co hh cSj^t
3 Pf -. >—v ff-\ pQ _ij (-r\ (-T) o O t-H OCOrHCO CO t' - CO OCOOICOOS 05 CO
£SH?oSSS?COt-SSoDHL-OOMOCCOSOS iOCS 0100HH
° L a:, CO OO<W L- O 00 <W CD CN rH tH 05^
rH rH rH rH rH~ rH rH oT CM'GI COCOCOCOCOCOOICOCO
wT
&
o
Pi
X
W
o
p ntnHmGtMHOOiOOOOOCDCOGCOHL'i.CiOO^^OOOqt'O
> . 22325h-KSrQSffISoi>COCOCOCOCOOSCCCOHJO(MOHOHC>CO
r >• S^SSSwSSSSSSS&oP^SI-eRrHL-O^WCTeOrHWt--#
. • ■_u pq prs rf\ CO IO JO 05 IO rH C**? CO Ol lO JO 05 CO CO JO CO rH CO rH (O 05 <0 JO 03 0^
A PdSSSSSScnInSffiSSHJOL-CDCOOSGOCOHOiOCOL'CMOH(NH
aJ
ry _T _JHoio3COiOCOL^OSC3CDOSC : 3b-COL'“I>L^HHCDHCS'HOSi^OCSJ.OCO
u' U HHHcqcqcQcqcoco^H^oioooc)Oioco
CO ,^1
K~s w-s cO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO L"~ I.'* L'~ b 4 L"- b* L'" L''“ L''* 1 ■-O CO CO CO
(X) CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CD CO CO CO CO CD CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO (O <o CO co
Shhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh tHtH hhh
o
I*
r-H rH


BRITISH AND FOREIGN VESSELS ENTERED AND CLEARED.
Return showing the Number, Tonnage, and Crews of Vessels entered and cleared at New Zealand Ports during the Year 1884.
Entered.
Nationality of
Vessels.
With Cargoes.
In Ballast.
Totals.
Totals for 1883. 12
H
Vessels.
Tons.
Crews.
Vessels.
Tons.
Crews.
Vessels.
Tons.
Crews.
Vessels.
Tons.
Crews. N
H
British ..
Foreign
Totals
749
52
480,181
36,041
18,698
1,531
50
1
12,881
85
481
7
799
53
493,062
36,126
19,179
1,538
727
78
435,037
69,889
16,173 £
2,212 2
W
. 801
516,222
20,229
51
12,966 : 488
1
852
529,188
20,717
805
494,926
18,385 g
to
m
H
ts
Cleared. g
British ..
Foreign ..
Totals
721
44
456,464
30,065
18,051 92
1,468 15
40,594 | 1,066
7,119 152
813
59
497,058
37,184
19,117
1,620
770
81
445,827
61,738
16,070
2,221
765
486,529
19,519
107
47,713
1,218
872
534,242
20,737
851
507,565
18,291


Table showing the Value of the Imports and Exports of the Colony
and to each of the under-mentioned places during the year 1884.*
Country, Place, &c.
Imports.
■Exports.
United Kingdom
Australia ..
4,934,493
5,158,078
1,572,987
1,555,304
Tasmania..
80,458
100,181
18,537
90,070
Pacific Islands
United States —
East Coast
West Coast
300,181
48,372
183,939
30,430
Brazil
China
282,897
13,765
India
73,467
257,670
26,024
Mauritius..
3,850
Europe
* Insignificant figures are omitted.


THE PRESENT CONDITION AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
OP THE
INDUSTRIAL RESOURCES OF NEW ZEALAND,
AND THE
BEST MEANS OF FOSTERING THEIR DEVELOPMENT.
AN ESSAY; BY GEORGE ROBERT HART.
“Nunquam dormio.”
In dealing with the subject selected for the essay I take it that
the condition relative to the present position of the industrial
resources of the colony means that a brief review of the point
at which the .various principal industries of New Zealand have
arrived—as evidenced by the late Exhibition —will he con-
sidered sufficient. At any rate, I purpose dealing with it in
this way, as I feel that the matter of fostering the local indus-
tries now at work, and of encouraging those which may here-
after he developed, is by far the most important branch of the
subject to which the essayist can direct his attention in the
hope that good may result therefrom.
Viewed in this light, I will first refer to what cannot but
be regarded as the most important of all our industries—
namely, the conversion of the raw material of wool into the
manufactured articles. No doubt the mineral resources of the
country, and the manufactures arising therefrom, must be re-
garded as very important factors in the sum of prosperity of
the colony; hut still they are subsidiary to a large extent to
that industry which profitably absorbs so large a proportion of
our chief staple product.
Beginning in hut a small way, the woollen factories of
Kaiapoi, Mosgiel, and Roslyn have placed the industry to which


lam referring on almost the highest pinnacle of success. They
have not only opened up new avenues of employment for large
numbers of our people, mainly amongst those for whom it is
always difficult to obtain work —namely, our young people, but
they have also created what is most important, to the interests of
the colony as a whole —a local market, and demand for the wool
grown here. Prior to the establishment of these factories the
wool-grower had no other market for his produce but the Home
one, and thus the amount received in payment for his wool was
depreciated by the charges which he had to pay, and the fluctua-
tions of a market over which, to a large extent, he had no con-
trol ; besides which the expending power of the principal por-
tion of our producing population was curtailed by so much.
Now this is altered, and the result is due to the growth of the
industry under notice. The wool-grower now finds that he has
a local market open to him, capable of absorbing a fairly-ap-
preciable quantity of the raAV material; and he can obtain a full
price for his wool without incurring the various charges for
freight, insurance, &c., or the risk and delay of a long sea-
voyage.
With regard to the manufactured article produced by the
woollen companies, what I take to be the greatest test of the
present good position of the industry is the fact that not only
have they succeeded in almost entirely superseding the imported
article in the colony itself, but that a large and increasing trade
has sprung up in Australia for the products of the looms at
Kaiapoi and elsewhere. One branch of manufacture in which,
of late years, great advances have been made by our local wool-
len factories has been that of ready-made clothing. This has
developed into a most important item in the work of all the fac-
tories ; indeed it may be said that it now forms the most
important branch of local industry comprised under the head of
“ Woollen Manufactures/’ In the production of blankets, also,
the factories have made marked progress; so much so that their
products arc now inquired after all over the Australasian Colo-
nies, in preference to those manufactured in England or else-
where.
Let me here briefly, and without going into statistics too
deeply, trace the rise and progress of one of these factories- —
namely, that of the Kaiapoi Woollen Company. I select this


one, not from any desire to make invidious comparisons, but
because I can the more readily refer to the facts and figures,,
and also as the progress of this factory is typical of that of the
other two in the southern part of the colony. The comparison
of what was with what is, as having reference to the Kaiapoi
Woollen Factory, will enable a more satisfactory estimate to be-
arrived at as to the present position of this important industry
than would otherwise be the case. Starting, in 1875, with a
capital of =€20,000, the career of the company was commenced
under very favourable auspices, the bonus of £2,000 offered by
the Provincial Government for the encouragement of the woollen
industry being gained by it. Difficulties, however, were expe-
rienced, as in the early days of all industries, and in 1877 the
whole concern was sold for £7,000. In July, 1878, the present
company was formed, with a capital of £15,000, of which the
extension of operations has necessitated the increase to £IOO,OOO.
Since then its career has been most prosperous, as is shown by
the fact that, after paying in oite year no less a sum than
£30,000 for land, plant, and buildings, the company were
enabled to declare a dividend of 10 per cent, and carry forward
a substantial sum. As to the extent of the trade done, it may
be gathered from the fact that about B,ooolb. of washed wool,,
equal to 16,0001 b. of greasy, passes through the carding-room
every week. At the works at Kaiapoi 240 hands are regularly
employed; whilst at the clothing factory in Christchurch some
170 more are engaged, the latter being principally women and
girls. Almost every description of woollen goods, from the
coarsest to the finest, is produced in the mills; and many other
industries are dependent upon or have been stimulated by this
one.
Thus, I take it, the colony can be fairly congratulated upon
the progress made by its chief industry. All who saw the
magnificent display made at the Wellington Exhibition by the
three principal factories to which reference has been made will, I
am sure, agree with me in awarding the palm for importance to-
the woollen industries of New Zealand. Given the conditions
to which I will refer later on, and the future prospects of our
woollen industries must be such as to exercise a very important
influence on the future prosperity of the colony as a whole.
Next in order I come to the metal industries, and here


again we liave cause to indulge in what Mr. Anthony Trollope
designated as the colonial habit of “ blowing.” The present
position of this industry is an exceedingly satisfactory one.
We have seen that a colonial firm has been enabled to under-
take to supply locomotives for the Government railways, and
that in apother part of the colony iron ship-building has been
•carried out most creditably alike to the colony and the firm
undertaking the work. . The exhibit of the Public Works
Department in the Wellington Exhibition has shown to those
who have inspected it that our workers in metals in the colony
have been able to construct work in connection with the opening-
up of the country which would not disgrace the Old Country.
Reference may be made, in illustration of this, to the Rakaia
Gorge Bridge, the Wingatui Viaduct, and other works which
have been carried out under the supervision of the Public Works
Department. Viewed as typical exhibits of the metal indus-
tries of the colony, those sent to the Wellington Exhibition by
Messrs. Scott Bros,, of Christchurch, and Messrs. A. and T.
Burt, of Dunedin, are such as no country need be ashamed of.
Such work as this shows far more emphatically than I could
demonstrate in a dozen pages of manuscript what progress has
been made in the past in reference to this industry, and what
great results we may look for hereafter in the light of the ex-
perience which we have gained. Nearly every article exhibited
by these two firms—and, as I have said, I only select them as
being typical of others existing in the colony —would, some tew
years back, have had to be imported. In finish of the more
artistic or luxurious kind of work and general completeness
our colonial products under this head will fairly bear com-
parison with the manufactures of the older centres of in-
dustry in England. If this be so and there can be but
little doubt on the subject—then I think it may fairly be
assumed that the second of our principal industries must be
taken to have achieved success, and to be progressing onward
■satisfactorily.
In an important branch of this industry the advance made
in an almost incredibly short period has been most marked. I
refer to the production of agricultural implements, an industry
which is daily assuming very large proportions amongst us,
particularly in the southern part of New Zealand. It is not so


many years ago since a colonial plough, or indeed any agricul-
tural implement of importance, was almost unknown, or at any
rate unused, amongst the farmers of the colony. With that
true British conservatism which it is almost impossible to
uproot from the minds of the people, the agriculturists of that
period still clung with unfailing tenacity to the unwieldy
ploughs and harrows of their native land. The infant industry
had thus, as might be expected under the circumstances, a very
hard struggle ; but then the victory which has been gained since
has been all the more glorious. Now the good old-fashioned
imported implements are conspicuous by their absence from
nearly every farm in the country, and they have been replaced,
to the advantage of the farmers, by the manufactures of such
colonial firms of implement makers as Messrs. Reid and Gray,
P. and D. Duncan, Booth and Macdonald, Andrews and Beaven,
and others.
But it is not alone in the production of what I may term
the more common class of implements —those, I mean, in every-
day use —that our colonial manufacturers have beaten the
imported article. In the higher branches of the production of
agricultural machinery they are rapidly invading the territory
at one time exclusively occupied by the Home firms, and
gradually but surely forcing them out of the market. This is
the more noticeable in the production by a colonial firm—
Messrs. Reid and Gray, of Dunedin —of a reaper and binder
which has worthily held its own in the trials made as against
those manufactured in America and elsewhere. The impetus
which would be given to the local industry of the iron trade by
the coming into extensive use amongst our farmers of the
colonially-made reapers and binders in place of the imported it
is almost impossible to over-estimate; and, what is of still greater
importance, a very large sum of money which now annually
finds its way from the colonies to America would be retained
here and spent within our own borders.
Thus it appears to me that the present position of the
second of our staple local industries, though not what it ulti-
mately must become, is yet exceedingly satisfactory from two
points of view—(1.) That the growth of the industry in our
midst has provided employment for a large class of the com-
munity, and must, from the large field for expansion which is


before it, be the means in the future of affording still greater
facilities for the employment of labour. (2.) That it encourages
the settlement and cultivation of the country by affording tin*
agriculturist possessing only a small capital the opportunity of
acquiring the requisite implements, &c., at the cheapest rate,
and on the most favourable terms. As to the future of this very
important industry, there can be no doubt of it being a brigh,
and hopeful one.
The action taken by the Government with reference to the
more complete opening up and utilization of the vast coal
deposits on the west coast of the Middle Island by the im-
provement of the harbours will have a very great effect upon
the future of all local industries connected with the working of
metals, and, indeed, all industries of whatever kind, because
there is no department of human industry into which the use of
coal as a means of manufacture does not enter either in a direct
or indirect degree.
The industries which provide for the utilization of our timber
resources properly claim attention next, and it is most satis-
factory to be able to record that much progress has been made
therein. It is true that the vandalism which has used for the
fire and the commoner purposes of station requirements the
finest woods, perhaps, in the world for furniture and ornamental
purposes has to a very large extent decimated our forests ; but
the growth amongst us of industries which encourage the use of
our local timbers in the construction of the more elaborate and
■ornamental articles of furniture has put a stop to this practice.
The exhibits at the Wellington Exhibition of furniture and wood-
work from various parts of the colony, and more especially the
comprehensive exhibit of the Dunedin Woodware Company,
showed conclusively that our woods are well adapted for the
manufacture of the more luxurious articles of household furnish-
ing and adornment, as well as those in daily use. The whole
collection of exhibits at Wellington under the head of woodware
proved that great progress has been made in this as well as the
other departments of local industry which 1 have passed under
review. The importation of furniture from England, which at
one time used to be largely carried on, has now all but ceased,
the only exception being some stray consignments which now and
again find their way to the colony, but which, from the unre-


munerative nature of the returns, and the advance made by the
local industry, will no doubt ere long cease altogether. This
industry, from the very nature of things, is hound to make great
strides in the future.
With the institution of the direct steam service a new class
of addition to our population has come amongst us. The class
of assisted or free immigrants, who lauded with just enough
money to pay a few weeks’ rent until work was obtained, and in
some cases not even possessing that small amount of capital to
start with, has disappeared, and instead we are receiving as acces-
sions to our numbers persons who possess a moderate amount of
capital, and who are able and willing to expend some portion of
it in making their new homes attractive and comfortable. The
advent of this class must have the effect of -stimulating to a very
great extent the development of the industry of which I have
been speaking, and this development in its turn will re-act on
the general prosperity by the increased labour which will be
absorbed, and the consequent addition to the spending power of
the community.
The leather- and boot-manufacturing industry, from the
great progress made by it, naturally claims some degree of atten-
tion. The development in this industry has been remarkably
rapid, and large factories, employing an immense number of
hands, have sprung up like magic in the various centres of
population. The experiments which are in course of progress
to test the suitability of some of the barks of our native trees
for tanning purposes will, if successful, be the means of intro-
ducing a new branch of industry in connection with this one.
As to the manufactured article, the display made at the recent
Exhibition by Messrs. Lightband, Allan, and Co., the Northern
Hoot Factory, and others, most emphatically shows that in this
as well as in other departments our local industries can well
hold their own. The future of the industry under notice can-
not but be a most important one, as it supplies all our present
wants, and one which grows with the population. If the experi-
ments alluded to are found to answer, then a great reduction
in the cost of production of leather will be effected, and a con-
sequent lower price to the purchaser of the manufactured
article will no doubt follow. Whilst on the subject of leather,
it may be noted that a new industry has been developed recently


in connection therewith. I allude to the production, for the
first time in the colony, at the factory of Messrs. Bowron Bros.,
of Canterbury, of high - class furniture- and hook - binding
leathers. The finish of these is equal to anything that can be
imported, and the further development of this branch of manu-
facture cannot but have a very important bearing on the future
prospects of the leather industry as a whole.
I now come to an industry which is of immense importance
to the welfare of the community at large, but in respect to
which there is, I regret to say, not so much progress to note as
with regard to others. I allude to the mining industry. ’As I
shall have to refer more particularly to this question when deal-
ing with the best means of fostering and encoui aging the
development of our industrial resources, I will not do more than
glance at the salient points which present themselves when con-
sidering the matter. It seems to me that the mining industry
of the colony will, in the future, occupy somewhat the position
of the ugly duck in Hans Christian Andersen's fairy story; and
that, though we have treated it hitherto with a great deal of neg-
lect/ it will yet prove to be the means of largely increasing the
prosperity of the colony. Let me here explain that by mining
industry I do not mean the mere digging for gold, but rather
the development of those vast stores of mineral wealth which
are known to exist in various parts of the colony. It is tine,
as already noticed, that the Government have taken a most
important step in the right direction by making such improve-
ments in the coal harbours of the West Coast as will enable the
coal deposits there to be utilized to their fullest extent. There
can be no doubt that, when these Avorks are completed, the ex-
port of coal from New Zealand will be largely increased. As a
o-as coal there are few to surpass it. This has been conclu-
sively proved by a test recently instituted in comparison with
New South Wales coal. The production of gas per ton of the
New Zealand coal amounted to 11,928 ft.; whilst the same quan-
tity of Ncav South Wales coal only produced 9,000 ft. As a
steam coal also it will compare favourably with the best Welsh.
Thus it may be assumed that, so far as the production of coal
is concerned, this branch of industry is making fair progress,
and has before it an encouraging future. But when we turn
our attention to the vast natural resources of the colony, com-


prising as they do every mineral known to science, in greater
abundance than any other country in the world for its area,
how little, comparatively speaking, has been done, or is in course
of being done, towards their development and bringing into use-
ful manufacture. Some efforts, it is true, have been made; but
nothing of a thorough or complete kind. The result is that,
in relation to one of the most important of all industries, we are
sending money out of the colony for manufactures, when we have
the raw material in abundance within our own borders only
awaiting development. The future prospects of this industry
are bright in the extreme, if only we initiate and carry out a
vigorous and liberal policy of encouraging, by all means in our
power, the development of the undoubtedly rich mineral resources
of the colony.
Another industry which has grown up amongst us during the
past few years is that of the export of frozen meat. The natural
growth of our flocks pointed to the inevitable necessity, at no
distant date, for the provision of a market beyond our local ones,
and the discovery of the process now applied to the exportation
of frozen mutton to England supplied the means to that end.
The present condition of the industry, it is true, is not so bright
as could be wished; but, though this is so, it has supplied a means
for the disposal of our surplus stock which could not have been
so profitably supplied by any other industry. Boiling-down or pre-
serving would not have answered the purpose, neither would they
have insured such good pecuniary returns to the flockowners of the
colony. The future of the industry depends in a large measure
on the colonists themselves. If the present method of shipment
and distribution in England be continued then the flockowner
cannot expect to see any improvement on present prices, nor will
the demand increase, as it undoubtedly would if a different means
were adopted of dealing with the carcases after they reach their
destination. To enable the meat to reach the thousands of con-
sumers who will only be too glad to have the opportunity of
purchasing it, shops for the sale of New Zealand meat and
that alone will have to be established in the principal centres
of population throughout the United Kingdom. These once
established, with a kind of co-operative cold stores belonging to
the New Zealand shippers, and working in concert with the
shops, and the future success of this industry, which is destined


to have a most important effect on the welfare of the colony, is
assured. In considering this matter it must he remembered
that it is one of colonial and not individual interest, because the
success or failure of this industry means either, on the one hand,
a large addition to our resources, a new market for our surplus
produce, and an increase of our staple products, or, on the other,
a compulsory reliance upon the two staples of wool- and wheat-
growing—a reliance which the experience of the past two or three
years has shown to be without any very sure foundation. There-
fore, though perhaps not strictly coming under the head of what
are called popularly local industries, the exportation of frozen
meat —from the important part it is destined to play in the
development of our industrial resources by adding to the
general prosperity cannot be overlooked in an essay of this
character.
I have dealt specifically with all the industries which seem to
me to call for individual mention. Let me now briefly, before
touching upon the subject of the best means of fostering the
development of them, group together some which I think de-
serve at any rate a passing notice. One of these which has
during the past made great progress, and to a large extent sup-
planted the imported article, is the candle and soap manu-
facturing industry. A means of judging of what has been done
in regard to this industry was afforded by the exhibit of Messrs.
Kitchen and Co. at the recent Exhibition at Wellington. Those
who remember the very crude efforts which were made some
years ago in the direction of supplying the market with a better
class of candles, so as to do away with the necessity for sending
so large a sum of money annually out of the colony for the im-
ported article, will note what a stride has been made, to place the
industry in the position in which it now is. The colonial manu-
facturer is able to turn out an article quite equal to the best, if not
superior to some, of the second-class imported brands. All that
is wanted to open up for this industry in the future a large and
increasing field of operation is the dissipation from the minds of
the people the absurd notion that because an article is colonially
manufactured it must of necessity be of that description known
as “ cheap and nasty.” The demand in both branches of this
industry is exceedingly great, and once the colonial article can
obtain a footing—as from its quality and price it is bound to do


in the end—we may look for an extensive manufactory of these
articles growing up in our midst.
Another industry which has up to the present achieved a
very satisfactory position is that of the manufacture of pickles,
jams, and preserves. So rapid has been the success attendant
upon the establishment in various parts of the colony of local
manufactories, that the importation of these articles may be
said practically to have ceased. Only one obstacle at present
seems to stand in the way of the growth of the industry to a
magnitude yet undreamt of, and that is the difficulty of obtain-
ing the raw material in the shape of vegetables and small fruits.
It seems almost inconceivable, in a country like this, where
every cottager possesses a piece of garden ground of more or
less extent, even in close contiguity to our cities, that this diffi-
culty should exist; but the fact remains that it does do so.
Still, in spite of this drawback, the industry has made great
strides, and the article produced will bear favourable comparison,
alike in price and quality, with those imported. The present
position of it is this, that it affords remunerative employment
to a large number of persons; it has stimulated the bringing
into work of a new industry in the shape of glass-making, and
it will also be the means of inculcating on the small-cottager
class habits of industry by offering a ready and remunerative
market for the produce of their gardens. In the future, when
these advantages come to be better understood and more fully
recognized and taken advantage of by the people as a whole,
there can be no doubt this will be a most important industry,
and one which will have a very marked effect upon the mass of
the people for good in the direction I have indicated.
The pottery and clay-goods industry is another in which
marked progress has been made, and the position of which is
now such as to cause a feeling of satisfaction. This result has
been aided materially, I may note, by the well-timed liberality of
the Minister for Public Works, who has reduced the rates of
carriage on the lines between the potteries and the market.
Nor alone has the industry achieved a good position as regards
the commoner class of goods, such as drain-pipes, flower-pots,
&c.; but in the more ornamental branches a marked degree of
excellence is displayed. This is especially notable in the
production recently by some of the colonial potteries of high-


class plaques, suitable for artistic flower- or figure-painting of
the best description, and of which experts speak • highly, as
equal to any which could be produced by the artistic potteries
at Home. The future of this industry, judging by the progress
made in the past, is bound to be one to which we can look
forward hopefully, the condition of success being that, in common
with others, it receives, alike from the Government and the
people, liberal encouragement and support.
Though perhaps not a local industry, yet one which will, I
think, be of great value to the colony as a whole, I cannot pass
over the apiarian industry, which has been so largely and suc-
cessfully prosecuted in the northern part of the colony. Though
only yet in its infancy, it is affording employment to a number
of people, and also making remunerative use of land from which
perhaps, except in this way, no return would be received.
Though only a small item in the sum of our industrial resources,,
we cannot afford to despise even the day of small things, and I
look forward with very great confidence to the apiaries of New
Zealand in the future (though not rivalling the larger industries
of woollen or iron manufacture) playing no inconsiderable part
in the general prosperity of this young and vigorous nation,.
A brief mention of one or two industries which have been
recently started and I will close this part of my subject. An
industry—the only one in the colonies, so far as I can learn—has
been started in the Middle Island, which bids fair to be of
very great importance, and which would, had it been longer
established here, have claimed far more attention than being left
so late in the day : I refer to the manufacture of carpets, which,
in a small way, it is true, has recently been started by Mr. N.
Mitchell, at Canterbury. Of the present position of this ad-
dition to our industrial resources one can say but little, as it has
not yet got out of its infancy. It may, however, be noted that
the articles produced are of excellent quality, and that the pat-
terns are both handsome and artistic. The demand at present,
though fairly remunerative, is not by any means what it will be
when the industry gets properly started. There is this about it,
that it adds yet another to the list of those industries which
will ultimately put am end to the necessity which now appears
to exist, in some degree at least, for our sending our wool away
in the raw state to be manufactured elsewhere, and returned to


us at a high price in the shape of the manufactured articles.
Further than this, it provides a means for the utilization of a
great deal which, without the presence in our midst of this in-
dustry, would go to waste. As to its future prospects, those
who have seen the effect which the establishment of the carpet
industry has had upon certain cities in the Old Country, and the
prosperity which has grown out of this trade alone in the
localities where the production is carried on, will at once agree
that, when it has passed through its present chrysalis stage, its
future ought to he fraught with very important results to the
colony as a whole. Another small industry, which, however,
promises to enlarge at no distant date into an important branch
of manufacture, is the brushware industry. This is now pretty
extensively carried on both in the northern and southern portions
of the colony, and, though not much has yet been done, there
are hopes for it in the future. The latest phase of the develop-
ment of our local resources is the project of Mr. Noble, of
Timaru, to utilize wheat-straw for the manufacture of wrapping
paper. A very good sample of tough paper has been produced,
and, if it can be carried on at a reasonable cost, there should be
a good market for the products of the factory when started. I
can only refer by name to the older industries, such as the
Auckland Tobacco Company, the various rope and twine manu-
factories, the carriage factories, &c. So that in nearly all
departments of human industry our local manufacturers have
established factories, &c.; and all that is needed to insure a suc-
cessful future for them is the practical support both of the
Government and the people of the colony as a whole.
I now come to what I consider the most important branch of
the subject under consideration —namely, “ The best means of
fostering the development of the industrial resources of New
Zealand.” I think the methods by which we can best achieve
this end may be placed under three heads —(1) The develop-
ment, by means of roads, &c., of the large mineral resources of
the colony; (2) the encouragement of local industries and
productions by the imposition of such import duties on all those
articles which can be manufactured in the colony as will afford
aid to the local producers, and by a liberal application of the
system of bonus for the starting of new industries; and (3) the
education of the people by the encouragement of the formation


of industrial associations in various parts of tlie colony, and the
adoption of a liberal and generous policy by the Government
towards them, so as to inculcate the necessity of a more extensive
use by the people of the products of the colony in all branches
of human industry.
Dealing with the first of the three methods which I have
indicated, the paramount importance of the vast deposits of
mineral wealth which are known to exist in these Islands with
regard to our local industries will at once be admitted. We
possess all the metals used in manufactures within our own
borders, and in abundance; but we have done little or nothing
towards their development. Boards have been made and large
sums of money expended in opening-up country for purely agri-
cultural or pastoral purposes —both very desirable adjuncts to
the settlement and development of the country; but where have
we done anything practical towards bringing the vast stores of
mineral wealth we possess nearer to the centres of population ?
Except in the one instance of the construction of harbours on
the west coast of the Middle Island, little or nothing has been
done. We have deposits of copper, of ironstone, and other
valuable minerals lying practically untouched and undeveloped
—a magnificent industry starving for the expenditure of a few
thousand pounds in opening-up the country and making the
regions where the minerals are known to exist accessible. Yet
there is scarcely one of our local industries to which I have re-
ferred in the first part of this essay but would be benefited by
the more thorough development of our mineral resources. In
the one article of coal alone the benefit which would accrue to
all industries from an increased supply being able to be obtained
at a lower rate can scarcely be estimated. And so with refer-
ence to the other minerals which we possess. Their development
would naturally lead to the establishment of manufactures for
the conversion of the raw ore into the article of commerce.
Factories would spring up on all sides, employing labour and,
above all, turning to profitable use what is now lying useless in
the earth. Other and kindred industries would be stimulated
by the production locally of machinery and partially manu-
factured articles for ultimate conversion into the thousand forms
used in trade, and thus a most important factor in the work of
fostering and developing our industrial resources would be sup-


plied which is now all hut totally absent. I say “ all but totally
absent,” because some steps have been taken in the direction of
the development of our coal industries.
What would result with regard to other minerals were a
policy of development extended to them may be gathered by the
consideration of the enormous impetus which the only partially-
completed works on the West Coast have given to the coal trade
—an impetus which will be as nothing compared with what will
result when the full extent of the scheme of harbour improve-
ment is carried into effect. Even now we are enabled to go into
the Australasian market and not only compete with the New-
castle coal, but realize an increased price per ton when compared
therewith. As yet we have but a superficial knowledge of our
mineral wealth; but that is sufficient to afford a very good basis
for the belief that in’ its practical development exists one of the
principal means of success in the fostering and encouragement of
our industrial resources. We have confined our attention in the
past too much to the development of the two industries of wool-
and wheat-growing. Experience has bitterly taught us that
we cannot rely on these alone for the prosperity or future great-
ness of our community, because it is an admitted fact that the
nations achieving the greatest amount of success in the world’s
history have been those in which manufactures have held the
premier position. No country devoted exclusively to the pro-
duction of wool or of cereals has ever taken a high position
among its fellows. With this as our guide, and remembering
how intimately and indissolubly the interests and advancement
of our local industries are bound up and associated with the
development of our mineral resources, this latter, it seems to me,
should be the main plank in the platform of any policy having
for its object not alone the fostering of those industries which
at presefit exist in our midst, but the encouragement of the
foundation of new ones.
Next in importance to the development of our mineral
resources as a method of encouraging and fostering local indus-
tries comes that which I have indicated under the second head.
That is the imposition of duties on all articles that can be
manufactured in the colony. This, I take it, would be found
to be a very important means of encouragement to the loca
manufactures, enabling them to get over that period of thei.


existence during which, like children, they require a certain
amount of nursing, until they can run alone. The imposition
of duties for the encouragement of local manufactures results
in no injustice to the community, whilst it confers great benefits
in the direction of encouraging their use by the people, enabling
employment to he given to a large portion of our population,
and causing money which would otherwise go out of the colony
to be retained and spent here. Under present circumstances
the expansion and progress of our local industries is to a large
extent retarded from the fact that the majority of the mercan-
tile firms are agents for consignments of goods the sale of
which clashes with that of the local product. If, however,
import duties were imposed sufficient to keep the those con-
signments, and to give the local industries the benefit of a
reasonable handicap, a very great incentive to their progress
would be supplied, and the fostering and encouragement in the
people of self-reliance on our own powers of production would
be practically brought into active operation.
Another important method of stimulating local enterprise in
the matter of developing onr industrial resources is by means of
bonuses offered by the Government for the production of a cer-
tain quantity of any locally-manufactured article. Our experi-
ence in the past shows that the policy of offering bonuses is a
wise and prudent one, and calculated to prove of benefit to the
community as a whole. I need hardly point to the example of
the Kaiapoi Woollen Factory as an example of this. The bonus
comes at the most critical portion of the history of an industry,
just when capital for the further development and perfecting of
it is most urgently needed, and many of our flourishing indus-
tries would not to-day be in existence were it not for the timely
assistance thus afforded. The expenditure in the past of a few
thousands of pounds from the public purse has been the means
of establishing upon a firm basis in our midst industries which
have proved of inestimable benefit to the whole colony, and
therefore I cannot but regard the system of offering bonuses by
the Government in aid of local industries as most valuable in
the direction of their fostering and encouragement.
In carrying out this policy it is, however, necessary that a
fair amount of liberality should form an essential part of it.
Whilst care is taken that the projectors of the local industry


shall amply prove that it has been established up to such a point
that there is a reasonable chance .of its becoming permanent,
they should not be hampered with too many conditions, which,
when fulfilled, in many instances do not aid in the direction I
have indicated. What I take to be the duty of the Government
in this matter is, to take such precautions as will prevent an in-
dustry being taken up merely as a speculation, to secure the
bonus offered. Having, in the interests of the public, provided
against this, it then becomes their duty to assist so far as is pos-
sible by libreal encouragement, and reasonable concessions, if
necessary, in the development of all new methods for the utiliza-
tion of our industrial resources by aiding them at the start. As
a means, therefore, to this end I regard the granting of bonuses
by the Government, on the most liberal terms consistent with
safety to the public purse, as being very valuable.
I now come to the third and last branch into which I have
divided this portion of the essay. There can be no doubt what-
ever that the formation of industrial associations in our
cities gnd towns exercises a great influence for good in the direc-
tion of fostering the development of the industrial resources of
the colony. It is to them that the projector looks for assistance
to bring his particular industry under the notice of the public,
and it is to them that he looks for advice. By means of papers
on various subjects, the holding of exhibitions, and, above all, by
the collecting together, as has been done in Christchurch, the
nucleus of a permanent exhibition of industrial products, these
associations do a large amount of good in the direction of edu-
cating the people as to the extent and variety of our industrial
resources. The ignorance of the great bulk of the people as
to what we really can do for ourselves in the matter of local
productions is the great stumblingblock in the way of the fuller
progress of the local industries already established amongst us,
and the growth of others yet to be projected.
I venture to say that to ninety-nine out of every hundred
visitors to the Exhibition at Wellington the display of colonial
products came upon them as an utter surprise, and that they
had no idea that half the articles there exhibited could be and
were being produced in the colony. It is this ignorance, coupled
with the unreasoning and unaccountable prejudice which exists
amongst the great bulk of the people with regard to anything


colonially manufactured, which, prevents our local industries
attaining that perfection and magnitude which it is necessary they
should attain to enable them to perform the work of placing New
Zealand in a high position amongst the manufacturing nations
of the world. We want our people to become thoroughly im-
bued with the idea that there is no need whatever to go outside
our own borders for anything they may need to eat, drink, wear,
or use. Anything that will accomplish this will be doing a
great work in the direction of fostering the development of our
industrial resources. And I claim for the industrial associations
of the colony and all kindred organizations that they are to the
best of their ability endeavouring to do this. But their efforts
are to a great extent cribbed, cabined, and confined from the
fact that they are expected to do in a large degree what is in
reality a national work out of their own private resources. They
are called upon to devote not only their time but their money
also to accomplishing that which, if not actually undertaken by
the Government as one of its departments, should at any rate
receive from it a liberal and generous assistance. Therefore it
is that I say one of the most effectual methods in which the
development of our industrial resources can be stimulated and
aided is by assisting those industrial associations now in exist-
ence so as to largely extend the sphere of their usefulness, and
also to encourage the formation of similar associations where
they do not at present exist.
The Government here thought it necessary to foster and
promote the agricultural industry amongst us by the formation
of a special department. How much more important, I would
venture to point out, is the development of our industrial re-
sources, the perfection of which can alone render New Zealand
great and prosperous ? It is no doubt a very good thing to
educate the people to a knowledge of sound farming; but it is
infinitely more important, in view of the bearing upon our future
prosperity, that they should be educated to a fuller knowledge
of the vast stores of wealth and materials for progress which
lie at present undeveloped, in the shape of new industries which
might be started and mineral resources to be utilized.
If we do not form a department for the industries of the
colony similar to that for agriculture —and I see no reason why
we should not—then the next best thing is to make the in-


dustrial associations of the colony as useful as possible in the
'direction I have indicated. By grants in aid of buildings which
may he used for the permanent exhibition of our products, by
placing in the hands of these associations bonuses for the de-
velopment of new industries, and by adopting towards industries
already established a liberal policy as regards rates of carriage
from the factories or mines to the centres of population, I
think a great step will be taken in the direction of fostering the
development of our industrial resources, upon which in the
future so much will depend. Everything that is now occurring
around us, as well as the past history of other countries, teaches
us one great lesson —namely, that a country, to be truly great,
and to be able to support a happy, prosperous, and increasing
population, must be a manufacturing country, and not a cereal-
or wool-producing one only. For manufactures we should
always have an increasing local market, as well as a foreign
trade. That we can go outside our own boundaries with our
manufactured products has been proved by the tweeds, &c., of
the Kaiapoi Woollen Factory and the other factories of the
colony finding a ready market elsewhere than in New Zealand
itself. So it might be with other products of our local manu-
factories, if their development be stimulated by a liberal policy
being adopted towards them by the Government, and the
practical assistance of the people as a whole. If this be done
we shall then see New Zealand taking that position to which
her great natural advantages and vast resources entitle her as
the greatest manufacturing nation of the Southern Hemi-
sphere.
By Authority : George Didsbury, Government Printer, Wellington.—lBB6.
