

Pro Pratria
Australian Love Stories.
1/-
WILLIAM BROOKS A CO.. LTD., SYDNEY.




Pro Pratria




Pro Patna
is tipiiratfi to
lExrotUnrg SJafcg iEtelUt? otrirklant>.


I drifted last night on an inland sea,
Hedged in by the hills of years,
And while none of the scenes of my dream were new,
Each claimed for itself, as it came to view,
Its measure of tribute to memory due,
In smiles, and sighs—and tears.


FOREWORD
7^ HIS little book is launched with a fervent prayer that every
copy of the 5,000 printed will be sold.
* i The work is my mute thanks to the people of New
South Wales for extreme kindnesses received by myself from
them —of every political and social standing—during my
few years of work in this State.
Furthermore, it is a grateful tribute to our brave and gallant
men, so many of whom I have met in happier and more peaceful
days.
I tender my grateful thanks to Mr. Gordon Vicars , who has
so patriotically consented to defray the cost of printing and
production, in order that the entire proceeds from the sale of
Pro Patria —booklets 1/- each —may be devoted to the War
Chest Flower Studio—an auxiliary of The Citizens’ War Chest
Fund—for the New South Wales division of the Comforts Fund —
a boon to our men “over there.”
FLORENCE FRANCESCA FOURDRINIER.
January, 1917,
New South Wales.




PRO PATRIA
A Dream Picture
EATED on the deck of a Manly steamer on the first week in the
New Year of 1917, the gentle movement of the vessel as it sped
through the mild waters of the Harbour caused a series of mov-
ing pictures to appear in the fleecy clouds overhead
The entire surroundings were conducive to a lazy content,
which, in some indefinable way, seemed to arouse memories.
Many of the seats were occupied by stalwart, bronzed khaki-clad forms;
the strains of music carried on the cool breezes from the far end of the
steamer; the wonderful peace and subdued happiness of the passengers, the
happy chatter of tiny children and the musical laughter of the many young
girls in their dainty summer frocks all made a delightful whole, and, with
closed eyes, I in fancy saw thousands, line upon line, of handsome brave
young forms and faces of our soldier boys, as well as those of the graver
men, pass in review as on that memorable first march through the streets
of Sydney. “Pro Patria” was their watchword; there they marched shoulder
to shoulder —poor man and rich man—dwellers of cities and dwellers of
country and distant bush—all alike bearing their prescribed weight of ac-
coutrements ; their bearing was the personification of the prayer of a Knight
of old—when his plea was, “Make me Thy Knight to fight for the Right in
the light of Thy Might!”


The crowds of spectators who lined the streets and filled the open win-
dows and spaces along the route of march were strangely moved.
Pride, grief, love, patriotism, and an undefinable dread were imprinted on
so many faces—their hearts were too full to cheer heartily—but “Pro Patria”
was their unspoken prayer also.
Then, I saw many of our brave defenders of our honour; but, alas!—not
in brave array of drilled men, file after file—but in “corridors of pain.”
A transport of wounded had arrived, and I, in company of so many of
those left behind, had gone to meet a dear one.
Oh! the grand bearing and the fortitude of those heroes. Some would be
healed and return “to finish their job”; but there were others crushed and
others in the dark.
In golden gleam these words stood out amidst the fleecy clouds:—
“The way that led to winter
Will lead to summer too;
For all roads end in other roads
Where we may start anew!”
And in the background there arose an immense hostel in the midst of culti-
vated grounds'—a lasting institution and memorial of a grateful people of this
State to those men who had fought and suffered.
Politics, creed, caste —all—were as naught. The inmates and the owners
were the defenders and saviours of our honour, hearths, and homes.


Sweetly-scented flowers and shrubs bloomed everywhere; rustic seats
were placed in cool, quiet spots, and the pleasant trickling of water and the
songs of birds gave music to the surroundings.
In the entrance hall was placed a huge War Chest, where thousands of
grateful people—who never could forget—dropped in their coins, according to
their means—a practical acknowledgment of an undying debt.
There was a huge banqueting hall, where, on each anniversary, “battles
were fought o’er again,” and where loving women brought a wealth of luxuri-
ous flowers to be distributed to the sick and lonely in every public hospital in
memory of those sleeping ones under foreign skies—who, for their country’s
sake, laid down their lives.
I saw the office with its rows and rows of books and cards of reference;
not one widow or orphan of our fallen heroes were ever forgotten—their
names and addresses carefully recorded.
I saw the various and practical means of assisting our men to choose and
perfect themselves in any vocation of life that was most suited to their
strength, ability, and education. I saw the organising committees of earnest
men and women—visiting, cheering and advising. I saw the present arms
of the Red Cross and War Chest unitedly carrying on work which must never
cease. No one was forgotten or overlooked; the maimed and infirm had their
own quarters in the hostel’s grounds. In the banqueting hall I saw a painxing
by an Australian artist depicting “A Nation’s Thanks.”
I saw that the Great War —after all the loss and suffering; after all the
unrest and turmoil—would eventually be the Cleanser and Healer of all that
was in the past bad and sad.


I saw that the bonds between Australia and the Overseas would be
stronger; that the Brotherhood of the English-speaking race and Our Allies
would be knit as with bands of steel; that this wonderful land of Australia
would be populated—her wide spaces filled; that her untold wealth still lying
idle in the bowels of the earth would be worked and utilized; I saw*that those
prophetic lines—
“That there is room on the earth for the toilers too,
And some must draw where their grandsires drew,
And some must lope on the trails anew ’’
would be recognised by mankind as Nature’s laws, and that eventually
Australia—the Benjamin of Britain’s possessions; the jewel of the Southern
Seas—would for ever and a day take “Pro Patna’’ as her watchword and
keep the name that the Anzacs made for Australia free from flaw or blemish;
one that future generations will be proud to bear.
Things can never go badly wrong
If the heart be true and the love be strong;
For the mist, if it comes, and the weeping rain,
Will be changed by love into sunshine again.


A Flower-crowned Love
A Life Story
HE fruit trees in the station orchard were a mass of white and
delicately tinted pink bloom; the willows, so fantastic in shape on
the river’s banks, were clothed in their Virgin robes of palest
green; the wattle trees with their wealth of golden blossoms and
the native gums were all looking so fresh and beautiful; the
birds, intent on nest-making, were softly warbling to their mates; insects
flitted to and fro; the yellow, the sombre-gray and white moths gyrated with
their cousins, the gaily-tinted and delicately-pencilled butterflies; the bees
were diligently rifling the honey-laden flowers; the breeze caused the dainty
grasses and innumerable wild flowers to toss and rustle; and, over all, the
spirit of the bush—the pungent, health-giving, invigorating perfume —
hung.
All Nature joined in the jubilant refrain of “Spring has come!”
Coming across the paddock were two children—a boy and girl. The
former, strong and sturdy, the only son of the owner of “Woolomai.”
The little girl carried a basket filled with wattle-bloom; the boy in joy-
ous mood was pursuing the winged host. Hither and thither—tripping and
stumbling—round and round, on and on, he went; but the tantalising little


insects eluded his grasp; they alighted on his sunny hair and open brow—
one airy sprite planted a kiss on his pouting lips—but, never a one would
stray into his outstretched hands.
Finally, tired and disgusted at their unfriendly behaviour, he returned to
his playmate.
Ruby, with her basket of silver and gold, was sitting on a fallen mossy
log, laughing at his discomfiture. As he flung himself beside her, she held a
wattle spray temptingly towards him as if to show that he might win some-
thing.
He snatched the flowers from her hand, and with mischief-beaming eyes
appropriated the basket and decorated her brown curls with its contents.
Jumping up, they raced across to the home paddock, and as the flower-
crowned lassie moved, the unsecurely, hastily fashioned floral crown fell—and
was left lying—dainty splashes of gold on the green grass.
Years and years have passed away. The bright sunset of the Australian
summer’s night filled the bush with fairy-light; shadows lurked in the hollows
of the hills.
The willows, overhanging the river which lazily splashed its course over
the rocks and fallen branches, had taken on a deeper green.
The air was heavy with perfume from the bush trees and the roses and
other choice flowers in the garden of “Woolomai”; the night-birds were
sending forth their weird and plaintive cries.


From the lawn was heard the light and musical laugh of a girl answered
by the deeper tones of her companion; and, presently, the two lovers came
slowly down the path.
The girl had a bunch of roses fastened in the belt of her cool muslin
frock; unheeded, they fell. Suddenly, noticing her loss, she turned, with a cry,
“Oh, my pretty flowers!”—to find them.
Jack was before her, and, as he turned to restore the fallen floral treasures,
their eyes met—the lovelight in them burned; and he, as in a mirror, saw the
bygone childish scene, and remembered that even then he had crowned her
“his Queen.”
On again they wandered into the realms of love with their own happy
thoughts for company.
Only a short year had fled, and the spirit of Autumn breathed its mellow
sweetness over all.
The Native gums were clad in their darkest green; the peppers were a
glowing mass of scarlet berries; the oak, the maple and the elm in the garden
seemed to outvie each other in their contributions of russet, yellow, deep
crimson and silver; little clouds sailed overhead.
To and fro, circling and whirling amongst, and through, the almost bare
branches, and fallen leaves, flittered the magpies, the pee-wits, the soberly-
brown clad birds—here and there a saucy robin with his vivid breast —a speck
of crimson against the brown; on the bare branch of a ring-barked she-oak a


pair of kookaburras perched and made the bush re-echo with their laughter,
and, over all, the sun lent a grandeur to the undulating country with the hills
far away in the background.
Out of doors were warmth, colour and life. Indoors was sorrow—grief—
in which pride was the silver lining in the dark cloud.
She, who had looked forward with such joy to being the light of her hus-
band’s heart and home, was learning with bitter tears and aching heart to bear
the Cross —alone.
Yet, she was not alone, for Ruby, the ward —and now daughter of her
dear one’s parents —in soothing their grief, learned to submit and live for the
older people, and, a tiny living legacy and remembrance of her own brief and
beautiful happiness.
The lover of last summer shall never revisit the old station home. He is
peacefully sleeping in foreign soil. “Take my allegiance,” was his answer
when England called to Australia’s sons, and so he left his heart’s darling—
and, won a name, and honour, which, with thousands of other brave men’s—
is inscribed on the rolls of fame.
Time, with relentless footsteps, has sped on. A sweet-faced woman who
still bears the mien to her who was “his Queen,” divides her time between a
sunny-haired small boy in whom his mother sees her loved husband and hero
and her flowers.
She in working and living amongst her flowers is conscious that in some
flowers, and some trees, there is a dim personality; she loves her garden with


its music, its freshness, its fragrance; its peace and its memories; floral beau
ties are sent by that gentle and gracious lady to the sick and wounded.
Her living thoughts and whispered messages must bear fruit to the grate-
ful recipients.
There is nothing more precious than the precision with which flowers fill
their place in the scheme of things. As a soldier’s loyalty is to his regiment,
and a seaman’s to his ship (whoever the officers and men may be), so is the
loyalty and love to the race, not to individual flowers.
The closing scene is Winter; and, far “over there”
Out on the fields the kindly snow
Lies light on the graves that are hid below;
While the silver stars in the frosted sky
Shine down on those who will never die.


A Legend of the Bush
The Peal of the Fairies.
jESSIE, do look! Did you ever see such a glorious sight? I
must stop five minutes longer and feast my eyes on that golden,
glorious splendour! Oh! the perfume of it all—a hundred Rim-
mel’s rolled into one!
“No wonder that your Australian poet, Adam Lindsay Gordon, in his
‘Bush Ballads,’ says:—
‘ln the spring when the wattle gold trembles
’Twixt shadow and shine,
When each dew-laden drought resembles
A long draught of wine.’
Yes, I endorse the sentiments in those lines. There is an intoxication in
the air this morning.
Australian spring! I feel as though I must laugh, dance, sing and cry
all at once—all is so beautiful, vast, wild, free and sweet!
“Good-bye, you lovely fluffy yellow balls—l shall come out and feast
upon you all every morning this week, until I leave for the city, and work!
I love your beauty, your perfume; I shall never, never forget you!”


Thus spoke lively Beatrice Fenn, who had arrived from England by the
last boat. She had accepted the invitation of Bessie Blair to accompany her
to her parents’ home for one week, and thus gain their land legs and talk about
the Old Land before taking up their respective duties in the busy haunts of
men—the City.
Bessie Blair was a typiste. The firm for whom she worked had given her
three months holiday on full pay. She had ever wished to travel and visit her
parents’ relations in Wales.
Her father and mother, unable to go themselves, welcomed the chance
that allowed their eldest daughter to meet their own kith and kin, whom they
had left behind when they sailed for far-off Australia—over twenty years ago.
They were pleased and proud that all the folks at home would see their Bessie.
Bessie found that she had to ask for further leave, but a girl so careful
and trustworthy—and as well a favourite—obtained the concession, and in
due course arrived safely in Sydney, and, in company with Beatrice, came to
her home in a part of the lovely New England district for one week.
As their guest was so fascinated with the beauties and space of Aus-
tralia, Bessie, her parents and the rest of the household did their best to give
Beatrice a chance to view and appreciate the natural beauties of their Aus-
tralian surroundings.
Beatrice was a worker also. She wrote short stories for children, and was
a clever illustrator.
As she had a moderate competence of her own, she, for some time, had
contemplated a visit to the far-away land of gold that she had read so much


about. She was steeped in the mysteries of the “Land of Dawning,” and
wanted to see something of its grotesque and weird bush life.
The district where Bessie lived supplied her with sufficient scope and food
for her imagination. All too soon, that week was a lovely haunting memory;
the two girls obtained a dainty little flat overlooking Sydney’s greatest charm
—the Harbour.
Beatrice had been very fortunate—she declared that “her luck was, most
decidedly, in,” in finding an outlet for her artistic abilities.
Her first piece of work was the designing of a poster for a large motor
firm, which was to be purely symbolical of the wonderful Southern Land—
Australia.
Possibly the excitement, and her own artistic temperament, combined,
caused her to dream of the wonderful experience which she related to Bessie
when they were comfortably seated, enjoying the evening breeze which came
to them from the Heads in their own tiny balcony.
“I was so tired, Bessie,” said Beatrice, “last night that I fell sound asleep
directly my head touched the pillow.
“Suddenly I was standing on the slope of the hill—you remember, Bessie,
where you took me on my first morning at your home?
“I heard a musical trickling of water, and turned to see from whence it
came—that movement must have dislodged a mine—for I was almost blinded
with a brilliant burst of flame which seemed to come from under my feet. It
lasted a second and was gone. I stooped down to feel if my dress was


scorched, and I was astonished to find that I was clothed in the softest and
most silky texture —tissue upon tissue of exquisite turquoise blue and sunset
rosy glow pink, over which was draped the most filmy lace. On my feet were
a pair of gold slippers, which peeped out so cunningly from under my trailing
silken robes, and in my hand I held a long slender brown twig.
There came another bright flash, but this time it was the reflection of the
sun’s rays on my gold slippers, and the twig slowly took the form of a para-
chute. I felt myself being borne—up, up, up—floating ever onwards or up-
wards until I was looking over what I had last seen as a grove of golden
wattle. Tre feathery silver foliage was still there, but, instead of my lovely
fluffy golden balls, there were funny brownish-green sprigs with hard little
green knots of various sizes.
“Where,” I cried aloud, “is my lovely wattle? Where is all the golden
bloom—the sweet haunting perfume? I don’t like those nasty things! I wish
I had never come here!”—and, in my anger, I pulled the parachute.
As though, by magic, I was hurled down and landed almost in the middle
of a swiftly-running stream. I managed to get a rather insecure footing on
the branch of a fallen tree, and, as I still wore my silken robe, I moved care-
fully along the tree to get clear of the water. The action caused the lower
end of the tree to dip in the water —the parachute had disappeared, and I again
held the brown twig—l noticed some ripples pass over the surface of the
water, and, in a few minutes, there was a most dreadful splashing and snort-
ing.
Oh! I thought this must be some dreadful serpent, and there arose from
the depths of the stream a huge, hideous monster, stirring up the mud and


crushing the delicate maiden hair and other ferns as he scraped his unwieldy
body against the bank.
His coming changed the aspect of everything; even the sun that had been
shining brightly in the blue sky hid himself, and all was dark and overcast.
There I stood, the one bright object.
I cried out, “You horrid brute! Look at your handiwork; look at the poor
ferns that you have crushed and killed; look at the once clear water that you
have changed into filthy mud; everything—even the sky and sun is altered!
Who are you? Where do you come from?”
And the creature bellowed in answer to me, “I think that it is I who ought
to talk —not you. You say too much. Understand that this creek is my do-
main, and all that is in or near is my property. With it I shall do as I will.
Some silly fools call me the ‘Bunyip’; but I am the personification of all that
is evil, coarse and cruel —anybody that willingly crosses my path has cause to
regret that they ever did so.
“Your robe proclaims that you are pure and good. Had you not been so
it would have tarnished and faded, and the ring of shining light, within which
you stand, would be slimy mud. That shining circle saves you from me.
“Something must have happened for you to be here. Did a companion
entice you or tell you of this spot? Was it woman’s fatal gift of curiosity that
brought you here? Take my advice and begone!”
I could not think what to do, so I called out in answer—“Do you think
that I would willingly plunge myself into this position? I did not know that
there was such an awful spot. I have sufficient strength of will to steer clear


of bad company. My mother’s prayers are a shield and protection. I did not
come here of my own free will, and I appeal to you to assist me in getting
away as quickly as possible.
“Ugh! those horrid toads. Look how they glare at me! Hark! to those
diabolical peals of laughter! Everywhere!—l see gloomy shadows and weird
shapes.
“Cannot you help me? Surely you have a tiny spark of goodness—some
kindly memories and thoughts of past better days!”
“Where do you want to go?” growled the monster.
“Up, up,” I made reply, “away from here. Back to the sweetness and the
beauty of my innocent wattle blossoms. I was there —looking for them.”
“Yes, you were there,” shouted the horrid form. “I see it all now. You
had the parachute ‘Kindness’—and you treated it roughly. Just because you
couldn’t see exactly what you wanted you became impatient and angry. If
you had paused a moment and smiled as you did on that morning when you
saw the wattle bloom for the first time—all your blossoms would have re-
sponded to the magic of your love and happiness, they would have burst from
their green coverings to welcome you. Temper got the upper hand. Thank
God that you have borne such an unblemished life, or—well, never mind. Be
careful and keep your balance on that log.
“I cannot approach you, so catch this pebble and never lose it. With your
right hand strike your twig in the centre of the pebble.
“Good-bye! Think kindly of me sometimes!”


Not one single moment did I waste, but struck, as directed, and—wonder
of wonders—l felt that I was gradually rising. I looked down and waved my
hand at the poor brute—the look in his eyes will haunt me for ever—such
misery, despair and shame.
Fairy music was everywhere around me, and I felt so happy. An immense
pure white butterfly flew close beside me, and all around were myriads of
beautifully tinted moths and butterflies.
Presently I heard a pretty silvery voice say, “I have been with you all
the time. I am the fairy ‘lnnocence,’ and the pebble which you carry is my
cousin ‘Fairy Courage.’ We are taking you back to your favourite spring
blossoms, and they will rejoice that you have escaped from the dreadful
‘Slough of Despair and Sin.’ Your firm bearing through danger has brought
you to safety. Here we are!”
Lucky I! The sun was shining and the little fleecy clouds scampered and
skimmed across the blue sky. My beautiful robe was pure and spotless, and a
sound—
“Like the marriage peal of fairies,
Waft across the range,
Through the golden-tufted wattle came
Music low and strange.”
Then, Bessie, I awoke and found my room flooded with the rays of the
early rising sun. I sprang out of bed, and for a few minutes watched the won-
derful shadows of the dawn of day on the waters of the Harbour. Then I
took out my writing case and wrote of my adventure with the good and bad
fairies of your wonderful Australian bush, so that I may tell my sisters when I
return to my home amidst the Welsh hills what I learned during my sojourn
in the Sunny Land of Australia—the Land of the Wattle Bloom.


To the School at War
The Rev. C. A. Alington, head master of Eton, is the author of the fol-
lowing verses, which have been set to music by Mr. L. A. Adamson, of
Wesley College:—
We don’t forget—while in this dark December,
We sit in schoolrooms that you know so well,
And hear the sounds that you so well remember —
The clock, the hurrying feet, the chapel bell.
Others are sitting in the seats you sat in;
There’s nothing else seems altered here —and yet
Through all of it, the same old Greek and Latin,
You know we don’t forget.
We don’t forget you—in the wintry weather
You man the trench or tramp the frozen snow;
We play the games we used to play together
In the days of peace that seem so long ago.
But through it all, the shouting and the cheering,
Those other hosts in graver conflict met,
Those other sadder sounds, your ears are hearing,
Be sure we don’t forget.
And you, our brothers, who for all our praying.
To this dear school of ours come back no more,
Who lie, cur country’s debt of honour paying—
And not in vain—upon th’ .ffigean shore,
Till that great day when at the throne in Heaven
The books are opened and the Judgment set:
Your lives for honour and for England given,
The School will not forget.






