

Problematical Features in Maps
DESIGNED BY
Mercator and Desceliers.
J. R. M c .Clymont, M.A., Edin.




Problematical Features in Maps
DESIGNED BY
Mercator and Desceliers.




Problematical Features in Maps
DESIGNED BY
MERCATOR AND DESCELIERS.
James Roxburgh M.A., Edin.
Author of ‘The First Expedition of the Portuguese
to Banda.’
Printed for the Author
MCMVII
All Rights Reserved.


One Hundred Copies Printed.
No. //


IN this short dissertation I purpose discussing certain problematical
features in Maps of the World by Gerardus Mercator and
Pierres Desceliers.
Gerard de Cremer, who is usually styled Gerardus Mercator —the
name which he himself adopts on his cartographical and literary
works—was born at Rupelmonde in East Flanders in 1512. In 1538
he executed a double cordiform map of the world dedicated to
Joannes Drosius, which is (or was lately) in a private library in New
York.* And at Louvain in 1541 he dedicated to Nicolaus Perrenot
Granvella, Imperial Chancellor of Charles V., a terrestrial sphere,
examples of which are preserved in the Imperial and Royal Library
in Vienna, the Royal Library of Belgium, and the Grand-Ducal
Library of Saxe-Weimar.f In 1559 Mercator was appointed Cosmo-
grapher to the Duke of Juliers and Cleves and thenceforward his
cartographical and literary work was accomplished chiefly at Duisburg,
which at that period was attached to the Duchy of Cleves. It was at
Duisburg that Mercator executed the large map of the world, issued
in 1569, intituled ‘Nova et aucta orbis terrte descriptio ad usum
navigantium emendate accomodata.’J Examples of this work are in
the Bibliotheque Nationale and in the City Library in Breslau. In
1587 it was re-published by order of Rumoldus Mercator with the
title ‘ Orbis terrse compendiosa description An example of it was in
the possession of Baron Nordenskiold. In 1594 appeared at Duisburg
the ‘ Atlas sive cosmographicae meditationes de fabrica mundi,’ and in
1595 —the year after that in which Mercator died—a supplementary
tome was published at Diisseldorf.
One problematical feature in maps of the world designed by
Mercator is the series of new countries which is delineated near their
lower margin and designated collectively ‘Terra Australis Incognita.’
We may regard the Terra Australis of Gerardus Mercator as a con-
catenated series of insets of newly discovered islands and tracts of
continental land the geographical position of which could only be
approximately ascertained or could not be ascertained at all by
the chartographer. That a large continent must exist in the
* A. E. Nordenskiold, Facsimile Allas to the early history of c/artography,
XLIII. Bulletin of the American Geographical Society, 1878, p. 195' f.
t Sphere terreslre et sphere celeste de Gerard Mercator de Rupelmonde.
Bruxelles, 1875.
X Jomard, Les Monuments de la Geographic, XXL


southern hemisphere was postulated by geographers of the school of
Ptolemy ; such a continent was held to be necessary in order to
counterbalance the great mass of land in the northern hemisphere,
and Gualterus Ghymmius affirms that Mercator adhered to this
theory. His drafts of the land portion of the southern hemisphere
may have been influenced by it.
The voyages of Alvaro de Saavedra in 1528 and 1529, and of
Ynigo Ortiz de Roda in 1545 ma y have given occasion to the
presentment of New Guinea in the world-maps of Mercator. It is
represented as an island, but its insular character is declared to be a
matter of uncertainty. From a point contiguous to the supposed
strait the coast line of a Magellanica Regio trends southward and
eastward to Tierra del Fuego. We learn from the inscription on the
Magellanica Regio that it was so called by some because it was
discovered by Magellan. It is therefore probably the east coast of
South America, placed considerably to the left of the authentic
delineation of that region. To the left of the Tierra del Fuego we
find a Promontorium Terrse Australis and a Terra Psittacorum.
There is an inscription upon the latter the import of which is that
the Terra Psittacorum was a land towards which Portuguese had
been led by wind* in 1500 during a voyage to Calicut, and that
the name had been bestowed upon it because of the large size of its
parrots, which attained a length of three cubits. The Indian fleet
which sailed in 15°° was under the command of Pedralvares
Cabral and we know from various sources that the Land of
Parrots (‘Terra d li Papaga’j) was one of the names bestowed
upon Brazil, the eastern coast of which Cabral discovered in the
year above-mentioned. We read, for example, in a letter from Pietro
Pasqualigo to the Seigneury of Venice, published in the Diarii di
Marino Sanutoj that the land discovered by Corte-Real was believed
to be connected with the land of Papagk, and Schoner, in his globe
constructed in 1520, delineates ‘America vel Brasilia sive Papagalli
Terra.’ It is therefore probable that the Terra Psittacorum is a
portion of the coast of Brazil.
Two bearings of the Promontorium Terras Australis are quoted by
Mercator from the Suma de Geographia of Fernandez de Enciso,
which bears the imprint ‘ Sevilla, 1519.’ This headland was situated
6co leagues of Cape Saint Augustine, 450 leagues W. of the
Cape of Good Hope, and was in 42 0 S. lat. It is evidently impossible
* ‘ Libegio vento appulsis’—perhaps ‘led by a wind from Africa.’
f Paesi nouamente retrouati, cap. cxxv.
+ Tom. IV., fasc. iv., pp. 200-201,


to reconcile all these data ; the most reliable datum is the latitude,
which may result from an observation, whilst the distances must have
been estimated only. The words Promontorium Terrse Australis
(Headland of southern land) suggest a pre-Magellanic discovery of
land in the south ; the bearings indicate the southern portion of the
American continent as the region in which this headland was
situated and the latitude is approximately that of the Gulf of Saint
Matthias. The globes of Johann Schoner of the years 1515 and
1520 demonstrate that a strait was supposed to exist in or near 42 0 S.
before Magellan departed on his voyage of discovery.
In the southern part of the Indian Ocean Ribero had placed on
the Carta Universal made at Seville in 1529 an ‘Y a de los Romeros’
(Island of the Pilgrims). It is evidently the island the discovery of
which is recorded by Francisco Albo in his derrotero of the voyage of
Magellan and of the Vittoria on the 18th day of March, 1522. Albo
enters the latitude as 38° S., which is nearly the actual latitude of
Amsterdam Island. The reason for the name ‘Y a de los Romeros’ is
not evident. But we may conjecture with great probability that it
was bestowed in allusion to the fact that after leaving Buru and when
approaching Mallua (which is probably Ombay) very bad weather
from the south imperilled the safety of the little ship, and the com-
pany vowed a pilgrimage to ‘ Nuestra Senora de la Guia.’ Mercator
places this island in the world-map of the year 1569 on the same
meridian as the easternmost point of Madagascar and considerably
west of its true position. An inscription on the adjacent Terra
Australis asserts that a strong tidal current ran from west to east and
from east to west between Madagascar and Los Romeros, so that the
navigation of that sea was extremely difficult. Mercator quotes Marco
Polo in support of the statement and even identifies Los Romeros
with the islands which were visited by the rukh But the islands
visited by the rukh lay to the south of Zanzibar and the current
which, according to Marco Polo, impeded navigation thence to India
was, apparently, the Mozambique Current. There is nothing which
calls for further comment until the meridian of the west of
New Guinea is reached, at which point the coast-line of the southern
pseudo-continent diverges tc the northward to Magellanica Regio. It
bears an inscription to the effect that this region is of vast extent as is
evident from the writings of Marco Polo and of Ludovico Varthema and
certain names inscribed upon it, such as Locach and Maletur, are derived
from the Book of Marco Polo. These are believed to be ancient names
of Siamese and Malay countries far removed from the positions in
which Marco Polo placed them. Locach is separated from Java


Major—the modern Java —by a narrow strait and Java Minor, which
is apparently a second Sumatra, is in a deep bay east of Maletur.
Jave la Grande is a new element which enters into and chiefly
characterises the southern pseudo-continent as it is delineated in three
mappemondes designed and drawn by Pierres Desceliers The most
informative pronouncement regarding Jave la Grande is perhaps that
which is to be found in the ‘ Cosmographie ’ of Jan Alfonce, a
pilot, sea-captain and cosmographer who was born at Saintonge near
Cognac, and who followed the calling of a seaman for about forty-
eight years from 1496 or 1497 onwards. In 1542 he was in Canada
with Roberval and in the following year was charged by that leader to
attempt the discovery of a North-West passage from the east side of
North America to China. He made this attempt, but there is no
satisfactory record of the results of his mission. In 1544 he aban-
doned the calling of a sailor and, conjointly with a sea-captain of
Honfleur, Paullin Secalar by name, wrote the ‘ Cosmographie avec
espere et regime du soleil et du nord.’ In 1547 a licence was
granted to Jean de Marnef to print ‘ Les voyages avantureux du
capitaine Jan Alfonce,’ and in 1559 that work was published. Alfonce
was probably dead before the work appeared. In the ‘Cosmographie’
he affirms that ‘ La grande Jayve’ is a country in the southern hemi-
sphere and that it is contiguous to the land of the Straits ol Magellan.
Alfonce apparently was of opinion that land was continuous from
Tierra del Fuego t» the southern part of Asia. Vestiges of the belief
that America was an eastward prolongation of the Asiatic continent
still exist in the names ‘ West Indies ’ and ‘ Indians ’ when that
designation is applied to the aborigines of North or of South
America.
Java Major or the Terre de Java la Grande is mapped in the
mappemondes of several French chartographers of the first half of the
sixteenth century. One of the earliest and most skilful of them
was Pierres Desceliers. Desceliers was born towards the end
of the fifteenth century; he is mentioned by the name Pierre
Deschelliers in 1537 in the Archives of the Department of Seine-
Inferieure. He was a priest and resided at Arques—the little town near
the confluence of the Aulne and the Arques, made well-known in history
by the victory which Henry IV. gained there over the Army of the
League in 1589. The information of which we are possessed regard-
ing him is but meagre. It is recorded that he drew a plan of all the
forests in France by order of the Duke of Guise, and that he gave
gratuitous instruction in hydrography to a small circle of pupils.
Amongst his early works were a celestial and a terrestrial sphere.


That he designed and painted a mappemonde in 1546 we know it is
now in a private library. A second mappemonde is dated 1550 and bears
the signature of its author thus: Faicte A Arques Par Pierres
Desceliers Pbre : Lan : 1550. It was purchased by Signor Christo-
foro Negri of Padua in 1842 from a family of Spanish refugees, and
was acquired subsequently by the Trustees of the British Museum.*
A third mappemonde drawn and painted by Desceliers is (or was lately)
the property ofM. V Abbe de Bubics of Vienna. (‘Vienne.’) On it
are inscribed the words ‘ Faicte A Arques Par Pierres Desceliers
Prebstre, 1553.1 Desceliers had several compeers ;in order to avoid
prolixity I mention their names only; they were J&an Rotz, Nicholas
Vallard, Guillaume le Testu, and Nicholas Desliens. Jean Rotz
appears to have been the first to propound his opinions, for his ‘ Book
of Idrography ’ bears the date 1542. An anonymous mappemonde
which bears the arms of the Dauphin is preserved in the British
Museum and is believed to be of still earlier date.
All these chartographers agree in delineating a country which
they call ‘ Jaye la Grande’ to the west of South America, although
they differ considerably one from another in matters of detail relating
to it. In one important respect Jave la Grande differs from the
Terra Australis delineated by Mercator and by Ortelius. If we
examine a fac-simile of it by transmitted light, or if we view the image
of it in a mirror, we perceive that it is an incomplete South America
reversed and removed to the westward so as to occupy a position on
the same meridian as Sumatra, Java, and certain easterly islands of
the Malay Archipelago. Only the outlines, however, of the northern
and eastern coasts of South America are reversed; the written
characters designating names of places are not reversed. It is not
difficult to recognise in at least one place-name the name of a South
American country. I refer to ‘ Baye bresill ’—a name which appears
on the mappemondes of Desceliers in a position which corresponds
approximately to that of Bahia de Todos Santos. It was to this part
of the coast that Norman merchant-adventurers came in search of
novelties soon after the visit of Cabral, and La Popeliniere notes the
fact that a river near Bahia de Todos Santos was named ‘ R. de
Brasil.’| Worthy of note also are the names of several islands
* French Maps of the World, drawn in 1536, 1546, and 1550. With an
Introduction by C. H. Coote. Privately printed, 1898.
f For biographical information relating to Alfonce and Desceliers I have
consulted Les Navigations francaises by M. Margry and Un geographe du
XVIe siecle retrouve (Extrait du Bulletin de la Societe de Geographic, Septembre,
1876), by M. Malte Brun.
t Les trois mondes, 111., fob 20. v.


situated to the north of that part of the coast-line which, I believe,
represents the northern sea-board of South America. The names
to which I refer appear on the anonymous mappemonde commonly
called the Harleyan Map and believed to have been executed
in the year 1536 or thereabouts. To the north-west ot a ‘ Baye
Perdue,’ the position of which is approximately that of the Gulf of
Paria, is a small island, the name of which I decipher as ‘Ye
de S. Xtofer,’ or Island of Saint Christopher, and to the right of the
Ye de S. Xtofer is another island or cluster of islands to which is
attached a name which I read ‘ Ye de Lucayos.’
But I do not rely on the correct deciphering of these names for
evidence of the identity of Jave la Grande with the north and east
coasts of South America, but upon the definition of La grande
Jayve which is given by Jan Alfonce, the analogies which exist
between Jave la Grande and the Magellanica Regio, and between
Jave la Grande and the ‘Ter. australis incognita’ or ‘insula
occidentalis America’ of Cornelis de Jode,* and finally upon the
evident general resemblance which the outlines of Jave la Grande,
as seen by transmitted light, bear to those of the north and east coasts
of South America.
Vide Appendix.
6


APPENDIX




Inscriptions relating to Terra Australis Incognita
ON TWO MAPS AND A TERRESTRIAL SPHERE BY
Gerardus Mercator and on a map by Cornelius
DE JUD/EIS.
On a double cordiform Map of the World by. Mercator dated
1538 •
Terras hue esse certum est sed quantas quibus; limitibus
finitas incertum.
On a terrestrial sphere by Mercator. Louvain, 1541
Quinta haec et quidem amplissima pars quantum coniectare
licet, nuper orbi nostro accessit, verum paucis adhuc littoribus
explorata.
Psittacorum Regio sic a Lusitanis anno 1500 ad milia pasuum
bis mille praetervectis sic appellata, quod psitacos alat inaudite
magnitudinis, ut qui ternos cubitos sequent longitudine.
On the Map by Mercator intituled £ Nova et aucta terrae descriptio
ad usum navigantium emendate accomodata.’ Duisburg, 1569
Nova Guinea que ab Andrea Corsali Florentine videtur dici
Terra de piccinacoli. Forte Sabadij insula est Ptolomeo si
modo insula est, nam sitne insula an pars continents australis
ignotu adhuc est.
Hie in latitudine 42 gr. distancia 450 leucarum a capite Bonae
Spei et 600 a promontorio S. Augustini inventum est promon-
torium Terrae Australis, ut annotavit Martinus Fernandas
Denciso in sua Summa Geographiae.
Psittacorum Regio sic a Lusitanis hue libegio vento appulsis
cum Callicutum peterent appellata propter earum avium ibidem
multitudinem. Porro cum hujus terrae littus ad 2000 miliarium
prosequuti essent necdum tamen finem invenerunt, inde austral-
em continentem attigisse indubitatum est.
Vehemens admodum est fluxus maris versus ortum et occasum
inter Madagascar et Romeros insulas ita ut difficilima hue
illinc sit navigatio, teste M. Paulo Yen : lib. hi., cap. 40 quare


non admodum multum haec littora a Madagascar distare necesse
est ut contractione alveo orientalis oceanus in occidentalem
magno impetu se fundat et refundat. Astipulatur huic Cretici
cuiusdam Venetorum ad regem Portugallie legati epistola, quem
nudos hie degere viros habet.
On the Mapintituled'Hemispheriu ab sequinoctiali linea ad circulu
poli atarctici ’ in the Speculum Orbis Terrse of Cornelius de Judseis
(Cornelis de Jode) Antverpige, 1593 :
Maxima et admiranda insula occidentalis America, nunc quarta
pars orbis nominata: ditissima fertilissimaq; omniu reru ad
vita Veteribus philosophis, cosmographis et
potentissimis Monarchis ignota et primu imperante Carolo V.
perlustrata. In his peninsulis et isthmo sunt maxime temporu
et reru variationes : quonia subiacent incoli 4 zonis, una frigida
est, altera torrida, tertia et quarta temperata.
Lusitani hanc spei legentes capitis promontoriu hanc terram
austra vers’ extare viderunt: sed nondu implorauere.
Habitantes sub hoc circulo cuius capacitas maior est tota
Europa habent die continuu 6 menses nimiru ab sequinoctio
autumnali usq. ad sequinoctiu vernale: et contra quonia incole
zona frigida habetes Polu in zenit: perpendiculariter et
verticularit.
J. Walch & Sons, Printers, Hobart.






111 I II
01752559
1508


BY THE SAME AUTHOR;
The First Expedition of the Portuguese to Banda,
and the Events Antecedent Thereto.
Copies of both Pamphlets may be obtained from
Mr. W. Me Clymont, i St. Clair Terrace, Edinburgh,
Price: One Shilling and Sixpence each.
