

PRO B A B LI T Y
OS’ A
DEEP LEAD OF GOLD
ROUND MELBOURNE.
By C. F. NICHOLLS.
Melbourne;
W.B. STEPHENS, BOOKSELLER, &c., COLLINS STREET WEST.
1 BGS.


F i*.W=J


dss
PROBABILITY
DEEP LEAD OF GOLD
ROUND
MEL B O U U .N E
BY C. F. NICHOLLS.
Hldbottriu :
W . B . STEPHENS, COLLINS ST’ RE E T WES T.


GIPPS LAND MINING AGENCY,
26 COLLINS STREET EAST,
TWO DOORS FROM BANK OF VICTORIA,
r FHE necessity for correct Mining information, and reliable Mining opinion,
I in reference to particular Claims, Quartz Lodes, or the operation of
Mining Companies, has induced Mr. Nicholls to establish the “ Gipps
Land Mining Agency.”
Special information to be had at the office about Gipps Land Mines.
Mines and Machinery reported upon in all parts of the country.


\ M
THE PROBABILITY
MELBOURNE GOLD-FIELD.
The following lecture on the subject of the probability of
a Melbourne Gold-field was delivered by me in the Church
of England school-rooms, on Richmond Hill, on the 23rd
June, 1863; and the first letter was published in the Ballarat
Star, on 28th January, 1862. At the time I was almost a
stranger to Melbourne and its neighborhood, having been
occupied in mining nearly the whole of the ten years I had
been in the country, and chiefly in the Ballarat district. In
May, 1862, I applied to the Government for leave to mine
on the Studley Park reserve, and after some little difficulty
the permission was granted. A shaft was sunk on the hill
at the back of the bank of gravel in which I found the gold,
and bottomed at a depth of twenty-two feet. There was no
wash on the bottom, but a quartz vein of some few inches in
thickness was struck in the bed rock. As far as could be
judged by the sinking of one shaft, the gravel did not run
into the hill; and from several trials I came to the conclusion
that the gold was widely but thinly scattered through the'
gravel, and that the deep ground under the basalt was the
most likely place to find payable dirt.
Of the Collingwood Mining Company, I have only to say
that they started, as many other companies have done, with
too small a capital, and that has been the source of their diffi -
culties and of the ridicule of practical miners. Ballarat men
never ridiculed the theory of a deep lead as stated by me,
but they laughed at the inadequate means, and the conse-
quent waste of time. The Company’s luck has served them
in the place of mining experience. After going away from


tlie deep ground, the bottoming, to all appearance, on a payable
gutter reef has saved the Company from extinction. Judging
from what could be seen on top at the time the prospects
were tried, I should conclude that bottom has been struck at
one end or other of the shaft; but that the dip in the shaft
has not been bottomed, though it might easily be so, and I
believe it must be before the shaft is puddled up. In the
report presented by the manager, and unanimously adopted,
at the last meeting of the Company, he is made to say that
he expects to have to go some thirty feet before bottoming.
If this be so, we are to believe that payable gold is struck
thirty feet above the bottom. It can hardly be that the
manager has said what he meant. I have no doubt that the
shaft is within a foot or two of being bottomed, and that the
dip is to the first bore, in a westerly direction, and that the
reef will be found payable to the gutter, which has yet to be
tested, but which will probably prove to be very rich.
DISCOVERY OE A MELBOURNE GOLD-FIELD.
LECTURE BY MR. C. E. NICHOLES.
On Monday evening, 23rd June, 1863, Mr. C. F. Nicholls
delivered a lecture at St. Stephen’s school-room, Richmond,
on “ The existence of a deep lead of gold in the suburbs of
Melbourne, and how to work it.” The chair was occupied
by the Hon. J. G. Francis, Esq., M.L.A.
The subject of the lecture had excited a great deal of
curiosity in the neighborhood of Melbourne, and several
influential persons were amongst the audience.
The Chairman having introduced the lecturer, Mr. Nicholls
after a few introductory remarks said—l had no intention to
make this what is called a scientific lecture, which generally
means something very learned, very philosophical and very
uninteresting. But you must not suppose from this that I
despise science or reject the labors of the chemist or metal-
lurgist. I only despise pretended science and assumed learn-
ing. This evening we have a tangible and practicable question
to deal with, and we can for to-night let the question of the
origin of the gold rest. No doubt its solution would be more
than interesting, for it would enable us to fix the geological
era of quartz lodes, and to say that wherever the bed rocks of
a country were visible, there was gold or the reverse, with
certainty. The subject is very interesting and fascinating to
some minds, and might be made entertaining also. There


are several points relative to the modes of occurrence of gold,
which have as yet received but very little attention from
scientific men at home, and—with one exception—no atten-
tion at all from scientific men here. How does gold originate
or how does it occur ? is a common question, and the miner
generally answers, “ in quartz reefs and alluvial deposits/ 7
The chemist will tell you that it has been formed in the ten-
drils of the vine and in the roots of the violet, that it is
indeed almost universally disseminated through rocks and
clays in its metallic state, and it may exist as an oxide and a
sulphuret. Indeed, it may be said to exist in some such state,
for the chemist has detected gold in a condition which would
imply that it has existed in other than a metallic state.
Nothing may he said to he known about the origin of gold,
and very little indeed as to how extensively it may be dis-
tributed through the crust of the earth. If we look at the
researches of the metallurgist in other directions, we find many
suggestive facts. Even the dreams of the alchemists have a
gleam of probability, not in the transmuting of metals, but
in the making of them. You all know the new and brilliant
metal ornaments that now decorate the beauty and youth of
the metropolis. Well, it is only as it were yesterday, that
the metallurgist succeeded in producing from the despised
clay which we tread upon the metal called aluminum. It
was only in 1837 that Wholer was able to obtain a grey
powder which was really the pure metal aluminum. In 1845
he was able to describe its appearance, and thanks to the
labors of Deville, Oested, and Dick, this beautiful metal is
now coming into general use. It is reasonable to suppose
that in the arcana of nature, many things as startling as the
conversion of common clay into a white and brilliant metal
like aluminum may yet be discovered. Perhaps in relation
to gold, a metal of the nature of which the chemist is entirely
ignorant. We do not know what may yet be the results of
the experiments made by the Germans, whereby analysis is
effected by observing the condition of bodies under the in-
fluence of polarised light. It is quite within the region of
probability that wonderful revelations may yet be made as to,
the modes of occurrence of gold. To-night, however, we
must not indulge in theories or scientific fancies, however
interesting or valuable they may be, but direct our attention
to the special subject in hand, which is interesting to all of
us in different ways, and of some importance to the country
at large. The lecturer then proceeded at some length to


describe the nature of the discoveries of gold which he had
made in the gravel of Studley Park, and drew the attention
of the audience to the remarkable resemblance which existed
between the valley of the Yarra with the neighborhood of
the Ballaarat mining district.
The following two letters, which were published in the
Ballaarat Star, at the respective dates affixed to them,
formed the substance of the lecturer's description of the
auriferous indications of the Yarra Valley, and of the course
of the deep leads :
PROBABILITY OF A DEEP LEAD IN MEL-
BOURNE.
Sir, —Almost every miner who thinks at all upon the sub-
ject of the mining resources of this country, considers that
what we already know indicates the extent of what we do
not know of the undeveloped mining resources yet to be
opened out. Not half-a-dozen years ago (9) no miner would
have thought of penetrating through basaltic rock to look
for gold. Now, on Ballaarat, Creswick, Talbot, and other
places, the principal leads are being worked under the rock,
the rock sinking ranging from 30 to over 400 feet in depth.
The presence of basalt rock in itself is no indication of gold,
but it is an indication of deep ground, and the importance of
that indication is known to every miner of any experience.
The theory of the volcanic origin of the basalt is generally
accepted by scientific men, with, I think, the exception of
Mr. Evan Hopkins. It is supposed to have been in a fluid
state, and, as it poured out of the craters of now extinct
volcanos, to have —by the law that affects all fluids—filled in
the deep ground in its neighborhood. That deep ground
would, in most instances, be the ancient water-courses of the
country. Whether the theory of the origin of basalt be right
or wrong is of little consequence to my argument, as I
believe that all the known facts go to show that the basalt
does cover the deep ground. Another fact, generally ad-
mitted by miners and scientific observers, is that the course
of our known leads is in the same main direction as our
surface water-courses, and generally in their immediate
neighborhood. These facts are the basis of my suppositions,
and will enable your readers to follow me clearly.
The first thing that strikes an observant miner in Mel-
bourne and its immediate neighborhood is the absence of


gravel. There is none in the garden walks of the suburbs
nor on the public side walks, nothing but the debris of the
basalt quarries. Walking for the first time from Richmond
Hill, down Church-street, across the Church-street bridge,
I came to the cutting on the Chapel-street side of the Yarra.
It is a slate reef having the general appearance of the bed
rocks in auriferous neighborhoods. Turning round to look
back for the opposite reef, I saw Richmond Hill, and went
back to examine that at the railway cutting at its foot, and
found it of the same character as its opposite neighbor.
Between these two reefs or bed rocks cropping out on the
surface is the Yarra river, and between it and Richmond
Hill is filled in with basalt rock. Here then is deep ground,
probably the old bed of the Yarra before the basalt rock
filled it in. There are several quarries in the immediate
neighborhood, one about 70 feet deep in the rock, and no
sign of its giving out; judging from the tops of the hills not
covered by the basalt and by the depth of the quarries, I
should expect that there is about 200 feet in depth of
rock near Melbourne. The sources of the Yarra and its
tributaries are I believe the Dandenong, the Plenty, and the
Great Dividing Ranges, all known to be auriferous. The
present bed of the Yarra is said to be auriferous. Gold is
said to have been found at Hawthorne and Kew, and
Anderson’s Creek diggings—a tributary of the Yarra—are
well known. No wonder there is no gravel in Melbourne,
it is all covered with basalt rock. From these facts I infer
that there is a large, deep, and probably rich lead of gold
running round Melbourne to the Bay, and that we must
look for it under the basalt and adjacent to the high ground
furthest from the present bed of the river. If my inference
is correct, what an immense field might be opened out. The
course of the lead is clearly indicated for a considerable dis-
tance, and embraces Melbourne from Prince’s Bridge to
Studley Park Bridge, being about fifteen miles. These few
hints may lead to other facts being known, and perhaps
may direct attention to an important subject.
Of the country up the Yarra I know nothing personally,
but I am told that the run of basalt rock is continuous to
the Yan Yean reservoir. The valley of the Yarra is the
great outlet to the ocean for the watershed of all that
immense auriferous district at the sources of the rivers in
the dividing ranges. Imagine the basalt rock removed, and
Melbourne becomes a rangy country like Jim Crow in the


Hepburn District. This character is indicated by the sur-
rounding country, and the auriferous indications would be
exposed and easily detected. Had it not been for the
basalt rock, we might have had our first Bendigo or Bal-
laarat within a stone’s throw from Melbourne.—l re-
main, &c. C. F, Nicholls.
January 38, 1863.
PROBABILITY OF A MELBOURNE GOLD FIELD.
Sir, —Four months ago I wrote you an account of my sup-
position that a deep lead of gold lay under the basaltic rock
in the valley of the Yarra, and gave my reasons for the sup-
position. The theory of four months back is now to my
mind a fact. In my former communication I explained the
relation of the valley of the Yarra to the ranges to the east.
The Jordan and other diggings are satisfactory proofs of the
richness of the gold deposits on this side of the great dividing
range, and that before long we are likely to have as rich and
celebrated an Eastern gold-field on the Melbourne side of
the dividing range as any of our Western or North-
western gold-fields. It was also pointed out that the run of
bluestone (basalt) filled in the deep ground round Melbourne,
and forming the northern and western bank of the river,
nearly surrounded Melbourne. That a deep lead existed I
had no doubt, but to justify the supposition of its being rich
I considered that is was necessary to find auriferous ranges
in its immediate neighborhood, and gold-bearing quartz reefs
intersecting the course of the lead and probably acting as
local feeders. These I believe to exist. Gold-bearing reefs
have been worked at Boroondara, four miles from Melbourne,
and on a farm of Mr. Peter Smith, about eight miles from
Melbourne. Gold has been found in alluvial drifts at North
Melbourne, at Emerald Hill, at St. Kilda, at Greville-street
station, at Kew, Hawthorn, and at Studley Park, making a
circle round Melbourne of about thirteen miles. My own
special search led to the discovery of heavy gold in the gravel
at Studley Park on the 33rd February last, and a speck or
two of fine gold and a large per centage of black sand out of
as much wash-dirt as I could poke up with a stick from a
gravel pit and carry home in a cambric handkerchief. At
Prahran there are like indications. On the south side of
Prince’s bridge, near the St. Kilda road; the same, and
on the hill on which the Exhibition Building stands. I


presume that all the auriferous deposits on the high
ground around Melbourne lead into the deep ground,
the Yarra valley, which is primarily fed by the auriferous
drifts of the Dandenong, Plenty, and great dividing ranges.
Without attempting to be scientific, I rest upon two or three
facts, which, if Government allows me to follow up, may be
dealt with by our savans as seems to them best. I account
for nothing, and do not pretend to interpret nature or justify
scientific induction. I rest upon common-place observation
and mining experience, and judge by analogy and fact. My
special facts are these:—That on the Studley Park reserve
there is opened out to view an unmistakable deposit of wash-
dirt, in which others have found gold, and in which I have
found gold. This washdirt is being carted away to gravel
footpaths and make concrete. 1 have asked Government to
grant me a right or permission to carry on a mining opera-
tion, which will do no more damage to the reserve than is
now being done; and in return I undertake, if it is possible,
as I believe it is, to follow the run of paying dirt (if any)
into the deep ground, and prove the existence of the deep
lead. I must give the Board of Land and W orks the credit
of acting promptly, the President at once stating there would
be no difficulty thrown in the way of anything the Mining
Department thought it wise to do in the matter. The
Mining Department have the matter under consideration,
and have shown an excellent spirit up to the present time.
The difficulty appears to be protecting the reserve from being
rushed. I do not myself see the difficulty, as there is a
special clause protecting reserves against holders of miners’
rights. If not hindered by Government, I hope shortly to
prove that, if we will only use our experience, we may find
better things under our feet than over the sea.
C. P. Nigholls.
Melbourne, 37th May, 1862.
Proceeding to the subject of co-operative mining, the lec-
turer said that the chief cause of failure in undertakings of
that nature had been the absence of the principle of emula-
tion, by which he meant a system by which the workman
would receive a return for his labor and skill proportionate to
his industry and application. He instanced some cases in
which such a system had been adopted, and had been attended
with the most beneficial results, forming a marked contrast
to those too numerous cases in which, under other systems.


the drones claimed an equal share of the profits with the
bees of the mining hive. The lecturer then proceeded to
say ; —I have now, in as plain and practical a manner as my
ability would allow me, endeavored to manifest to your under-
standings what appears so clear to mine. It is quite possible
that I may not have succeeded, as I am well aware that I
can lay no claim to that high class of oratory which rouses
and stirs the feelings, exalting the most common-place sub-
ject, and reaching the understanding of the listener even in
spite of himself. My pretensions are less ambitious—my
aim has been the more humble, but perhaps not less useful
one of supplying the facts which will enable you to think for
yourselves, to judge for yourselves, and to draw your own
conclusions—of giving you the benefit of an experience
which those who live in cities can rarely obtain through
their own personal knowledge, and of enabling you to apply
those facts and that experience to the case in hand. If I
have convinced you that the supposition of the existence of a
deep lead of gold under the rock that surrounds the hill upon
which we are assembled is a reasonable one, that the matter
is worth thinking about, and probably of being put to the
test of actual experiment, some of you who take an interest
in the welfare of the neighborhood—in its progress and
prosperity—may deem it wise to take some practical action
upon the hints that have been given. I have every faith
that those who do so will aid in the development of a new
gold-field, but it must be remembered that success in mining
depends as much upon the exercise of prudence and caution,
as upon a display of vigor and energy ; that persistency and
patience are as necessary as skill and experience. I have
endeavored to point out some of the advantages of associative
bodies, while I have not sought to disguise their incidental
disadvantages. I have alluded to their points of weakness as
well as their elements of strength—to the danger and diffi-
culties which are sometimes placed in the balance in estimat-
ing their utility, their capacity, and their power. If working
men can find a captain of industry capable of leading them
and of controlling their energies and capacities to useful
industrial ends—or, I should rather say, if they themselves
have the virtue necessary for such associations ; if they can
be true to each other, open, honest, and manly—workers and
doers, and not mere talkers and grumblers, waiting on
Government as their special providence, then will co-opera-
tion be not only possible but successful —a fact instead of the


farce which it has too often proved. That description of
mind and body which leads to order, regularity, and method,
is essential to success in this as in every other kind of under-
taking. When subordination is possible, the organisation of
labor need no longer he a myth; without it, co-operative
companies are nothing more than the combination of weak-
ness, folly, and incompetency. The organisation of labor
has been the theory of philanthropists, and the theme of philo-
sophers and great orators. It has been the watchword of
revolution in Europe, the dream of enthusiasts, and the hope
of some of the soundest thinkers of modern times. The
working men are the only possible realisers of it, and never
before had they stood on such vantage ground as in this their
adopted country; never before had they had the same means
and appliances for the attainment of the desired object; never
before had they held the same influence in the state, and the
same power of worthily exercising it; never before has oppor-
tunity so offered or so advantaged them. The mines of this new
country are their own, if they know how to use them. Their
destiny and the destiny of their posterity is in their own
hands, if they are but wise and resolute enough to master it.
Millions of acres of known but unworked auriferous land,
thousands of untried quartz lodes await their combined
industry. Mining, still in its infancy, will so remain for
years without their united aid. In Europe they count by
fathoms the depth they delve into the bowels of the earth to
wrest from nature her hidden treasures —here we reckon by
feet and inches. Here is an almost illimitable field open to
the workman, if labor were properly organised; here exists an
opportunity never before granted to him for testing, under
the most advantageous circumstances, his capacity for organ-
isation —his aptness for associated industry. To the skilled
and unskilled the field of labor is open, to every willing
worker, providing room for any surplus population, if such a
thing is possible on God’s earth. Labor may truly be said
to be the king of the mines, and the master of the most
precious of metals. Labor is the chief charge in all large
mines here, and the wages sheet is the rock that has wrecked
many a hopeful enterprise, and many a goodly company.
This labor capital, which is so essentially necessary, is the work-
ing man’s stock in trade; and while health and strength
remain to him, it will always pay his calls upon it. It cannot
be done without —no machinery can supersede it—no skill
take its place. The enterprise I have pointed out to you is


before you —at your very doors, and beneath your feet. Tt
remains for you to test it or not, as you think best. To close
with a quotation from our great poet, trite but most apposite'
to the matter in hand—
“ There is a tide in the affairs of man,
Which, taken at the flood,
Leads on to fortune. ”
If we hesitate and delay, waiting for the morrow that never
comes, the opportunity may never more offer. Time, with
implacable steps and unrelenting speed, moves onward, leav-
ing the weak, the foolish, the pretending, and the procras-
tinating stranded and wrecked, without hope and without
reprieve. To-day is our own, and in it everything is pos-
sible; to-morrow does not belong to us, and its events may
elude our grasp.
The following report shows that I was not alone in the
inferences I had drawn from the facts referred to:
To Mr. C. F. Nicholls.
Sir, —According to your instructions I have surveyed ten
acres of the Studley Park Reserve, taking in the two cuttings
mentioned by you, and have made a careful inspection of the
ground and neighborhood. Of the auriferous character of the
ground I think there can be no doubt. The north cutting
abutting on the Johnston-street Bridge Road, and the
southern cutting abutting on the Studley Park Bridge Road,
are to all appearances auriferous. I think it probable that a
quartz reef is situated between the cuttings, and that the pro-
per testing of this locality (whether it prove rich enough to be
profitable to the proprietors or not) might lead to proving
the auriferous character of the adjacent flat, which probably
contains much larger deposits of auriferous dirt. Should this
be so, and a deep lead be proved to exist under the bluestone
(which I think very probable), it would give employment to
several thousand miners. Should this happen, not only would
a lead be traced southward through Collingwood flat, but
there would be the same chance of its being traced north
towards Anderson’s Creek, thus opening up a large tract of
almost untried country.
(Signed) Robert Mason, Land Surveyor.
Melbourne, 15th May, 1862.


Since the letters were published, and the lecture delivered,
there have been various objections to the theory propounded
in them; but new facts have become known tending to sup-
port my views, At Diamond Creek a valuable quartz lode
is now being worked, and at Morang, about fourteen miles
from Melbourne, large areas of alienated laud are known to
be auriferous, in the neighborhood of the River Plenty, which
flows into the Yarra. One objection raised against the rich-
ness of the deep leads round Melbourne is “ that gold does
not travel,” and that the auriferous character of the ranges
that feed the Yarra and its tributaries is not sufficient to justify
the inference of the lead being payable. It may be conceded
that gold does not travel far, under ordinary circumstances; just
as in washing auriferous dirt in sluice-boxes, with the dirt
kept alive by forking, and an adequate quantity of water for
the work, and no more, all the gold will be found on the
upper part of the top sluice-box; but let the dirt harden in
the bottom, or double the supply of water, or both together,
and it will be found that the gold will travel faster than is
pleasant for the worker. Suppose a valley, a tremendous
ground-sluice, with the rain and mountain torrents washing
away the spurs of the auriferous ranges, cutting gullies in
the hills, disintegrating quartz lodes —a Titanic sluicing
operation, carried on by nature’s own forces—not only
affecting the head ranges, but the neighbouring hills,
from which rivulets feed the main water-course ; sup-
pose these operations to be going on for countless ages,
diversified by tremendous floods, to which that which lately
surrounded a part of Melbourne was a trifle, and the least
experienced person can understand how quickly gold travels,
and how far, if the force or motive power be adequate. I
have pointed out how little the chemist knows of the nature
of gold, and how little science knows of its modesof occurrence.
It is, therefore, justifiable to look for new facts as well as old.
The bed rocks upon which Melbourne is built, and Richmond
Hill, are what geologists call the new silurian; and as up to
the present time no payable gold-field has been worked in
their immediate neighborhood, it is inferred that these rocks
are not sufficiently auriferous to justify the supposition that
payable deposits exist in their immediate vicinity. In answer
to this, if it requires any but that of practical experiment,
are the facts that gold has been found in the nume-
rous places named by me round Melbourne, and that
on the shoulder of Richmond Hill heavy gold was found


in close affinity with the hard bed rock by one of the
men who sunk Mr. Hancock’s cellar, and that the same man
found gold on the opposite side of the Yarra when cutting a
gutter for Col. Anderson—not mere specks, but from one to
five pennyweight pieces. Though the bed rock may not be
payable, it is reasonable to conclude that it is rich enough to
help feed the deep lead under the basalt.
Another objection is, that as the river claims in the present
bed of the Upper Yarra do not pay, the ancient bed of the
river, now covered with basalt, is not rich. It is hardly
necessary to point out that the fact that gold can be found
almost anywhere in the present river bed, though not in
payable quantities, tells in favor of the deep lead, as it is
positive proof of the process assumed to have been going on,
and that gold does travel. The richness of the gutter has to
be proved by experiment; it would be absurd to be positive
on that point. Those who, from the poverty of the present
bed of the river, assume that the ancient water-course must
be poor, might with as much logic and correctness assert
that because the beds of the Leigh and the Yarrowee are not
payable, the deep leads of Ballarat must be poor.
The proof of the pudding is in the eating. The Colling-
Avood Mining Company has the proof in its hands. With the
Avater out of their shaft, any experienced miner could tell
the Company in an hour whether it has bottomed or not, and
whether the bottom is a payable gutter reef or not. Presum-
ing the prospects to be reliable that were washed out on Fri-
day, January, 1864,1 have no hesitation in assuming that the
gutter or deep ground will be payable. The shaft is reported
to be 111 feet deep, being at least twenty feet shalloAver than
the bore, and a considerable depth below the bottom of the
Bay. In sinking, sixty-two feet of basalt rock was gone
through, then about twenty feet of black sandy clay, which
brought them on to floating reef which, I suppose, Avill lead
on to bottom. That which has been sent up is a green slaty
reef containing small rounded quartz, sand, and pyrites, as
well as gold. The water that now runs into the shaft is
reported to be entirely from the basalt rock, if so, it would
be got rid of by puddling the shaft, and the men who work
would do so with comfort. At present work is suspended,
the dispute between the company and the contractor being
unsettled. It is expected that a new manager will be
appointed, and that work will be resumed in a few days.
W. B. STEPHENS, COLLINS-STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.


T II E
North Crinoline Quartz lining Company
(registeebd),
NORTH GIPPS LAND.
Capital, £10,500, in 1500 Shares of £7 each.
Deposit, £1 per Share; 10s. per Share on Allotment, and the balance in Galls
not exceeding ss. per Share per Month.
f iNE of the Quartz Lodes to be worked by the Company, “ The Crino-
line,” varies from 2 4 to 20 feet wide, and the yield of gold from 2J ozs.
to 16 ozs. to the ton. The prospecting claim is valued at from £25,000 to
£30,000.
Two-thirds of the Shares are already applied for, and the allotment will
positively take place on the Ist of March, and work be started immediately.
For particulars and Prospectuses, apply to the Office of the Gipps
Land Mining Agency, 26 Collins-street East, two doors from the Bank of
Victoria.
Vide Argus, Jan. 26 —In No. 1 North Crinoline, the reef has been struck
in the tunnel, 300 feet below the cap. The stone is rich in gold and other
minerals. A quarter of a pennyweight of gold to the tin dish was obtained
from the casing of the reef.


T H E
North Crinoline Quartz lining Company
(registered),
NOR T H GIF P S LA N I).
Capital, £10,500, in 1500 Shares of £7 each.
Deposit, £1 per Share; 10s. per Share on Allotment, and the balance in Calls
not exceeding s s. per Share per Month.
ANE of the Quartz Lodes to be worked by the Company, “ The Crino-
line,” varies from 24 to 20 feet wide, and the yield of gold from 24 ozs.
to 16 ozs. to the ton. The prospecting claim is valued at from £25,000 to
£30,000.
Two-thirds of the Shares are already applied for, and the allotment will
positively take place on the Ist of March, and work be started immediately.
For particulars and Prospectuses, apply to the Office of the Gipps
Land Mining Agency, 26 Collins-street East, two doors from the Bank of
Victoria.
Vide Argus, Jan. 26— In No. 1 North Crinoline, the reef has been struck
in the tunnel, 300 feet below the cap. The stone is rich in gold and other
minerals. A quarter of a pennyweight of gold to the tin dish teas obtained
from the casing of the reef.
