

PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
SIXTH CONFERENCE
FEDERATION.
SEPTEMBER, 1885.
Melbourne:
FERGUSSON & MOORE, PRINTERS, 48 FLINDERS LANE EAST,
1885.




MINUTES
OF CONFERENCE.
General Code-
INDEX
Report on Rules and Forms (5
Formulated Basis of Federation 7 &c.
Constitution and Process of the Federal Assembly - • 11 &c.
Questions to be put to Ministers, &c. 14
Declaratory Act and Explanatory Statement - - - - 14
Directory for Public Worship 14
Motion by Rev. G. D. Buchanan 12-14
V
Motion by Rev. A. Hardie 8-15
Motion by Rey. Dr. Gilchrist relative to Remit and
First Federal Assembly 17




MINUTES OF THE PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
SIXTH CONFERENCE
OF THE
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCHES OE AUSTRALIA
AND TASMANIA.
The Sixth General Conference of the Presbyterian Churches of
Australia and Tasmania met, according to appointment, in the
Assembly Hall, Collins Street, Melbourne, on Wednesday, the 16th
day of September, 1885, at 11 a.m.
The Chair was taken by the Rev. J. Clark, Moderator of the
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, and the
Conference was opened with praise, reading of the Word, and
prayer.
The Rev. Dr. Nish, Victoria, and the Rev. G. Maclnnes, 8.D.,
New South Wales, were appointed to act as Clerks to the Conference.
The Chairman gave a brief opening address.
The Roll of the Conference was made up, and it was found that
the following Delegates were present: —
Victoria, —Rev. J. Clark, Dr. Macdonald, Dr, Rentoul, Dr. Nish,
J. Megaw, J. G. Mackie, W. G. Fraser, A. MacVean, J. T. Robertson,
J. Weir, W. Ross, J. Gardner, J. D. Dickie, A. Stewart, A. Hardie,
D. S. Maxwell, M. Macdonald, A. McDonald, A. R. Boyd McCay, H.
McFarlane, J. Steele, J. Ballantyne, W. S. Login, S. Fraser, W. S.
Rolland, G. D. Buchanan, D, S, McEachran, W. M. Alexander, J.
Henderson, with Messrs. J, Macßain, W. Anderson, A. Turnbull, T.
J. Finlay, J. Bennie, J. Baird, and J. Balfour.


New South Wales. —Rev. Dr. Gilchrist, G. Maclnnes, J. M,
Ross, P, Fitzgerald, R. Collie, J. C. Macdonald, and A. M. Tait.
Queensland. —Rev. J. F. McSwaine, with Messrs. D. P. Milne
and D. McNabb.
South Australia.— Rev. J Hall Angus, with Messrs. D. Murray
and T. W. Fleming.
Tasmania. — Rev. J. Scott,
The following Ministers and Elders being present took their seats
as associated members of the Conference : —Rev. J. N icol, G. M.
Connor, D. S. Brunton, J. A. Stuart, A. Yule, J). McKenzie,
H. McKail, A. Robb, C. Robinson, R. Angus, W. J. Gillespie, with
Messrs. R. Harper and G. Young.
The Rev. Dr. Talmage, of Amoy, was cordially welcomed by the
Chairman, and invited to sit as an associated member of the Con-
ference, and take part in its proceedings.
Dr. Nish submitted the following programme of the business of
the Conference, which had been prepared by the Committee on
Rules and Forms :
1. Report of the Committee on Rules and Forms,
2. Formulated Basis of Federation,
8. Constitution and powers of the Federal Assembl}'.
4. Questions to be put to Ministers and Elders at their Ordination
and Induction, and Formula to be signed by them.
5. Declaratory Act and Explanatory statement.
6. Directory for Public Worship.
7. General Code.
The programme was approved.
Dr. Nish, as Convener of the Committee on Rules and Forms,
read their Report, and on the motion of the Rev A. Hardie,
seconded by the Rev J. M. Ross, the Report was received, and the
Committee, and especially the Convener, were unanimously thanked
fer their diligence.
On the motion of Dr. Macdonald, seconded by Mr. W. Anderson,
it was agreed that the Clerk should read the Formulated Basis of
Federation adopted at last Conference, and that thereupon the


Conference should proceed to consider its clauses seriatim. The
motion was approved, and the Conference proceeded to the con-
sideration of the Basis accordingly.
On the motion of the Rev. D. S. McEachran, seconded by Dr
Gilchrist, the consideration of Clause 1 was postponed for the
present. .
Mr. R. Harper, seconded by Dr. Gilchrist, moved that Clause 2
be read thus : —“ The names of the present Supreme Courts of the
various Churches entering into the Union are to remain unaltered.”
Dr. Nish, seconded by the Rev. J. Ballantyne, moved as an
amendment, that Clause 2 be read thus:—“ The names of the
present Supreme Courts of the Federated Churches are to remain
unaltered.” The amendment was carried.
The Rev. D. S. M'Eachran, seconded by Dr. Gilchrist, moved that
Clause 3 be read thus:—“Each such Supreme Court is to retain the
control of its own properties, and, in the meantime, of its own
funds.”
Mr, Fleming, seconded by Mr. Murray, moved, as an amend-
ment, that Clause 3be read thus ; —“ Each such Supreme Court is
to retain control of its properties and funds, and to have power in
all matters connected therewith.” The amendment was carried.
Mr. Fleming, seconded by Mr. Murray, moved, as an additional
Clause: —“ Each such Supreme Court is to have power in all other
matters now under its jurisdiction, except as hereafter provided,”
The motion was approved.
It was agreed to substitute for clauses 4,5, and 6, the following:—
4. The decisions of such Supreme Courts are to be final in all
cases, except where any such Supreme Court decides, with the
consent of parties, to refer a matter to the Federal Assembly lor
advice or arbitration.
5. The Supreme Court with which the case originated, adopts
simpliciter the decision of the Federal Assembly in regard to it,
and proceeds thereafter on its own authority to give the required
effect to the decision.
6. Members of the Supreme Court, who disapprove of the decision
thus adopted, retain their right of dissent, but the privilege ot
dissent thus exercised and recorded has no other result except to


relieve the dissentients personally from taking any part in giving
formal effect to the decision.
At this stage the following Committee were appointed to consider
a communication from the Rev. D. Shearer, of Perth., W.A., viz.:—
Rev. J. A. Stuart, J. Clark, Dr. Gilchrist, Dr. Nish, G. Maclnnes, J. M.
Ross, J. H. Angus, J. Scott, with Messrs. D. P. Milne, T. W. Fleming;
Rev. J. A. Stuart, Convener. The Committee were appointed to
meet on Friday, at 10 a m., and to report.
The following Committee were appointed to consider the reference
from the General Assembly of New South Wales relative to the
Presbytery of Murrumbidgee, viz.:—Rev. A. Macdonald, Dr.
Macdonald, Dr. Nish, Dr. Gilchrist, J. M. Ross, J. C. McDonald,
A. M. Tait, A. MacVean, J. F. McSwaine, J. Scott, and Mr. D.
Murray; Rev. A. Macdonald, Convener. The Committee were
appointed to meet at 10 a.m., on Thursday, and to report.
It was then arranged that the Rev. J. M. Ross, of New South
Wales, should preside at the Sederunt of this evening; Mr. D. P.
Milne, of Queensland, at the Morning Sederunt next day; Mr. D.
Murray, of South Australia, at the Evening Sederunt; and Rev. J.
Scott, of Hobart, at the Morning Sederunt on Friday.
The Rev. A. Hardie gave notice that when the Chapter in the
Code of Rules and Forms on Congregational affairs is taken up, he
intends to move the insertion of certain rules relative to Sabbath
Schools.
The Conference adjourned, to meet this evening at 7 p.m., which
having been publicly intimated, the Sederunt was closed with
prayer.
JAMES NISH, I
GEORGE MacINNES, j Clerks *
Assembly Hall, Collins Street, Melbourne,
16th September, 1885.
The Conference met, pursuant to adjournment, at 7 p.m.
The chair was taken by the Rev. J. M. Ross, and the Meeting
was opened with reading of the Word and prayer.


The Conference resumed consideration of the Formulated Basis
of Federation.
The Rev. Professor Rentoul, seconded by the Rev. J. Gardner,
moved the omission of Clause 7, and the substitution of the follow-
ing;--“The Theological Halls and Seminaries of the various
Churches are to remain as heretofore, under the control of the
several Supreme Courts to which they at present respectively belong,
provided, however, that all Students of Theology, wherever they may
have been trained, be required to undergo examinations on common
subjects prescribed by the Federal Assembly through its Board.
Dr. Nish, seconded by the Rev. J. Ballantyne, moved as an
amendment, that the clause stand as follows:—" The Theological
Halls and Seminaries of the Federated Churches are to be under
the general supervision of the Federal Assembly, and all Students
of Theology, wherever they may have been trained, are required to
undergo the examinations prescribed by the Federal Assembly
through its Board.”
The amendment was carried by a large majority.
Dr. Gilchrist, seconded by Mr. Murray, moved an additional
clause as follows:— ■“ The appointment of Professors and Teachers
in the Theological Halls and Seminaries is to remain, as at present,
in the hands of the several Supreme Courts.”
Dr. Nish, seconded by Rev. J. F. McSwaine, moved as an amend-
ment That the nomination of Professors, and the initiatory steps
for their removal, rest as at present with the various Supreme Courts,
who have the immediate supervision ot the Halls and Seminaries
with which they are connected, but that power be conceded to the
Federal Assembly to give counsel when they shall see cause in
regard to these matters, and that it be remitted to a Committee to
consider more maturely in what form due effect can best be given
to the exercise of this power, and report at a future Sederunt.”
The motion was carried.
The Conference adjourned, to meet at 11 a.m. next day, which
having been publicly intimated, the Sederunt was closed with prayer.
JAMES NISH, 1
GEORGE MacINNES, j Uerks *


Assembly Hall, Collins Street, Melbourne,
]7th September, 1885.
The Conference met, pursuant to adjournment, at 11 a.m.
The chair was taken by Mr. D. P, Milne, and the Meeting was
opened with praise, reading of the Word and prayer.
The minutes of the morning and evening Sederunts of the
previous day were read and confirmed.
The Conference resumed consideration of the Formulated Basis
of Federation,
The Rev. J. M. Ross, seconded by Dr. Gilchrist, moved the
omission of the first part of Clause 8, and the substitution of the
following:—“(1) The Foreign Mission operations of the Federal
Churches are placed under the supervision and direction of the
Federal Assembly; (2) When any of the Federated Churches may
desire to hand over the management of their'internal Heathen
Mission work to the supervision of the General Board, the Federal
Assembly have power to confirm this arrangement.”
The Rev. A. Hardie, seconded by the Rev. W. M. Alexander,,
moved as an amendment the substitution of the following : —“ The
Heathen Mission Committees of the various Churches shall report
their proceedings to the Federal Assembly.”
The motion was carried by a large majority.
From this decision the Rev. A. Hardie and W. M. Alexander
craved leave to record their dissent, which was granted.
It was agreed to substitute for the latter part of Clause 8 the
following : —“ The various General Assemblies, while required to
report their Home Mission operations and the arrangements made
by them for the support of the Ministry within their bounds, are
not to be otherwise limited thereanent by any action of the Federal
Assembly.”
It was agreed to substitute for Clause 9 the following:—“ All
regulations which bear on matters committed to the Federal
Assembly are to be framed by that Assembly.”
It was agreed to substitute for Clause 10 the following : —“ The
foregoing Regulations may be enlarged or amended from time to
time, provided always that no change be made on the Articles of


this Basis, unless with the consent of a majority of all the Pres-
byteries comprised in the Federated Churches. The changes
approved by the Federal Assembly are sent down thereupon to
Presbyteries for their consideration. The returns to these remits
are sent back by the Presbyteries through their respective General
Assemblies, to the next Meeting of the Federal Assembly.’
The Conference, in accordance with previous arrangement, pro-
ceeded thereafter to consider Clause 1 of the Basis of Federation.
Dr. Nish, seconded by the Rev. J. Scott, moved the omission of
Clause 1 in the Basis adopted at last Conference, and the substitu-
tion of the following“ 1. The final Court of Arbitration or Advice
among the Federated Churches, in respect to all matters legitimately
brought before it, and in respect to these matters alone, is called
the Federal Assembly of the Presbyterian Churches of Australia
and Tasmania.”
The Rev. J. Ballantyne, seconded by the Rev. M. Macdonald,
moved as an amendment the substitution of the following “ The
Final Court of Arbitration or Advice among the Federated Churches
is called the Federal Council of the Presbyterian Churches of
Australia and Tasmania.”
The motion was carried.
The Conference then adopted in globo the Formulated Basis of
Federation as now amended.
The Conference adjourned to meet at 7 p.m., which having been
publicly intimated, the meeting was closed with prayer.
JAMES NISH, Inww
GEORGE MacINNES, /^ ieiKS -
Assembly Hall , Collins Street, Melbourne,
VJth September , 1885.
The Conference met, pursuant to adjournment, at 7 p.m.
The chair was taken by Mr. D. Murray, and the meeting was
opened with reading of the Word and prayer.
The Conference proceeded to consider the Constitution and Powers 3. constitution
17 , and Powers of
of the Federal Assembly, and the following resolutions were agreed the Federal
to: —


1. The Federal Assembly consists of representatives from all the
Presbyteries within its bounds. The Representatives, composed of
an equal number of Ministers and Elders, are elected by their
respective Presbyteries, and form one-sixth of the members of
each Presbytery. Presbyteries having less than nine charges are
represented by one Minister and one Elder, and Presbyteries having
nine charges, but less than fifteen, are represented by two Ministers
and two Elders, and so on— i.e., an additional Minister and an
additional Elder are allowed for each six charges after the first nine.
The results of the elections by Presbyteries are reported to their
respective General Assemblies to be forwarded by them to the
Federal Assembly,
2. Presbyteries not having on their rolls a due proportion of
Elders, who are in circumstances to attend the sittings of the
Federal Assembly, may elect bond fide acting Elders within the
bounds of their respective General Assemblies to act as their
representatives under such circumstances, and in the event of
Presbyteries failing to appoint such representatives, they may be
appointed by the General Assembly.
3. The Federal Assembly appoints a Home Mission and Church
Extension Committee, whose duty it is to receive and submit
reports from the Home Mission Committees of the various General
Assemblies.
The Rev. G. D. Buchanan gave notice that at next Sederunt he
would move as follows : —“ Presbyteries at the time of the election
of representatives to the Federal Assembly, also elect an equal
number of alternates, observing the same order as in the election of
principals.”
The Conference adjourned to meet at 11 a.m. next day, which
having been publicly intimated, the Sederunt was closed with prayer.
JAMES NISH, X Ct frks
GEORGE MacINNES, j ULERKS -
Assembly Hall, Collins Street, Melbourne,
18 th September, 1885.
The Conference met, pursuant to adjournment, at 11 a.m.
The Chair was taken by the Rev. J. Scott, and the meeting was
opened with praise, reading of the Word, and prayer.


The minutes of the morning and evening Sederunts of the
previous day were read and confirmed.
The Rev. A. Hardie gave in reasons of dissent from the decision
of the Conference relative to Missions to the Heathen, which were
read and ordered to be kept in retentis.
Dr. Nish gave notice that he would move, before the rising of the Noticeo{
Conference* —“That the following be appointed a Committee on Motlon "
Rules and Forms, with instructions to issue as soon as possible a
revised edition of the General Code, from which all existing
discrepancies shall be eliminated, which shall embrace all the
resolutions adopted at this Conference, and in which the Chapters on
Congregational affairs shall be so enlarged and amended as to
bring it as nearly as may be found practicable into harmony with
the suggestions of the Assemblies and Presbyteries which have
reported on the Code:—viz., Dr. Nish, Dr, Macdonald, Dr. Gilchrist,
Dr. Rentoul, Rev. J. Ballantyne, W. G, Fraser, J. M. Ross, W. Ross,
H. McFarlane, A. Yule, A, Hardie, J. T. Robertson, J, F. McSwaine,
J. Scott, J. Hall Angus, G. Maclnnes, with Messrs. J. M. Davies,
and T. W. Fleming ; Dr. Nish, Convener.
It was agreed to resume consideration of the Constitution and
Powers of the Federal Assembly at 1.30 p.m.
The Rev. A. McDonald, Convener, gave in the Report of the Report ’ Relative-
Committee on the disjunction of the Murrumbidgee Presbytery and from e New° e
the Albury Congregation from the Presbyterian Church of Victoria South ' Valct ’
and its annexation to the New South Wales Church.
On the motion of the Rev. J. M, Ross, seconded by the Rev. Dr.
Macdonald, the Report was adopted.
Dr. Nish, in room of the Convener, gave in the Report of the
° i Resolution
Committee on the communication from the Rev. D. Shearer, of western 40 ’
Perth, Western Australia; and on his motion it was resolved— Australia..
“That this Conference unanimously agree to recommend the
Assemblies of New South Wales and Victoria to vote grants of
at least £5O per annum for the next three years towards the
carrying out of Home Mission operations in Western Australia;
that the Churches in the other Colonies be urged to assist according
to their resources in this good work; that similar grants be solicited
from the Presbyterian Churches in England and Ireland; and that
*p. 15.


appeals be also made to the three Home Churches in Scotland, to
vote grants of (say) £lOO each for the same term, in the confident
hope that under the Divine blessing at least four new charges will
shortly be established in this rising Sister Colony, which has been
too long neglected by our Church.”
The Conference further agreed to request the New South
Wales Church to send the Rev. J. M. Ross to visit Western
Australia at his earliest convenience, and assist in organising the
new charges which are ready, needing to be established with the
least possible delay.
The Conference yet further agreed to recommend that a Committee
representing all the Churches about to be federated be appointed to
act with the Rev, D. Shearer as a Council of Advice in disposing of
the grants which may be obtained for Home Mission operations in
that sister colony, and that all such grants be paid to and through
the Treasurer of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria.”
I The Conference then proceeded to take un the Questions to be
. imisteis. p U f. Ministers and Elders, and the Formula to be signed by them.
when it was unanimously agreed—“ That it is inexpedient to aim at
uniformity in these matters, and that meanwhile it be left to each
of the Federated Churches to use the Questions and Formula which
it may think most fit.”
s Explanatory It was further agreed—“ That the Explanatory Statement and
Statement ana ° L J
Declaratory Declaratory Act, approved at last Conference, be meanwhile omitted
from the Appendix to the General Code, and that it be left with
7~ rfjo each separate Church to introduce them if it see cause, or as it may
see cause, into its Supplementary Code.”
was a^so a o ree( l—That no action should be taken for the
present relative to the Directory for Public Worship.
Motion hy Rw. The Motion of which the Rev. G. D. Buchanan had given notice
G. D. Buoha urn. o
was taken up in the following altered form, and approved unani-
mously ; —“ As much as possible to prevent all failure in the repre-
sentation of the Presbyteries, arising from unforeseen accidents to
those first elected, each Presbytery elects also an alternate repre-
sentative, to supply the place of the first representative in case of
his necessary absence.”


The motion of which Dr, Nish had given notice* relative to the M Ni°h S and r£v
Committee on Rules and Forms was approved unanimously, and the A- Hardie
resolutions of which Rev. A. Hardie had given notice were handed
over to that Committee in terms of this motion.
The Conference then resumed consideration of the Constitution
and Powers of the Federal Assembly.
The following addition to Rule 3 was approved unanimouslv, viz.. 3. constitution
° 1 L J ana Powers of
“ And to offer such suggestions as may conduce to the harmonious aI
and effective carrying out of the Home Mission operations of all the
Federated Churches.”
The following were also unanimously approved as Rules 4, 5 and
b: —
Rule 4. The Federal Assembly appoints a Committee on Missions
to the Heathen, whose duty it is to receive reports from the Heathen
Mission Committees of the various General Assemblies, and to
prepare a Report thereon to be submitted to the Federal Assembly.
5, The contributions of all the Federated Churches towards
Foreign Mission Work are remitted to a common Fund, which is
under the immediate supervision and control of the Federal
Committee.
6. General Assemblies may also send in to the Central Fund the
whole or any part of the contributions which they raise for their
internal Heathen Mission work.
It was moved by Dr. Nish, and seconded by Dr. Gilchrist, that
Rule 7 should be as follows :
Rule 7. The Federal Assembly appoints a Board of Exami-
nation, by whom the questions to be put to Students applying
for admission into the Theological Hall, and also to Students
intending to apply for license, are prepared, and to whom all the
answers returned to these questions must be forwarded by the
Examining Boards of the respective General Assemblies, who are
to conduct the examinations, and who are also to form Sub-Com-
mittees of the General Board; and no Student can be received into
the Hall, nor be taken by any Presbytery on trials for license, until
he shall have received the imprimatur of the General Board.
*p. 13.


The Rev. Professor Rentoul, seconded by the Rev. G. D. Buchanan,
moved as an amendment that the following be Rule 7:—“The Federal
Assembly yet further appoints a Central Board, whose duty it shall
be to secure, so far as is possible, a common understanding as to the
course of study to be pursued in all the Theological Halls and
Colleges, and as to the Sessions during which the several branches
shall be taught; also to see that, so far as is possible, a similar
standard of proficiency shall be required in entramce, exit, or other
examinations by the Examining Boards of the respective Churches.
The motion was carried by a large majority. From this decision
Dr. Rentoul and Mr. J, Balfour craved leave to record their dissent,
which was granted.
The following were approved unanimously as Rules 8 and 9 :
8. The Examination Board reports annually to the Federal
Assembly on the manner in which the Examinations have been
conducted and their results, and submits the Scheme of Examination
for the following year, for approval and confirmation.
9. The Federal Assembly appoints a Theological Hall Committee,
whose duty it is to receive reports from the Theological Hail
Committees of the various General Assemblies, and to present them
in a condensed form; with the view of harmonising the System of
instruction adopted in the different institutions, the Subjects of
Study, the Text Books, and the Exercises prescribed to the Students.
The following was approved as Rule 10 :
10. No law or rule approved by the Federal Assembly can become
a permanent rule or law of the Federated Churches until it shall
have been remitted to all the Presbyteries of the different Churches
and approved by a majority of them.
The following were approved unanimously as Rules 11, 12, 13
and 14 :
11 Presbyteries, in dealing with remits from the Federal Assembly
are required either to approve them or reject them, and in rejecting,
they are free to state the grounds on which their rejection has been
based. They may also approve in part or disapprove in like
manner; but in either case they are required to specify the parts,
of the remit which are so approved or disapproved respectively.


Presbyteries failing to send in a return are held as approving of the
remit.
12. The meetings of the Federal Assembly are held annually in
such leading centres of population as may be agreed upon at the
close of each meeting, and at such times as may be then fixed on
and definitely recorded.
13, A Committee, proportionately representative of all the
Presbyteries of the Federated Churches, is appointed annually by
the Federal Assembly to select the Moderator for the following
year. This Committee holds its meetings at the seat of the
Assembly for the coming year, and members avlio cannot attend
' these meetings communicate their views personally to the Convener,
Two meetings of Committee are held during the year—one for the
nomination of brethren considered eligible for the Chair, and the
other to select one of the brethren so nominated. The names
of the three brethren highest on the list of nominees are communi-
cated to all the members after the first meeting, and at the second
meeting, the nominee who receives the highest number of votes is
declared to be selected, and his selection is then publicly announced.
The votes sent in writing to the Convener have the same force as
the votes of brethren who are present at the meeting.
14. The position and duties of Moderators of the Federal Assembly
are the same with those of Moderators of the General Assemblies.
On the motion of Dr. Gilchrist, it was next unanimously agreed—
Motion relative
“That the Supreme Courts of each of the Federating Churches First Meeting
r . of the Federal
be recommended to pass a resolution at their next Ordinary Meet- Assembly,
ings accepting the Formulated Basis of Federation as adopted by v
this Conference, on the distinct understanding that all other reso-
lutions approved by this Conference are simply sent down for con-
sideration and review, to be reported on to the Committee appointed
to revise the General Code, and to be submitted by them, if neces-
sary, to the First Meeting of the Federal Assembly for confirmation
or amendment; that in the event of the various Supreme Courts
approving of the Basis of Federation, the Committee be instructed
to arrange for having the First Meeting of the Federal Assembly
held in St. Stephen’s Church, Sydney, on the Second Wednesday
of July, 1886;” and further—“ That the Moderator of the First


Federal Assembly be elected by the votes of the majority of all
the Presbyteries of the Federated Churches, and that such elections
are to take place and the results be reported to the Committee on
Rules and Forms not later than the middle of June next, and to be
notified thereafter to the Churches by the Committee with all
convenient speed”
The Minutes of this Sederunt having been read and confirmed,
the Conference was closed with prayer.
JAMES NISH, ) Clerks
GEO. MacINNES, j LERKS -


BUSINESS PAPERS.




INDEX.
I.—Report of the Committee on Rules and Forms - - 5
ll.— Returns from Assemblies, Synods and Presbyteries - 8
lll.— Basis of Union Adopted by Fifth Conference- - - 15
IV. —Formulated Basis of Federation as Amended, &c. - - 17
V.—Formula Adopted at Fifth Conference - - - - 18
Resolution of Fifth Conference Relative to Explana-
tory Statement 18
YII. —Directory for Public Worship 19
VIII
Report of Committee Relative to the Presbytery of a
Murrumbidgee, tfec. 18




APPENDIX.
I.—REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES AND FORMS.
From the returns hereto appended it will be seen that all the
Assemblies, Synods and Presbyteries which have sent in reports,
with three exceptions, approve generally of the proposed Scheme of
Federation and the provisions of the General Code. The three
exceptions consist of the Presbyteries of Melbourne, Geelong and
Mortlake. But, though the objections which they raise are somewhat
formidable in appearance, it will be found, on closer examination,
that they either arise from misapprehension, or are met in large
measure by the amended Basis of Federation which your Com-
mittee have unanimously agreed to recommend, and which they
trust this Conference will, with like unanimity, be prepared to
accept with, at most, very slight modifications.
The objections which have been raised are mainly these:—
1. That there is no regulation in the Code which forbids the
Federal Assembly to control the property presently possessed by
the Churches; and that the Federal Assembly is entrusted in
Section 7, Chapter IV., with powers similar in all respects, except in
the matter of receiving certain kinds of appeals, to the powers now
possessed by the different General Assemblies.
The first part of this objection, it will be seen, is effectively met by
the amended form of the first and third principles in the revised
Basis of Federation ; and the second rests on a misapprehension of
the intent of Rule 7, Chapter IV. This misapprehension may
easily be obviated in future, by a slight change in the phraseology
of the Rule, which, in reality, does not, and never was intended to
entrust the Federal Assembly with any such powers.
2. Objection is next taken to the control given to the Federal
Assembly in the matter of appointing and removing Professors of
Theology. This objection also arises from misapprehension. The
terms of the Rule excepted to are as follows ; —“ The Theological
Halls are directly under the control of the Federal Assembly by
whom Professors are appointed or removed in accordance with * the
rules framed thereanent” Everything depends on the provisions of
the rules so referred to, which have not yet been framed. But it
has always been the intention of your Committee to recommend, as
soon as opportunity was afforded them, that the nomination of the
Professors and the initiatory steps, for their removal should rest with
the Supreme Courts within whose bounds the Halls were situated,
and under whose immediate supervision they were placed, and that
the only power conceded to the Federal Assembly should be the
power of confirming or taking exception if cause should arise to, the
proposals made on such matters by the General Assemblies ; and
your Committee are still of opinion that this will be found to be a
wise and salutary provision.


3. Objection has been taken to appeals being made to the Federal
Assembly in cases of heresy. The full discussion of this objection
must be conducted in the Conference, and your Committee venture
to hope that, when looked at thoughtfully, it will be all but unani-
mously dismissed,
4. Exception has also been taken to the altered Formula and the
revised form of the Questions to be put to Ministers and Elders at
their ordination or induction. To obviate the risk of imperilling
the tenure of our property which may be involved herein, your
Committee have agreed to express their cordial acquiescence in the
suggestion “ that, for the present, it is expedient not to aim at
uniformity, or to introduce any sweeping change in this respect, but
to leave each of the Federated Churches to use its own questions
and formula as it may think most fit.
5. Objection has next been taken to what is described as “ the
cumbrousness of the machinery proposed with regard to the Home
Mission Committee, and the examination of Students.” To your
Committee this objection seems altogether untenable. No machi-
nery could be more simple, and its operation, if introduced, will
greatly simplify the work of the different Churches in regard to the
unattached Ministers, Preachers and Students. Each separate Home
Mission Committee will simply send up once a year to the General
Committee a condensed report of their proceedings. Unless their
action is appealed against, the steps taken by them in regard to
labourers placed under their supervision will, as a matter of course,
be approved; and the men dealt with in the way of discipline in one
Church will be prohibited ipso facto from receiving employment
in another Church until their suspension is removed. One General
Board of Examination will also prepare the questions to be put to
Students in all the Churches ; and each General Assembly will take
the supervision of its own students in regard to the answers given
in to those questions, which will be forwarded simpliciter to the
General Board that they may adjudicate on their merits. A
uniform standard of attainment will thus be secured, and all risk
of partiality or perfunctoriness will be avoided. To the minds of
your Committee the scheme commends itself for its simplicity and
effectiveness.
6. Your Committee cordially acquiesce in the proposal that, for
the present, the proportionate representation in the Federal
Assembly be reduced from one-third to one-sixth, with the proviso
that Presbyteries having less than nine charges be represented by one
Minister and one Elder, that Presbyteries haying nine charges, but
less than fifteen, be represented by two Ministers and two Elders
and so on. On the other details relative to Corresponding Members
and the payment of Members of Committees, your Committee do
not think it advisable to enter in this Report.
7. On the objections to the Explanatory Statement and the
Declaratory Act your Committee have no suggestions to offer.


8. Your Committee have been specially gratified by the receipt
of the accompanying communication from the Chairman and
Secretary of the European Section of the General Presbyterian
Alliance.
Edinburgh, July, 1885.
Rev. and Dear Sir,
On the part of the European Section of the Executive Commission of
the Alliance of Reformed Churches holding the Presbyterian system, we desire
to convey to your Church our brotherly salutations.
Having as one of our chief objects to promote closer and more friendly
relations among the various branches of the Presbyterian family, we have
heard with profound interest of the movement now in progress for establishing
a Federal Alliance among the Presbyterian Churches in the Australasian
Colonies of Great Britain. It is no part of our function to enquire into the
precise nature of the arrangements proposed, far less to interfere with any of
them; it is enough for us to know that your movement is directed towards the
promotion of the object which we have so much at heart. We hope that you
will not regard it as unfitting for us to express our interest in your movement,
and our prayer that it may be carried to a successful issue, and may prove of
signal benefit to the highest interest of all the Churches concerned.
We are well aware of the many difficulties you have to encounter in carrying
on your work, especially in the, newer and more sparsely peopled districts of
your adopted lands. We appreciate the zeal and earnestness which have so
often been manifested in trying circumstances, while we regret that the distance
between us is so great that, until pur Alliance is more firmly consolidated, we
■can only express by letter the feelings that we would fain communicate by the
mouths of some of our members.
Requesting you to communicate this letter to your Church,
We remain,
Rev. and Dear Sir,
In name and by authority of the European Section of the Executive
Commission of the General Presbyterian Council.
JOHN CAIRNS, Convener.
W. G. BLAIKIE, Clerk.
This communication shows that esteemed brethren in Europe and,
may we not also add, in America are watching our negotiations with
the deepest interest, and regard us as pioneers in the work of consoli-
dation in these Southern climes—and your Committee cannot even
for a moment entertain the fear that the work which has been
carried on so pleasantly ever since its inauguration is now to receive a
check. On the contrary, your Committee cherish a confident hope
that under Divine blessing and guidance this present Conference
will be distinguished even above all previous Conferences for the
manly freedom and cordial brotherliness of its discussions, and for
the wisdom and finality of its decisions.
By order of the Committee,
JAMES NISH, Convener.


lI.—RETURNS RELATIVE TO THE SCHEME OF FEDERA-
TION AND THE CODE OF RULES.
Have been received as follows :
I. From The Commission of the General Assembly of
New South Wales.
11. The Assembly of Queensland.
111. Presbytery of South Australia.
IV. Synod of Tasmania.
Also from
1. Presbytery of Melbourne.
2. Presbytery of Geelong.
8, Presbytery of Castlemaine.
4. Presbytery of Mortlake,
5. Presbytery of Seymour.
6. Presbytery of Macedon.
7. Presbytery of Reechworth.
8. Presbytery of Hamilton.
9. Presbytery of Ballarat.
I.—THE COMMISSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
OF N. S. WALES.
REMIT ANENT FEDERATION,
As amended and approved by the Commission of the
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of New
South Wales, held in Sydney, 9th July, 1885.
I.—Principles op the Basis of Union.
1. The Supreme Court of the United Church is to be called the Federal
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of Australia and Tasmania.
2. The names of the present Supreme Courts of the various Churches
entering into the Union are to remain unaltered.
3. Each General Assembly* is to retain the control of its own properties,
and in the meantime of its own funds.
4, The decisions of the various General Assemblies are to be final in aP
cases except where any of the General Assemblies decides, with the consent of
parties, to refer a matter to the Federal Assembly for advice or authoritative
adjudication.
5. The Theological Halls and Seminaries of the United Church are to be
under the general supervision of the Federal Assembly ; and all Students of
Theology, wherever they may have been trained, are required to undergo the
examination prescribed by the Federal Assembly through its Board. The
appointment of Professors and Teachers to remain, as at present, in the hands
of the several General Assemblies.
* “ General Assembly "fia employed in these Regulations to designate the highest Court in
each separate Colony, whatever may be the designation which the members of each Court may
prefer to take to themselves.


6. The Heathen Mission operations of the United Church are also placed
under the immediate supervision and direction of the Federal Assembly, but
the various General Assemblies, while required to report their Home Mission
operations, and the arrangements made by them for the support of the Ministry
within their bounds, are not to be otherwise limited thereanent through any
decisions of the Federal Assembly.
7. All rules which bear on matters affecting the general interests of the
United Church have to be framed by the Federal Assembly.
7. No change shall be made in the Articles of the Basis of Union, unless
with the consent of a majority of all duly commissioned members of the
Federal Assembly, and a majority of the Presbyteries comprised in the various
General Assemblies.
II. —Formula and Questions.
Questions to be put to Ministers at their Ordination or Induction.
1. Do you believe the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments to be
the Word of God, and the only rule of faith and practice ?
2. Do you receive and adopt the system of doctrine contained in the
Westminster Confession of Faith as founded on, and agreeable to, the Word of
God, and declare your adherence thereto ?
3. Do you believe the Presbyterian form of Church Government to be
founded on and agreeable to the Word of God? and do you promise to adhere
to it, to support it, to give conscientious attendance on the Courts of the
Church, and to yield to them submission in the Lord ?
4. Are zeal for the glory of God, love to the Lord Jesus Christ, and a
desire for the salvation of souls (so far as you know your own heart) your great
motives and chief inducements to engage in the work of the Ministry ?
5. Do you promise to study the purity, peace and unity of the Church ?
6. Do you engage to be faithful and diligent in the exercise of all private
and personal duties which become you as a Christian and a Minister of the
Gospel, as well as in all relative duties and the public duties of your office, and
thus to act as an example to the flock of which you are the overseer ?
7. Are you willing to take the charge of this Congregation agreeably to
your declaration on accepting their Call, and do you promise to fulfil faithfully
the work of your pastorate among them ?
8. All these things you profess and promise, through grace, as you shall be
answerable at the Coming of the Lord.
Formula.
I hereby declare that I receive and adopt the system of doctrine contained
in the Westminster Confession of the Faith, as founded on and agreeable _ to
the Word of God, and consent to the said Confession as the standard by which
my teaching in this Church shall be judged ; that I believe the government of
this Church by Sessions, Presbyteries and Assemblies, to be founded on and
agreeable to the Word of God ; that I own the purity of worship at present
authorised by this Church, and that I engage to adhere faithfully to the said
system of doctrine, to maintain and defend the said Form of Government, to
conform to the said mode of Worship, to submit to the discipline of the Church
as exercised through her different courts, and to follow no divisive courses
from the order thus established (vide Resolution I.)
111. —Declaratory Statement.
The Commission unanimously agreed to recommend its omission.
IV.— Explanatory Note.
The Commission unanimously approved its omission.
Y. —Revised Directory.
(vide Resolution II.)


VI. — Representation in Federal Assembly, and Mode of
Election of Moderator.
1. Representation in Federal Assembly:— (l.) That the various Presby-
teries be represented in the Federal Assembly by one-sixth of their members,
the calculation being based on an allowance of one Minister and one Elder for
each sanctioned charge. A Presbytery having less than six sanctioned charges
to be represented by one Minister and one Elder. (2.) That Presbyteries not
having on their roll a due proportion of Elders who are in circumstances to
attend the sittings of the Federal Assembly, be allowed to elect Elders con-
nected with any other Presbyteries of the Federated Churches to act as their
representatives in the Federal Assembly.
2. Election of Moderator: —That the Moderator of the first Federal
Assembly be elected by the votes of a majority of Presbyteries of the United
Church, and that for the election of future Moderators a Committee fitly
representative of all Presbyteries be appointed by the Federal Assembly to
meet on an early day in the Session for the nomination of the Moderator of
the following Assembly.
RESOLUTIONS.
I. Anent Questions and Formula. —The Commission would respect-
fully urge upon the Conference to consider whether it would not be expedient
to leave the several Churches entering into the Union to retain, for the present,
their own Questions, Formulas, and Rules of Procedure.
11. Anent Revised Directory.— The Commission are of opinion that
the adoption of a Directory for Public Worship should be deferred until the
Federal Assembly has been constituted.
111. Approve of the proposed arrangements and programme of the Con-
ference to be held in Melbourne on the 16th September next, and following
days.
IV. Anent the Murrumbidgee Presbytery. —The Commission instruct
the Delegates from this Church to the Conference to bring under the notice of
the Conference the matter of the transference to this Church of the congrega-
tions in the Murrumbidgee Presbytery, and of the congregation at Albury, and
to urge a speedy settlement of the question.
V. Appoint the following as Delegates to attend the Conference in Mel-
bourne, viz.:—Revs. J. Cosh, M.A.; J. S. Laing; J. M. Ross; A. M. .iarvie;
Dr. Cameron ;J. Auld, M.A.; H. Macready; Dr. Geekie; Dr. Steel; Dr.
Gilchrist; A. M. Tait; J, F. Henderson: J. Taylor; J. D. Murray; G.
Machines. 8.D,: P, Fitzgerald ; J. C. McDonald, M.A. ;J. T. Main, M.A,;
T. E. Clouston, 8.A.; T. Nisbet; R. Collie, F.L.S.; Dr. Grant; W. Bain ;A.
Gardiner, M.A.; A. Osborne, M.A.; D. Smith, M.A., Ministers; and Messrs.
J. H. Goodlet; Alex. Macredie ;A. Dodds; W. Lamrock; A. Munro; A.
Munro ; A. Dean ; J. Barrie; J. Candlish ; J. Antrobus; J. Murray; Jas.
Anderson, jun. ; W. Neill, Elders.
VI. Resolved that the Commission was not instructed to consider the
Code of Rules.
JAMES S. LAING,
Clerk of Assembly.
lI.—THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY" OF QUEENSLAND.
“The subject of Federation of the Presbyterian Churches in
Australia and Tasmania having been taken up, it was agreed that
the Assembly approve of the contemplated Federation of the
Presbyterian Churches of Australia and Tasmania, as also approve
generally of the Code of Rules and Forms of Procedure for the use
of said Churches.”


lII.—PRESBYTERY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Cordially approve of the proposed Federated Union, and of the-
Code of Rules.
IV. —SYNOD OF TASMANIA.
Approve of the Scheme of Federation, but no report has been
received relative to the Code, except that it was sent down for the
consideration of Presbyteries.
I.—PRESBYTERY OF MELBO (JRNE— Adopted the following Report.
The matters remitted to the Presbytery for consideration are the proposed
General Code of Rules and Forms of Procedure, and not anything else connected
with the Federation movement. The matter specially remitted to this Com-
mittee to consider is the bearing of the Code of Rules on the tenure of the
property of the Church. The Committee are of opinion that the tenure of the
property of the Church is likely to be affected in the following ways :
I. In Part 11., ch. iv., under head Federal Assembly, p, 27, 28 and 29.
1. By the absence from this Chapter, and from any other part of the Code
of any regulation forbidding the Federal Assembly to control the property
presently possessed by the Churches, while in section 7 of this Chapter the
Federal Assembly is entrusted with powers similar in all respects, except in
the matter of receiving certain kinds of appeals, to those now possessed by the
different General Assemblies. (NoTE.—Though on the Basis of Union adopted
by the last Conference, at Sydney, Article 3 says “ Each General Assembly is
to retain the control of its own Properties and Funds,” yet it is added “ Subject
to the Regulations thereanent contained in the recognized Code of Rules of the
United Church.” This proviso of course makes the body termed “The United
Church,” and its Code of Rules supreme.)
2. By the control given to the Federal Assembly in the matter of appointing
and removing Professors of the Theological Hall. Section 6.
3. By the appeal to the Federal Assembly, allowed in cases of heresy
Section 10.
4. In this chapter iv., part 11., and otherwise throughout the book,
especially in part iv., chapter v., vi., vii. and xi., p. 54, 56, 57 and 59, the name
of the Church is changed to “ The Presbyterian Church of Australia,” or “ The
United Church,” and the Federated Churches are spoken of passim as
“ The Church,” “ This Church,” the designation “ Federated Churches ” being
employed only on the title page, and in one or two other places.
5. And, as connected with this, by the omission from the Questions and
Formula of several of the Standards of this Church, the Westminster Con-
fession only being retained, and in the Formula, p. 56, that “ Confession as set
forth by this Church in her Declaratory Act,” is the only standard adhered to.
In addition to these matters bearing very directly on the tenure of property,
the Committee ask the Presbytery to consider the following points :
1. The serious lowering of the strictness of adherence to the one Standard
left. See Questions and Formula, p. 54 and 56.
2. The want of a Basis or Succinct Statement of the terms of Federation.
3. The cumbrousness of the machinery proposed with regard to the Home
Mission Committee, and the Examination of Students, p. 27, 28.
4. The great expense likely to be entailed by—
(1) The size of the Federal Assembly.
(2) The proposal about corresponding members of the General
Assemblies.
(3) The payment of the expenses of Committee members.


5. The unsatisfactory character of the Explanatory Statement —-noting
that it contains no doctrine of the Church, or of the Sacrament, or of the Last
things.
6. Provision should be made that the appeal allowed, p. 48, section 12,
should not stay procedure.
7. Verbal emendations are needed, p. 30, 40, 55, and the inconsistent rules
p. 22, 26, about pro re nata meetings of Assembly need to be adjusted.
Proposal to Remedy the Defects pointed out.
L That in part 11, chap, iv., under head Federal Assembly, the first
section be—
(1) “The Federal Assembly shall have no authority to interfere
with the authority of the different Churches, nor shall any of the decisions or
acts be allowed to affect any rights of property, or control the disposal of any
Trust Funds connected with these Churches, except in those cases when, with
the express consent of parties, questions in dispute are referred to the Federal
Assembly as a Court of Arbitration. But this rule shall not interfere with the
right of the Federal Assembly to control any property or funds which may
be acquired by itself, whether for general or special purposes.”
11. Instead of sections 5 and 6, chap, iv,, page 28, substitute the
following:—
(6) “ While the Theological Halls are directly under the control of
the separate General Assemblies, and Professors are appointed and removed by
them, it belongs to the Federal Assembly to secure a common understanding
as to the course of study to be pursued and the Sessions during which the
different branches shall be taught, so that students may be able to avail them-
selves of whatever advantages may be gained at any of the Halls ; also to see
that, so far as possible, a similar standard of proficiency shall be required in
entrance, exit, or other examinations by the Examining Boards of the different
Churches.”
111. —It was agreed to omit sections 7 and 8, p. 28 and 29.
IV,—Delete section 10, p. 29, allowing appeal to Federal Assembly in
cases of heresy.
V, —Wherever the Federated Churches are mentioned let them be
designated by this name, “ Federated Churches,” and not termed “ The United
Church ” or “ The Church.’’
Vl—That the Presbyterian Church of Victoria continue to employ the
Questions, Formula and Forms of Calls, Edicts, Libels, &c., now in use.
VlL—That in chapter iv., section 3, p. 27, the rule about the Home
Mission and Church Extension Committee be simplified, so as to provide for
cordial co-operation between the Churches.
Vlll.—That the coming Conference be requested to revise the short
statement of principles or basis of Federation in accordance with the sugges-
tions to be transmitted to the General Assemblies, and by them considered
and remitted to Presbyteries—the final adoption of the Code of Rules to
succeed and not to precede the adoption of the revised Basis.
IX.—That the emendations suggested in section 12, p. 48, and the
emendations p. 30, 40 and 55 be made at once, and rule p. 22 as to pro re nata
meetings be deleted.
X. —That with a view to avoid unnecessary expense and the occupation
of the time of Ministers and Elders—(l.) The proportionate representation in
the Federal Assembly be reduced from one-third to one-sixth. (2.) The plan
of having Corresponding Members be abandoned. (3.) The expenses of Com-
mittee Members continue to be paid as at present.


Xl.—That the explanatory statement p. 64, 65, and 66, be omitted.
XII.—That the latter part of Rule 4, p. 28, beginning with the words.
But in the event, &c.,” be omitted.
2. —PRESBYTERY OF GEELONG — Adopted the following report.
1. Your Committee desire to point out that this General Code proposes to
establish a new Court of our Church which shall have jurisdiction over the
General Assembly as at present constituted. They beg to draw the Presbytery’s
attention to the fact that this amounts to Incorporation of the various
Churches and not simply Federation.
2. The Committee recommend the Presbytery to approve generally of
the Code of Rules so far as they apply to the Presbyterian Church of Victoria,
i.e., with the exception of chapter iv. of part ii., re Federal Assembly, and
all references to the same throughout; but recommend that they be further
submitted to the Law Agent for report upon their legal bearing and consis-
tency, and that section 3 of chapter ii. in the Rules and Forms of Procedure at
present in use, so far as it has reference to the management of Congregational
affairs, should be retained or something equivalent to it be inserted.
3. From chapter iv., part ii., it appears that the Federal Assembly claims,
among other things :
(a) To appoint a Home Mission and Church Extension Committee to
receive and submit reports from the Home Mission Committees of the various
Assemblies, and to dispose of complaints made to them by these Committees,
or refer them to the Federal Assembly for decision. This Committee has also
the prerogative of disapproving of Ministers and Preachers if they think fit,
and of preventing their employment.
( h) It claims also to appoint a Heathen Mission Committee to receive
reports from the Conveners of the various Assemblies’ Committees, and to
prepare a report thereon to be submitted to the Federal Assembly. Also to
arbitrate between Missionaries and local Committees in case of Missionaries
alleging grievances.
(c) It claims also to control Theological Halls; to appoint and remove
Professors ; and to appoint a Board of Examination whose imprimatur must
be received by the Students.
(d) It claims the power of initiating legislation apart from the existing
Assemblies.
(e) It claims to be a Court of Appeal and Review in cases of Heresy.
Your Committee in reference to the above would point out that these
powers seriously interfere with the autonomy of this Church, and in the
following manner: —
(1) The proposed Federal Assembly takes out of our hands the
power of dealing with complaints against the Home Mission Committee.
(2) And claims jurisdiction in the employment of Preachers, —Sec-
tion 3.
(3) Interferes with the discipline of the Heathen Mission Com-
mittee. —Section 4.
(4) Removes the Theological Hall, Professors and Students, from
control of our Assembly.—Sections 5 and 6.
(5) May frame laws and issue directions without reference to our
Assembly.—Section 7.
(6) Interferes with the autonomy of the Church in claiming to revise
our Assembly’s decisions in cases of heresy.—Section 10.


SUMMARY.
Your Committee are of opinion that the Presbytery should disapprove of
these Rules, chapter 4, part ii. They beg to point out the cumbrousness of the
additional machinery proposed to be established, the labour and expense of
working it, and would suggest that the objects contemplated, viz., co-operation
between the Churches in matters of common interest and importance, might be
attained by simpler means, such as an alliance of the Presbyterian Churches of
Australasia holding periodical Conferences, without legislative powers, but
with powers of recommendation.
The Committee further recommend that the questions to be put to ministers
at Ordination and Induction, as well as the Formula, remain as heretofore.
3.—PRESBYTERY OF CASTLEMAINE.
Approve generally of the the Code and the Scheme of Federation, but
make the following suggestions
Standing Order 22, p. 8. —After “ Any question or motion ” insert
“ the Mover of the original motion has the right of reply.”
Rule 10, p. 17, &c.—Omit 11 bona fide ” in this and all other places
where it occurs.
Rule 7, p. 22. —After “ quorum of the Assembly ” insert “ while in
session.
Rule 25, p. 26. —Expunge as superfluous and inconsistent with
Rule 8, p. 22.
Rule 11, p. 29. —For “eligible of”read “ eligible for.”
Rule 4, p. 33. —Add “ or any Presbyterian Church in fellowship
therewith,” and read “ this ” for “ the ” in last clause.
Rule 7, p. 34. —Insert “ but no call can be sustained unless it is
signed or can be shown to be acquiesced in by three-fifths of the Communicants.”
Formula, p. 56. —Insert clause agre.ed to at last Sydney Conference
“ And consent to the said Confession as the Standard by which my teaching
in this Church shall be judged, subject to the explanation contained in the
Declaratory Statement hereto appended”—and alter the arrangement so far
as may be necessary for this purpose.
4.—PRESBYTERY OF MORTLAKE.
With reference to the subject of Federation, the Presbytery agreed to the
following findings (1.) That in the opinion of this Presbytery the Code of
Rules, etc., for the Presbyterian Church of Victoria should be separated from
the Constitution of the Federal Assembly, and should, before being sent to
Presbyteries for final approval, be submitted to the law agent of the Church,
as its professional adviser. (2.) That this Presbytery, while approving
generally of the principle of Federation among the Presbyterian Churches of
Australasia, is unable, as at present informed, to approve of the machinery
proposed in chapter 4 for attaining this object, regarding the same as too
cumbrous and costly.
S.—PRESBYTERY OF SEYMOUR.
Approve generally of the Code and the Scheme of Federation, but
make the following suggestions
Part 11., chapter i., section 2, after “Worship and Discipline,” read
(including Sabbath Schools.)
Part 11., chapter iv,, section 6, delete this section.


Part 11. , chapter iv., section 10, delete, but insert a section allowing
either the party accused of heresy, or the General Assembly before which the
case is brought, to have it referred to the Federal Assembly for their judg-
ment as to the relevancy of the libel.
Part 11., chap, v., after section 6, insert 5 and 6, page 14 in present Code
(Victorian.)
Part 111., chapter iv., section 8, in first line for “Sabbath” read “day.”
In 6th line, after prayer, insert “ and laying on of hands.”
Part IV., chapter i. To ministers ordained or inducted to charges in
Victoria, question 2 in present Code should be put.
Part IV. In first line of first question to be put to congregations,
instead of “ the people ” read “ the Members and Adherents.”
6.—THE PRESBYTERY OF MACEDON.
While approving of the “ Code of Rules ” as a whole suggest that in
defining the powers of the Federal Assembly it be distinctly stated, that it can
in no way interfere with the properties and funds of the different Churches,
and recommend that advice be taken as to whether the proposed change in the
Formula will affect the tenure of the property in this Church.
7.—PRESBYTERY OF BEECHWORTH.
The new Code of Rules and Forms having been considered, it was
agreed to approve of them generally, provided that due care is taken that the
tenure of Church properties is not affected by the changes proposed in connec-
tion with the Federation Scheme.
B.—PRESBYTERY OF HAMILTON.
Approve generally of the Scheme of Federation and the Code.
9.— PRESBYTERY OF BALLARAT Adopted the following resolution.
“ That this Presbytery, while agreeing with several portions of the proposed
Code of Rules, think there are parts, such as Chapter IV., relating to the'
Federal Assembly, and Chapter 111, Section 3, that need careful amendment
in order to preserve the autonomy of the Churches, and prevent unnecessary
cumbrousness in their internal management; and that all the Rules need to be
submitted to the Law Agent of the Church before being passed into law.”
111. The following papers are also submitted for the considera-
tion of the Conference :
BASIS OF UNION ADOPTED BY THE FIFTH
CONFERENCE.
1. The Supreme Court of the United Church is to be called the
Federal Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of Australia and
Tasmania,
2. The names of the present Supreme Courts of the various
Churches entering into the Union are to remain unaltered.
3. Each General Assembly* is to retain the control of its own
Properties and Funds, subject to the Regulations thereanent con-
tained in the recognised Code of Rules of the United Church,
* “ General Assembly” is employed in these regulations to designate the highest
Court in each separate Colony, whatever may be the designation which the members
of each such Court may prefer to take to themselves.


4. The decisions of the various General Assemblies are to be final
in all cases, except in cases of alleged heresy.
5. Appeals in all cases of heresy may be made to the Federal
Assembly against the decisions of the General Assembly; and, even
when not appealed against, these decisions have to be reported to
the Federal Assembly for confirmation or amendment.
6. With the consent ot parties, References may be made to the
Federal Assembly on all questions either for advice or for authori-
tative adjudication, as shall have been agreed upon in the General
Assembly; but no appeals can be allowed against the decisions of a
General Assembly, except in cases of prosecution for heresy.
7. The Theological Halls and Seminaries of the United Church
are to be under the general supervision of the Federal Assembly;
and all Students of Theology, wherever they may have been trained,
are required to undergo the examinations prescribed by the Federal
Assembly through its Board.
8. The Heathen Mission operations of the United Church are also
placed under the immediate supervision and direction of the Federal
Assembly, but the various General Assemblies, while required to
report their Home Mission operations and the arrangements made
by them for the support of the Ministry within their bounds, are not
to be otherwise limited thereanent through any decisions of the
Federal Assembly.
9. All Rules which bear on matters affecting the general interests
of the United Church have to be framed by the Federal Assembly
in terms of the provisions made thereanent in the recognised Code
of Rules, but the members of each General Assembly aie free to
frame for themselves Bye-Laws relative to the management of the
affairs placed under their authoritative direction, provided always
that these Bye-laws are in harmony with the Code approved by
the United Church.
10. These Regulations may be revised and amended or enlarged
from time to time, provided always that no change be made on the
principles of this Basis unless with the consent of a majority of all
the duly commissioned members of the Federal Assembly, and a
majority of the Presbyteries comprised in the various General
Assemblies.
Y. FORMULATED BASIS OF FEDERATION, AS AMENDED
BY THE COMMITTEE ON RULES AND FORMS.
1. The Final Court of Adjudication or Advice among the
Federated Churches, in respect to all matters legitimately brought
before it, and in respect to these matters alone, is called the Federal
Assembly of the Presbyterian Churches of Australia and Tasmania


2. The names of the present Supreme Courts of the Federated
Churches are to remain unaltered.
8. Each such Supreme Court is to retain the authoritative control
of its properties and funds, and to have unfettered power in all
matters submitted to its direction, except as hereafter provided.
4. No decisions of any such Supreme Court can be appealed
against except in cases of heresy. ,
5. Appeals may be made to the Federal Assembly in connection
with all cases of heresy, and, even in such cases, when no appeals
are taken, the decisions of General Assemblies* are to be reported to
the Federal Assembly for confirmation or amendment.
6. The General Assembly, with which the case of heresy originated,
adopts simpliciter the decision of the Federal Assembly in regard
to it, as founded either on report or appeal, and proceeds thereafter
on its own authority to give the required effect to the decision so
accepted.
7. Members of the General Assembly concerned in the case, who
may disapprove of the decision thus adopted, retain the right of
dissent. But the privilege of dissent thus exercised and recorded
has no other result except to relieve the dissentients personally
from taking any part in giving formal effect to the decision,
8. With the consent of parties, references may be submitted by
General Assemblies to the Federal Assembly on all matters in
regard to which they desire advice ov adjudication,
9. The Theological Halls and Seminaries of the Federated
Churches are to be under the general supervision of the Federal
Assembly, and all Students of Theology, wherever they may have
been trained, are required to undergo the examinations prescribed
by the Federal Assembly through its Board.
10. The nature and limits of the general supervision which is to
be exercised over the Halls and Seminaries by the Federal Assembly
are defined in the General Code, Chapter IV.
11. The Heathen Mission operations of the Federated Churches
are likewise placed under the supervision and direction of the
Federal Assembly, but the various General Assemblies, while
required to report their Home Mission operations and the arrange-
ments made by them for the support of the Ministry within their
bounds, are not to be otherwise limited thereanent by any action of
the Federal Assembly.
12. All regulations which bear on matters affecting the general
interests of the Federated Churches are to be framed by the Federal
Assembly in terms of the provisions made thereanent in the General
Code; but the General Assemblies are free to frame for themselves
* Note.— ln these “Regulations “General Assembly” is used to denote the
Highest Court of each Federated Church, whatever may be its more ordinary
designation.


respectively special rules for the management of the affairs placed
under their exclusive direction, provided that these rules are in
harmony with the principles of the General Code.
13. The foregoing Regulations may be enlarged or amended from
time to time, provided always that no change be made on the
principles of this basis, unless with the consent of a clear majority
of all the duly commissioned Members of the Federal Assembly in
which the change is proposed, and of a majority of the Presbyteries
comprised in the various General Assemblies, by whom the proposed
change shall be sent down to Presbyteries for their consideration.
y,—formula approved at fifth conference.
%
I hereby declare that I receive and adopt the system of doctrine con-
tained in the Westminster Confession of Faith, astounded ontgftid agreeable
to the Word of God, and consent to the said confession as the standard by
which my teaching in this Church shall be judged, subject to the explanations
contained in the Declaratory Statement hereto appended; that I believe the
government of this Church by Sessions, Presbyteries, Provincial Assemblies,
and General Assemblies, to be founded on and agreeable to the Word of God •
that I own the purity of worship at present authorised by this Church, and
that I engage to adhere faithfully to the said system of doctrine, to maintain
and defehd the said Form of Government, to conform to the said mode of
Worship, to submit to the discipline of die Church as exercised through
her different Courts, and to follow no divisive courses from the order thus
established.
VI—RESOLUTION OF FIFTH CONTE HENCE RELATING TO THE
EXPLANATORY STATEMENT.
That the Explanatory Statem-Mt be retained as an assistance to the under-
standing of the wojds “Svstfmof Doctrine” in the questions to be put to
.Office Bearers at their Ordination or Induction.
VII —Directory for Public Worship not printed.
ViII REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE DISJUNCTION OF
THE MURKUMBIDGEE PRESBYTERY AND THE ALBURY
CONGREGATION.
The Comniittee resolved to ask the Conference to recommend the Assembly
of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria to disjoin the Murrumbidgee Presbytery
and the Albury Charge, with a view to their being brought under, the
jurisdiction of the Presbyteriim Church of New South Wales; and the
Committee also recpmmend thau as far as found practicable the boundaries to
be observed by thi) Federating Churches be the political boundaries of the
respective colonies. It was also resolved that it be a recommendation to the
General Assemblies of the contiguous colonies to endeavour to secure
reciprocal rights to Ministers of Border Charges in respect to the celebration
of Marriages on both Hdes of the Border.
Ministers of Border Charges in respect to the celebrati
th Vdes of the Border.
ALEX. McDONALD, Convener.
lAff \
r
r * v
and F>ore, Printers, 48 Flinders Lane East, \,\B R AR
M«uj
