

v 2 > a
PeTH V tvm
\ ■**
PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
CONFERENCE,
OF THE BISHOP, CLERGY, AND LAITY,
OF THE
IBiocfSe ot Bfcelaitie:
Held ox the 6th of January, in Trinity School Room,
ADELAIDE.
gtbelaibe:
PRINTED BY H. HUSSEY, KING WILLIAM STREET.
1852.




LETTER
ADDRESSED TO THE MEMBERS OF THE CHURCH SOCIETY BY THE
LORD BISHOP OF ADELAIDE.
Tuesday, September 2, 1851.
Gentlemen —The recent, vote of the Legislative Assembly, whereby all
aid from the State in disseminating the doctrine and moral laws of our
adorable Redeemer has been cut off, and so far His kingdom upon earth no
longer publicly recognised, compels me to address you earnestly and affectionately
with reference to the fmure support of your Clergy, and the extension of the
means of grace to the members of our C hurch, who are scattered through the
province, and continually arriving in considerable numbers It appears to me that
the time has arrived when every earnest-minded Christian in communion with our
Church, is imperatively called on to contribute to his power, yea, and beyond
his power, for the furtherance of the Gospel, so far as it depends on the Ministry
of the Word ; and to exert his influence in order to raise a General Diocesan
Fund for the support of Clergy, both Parochial and Missionary. The moral
degradation of a people, deprived of the ordinances ot the Gospel, is certain and
progressive Nor can we expect any other result than the spiritual deterioration
of the people of this Colony, if the means of grace are not supplied in proportion
to their increasing numbers. Let it be remembered that the next generation
will not enjoy the privileges we have possessed in our father-land, and in the
bosom of our Church ; while experience forbids us to hope that a population
deprived ol the public worship of Almighty God, can preserve that sense of His
Providence and Government of the world, which is essential to its well-being,
and the observance of the Kternal Laws of Truth and Highteousness. Under
these circumstances I would urge the appointment ot a Committee of five Lay
Members of the Society to consult upon the best means of developing the resources
of our Communion for the support of its Ministers ; and to report upon the best
mode of enlisting the sympathies of the great body of the Lay members of the
Church in this most Christian and necessary work. Among other plans which
have occurred to me, are, Ist - The assembling together in Adelaide of one or
two Lay Members, being Communicants, from each congregation, to act as a
pro-tempore Convention in futherance of the above object. 2ndly—The ap-
pointment of two Laymen to act as Stewards of the I docesan Fund to be raised;
and of a Treasurer. 3rdly—That the endeavour should be made to obtain not
less than one shilling per quarter, over and above their local contributions, from
every one who frequents the worship of our Church, lor a Diocesan Fund in the
support of the Ministry; to be collected and paid over by local Stewards,
appointed for this purpose by each congregation. 1 have only to add, that I
shall be ready to contribute all the aid in my power towards the proper support
of a zealous and efficient Ministry.
I remain, Gentlemen,
Your faithful Friend and Brother,
Augustus Adelaide.
In pursuance of the suggestions of the Committee of the Society,
appointed to consider the above Letter, the following Gentlemen
were elected by their respective Congregations to represent them in
the Conference of the Bishop, Clergy, and Laity, which was fixed
for January the 6th, the Feast of the Epiphany.


CHURCHES AND REPRESENTATIVES.
Trinity, Adelaide, Very Rev. Dean Farrell, M.A. His Honor Judge Cooper.
Captain Butler.
Mr. Wm. Roberts.
St. Johns, Adelaide, Rev. T. P. Wilson, Captain Freeling.
Mr. G. W. Hawkes.
“ G. A. Branthwaite.
Christchurch, North Adelaide, Rev. W. J. Woodcock, Major Campbell.
Mr. MacDermott.
** Wickstoed*
St Paul’s, Port Adelaide, Rev. E. Bayfield, Dr. Duncan.
St. Andrew’s, Walkerville, Rev Platts, B A. Mr. MacDonald.
All Saint’s Hindmarsh, Rev. Wm Wood, Dr. Hammond.
St. Matthew’s, Kensington, Rev. J. Watson, None.
St. George’s, Macgill, Rev. E. K. Miller, Mr. Silke.
Christchurch, O’Halloran hill, Rev. J. W. Schoales, B A.' Major O’Halloram
St. Mary’s, Sturt,
St. James’s, Blakiston,
St. George’s, Gawler,
St. Stephen, Willunga,
Clare & Penwortham,
Kooringa, Burra Burra,
St. Thomas, Port Lincoln,
Unattached,
Ditto
Rev. J. Fulford,
Rev. W. H, Coombs,
Rev A. B. Burnett,
Rev. J. C. Bagshaw,
Rev. Jas. Pollitt,
Yen. M B. Hale, M.A.
Rev. S. P. R. Allom.
None.
Mr. J. Smith.
P Butler.
T. S. Kell.
None.
None.
Mr. O. K. Richardson.
NOTICE
FOR THE
MEETING OF THE SYNOD AND CONVENTION.
The Clergy and Lay Delegates are requested to meet in Trinity
School Room, at half-past 10 a.m. when the Bishop will open the
Assembly.
Divine Service will commence at 11 o'clock.
The Clergy, habited in their surplices, and the Lay Delegates,
will occupy seats reserved for their use respectively.
The sermon will be preached by the Bishop, and the Holy
Communion administered; after which the Bishop will read a
Pastoral Letter.
At the conclusion of the Service the Clergy and Delegates will
return to Trinity School Room, and after a short adjournment,
proceed to the consideration of the subjects proposed by the Bishop.
Tuesday Afternoon, 2 p.m. —Question (probably to be discussed)
—“ Pastoral Aid Fund.”
Wednesday* —Morning Session, at 10 a.m., Afternoon Session, at
2 p.m.—Question (ditto) —“ Trust Deed,” &c.
Thursday —Morning Session, at 10 a.m., Afternoon Session, at
2 p.m.—Question (ditto) —“Church Organization.”


THE SERMON.
PETER THEREFORE WAS KEPT IN PRISON, BUT PRAYER WAS MADE
WITHOUT CEASING OF THE CHURCH UNTO GOD FOR HIM.
Acts xii. 5 .
Outward pressure—inward strength .
It has ever been part of God’s counsel in his dealings with mankind,
to effect his purposes of mercy by weak and unexpected instruments;
as if on purpose to confound the wisdom of this world, that no flesh
might glory in His sight. The saying of St. Paul, is true also of
the whole Church of God, “We have this treasure in earthen
vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God and not of
us.” Who, for example, can read the brief record of that cloud of
witnesses which St. Paul has left for our learning, without feeling
that all who will live godly must suffer persecution; that the world
will love its own; and that through much tribulation we must enter
into His kingdom.
And yet brethren we do not, we will not realize this truth; until,
at least, God chastens us with the rod of affliction, in order that we
may not be condemned with the world. Nevertheless it is our
wisdom and our consolation to know these things; that the
Church should read in the history of the past the lesson of the
future; that she should discern wherein lies her danger and
weakness ; and on the other hand lift up her hands when they hang
down, and strengthen her feeble knees by, considering that she can
never reign with Christ her Lord until she has first suffered with
him and for him: that she must be truly militant before she can be
triumphant.
This is equally true whether we contemplate St. Peter in his own
personal character, or as a type of the Church persecuted in his


person. His own soul, and the inner life of the Church, equally
gathered strength from outward pressure. The fountain of God’s
grace rose higher as greater force was used by the world to com-
press and restrain it. And if our times are dark and troublous; if
the world treats Christ’s kingdom not with persecution but in-
difference and neglect, then may we hope that as is our day so will
our strength be; provided we see and have recourse to that source of
strength which carried the Church through three centuries of per-
secution, and has sustained her to this hour against the gates of hell,
the enemies of godliness, whether from without or from within.
That St. Peter himself, before and after the Crucifixion, was an
altered man, is, I think, obvious. In spite of his confession of faith ;
in spite of the vision of the Transfiguration ; in spite of our Lord’s
reproof, “Get thee behind me Satan,” and of repeated warnings that
the Son of Man must be delivered into the hands of the Gentiles, he
still savouied the things which be of man ; when in his anger he
drew his sword and smote Malchus in the garden, and thrice denied
his suffering and despised Master!
How different was his spirit not many weeks after, when he
departed from the Council rejoicing that he had been counted worthy
to suffer shame for His name’s sake! Not that the same feelings
did not animate the other Apostles, and pervade the whole body of
the disciples. There was not one who said that ought of the things
which he possessed was his own ! there was none that counted his
life dear unto himself! In this spirit they encountered the world,
and in this spirit they overcame it! It was no solitary confession
of St. Paul, but the voice of the whole Church, speaking by the
Apostle, “ I have fought the good fight, I have finished the course,
I have kept the faith, henceforth there is laid up for me the crown
of glory, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will give me at that
day.”
The truth of the general position, that seasons of persecution were
seasons of vigorous life and progress in the age comprised within the
Acts of the Apostles will be readily allowed, c. iv. “ When the
Priests, and the Captain of the Temple, and the Sadducees, laid
hands on the Apostles and put them in hold,” we read, “ Howbeit
many of them which heard the Word believed : and the number of
the men was about five thousand.” Again, when the same per-
secutors once more put them “in the common prison,” v. 17,
immediately following we find it recorded that “ the number of the
disciples was multiplied.”
The “ havock of the Church,” which Saul made after the mar-
tyrdom of Stephen had none other effect than to scatter abroad the
seed of the Word. Samaria then received from Philip the Gospel
of their salvation. The Eunuch then became the first-fruits of
Ethiopia. Damascus and Syria then received the Word of life


from the lips of the converted Paul. Tarsus soon after was blessed
with his presence, and meanwhile “ the Churches throughout Judea,
Galilee, and Samaria, were edified, and walking in the fear of the
Lord and comfort of the Holy Ghost were multiplied.” We might
pursue these notices still further ; and show how the cruelty of
Herod in killing St. James, and putting St. Peter into prison,
stopped not the progress of Christ’s kingdom for one moment; but
while that artful prince, in the pride and pomp of regal state
perished in his iniquity, “ being eaten of worms,” it is recorded at
the same moment that “the Word of God grew and multiplied;”
and if we follow the great Apostle of the Gentiles in his eventful life,
the same truth will be exemplified. Stripes and imprisonments
awaited him in every city ; nevertheless the Church of God was
planted in those same cities, and in many the Lord had “much
people.” At Rome the Apostle’s “ bonds were made manifest in all
the palace.” In the age then of miraculous gifts and graces, that
persecution resulted in the increase of the Church there can be no
question. At the beginning of the fourth century the seed of
mustard had become a great tree, in which the fowls of the air—the
nations of the earth —had found their lodging.
But the later ages of the Church bear testimony to the same
truth. Seasons of security have been seasons of worldliness and
decay of spirituality. On the other hand, times of persecution for
conscience sake, have invariably stirred up dormant zeal, and called
forth latent energies. No Cross, no Crown, has then been realized.
Never were faith and patience more brightly characterised in the
fathers of our Church than when fire at the stake lighted their
path to heaven.
Still later it has come to pass that whenever the strong hand of
power has tried to crush the religious convictions of devout men,
enthusiasm has burst forth with fiercer intensity, and borne down the
puny efforts of the world, or of spiritual wickedness in high places,
to trammel wdiat they believed to be the everlasting Gospel ! It is
an axiom then that trouble from without is the condition most
favourable for increased vigour within. But this is a truth not
pleasant to flesh and blood ; we do not half believe it, or why should
we be so careful when the povrers of the world frow T n upon us, and
withhold their silver and gold ; nay, more, cast out the Ministers
of the Gospel from the office given them by Christ himself, that of
u feeding his lambs.” The Apostles departed from the face of a
Council threatened with rods and imprisonment. Herod “ stretched
out his hands to vex certain of the Church,” Peter “was kept in
prison but how did the Church answer such treatment ? Prayer
was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him. This
was, and is, and ever will be, the spiritual alchemy by which the
stone given us instead of bread will be turned into goid tne genuine


love of Christ and disinterested preaching of his glorious Gospel,
Accordingly we shall find in the Acts of the Apostles such seasons
as I have described signalized by three remarkable effects—
-Ist. Growth in grace and true devotion to God.
2dly. The lengthening of the cords and strengthening the
stakes of the Church in her outward organization.
3dly. The more active exercise of her inherent powers and
offices.
How beautiful for example is the picture of peace, and holiness,
and godly love throughout the Church set before us on that occasion,
when the Apostles suffered shame for the name of Christ. “ They
rejoiced that they were thus honored and when they had rejoined
their own company (Acts iv., 23) “ they lifted up their voice with
one accord and prayed ; and they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost, and spake the word of God with boldness. And the multi-
tude of them that believed were of one heart and one soul, and great
grace was upon them all; and none lacked; for the possessors of
lands and houses sold their possessions, and distribution was made
by the Apostles as every man had need. And daily in the Temple,
and in every house, they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus
Christ.” My text affords another illustration of the same truth.
When Peter was shut up in prison, the faith and love of the whole
Church was quickened. “ Prayer was made to God without ceasing
for him.” Before break of day, “in the house of Mary the mother of
John, surnamed Mark, many were gathered together praying ;” and
wherever prayer is thus fervent, and continued, we cannot doubt
that hearts were filled with zeal and love, and that the Word of
God mightily grew and prevailed.
A second effect closely connected with such seasons of trial
seems to have been, the completion of the outward framework
of the ministry in its threefold character, and the multipli-
cation of labourers in the Lord’s vineyard. When the perse-
cution of the Apostles was followed by an enlargement of the
Church, through multitudes of believers, it gave rise to the order of
Deacons, who should attend on the daily ministrations. Their
appointment stamped for ever with Divine authority two great
principles —Apostolic ordination, and Election by the body of the
Church of the persons so ordained. “ Look ye out among you (say
the Apostles) seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost
and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business.” Again,
the first mention of Elders in the Church of Jerusalem is connected
with a season of distress. While the twelve themselves fed the
flock in Jerusalem, while Saul made havock of the Church, we do
not as yet read of this ministry ; but when the great famine, pro-
phecied by Agabus, came to pass, the brethren of Antioch, having
determined to send relief to the disciples in Judea, they sent it “ by


the hands of Barnabas and Saul, to the Apostles and Elders at
Jerusalem.” Acts xi. 80. The Jewish Church indeed had had its
Elders, and when the altar, and sacrifice, and priesthood were
fulfilled upon the Cross, the Aaronic office was done away, and
simple Elders in the Church of Christ received the oversight of
separate congregations, even as the Apostles retained “the care of
all the Churches,” each in his own line of things. The Gospel of
the Circumcision was committed unto Peter; St. Paul was sent
unto the Gentiles; and James, the brother of our Lord, presided over
the Church of Jerusalem.
Persecution had even a wider effect: it multiplied labourers in
the Lord’s vineyard—“ the brethren who were scattered abroad on
the death of Stephen could not but testify to the Gospel of God’s
grace. They travelled as far as Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch,
and some were of Cyrene. Those Israelites who spoke the Greek
language preached the Lord Jesus. “And the hand of the Lord
was with them, and a great number believed and turned to the
Lord.” Thus then in her threefotd ministry, and in the brotherly
zeal and evangelical labour of all her members, a season of perse-
cution to the Church of Jerusalem, was a season of refreshing from
the Lord!
Lastly, there are gifts and powers inherent in the Church of
Christ, as a corporate Body, different from those of any earthly
Society! These also were called into more active exercise by
external pressure. The Church was ordained to be the pillar and
ground of God’s revealed truth; not by a perpetuated infallible
authority to interpret God’s Word, but as a witness and keeper of
that Word and of the faith once for all delivered to the saints. This
power of witnessing to the truth as it is in Jesus was manifested
especially, when the Judaizing and Pharasaic party attempted to
fasten on the Gentile Churches the observance of the Mosaic ritual.
Then the Apostles and Elders with the whole Church wrote letters,
and sent them by chosen men, to signify also by word of mouth
that the Gentiles should be “ saved by grace through faith,” and
not by the works of the law. In resistance also to the same
pressure from without St. Paul was compelled to assert his co-equal
and independent authority as an Apostle. In the name of the
Gentile Churches he “ withstood St. Peter to the face.”
Again, persecution from the upholders of Judaism, led to the
more extended missionary labour of St. Paul and Barnabas. When
“the Jews stirred up the devout and honourable women and the chief
men of Antioch in Pisidia, and raised persecution against them, and
expelled them out of their coasts, they shook off the dust of their
feet against them, and came to Iconium, and from thence again to
Derbe and Lystra; and when they had ordained them Elders in
every Church, and prayed with fasting, they commended them to


the Lord on whom they believed.” Thus seasons of persecution, yea
even of internal dissension, were blessed of God to the quickening,
first of the spiritual life of the Church itself; secondly, to the com-
pletion and extension of its ministry ; and, thirdly, to the exercise
of its own inherent right of self-government, as well as the en aige-
ment of its missionary labours. .
The grace of almsgiving was then also more fully exercised.
We read how in the beginning of the Gospel many sold houses
and lands, and brought the price thereof to the Apostles for
the kingdom of heaven’s sake; how none were suffered to lack,
for distribution was made as every man had need—how the
widow and orphan was provided for out of the weekly
offerings of the brethren —how the Gentile converts relieved the
sufferings of the Jewish brethren in a season of general famine how
St. Paul’s necessities were supplied once and again—how
brethren who preached the Gospel freely to the Gentiles were
brought on their way by the charity of Gams and other devout men.
How the deep poverty of some Churches redounded to the riches of
their liberality. Surely these are gifts and graces not tied to the
Apostolic age. Missionary labour and Christian almsgiving are
labours of love, and therefore peculiarly and inherently Christian.
It would seem then that if there be real spiritual life in a Church,
or an individual, the living unction of the Lord shall maxe it great,
and tribulation shall be overruled to the increase of love and power
and of a sound mind. . . , .
The application of these truths to the position of our Church at
this day is obvious. It is thrown for the first time, since the exist-
ence of the Church of England, completely on its own mtei nai
resources. The Civil Government gives no helping hand to the
support of its Ordinances or its ministry. It is as unconnected with
the powers that be as in the days of the Apostles. Nay, further,
the whole ministry of the Christian Church has been deemed unfit
'to have part or lot in conducting the religious education of the peoplm
' If, however, there be spiritual life in the Church, these events
are the very means whereby the Great Head of the Church is
'proving us. He is calling into fuller exercise the graces of faith
and patience, and meekness, and long-suffering, and almsgiving and
loV |hall we accept then joyfully the lesson afforded us by the
purest and most primitive Church?—the Church of J e ™ s *[ e
Shall we, if in great straits, wax colder in our zeal, or shall w
strengthen the things that remain ? When Peter was in prison,
prayer was made without ceasing to God for him, and he w
delivered. Who can doubt that deliverance out of our difficulties
wold come to it the grace of God poored open os the epm. .
prayer. Those difficulties would work for our good ! With prayer


and almsgiving and fellowship in the Gospel, godliness would in-
crease. We should provoke one another to love and good works;
the ministry would be extended ; Missionary labours would increase;
our heathen brethren would be reclaimed and saved. We should
have the same signs of life as were recorded of the Apostolic
Churches. What miracles were to them the Scriptures are to us,
namely, the evidence of revelation. The gift of tongues is replaced
by the ready acquirement of them. Even now the Scriptures are
translated into 147 languages. We have the doctrine of the
Apostles and their transmitted authority for ordaining Elders and
Deacons. We have the Sacraments as they used them; we have
the pure Word as they wrote it. Our Church, like their’s, is free
to do its own divine work, unhampered by Civil authority. I know
no reason why this day of trial may not be blessed to our spiritual
good. Let us pray without ceasing that it may be so ordered, and
that our candlestick instead of being removed out of its place, may
hold forth the Word of life more brightly, because shining in a dark
place. Let us pray that all its members, whether of the Laity or
the Clergy, may adorn the doctrine of our Saviour God in all
things, that others seeing our good works may glorify our Father
which is in heaven.


PASTORAL ADDRESS.
Reverend and Dear Brethren
When a little more than a year ago, in conjunction with
the Metropolitan and other Bishops of this Ecclesiastical Province,
I gave my opinion “ that the Laity, acting by their Representatives
duly elected, should meet in Diocesan and Provincial Conventions,
simultaneously with the Diocesan and Provincial Synods, that the
Clergy and Laity might severally consult and decide upon all
questions affecting the temporalities of the Church,” I hardly anti-
cipated that circumstances, over which I had no control, would so
soon have rendered necessary recourse to such a measure in this
Diocese. The withdrawal of State Aid in this colony from the
Ministry and Ordinances of the Christian Church, compelled me to
address the Lay members of our Communion, with reference both to
the support of that Ministry and the general extension of our
Church.
I thought it but due to the Church Society, whose Lay members
for many years have been forward in promoting these objects, to
request the advice and co-operation of their Committee in devising
some measure which might subsequently be laid before the whole
Church in its several congregations. This meeting of the Clergy
and Delegates from those congregations is the result of that con-
sultation. So far, then, the Minute above alluded to, of the
Metropolitan and Bishops of the Province has met with the con-
currence of the Laity of this Diocese.
The immediate object of calling this meeting together was, as I
have already observed, the cessation of State Aid. But I felt also,
that our Church had suffered, and was likely still more to be
hampered in her efforts, from the want of that feeling of fellowship
in the Gospel which should attach its members to each other, as
“ members one of another,” in that body of which Christ is the
head. We ordinarily call ourselves Churchmen; by which, I
presume, we mean that Christ ordained a visible and organised
Church militant upon earth, with its Ministry and Sacraments, and
written Word, to be a witness for God in the world. Yet, holding
this principle, we are at little pains to make the members of our
Church feel that we do indeed consider ourselves Brethren in the
Lord. There is, no doubt, a common feeling of attachment to her


Liturgy, and doctrine, and general Ecclesiastical system; but this is
rather felt than manifested , unless some danger threatens or some
shock is given to our cherished associations.
To supply, then, this deficiency, as well as procure increased
support for the Ministry, I judged it advisable to bring both
subjects before the Laity in my letter to the Church Society. I
wished to ascertain the depth and force of the attachment to our
Church, and to bring it if possible into more active exercise.
I am aware that the method which I adopted of addressing the
Church Society in the first instance has been blamed, and the Report
which emanated from its Committee viewed with some degree of
jealousy. lam at a loss, however, to conceive, how it could have
been thought by any one to be more than suggestive ; nor do I see
the reasonableness of the idea, that the published opinions of a few,
whether they be Bishops or Laymen, should be considered “ dic-
tating’’ to the majority.
At all events, the Supremacy of the Crown, acknowledged by the
Church of England, points out to us that no rules can be binding
on her members, either here or elsewhere, without the license and
consent of the Crown, as well as the concurrence and agreement of
the Clergy and people. So far, then, and no further, have I availed
myself of the suggestions of the Report, as to follow the method it
pointed out of convoking this “ pro tempore Convention” to meet
the Synod of the Clergy. The other parts of it, I admit, are
valuable, as directing the minds of Churchmen to those points of
Ecclesiastical Polity, which, though in some degree familiar to
Theologians, have not generally attracted the attention of the Laity,
until recent events have given them practical importance.
Considering, then, the Report as merely suggestive , and indicating
wants which may hereafter be supplied, I proceed to state the
subjects which I would propose for your deliberation:—
Ist. The question of finance. Whether it is possible to raise a
Diocesan Fund in this colony, out of which the Clergy of the less
opulent congregations may receive aid, and new Missions be opened.
Secondly, the tenure of Ecclesiastical Property; the right of
nomination to vacant churches; and a declaration of the trusts
connected with them.
Thirdly, the internal organization of our Church, whereby union
between our several congregations may be secured, and a general
interest excited in her cause.
With respect to the first; surely when for the first time in her
history our Church has been denied aid from the Civil Government,
it is not unreasonable to appeal to her members. We have lived to
see the day when the title and office of “ Nursing father and Nursing
mother” to the Church has been repudiated by the “powers that be”
in this Colony, and we are told to depend upon the faith and love of


the brethren who worship with ns. Zealots may tell you that it is
sinful to accept State Aid, forgetting that God himself established
the Mosaic Ritual by legal provision for its support; and restored it
after the Captivity by the royal aid of Heathen Princes. They
forget that our Lord himself was, by circumcision, as the son of
Mary, a member of that Church; that he “ ever taught in the
Synagogue and in the Temple;” whose service, though supported
by taxation, from which, as the Son of God, he was exempt, claimed
from him a miracle that it might be maintained.
While, however, we reject the notion that it is sinful to accept
the aid of the State in propagating the Gospel, we are not blind to
the evils with which indiscriminate State Support was accompanied.
We may console ourselves at least, under its loss, with the thought
that the State no longer, by its equal support of all forms and all
doctrines calling themselves Christian, casts doubt upon the very
existence of one “ faith once delivered to the Saints;” and one
Church founded by the Apostles! and if the zeal of private Christians,
members of our communion, will supply adequate funds, I presume
we should all hail it as a proof of the divine and inherent energy of
the Church, to fulfil her ministry independently of secular power.
I earnestly pray that such zeal for the Gospel may be realized in
our reformed branch of the Church Catholic in this colony. It is
for you brethren of the Laity to say if by any, and if so, by what
measures this can be accomplished. Persons I presume might be
elected in each congregation, as Sidesmen to the Wardens of the
Church, for the collection of subscriptions to such Diocesan Fund;
or collections might be made in the congregations, or “ from house
to house,’’ on certain Festivals of the Church, or times set apart for
this purpose, such as the Sunday next after Christmas Day, and
Whit Sunday. A statement of the means also dispensed by the
attorneys for the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, and the
rules by which we propose to guide the distribution in future will
be laid before you, so that we may be able to work together in
promoting the same object.
The next subject which invites your attention is the tenure of
Ecclesiastical property, and a specification of the trusts on which it
is held; the exercise of patronage, and the rights of the Minister
when licensed to a parochial district; the power of removal by duo
course of judicial enquiry and the right of appeal; and lastly, the
right of teaching in the schools built by the members of our Church
that “form of sound words,” which composed by the friend of
Luther, was translated probably by Cranmer himself, and completed
by Bishop Overall. With regard to the religious education of our
youth, I may observe that our Church bids us in her Baptismal
Service, to teach her children “ die Creed, the Lord’s Prayer, and
the Ten Commandments;” the Catechism itself having been framed


with a view to the instruction of candidates for Confirmation.
These points are all of vital importance to the peace and welfare
of our congregations, and the usefulness of the Clergy.
As respects Patronage, while the wishes of the Laity are, and
ought to be, consulted in the first appointment of one who is “ to
watch for their : souls,” it would be perilous to his mental inde-
pendence, and spiritual faithfulness, if he were liable, as a mere
hireling, to be dismissed at the caprice of a bare majority of seat-
renters.
There is a scriptural jurisdiction vested in the Bishop, who is
enjoined “not to receive an accusation,” much more censure,
suspend, or degrade an Elder, but “ before two or three witnesses,”
after solemn enquiry, that is, and clear evidence of false teaching or
immoral conduct.
Different modes may be suggested of vesting the Patronage of
vacant churches, so as to prevent the intrusion of an incompetent
or unwelcome pastor. But as in this Diocese no inducement to
nepotism exists, and no simoniacal contracts can be made, I cannot
deem it wise so to vest the whole patronage of the churches that no
power should be left to the Bishop of rewarding merit, or relieving
infirmity.
I do not myself see the objection, made by some, to giving the
duly nominated and licensed Minister of any Church, the right to
collect his own dues. They are his by compact with the seat-renter,
who engages his sittings voluntarily , and can resign them at his
pleasure. The causes therefore of ill-will connected with the collec-
tion of tithes do not here exist, and the argument does not apply to
he collection of seat-rents.
The last subject which I would bring under your notice, because
it forms so prominent a feature in the Report of the Committee of
the South Australian Church Society, is the future organization of
the Church.
I approach the subject with diffidence, inasmuch as while some
such measure is needed, I feel that this being almost the youngest,
and smallest of the Colonial Dioceses, may well be content to follow
rather than take the lead in this matter. Indeed nothing but our
peculiar financial position —deprived of State Aid, and needing the
combined energies of all her Lay members —could justify the
attempt to awaken their dormant sympathies, through the organ-
ization proposed in the Report. I will merely state some general
principles which should regulate such organization.
It is evident from late discussions in Parliament that a Repre-
sentative Convocation of the Church must contain a Lay element as
one of its constituent parts. At present, while the Bishops and
Clergy form the National Synod of the English Church, the Laity
are represented by the Crown and Parliament. The want of union


and association of these elements, has led on the one hand to the
suspension of the deliberative functions of Convocation in its present
form, and on the other much legislation has been proposed, often
offensive, and sometimes injurious to the Church of England.
Parliament now is open to the enemies of her discipline and
doctrine, and yet such members have a right to vote on any Bill,
however deeply affecting her organization and property. The
true remedy for this wrong (for wrong it is) is, that her Laity
should be directly represented in her own Convocation, and join in
framing her own laws.
This would be like the rest of her reformation, a return to the
usage of the Apostolic Church.
Even in the Theocratic institutions of Moses, the Civil Magis-
trate invested the priesthood with the robes of sacred office; and
the supreme jurisdiction of the Crown of Israel was vindicated,
when Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being priest when guilty of
rebellion. The Supremacy of the Crown of England in all causes,
and over all persons —Ecclesiastical as well as Civil, is but the
assertion of the same sovereign jurisdiction residing in the Civil
power, the Crown with us acting on behalf of the Laity. We do
not give any right to our Soverigns to minister the Word or Sacra-
ments, any more than it was permitted to Uzziah to offer incense
before the Lord. Nor, again, do we acknowledge in the Crown the
authority to determine “ controversies of the faith.” What we
deny to the Bishop of Borne, we do not transfer to a Lay Sovereign.
If deliberative assemblies of the Church are needed, a pattern is
furnished by the Church at Jerusalem, in the Acts of the Apostles.
When the observance of the Mosaic Kitual was obtruded on the
disciples by the sect of Pharisees, we read, ch. xv., “ that the
Apostles and Elders came together to consider this matter,” and
finally after much discussion, the decision proposed by St. James,
brother of our Lord, then presiding Bishop over that Church, was
adopted by the Apostles and Elders with the whole Church, v. 22.
If the Convocation then at home is remodelled, the respective
rights and duties of Clergy and Laity, Crown and People, will, no
doubt, be duly considered. All the learning, the ability, the ex-
perience, the piety of our Church will be brought to bear upon this
question. We may safely await then its coming solution, when our
Diocesan arrangements will naturally follow the model of the Church
at home. At all events we can establish nothing here, nor make
rules binding on our Clergy or Laity, without the license of the
Crown first had for that purpose, and its sanction solemnly given to
such arragements. We may thus perhaps be preserved from the
evil of party or ill-considered propositions.
I have already alluded to the subject of Ecclesiastical discipline,
and the Scriptural jurisdiction inherent in the Episcopal Office, to


admonish, censure, suspend, degrade, or cut off from communion
of the Church j yet the exercise of this power should be duly re*
gulated. The principles enunciated by St. Paul, in his Epistle to
Timothy, and by our Lord himself in the 18th of St. Matthew’s
Gospel point out the way. While the Bishop exercises the functions
of judge, presbyters are recognized in our Church as the witnesses
before whom the accusation should be preferred; and whenever
withdrawal of license to officiate involves the deprivation of a
benefice, with its temporal advantages, it is but right that the whole
Church, whose best interests are affected by the scandal, as well as
the particular congregation deprived of its pastor, should be cogni-
sant of, and concurrent in the sentence.
In truth the great difficulty in Church organization is to adjust
properly the respective offices of the Clergy and Laity, whether
deliberative, judicial, or executive. The problem has yet to be
solved. The hierarchy of the middle ages acted as “ Lords over
God s heritage. The Protestant Sovereigns at the Reformation
violently reclaimed their own and people’s rights. It may remain,
then, for our more peaceful age, when education also is generally
diffused, to reconcile principles which cannot really be conflicting in
the Church of God, so that the Bishops and Elders with the whole
Church, may act together for the advancement of Christ’s kingdom
and the glory of God.
Indeed a prosperous future opens on the Church, if, guided by
the spirit of love, the principles of the inspired Word, and the
history of the Apostolic age, we stand upon the old paths, and do
not seek out “ new inventions.”
In the Church of England in this colony, what is there at variance
with the Primitive model ? No zealot can scoff at her, as the hired
servant of a lafcitudinarian State ? None that the Csesar intrudes
“into the things of God.” We have the transmitted authority of an
Episcopate unbroken at the Reformation. Our Presbyters are duly
called according to the ancient order of the Church. Our Deacons,
like those of Jerusalem, exercise a spiritual office as well as care for
the sick and poor. In respect of nominating their own Ministers,
the Laity exercise perfect freedom. In their temporal relations, our
churches are wholly independent. Laymen duly authorised and
acting in unison with the Clergy, minister in various ways as
Teachers, “helps, governments.” They are Catechists, Readers,
District Visitors, Sunday School Teachers.
Old. objections then to the spots and blemishes of the Establish-
ment in England are here removed.
The defect being gone, the protest becomes needless—separation
without grounds. What then does hinder our progress, if we,
brethren, make full proof of our Ministry.
Let this then be our endeavour as it is assuredly our duty With


this view I have taken upon myself the responsibility' of convoking
this Meeting of the Clergy, and the Laity by their Delegates from
each congregation. I commend to your notice, and I ask your
advice on the several topics which I have suggested for your con-
sideration. With due respect for the Supremacy of the Crown, we
must at present regard ourselves only as a “pro tempore Assembly.”
We claim no Legislative functions. We may agree, if it seem good,
to carry out the suggestions of the Report of the Church Society s
Committee. We may recommend to the several vestries the
establishment of a Diocesan Pastoral Aid Fund, with Collectors
for each congregation. We may consider and propose for discussion
a Trust Deed, which, when agreed upon, may be adopted by the
whole Church as its Model Deed. And as to the organization sug-
gested in the Report, we may in like manner refer it to the several
vestries for further consideration, and watch meanwhile the progress
of Ecclesiastical events at home. So much of it I would however
recommend should be adopted, namely, the annual meeting of the
Clergy and Delegates of the congregations, for the purpose of re-
ceiving the report of the funds distributed, for the cultivation of
sympathy among the members of our churches, and for making
known the progress and measure of success with which it has pleased
God to bless the labours of our Ministry.
It is surely a time of refreshing, when the Church Representative
meets together, as on this day, for prayer and Holy Communion. I
recognise most of you, brethren, as members indeed of the Church
Society, with which I have been acting for four years To-day I
hail you as the Representatives, not merely of your own feelings and
wishes, but as representing the sentiments and spirit of the whole
of this Diocesan Church. It is this which bids me “ thank God
and take courage.” We know our sister Churches in America, once
placed in less favourable circumstances than ourselves, are at this day
great and flourishing branches of the Church of Christ.
Let us hope and let us pray, that this our “ day of small things”
may open more and more to Meridian brightness, that wisdom and
strength may be given us to emerge from our present difficulties,
and that, like the Church of Jerusalem, we may “ continue in the
Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread and in
prayers.”
So shall we be “ all of one heart and of one mind.” We shall
distribute from the common fund of the Church u as every man hath
need.” So walking in the fear of God, and comfort of the Holy
Ghost, we shall enjoy the blessings of Peace, and our Churches will
be. multiplied. Our salt will not have lost its savour, nor our
. candlestick be removed out of its place.


RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE
CONFERENCE.
Whereas the Churcb of England in South Australia receives
no aid from the Local Government by grants of land or money;
but is dependent solely on the voluntary contributions of its
members for the support of its Ministry; the maintenance of
Missions to the Aborigines and other Heathen; and for the
building of Churches, Parsonages, and Schools, in which its
doctrine and discipline may be taught: And whereas for the
edification of its Members, and “provoking to love” and the
above-mentioned “ good works,” it is desirable that they should be
brought into closer fellowship by Parochial Organization, and
“ the assembling of themselves together” periodically :—We the
Bishop, Clergy, and Laity, in Conference assembled, have agreed
to recommend the following plans and suggestions to the several
Congregations of this Colony.
And whereas this Diocesan Church is part and parcel of the
United Church of Lngland and Ireland, by Law established in
the United Kingdom ; and therefore subject to the general Eccle-
siastical Laws enforcing the Supremacy of the Crown, the use of
the Book of Common Prayer, the Authorised Version of the Holy
Scriptures, and subscription to the Thirty-nine Articles:—We, the
Bishop, Clergy, and Laity being under the obligations thus implied,
and being earnestly desirous to maintain inviolate that unity and
fellowship in the Church of our Fathers, do declare that we hold it
to be incompetent for any Diocesan Assembly, or Synod of the
Clergy, or Convention of Lay Representatives, held in pursuance
of these recommendations, to “treat, debate, consider, consult, or
agree upon,” any alteration in those Formularies and Principles,
except it be initiated by the direct authority of the Crown, or in
virtue of Licence from the Crown obtained in that behalf:


Under this limitation, Vvith the view of promoting the closer
fellowship as well as efficiency of this Diocesan Church, we have
resolved to recommend that an Assembly consisting of the Bishop,
Chapter of Clergy, and Convention of Lay Representatives be con-
vened periodically, composed as is hereinafter specified, and to be
called the “Diocesan Assembly.”
I. Diocesan Assembly.
This Assembly is constituted when the Convention and Chapter
of Clergy meet together and are presided over by the Bishop.
11. Chapter of Clergy.
The Chapter of Clergy consists of every duly licensed officiating
Minister, Presbyters alone having the right of voting.
111. Convention of Laity.
The Convention shall consist of Lay Representatives (being Com-
municants) for all the Congregations, in the following proportion: —
for a Congregation under 100 souls, one Representative; 100 and
under 20(f, two Representatives; and so on in proportion: to be
elected annually in the month of October by the registered Lay
Members of each Congregation contributing to its Seat Rent or the
Pastoral Aid Fund, and attending from time to time on the worship
of the Church.
isstruction. Under the present circumstances of the Church in this
Diocese, we are of opinion that persons who communicate three times in the
your 8,1 g eligible to be elected Liiy liepiesentati\es.
IV. Election of Representatives.
A meeting of adult male Registered Lay Members qualified to
vote according to Clause 111. shall he called for the purpose of
electing Representatives, by the Minister, or in his absence or default
bv the Wardens, by a Notice posted on the Church doors at least
seven clear days previous to the day of Meeting. Each adult shall
have a vote for each sitting, provided that no person shall have
more than six votes. No person shall vote in respect of any sitting
the rent of which shall be then due and unpaid. The Votes
shall be in writing, to be openly declared, personal attendance
not being necessary. In the event of any person elected as
Representative declining, or being unable to act, the next highest on
the list, shall be declared duly elected. In the event of an equality
of votes the Chairman shall have a casting vote. A Return of the
Representatives elected shall be made by the Chairman, who shall
he the Minister, or in his absence such person as the Meeting may
elect, to the Bishop of the Diocese within fourteen days. The
presence of at least five Members of the Congregation besides the
Chairman, shall be necessary to constitute a meeting for the election
of Bepresentatives. The Wardens, il in at tend ante, shall act as
Scrutineers.


V. Meeting of Assembly.
The Diocesan Assembly shall be convened annually by the Bishop
in the month of December, on which occasion Divine Service shall
be held, and a Pastoral Letter from the Bishop containing a report
of the general state of the Church in this Diocese —the progress of
Religion and Education —and of the means of Public Worship, will
be received Extraordinary meetings may be convened by the
Bishop, when he sees fit, or upon a requisition by seven ot the
Clergy who have been at least five years in Priest’s Orders, or of ten
Representatives.
VI. Mode of Deliberation.
It shall be lawful for the Chapter of Clergy and Convention to
deliberate apart, or in conference (by mutual agreement) with each
other, or with the Bishop.
YU. Mode of Voting.
The assent or dissent of the Chapter of Clergy and Convention
shall be determined by the majority of open votes in each order
respectively. No resolution shall be passed, unless one third of each
order shall be present.
VIII.
No Rule shall be binding on the Members of the Church in
this Diocese, which shall not have received the concurrent assent
of the Bishop, the Chapter of Clergy, and the Convention in the
Diocesan Assembly.
IX. Committees.
The Diocesan Assembly shall, at every Annual Meeting, appoint
a Standing Committee for the ensuing year, consisting of seven
Clerical, and fourteen Lay members, the Bishop of the Diocese to be
the President. Two Clerical and four Lay members shall form a
quorum. This Committee shall elect its Finance and other Sub-
Committees, and transact the business assigned to it by the Diocesan
Assembly during its recess, subject to such Rules and Regulations
as may be adopted by that Assembly.
X. Finance.
The establishment of five separate and distinct Funds is recom-
mended, viz.—a Pastoral Aid Fund, which we consider to be of
primay importance, an Endowment Fund, a Church Building Fund,
an Educational Fund, and a Mission Fund to the Aborigines and
Heathen. These funds shall be placed under the control and be
subject to the regulation of the Diocesan Assembly, and be admin-
istered by its Finance Committee.


XI. Pastoral Aid Fund/
a . The object of this Fund is to afford aid to Ministers whose
incomes may not reach the minimum sum of .£l5O per annum from
Pew Rents and Endowments. Claims on this Fund will not be
admitted as a matter of right from any Minister whose Church or
District is capable of providing him with a suitable income ] it
being more particularly intended to aid Ministers having small
churches and in poor districts; as the state of the Fund may permit,
due consideration being had for such Ministers as have families. It
is also proposed that aid should be granted from this Fund towards
the support of Clergymen to itinerate in remote districts.
Amount of Subscription.
b. It is recommended that a subscription of one shilling per month
towards this Fund be collected from all who are willing to contribute
thereto.
Sidesmen or Collectors.
c. It is recommended that Sidesmen, or other persons be elected
annually by the respective congregations, to collect the subscriptions
to the Pastoral Aid Fund.
Annual Sermons.
d. It is recommended that Annual Sermons be preached, and
collections made in all churches in support of the Pastoral Aid Fund.
Note. Aid should not be granted from this Fund (except in extraordinary
cases) to Ministers of Churches the Trust Deeds of which shall appear to the
Finance Committee inconsistent with rules to be laid down in that behalf by the
Diocesan Assembly.
XII. Endowment Fund.
It is suggested that this Fund he established by means of annual
subscriptions, and donations of money or land. This Fund is
intended to aid local efforts in providing endowments and erecting
Parsonage Houses; the Fund to be administered by the Finance
Committee, on conditions to be prescribed by the Diocesan Assembly.
XIII. Church Building Fund.
This Fund is to be formed and administered in like manner as the
preceding.
XIV. Mission Fund.
This Fund is to be formed and administered in like manner as the
preceding.
XV. Educational Fund.
The establishment of a Fund is recommended in aid of salaries to
School Masters and School Mistresses; building School Houses, and
to promote education according to the principles of the Cbuich of
England, under conditions to be determined by the Diocesan
Assembly.


XYL Miscellaneous Resolutions.
1. Ecclesiastical Tribunal .
a. It is the opinion of this meeting that the Laity should have a
voice in any Court, when sentence might have the effect of depriving
a Minister of the temporalities annexed to his cure.
h Resolved that the Lord Bishop be requested to communicate
to His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Her Majesty’s
Secretary of State for the Colonies, the foregoing resolution, in
order that the wish expressed in it may be considered, in case it
should be deemed expedient to make any provision for the better
Ecclesiastical Government of this and other Colonial Dioceses.
2. j ßegistration.
It is recommended that Registers after an approved form be
compiled by each Minister, and kept by him, of all Members
of our Church, residing within his Parish or District, from which a
Register for the Diocesan Assembly shall be compiled and corrected
periodically; the object being, to bring the Members of the Church
into closer fellowship by means of Pastoral visitation, and to extend
Church accommodation and the means of Education as Population
increases.
3. Corporate Forcers .
It is recommended that, (in addition to the powers possessed by
the Lord Bishop, as a Corporation Sole, in virtue of Her Majesty’s
Letters Patent) Corporate powers should be sought for
to hold lands in perpetuity, for the benefit of each Church or Con-
gregation.
4. Memorial to the Queen.
A Memorial, setting forth the various requirements of the Church
in this Diocese as respects Ecclesiastical Discipline, shall be
prepared by this Assembly and forwarded by the Lord Bishop of the
Diocese through His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury to be laid
before Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen, praying that such
requirements may be met in such way as Her Majesty and Her
advisers in matters Ecclesiastical, may deem expedient.


MEMORIAL TO THE QUEEN.
To Her Most Gracious Majesty VICTORIA, by the Grace of
God Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith.
The Memorial of the undersigned Bishop, Clergy, and Laity of
that part of the Diocese of Adelaide, comprised within the
Province of South Australia, in Conference Assembled:
Humbly Sheweth
That the Church of England in this Diocese not
being by Law established, and the Clergy not enjoying Corporate
Rights as in England, much expence and inconvenience arise in the
conveyance of Ecclesiastical Property to Trustees.
That changes in the office of Trustee are very frequent in a newly
settled Colony.
That Churchwardens are elected annually by the Minister and
Congregation.
That the Churchwardens so appointed, have no legal right to
perform the duties usually appertaining to that ancient and popular
office; the Church and Church Property being vested in Trustees,
who may remove to a distance from the Church, or even depart out
of the Colony.
That the body of English Ecclesiastical Law, has not yet been
adapted to the wants and necessities of the Church in the Colonies.
That the jurisdiction of the Bishop over the Clergy is left without
any prescribed form of Process: that he is not armed with legal
authority to deprive of temporalities a Clergyman duly convicted of
teaching contrary to the doctrine of the Church of England, or of
immoral conduct.
That there is no prescribed form or mode of Appeal to the Metro-
politan, or of giving effect to the sentence of his Court.
That the periodical meeting of the Bishop, Clergy, and Laity in
Diocesan Assemblies, is as yet unauthorised by the Supreme authority
of the Crown.
That your Memorialists are persuaded much good is likely to arise
from such Assemblies, when conducted according to prescribed rules,
and with powers properly defined.
Your Memorialists therefore humbly pray that your Gracious
Majesty may be pleased to sanction such Diocesan Meetings of the
Bishop, Clergy, and Laity; and to empower them to make and give
such effect to Rules and Regulations as may be deemed expedient for
the better government of the Church in this Colony, and as may be
consistent with the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of
England and the lawful Supremacy of the Crown.


SUGGESTED
PRO VISIONS FOR A TRUST DEED,
AND
Regulations for the Better Preservation of Trust
Property to the Uses Appointed by the Donor.
PROVISIONS.
The Church, 1. That the piece of land, lying and being situate
name and pur- w i t h the buildings
vested' 111 °" (if an j) thereon be vested in Trustees (to be chosen in
manner hereinafter described) for the erection or main-
tenance of a Church, to be called for
Divine Service according to the rites and ceremonies of the United
Church of England and Ireland.
Number of 2. That not less than three or more persons
elec he chosen as Trustees. In the first instance, by
tlon the subscribers of not less than £1 towards the erection
of the Church, and ever after, on the occurrence of a
vacancy, by the Seatholders: Provided always that every Trustee
■whensoever chosen, shall, previous to his acting as a Trustee, make
and subscribe in a book to be kept for that purpose, the Declaration at
the foot of these presents marked with the letter A. Provided also
that the Bishop of the Diocese may be Sole Trustee.
Vacancy of 3. That in the event of any vacancy occurring in
diereof ’ office of Trustee by death, removal from the Pro-
mode of filling y i nce °f South Australia, secession from the Church of
up vacancies. England, resignation, refusing to act, or inability to
discharge his duties through insanity, insolvency, or the commission
of any act of felony, the Minister or the Churchwardens for the time
being shall convene a meeting of the Seat-holders in manner here-
inafter mentioned for the appointment of a Minister, when such


Meeting shall proceed to elect and appoint another Trustee to fill
such vacancy: and should the Churchwardens and Seat-holders
neglect for the space of three calendar months to appoint a new
Trustee, then it shall be lawful for the Minister of the said Church
to nominate a person to fill the existing vacancy, or in the event of
there being no Minister, then it shall be lawful for the Bishop of the
Diocese to do so.
Qualification 4. That the Minister of the said Church shall be a
of Minister. Minister of the United Church of England and Ireland,
regularly ordained in Priest’s Orders and duly Licensed by the
Bishop to officiate in the said Church according to the rites and
ceremonies thereof, and on institution, shall make and subscribe in
a book to be kept for that purpose, the Declaration at the foot of
these presents marked with the letter B.
Power of 5. That it shall be lawful for the Vestry, Minister,
altering Trusts Trustees, and Churchwardens for the time being, with
ene ' the consent of the Ordinary, by any instrument in
writing to be by them signed, sealed and delivered in the presence
of, and to be attested by, two or more credible witnesses, from time
to time to revoke, alter, qualify, amend, or add to the Trusts
hereinbefore contained as circumstances may require: Provided
always that the new additional or qualified Trusts shall not in any
way alter or vary the purposes for which the land or site of the
said Church and Parsonage was granted and released, and for which
the Church and Parsonage shall have been erected: nor vary the
mode hereinbefore stated of electing and nominating a Minister to
the said Church, except in accordance with Rules to be framed by
the Diocesan Assembly.
THE DECLARATIONS ABOVE REFERRED TO.
I, B. do hereby declare that lam a Member of the Church of
England, and that I allow the Thirly-mne Articles and the Book of Common
Prayer to be agreeable to the Word of God : and I do hereby accept the office
of Trustee of Church and do promise to the best
of my judgment and ability to perform the duties of the said office.
Witness my hand this day of I*s
A. B.
Witness £ e F
I, A. B. do hereby solemnly engage to submit myself to the decision of
the Court of Representatives or Diocesan Assembly, and to give up possesion of
the temporalities of the Church or District which I may hold, if sentenced to
Suspension or Deprivation by the Court of Representatives or Diocesan
Assembly in case of Appeal,


27 :
REGULATIONS.
Election of 1. That the nomination of the first Minister shall
Minister m the ves ted in the persons who have subscribed and paid
rs ms ance. owar( j g e erec tion or endowment of the Church:
each Subscriber of £1 entitled to one vote ; of £5 to two votes; and
and to one additional vote for every additional £5.
Note. It is not intended by this regulation to prevent the original Subscribers
from vesting the Patronage of the Church in such manner as they shall deem
expedient.
Election of 2. That on any occasion of a vacancy in the office of
Minister in all ]\lJ n i s t er 0 f the said Church, unless it be otherwise
firstf a 61 6 provided in the Trust Deed, the Churchwardens or, in
their absence, any two Seat-holders, shall convene a
meeting of the Vestry or Seat-holders by a notice affixed to the
Church door, a copy of which shall be published in one or more
newspapers, at least fourteen days before the day of meeting; when,
in the latter case, the Seat-holders so assembled shall nominate five
of their own body to act in conjunction with the Trustees and
Churchwardens in nominating a Minister to fill such vacancy; and
should such Vestry, or Trustees, Churchwardens, and Committee of
Seat-holders neglect for the space of six calendar months from and
after such vacancy, to nominate a Minister thereto, then it shall be
lawful for the Bishop of the Diocese to nominate and appoint a
Minister thereto: Provided always that such power of nomination
by the Bishop shall only apply to the then existing vacancy.
Form of 3. That whenever the Vestry, or Trustees, Church-
—g a war dens, and Committee of Seat-holders as above
mis er. S p ec ifi ghall nominate a Minister to the said Church,
it shall be done by signing and forwarding to the Bishop a Form of
Nomination as follows; —
To the Right Rev. by Divine Permission,
Lord Bishop of Adelaide.
We, the undersigned,
of Church duly authorised
by the provisions of a Deed of Trust of the said Church executed on the
day of 18 to elect and nominate a Minister to the said
Church, do hereby nominate the Rev. A. B. to be Minister of the said Church,
and do pray that he may be forthwith duly licensed to the Incumbency thereof.
Signatures.
Dated this day of
in the year of our Lord 18
Appointment 4. That the Seat-holders shall meet in Easter week
■den^ UIC^War " eaC k ever y y ear > which notice shall be given
on the previous Lord’s Day, by the Minister during


Divine Service, when they shall appoint one person to he a Church-
warden, and the Minister shall appoint another person to be the
other Churchwarden; and such two persons shall, in a book to be
kept for that purpose, sign their names to the Declarations at the
foot of these presents, marked with the letters A. and C.: and such
Churchwardens shall continue in office till the ensuing Easter.
Power to fill 5. That in case of a vacancy occurring in the office of
VaC ffl ncie f Churchwarden, from resignation or death, it shall be
Churchwar- °* lawful for the Minister to appoint a person to fill such
den. office for the remainder of the then current year.
Proviso 6. That in case the Minister or Seat-holders shall
against omis- ne gl ec fc to appoint a Churchwarden as aforesaid, then
in° n appointhig fhe P ar ty n °t having so neglected shall nominate and
Wardens. appoint both Churchwardens for the ensuing year.
Right of 7. That from and after the due appointment of a
Minister to in- Minister to
come. Church, he shall be entitled to the rents and profits
arising from the letting of Pews and Sittings in the said Church;
from the Glebe, and from all other Lands, Tenements, or property
of whatever kind appertaining to him in virtue of his Cure.
Rate of 8 . That the Y estry, or Trustees, Minister and Church-
fixed rentS ’ k° W war( i ens shall fix and determine the rate at which the
Pews shall be let; and that such rate so fixed shall not
afterwards be altered without the consent in writing of the Minister
for the time being, and the Bishop of the Diocese.
Pews when 9. That the Pews shall be let and paid for half-yearly
deemed let or j n a( jyance; and that no Pew or Sitting shall be
ta en * deemed let till the rent be paid.
Monthly Col- 10. That there shall be monthly, or oftener, a col-
lection. lection of the Voluntary Offerings of the congregation
made during Divine Service.
Payment of 11. That the Churchwardens shall, from the fund de-
incidental ex- pjyo(j from the monthly collections, and the fees derived
penses. f rom open i ng an( j leasing of the ground in Cemetery or
Churchyard, pay or caused to be paid all expenses connected with
the cleaning lighting, and keeping in repair the Church and Church-
yard; for providing all things necessary for the due and decent
performance of Divine Worship and administration of the Sacraments;
and in paying the salaries of such officers or servants as shall be
appointed.
Appointment 12. That the Minister for the time being shall have
of Clerk, Sex- p owe r to appoint and remove or discharge the clerk,
ton c * sexton, pew-openers, or any such other officers as it
may be deemed adviseable to appoint. But that the salaries of those
officers be fixed by the Minister and Churchwardens.


Audit of ac- 13. That the Churchwardens shall give an account
counts, &c. a k E as ter Meeting of Seat-holders of all moneys
received and disbursed by them during the past year in virtue of
their office, which being audited and passed, shall be entered on the
Minutes: and the said Churchwardens shall then and there pay over
to their successors in office, the balance, if any, remaining in their
hands: and it shall be lawful for the then elected Churchwardens,
together with the Vestry, or Minister and Trustees, to dispose of
the said balance in the way which may seem to them best calculated
for the benefit of the said Church or the Congregation.
Constitution 14. That at all Meetings, whether of the Vestry, or
of Meetings. 0 f Trustees, Minister and Churchwardens, or of Seat-
holders, the Minister shall be Chairman; or, in his absence, such
person as the Meeting may elect.
Alterations in 15. That no alterations or additions shall be made
Buildings, &c. |. O Ohurch 0 r Parsonage, without the concurrence
in writing of the Vestry, Minister, Trustees, Churchwardens, or a
majority of them; and not then, without the written consent of the
Bishop.
Power of 16. That it shall be lawful for the Trustees, or a
leasing Church ma j o rity of them, with the consent of the Minister,
property. an( j 0 f the Bishop, (such consent to be given in writing)
to let, rent, or lease any property belonging to the said Church, and
to receive, take, and pay to the Minister for the time being, the
rents, profits, and issues thereof: Provided that no such property be
leased for a longer period than twenty-one years: nor shall it be
lawful for the Trustees, or any one else, to received or take any fine
or premium for granting or renewing any lease of such property;
nor shall it be lawful to renew any lease thereof till within three
years on or before the expiration of the then existing lease.
THE DECLARATION ABOVE REFERRED TO MARKED
I, A. B. do hereby accept the office of Churchwarden of
Church and engage to perform the duties of the said
office to the best of my judgment and ability, and according to the provisions
of a Deed of Trust of the said Church executed on the
day of 18 and I also hereby engage to render true and
full accounts of all sums of money that shall come to my hands by virtue
of the said office, and to pay all such moneys to such person or persons
as may be authorised to receive the same.
Witness my hand this day of 18
H. Hussey, Printer, King William Street, Adelaide.


