

AUSTRALIAN
Mutual Provident Society,
Laying the Foundation Stone
OF
NEW OFFICES,
PITT STREET, SYDNET. •
TUESDAY, JANUARY 23, 1877.
Sydney :
GIBBS, SHALLARD, & CO., GENERAL MACHINE PRINTERS,
PITT STREET NORTH, NEXT UNION RANK.


>*
H
W
u
o
c/3
H ti-3
£ 5
M Q
Q
P oo
>
o Ui
03 <->
* E
ti-
l-1 o
<1
P Q
H <
P W
% =
5
< UJ
3 25
<
03
H
C/3
P
<!


AUSTRALIAN
Mutual Provident Society.
PROCEEDINGS AT
Laying the Foundation Stone
OF
NEW OFFICES,
PITT STREET, SYDNEY
TUESDAY, JANUARY 23rd, 1877.
Sydney
GIBBS, SHALLARD, & CO., GENERAL MACHINE PRINTERS,
PITT STRFET NORTH, NEXT UNION BANK.




Australian Hfufitstl S?ocictn.
PROCEEDINGS AT LAYING FOUNDATION
STONE OF NEW OFFICES.
[ Reprinted,, with corrections, from the “Sydney Morning Herald .”]
Tuesday, the 23rd January, 1877, will hereafter be a
memorable anniversary in the history of the leading Life
Assurance Society in Australia. On that day the founda-
tion stone of the new and splendid edifice to be erected
for the offices of the Association was laid by Professor
Smith, the chairman of the Board of Directors, in the
presence of a large assemblage; and the event marks
another advance in the rapid and substantial progress of
the Society.
The site selected for the new offices (the' society, as will be seen by
the remarks of Professor Smith, having been compelled by the increase of
business to make several movements to more commodious premises from
time to time) is in Pitt-street, directly opposite Spring-street, one of the
best business situations in the city : and the edifice to be erected thereon
will be well worthy of the position which the Society deservedly takes
among Life Assurance Societies, whether here or elsewhere.
The following description of the new building has been furnished by
the architects, Messrs. Mansfield Brothers : —The building has a frontage
of 99 feet to Pitt-street, of 61 feet to Bond-street, and of iox feet to Hamilton
street. The principal elevations, which face Pitt and Bond streets, are to
be entirely of the best Pyrmont stone. They are designed in what is
known as the Renaissance, or revived Italian style of architecture, and are
treated rather in the Venetian than in the Roman school of that style.
From a deeply rusticated base rise, at either end of the front, two massive
piers carried up the full height of the building, and becoming lighter in
their treatment at each successive story. These, with the windows which


are placed between them, form, as it were, the wings of the fagade, and
give to it the requisite expression of strength and solidity. The intervening
space is occupied by architectural features of a lighter character ; the
windows being separated by three-quarter columns and pilasters of the
Corinthian order, with balustrade and other characteristic details. At
each story a bold and simple ornamental cornice runs along the full extent
of the front, connecting the different parts, and giving unity of effect to
the whole composition. Surmounting the uppermost range of piers and
columns is a handsome entablature and cornice, with bold projection, and
with balustrade and ornamental parapet crowning the whole. In the centre
of the Pitt-street front, and on the highest point in the building, will be
placed the group of statuary which now ornaments the present offices, and
which is so familiar to all the members from its frequent appearance upon
the policies and other documents, that it has almost come to be recognised
as a kind of trade mark of the society. The principal entrance is centrally
situated in the Pitt-street frontage, and is marked and emphasised by two
columns of Aberdeen polished red granite, bearing a pediment and a richly-
carved tympanum. A subordinate entrance —to be used chiefly for access
to the offices which will be available for letting—occupies the centre of the
Bond-street elevation. A third entrance, for clerks, messengers, and the
general service of the establishment, is provided in Hamilton-street. The
eievation to this street is plain and unassuming in character, retaining only
such a modified and subdued resemblance to the principal fronts as is
necessary to retain something like harmony of effect. The basement story
■—the greater part of which is already constructed—will rise to a height of
about 3 feet above the street level, which will admit of its being well
lighted. It is surrounded entirely by an open area and retaining wall,
which will ensure perfect dryness and thorough ventilation, and it will be
vaulted above with concrete arches on iron beams, which to a great extent
will render it fireproof. Facing Pitt and Bond-streets are six large rooms,
which it is proposed to let as offices, having an easy and commodious
access from the entrance hall in Bond-street, and provided with all neces-
sary conveniences. The remaining space in the basement is devoted to
the requirements of the Institution, and comprises stationery room,
clerks’ hat and cloak rooms, lavatory, and other conveniences, together
with a large and massively-built strong room, vaulted, and fire-proof.
Ample space is afforded, moreover, for the stowage of old records. On
the ground-floor, entered from the principal doorway in Pitt-street, and
occupying the centre of the building, is the large hall for the public
business. This room is 59 feet deep, by 51 feet 6 inches wide and 21
feet high, lighted by windows, front and back, and is intersected by a
row of Corinthian columns near its centre, so disposed as to form a kind
of semi-screen between the public space and that devoted to the clerical
staff, and to increase the apparent height and size of the room. The hall
will be handsomely but not lavishly decorated. Its floor in the public
space will be marble-paved, and its walls will be relieved with pilasters and
recessed arches. Immediately adjoining the public hall, and entered from
it, are the rooms of the Secretary and the Actuary. These rooms are
situated one on either side of the main entrance, and occupy the front
corners of the ground floor. The Auditors’ room, also entered from the


principal office, is placed behind the Actuary’s room, and is separated
from it by the public staircase hall. The offices of the Accountant
and Chief Clerk are situated in the back part of the principal office, one
on each side. These apartments are enclosed with cedar and glass screens
of moderate height, and are so arranged that the two offices in question
can command and supervise the whole clerical staff. Immediately over
the strong room in the basement rises another strong room of equal size.
Special pains have been taken to ensure these rooms being thoroughly fire-
proof, damp-proof, and perfectly ventilated. Two handsome staircases
give access to the first floor suite of rooms. One at the Bond-street
entrance wiil be devoted to the use of the tenants of the various offices.
The other, opening from the pnblic office, will be reserved exclusively for
communication between the several departments of the Society’s own
offices. Of the first floor rooms, a portion only is retained for the use of
the institution. The remainder, comprising an area of nearly two-thirds
of the whole floor will be available for letting as offices, and will form a
valuable reserve space, which can in future years be resumed when the
growing necessities of the business render such a course desirable. In the
portion retained for present use are situated the Board room, Medical
officer’s room, waiting room, &c. The second floor is occupied entirely
by office space, the greater portion of which it will probably be found
necessary to retain for the purposes of the Society’s business. In the
construction and finish of the building all the most modern improvements
will be introduced, especial attention having been paid to the ventilation
and to perfecting the system of drainage. The working requirements of
the office have been carefully studied, efficiency and convenience having
throughout been regarded as primary considerations, and it is hoped that
when completed, the building will be not only a handsome and spacious
structure, but that it will afford special facilities for the conduct of the
society’s business. The contract for the construction of the foundations
was taken by Mr. Loveridge in March, 1875, and this portion of the work
has been most satisfactorily completed. The contract for the completion
of the building has been taken by Mr. Hugh M‘Master, the ironwork
(girders, columns, &c.) being supplied by Mort’s Dock and Engineering
Company. Including the work already completed, the contracts now in
operation, the cost of some goods to be imported from England, the
architects’ commission, and all other expenses, the entire cost of the
building (exclusive of land) will amount .0 something under £45,000.
On Tuesday afternoon, at the time appointed for laying the foundation
stone, there was a large attendance. The following directors were
present: —The Hon. Professor Smith, M.L.C. ; Hon. John Fairfax,
M.LC.; Hon. Alexander Campbell, M.L.C.; Hon. Saul Samuel, M.L.C.;
Mr. I. E. Ives, Mr. R. J. King; and also the Hon. Thomas Holt,
M.L.C.; Hon. S. D. Gordon, M'.L.C.; Mr. G. A. Lloyd, M.L.A. ; Mr.
John Davies, M.L.A.; Rev. Thomas Johnson, Rev. James Milne, Mr. A.
T. Holroyd (Master in Equity), Mr. S. A. Stephen, Mr. B. Palmer, Mr.
\\\ Bradley, Mr. Phillips, Mr.'j. fleece, Mr Mansfield, Mr. Ralston, Mr.
M. A. Black, Mr. R. fleece, Mr. Goodlei, Mr. Brush, Mr. J. Henry,
Mr. S. A. Joseph, Mr. J. Alger, Mr. Josiah Mullens, Mr. Molyneaux, Mr.
Learmonth, Mr. Peate, Mr. S. Thompson, Mr. M. E. Murnin, Mr. Murray


(P. N. Russell an I Co.), Mr. M'Donald, Mr. W. S. Friend, Mr. G. H.
Reid, Mr. C. H. Hayes, Mr. Skinner, Mr. Gilfillan, Mr. W. G. Walker,
Mr. M‘Master, Mr. A. Allen, Mr. Samuel Lyons, Mr. Sandy, besides
many others interested in the progress and welfare of the society. At the
entrance gate woodcut engravings were distributed to the visitors, giving
an idea of the new head office, as it will be when completed. As to this,
apart from the architect’s description, it may be fairly stated that the
premises will not only do the society credit, but will be an ornament to
the city.
Everything being in readiness, the Hon. J. Fairfax, M.L.C., deputy-
chairman of the society, addressed the chairman to the following effect: —
“ Dr. Smith, —On behalf of the directors and other members of the
Australian Mutual Provident Society, I have the honour of asking you to
lay the foundation-stone of their new building. It is meet and proper that
you, the chairman, should perform this office, and I am sure that it will
give satisfaction to the policy-holders that you should engage in this duty.
You will please accept this trowel and mallet; the one is manufactured of
Australian gold, and we trust they will be handed down for generations to
come in connection with the celebration of this day.” (Cheers.)
Mr. Fairfax then handed to Professor Smith the trowel and mallet.
The trowel is really an artistic piece of design. The handle is of ivory,
inlaid with gold and malachite : the blade, which is of gold, bears the
company’s emblem, is handsomely ornamented with scrollwork, and has
the inscription : —“Presented to the Hon. Professor Smith, M.D., L.L.D,
M.L.C., chairman of the Australian Mutual Provident Society, on the
occasion of his laying the foundation stone of the society’s new offices.
January 23, 1877.” The mallet is made of myall wood, enriched with
gold and malachite, with Professor Smith’s initials engraved on a gold
plate. The whole are the work of Messrs. Hardy Brothers, of Hunter-
street, and are excellent specimens of colonial art.
Under the stone, and in the cavity prepared, was placed a glass vase,
containing the following documents :—l. Record on parchment of the
society: Australian Mutual Provident Society, established a.d. 1849, for
Life Assurance on the mutual principle.—This foundation stone of the
society’s new head office was laid this 23rd day of January, a.d. 1877, by
the Honorable John Smith, M.D., L.L.D., M.L.C., chairman of the Board
of Directors. The architects for the building are George Allen Mansfield
and Ralph Park Mansfield, carrying on business under the style and title
of Mansfield Brothers, and the contractor for the erection is Hugh
M'Master. The directors of the society are: The Hon. John Smith,
M.D., L.L.D., M.L.C., chairman; the Hon. John Fairfax, M.L.C,
deputy-chairman; Robert John King, Esquire; the Hon. Saul Samuel,
C.M.G., M.L.C. ; Isaac Ellis Ives, Esquire; the Hon. Alexander
Campbell, M.L.C. The managing officers of the society are—Morrice
Alexander Black, F.1.A., actuary; Alexander James Ralston, secretary ;
medical officer, Walter Fawkes Mackenzie, L.S.A., Lond., M.R.C.S.,
Eng., L.R.C.P., Edin. ; solicitor, Septimus Alfred Stephen; auditors,
Robert Gilfillan, James Dufi Milne. The society has branch offices, with
local Boards of directors in Melbourne, in the colony of Victoria;
'Wellington, New Zealand ; Adelaide, South Australia ; Brisbane, Queens-


land. The revenue of the society at 31st December, 1876, was £470,000;
the accumulated fund was £1,970,000; the policies in force number nearly
27,000, assuring £11,000,000 sterling. 2. Last report of the society, and
the fourth and fifth quinquennial investigation reports ; and 3. Copies of
the Sydney Morning Herald of 23rd January, 1877, and of the Sydney
Mail and Town and Country Journal of last Saturday’s date. The foun-
dation stone then having been lowered into position,
The Hon. Professor Smith, in the usual manner declared the
stone well and truly laid. He then delivered the following address :
Before proceeding to address myself to the members present, I desire
to offer my warmest acknowledgments to Mr. Fairfax and my
fellow directors for the gift of this costly and beautiful trowel.
I will value it very highly as a tangible proof of the esteem of my fellow
directors, and of the committee who joined with the directors in voting
for this presentation. While I live it will recall them to my memory, and
it will revive the recollection of our mutual labours in bringing this
present enterprise to a successful issue. Leaving this personal matter I
wish to offer some observations pertinent to the present occasion. We
have invited you, gentlemen, to witness the formal ceremony of laying
the foundation stone of this building, intended as new offices for the
Australian Mutual Provident Society. It may occur to you that it is not
usual to have such a ceremonial in such a /;ase. You may have been
summoned on other occasions to the laying of foundation stones of
churches or of buildings intended for benevolent or educational purposes,
but never of a bank, or warehouse, or office of any public company.
This, therefore, may seem to you an exceptional case ; it may be so, and
yet be none the worse on that account. But if we should think it necessary
to justify our action by precedents, we might claim that our institution is
pre-eminently religious and benevolent. Are we not told on the best
authority that a necessary characteristic of true religion is to visit the
fatherless and the widow in their affliction ? And does not this society
signally fulfil that indication 1 Again, are we not told that he that pro-
vides not for his own, and especially for those of his own house, hath
denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel ? And is it not the case
that this organization enables a man to make certain provision for those
depending on him in a most easy and effectual manner ? This society
then enables a man to perform essential religious duties, and if not
religious itself, it is the medium or instrument of religion in its members.
It is also a benevolent society—a benevolent society of the very best
character—whose gifts imply no degradation, and need cause no shame in
the most sensitive. Amongst the many modern contrivances (chiefly the
outcome of Christian civilization) for alleviating the pressure of poverty,
and modifying to some extent the ill consequences of unexpected and
premature death, none are more unexceptionable in principle, or success-
ful in operation than life assurance. Its timely aid comes just when most
needed, and its gifts can be received without any feeling of obligation or
irksome dependence. Its help is not, indeed, strictly a gift, for it has
been bought with money, and is the outcome of a definite mutual con-
tract. Yet in the experience of many it is in effect a most generous gift,


as in cases that frequently occur where, after the payment of a trifling sum
in premiums, the head of a house is suddenly removed by death, leaving
little or nothing to his helpless family but the fruits of his life assurance.
In the course of twenty-five years this society has paid to the representa-
tives of 1,156 dead members nearly But, to repeat words I
used at a meeting of the society seven years ago, “ how shall we reckon
up the hearts that have been comforted, the hands that have been
strengthened, the tears that have been dried ? And this
noble sum has been dispensed just at those critical periods when it could
avail most to lighten the heavy burden and smooth the rugged road of the
bereaved.” Have I not then made good my case that the ceremony of
laying a foundation stone for a life assurance office may be justified by
precedent, inasmuch as the institution may fairly be reckoned in the
category of religious and benevolent 1
It seems proper on this occasion to give some particulars of the rise and
progress of the society which is to make its head-quarters in this building.
Indeed, I am strongly tempted to dwell for a little on the rise and progress
of life assurance itself; but I will give way to this temptation only to the
extent of a few sentences.
Life assurance, as we know it, is scarcely more than one hundred years
old, and its chief growth has been within the present century. But its
germs can be traced back to the middle ages. The idea arose out of
marine insurance, which is of very old date, and the principle was first
applied to the redemption -of persons in captivity—seafaring men and
pilgrims assuring their ransom in case of capture. It was then applied to
seafaring men in case of death during a voyage; but such contracts were
considered to be against good morals, and were forbidden in several coun-
tries. So late, indeed, as 1681, there was a French ordinance which for-
bade “ the making of any insurance on the life of men,” exception how-
ever, being made in favour of the redemption of captives. Even yet we
are not entirely free from the notion that insurance of life is contrary to
religion and morals. It is thought by some to be a kind of gambling
transaction, and to imply a want of faith in the Supreme Disposer of
events. As to gambling —it is the man who, not having made other pro-
vision for those dependent on him, has the opportunity of assuring his
life and does not use it —that man is the gambler, risking all on his own
chance of life. But such a man will often say that if death should over-
take him prematurely his religious faith encourages and requires him to
leave his wife and children, without doubting, to the care of that kind
Providence which always watches over them. But what does this fine
sentiment really mean when turned into the practical language of common
life ? Is it not that the man has no objection to shift his own proper
burden upon the shoulders of other people who may have quite enough to
bear of their own ? No man has a right to speak of throwing his children
on a kind Providence, meaning simply his fellow-mortals, who has not
exhausted every available means of providing for them himself. Among
these means life assurance stands boldly prominent. It is founded upon
the unassailable principle of averages. While the duration of an indi-
vidual life is utterly uncertain, the average or expectation of life at any
given age is well made out and is remarkably unchanging. Here then is a


golden opportunity for mortals enjoying the precarious gift of life to com-
bine for mutual protection; and the system is now so well worked out,
and is so trustworthy, that there can no longer be any excuse for a man in
ordinary health, and earning more than bare subsistence, leaving his
widow or children to the cold charities of the world.
The first society instituted in England for carrying on life assurance
as a business, was the “ Amicable,” which began in 1706, but its mode of
action was very different from that of modern life offices. All persons
between the ages of 12 and 45 were admitted on the same terms, and no
fixed sum was assured at death. After many years’ experience, it changed
more to the practice of the present day, but it has now ceased to exist,
being killed by a faulty method of dividing the profits. The first society
that began on the modern system, and on what is known as the “ mutual ”
principle, was the London “Equitable” (established 1762), to which a
charter was at first refused, mainly because of the prevailing disbelief in
the principles ot life assurance. As soon as those principles came to be
correctly apprehended, the multiplication of life societies went on apace.
The resulting competition had the usual effect of weakening the restraints
of prudence, and leading sanguine and not over-conscientious men to rush
into lavish expenditure, and to offer terms not justified by correct calcula-
tions ; and thus we have had the unhappy spectacle of life offices col-
lapsing altogether, or being saved from that last disgrace only by being
absorbed into some stronger institution. But a society may be killed by
unwise economy as well as by lavish expenditure. Some old offices,
successful in their day and distinguished by careful and honest manage-
ment, may yet die of inanition, —issuing fewer policies per annum and
with assets diminishing; and this because the directors decline to join in
the competitive struggle of the present day. No society appears to be
inherently strong enough to prosper without joining to some extent in this
race. Competition of course involves expense, and directors ought to
have the sagacity to discover the point at which expenditure becomes
unremunerative. “ The true test,” says a recent writer, “of excellence on
the score of expenditure is not how little is spent, but what is the beneficial
result of outlay. Judicious liberality may prove to be the best economy.”
To return now from this digression to the origin of our own society.
The small beginnings of institutions that become great and powerful are
often interesting and instructive ; but as time rolls on it becomes more
and more difficult to recover their true history; and in the case of our
society, although only twenty-eight years have passed since it was first
launched upon its prosperous career, its origin is already obscured by the
mists of antiquity. The accounts I have elicited from various persons
concerned in its initiation are to some extent conflicting, but the clearest
and most definite is that kindly furnished to me by Mr. T. S. Mort, and I
cannot do better than give it in his own words : —“ The original promoters
of the Mutual Provident Society were Mr. Holt, Rev. Canon Walsh, and
myself—my interest in Mr. Walsh and his cloth generally having led on to
it. It occurred in this wise. Mr. Walsh was out of health from overwork, and
1 invited him to accompany Mrs. Mort and myself to Camden for a few
days. On our way we visited Mr. Holt at Sophienberg, near Liverpool.
During luncheon I mentioned the necessity which existed for some means


of providing for clergymen and their families in case of old age or death
overtaking the head. Mr. Holt at once suggested the establishment of a
Mutual Provident Society which should embrace these objects. Mr. Holt
was very earnest, and so was I, for I saw at once how good the idea was,
and on our return to town we agreed to put the thing before our mutual
friend Mr. Perry, then an official assignee of very good status. . . You
may sum up all in a few words—Mr, Walsh was the instrument, Mr. Holt
the performer, I the bellows-blower, and every man we met at the time
singing chorus to Mr. Holt’s solo.”
The first recorded meeting in Sydney was on August 31, TB4B. It is
described in the minute-book as “ A meeting of several persons desirous
of establishing a provident society to be styled the Australian Mutual
Provident Society.” There were present —The Rev. W. H. Walsh (in the
chair), Messrs. Thomas Holt, T. S. Mort, W. Perry, and C. Lowe. These
formed themselves into a provisional committee, with Mr. Perry as
secretary, and they invited fourteen other gentlemen to assist in their
future deliberations. In the following month of September six meetings
were held, and a new provisional committee of sixteen was appointed. It
seemed difficult to get the committee together, and at length, on the 15th
December (there being only three members then present), a board of six
directors was nominated —Messrs. Michie, T. W. Smart, T. Holt, F.
Ebsworth, D. Jones, and M. E. Murnin, together with three trustees —
Messrs. S. A. Donaldson, C. Cowper, and T. S. Mort. The first meeting
of directors was held on December 19th; the first advertisement of the
new society appeared on December 21st, and a code of rules was adopted
on December 28th. At an early meeting in January, 1849, it was
resolved, —“ That an allowance of 10s. be made to the directors for
attendance at the usual board meetings, and that a fine be imposed of ss.
for non-attendance, unless upon good cause shown.” The latter part was
afterwards rescinded, and the first part was not acted upon—no fees being
claimed or paid during that year. No salary was paid to the secretary :
and office rent, which at first was at the rate of a year, was reduced
in October to
The first member that joined the society was Mr. F. Ebsworth, who,
on January 24, had his application for certain deferred annuities accepted.
On February 9, the first assurance policy was granted—^3oo—on the
life of Mr. Perry, the secretary, This became a claim in six years there-
after; but the second assurance policy on March 7) is still in
existence, and the original £3OO has become <£747 through bonus addi-
tions. But I must not weary you with details of those early days.
Business was by no means lively. Proposals came in very slowly, and the
directors were very cautious in accepting them. They also seemed to be
getting to some extent apathetic, for a number of meetings lapsed for want
of a quorum. The office was an upper room in George-street, near
Hunter-street, over a grocer’s shop, above the door of which there pro-
jected a gilt coffee pot; and I have heard that the office-boy, finding the
time heavy on his hands, used to extract some amusement i» various ways
out of that same gilded presentment.
The first annual general meeting was heldan January 30, 1850. It was
attended by three directors and the secretary, together with one other


member, making five in all. The report was apologetic in its tone, and
was mainly an essay on the nature and aims of the society, and an appeal
to the public for support. Thirty life policies had been issued during the
year, assuring £9450, and twelve policies had been issued for annuities
and endowments. These results w 7 ere admitted not to be flattering, and
it is pointed out that the society had not gained the support of those for
whom it was chiefly intended. “The society was formed more par-
ticularly for the benefit of the industrious poorer classes of the community,
and, with few exceptions, the insurers are of the higher and middle
classes.” The report alludes in the beginning to “ heavy preliminary
expenses,” and in another part it says—“ As may have been anticipated,
the expense of forming this society has been considerable, although the
strictest economy has been observed, and all the duties performed gra-
tuitously.” When we hear such expressions now-a-days applied to the
formation of companies we naturally think of thousands of pounds. In
point of fact, the expenditure for the first year of this society was
barely with an additional indebtedness of making a total of
£226 ; and for this there was a stock of books and stationery on hand
valued at leaving the proper cost of the year’s business at no more
than The income for the year was jQ 26B, and the available cash
balance was therefore ,£42.
It is sufficiently clear that the new-born society was but a feeble
infant, and its sponsors were evidently very diffident of its prospects in
life. It had the advantage, however, of careful and anxious nursing, and
all its affairs were conducted on the most economical, not to say parsi-
monious, principles. It was also very fortunate in the selection of lives,
there being no deaths for three years, and only five in the next two
years.
It is a noteworthy point that in settling the constitution of the society
the originators stipulated for no special benefit to themselves. Of late we
have been so accustomed to see the “ promoters ” of public companies
taking the lion’s share of expected benefits, that it is quite refreshing to
meet with a case of an opposite character. The founders of our society
were actuated, I believe, by purely philanthropic motives. They were
desirous of creating and fostering among their fellow-citizens habits of
prudent economy and foresight. In the vicissitudes of a young colony
they must have seen lamentable reverses of fortune—examples of families
reared in comfort being thrown into deep poverty or galling dependence
by the sudden removal of their breadwinners, who had made no provision
for the future. Moved by such spectacles of bereavement and destitution,
and doubtless observing that comparatively few r of their contemporaries
had availed themselves of the simple device of life assurance, our founders
combined together to establish a society not for money making but for
mutual aid, and to induce all within the sphere of their influence to unite
in the good cause. In the event of any profit arising out of the business
it was enacted in the original constitution that it should be divided “fairly
and equitably among the members of the society,”- -the promoters taking
their share with others on equal terms. It would appear, however, that
proposals were coming in so slowly that the directors felt it expedient to
hold out some special attraction for a time, by giving the early policy-


holders some little advantage over those that came after, in order to-
make a fair start; for it will be understood that while the funds remained
low there was great risk of an ignominious collapse. Accordingly in
May, 1850, it was resolved that if any profit should be made in the first
five years, two-thirds of that profit should be divided among the first
hundred policies. It was problematical if there would be any profit. The
expenses of starting such a society are usually great, and it would have
been no disparagement had there been no profits to divide. We have
recently seen in these colonies examples of the first five years of similar
institutions being passed without any profit, and it is probable that more
of the kind will occur, and no reflections need be cast upon young
societies on that account, for they may be laying solid and durable found-
ations notwithstanding. The only inducement then held out to the early
members of our society was that if any profits were made in the first five
years, two-thirds should go to the first hundred policies, the remaining
third being reserved. As a matter of fact the profit of the first quinquen-
nium was calculated at about of which was allotted.
In spite of the temptation thus held out it was more than two years
before 100 policies were issued ; while at the present that would not
make the business of a single week. At the head-office alone we have
sometimes granted at one sitting more policies, and for a far greater
amount than the society had at risk at the end of the second year.
During the first five years there were 321 policies issued—assuring
The deaths within that period were five, and the claims paid
amounted to The expenses were only and the invested
funds reached
I find by the minutes that, in August, 1850, it was resolved that the
secretary should be paid for his services during that year, and that
30s. should be divided at each meeting among the directors present. In
the same month a curious episode is recorded : —A lady, represented as
63 years of age, and of very infirm health, applied for an annuity in con-
sideration of paid down. The directors, thinking she was not long for
this world, agreed to give her per annum. But wonderful is the life-
giving power of an annuity; surely the nearest approach to the elixir vita
ever discovered! This good lady, from that day to this, for six-and-
twenty years, has come regularly every quarter to draw her allowance.
Another curious incident is recorded in the following month. A
leading clergyman of Sydney was appealed to for a lecture on behalf of the
struggling society, but it was refused on the ground that “he disagreed
with the principle of providing for one’s family by such means.”
At the second annual meeting (held in January, 1851), it was
announced that thirty-nine life policies had been granted during the year;
that the income had been and the expenses of management,
There were investments to the extent of and a bank balance of
We are apt to smile at the petty transactions of those early days,
but the cautious and economical policy then pursued paved the way for
the future prosperity. I was amused to see lately in Melbourne con-
spicuous placards at the railway stations and other places comparing the
small business of this society in its early years with the much larger busi-
ness of a Melbourne life office in its corresponding years —the inference


clearly intended being that when the young society should attain the years
we have now reached their business would be proportionately greater than
ours. Time will show. But it is not at all surprising that the young
societies of the present day, operating upon a much larger population, and
with more light of experience to guide them, and subjected to the stimulus
of keener competition, should be able to achieve better results than our
infant society was able to produce.
In July, 1854, Mr. Perry, whose health had given way, was succeeded
by Mr. Robert Thomson, as secretary and actuary. And here it would
be unjust not to acknowledge the great advantage derived by the young
institution from the energy and zeal of that gentleman. Whatever his
shortcomings, there can be no question that his enthusiasm in the cause
of life assurance contributed much to the rapid development of our Society.
He remained in the service for eleven years, during which time he had the
advantage of the assistance of Professor Pell as consulting actuary. In
1865 Thomson was succeeded by the present secretary, Mr. Ralston.
In 1868 Mr. Black arrived from England to fill the post of actuary. Both
of these gentlemen have served the society zealously and well.
In the early part of 1851, the office was removed from the upper
room in George-street to more commodious premises in Pitt-street. In
seven years more it was moved to the corner of Pitt and Hunter streets,
but the lusty young bantling was continually outgrowing its clothes, and
in 1861 the directors summoned a special meeting of members to obtain
their sanction to the building of new premises. This sanction was refused,
but at another special meeting for the same purpose in the following year,
the directors were more successful, and immediately proceeded with the
erection of the handsome building opposite, which w r as finished and occu-
pied in 1864. At the following annual meeting (the 16th), the directors
said in their report that “ the portion of the premises reserved for the
Society’s own business is in every way suitable, and will accommodate such
a staff of officers as will be necessary for many years to carry on its rapidly
extending operations.” That expectation was not fulfilled. In less than
twelve years we had to get rid of our tenants and occupy the whole
building, and now, after making various alterations to gain more elbow
room, we are driven to abandon the premises and to build anew. In
1864, when the last move was made, there were about 5000 policies in
force, assuring about the premium revenue from which was
about and the invested funds had reached At the
present time there are about 27,000 policies in force, assuring nearly
eleven millions. premium revenue is nearly and the
invested funds well millions.
Two alternatives had to be reviewed —either to spend a good deal of
money in enlarging and improving the present office, or to build a new
one and sell the old. Adopting the latter alternative the Board, in
187 4, authorised Mr. Alexander Campbell to purchase the site on which
we now stand, having a frontage of 99 feet to Pitt-street, for
.Messrs. Mansfield Brothers were then appointed architects, and designs
for the basement having been prepared, a contract for that portion of the
building was entered into in March, 1875.


At the annual meeting in April, 1876, it was announced that the first
contract was completed, and that the directors were then prepared to go
on with the superstructure. A good deal of discussion ensued, and it was
ultimately resolved to appoint a committee of six members (Messrs.
Bradley, Friend, Goodlet, Mullens, Murray, and Tidswell) to co-operate
with the Board with the view of having the whole matter of new offices
further considered. This action of the members necessarily caused delay
in the works, but I think the delay has been fully justified and compen-
sated by the results. To some it may have appeared that the functions of
the directors were being usurped to some extent, but in a democratic
society like this, with enormous interests at stake, it is well that the general
body of members should keep a sharp, even a jealous eye on the pro-
ceedings of the Board. While there should be no vexatious interference
with the ordinary course of business, yet on the occasion of any unusual
crisis, such as the initiation of an important line of policy ; or, as in the
present case, the committal of the Society to a heavy expenditure, I think
the intervention of the members is not to be deprecated, but rather encou-
raged ; for when such intervention is carried out, as I am happy to say it
has been in the present case, in an enlightened, fair, and candid spirit,
nothing but good may be looked for. Such an intervention also occurred
twelve years ago, with great benefit to the Society. In the matter of this
new building, my own opinion at the very outset was that the members
should in some way be got to share the responsibility with the directors,
and that has now been effected in a most satisfactory manner. The
general body of members must now feel assured that the question of new
offices has been thoroughly sifted, and that the conclusion arrived at will
promote the interests of the Society. The joint committee first looked
carefully into the requirements of the office, present and prospective.
Then they examined the capabilities of the present building, and deter-
mined the probable cost of enlarging and improving it. Finally, they went
carefully through the plans for the new building with the double purpose
of perfecting the details, and at the same time keeping down the expense.
At length, after much investigation and discussion, a resolution was
unanimously passed on June 20, to go on with the new building at a cost
not to exceed in addition to the land. It may surprise many
members, as it certainly ought to gratify all, to be assured that it will be
more profitable for the society to go to this large expenditure for a hand-
some and commodious new building than to spend money in improving
the old. The members of the joint committee reached this conclusion by
various roads, so to speak; and I may perhaps succeed in leading you to the
same goal by a simple illustration. Suppose lam living in my own house,
and have invested at 5 per cent.,—l sit rent free, and enjoy an
income of .£ISOO/ a year. But my house becomes too small for me, and
I have to consider what is best to be done,—whether to enlarge it or build a
new one; and for certain reasons it appears expedient that if a new house
is to be built it should be large enough to accommodate another family who
will pay me rent. On going into figures the matter shapes itself thus : The
improvement of my present house will cost ,£IO,OOO. That sum must be
taken from my invested capital, leaving £20,000. I would then sit rent
free in a better house, but my income would be reduced to £IOOO a year.


If I build a new house I may, of course, sell the old one, and I expect to
get for it .£25,000. If I add that to my capital, and spend £55,000 on
the new building, I have not only handsome accommodation for myself,
but I can let off what I do not need for at least £IOOO, so that I sit rent
free in more sumptuous premises, and enjoy exactly the same income
as if I stuck to the old house improved. Naturally then, I decide for
the new building. I may add that the committee estimated the cost
of altering the old building at more than £IO,OOO, and they considered
that more than £IOOO would be obtained from the new in the shape
of rents. Such alterations in the figures would of course make the
comparison still more favourable to the new building.
But some members may interpose the objection that, in spite of
this favourable comparison there will still be unnecessary expenditure,
and that a plainer and cheaper style of building would answer our
purpose equally well. In answer to that lam assured that comparatively
little money will be spent on mere ornament; and I trust that the general
body of members will agree with their own committee and with the
directors that a somewhat liberal expenditure is good policy. A Society
like this ought to have a home in keeping with its dignity and impor-
tance. We do not intend to emulate the marble and granite palaces of
the life offices of New York, but we trust to have a building that the
members can look on with some pride and pleasure, and which will
contribute something effective to the embellishment of our growing capital.
It is, I think, the duty of all well-to-do citizens and of all prosperous
companies to bear their part in beautifying and enriching this city which
helps them to their wealth. It is no small part of the education of the
young that they have daily before their eyes as they walk through the
streets good examples of the noble art of architecture. Till recently
Sydney had little to boast of, but of late we have done something to redeem
our credit, and although no doubt there is room for adverse criticism, we
are now getting public buildings and specimens of street architecture that
we can exhibit to strangers without shame. Now, surely no member of
this great society will grudge a few thousands from the ample funds to
make this new home of the society a beautiful structure, which we can look
upon with satisfaction and hand down to our successors with a reasonable
pride. And a liberal outlay will not be without some immediate return,
for the more attractive we make the structure the more rent we are likely
to draw from the spare portions of it.
I trust I need say nothing further in justification of this building
enterprise on which the society has entered. The members may rest
satisfied that it has not been undertaken without much deliberation, and
that the expenditure (relatively moderate considering the magnitude of the
business) may be viewed as a profitable investment.
It is very satisfactory to all concerned that the total cost of the
building will be within the amount fixed by the joint committee. When
tenders were invited for the completion of the work the competition was
very good, there being altogether twenty-seven sent in, namely, eight for
masonry and brickwork, four for carpentery and finishing, excluding
plastering; five for same, including plastering ; six for plastering ; four for
the whole, excluding ironwork ; and five for ironwork. The tender of Mr.


Hugh M‘Master for the whole, exclusive of ironwork, was accepted last
month ; and for ironwork the tender of Mort and Co. was accepted.
Adding commission and certain extras, the total for the building complete
will be under .£45,000.
Now, before concluding, let me bring before you in few words the
splendid success already achieved by our society, a success unexampled, I
believe, in the same time, among the life offices of the British Dominions,
and which has raised it to a pitch of strength and prosperity equally
gratifying and surprising.
The society, in the twenty-eight years of its existence, and notwith-
standing the little progress made in the early time, has issued 35,000
policies, assuring over 13J millions sterling. Its total income has been
£3,409,000. Of this sum the income from premiums makes £2,704,000,
leaving £705,000 as the fructification of investments. The society has
paid £707,000 in satisfaction of policies becoming claims by death or
maturity, by which it appears that the single item of interest has very
nearly sufficed to meet this portion of the expenditure. But the society
has paid to living members very nearly £300,000 in the shape of surrender
values, cash bonuses, and annuities—making the whole amount paid to
members and their representatives the goodly sum of £1,007,000. The
expenses of management, including commission, have amounted to
£426,566. To this must be added a sum of £19,000 written off at
various times as losses on investments and value of furniture. Now, from
the whole amount received from members, take the whole amount returned
to members, together with the above sums for commission, management, &c.,
and we leave a balance of a million and a quarter to be accounted for.
But all this, and nearly three-quarters of a million more, will be found in
our investments, for these at the present moment are not much short of
two millions sterling.
Taking last year by itself, I am informed by our Actuary that we
issued 4,558 policies, assuring and increasing the premium
income by The total annual revenue from all sources is now
over being considerably more than the whole revenue of the
colony in the year our society was started.
Comparing ourselves with other British offices, our position is nothing
short of marvellous. Seventy-six of these offices are older than ours,
ranging from the London Assurance and the Royal Exchange, which are
127 years older, and the Equitable, 86 years older, down to the Gresham,
which has the advantage of us only by a few months. Being longer in
the field, it is natural that their accumulated funds and interest revenue
should be larger ; but, notwithstanding our shorter duration, we stand well
up in the list in these respects ; while relatively to the liabilities no office
has a better reserve than we have, and few are so strongly fortified. In
the matter of new business (including number of policies issued, amount
assured, and premium income) we stand clear at the head of all. In
regard to total amount at risk, the Scottish Widows’ Fund (61 years old)
and the Standard (51 years) are considerably ahead of us. The Gresham
is a mere trifle ahead, and our society ranks fourth. In total revenue we
also stand fourth, the same three offices being above us. The Gnesham,
being so nearly our own age, affords an interesting comparison. It was


far more active and successful in its early years; for example, in the first five
years it did ten times the business of our society, but we have gradually
crept up, until the accumulated funds and amount at risk are now nearly
equal. Our total revenue is about 6,000 less, but our interest revenue
is ,£14,000 greater, while last year, as I have stated, we were considerably
ahead in new business. The Gresham costs much more to conduct than
our society, their expenses of management being about 24 per cent, of the
premium income, while ours are under 15 per cent.
It is during the last eight years, or since the close of the fourth quin-
quennium, that the progress of our society has been most marked. Since
then the income has increased 163 per cent.; the total amount assured,
168 per cent.; and the realised assets no less than 227 per cent.; while of
late the proportion of expenses to premium income has been diminishing.
I may add here that life assurance in Great Britain has now attained
gigantic proportions. There is reason to believe that the total amount
assured must be nearly four hundred millions sterling; the annual pre-
miums between ten and eleven millions; and the realised assets not less
than one hundred and ten millions.
I fear that I weary you with these details, and I will not enlarge
farther, although much might yet be said to illustrate the wonderful devel-
opment and the present strength of our society. The colony may well be
proud of such an institution. But its great prosperity carries with it
corresponding responsibilities. It is to be hoped that the directors and
superior officers will never be found wanting in vigilance, sagacity, and
probity in administering their sacred trust; but I have often tried to im-
press upon the members, and I take this public opportunity of reiterating,
that a heavy responsibility rests upon them also. It lies with them to fill
up vacancies on the Board, and they should see to it that their votes are
never given on any ground of mere personal friendship or antipathy, or
because they happen to want a particular crotchet supported, or because of
the importunities of candidates. Always seek out and support able and
trustworthy men, who will have the best interests of the society at heart,
and who have shown the ripe fruits of prudence, knowledge, and experi-
ence in other walks of life. If the members secure men of that stamp
to direct their affairs then they may look forward to a long career of pros-
perity, and to the permanent establishment of this institution as a great
and beneficent power in these colonies. When this building that we are
now preparing becomes old and weather-worn, bearing upon it the impress
of a byegone age, and linking the time then present with the forgotten
past, may our society still flourish—renewing its strength by timely adap-
tations to advancing knowledge and change of circumstances, still pro-
moting prudence and foresight among its members, still pouring out its
bounties with liberal hand to the distressed, and still maintaining its place
and carrying on its work with the lusty vigour of perennial youth.
The address was frequently cheered throughout, and at its close the
Hon. Professor was loudly applauded. Cheers having been heartily
accorded to Dr. Smith, the proceedings of the afternoon terminated.


CELEBRATION DINNER.
In the evening about thirty gentlemen, comprising the Directors,
Members of the Committee, Secretary, Actuary, Solicitor, Medical Officer,
the Architects, and Contractors, met together, with as many ex-Directors of
the Society as could make it convenient to accept the invitation. The chair
was occupied by the Hon. Professor Smith, M.L.C., and the vice-chair
by the Hon. John Fairfax, M.L.C. An elegant menu, admirably served
having been brought to a conclusion,
The Chairman proposed the usual loyal toasts —“ The Queen,” and
“ The Prince of Wales and the rest of the Royal Family,” which were
duly honoured.
In proposing “ His Excellency the Governor,” the Chairman said it
seemed to him that this colony had been remarkably favoured in its line
of Governors, at least since he (Professor Smith) had been a colonist—
now some four-and-twenty years. In the future roll of fame our present
Governor, Sir Hercules Robinson, he thought would stand high. He had
shown sagacity, tact, and firmness in the conduct of public affairs, and as
connected with the University he (Professor Smith) could not but remem-
ber that his Excellency last year gave one of the best speeches ever heard
within the walls of the institution. (Cheers).
The toast was drunk with three cheers for His Excellency.
The Hon. A. Campbell, who was called upon for the next toast, was
afraid that the chairman in his exhaustive deliverance that day had left him
little to say. He had to propose “ The Committee of Members appointed
at the 27 th annual meeting, coupling with the toast the name of Mr.
Mullens.” At the time that committee was appointed it was generally
supposed to have in view the correction of some mistake on the part of
the Board, who it was thought was rashly or imprudently about to build
costly new offices that were unnecessary, while the present building was
imagined to be sufficient for the requirements of the society. The direc-
tors acceded to the appointment of the committee, who had to decide
whether they had acted wisely or not. The Committee went to work
earnestly, and with an evident desire to perform their duty thoroughly;
they were months engaged in their task before they were satisfied. But
they ultimately arrived at the same conclusion as the directors did two
years before —viz., that the present offices by any expenditure upon them
would not be sufficient to accommodate the expanding business of the
Society for more than a few years, and that a new building was abso-
lutely necessary, provided that it did not cost more than a reasonable
sum of money. On the whole the appointment of this committee
was one of the most satisfactory things that could happen, not only
lor the society, but also for the directors, as it relieved them from a great
responsibility. The committee, no doubt, rendered a valuable service,


and all engaged in the work delegated to it were animated with
but one sentiment—the desire to promote the interests of the society.
The committee of members and the directors worked together harmoniously
in the work allotted to them, and he (Mr. Campbell) was quite willing to
admit that much benefit had resulted from their combined action in settling
the plan and design of the new building.
The toast was drunk with enthusiasm.
Mr. Mullens, in returning thanks, acknowledged the courtesy of the
Board in meeting the members of the committee on what at first sight
might appear an invidious task. After the first few meetings it seemed to
be accepted that the work of the committee was one of assistance, not of
fault finding. It was found that the committee were able to bring some
considerable amount of knowledge and experience in building matters to
the aid of the Board, and therefore the whole body cordially and heartily
united to arrive at a satisfactory conclusion. The result of their action
had been that a much nobler building than the one originally proposed at
was now being raised for The investigation had
saved to the society, and that was a justification for the appoint-
ment of a committee, and a sufficient reason for its existence. When
one thought what this great society meant, small jealousies should dis-
appear. It embodied one of the grandest ideas in the world ; it was the
greatest institution in these colonies. There was no jealousy of it in the
other colonies. They accepted it as a magnificent work—Victoria, South
Australia, and Queensland being as proud of it as were we ourselves. The
Board materially helped the committee to a successful conclusion of their
labours, and now all must rejoice that a noble structure was being
erected in a style worthy of the idea of that still nobler building, the
society itself. Its basis was truth and justice, its corner-stone was love,
and its top-stone self-denial. When completed the new office would be
adequate to all its purposes, which had been very carefully studied and
provided for. While thanking the Board of Directors for the courtesy
with which they met the committee, he should be falling short in his
duty if he did not in the name of his colleagues thank the architects, Messrs.
Mansfield Brothers for the courtesy and patience with which they had
met their inquiries, and listened to the suggestions made at the Board for
perfecting the work. He begged to express his admiration of the very
complete specification on which tenders were invited, and felt quite
satisfied that the matter was in most competent hands.
The Chairman then gave “The Founders and ex-Directors.” He
had already spoken on this subject in the afternoon, and had explained
that there was some difficulty in fixing who were exactly to be regarded as
the founders of the Society, as the accounts he had received were not
altogether consistent. One of them, which seemed to be a fair one, attri-
buted the first idea to a casual meeting of Canon Walsh and Mr. Mort
with Mr. Holt. He believed Mr. Holt considered that this did not go to
the origin. It went to the origin so far as Mr. Mort knew; but it would
—Xiiis is liot quite correct. Tue original estimate was >607,000, bui on let erring to my notes
©f proceedings I find that there was included in the sum of .667,000, a charge for loss of interest, during
the progress of the building, of ,£3,500. As this was an estimate only, and applicable to alteration of the
present office as well as to a new building, it was agreed to leave it out of the comparison. Ihe true
saving should, therefore, be put at £8,500 instead of £12,000. —J. Mu«llens.


appear that the thing had been incubating in Mr Holt’s mind for some
little time previously, and that this was the occasion on which it was
brought to light. He (Professor Smith) imagined the founders of this
Society had in their minds a more modest affair than that they saw before
their eyes now. They could scarcely have looked forward twenty-eight
years ago, when the population of the colony was very small (as it was
before the gold discovery), and when the public revenue was actually
smaller than the present revenue of this society, to the extraordinary
development of the institution. Even a society of this kind, founded in a
populous country, could scarcely be expected to reach such a position
after a lapse of twenty-eight years ; and he thought the founders must feel
proud indeed to see so large an expansion of the little institution they
launched upon the world. The directors on the present occasion had
endeavoured to bring together as many of the founders and old directors
as they could reach. They had expected to get three more members of
the old Board, namely, Mr. Murnin, Mr. Ebsworth, and Mr. Smart; but
these gentlemen had been unable to attend. Mr. Murnin had sent a note
excusing himself on the ground of ill-health, and expressing his con-
tinued deep interest in the society. The only member of the first Board
whose presence they had been able to obtain was Mr. Holt. He (Professor
Smith) had mentioned previously who took part in the first meeting. At
the next meeting Mr. Metcalfe’s name appeared, and soon after Mr.
Ebsworth’s. The early meetings were attended chiefly by the three or
four whose names he had given. He had made up a list of all the directors
from the beginning, and on an occasion such as this he thought it worth
while to bring it before the members, for he thought all who had taken
part in the nurture of this society might feel a pride and pleasure in the feet.
In 1848 the first Board consisted of Mr. Michie, Mr. Smart, Mr. Holt,
Mr. Ebsworth, Mr. David Jones, and Mr. Murnin. In 1849, Mr. John
Fairfax joined the Board, and had now served for the long period of
seventeen years. (Cheers.) He had served far longer than any other
director, and he (Professor Smith) had a feeling of sorrow that they were
soon to see the last of him at the Board. He believed it was Mr. Fairfax’s
intention at the ensuing annual meeting to retire permanently from the
Board, and although he was not included in this toast, being an existing
director, yet it was only right to refer here to the fact that his services far
exceeded others in regard to duration. But it should be mentioned that
Mr. Holt served thirteen years, and Mr. Murnin also served thirteen years.
In 1850, Major Christie and Mr. Metcalfe joined the Board. In 1851,
Dr. Savage. In 1852, Mr. Unwin and Dr. Mitchell. In 1855 Mr.
Holroyd became a director, and was of great assistance in establishing the
early rules of the society, and in getting the incorporating Act passed.
That gentleman happened to take a good deal of interest in such societies
at home, and brought out to the colony a number of documents very useful
in the development of this society. In 1858, Mr. George King joined the
Board, and served for fifteen years. In 1862 Mr. S. A. Joseph, Mr. S.
Thompson, and Mr. Robert Gilfillan became directors. In 1864 he (Pro-
fessor Smith) was elected to fill an accidental vacancy. In 1865 Mr.
Josephson joined the Board ; Mr. A. Campbell, Mr. S. Lyons, and Mr.
Goodlet, in 1866 : Mr. Beilby, in 1868 ; Mr. Molineaux, in 1869 ; Dr.


Nathan, in 1871 ; Mr. Dibbs, in 1874; and in 1875, Mr. Ives, Mr. R. J.
King, and Mr. Samuel. He believed this was a complete list of the
directors up to the present time. The society owed gratitude to all those
gentlemen who had taken part in the building up of the institution. It
was a grand fabric. It was one of the most serious responsibilities that
rested upon the general body of members to take care to keep up the
direction and fill the vacancies by the very best men. He intended to
couple with the toast the name of Mr. Holt, because on the whole he
appeared to deserve the chief place as the founder. That gentleman,
however, would no doubt be ready to say that others should be associated
with him as founders; for several gentlemen, including Mr. Mort, laboured
much in the early stages of the society for its organisation. But as far as
he (Professor Smith) could gather, the chief proceedings of initiation were
attributable to Mr. Holt : early notices in the minute book seemed to bear
this out. At the seventh annual meeting, the Rev. George Macarthur said
it was within his knowledge that the society owed its origin to the three
gentlemen already mentioned—Canon Walsh, Mr. Thomas Holt, and Mr.
Thomas S. Mort. The eighth annual report contained this paragraph :
“ Mr. Holt’s retirement from an active management of a society so
deeply indebted for its present prosperity to his unremitting exertions
during its early struggles will be regretted by the members generally.”
Ihe chairman concluded by saying he had great pleasure in proposing the
health of the founders and ex-directors of the society, coupled with the
name of the Hon. Thomas Holt. The toast was honoured with cordiality.
The Hon. T. Holt responded. Pie thanked them for the very
hearty manner in which they had drunk the toast. Although those who
originated the society might be considered entitled to some little credit,
he thought that those who had the management now that its income
amounted to nearly half a million and its investments to nearly two
millions sterling, were entitled to as much, if not more credit. He spent
a portion of yesterday in looking over the old minute book of the society,
and he felt in perusing it as if he had been in the presence of old friends,
and as if he were assembled in the old office in George-street, now
occupied, he thought, by Mr. Macdonnell, the jeweller. He called to
mind when they went to Mort’s buildings, and afterwards into Hunter-
street. Mr. Mort was mistaken in reference to the origination of this
society when he referred to the meeting of Canon Walsh, Mr. Mort, and
himself. Their object at that interview, as suggested by himself, was
chiefly the establishment of a society to provide deferred annuities to
people at old age. These gentlemen entered heartily with him into the
idea. He believed then, and still believed, that there need not be a
single person in the charitable institutions if they would avail themselves
when young of this branch of the society’s operations. Of course he did
not ignore the value of providing for the widows and orphans, but at that
time he did not think people would be found so unselfish as to join a
society with that object. He was happy, however, to find that he was
mistaken, and that the result showed that people rather preferred to make
a provision for their widows and children than to make a provision for
their own necessities and that of their wives in their old age. In looking
over these old records he found how the idea they three had talked about


widened, and how subsequently others and himself got the assistance of
Mr. Perry, then official assignee, at whose office the business of the society
was first conducted. One of the other* gentlemen present at an early
meeting was Mr. Lowe, the solicitor. Mr. Lowe prepared rules, but these
were too voluminous, and the rules of the National Provident Society,
fortunately received at the time by Mr. Holroyd, were adopted by the
directors as just the thing that was needed. Three months or more
before the first directors were appointed, he read a bill that he had
prepared with a view to protect payments for deferred annuities from
creditors. But Mr. Michie, one of the first directors, said that no Legis-
lature in the world would pass such a bill. Subsequently, however, the
matter was laid before Mr. Plunkett, and that gentleman introduced a bill
which became the first Act passed by any Legislature protecting deferred
annuities, and the same protection has since been extended to life
insurance policies. He bore testimony to the valuable assistance rendered
to the society in its early days by Mr. T. S. Mort, when there was great
prejudice existing against the principle of life insurance, of which he gave
two or three illustrations. Then it was thought that it was presumption
for a man to insure his life. When this society had been established
thirteen months there was not ,£IOO to its credit, and the books were not
equal to those of a small shopkeeper. Now the society’s books would
compare with those of the Bank of England, as they would -see when he
stated that about £11,000,000 sterling was insured, and nearly £2,000,000
was invested. There were only four companies that could at all compare
with it in England, and they were old companies. This society said a
great deal or the prudence and providence of the people of Australasia.
There were 27,000 policies in existence, and allowing four persons to be
interested in each policy, they would represent a population of 108,000
widows and orphans, who at some future time from day to day would
draw this £ it, 000, 000 now assured. He believed that much of the
prosperity of the society was due to the early directors, who, to the loss of
much business, established it on a firm basis by fixing the premiums at a
high but safe rate. He thought also one great cause of the success of the
society was the insertion of many valuable communications in the Sydney
Morning Herald in support of life insurance principles in the earlv days of
the colony. (Applause.)
Mr T. S. Mort, in proposing the next toast, “ Prosperity to the
Society,” said he should scarcely have ventured there that night had it not
been for the very kind invitation sent to him by the secretary at the
instance of the Board, in which his name was made honorable mention of
as one of the founders of the society. He confessed he accepted the
name of one of the founders with very great modesty and some hesitation,
for he could scarcely look upon himself as such. He was a very humble
instrument in promoting a great design which Mr. Holt no doubt had in
his mind on the occasion of the matter coming accidentally before them.
He thought he could not lay claim to anything more than to having been
a very active outsider in the affairs of the society in its early days. He
did take a very great interest in it, because he anticipated that it would
be a very great blessing to the community. No one could doubt, that Mr.
Holt, as it were, presented the seed to them. A few of them joined hands


and planted it; others came in and watered it; and now the grain of
mustard seed had become a huge tree, which had spread its branches over
the whole of Australia, and had taken under its grateful shade thousands
who otherwise might have been left in poverty and distress. (Cheers.)
He confessed he thought they were imprudent people in the beginning.
They started upon nothing ; and if they had had the misfortune to have
had one death, they would have come to grief. But they were favoured,
and before they were called upon to pay any money they had premiums
to pay with. He pointed out that in early days the byedaws were very
much less favourable to assurers than they were now. Payments to assurers
were at that time rather hindered than facilitated as they were now. Many
restrictions had been removed, and inducements given to assurers. As
the result of this liberality, coupled with a careful and prudent manage-
ment, the society has been placed on a firm foundation ; and to wish it
more success, the work now committed to him, he could not help regarding
as an act of supererogation, seeing that it had attained a measure of pros-
perity which he believed was without a parallel. (Cheers). Still we all
knew that life insurance societies, based upon sound and tried principles
like those upon which the prosperity of this society had risen, can never
have their sails too well filled, for the more canvas they can spread the
safer are those on board their ship ; so after all they might with propriety
drink even greater prosperity to the \ustralian Mutual Provident Society,
and which he felt sure every one present would do from the depths of his
heart.
The Hon. Saul Samuel proposed —“ The Directors of the Society’s
Branches,” and said : This toast was placed upon the programme in the
expectation that they would this evening have been honoured with the
company of Sir Henry Ayres, one of the directors of the South Australian
branch, who was now on his way to this colony, and who he regretted was
not present. The appointment of directors to the branches rested with
the principal Board, and they had succeeded in securing the valuable
services of a number of influential gentlemen to act as directors in the
other colonies, amongst whom they had the Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly of Zealand ; and in Victoria, South Australia, and Queensland,
leading and influential public men. All of them took a great interest in
the welfare of the society, as may be evidenced from the fact that a large
portion of their business was done in the other colonies, the number of
policies there being over 16,000, and the annual premiums over
He would like to correct a statement made by his friend Mr. Mullens,
though he was sure it was made in no unfriendly spirit, but rather from
misconception. That gentleman stated that he moved his resolution at
the last annual meeting for the appointment of the committee in conse-
quence of a rumour that the Board intended to expend in the
purchase of land and building of new offices, and that afterwards the
amount was ascertained to be which the committee had suc-
ceeded in reducing by ;£i 2,000., This was entirely a mistake. The Board
before the annual meeting had never discussed or arrived at any decision
with regard to the amount to be expended on a new building ; they had
certainly approved of a design and elevation, but they did not receive the
architects’ estimate of the cost until the morning of the meeting, anti that


was (including cost of land) and not When the Board
heard that it was intended to propose a committee to act with them, they
determined to assent to the proposal, as it would relieve them greatly of
their responsibility in dealing with so important a matter, involving such
great cost. They met the committee in the most friendly way, and they
acted cordially with them. It was not correct to say that the committee
saved the society or —it was the directors and committee
co-operating together as one body that they arrived at the final determin-
ation as to cost. [Mr. Mullens : I corroborate that fully.] He thought
it necessary to make this statement to prevent any wrong impression
going abroad in consequence of Mr. Mullens’ remark.
The Hon. John Fairfax proposed “The Secretary, Actuary, and
other Officers of the Society,” and bore testimony to the services rendered
by them. No two men had ever served a bank or any other institution
better than the secretary and actuary had served their society. The amount
of work which passed through their hands was perfectly astonishing.
Mr. Ralston responded to the toast for himself and on behalf of the
other officers of the Society. It afforded him pleasure to bear his testi-
mony to the zeal and assiduity of the officers generally, and he referred
especially to the valuable co-operation, in the interests of the Society,
received from the Resident Secretaries of the several branches in the other
colonies, and the services of the gentlemen presiding over the different
departments of the work at the Head Office.
Mr. Black also returned thanks. This occasion afforded him an
opportunity of referring to the cordiality with which his colleague, Mr.
Ralston, and himself co-operate in the joint management of the society.
Where there is dual management, although with duties to discharge for
which he was individually responsible, it was something to be able to
speak of one’s official relationship with pleasure. He had much pleasure
in adding his testimony to what Mr. Ralston had said about the efficiency
of the staff generally, and of the zealous way in which all discharged their
respective duties. In connection with the staff, there was one feature in
the management that he should like to refer to, for he thought it ought to
be more generally known than it was ; he alluded to the fact that the
directors had renounced the patronage of junior clerkships. To their
honour be it spoken—for, he could assure them, it was of more conse-
quence to the society than many would think. All appointments to
junior clerkships were now obtained by young men, who pass with credit,
a competitive examination. It was not a question of young men being
nominated by directors, and their nominees getting into the office by just
barely passing a test examination. When vacancies occur, clerkships are
open to competition. The lad who stands highest is selected, apart from
any other influence. The system has been in operation for four years, and
we have now fourteen clerks who had got their appointments in the way
he had stated. In the examination they have to undergo special import-
ance is attached to their mathematical knowledge, because we desire to
train, and are training, a scientific staff. Our system, however, with these
juniors is to pass them from one department of the business to another,
so that they might gain a practical knowledge of the business in all its
details. He would add that the system was working well, and he hoped it
might long continue to be a rule acted on by the directors.


Mr. Holroyd proposed “ The Chairman,” who now for some years
had continued to occupy the position with much advantage to the society.
As an instance of what their chairman had to do, he pointed out that he
had to inspect no fewer than 200 medical certificates every week. He
eulogised the history of the Society given that afternoon by Professor
Smith, and added some of his own early recollections. He thought they
must be deeply thankful for the services rendered by Professor Smith for
a period of eleven years.
The toast was drunk with cheers.
The Chairman returned his warm thanks for the honour they had
done him. Mr. Holroyd had made a mistake as to the number of
medical certificates he had examined. He only examined those from
New South Wales, and the greatest number in any one week had been
about seventy. But that was quite enough. Joining the Board in 1864,
he had, with the exception of a year when in England, served continuously
as a director, and when at home he had been able to render some assist-
ance during the actuarial investigations that took place there. He feared
that he could not expect to serve the society much longer, as his health
and eyesight were failing him. While, however, he continued on the
Board he would be glad to do the best he could for the society.
(Cheers.)
Mr. A. Campbell proposed “ The Architects and the Builders.”
Mr. Mansfield responded.
The Chairman proposed “ The Medical Staff.”
Dr. Mackenzie responded, and the company separated.


Australian Mutual Provident Society,
Directors:
The Hon. JOHN SMITH, M.L.C., Chairman.
The Hon. JOHN FAIRFAX, M,L.C., Deputy Chairman.
The Hon. SAUL SAMUEL, G.M.G., M.LC.
ROBERT J. KING, Esq.
ISAAC ELLIS IVES, Esq.
The Hon. ALEXANDER CAMPBELL, M.L.C.
Chief Medical Officer:
Dr. W. F. MACKENZIE, L.R.C.P. (Edin.), 5, Lyons’Terrace.
Actuary:
MORRICE A. BLACK, Esq.
It is found in the course of business that mistakes frequently occur, in consequence of
the similarity of title assumed by some of the new Life Offices recently established in the
Australian colonies. The public are requested to note—
FIRST. —That the Australian Mutual Provident Society is the correct desig-
nation of the oldest Mutual Life Office in Australia.
SECOND.—That the Society was established in the year 1849, and has issued 35,000
Policies, assuring, £13,500,000.
THIRD. —That the Accumulated Fund is nearly two millions sterling.
FOURTH.—That the annual income from Premiums and Interest exceed £470,000.
FIFTH.—That the Society has paid to the representatives of deceased members upwards
of £700,000 sterling in satisfaction of death and matured claims.
SIXTH.—That the sum of ,4412,000 sterling has been divided among the members,
yielding reversionary bonus additions amounting to £910,000 sterling.
SEVENTH.—That the Society has at this date twenty-seven thousand Policies in force;
the sum assured, including bonus additions, exceeding eleven millions sterling.
RESULTS OF THE 28th YEAR’S BUSINESS.
FIRST. —The number of the New Policies issued was 4558.
SECOND. —The New Assurance business effected was for ,£1,652,375, an amount
exceeding that of the previous year by 11 per cent.
THIRD.—The New Annual Premium Income amounted to £561281. This is a larger
amount of new business than was obtained during the same period by any other
Life Assurance Office in the British Empire.
FOURTH.—The net increase to the business, after allowing for loss of income from
terminated policies, was represented by 3,491 Policies assuring £1,288,187.
FIFTH.—The operations of the year raised the annual income of the. Society from
to £470,000, an increase in twelve months of £61,373, or 15 per
cent, of the previous year’s revenue.
SIXTH.—The Accumulated Fund was increased during the year by the sum of £264,000,
equal to 77 per cent, of the gross premiums received.
SEVENTH.—The deaths among lives assured were 160 in number, causing claims upon
the Society for the sum of £78,960, including bonus additions, under 178 Policies.
QUINQUENNIAL PROGRESS OF THE BUSINESS.
The progressive increase in the Society’s business and resources is prominently brought
out by comparing the amount of business at the periods of the several Quinquennial
Investigations, as shown in the following :


SUMMARY OF QUINQUENNIAL INVESTIGATIONS.
Quinquennial
Investigation.
No. of
Policies.
Amount
Assured.
Total Annual
Income.
Accumulated
Funds.
•
Profit
Divided.
ISt
'
266
£101,330
£3,616
£6,583
£1,286
2nd
1,140
566,085
22,707
41,337
13,900
3rd
3.990
1,891,124
81,530
194,457
64,082
4th
8,663
3.784.119
171,716
602,647
97,333
5th
I7.5II
6,977,795
316,651
1,313,853
235,185
When it is borne in mind that this large amount of business was obtained in
twenty-five years from the Australian colonies and New Zealand, the success of the
Society has a national interest.
Few institutions have more completely realised the intentions of their founders or
enjoyed more uniform success and prosperity than the Australian Mutual Provi-
dent Society. Its growth was for several years slow but progressive. ' Gradually the
soundness and disinterestedness of its principles—the reputation for liberality in its
business arrangements —the constant attention given by the Directors to the management
of its affairs—and the profitable results of its business, impelled the community in their
own interests to yield to it their confidence and support* In late years so extensively
has this support been accorded, that the Society now ranks with the first-class Life
Assurance Institutions of the old home country.
The last Quinquennial Investigation report may be had on application. It contains
exact details of the method by which the surplus has been ascertained, and the profit
divided. The information contained in that report is admitted on all hands to be
more full and complete than was ever presented to the public regarding the position
of any Life Assurance Society. It fully and clearly makes known to actuaries and
persons skilled in the finance of Life Assurance what provision has been made for
security, and what are the prospects of profit to new members on joining the Society.
SEPTENNIAL PROGRESS OF THE BUSINESS.
The steady progress in the estimation of the public is proved by the increased amount
of New Business transacted during the last seven years.
Official Year
ending
31st Decem-
ber.
No. of New
Policies
Issued.
Amount Assured.
New Annual
Premium Income.
New Annual
Income
From Interest.
Total
New Revenue.
1870
1723
£659,775
£24,460
£5,558
£30,018
38,251
1871
2195
833,918
30,354
7,897
1872
2283
806,563
29,044
4,576
33,620
1873
3069
1,138,583
40,501
8,961
49,462
1874
3291
1,166,650
1,487,357
40,601
13,347
53,948
1875
4144
52,083
I I,68l
63,764
70,2S I
1876
4558
1,652,375
56,281
14,000
The Society being annually recruited so largely by new members, affords special-
advantages to the insuring public. An office with a numerous body of assured lives
realises larger profits, and is more secure than one having few policy holders, for the
rate of expenditure is thereby lessened, whilst the continual influx of selected members
scattered throughout the salubrious climates of the Australian and New" Zealand ter-
ritories renders the fluctuations in the rate of mortality extremely slight.


THE BONUSES THAT HAVE BEEN ALLOTTED
The affairs of the Society are investigated every five years, and the
next division of Profits will take place as from 31st December 187 8, and
Policies now effected will share therein. The whole of the profits of the
business are divided exclusively amongst the participating Members, and
in accordance with a scheme admittedly the most equitable that has yet
been devised. The Bonuses paid have varied from £l4 per cent, on
the sum assured for a Policy of five years standing to £l5O per cent, for
one of 25 years duration. The vested Bonuses are in the first instance
stated as additions to the sum assured, but they may at any time be
surrendered in whole or in part for their present value in cash, or applied
to reduce future Premiums for five years, or for the remainder of the life
of the assured.
The Bonuses upon Policies still in existence.
Policy No.
Duration of
Policy at
Sum
Assured.
Policy
increased
Percentage of
Bonus on
Percentage of
Bonus on
31st Dec., 1873.
by Bonus to
Sum Assured.
Premiums Paid.
2
Years.
24
Months.
9
£
300
£
747
149 per cent.
192 per cent.
4
24
9
25O
603
141
206 „
22
24
4
200
475
138 ,,
215 ,,
38
23
IO
500
1.163
133 „
184 „
48
23
5
500
1,231
146 ,,
148 „
73
22
II
200
444
122 ,,
159 ,,
82
22
9
200
451
126 ,,
145 „
88
22
9
1,000
2,208
121 ,,
*65 „
96
22
8
500
1,067
113
l80 ,,
The Bonuses upon Policies that have become claims
Policy No
Duration at date
of death.
j Amount
! Assured.
Amount Paid.
Percentage of
Bonus on
Sum Assured.
1 ears.
Months, i
i £
£
S.
d.
86
15
IO
1,000
2,087
14
4
108 per cent.
90
20
2
5°o
1,017
4
3
i°3 »,
IOO
20
4
500
1,051
IO
8
HO ,,
118
J 9
7
5 00
876
14
IO
75 »
45 2
19
TO
I.OOO
1,611
9
6
61 „
609 i
19
5
1,000
1,508
15
I
5i
975 *
15
11
SCO
8iS
IO
7
63 »
2,766
12
4
500
725
is
7
45 „


The General Results of Four Quinquennial Divisions of Profits are shown in the
following
TABLE OF BONUS ADDITIONS ATTACHING TO POLICIES OF £1 ,000 EACH.
Last Quinquennial Division of Profits made up to 31st December, 1873.
Entry.
Number of
Premiums
Paid.
Twenty.
Fifteen.
1
Ten.
Five.
h
Previous
Bonus
Previous
Bonus
Previous
Bonus
Previous
Bonus
Bonuses.
1873.
Bonuses.
1 873-
Bonuses.
1873-
Bonuses.
1873-
£
s. d.
£
s.
d.
£ s.
d.
.4 s.
d.
1 s.
d.
£ s.
d
£ s. d.
£
s.
d.
20
447
16 0
162
4
O
192 4
O
151 O
O
45 r 7
O
146 10
O
—
I46
O
O
25
443
9 0
162
14
O
182 11
O
152 4
O
47
O
148 18
O
—
150
12
O
3°
479
15 0
157
7
O
198 19
O
H5 4
O
46 3
O
140 IO
O
—
143
12
O
35
520
13 0
158
13
O
211 I
O
H3 12
O
52 O
O
• x 37 3
O
—
139
6
O
40
554
7 0
163
O
O
229 14
O
141 14
O
5° 7
O
133 2
O
—
4
O
45
597
11 0
l68
9
O
248 5
O
143 18
O
61 8
O
I3I 12
O
—
130
O
O
So
673
7 0
167
15
O
295 14
O
142 14
O
75 3
O
125 8
O
—
119
6
O
55
'JOT.
6 0
183
5
O
2Q2 IQ
O
152 O
O
79 1
O
r 37 9
O
—
128
14
O
60
00
14 0
199
18
O
3°7 9
O
163 10
O
69 6
O
143 18
O
—
x 37
12
O
The effect of Surrendering the above Bonus Additions for a reduction of the Annual
Premium, or for their Cash Value as at 31st December, 1873, i- s shown in the following
Tables :
Age
at
Entry
Premium
payable
when
Policy
was
effected.
Bonuses applied to a reduction of future
Annual Premiums.
Cash Value of Total Bonus Additions as at
31st December, 1873.
20 Prems.
paid.
15 Pren
paid.
IS.
id
m
73-
10 Prems.
paid.
5 Prems.
paid.
20 Prems.
paid.
15 Prems. 10 Prems.
paid. 1 paid.
5 Prems.
paid.
Reduced
Premium
after 1873.
Reduc
Premil
after 18
Reduced
Premium
after 1873.
Reduced
Premium
after 1873.
Cash Value.
Cash Va
ue. Cash Value
Cash Value.
£
S.
d.
£ s. d.
£
s.
d.
£ s. d.
£
s. d.
£ s.
d.
£
s.
d. I £ s.
d.
£
s. d.
20
18
T 4
2
6 18 11
'3
5
5
16 3 4
17
1 8
189 l6
O
93
10
O 46 I
O
3°
16 0
25
21
6
8
6 15 9
14
17
7
18 4 s
19
6 11
216 15
0
104
3
0 53 ”
O
36
1 0
3°
24
1
8
4 15 5
15
l6
6
20 9 8
21
16 2
261 8
O
123
I
0 ! 58 2
O
39
3 0
35
27
13
4
i 3 4
l6
18
6
23 2 6
24
19 9
319 2
0
145
IO
0 67 13
O
43
7 0
40
32
4
2
d 0 0
17
14
5
26 12 11
28
19 3
383 8
O
174
IO
0 j 75 6
O
48
7 0
45
38
0
O
000
*7
12
2
30 9 6
34
I O
460 6
O
209
12
0 ! 90 13
O
S3
7 0
5°
44
18
4
0 0 0
r 5
4
4
34 13 4
40
5 3
562 5
O
263
9
O 107 4
O
Sb
1 0
55
56
1
8
000
15
6
I
41 8 \
49
IO 2
648 9
O
297
8
O I30 2
O
68
16 0
60
70
I 3
4
000
II
IO
8
5126
6l
6 11
74610
O
344
17
O I42 II
O
82
14 0
Policies in respect of which the whole of the Annual Premiums payable upon them
respectively have been extinguished, and additions also made to the original sum Assured.
Date of
Policy.
Age
at
Entry.
Original Premium
Payable.
! Total addition to Policy
t by Bonus after
i Extinction of Premium.
Tot&l amount Assured
at 31st December, 1873.
£ s. d.
£
s. d
s. d.
40
32 4 2
46
11 0
1,046
II O
>'
45
38 0 0
T23
6 0
1.123
6 0,
yy
5°
44 18 4
234
'3 0
1,234
13 0. 1
yt
55
56 1 8
321
7 0
1,321
7 0
”
60
7° 13 4
421
3 0
1,421
3 0
The extinction of the Annual Premium by Bonus in the above examples was completed in
1873, or within 20 years from the date when the Assurance was effected.


LIBERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS.
The attention of intending insurants is invited to the following important advantages
afforded by the regulations of the Society
A Mutual Provident Policy contains no conditions as to travelling; for members are
allowed to go all over the world without license or payment of extra premium.
A Mutual Provident Policy contains no restrictive conditions about trade or profession ;
for members may engage in any occupation or calling after they have been
insured.
A Mutual Provident Policy is not forfeited, although the life assured contract habits
of intemperance, or is convicted of felony subsequently to the date of the policy.
A Mutual Provident Policy is not forfeited in the event of the person whose life is
assured dying by suicide (except when committed within 13 months after the
date of assurance), the hands of justice, or in consequence of intemperate habits.
A Mutual Provident Policy is endorsed with an admission of age when issued, if a
certificate of birth is produced. The Society will at any time afterwards admit
the age upon proof being furnished, and if a certificate of birth cannot be
obtained, the best evidence available is accepted instead.
A Mutual Provident Policy, when the age has been admitted, is free of all conditions
after being five years in force, provided the life assured has resided within the
ordinary limits from the date of the policy, and has attained thirty years of age.
A Mutual Provident Policy is absolutely indisputable and unchallengeable after five
years, and the life assured can reside in any part of the world without having to
pay an extra premium.
A Mutual Provident Policy may be revived at any time within thirteen months from
the date when the policy lapsed, if the assured is in good health, on payment
of the premium in arrear, and a fine.
Mutual Provident Policies are kept in force so long as the surrender value is sufficient
for the payment of one yearly premium. When, through omission or from any
other cause, a member fails to pay the premium for a renewal of his assurance,
the surrender value of his policy will he held available and applied accordingly.
Should death take place while the policy is kept alive out of its surrender value,
the Society holds itself liable for the sum assured less the amount advanced,
with interest.
Mutual Provident Members can borrow 90 per cent, of the surrender value of their
policies.
Mutual Provident Policies are issued to secure for members a provision in advanced
age. It is sometimes urged as an objection to life Assurance, that the person
making the provision does not himself reap any advantage during his own life-
time. An Endowment Assurance Policy, effected under the Society’s table
“J,”is payable during the member’s lifetime, and such a policy becomes an
investment, into the possession of which he may enter at any age he chooses, or
in the event of death before attaining the specified age the sum assured will be
paid to his representatives.
Mutual Provident Policies are issued with or without participation in the profits of the
Society. The premiums for the latter are reduced to a rate commensurate with
the risk, and will be found considerably lower than those of any other Life
Assurance Institution transacting business in the Australian colonies. Persons
proposing for assurance may elect to pay their premiums either annually, half-
yearly, or quarterly.
Mutual Provident Polices are issued for assurances on a single life to the extent ot
£4OOO.
Mutual Provident Policy holders at once create for themselves a fund, should death
occur, equivalent to the savings of many years ; and, apart from the considera-
tion of any other capital or property whatever, can bequeath wealth to the
amount for which they are assured.
The Annual Reports of the Society’s state and progress, Prospectuses, and Proposal
Forms may be had, or will be sent, post free, on application to the Society’s Agents and
Branch Offices, or to
ALEXANDER J. RALSTON, Secretary.
Sydney, \sf February, 1577.




