





PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
UNITED METHODIST CONVENTION
FOR THE SPREAD OP
HELD IN
YORK STREET CHURCH, SYDNEY,
DECEMBER g, 10, n, 1885.
“Thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord
hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto Himself." —Deut. xiv. 2.
“Our mission is to spread Scriptural Holiness over the land.”
—John Wesley.
cSstmej} :
WESLEYAN BOOK DEPOT, 413 GEORGE STREET,
CENTRAL METHODIST MISSION, YORK STREET.
1886.
Sold (under cost price) at Is. each, and 9s. per dozen.


Follow peace with all men, and Holiness , without “ which no man shall see the
Lord.” —Heb. xii. 14.
“ Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a
dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold.”—Psalm Ixviii. 13.
“ Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, hut alive unto
God through Jesus Christ our Lord.'” —Romans vi. 11.
“ Let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and Spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear oj God.” —2 Cor. vii. 1.
“As obedient children, not fashioning yourselves according to the former lusts
in your ignorance : But as He which hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of conversation; Because it is written, be ye holy, for i am holy.”—
1 Peter i. 14-16.
“ Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.”—Matt. v. 8.
“ What are these wdiich are arrayed in white robes ? and whence came they '
. . . These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed
their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they
before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in His temple.—
Rev. vii. 13-15.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
At their last September Quarterly Meeting, the office-bearers of the
York Street Circuit decided upon holding a Camp Meeting on the
Prince of Wales’ Birthday, Nov. 9th. A lovely spot on the Lane Cove
River was chosen for the celebration. The President of the Conference
was asked to superintend. The co-operation of the Primitive Methodist,
United Methodist Free Churches was invited. A number of
ministers and laymen took part in the proceedings. Fully 1200 persons
attended. So gracious a spiritual influence pervaded the various
gatherings of the day, that it was arranged to hold another meeting,
especially for the promotion of holiness, in the York Street Church, on
the 11th. A large number attended, and many expressed themselves as
■earnestly seeking the blessing of perfect love. It was then decided to
spend the whole of the following day in conversation and prayer, with
a view to a deepening of the interest awakened on the subject of
holiness. That arrangement was carried out, and for the results thereof
we shall never cease to praise God. It was at this meeting—full
particulars of which appeared as a special supplement to the “Weekly
Advocate” of November 21st—that we suggested the early holding of
the “ United Methodist three days Convention for the spread oj Scriptural
Holiness” the proceedings of which are reported in this pamphlet.
We distinctly recognise in the whole growth of the idea of this
Convention the hand of Divine Providence. We were so manifestly
led thereto by the Holy Spirit, and the results have been of such a
satisfactory character, that we can but exclaim ; —“ This is the Lord’s
doing ; it is marvellous in our eyes.” (Psalm, cxviii., 23).
To give every publicity to the arrangements, we spared no expense
in spreading information throughout the colony of the various meetings
to be held. At once we received, from far and near, words of
■encouragement from ministers and laymen of our own and the Primitive
Methodist Churches. As far as possible, we resolved to pursue the
lin s adopted by the Rev. W. H. Tindall, at the great English
Convention held at Southport, in the month of June last. The result
has proved the wisdom of this decision. As at that Convention, so
here, Methodist people from great distances came up, either as
seekers of the blessing of holiness, or to help by prayer and exhortation
in the objects of the meetings. The “Visitor’s Register,” opened at the
beginning of the Convention, gives the names of persons, some of
them ministers and leading laymen, who attended from Bathurst,
Orange, Mudgee, Molong, Hill End, Tarana, Lithgow, Penrith, Coul-
burn, Brewarrina, Crookwell, Kangaroo Valley, Cow Flat, Bowral,
Bulli, Singleton, Morpeth, Newcastle, Wallsend, Cosford, M’Donald,


and Hawkesbury Rivers, Windsor, Liverpool, Parramatta, Castle Hills,
Prospect, Pennant Hills, Ryde, and other places outside the city and
suburbs. Whilst congratulatory telegrams and letters were received
from the following places :—Brisbane, Clarence and Macleay Rivers,
Muswellbrook, Singleton, Bulahdelah, Lochinvah, Tarro, Locksley,
Morpeth, Wallsend, Dubbo, Orange, Spring Hill, Rockley, Bathurst,
Mudgee, Goulburn, Jamberoo, Nowra, Kiama, Wollongong, Bowral,
and Richmond.
The Rev. J. A. Nolan (President of the Conference), presided at
all the Sessions, save one, when the chair was occupied by the under-
signed. The Inaugural Sermon preached at the opening Session, left
little to be desired. Great heartiness, and at times a blessed unction,
characterised the service. From thirty to forty ministers of our own
and sister Churches were present. The President’s clear and earnest
setting forth of the doctrine of entire sanctification, his apt quotations
from the Scriptures, his references to the constant preaching of this
doctrine by the early Methodists, and his cogent appeals to all present,
went home to many a heart.
The spirit of the first meeting continued through all the session
Some of the Papers were read under a depth of feeling that spread itself
throughout the congregation. The addresses given at the night
meetings were for the most part marked by a clearness of statement,
and by an earnestness of appeal, which were manifestly honoured by
the Great Head of the Church. Fully one hundred persons—amongst
them ministers, ministers’ wives, and officers of the Church—came
forward as seekers of the blessing of perfect love.
We are especially thankful to God that throughout the nine Sessions,
there was nothing said that savored of a spirit of controversy or of
hostile criticism. Differences of opinion were expressed; this we
expected. Throughout the whole of the discussions, that followed the
reading of the papers, there was an evident desire to get at and
grasp the truth. Ministers and laymen alike, expressed their views
on the subject under discussion, with a freedom and a point that was
most refreshing. When it is remembered that for three or four hours
each day, the Sessions were open for any one who chose to speak, there
is room for wonder that there was so little of aught approaching
extravagance of speech. For this we also thank God. The pervading
tone of the Convention was that of joy. This was especially noticeable
in the prayers offered, and in the testimonies given. The singing
throughout was of the heartiest. Few but “ old fashioned Methodist
tunes ” were sung, and they were rendered with a depth of feeling, worth
a journey of miles to hear. The President was ever happy in his
selection of hymns. Often the point reached by the conversation of an
hour was seized and voiced in some stanza, that carried those present
away with it. This was manifestly the case when, after the utterance
of telling words which showed that the blessing of holiness was obtain-


able by faith and was within our grasp now , the following verse was
struck up to the old tune “ Lydia ” :
“ 0 that it NOW from heaven might fall,
And all my sins consume !
Come, Holy Ghost, for thee I call,
Spirit of burning come ! ”
The happy feeling manifest throughout, culminated at the
“ Holiness Love Feast.” We shall never forget that Service. During the
former part of the meeting, between 60 and 70 testimonies were given.
It was a time of great joy to us, as friends from all parts of the colony
spoke of blessings received at this Convention, of their personal search
for and acceptance of the grace of full Salvation, and of their longing to
see our Methodist Churches throughout Australia blessed with a
gracious revival of the w T ork of God. The climax was reached when, at
the end of the Love Feast, the whole space around the pulpit was
crowded by those pleading with God for the blessing of which so many
had spoken.
We were fortunate in having Miss Leonard present with us. God
has greatly honored this sister’s visit to New South Wales ] and many
of us were much helped at the Convention by her co-operation. The
blessings of the Great Head of the Church go with her throughout the
Circuits of this Colony !
What the ultimate results of this Convention will be are known
only to God. Arranged for with unshaken faith in the God of our
forefathers, accompanied throughout by the marked presence of the
Holy Spirit, and followed by so much of good to most who were present;
that good cannot, it must not, be allowed to die. The responsibility of
all who took part in the Convention is great. Looking into the future
we dare do nothing but go right on in our efforts to bring this great
doctrine to the front. Of this we are persuaded : —The whole Church
will be richer in power, more aggressive in spirit, and more successful
in the great work of soul winning, if only our people become possessed
of an enthusiasm of full consecration, and of faith in the all-cleansing
power of the blood of Christ.
As the natural and logical out-growth of this Convention, and
practically to aid in the furtherance of its great object, arrangements
are being made by those who took a prominent part therein, to band
themselves together for associated effort in such directions, amongst
others, as are here indicated.
1. The formation of a union for prayer, that our Churches through-
out the land may be blessed with a revival of Scriptural
Holiness.
2. The holding of frequent meetings for the purpose of strength-
ing each others’ hands in God.
3. To arrange for the conducting of Holiness Conventions in those
Circuits to which any members of the union may be invited.


Feeling as we do that the one need of the Methodist Churches of
this Colony, is that of such deep toned spiritual life, as ever
follows the attainment of the scriptural grace of '•'•full Salvation ”; and
convinced that this, once assured, will satisfactorily answer the pressing
questions of our Church life, bearing upon financial and numerical
growth ; with all the fervour of which we are possessed will we pray
for that revival, to promote which we exist as a church, a revival of
“ Scriptural Holiness,” which shall spread itself throughout the length
and breadth of our beloved land.
Christian reader, will you aid in this work ? First of all, seek
for yourself the blessing of a “ clean heart ”; and rest not until you
revel in the fact of its possession. Then, without delay, join yourself
to every enterprise that aims at filling the land with holy men and
women. Be constant in prayer ;be enthusiastic in effort; be liberal in
your gifts ; by all the means within your power, by the force of personal
example, by confessing Christ at every opportunity, by spreading
broadcast our Methodist literature on the subject of Holiness, we pray
you to “ come up to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against
the mighty ! ” Thus the blessing of the God of our fathers will be your
abiding portion, and thus will you practically aid the glorious work of
which the beloved songster of our Church, Charles Wesley, has writ-
ten :
“ See how great a flame aspires,
Kindled by a spark of grace !
Jesus’ love the nations fires,
Sets the kingdoms on a blaze ;
To bring fire on earth He came,
Kindled in some hearts it is,
O that all might catch the flame,
All partake the glorious bliss !
Saw ye not the cloud arise,
Little as a human hand ;
Now it spreads along the skies,
Hangs o’er all the thirsty land ;
Lo ! the promise of a shower
Drops already from above ;
But the Lord will shortly pour
All the Spirit of his love ! ”
W. G. Taylor.
Central Methodist Mission,
Sydney.
January Ist, 1886.
N. 8.—1 have received much valuable assistance, in the preparation of this
report, from my colleague, Rev. Jos, Woodhouse, who took short-hand notes of
the various addresses given at the Evening Sessions, as also of the conversations
following the reading of the prepared Papers. Though it entailed considerable
labour, the carrying of this report through the press has been a rich means of
grace. God grant that as great a blessing may be received by all who peruse its.
pages.


REPOR
OF THE
M|nit(td j|||j%dist Ipap’
FOR THE SPREAD OF
SCRIPTURAL HOLINESS
HELD IN
YORK STREET CHURCH, SYDNEY,
On December 9th, 10th, and 11th, 1885.
FIRST SESSION — Wednesday Morning, December 9th.
A brief service of Praise and Prayer was conducted by the Rev. J. A.
Nolan (President of the Wesleyan Conference), who then proceeded to
deliver the
INAUGURAL SERMON.
“I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shalt enlarge my
heart.” —Psalm cxix. 32.
This deeply interesting Psalm is too often over-looked, merely because
it happens to be the longest chapter, in the Bible. People are fright-
ened of it. The Psalm is anonymous. But whoever the Psalmist was,
it is evident, from the Psalm itself—(l) That he was a servant of
Jehovah —(2) That he was not satisfied with his present religious
experience-—(3) That he was very earnestly longing and striving after
a higher religious life. These three things appear all through the
Psalm ; and they are all three of them fairly implied in this single
verse. We have heard the cry of one who everywhere claims to be a
servant of God; and we have his implied confession of short-coming in
the way of God’s commandments. He is not yet running that way,
but he determines that he will do so; and he is waiting at the footstool
of Jehovah for His enabling grace—the heavenly gift that will so
expand his religious life that, at last, he will be able to run the way o£


His commandments. And this is not the only Scripture that teaches
us that running is the normal method of Christian progression.
“ Know ye not that they who run in a race, run all . . . So run that ye
may obtain.” And, says Paul, “I, therefore, so run.” Of his beloved
Galatians he says, with a sore and troubled heart, “ Ye did run well.”
And all Christians are exhorted to “ run, with patience, the race that
is set before us.” And surely, in our days more than ever, there ought
to be Christian running, for there is, on the part of the people of the
world, plenty of unchristian running. “Their feet run to evil.” Such
worldliness, such frivolity, such scepticism, such open rejection of God !
As of old, and more than ever, “ they do evil with both hands earnestly.”
It is not a time for Christians to be loitering and limping along “ the
way of God’s commandments.”
But the running Christians, where are they ? There are sedately-
walking Christians, and there are idly-sauntering Christians, and there
are lame and limping Christians, and there are Christians who are even
stepping backwards—always an ungraceful and dangerous operation.
But the running Christians, how many of them can you count in the
circle of your acquaintance 1 The ordinary Church member of to-day,
you will recognise his portrait anywhere. Now and then he will tell you
how, years ago, he was converted. He has no doubt about it, and very
likely there is no doubt about it. He really was once converted, and
since then, he has always been acknowledged to be a Christian man. His
moral and religious character stands unimpeached. He attends the
Sunday, and, perhaps, even the week-night services, with regularity.
Nor is he an idler in the Church. If he is not one of the hard workers,
he at least does something. He thinks, probably, that he does his share ;
and he thinks, also, that he gives his share. He is not, indeed, remark-
able for liberality ; but then neither is he remarkable for stinginess.
But when you come to the matter of his religious experience, ah ! then
is the rub. Being an honest Christian man, he will be himself the
first to tell you that his religion does not give him much delight. The
motive of his religious life is a sense of duty rather than an impulse of
love. In any Christian work that he may attempt, there is a lamentable
lack of power, and no one deplores this more than he does himself. He
does not impress unconverted people with the thought that he is a very
religious man. They know, of course, that he is not one of themselves ;
but he does not make them feel uncomfortable. His witness for Christ
is an extremely prudent and moderate affair. He cannot truthfully say,
and therefore he does not say that he is growing in grace. It is well,
indeed, if his growth is not the other way. He remembers the warm
glow, the bright hopes, the high and inspiriting ideal of Christian
experience and work, that he had when he was converted. But all that
is a vanished past, towards which he often looks with unutterable regret
and longing; and yet, all the time, he has in his creed a doctrine of
Christian holiness, to which in his practice he scarcely even attempts to
conform. Yet it has a charm for him. He likes to hear about it.


He likes to read about it. He honours those who consistently profess
it, and over and over again he has tried to get an experience of it for
himself, but his success has never been more than partial or temporary.
It has been scarcely more than failure. There stands the well-known
portrait. A Christian man he undoubtedly is, but a poor specimen of
what a Christian ought to be. His Christian character is not
symmetrical. His Christian experience is not joyful. His Christian
work is not abounding. I shall not tell you who it was that sat to me
for this portrait, but I would ask you, do you recognise in it any
lineament of your own religious life? Now with this portrait of the
imperfect Christian, limping and toiling along the way to heaven,
compare the portrait (alas! not nearly so familiar) of the running
Christian. His conversion and his early Christian life were no better
than those of his loitering brother, whom he has left so far behind ; but
there came a time, when the character of his whole Christian life and
experience was suddenly changed (note 3). It was nothing of earth,
it came down from on high. It was like a second conversion (note 2), for
the “old things” of his Christian experience passed away, and all
things became new. The walking and the limping at once ex-
changed for running. He soon out-stripped “ his old companions in
distress,” and it was only natural if some of them did not altogether
like it. The motive power of his Christian life has been greatly
increased; it is no longer chiefly .duty that impels him, but something
that is nobler and mightier far than duty, namely, love. Love is
the noblest and the mightiest thing in human life, and love is
the definition of this higher Christian life. It is the perfect love
of God filling and ruling the heart. And with this great accession
of motive power, he has gained a great increase of Christian speed.
He is now a running Christian. His course is now marked by progress
and power. His Christian momentum is much greater than it used to
be. You instinctively step aside out of the way of a man who is running.
No trifling difficulties will stop him in his course. “By Thee (said
David) I run through ( margin ) a troop, and by my God do I leap over
a wall.” Do you know such a running Christian amongst your acquaint-
ances ? If so, “ mark the perfect man,” for he may teach you some things
that you ought to know. Why do men ever run ? Either to escape from
some danger, or to gain some desired end. The former of these has almost
ceased to be the motive that is urging the Christian who is running in
the way of God’s commandments. He seldom thinks now of fleeing
from the wrath to come. Of course he is doing this all the time. But
it is not that this is mostly occupying his thoughts, but “ the mark from
the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.” You run to catch
the train. You run to win a prize. Perhaps you run, sometimes, from
mere exuberance of physical health and vigour. So the running
Christian is fired with the hope of no mean success in “ the way of God’s
commandments.” He has set before him a high and inspiriting ideal. If
it is an ideal that is hard to reach, that is all the better for his sanctified


ambition. It fills his soul with Ohristly eagerness that impels him all
the time to run. Ah ! you limping, loitering Christian, if you could
only feel what he feels, and see what he sees, you would limp and
loiter no longer. It would wonderfully quicken your pace. You, too,
would join in this blessed running. And see, he does not tire with
his running. It is his birthright privilege to run and not be weary.
It is easier for him to run than it is for you to limp and loiter. And
it is safer too. It is but seldom that a galloping horse falls with you. It
is the sluggish spiritless horse that is apt to trip and fall. For every
running Christian there is a special promise. “ When thou runnest
thou shalt not stumble.” And instead of becoming exhausted as you
might think, he grows stronger every day and better able to run. His
understanding grows stronger. He sees more, and hears more, and
learns more of Christian experience in a day’s running, than you would
do in a month’s dawdling and halting, absorbed as you are with your
aches and pains. His rapid motion fans to a flame his Christian zeal.
“ How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet ” of such a runner !
Wherever he comes he brings the glad tidings of salvation. While your
mouth, you poor limping Christian, is filled chiefly with lamenting
over your own shortcomings, he grows daily in Christian
symmetry and beauty. God has put into you an instinctive
love for beauty, and He has ministered to it on every hand,
in the changing clouds, the golden sunsets, the varied landscape, the
singing of the birds, and the perfume of the flowers. But no beauty
captivates like the heart of life. On every hand there is beautiful
life, and on every hand, alas, there is beautiful life that is ruined by
unhealthiness. Rising higher in the scale of life, we find that the
beauty that excelleth is moral and spiritual beauty, “ the beauty of
holiness,” and of this the running Christian is a constant example. The
glow of spiritual health is on his cheek, the white robes of spiritual
purity are about him, and he grows every day in Christian symmetry,
vigour and beauty, and, as of old, “ length of days is in his right
hand. ’ His running gives him a better chance of attaining the wonderful
beauty of Christian old age, for his perfect deliverance from corroding
care makes all the wheels of life run smoothly. Too often it is not the
work, but the worry that kills. But “ the righteous shall flourish like the
palm tree; he shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon . . . they shall still bring
forth fruit in old age ; they shall be full of sap and green.” Come now,
my brethren, who are loitering instead of running in the way of His
commandments, do you not long with the Psalmist in this text; will you
not resolve with him, that you will, from this hour, be running Christians ?
He said, and do you not say to-day, “ I will run the way of thy
commandments.” O, the majesty, the dread responsibility of the human-
will. If you say, by the help of God, to-day, “ I will run,” what power
on earth can hold you back ?
I will run the way.” If it went no further you would know what
\\a} was meant. It is not your own way. That is a poor foolish way to


run in. Not “ the way of evil men,” for that is “ the way to hell,” the
“ broad way that leadeth to destruction,” and you know that “ the way
of transgressors is hard,” and that “the way of the ungodly shall perish.”
No! it is what the Christians of the Apostolic Church were accustomed to
speak of, as “ The Way.” It is “ the way of the righteous,” “ the way of
His saints,” “the way of life,” “the narrow way that leadeth unto
life.” Above all, it is God’s way, “ the way of thy commandments.”
Such a way cannot be other than “ the good way,” “ a perfect way,”
“the way of salvation.” You may well cry out with the Psalmist,
“ Teach me thy way, 0 Lord.” “ I will run the way of thy command-
ments.” Are you in this blessed way ? are you walking in it 1 are you
running in it 1 It is the way of your most sacred duty, the way of your
most exalted privilege, “ the way of peace, peace unspeakable, unknown,”
and “the way of holiness,” that privileged highway for the redeemed to
walk in. It is “ the way to Zion,” the only way that leads from earth to
heaven. By this way alone “ The ransomed of the Lord shall return
and come with singing unto Zion ; and everlasting joy shall be upon
their heads : they shall obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow and sighing
shall flee away.”
Will you be content not to be in such a blessed way ? Will you
be content to be a loiterer in “The Way”? Or will you say, with all
your heart, this day “ I will run in the way of Thy commandments.”
You will run as soon as ever the one necessary qualification is
supplied—“ When Thou shalt enlarge my heart.” “The heart,” in the
familiar language of the Psalmist, is the moral, the spiritual nature, i.e.,
the man himself. An enlargement of the heart is, therefore, an
expansion of all the moral and spiritual powers of the man. All sin is
selfishness, and it is the nature of selfishness to contract the heart.
Hence the primer lesson of Christianity is self-denial. True religion
and selfishness cannot go together. The further we get away from
self and sin, i.e., in other words, the more religious we get, the more
our hearts will be enlarged. Look at what are the fruits of the Spirit:
“ Love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith.” Such
things as these have a wonderfully enlarging influence on the heart.
The more religious a man gets the broader will be his human sympathies,
the wider will be the horizon of his spiritual vision ; he will see more,
and feel more, then ever he could have done before. O for this blessed
enlargement of the heart ! to be no longer contracted and shut up in
selfishness ; to be set free from earth, and self, and sin, and to taste the
liberty and joy of this blessed enlargement of heart ! But it is, you
will see, something that you will never get by your own wit or strength.
This enlargement of the heart must be a Divine work. “ When Thou
shalt enlarge,” &c. It is an operation of omnipotence, and anticipates
all objections. What was impossible before, is now easy. A moral
and spiritual miracle has been performed. The Supernatural has come
down into the sphere of the human. The Almighty Creator, has
put forth his hand, and a “new man” has been called into being. He


is not the same contracted, selfish man that he was before; he has
enlarged hopes, enlarged faith, enlarged sympathies. It is a blessed
enlargement of the whole moral man, accomplished by no less an agency
than the direct intervention of the Omnipotent hand of God. “ When
Thou shalt enlarge my heart.” Not “ when Thou shalt enlarge my circum-
stances.” This would be bad news for many people whose circumstances
are never likely to be enlarged. But the fact is, that straitened circum-
stances are a help, rather than a hindrance, to those who are running in
“ The Way.” Not “when thou shalt enlarge my understanding,” for then
this blessed running would be a monopoly of the aristocracy of intellect,
which is very far indeed from being the case. “Brilliant brains” willenable
a man to “ run ” in the way of literature, or of commerce, or of politics. In
any of the highways of the world they will enable a man soon to out-
strip his dullard competitors. But they will not help a man very much
to run in the way of God’s commandments. It is not knowledge that
raises a man to the peerage of worth, but goodness. This blessed enlarge-
ment of the heart, and this blessed running in the way, are possible to
the very humblest disciples of our Lord Jesus, i.e., to all. You will have
gathered from what I have already said that, as I understand it, this
divine enlargement of the heart, that is to make us running Christians,
is to be looked for as a blessing, distinct from the regenerating grace
which we already possess (Note 1). Every regenerated Christian is holy
in a blessed degree, and ought to grow daily in holiness. Regeneration
is santification begun. If you are truly regenerated, there is no other
work that God has to do for you in this life. But there is a further
work of the same kind, a divine enlargement of your heart, that God
is waiting to accomplish in you this very day, if you will only let Him,
There is a further blessing to which, in the Scriptures, every regenerated
soul is urged to press forward (Note 1). In one passage it is spoken of as
being “ sanctified wholly ” ; in another as “ pressing on unto perfection ”;
in a third as “ perfecting holiness ” ; in a fourth as being “ cleansed from
all sin” ; and yet again as “ our love being made perfect.” This giftof God’s
love has been purchased for us by the atonement of Christ; and it is to be
appropriated by faith. There is no other way of obtaining it. But, if it
is a gift of God to be received by faith, then it is evident that there must
be a moment when that faith is exercised, and that heavenly gift is
received (Note 3). But if this is a definite point to be gained in your
Christian experience, it is also a fresh starting point in “ the way of His
commandments.” If you have been faithful to the regenerating grace
which you received when you were converted, you have been growing
in holiness all the time. But now that you have “ gained perfection’s
height,” you will grow as you have never grown before. Hitherto you
have been a walking Christian, and perhaps hardly that. But hence-
forth, through this divine enlargement of your heart, you will run the
way of His commandments.
Brethren, I am bringing no strange things to your ears. This
perfect sanctification, as distinct from growth in sanctification, (Note 4)


was taught by John Wesley. It was taught by Charles Wesley in his
hymns. It was taught by Fletcher, o£ Madeley, and by a host of others
in those early days. Since then it has been taught by a noble succession
of princes in Methodism. And it is the living voice of English Method-
ism to-day. The voices of William Arthur and Ebenezer Jenkins, and
Mark Guy Pearse, L. E. Page, Joseph Agar Beet, and Benjamin
Gregory, are not yet silent in the grave. And many a time, these forty
odd years, has this doctrine sounded clearly forth from this York Street
pulpit. Let me select a single name—but it is a name to charm with
in every colony of Australasia—l refer to our beloved Father Watsford.
And may I be allowed to add, that this is the doctrine that your
preacher of this morning has constantly held, and has occasionally
preached, these five and twenty years. With unutterable regret he-
confesses that his experience has fallen infinitely below his creed.
I know that there are some who do not agree with me. It is the
very least that ought to be expected of me, that I should feel towards
them a perfect charity. To utter one word against them in a censo-
rious spirit would be a breach of that “ love which is the bond of
perfectness.” And I hope that no such word will be uttered in this
Convention, from the beginning of it to the end of it. They have a
perfect right to maintain their opinion, and to defend it as best they can.
But I claim the same right to maintain my opinion, and to defend it as
best I can. And I claim that the doctrine of Christian Holiness, as I have
tried this morning to set it forth, is to be clearly gathered from the doctrinal
standards of our Church, and, above all, I claim that it is to be most
surely gathered from the pages of the Word of God. Ah ! This divine
enlargement of your heart is just what you want to enable you to
“ run the way of His commandments.” “ Privilege and duty always go
together, but with a greatly increased privilege, duty becomes transfigured
into delight. With this divine expansion of your moral and spiritual
powers, your walking will be changed into running. Until then you can
only limp and loiter still. Till then your feet are clogged and heavy.
Till then heart is faint, your courage fails you, and your strength is
small. Till then a thousand influences of the world, like some magic
spell, detain you in “ the way.” But when once there has come upon
you from the throne of God, this divine enlargement of heart, all
will be changed. The difficult and irksome will become easy and
pleasant, the spell of the world will be broken, and the mightier spell
of the noblest impulse that can thrill the human heart will be always
resting on your spirit. Your feet will be “ like hinds’ feet.” For
shameful loitering there will be eager haste. No more complaints will
be heard of the roughness of the way. But instead, there will be a
“ gladness and joy ”of the pilgrims returning to Zion. Ah ! my friends,
if your heart is like the Preacher’s this morning, you are saying from
the depth of your soul, “ Put an end, O blessed Jesus, put an end
for ever to this wretched limping and loitering in “ The Way.” Set this
cold phlegmatic heart of mine on fire ; quicken these dilatory steps;


send down upon me from Thy throne such a divine expansion of
all my powers, that “ I will know the way of Thy commandments, when
thou shalt enlarge my heart.”
The above sermon was not written with a view to its being published. But,
having consented to its publication, I have thought it best not to amend it. It is
submitted, therefore, with all its faults, exactly as it was delivered. I have made
a few extracts from Methodist writers, and have appended them as notes to
some of the things which I said in the sermon. I would urge the reader to
give them careful perusal.
J. A. N.
NOTE 1.
“ There is a further blessing to which, in the Scriptures , every regen-
erated soul is urged to press forward ’.” . . . “A blessing
distinct from the regenerating grace which we already possess.”
In the minutes of the second Conference it was asked, “ When
does inward sanctification begin 1 In the moment we are justified.
The seed of every virtue is then sown in the soul. From that time the
believer gradually dies to sin, and grows in grace. Yet sin remains in
him—yea, the seed of all sin—till he is sanctified throughout in spirit,
soul, and body.” Storris Hist. Meth ., /., 311.
In 1760, and following years a remarkable revival of holiness took
place in the Methodist societies. Do. I. Jf)2 , dec.
In 1763 Wesley said, “During the whole time many have been
convinced of sin, many justified, and many backsliders healed; but the
peculiar work of this season has been what St. Paul calls the perfecting
of the saints.” “ And,” says he, “ God still convinces, iustifies, sancti-
fies.” Do. /., Jfif
“ It is,” he said, “ the grand depositum, which God has given to the
people called Methodists; and chiefly to propagate this, it appears, God
raised them up. Their mission was not to form a religious party, but
to spread holiness o ver these lands.” Do. /., 4.06.
In his sermon on the Scripture way of salvation he says, “At the
same time that we are justified—yea, in that very moment—santifica-
tion begins. . . . How naturally do those who expe-
rience such a change imagine that all sin is gone ! But
it is seldom long before they are undeceived, finding sin was only sus-
pended, not destroyed. . . . It is thus that we wait for
entire sanctification, for a full salvation from all our sins.
The repentance consequent upon justification is widely different from
that which is antecedent to it. This implies no guilt, no sense of con-
demnation, no consciousness of the wrath of God. ... It
is properly a conviction wrought by the Holy Ghost of the sin which
still remains in our heart , . . and is still cleaving to all
our words and actions.” . , , Without such a repentance of


the justified there is no place for his being perfected in love, to which
that repentance is indispensably necessary.” Sermon xliii.
“ That a distinction exists between a regenerate state, and a state
of entire and perfect holiness will be generally allowed. Regeneration,
we have seen, is concomitant with justification ; but the Apostles, in
addressing the body of believers in the churches, to whom they wrote
their Epistles, set before them, both in the prayers they offer on their
behalf and in the exhortations they administer, a still higher degree of
deliverance from sin, as well as a higher growth in Christian virtues.”
Watson’s Institutes, Works xii., p, 3.
“ But is not a person wholly sanctified when he is justified 1 Cer-
tainly not, except it may be in some extraordinary cases. When a
person is justified he is also regenerated—his sanctification is begun ;
but it is not finished.” Hannah’s Lectures, p. 375.
“ The work of sanctification, though commenced in every faculty of
the soul, and complete inasmuch as the whole man is changed, is incom-
plete inasmuch as no part is fully changed.” Hunt’s Letters, p. 23.
“ Entire sanctification implies deliverance from all these imper-
fections of the regenerated man.” Do., p. 36.
Dr. Dixon, in his Introductory Essay on the Life of John Smith,
says, “He had no scruples, no doubts, no misgivings, respecting the
doctrine itself. In his mind the perfect holiness of the believer was as
certainly provided for as the pardon of sin. P. xxv.
David Stoner says: “In a justified person, on certain occasions,
anger may be felt rising in the heart ; yet, by the grace of God, he
keepeth it down. But in a person wholly sanctified every remnant
of the disposition to anger is destroyed.” Life, p. IJfl.
“ Paul does not suppose that all his readers are actually dead to
sin, &c. This experience is thus contrasted with justification, to which
no sacred writer exhorts his readers, but which they all assume their
readers actually to enjoy. We have, therefore, two stages of the
Christian life, distinct in thought, and, perhaps, in time. The first
saves us from the anger of God, and therefore implies salvation from
the commission of actual sin. But sin injures and pollutes even those
who do not actually break the express commands of God. The second
stage saves us from sin so completely that it is compared to Christ’s
deliverance by His own death from the curse of sin. We may con-
veniently speak of it as full salvation.” J. A. Beet’s Commentary on
Romans, p. 181.
“ When we learn that God claims us to be His own, and when,
after fruitless personal efforts to render Him the devotion He requires,
we learn for the first time that God will work in us by the agency of
His Spirit, and by actual spiritual contact with Chifist, the devotion he
requires ; and when we venture to believe that God does now, and will
henceforth work in us this devotion to himself; and when we fine
by happy experience that according to our faith it is done to us—the
experience thus gained becomes an era in our spiritual life. We feel


that we are then holy in a sense unknown to us before.” Beet's Holi-
ness, as Understood by the Writings of the Bible, p. 57.
“ Here (at the moment of his regeneration), just at this point,
sanctification commences; but all who have experienced this great
change well know that at this stage of Christian experience all inbred
sin is not removed—that unsanctified tempers still remain.
O, my brother ! we bring you good tidings of great joy. We point you
to a loving Saviour, who is able to save you from all sin.” Watsford,
Full Salvation, pp. 2,4, See also Arthur's Tongue of Fire, pp.
Jf7, 48.
At a Conference Holiness Meeting, at which Samuel Coley and
others spoke, the Rev. E. E. Jenkins, M.A., said : “I thought it would
be dishonourable to the Master if I did not present my testimony of
my own experience of this great doctrine of holiness. In all my Chris-
tian life I have been reticent respecting the interior state of my own
heart. From the time that I first knew the Lord it was always a
great cross to me to speak of the secret intercourse of my spirit with
the Holy Ghost. ... I thank the Master for the great
changes wrought in my heart two years and tw'o or three months ago.
The shining forth of that morning I shall never cease to recall with
thankfulness and renewed dedication. ... I thought of
the man who said, ‘ Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean;’ and
I said, ‘ I can go as far as that man did. I can go further, and say,
“ Lord, thou wilt make me clean;”’ and by the grace of God helping
me in the interpretation of that passage, I was enabled to realise the
truth, ‘ Thou dost make me clean.’ , . . From that time
my mouth has been open. It was shut before. . , . The
name of Jesus makes my heart bound with joy whenever I hear it.”
See Dr. A. Clarke's Experiences in Life, by Dr. Ethridge, pp. 415. 416.
See also Thomas Cooper's Remarkable Experience, Life written by him-
self, pp. 82, 87.
NOTE 11.
It was like a second conversion.
“ Speak the second time ‘ Be clean ’
“Take away the inbred sin.”
Wesley's Hymns, 398.
“ Never do we read of a Higher Life that is other than the
intensification of the lower; never of a Second Blessing that is more
than the unrestrained out-pouring of the same Spirit who gave
the first.” Pope, p. 522.
NOTE 111.
There came a time when the character of his whole Christian life
and experience was suddenly changed “ There must be a moment when
that faith is exercised, and that heavenly gift is received."


“ Wesley claimed it as, like justification, an attainment of faith,
and practicable at any moment.” Stevens’ History of Methodism, I. 406.
“As to the question, is the change instantaneous or gradual? he
argues that it is both ; that from the moment of justification there may
be a gradual sanctification, a daily growth in grace; but that, if sin
ceases before death, there must in the nature of things be an instantaneous
change ; there must be a last moment wherein it does exist, and a first
moment wherein it does not.” Do. I. 439.
“We are sanctified as well as justified by faith, and indeed the one
of those great truths does exceedingly illustrate the other, exactly as we
are justified by faith, so are we sanctified by faith.” Wesley’s Sermon
on the Scripture way of Salvation, p. 46.
“ To this confidence that God is both able and willing to sanctify us
now, there needs to be added one thing more, a divine evidence and
conviction that he doeth it, in that hour it is done. God says to the
inmost soul, ‘ According to thy faith be it unto thee,’ then the soul is
pure from every spot of sin ; it is clean from all unrighteousness.’ ”
Do. p. 49-
“ Look for it then every day, every hour, every moment ! Why not
this hour, this moment? Certainly you may look for it now, if you
believe it is by faith.” ... If you seek it by faith, you
may expect it as you are; and if as you are, then expect it now
stay for nothing; why should you ? Christ is
ready ; He is waiting for you; He is at the door ! let your inmost soul
cry out, “Come in, come in thou heavenly guest.” Do p, 50. See
also Wesley’s Journal, iv., p. 78.
“ That the regeneration which accompanies justification is a large
approach to this state of perfected holiness, and that all dying to sin,
and all growth in grace, advance us nearer to this point of entire
sanctity is so obvious, that on these points there can be no reasonable
dispute, but they are not at all inconsistent with a more instantaneous
work, when the depth of our natural depravity being more painfully
felt, we plead in faith the accomplishment of the promises of God. The
great question to be settled is, whether the deliverance sighed after be
held out to us in these promises as a present blessing ? and, from what
has been already said, there appears no ground to doubt this.” Watson’s
Institutes’ Works, xii. 10.
“Then to this faith shall the promises of entire sanctification be given,
which in the nature of the case, supposes an instantaneous work imme-
diately following upon our entire and unwavering faith.” Do. p. 11.
“Is entire Christian sanctification an instantaneous or a gradual
work ? and why may it not be both ?— instantaneous, when the person,
by a vigorous act of faith, finds himself brought to love the Lord with
all his heart ; and yet gradual, as that more immediate attainment of the
blessing is of necessity preceded, as it will also be followed by a gradual
work.” Dr. Hannah’s Lectures, p. 377.


“While the tenor of the New Testament represents entire sanctifi-
cation as the result of a process, it is also ascribed to the result of the
constant effusion of the Holy Ghost, crowned in one last and consumma-
ting act of His power. . . . This final and decisive act of
the Spirit is the seal set upon a previous continuous work.” Pope's
Compendium, Ed., 1885, p. 522.
“ Is entire sanctification instantaneous or progressive ?
Sanctification, so far as what has been termed ‘The cleansing touch’
is concerned, is instantaneous, and progressive both before and after.
There is a moment when we first trust in Christ as our perfect Saviour,
and at that instant we are entirely sanctified. So far the blessing is
instantaneous. All may not be able to state the precise moment, as
some cannot state the precise time when the Spirit testified their accept-
ance with God, yet this must have been an instantaneous blessing; yet
sanctification is progressive before that instantaneous work, and equally
so after.” Hunt's Letters on Entire Sanctification, p.p. f 3,
“ In Rom. vi. 11, St. Paul bids us to reckon ourselves to he dead to
sin, hut living for God in Christ Jesus. . . . But up to
this moment we have been sadly alive to sin and living in part to please
ourselves. Our own past experience contradicts flatly the reckoning
which St. Paul bids us make. But as we stand beneath the cross of
Him who died that we might live no longer for ourselves, but for Him ;
and as we feel the constraining power of His mysterious love, we dare
not hesitate. And with a confidence, which seems to us akin to mad-
ness, but which is commanded by God, we believe, at the Apostle’s
bidding, that we are now dead to sin, and that from this moment we
shall live for God; and that in this separation from sin and devotion
to God, we shall be maintained to the end of life by the presence and
power of the Holy Spirit. And while we thus believe, the command of
God, which in believing we obey, is itself a pledge that in the moment
of our faith God works in us that which He bids us believe. Else the
reckoning which at His bidding we make is false, and His word is a
deception. Therefore, just as we obtain forgiveness by believing that
in the moments of our faith and through the death of Christ our sins
are forgiven, so, by believing that it is ours, we also so obtain and retain
the holiness which God requires and gives.” Joseph Agar Beet; Holiness
as understood by the writers of the Bible, p. 53.
“ It must be instantaneous, for it is by faith ....
There may be a few who cannot tell the particular moment when they
were saved from all sin, just as there are a few who cannot tell the exact
time when they were pardoned; but there are thousands who testify
that there was a moment when the work was done.” Wats ford, Full
Salvation, p. 53. See also Dr. A. Clarke, quoted by Wats ford, p. If
“ This voluntary sanctification may, by Divine grace, be speedily,
yea , summarily accomplished, if strenuously set about
‘ To-day, while it is called to-day,’ ‘ O God make speed to save us ! O


Lord, make haste to help ’! Rev. B. Gregory. See also Pick’s Central
Idea of Christianity, p.p. 233-235.
If, as has been truly said, this is something “to be verified by
experience,” it can be verified by the experience of others properly
attested, as well as by our own. For example, see Wesley’s Journals,
Biographies of Bramwell, Hester Ann Rogers, William Carvolso, Ac.
‘ Suddenly return, and never,
Never more, Thy temples leave.”
Wesley’s Hymns, 385.
NOTE IV.
“ Perfect sanctification.” The phrase is Dr. Pope’s, and so is the
teaching. Compendium, Ed., 1875, p. 512.
“ The counteraction of sin is entire and complete in man and upon
earth : the other world is the sphere of fruition, and judgment. There
is no hint given in the Scriptural history of redemption that the finished
triumph of the deliverer from sin is never to be known in this world.
Full deliverance from sin is both required and promised as the prepara-
tion for the presence of God.” P. 525.
“ Purification from all sin, entire consecration to God, and a state
of holiness leaving no room for imperfection, are all found in the central
and supreme prayer of St. Paul,” (Eph. iii. 14-21.) . . . .
It also shows why the doctrine is so much misapprehended; neither the
asking nor the thinking of the Church —especially the latter-—has kept
up to the high standard of Gospel privilege. Scripture presents a sinless
state as actually attained in this life. Perfect love casteth out fear.”
P. 526.
“ The notion that we are finally separated from sin only when
separated from the body is a subtle relic of Gnosticism
nor is there any trace of a purgatorial purification after death. The
only outer-court of preparation is the present life. The Scripture speaks
of no water-pots set for purifying, no final baptism at the gate of heaven.
We read of the final gratification of all unsatisfied hope, save that of
deliverance from sin. We hear before hand the rejoicings of Paradise :
they do not exult over sin as at length destroyed. Among the prophe-
cies concerning the final blessedness we find that there shall he no more
curse —the penalty of sin—but not that there shall be no more sin.” P.
527.
An unbroken, perfect, uninterrupted concentration of all the
faculties on God is possible in itself, and it is possible on earth.” P.
529.
“ The Apostle always prays as for an attainable blessing.” P. 530.
“In the judgment of the Christian Church, many in almost every
community and every age have been saints made perfect in holiness, and
self-renunciation, and charity, whosfe record is with God.” P. 531.


The remainder of the morning’s Session was devoted to Prayer and
Testimony. The following, amongst others, spoke :
Rev, T. R. McMichael (Crookwell) said the President had taken
a good portrait of himself before he received entir-e sanctification. tie
enjoyed that blessing soon after his conversion, but, not having a clear
intellectual conception of it, he lost it. When Mr. Inskip came to the
colony he heard him in that church. On the invitation being given for
seekers to go forward he felt he ought to go. Satan told him he would
forfeit his ministerial dignity if he did. Could he, as a minister, be
seen in the humbling position of a seeker at the penitent form 1 But
he found that it was with his dignity as it was with Jonah. The
mariners tried hard to get to land; but it was no use while Jonah was
in the ship. They had to throw him overboard. And so with his
ministerial dignity. He found it must go, or the storm within his soul
would never cease. Thank God, he conquered his pride, and soon
obtained the great blessing. They knew he had been to England on
account of his health, and returned in a far worse condition than when
he started from the colony. He just took himself and all his ailments
to Christ, and trusted Him for both bodily and spiritual strength, and
since then he had working power such as he never possessed before.
Rev. Robert Allen (Windsor) said : I thank God that He has
enlarged my heart to run in the way of His commandments. It is
only about three weeks since I rejoiced to realise the sanctifying power
of the Saviour’s blood. Some days after, through the consciousness of
mistakes and infirmities, I was tempted to doubt that the blessing I
had received was not that of entire sanctification, but simply a renewed
application of the blood of Jesus. Still I clung to the Cross, and strove
to say, “I will believe, I do believe, that Jesus saves me now ; ” and
one clay last week, as I was going to my knees, there came, as it were,
a flash of light to my soul that melted me to tenderness and love, and
filled me with peace and joy. Prom the time of my conversion I
believe I have had, theoretically, a clear conception of this doctrine, as
taught in the Scriptures and in our standards and biographies; and
from time to time, while urging it as a present attainment by faith, I
have felt that I was preaching to myself. Sometimes, in wrestling with
God for a higher experience of grace, I have seemed to be on the verge
of obtaining the blessing; but my soul has shrunk from making the
final grasp of faith which was needed to make the enjoyment mine. I
have feared to say—
“ ’Tis done ; thou dost this moment save.
With full salvation bless. ”
Thank God, however, this morning 1 can claim by faith that “ the
blood of Jesus Christ, His Son, cleanseth me from all sin.”


SECOND SESSlON —Wednesday Afternoon.
The Rev. W. G. Taylor presided.
A number of letters from all parts of the colony were read, expres-
sive of deep sympathy with the Convention, and of desire for its
success.
The following Paper was read by the Rev. JOSEPH ORAM, on
“ENTIBE SANCTIFICATION AS DISTINCT FROM
REGENERATION.”
When we are brought to a knowledge of the truth as it is in
Christ, we ai’e brought into the enjoyment of certain blessings and
privileges all differing in their nature from each other, such as pardon,
adoption, the witness of the Spirit, and regeneration. By the grant of
forgiveness, guilt and condemnation are removed; by adoption we are
no longer aliens, but children of God ; by the witness of the Spirit we
become acquainted with the fact that we are pardoned, and adopted
into the favour and family of God. As the Holy Spirit bears testimony
with our spirit that we are children of God, He exerts upon the soul a
regenerating and transforming influence, and thereby we become new
creatures in Christ Jesus. All these blessings in their nature are
distinct from each other, but are conferred at the same time. When
God pardons, he adopts, and then by His Spirit He produces in the
believing soul a conviction that it is so, and that is attended with a new
creation.
The Apostle Paul puts adoption and the witness of the Spirit
together, when he says, “ For ye have not received the spirit of bondage
again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we
cry, Abba, Father. The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit,
that we are the children of God.” The Evangelist John puts adoption
and regeneration together, when he says, “ For as many as received
Him (Christ) to them gave He power to become the sons of God, even
to as many as believe on His name, which were born not of blood, nor
of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.” In the
one passage, we have set forth the blessing of adoption, in the other the
blessing of regeneration; in the one, the sonship of adoption, in the
other the sonship of resemblance. Children more or less resemble their
parents. Indeed, as a rule, they are the moral and physical pictures
of their parents. As regeneration differs from adoption—and it does
very essentially, the one (regeneration) being a change of nature, the
other a change of relation—so entire sanctification is essentially distinct
from regeneration.
But we must not lose sight of the fact that regeneration is a great
and blessed change. It must not be undervalued. Paul magnified the
mercy and grace of God in the change. “Of His mercy hath He saved
us by the washing of regeneration and the renewing of the Holy Ghost.”
It is indeed, a great change, because it is nothing less than a change from


darkness to light, from sin to holiness, from spiritual bondage to spiritual
liberty, from spiritual death to spiritual life; in a word, a translation
from the kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of God’s dear Son.
The love of sin, and the dominion and practice of sin are destroyed.
The person is a new creature in Christ Jesus. “Old things are passed
away, behold, all things are become new.” It may be asked, can any-
thing be better than that ? I readily reply, yes, and will illustrate
what I mean. A perfect man, having right principles and ways, is
certainly better than a new-born babe, however vigorous and comely
the babe ; may be the mother may not think so, but he is. A full-grown
tree is better than a shrub or plant, however healthy or promising it
may appear ; a ripe scholar is better than he who is confining himself
still to first principles, because he has gone on from those to perfection
in knowledge; an entirely pure fountain is better than one that is only
partially pure. In regeneration we have the first principles of the
Christian state and life, and if we are faithful to the grace given, we
have them in growth, and in gradual development, but in entire sancti-
fication we have them in a state of maturity. Entire sanctification is
distinct from regeneration in the following particulars. In the one
state, we love God imperfectly, in the other, the love of God is perfected
in us, and we love Him with all our heart, and mind, and soul, and strength.
In regeneration the graces and fruits of the Spirit are implanted in the
soul. In entire sanctification they exist in a state of completeness, and
abound in us, so that we are not barren nor unfniitful in the knowledge
of Christ. Our love is perfect love, casting out all tormenting fear; our
faith is the full assurance of faith • our hope is the full assurance of
hope. And all the passive virtues of religion acquire corresponding
maturity, such as patience, and subordination to the will of God. Again,
while regeneration implies the pardon of sin, and the destruction of the
love and dominion of sin, we are not saved from all indwelling sin.
inere still exist roots of bitterness, evil tempers and dispositions, spring-
ing up from time to time. On this point, I need only appeal to the
experience of those who have not as yet gone beyond the state of regen-
eration. One of our poets felt the trouble and discomfort of this when
he wrote the hymn, a part of which I quote—
“ Break off the yoke of inbred sin,
And fully set my spirit free ;
I cannot rest till pure within,
Till I am wholly lost in Thee.”
Entire sanctification is the complete destruction of this yoke of inbred
sin, as well as loving God with all the heart. Allow me to illustrate
the difference between the two states by a plain simile. Here are two
sheets or ponds of water : at first sight they appear equally pure; one
of them has all filth and dirt taken from it, the other has not, still it
looks clean and pure. You throw a stone into it, the water is disturbed,
and there are the rings ; not only so, but as the stone reaches the
bottom, the mud lying there is also disturbed, and a part of it comes up


and discolours the water. You throw a stone into the other, the water
is disturbed, and there are the rings, the inner and the outer rings, as in
the other instance ; but as the stone touches the bottom no mud, no dirt
comes up, for the simple reason that none is there, the pond is pure and
clean, thoroughly so.
It is too often the case that a merely justified person is not only
disturbed and agitated by certain events of his life, but there is a
display of unholy anger and sinful temper; but not so with the man
who has cleansed himself from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and is
entirely sanctified. He may have the very same kind of trials to con-
tend with in his outer life, and may be agitated and disturbed as the
other, because it is natural to feel and to be sensible of trial when it
comes upon us, however holy we may be. The perfect and supremely
holy man, Christ, was the subject of deep feeling and keen sensibility
in some of His trials. “If I have done evil, bear witness of the evil,
but if well, why smitest thou me ” 1 And He is represented as saying,
“ reproach hath broken my heart.” But in the whole, there was no
unholy or vindictive feeling or temper manifested ; so with all those
who have in them thoroughly the mind which was in Christ.
Mr. Samuel Hick, better known in the Methodist Church as
Sammy Hick, received the state ef entire holiness as distinct from regen
eration, thus : he was walking one day through a field; seeing a tree
cut down, and the roots still remaining in the ground, he said, “ In my
spiritual state lam like that tree ”; going on a little further he saw
another tree cut down, and the roots taken entirely out of the ground;
“ There,” he said, “ I want to be like that tree, to have all roots of
sin taken out of my soul, and by the grace of God I will be in such a
state.”
Usually, people are not entirely sanctified when they are regener-
ated. It is possible ; but, as a rule, it is not so. No doubt there
are exceptions. For instance, the penitent malefactor on the cross was
at once perfectly meetened for Heaven. The very day he was par-
doned he was entirely sanctified ; but that is not God’s usual method.
When, as sinners, we go first to God, we go as condemned criminals,
and pardon is the great object of our suit and the subject of our per-
sistent prayers. When we are forgiven we are introduced to that state
of grace in which we are expected to grow. Hence there is salvation
from the guilt, love, dominion, and practice of sin, without realising as
yet deliverance from the inbeing of sin. In other words, we may be in
a state of grace and favour with God, but at the same time not perfect
in the will of God. This is illustrated by the condition of churches in
the time of the Apostles.
The members of the church at Colosse were true Christians. The
Apostle Paul addressed them as such. He called them the “ elect of
God, holy, and beloved.” He spoke of them as having “put off the
old man with his deeds,” and as having “ put on the new man, which
is renewed in knowledge after the image of Him that created him.”


He thanked God for their faith in Christ, their love to the saints,
and for their hopes of Heaven. Still he addressed them as imperfect
Christians, and said, “ Epaphras saluteth you, always labouring fer-
vently for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and complete in
all the will of God.” Epaphras desired their Christian perfection, and
prayed that they might be perfected, which implies that they were not.
The Christians at Thessalonica were the joy and glory of the Apostles,
and Paul, in writing to them, said, “We thank Cod always for you,
remembering your work of faith, labour of love, and patience of hope
in our Lord Jesus Christ.” But, though they were thus Christians, he
treated them as imperfect Christians —as Christians only partially
sanctified. His prayer for them was, “ And the very God of peace
sanctify you wholly ; and I pray God your whole spirit, and soul, and
body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ,” distinctly teaching them that their sanctification was begun,
but as yet it was incomplete and imperfect. The Apostle Paul speaks
of newly-converted persons as babes—as new-born babes—needing
expansion and growth. In the Christian state there is the commence-
ment, then growth, then maturity, and then going on to the consumma-
tion of the whole in the kingdom of glory above. First children, then
young men, and then fathers. So that, as the condition of the young
men differs from that of the children, so the state of the fathers differs
from the other two. But it is too often the case that people are babes
when they should be young men ; and some are young men when they
should be fathers in God’s Israel.
Many are weak and infantile in their Christian experience and
life when they should be robust and vigorous, or, as the Apostle puts it,
“ Strengthened with might by His spirit in the inner man,” meaning,
mightily strong in the inner man. The difference between regeneration
and entire sanctification must be apprehended by us, or else we shall
not see, I fear, our exalted privileges in Christ, and shall therefore stop
short of the possession and enjoyment of that which the rich grace and
the abundant mercy of God have provided for us in the present life,
and thus settle down to a comparatively low state of spiritual
experience.
We should see and feel that it is as much our duty to seek to be in
this state of Christian completeness, as it is the duty of unregenerate
people to seek to be reconciled to God, and to be His obedient children,
because there are Scriptures—indeed, Divine precepts —requiring as
directly and positively the one as the other, making' it as much our
duty, as believers, to obey the heavenly call to entire holiness, as it is
the duty of unbelievers to obey the call to repent and believe.
This is an important particular that must be understood and never
lost sight of. Entire holiness is a doctrine of the Wesleyan Church,
and has been propounded in her ministry, hymns, and literature, from
the first.


Whether this state of perfect holiness is gradually acquired or is
instantaneous is a matter that hardly belongs to my subject to discuss ;
but I would just say that it is both. It is gradual , because the very
desire to possess it is the result of increased spiritual quickening by ,the
Holy Ghost, and a sign of growth in grace. We cannot think and pray
about it rightly without adding to our spirituality. It is only those
who are growing in grace who seek entire holiness; and it is an
evidence they are growing in grace. Lukewarm members of the Church
of Christ certainly do not. It is instantaneous , because there must be a
time—a moment —when the man of sin within us expires, and the foun-
tain of iniquity is entirely dried up; and that moment is, when coming
to Christ in earnest prayer, and in lively and implicit faith, for nothing
else but to be cleansed from all sin, we are made happily conscious that
we are filled with God, and now love Him with all our heart, just as
when we came first in penitence and faith to Christ for pardon we felt
all at once, in a moment, that God loved us, and that our souls were
happy.
Entire sanctification is not only a distinct and a higher state of
Christian experience, but of Christian devotion and usefulness. Perfect
love not only casts out all fear that hath torment, but proportionately
constrains and prompts its possessor to zeal and activity in the
Saviour’s kingdom. Not only are his disposition and determination to
serve Christ perfected, but his spiritual capability to do it is enlarged,
so that his external devotion to the work and service of Christ corres-
ponds with his internal perfected spiritual life. Thus he stands evan-
gelically perfect and complete in all the will of God, and is what God
would have him be, and does what God would have him do. I say,
evangelically perfect, because I mean a perfection enjoyed in a sinful
world like this, but redeemed by Christ—a perfection consonant with
many personal defects, imperfections, and infirmities, with much tempta-
tion, sorrow, and ignorance, and with constant liability to err.
In closing my remarks, I desire to say that entire sanctifica-
tion is a superior state for spiritual growth. The tree is in
deeper and richer soil. It has more of the life-giving influ-
ence of the sun—the Sun of righteousness —and is more abundantly
refreshed by the upper and the nether springs. The soul now is
thoroughly rooted and grounded in love, and is in a better condition
to grow up into Christ in all things, than when in a merely regene-
rated state. In the world, the more a man gets the more he is able to
get, because acquisition is power. If a man has wealth every addition
he makes to it increases his power to add. The more learning a
student acquires, the greater is his capacity for acquiring • and so in the
spiritual life. Every degree of grace is power, and power to get more.
“ To him that hath shall be given, and he shall have more abundantly.”
So that the more we have, the more abundantly we receive.
Continual progress in the state of entire holiness is a necessary
condition to abide in the state. It will not admit of being stationary


any more than will a lower state of grace. Mr. Wesley said, “ How
much soever any man has attained, or in how high a degree soever he
is perfect, he has still need to “ grow in grace,” and daily to advance in
the knowledge of God, his Saviour.”
It is unreasonable and unphilosophical, as well as unscriptural, to
argue that if we are entirely sanctified we cannot increase in holiness.
It involves no absurdity, no contradiction, but rather is in accord with
our experience in our ordinary life. Here is a tree. As you jook at
it you call it a perfect tree ; but you do not mean that it cannot still
grow, that it cannot be taller, that it cannot multiply its foliage and
increase in bulk. Here is a man. As you look at him and listen to
him you pronounce him a perfect man. He has the age, the strength,
and the intelligence of a man ; still you do not mean for one moment
that he cannot increase in size, in strength, and in intelligence. Here
is a scholar. As you become acquainted with him you call him a per-
fect scholar; but you would deem it absurd for any one to say that he
cannot be wiser than he is—that he cannot possibly add to his intelli-
gence or information.
Now, it is no more difficult for me to understand that perfection in
our spiritual life admits of growth any more than does life in the
instances I have named.
The sainted Fletcher, of Madeley, England, Wesley’s designated
successor, said, “ A perfect Christian grows far more than a feeble
believer, whose growth is still obstructed by the shady thorns of sin,
and by the draining suckers of iniquity.” Indeed, in the case of the
angels and the archangels, and the spirits of the just made perfect in
heaven, there is no holiness nor happiness that does not admit of
growth. As in the kingdom of glory, so in the kingdom of grace.
“The kingdoms are but one.” Let us not hesitate and cavil, but go up
at once and possess the good land, for we are well able to overcome.
Rev. Jos. Woodhouse (York-street) said there was a tendency
on the part of some who enthusiastically published the doctrine of
entire holiness to undervalue the unspeakably precious work of regener-
ation, and he was glad that Mr. Oram had referred to that. There was
also the danger of imagining that when Christian perfection was
attained there was no further growth possible; but let it be remem-
bered that there was greater progress possible in the case of those who
sin, they could the more rapidly go on to maturity.
Rev. J. b. Cutler (M. E. Church of [J. S. A.), expressed his
feelings of gratitude in being permitted to engage in this blessed work
of piomoting Christian holiness. The Convention was a work of God.
He had begun it, and He w’ould do a wonderful work in perfecting His


people, and then make them a mighty power in the salvation of souls.
Some persons said that drawing this distinction between regeneration
and entire sanctification reflected upon God, that if he did a work it
was perfect, that conversion was His work, and was therefore perfect.
He had known such persons first pained by having sanctification spoken
of as “a second blessing” (and so termed by Mr. Wesley), and then
brought into the enjoyment, and brought to confess how glorious the
second blessing was. The point he was struck with as regarded the
work of grace in the human heart was that God permitted man to co-
operate with Him in that wonderful salvation which began by taking a
soul all stained with sin and converting it, and ended in that soul
reaching the glory of Heaven. Coming as a sinner, he cried for mercy,
and received pardon ; but he discovered his inbred corruption, and was
dreadfully alarmed that sin still lurked within. Then God would have
him co-operate with Himself in the work of cleansing by heartily sor-
rowing over his inward corruption, and applying to the blood of Jesus
for his full cleansing. Thus was he enabled to glorify God in every
stage of his salvation. Mr. Cutler had known a great host who had
crossed the flood, as well as many on this side of it, enjoying this second
blessing, and all he had spoken with had glorified God because they had
been made co-operators in the work of holiness.
Hev. S. Wilkinson (Petersham) was interested and profited by
the paper. Some thoughts had passed through his mind concerning
Christ dwelling in the heart as the ground, the fountal source of sancti-
fication. Paul said, “ I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me.”
Christ was the grand source of the light and life and power he enjoyed.
The Apostle spoke of this in several places, and the Saviour Himself
said, “If a man love Me he will keep My words, and My Father will
love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.”
It was the indwelling presence of God that must reform and complete
the work of holiness.
Miss Leonard rejoiced that while Mr. Oram’s paper plainly set
forth the glorious experience of justification it showed also that in the
regenerated heart were the remains of indwelling sin, from which the
believer had full deliverance when entirely sanctified. As to whether
it was possible for both regeneration and entire sanctification to be
received at the same time, Mr. Wesley had spoken of some receiving
the two blessings the same day. Mr. Oram said that the work was
both gradual and instantaneous ; but that, of course, meant that it was
both gradual and instantaneous in the same ferson. We come to the
point gradually; but there is a moment when sin ceases to have a
being. As Mr. Wesley puts it, a man is said to be dying gradually, yet
death does not take place till the instant the soul is separated from the
body. In like manner he may be dying to sin for seme time; yet he is
not dead to sin till sin is separated from his soul, and in that instant he
lives the full life of love.


After a brief service of praise and prayer,
Mr. WILLIAM DAVIES, J.P., of Goulburn, read the following
Paper on
“ENTIRE CONSECRATION THE HUMAN CONDITION OE
CHRISTIAN PERFECTION ”
This important subject is for the consideration of converted persons:
for those who are dear about the fact of their having passed from death
unto life, and who have the assurance of faith. Not to the multitudes,
not to the pharisees, not to publicans and sinners, did our Saviour say,
“ Be ye therefore perfect,” but to His disciples.
Entire consecration seems so divine a thing : perfection so lofty an
altitude, that we are in danger of thinking and acting as though every-
thing merely human must stand afar off, not daring to approach. Bow-
ing our heads we reverently say—
“ Thou hidden love of God whose height,
Whose depth unfathomed no man knows ;
I see from far Thy glorious light,
Inly I sigh for Thy repose. ”
For thirty years that was chiefly my attitude towards the great truth
we are considering ; and how strongly I am in sympathy with seekers
of full redemption I cannot tell. To those who are searching anxiously
for the truth I desire to be helpful.
If God would of His sovereign will and power just take and cleanse
our hearts, some might be disposed to allow Him to do the w r ork. Did
God so convert us ? Or was it after we had felt the sting of sin, and
longed for pardon, and sought it with tears, and cast ourselves at the
footstool of Mercy, and received Christ into our heart by faith? The
human condition of salvation is here seen plainly, and so, w 7 hen we seek
to be freed from inborn sin, to have heart-purity, to advance to Christian
perfection, there will be—there must be—just as surely the human
condition of entire consecration. We shall never be sanctified unless
we wish to be; and there must grow in our hearts a deep and ever
deepening conviction of our need of something more than came to us
when we first believed. Meanwhile our condition is not satisfactory.
We are anxious about the use we make of the talents entrusted to us,
and the future and righteous inquisition into all our conduct. Our
experience is dull, our service formal and cold, and we hide away in
our hearts the thing which hinders all our life-work. This may end in
backsliding, but thank Cod it need not so end, but in earnest desire,
purpose, and effort to know the will of God. We fling away our belief
in our goodness, and we see and feel our inability to make perfect our
extremely imperfect character. When this view of our case is clearly
realised we shall be led to exclaim—
“ Break off the yoke of inbred sin,
And fully set my spirit free ;
I cannot rest till pure within,
Till I am wholly lost in Thee.”


We have in the last line of that verse the idea of self-surrender, but
we do not yet convert it into fact. Our motive is not free from selfish-
ness. We are seeking the blessing desired, partly at least, if not wholly,
that we may be delivered from unrest; that we may be happier ; that
we may have more joy in service. This will not do. We must see how
far below the Bible standard—Holiness—we have been living; how
shamefully we have neglected the command, “ Be ye therefore perfect
how this has robbed God, as well as ourselves and others, and at the
foot of the Cross we shall say—
Forgive, and make my nature whole,
My inbred malady remove ;
To perfect health restore my soul,
To perfect holiness and love.
This is an excellent prayer, but it is not all. Many people do, methinks,
halt here. We must go forward. If purity of heart be what we need
shall we not comply with the earnest request, “ Give me thy heart,”
and will not the Apostle’s exhortation to the Romans seem like a new
revelation—“l beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God,
to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which
is your reasonable service. And be not fashioned according to this
world : but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye
may prove what is the will of God, even the thing which is good and
acceptable and perfect.” “ Present yourselves ” —according to Hr.
Adam Clarke—“to be as wholly the Lord’s property as the whole burnt
offering was, no part being devoted to any other use.” The body, the
whole man, mind and flesh to be given to God; and that he is to
consider himself no more his own, but the entire property of His Maker.’j
_ But this manifestly involves a great deal. This voluntary conse-
cration, whole, complete, carries with it a life of active, patient, willing,
dauntless, holy service. I cannot tell you all this entire consecration
involves, but it will be revealed to you by the Holy Ghost. To some
extent consecration is a venture. We may in some degree rely on the
experience of others; but we must trust the Lord Jesus Christ to act
righteously by us. We must not bargain but give up: not compound
but surrender: not square and shape our act by human guidance so
much as deal, in this crisis of our spiritual life, directly with God.
Now if we have come right up to this point, and are convinced
that the entering into or remaining out of “perfect love” must be
decided now between us and God only, let us see who is responsible for
the next step. What is the next step 1 Faith. The mere mention of
this word answers the question about responsibility. The sacrifice laid
upon the altar we must believe that God, for Christ’s sake, accepts us
we— accepts me now. Yes, just as the prayer came swift to the lips of
Peter, “ Lord, save me,” and the Christ caught him by the hand, so soon
as (being entirely consecrated) from our heart we say “ Lord, I believe,”


doth peace flow into our soul, and we can say with a spirit which is
restful, and with a deeply thankful heart —
“ Tis done, the great transaction’s done.
Steadfastly believe this, and God, the Holy Spirit, will give you assur-
ance, joy, and power; and “ye therefore shall be perfect, as your
heavenly Father is perfect.”
Rev. J. E. Cutler referred to the pleasure he had in listening to
the paper just read. With regard to consecration being different in dif-
ferent persons, Mr. Cutler spoke as follows :—We are differently con-
stituted and related in our lives, and, when we come to close in with
God for a clean heart, the Blessed Spirit will show us what is involved
in entire consecration as He may not show it to anyone else; so that
when entering into this blessed experience it will be found that all that
has been heard and read does not exactly present all the features of
each individual case. There are many things in the entire work of
salvation which only Cod and the seething soul can understand ; but
the Saviour will inform everyone that sits at His feet willing to be
taught.
Rev. J. K. Turner (Cosford) thought Miss Havergal’s well-known
hvmn—
Take my life, and let it be
Consecrated, Lord, to Thee ;
Take my moments and my days,
Let them flow in ceaseless praise, &c.,
simply and fully expressed Mr. Davies’s theme. That hymn expressed
his own feeling and desire.
Rev. R. Allen understood that the same spirit of consecration
was required in entire santification as in conversion, the only difference
being that in sanctification the Lord required the intelligent sacrifice of
everything that the enlightened believer possessed, while in conversion
the sinner surrendered himself just as he was. He was pleased that the
paper demanded a consecration which implied an earnest and intense
experience.
Rev. M. Maddern (Wallsend) said our life is a gift from God, not
a necessary and independent thing. We have numerous illustrations of
how divine and human co-operation takes place. The materials of the
painter are God s gift; but to produce a picture there must be the
effort of the artist. The stone in the quarry is stored by God ; but
before a substantial and stately structure can arise there must be the
design of the architect and the labour of the builder. There are divine
and human elements in man’s salvation. God is willing to do all in us ;
but He cannot perfect us in holiness until we have observed the condi-
tions required—utter self-surrender—the giving up of all.


Rev. H. Mack (Redfern) thought that some little explanation
should be given concerning the injunction, “ Be ye therefore perfect,
even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect We must look at
the context for the full meaning of it. Our Lord had been enjoining
upon His disciples to love their enemies, to be kind-hearted, charitable,
and merciful to all, taking God himself as their pattern, who is kind
unto the unthankful and the exil. In Luke the passage read, “Be ye
therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful.” Mr. Mack felt
all language about impulses, and sentiment, and experience of religion,
was only worth anything as it was found illustrated in the practical
life. When a deputation waited upon Mr. Spurgeon to ask his aid in
a movement for the promotion of holiness in London, he said he was in
perfect sympathy with their purpose, and wished it success; but he
said, “To be perfectly honest with you, I must say I know that some
of you are very wealthy—some actually princes in wealth—and there is
an untold amount of misery and poverty in our midst which consecrated
wealth would greatly obviate. I think, dear friends, if you were per-
fectly in earnest you would follow our Lord’s injunction to the young
man, ‘lf thou wouldst he perfect , go and sell that thou hast and give to
the poor,' &c. I think as soon as you do this I should believe in the
sincerity of your movement, and would enter into it.” They would
hardly be prepared to accept Mr. Spurgeon’s dictum ; but there was a
deal of force in it. With all their desire for a higher work of
grace, there must be a corresponding practical result in their lives.
Rev. J. W. Brown (Bourke-street) confessed he had a difficulty as
to the faith that brings full salvation. Is it an act of the mind or soul 1
or is it rather the life of the soul ? Paul said, “ I live, yet not I; ”
and that is how he (Mr. Brown) understood it. “ I live by the faith of
the Son of God, and when my faith slackens I don’t live.” It seemed
to him that the sanctification enjoined upon them in giving up their life
to Jesus was a momentary act of the soul.
Rev. J . S. Austin (Singleton) wished to emphasise that element in
entire consecration which was the giving up of the will. In very many
cases a certain object will be presented to the mind, and the question
will arise whether that can be entirely surrendered. Can the will be
fully resigned to God, letting him do just as He pleases with the soul in
everything. This was a vital point. He believed it was possible.
Miss Leonard said the subject of Mr, Davies’s paper assumed, of
course, that Christian perfection is an experience to be obtained.
Gathered together as Methodists, they were not discussing whether such
an experience was possible or not. Their standards and the Scriptures
clearly settled that. The question that interested them was what was
their part in this matter. It was not a question of bargaining with
God, but of giving up. When the child of God reached the point of full
surrender, and was on full stretch for the kingdom, then was he ful-
filling the human conditions of Christian perfection.


Rev. M. Maddern’s experience was that when a man was really
troubled about this matter there was a certain amount of difficulty in
connection with it. He himself rebelled against the doctrine at first.
Feelings of revulsion possessed him. He had a number of metaphysical
objections; but he found he had to swallow them, and submit to be
taught as a little child. He might be troubling himself about the bread
he ate, questioning whether every separate constituent was perfectly
uninjurious, analyzing and investigating, and resolving that unless it
were all satisfactory he could not bring himself to use it. He might
do this until he was starved. And in regard to this great blessing of
Christian perfection, we might keep ourselves out of the enjoyment of
it by our questionings and doubts. Whether it was called an act of
faith or a life of faith, they must come to the distinction the Bible
makes—the difference between loving God and loving Him with all our
heart, between giving ourselves to God and placing ourselves fully in
His hands.
Mr. W. Davies said that if the will were not given up nothing
was. He had as much self-will as most people ; but he found he could
not lead a life of holiness by the mere power of the will. There must
be the power of the Holy Spirit. That which made the Apostles the
mighty instruments they were was the baptism of the Holy Ghost,
Had they been told to go to Jerusalem after the Ascension and keep
as quiet as possible, do honestly, live peaceably, and regenerate the
world, when would the world have been regenerated? No, they had
to tarry for the baptism of the Spirit, and, endued with that, they
were powei’ful for good. The question of consecration must be
settled between the individual soul and God, and without the Divine
Spirit the consecration could not be made.
Rev. W. G. Taylor could not say that ever since he was con-
verted those words were true of him, “ I live, yet not I, but Christ
liveth in me,” &c. His experience after he believed had frequently
been similar to that depicted in the 7th chapter of Romans—striving
hard to give up all for Christ, and finding something rising up
up in his mind that he could not get rid of. Reading many books on
the subject of holiness, he became puzzled ; but after studying Mr.
Wesley’s “ Christian Perfection” lately, and going through the hymn
book, he had got light and understanding. Eventually he was con-
vinced the difficulty was not of the head, but of the heart. He had
not been prepared to make the full surrender. His reputation, such
as it was, had been a great difficulty, and as he got to the point,
“I will surrender my reputation, ray all, O Lord, to Thee,” thank
God he realised the passage true, “ The blood oj Jesus Christ cleanseth
Jrom cdl sin.” There is a human condition of sanctification, and that
was what had kept him out of the blessing. He thanked God for
its present realization.


THIRD SESSlON— Wednesday Evening,
In spite of the rain, the attendance at this
PUBLIC SERVICE
was excellent. Prayer was offered hy Rev. T. R. McMichael, and by
Messrs. Smith and Kelly. After an address by the President,
Rev. E. C. Pritchard, F.G.S. (St. Peters), delivered an address,
in which he thanked God that “ the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who, though He was rich, xjet for our sakes became poor, that we, through
His poverty, might he made rich,” was not in vain. Some of those
present were becoming more rich in Christian experience, in Chris-
tian joy and hope, because stronger in their faith in the fulness and
freeness of the salvation treasured up in Christ Jesus. Thank God
for what he was doing for them and in them. They all believed in
the power and privilege of prayer. The history of Methodism was
so full of evidence of the willingness of God to answer the united
prayer of His people that none of them doubted that if they made
any matter affecting God’s kingdom a subject of earnest and united
supplication, that He would hear them. He sincerely hoped there
would be a practical outcome from the meetings of that Convention,
in the formation of a union for prayer. There were many matters
that called for their attention as Christians that would be proper sub-
jects for supplication—that God would preserve to us the Sabbath,
that he would stem the tide of infidelity, and that He would dispose
those who were appointed to rule over them to set examples of godli-
ness and righteousness before the people.
Rev. R. Allen said he felt this Methodist Convention for the
spread of Christian holiness was being ordered of God, and would be a
blessing to them all. A hundred years ago this was a doctrine peculiar
to Methodism. The early preachers proclaimed it with all their power,
and those who most constantly preached it were the most honoured
and successful. It is now no longer a peculiarity of Methodism, but is
being proclaimed in other churches. He feared, in looking back over
the history of their church in this colony, they had not been as
faithful as they should have been to this great truth committed to
them by God. Their success in the future would depend upon their
fidelity to that doctrine. His soul’s desire was that they should not
rest short of a whole-hearted and entire consecration to God and His
service. The necessity for entire sanctification arises from the inward
depravity of human hearts. Every Christian believer knows that
though he has been delivered from the committal of sin he has within
himself the risings of pride and evil desires, which cause him trouble,
and rob him of Christian usefulness. Then he has the desire for this
to be removed. Personal purity was the necessity for successful Chris-
tian work. They all felt a sympathy with David’s prayer, “ Create in
me a clean heart, 0 God. . , , Then will I teach trans -


gressors Thy ways, and sinners shall he converted unto Thee.” There
was also not only the consciousness of inward depravity, but the sense
of God’s infinite holiness, pressing the necessity for entire sanctification.
God is holy, and he commanded them to be holy. They needed to
realise a clear view of God’s holiness, such as would make them say,
“ I loathe myself when God I see, and into nothing fall.” Isaiah,
before the glorious vision in the temple, cried out, “ Woe is me, for
lam undone, because lam a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the
midst of a people of unclean lips ; for mine eyes have seen the King,
the Lord of Hosts.” But, touched by the live coal from the altar,
and inspired by the Spirit of God, he was ready to say, “ Here am /,
Lord, send me.” Oh ! that all the Lord’s people were prophets, that
they could feel such a touch as would remove all natural timidity out
of the way, and make them ready to go anywhere and do anything
for the salvation of souls. Before this could be there must be personal
consecration. “ Who, then, is willing to consecrate his service this day
unto the Lord ? ” “Be ye clean, ye that hear the vessels of the Lord.”
As workers they must be pure, putting on the robes of salvation, just
as the priests of the old dispensation were required to be ceremonially
clean. Is not the world waiting for sanctified workers? Has not
the world need of Christians baptised with the Holy Ghost and fire,
to bring spiritual life and power to dying men ? As the Apostles tar-
ried for the power of the Spirit, and by Him were fitted to go forth
and preach the Gospel and Christianise the world, so they themselves
needed to seek to be filled with the Divine Spirit. For himself, he
could say he realized the efficacy of the blood of Jesus cleansing him
from all sin. Sixteen years ago he preached his trial sermon in that
York-street Church, and had never since spoken in that place. He
thanked God his theme to-night was “ Holiness unto the Lord.” He
exhorted all present to come in the spirit of the words—
Take my soul and body’s powers,
Take my memory, mind, and will,
All my goods and all my hours,
All I know and all I feel,
All I think, or speak, or do ;
Take my heart, but make it new.
And, trusting in the Saviour, who was willing to say, “ / will; he
thou clean,” the great blessing might be theirs to-night.
Rev. W. C. Hughes (Hawkesbury River) said he felt he ought
not to miss the opportunity of saying what was his exact position in
regard to this very great question before them. He had long been a
believer in the doctrine of entire sanctification. He believed it was
very fully taught in the Word of God, and for a considerable time
lie bad been a very earnest seeker of it. He wanted to possess that
which he saw was his great privilege to possess. Some would perhaps
wonder at his saying this; but his presence at the Convention was
rather as a seeker than as a speaker on the subject. There were


those present who had sought, and found the blessing. Others, like
himself, had come to get the help of the prayers and sympathy of
‘God’s people, that they might take away this great blessing with them.
Sometimes he had preached from texts that teach this privilege, and
he had sometimes fancied he enjoyed it; but the facts of every-day
life, the trials and temptations, revealed that there were some seeds
of sin remaining, some roots of bitterness which much impaired his
usefulness and happiness. He had thought of Oolossians iii., 1, and
of the purity of Heaven. If the Apostle was addressing the church
to day his exhortation would come to him, “You have risen with
Christ, passed from the death of sin; then seek those things which
are above—seek the purity of Heaven. Nothing entereth there that
defileth or maketh a lie.” And the question came to him, Have you
the purity of Heaven? and he felt he had it not. He thought also
of the love of Heaven, God’s perfect love of His children, Christ’s love
to sinners ; and he asked himself, T)o you love God with all your
heart, and your neighbour as yourself? and, after close examination
of character and conduct, he could not come to a satisfactory answer.
He thought, again, of the obedience of Heaven, and he found the
best illustration of this in the coming of Christ, “ Who made Himself
of no reputation , . . . and, being found in fashion of a
man, He humbled Himself , and became obedient unto death , even the
death of the cross.” Then the question was put to him, Have you
the obedience of Heaven ? Are you perfectly submissive to the
Divine arrangements concerning yourself? And as he thought of his
murmuring spirit and fault-finding heart he was again obliged to
answer in the negative. And when he thought of the field of use-
fulness before him, and of the few souls he could point to as having
been led by him to Christ, he was made to feel that the one great
business of his life was to seek that perfect love that casteth out fear.
He thought he had a perfectly correct apprehension of the doctrine
in his mind, and what he wanted now was to realise it as his experi-
ence, to have all he had lost in God. As a seeker of this blessing, he
had come to the Convention, and might God grant it to him, and to all.
Miss Leonard said ; My heart gives glory to God to-night, and the
one word that has been upon my mind for the last few moments is,
“ Believe ye that lam able to do this ? ” I have been led to feel that
after all that has been said, after the earnest words of conviction, and
testimony, and desire, that have been spoken from this platform to-
night, there are those here whose hearts are yearning to know this
great salvation, and to whom the Saviour is saying, “ Believe ye that I
am able to do this ? ” Before a man can be settled upoxr any point
regarding his salvation he must have a foundation for his faith. This
foundation, with reference to entire cleansing, is found in the Word of
God. There is the word of command, “Be ye holy , for lam holy ; ”
and the word of promise, “ Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you ,


and ye shall he clean. From all your filthiness and from all your idols
will I cleanse you. A new heart also will I give unto you, and a new
spirit will I put within you,” &c. And that other word of promise—
“lf tve confess our sins He is faithf ul and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from cdl unrighteousness,” —so familiar, that I often
fear God’s people fail to get out of it its full meaning, “ faithful to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness.” Added to these, we might go on
until this evening hour were more than closed with commands, and pro-
mises, and exhortations, that would set us all on fire for this full sal-
vation. And then lam sure that in the hymns we sing we are led to
believe most fully that Christ is able to do this. Charles Wesley
sings—
“ Lord, I believe a rest remains
To all Thy people known,
A rest where pure enjoyment reigns,
And Thou art loved alone ;
A rest where all our soul’s desire
Is fixed on things above,
Where fear and sin, and grief expire,
Cast out by perfect love.”
You have sung it ; have you believed it 1 Another hymn puts it
clearly—
-0 ! come and dwell in me
Spirit of power within !
And bring the glorious liberty
From sorrow, fear, and sin.”
If a man have “ liberty from sin ” how can he fear ?
“The seed of sin’s disease
Spirit of health remove,
Spirit of perfect holiness,
Spirit of perfect love.”
Again, if our faith falter, there are the words of that grand 401st
hymn—
“ All things are possible to him
That can in Jesu’s name believe,” &c.
T\ ith this foundation for our faith from the Scriptures, and the help
to faith derived from our hymns, are we not ready to hear once more
the Saviour say, “ Believe ye that I am able to do this ? ” and do not alt
our hearts respond, “ Lord, I believe Thou art able” 1 I do not
believe that we, as Methodists, praise God enough for our theology. It
comes so straight to us from His own Word. Have we not in that also
a strong help for our faith 1 I have here a volume of what Mr. Wesley
has said on this question of Christian perfection. I fear we have not
sufficiently studied his writings. Let me quote a few extracts :
Mr. Wesley to Rev. Joseph Benton, 1770
• • • . “You allow the whole thing which I contend for —an entire
deliverance from sin, a recovery of the whole image of God, the loving God with
all our heart, soul, and strength. And you believe God is able to give you this —


yea, to give it you iu an instant. You trust He will. Oh ! hold fast this also,
this blessed hope which he has wrought in your heart, and with all zeal and dili-
gence confirm the brethren—l. In holding fast that whereto they have attained,
namely, the remission of all their sins by faith in a bleeding Lord. 2. In expect-
ing a second change, whereby they shall be saved from all sin, and perfected in
love.” Works, vol. vii. , p. 71.
To Miss H. A. Roe, 1776 :
. . . “ Certainly, before the root of sin is taken away believers live
above the power of it. Yet, what a difference between the first love and the pure
love.” Works, vol. vii., p. 190.
To Miss Ritchie, 1872 :
“That point, entire salvation from inbred sin, can hardly be insisted upon,
either in preaching or prayer without a particular blessing.’’ Vol. vii., p. 181.
To F. Garrittson, 1781
“ And it will be well, as soon as any of them find peace with God, to exhort
them to go on unto perfection. The more explicitly and strongly you press all
believers to aspire after full sanctification as attainable now by simple faith, the
more the whole work of God will prosper,” Vol. vii., p. 184.
Again, iu his sermons he often dwelt upon this subject. He says :
. . . “Whosoever preaches perfection (as the phrase is), i.e.,
asserts that it is attainable in this life, runs great hazard of being accounted by
them as being worse than a heathen man or a publican. And hence some have
advised wholly to lay aside the use of those expressions, ‘ because they have given
so great offence.’ But are they not found in the oracles of God?
Whatsoever God hath spoken that will toe speak, whether men will hear or Jorbear,
knowing that then alone can any minister of Christ be ‘pure from the blood of all
men” when he hath ‘ not shunned to declare unto them all the counsel of God.’”
Sermons, vol. i., p. 355.
And he often preached upon the subject:—
. . . “Monday, 2, at five, I began a course of sermons on Christian
perfection.” Journal, Nov., 1761.
. . . “In the morning, Wednesday, I explained at large the nature
of Christian perfection. ... It remains only to experience what we
believe.” Journal, April, 1764 .
“At five in the morning I began a course of sermons on Christian perfection,
if haply that thirst after it might return, which was so general a few years ago.
Since that time how deeply have we grieved the Holy Spirit of God.” Journal,
Dec., 1767.
. . . “At Macclesfield I preached on Hebrews xii., 14— 1 Without
holiness no man shall see the Lord.’ ... I hope none of them will
hereafter dream of going to Heaven by any faith which does not produce holi-
ness.” Journal, April, 1777.
To Mr. Merryweather, 1762 :
“ Where Christian perfection is not strongly and explicitly preached there
is seldom any remarkable blessing from God, and, consequently, little to the
society, and little life in the members of it. Till you press the
believers to expect full salvation now you must not look for any revival.” Works,
vol. vi., p. 761.
1 imagine there are hearts resting on the basis of God’s Word, and on
the hymns, and now, encouraged by these words from our theology, are
ready to say, “ Lord, I believe ; how can I experience this in my own
soul 1 How may I realise this 1 ” By simply meeting the conditions
that God has laid down. As we read the Scriptures, every phase of
salvation is conditioned by faith ; but before a soul can exercise faith
for cleansing there must be his coming on believing ground by bringing
himself to the attitude wherein he can exercise the faith. This attitude


that the soul must assume is that of entire devoteraent to God. As was
said, the sinner surrenders himself to God that he may receive pardon.
The believer, being now alive in Christ, consecrates himself that he may
receive cleansing from the indwelling sin of his nature. I am convinced
that the consecration of a being to God makes, as it were, a vacuum.
Someone has said that ‘ grace, as well as nature, abhors a vacuumand
so, when consecration is completed, the soul, without an effort, believes,
and salvation fills his soul. Ido not believe that any person hungering
and thirsting after this blessing will be a long time waiting after he has
made an entire consecration to God. Almost uniformly, where the
soul is on full stretch for inward holiness, and yielding all he has to
God, the faith is given to realise “Thou doest it.” While you have
thought it a difficult thing to believe, is there not a difficulty beyond the
believing ? Are you willing to bring your whole soul and being to God
for Him to use you for ever ? It has to be a consecration irrevocable
and eternal, a yielding yourself as a literal transfer to God. And this
means something. It is not easy to human nature. To die to sin is
sometimes a hard struggle ; but out of the painful process there comes a
salvation that more than compensates. Be sure you are willing in the
day of God’s power. Shall not we have confidence in God that He will
keep what we give to Him—that He will not mar it, but only glorify
Himself, and bring out of the offering a purified heart ? God grant that
this condition of entire consecration may be met by every soul! There
are circumstances in every life that will test all the moral courage to
stand forth as a clear witness that sin is all destroyed. You who long
for your hearts to be entirely clean, come and seek for the blessing now.
Do not try to feel that you have it. Believe that God accepts the offer-
ring, and, sooner or later, you will have the witness in your own heart.
Be faithful to God to night. If I had the moments to tell you of this
wondrous salvation, the holy boldness and the sweetness of love, you
would, I imagine, be drawn at once to come for it. Do you want God
to sanctify you wholly with all the involvements of this blessing? Come
now, and we will bow in prayer with you.
In response to the invitation of the President, a large number of
persons came forward as seekers, and ere the happy meeting closed some
30 persons (amongst whom were to be found Ministers and laymen)
professed to rest upon Christ for “ full salvation.”
FOURTH SESSlON— Thursday Morning.
Prayer was offered by the President and Revs. J. Woodhouse and
J. Blanksby.
Rev. T. R. McMICHAEL read the following paper on
“HOLINESS OBTAINABLE BY FAITH.”
Unbelief banished holiness from Eden, and barred its gate against
the unbelievers. Y hen faith departs, love dies, and obedience is no


longer possible. God is the fountain of holiness, and faith links the
soul to Him j this link once broken, the stream of purity is cut off.
fein was impossible while faith lived, but sin became necessary when
faith died. Unbelief is sin, thus “he that believeth not is con-
demned already. The end of all God’s dispensations is the restora-
tion of faith for the re establishment of holiness. The devil insinuated
that Jehovah intended to defraud man of part of his inheritance, by
denying him the fruit of the tree of knowledge. Man believed the
lie, and has since believed all. the lies Satan has forged concerning his
Creator. In Christ’s advent the full and final refutation of that lie
was contemplated, and most amply did his atonement accomplish
this. Now every act of obedience performed by man, in the early
dawn of history, indicated the existence of a definite faith in God.
Abels acceptable sacrifice, Enoch’s walk with God, Noah’s escape
from the deluge which engulfed a guilty world, and Abraham’s
virtual sacrifice of his son, grew out of that faith which God was
seeking to restore, and in brief, all that bright array of heroes whose
short biographies appear in the epistle to the Hebrews achieved their
splendid victories through faith. It is natural for the human heart
to calculate upon gaining great blessings by correspondingly great
efforts. With a great sum must this freedom be obtained. The
Syrian leper, who loaded his chariot with gold and silver to pay
handsomely for his recovery, was greatly surprised and disappointed
when his wealth was refused ; and he nearly lost the blessing because
it could only come as the result of obedience and faith. Every
penitent struggling for liberty discovers the same inborn tendency,
by seeking to establish a claim to mercy, instead of receiving it as a
free gift by faith. In the 7th Romans hangs the portrait of every
man’s struggle, before experience teaches him better things. Luther
became the champion of salvation by faith only, after he had tried as
hard, and as long as any man, to establish a claim to it by works.
It is strange that in seeking purity the same mistake should occur as
is made by almost every penitent seeking peace. Yet so it is, for
when the conviction of this deeper need dawns upon us, we begin
with determining to do better, we fill up our programme with more
prayer, more self-denial, more Bible reading, more watching and
work, feeling sure that all this faithfully carried out will bring
us the blessing we seek. Thank God there is a much shorter and
better way—indeed the only way—the way of faith. Let us to the
law and testimony, and see if this view is not the correct one. That
faith is the condition of every step in the ways of God is the plain
teaching of His word. Isaiah promising deliverance to Judah from
the confederated armies of Pekah and Rezin declared, If ye will not
believe, surely ye shall not be established. Faith was the condition of
establishment. There was no mention of warlike preparations, they
were simply to be quiet, not to fear, not to faint, and this quietness,
courage, and strength resulted from faith in God’s promise. In the


reign of Jehoshaphat a great multitude came from Syria with hostile
purposes against Judah. The answer from God to the king’s appeal
for help was, “ This battle is not yours, but God’s ; ye shall not need to
fight, but stand still and see the salvation of God.” Jahaziel’s message
was, “ Believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be established; believe
his prophets, so shall ye prosper.” The Lord fought that battle, for
“when Judah came to the watch-tower of the wilderness, behold they
were dead bodies, fallen to earth, not one excepted.” In these two cases
the 'principle of faith is emphasised as the condition of a temporal
deliverance, and the use of such facts to symbolise spiritual triumphs is
perfectly legitimate and in harmony with apostolic usage.
TFe remark further that all God’s promises are given to invite the
definite faith of His people. The “I wills” of God, demand the “I believe”
of those who desire to realise them. Thus any promise, whether of
deliverance, or of justifying or purifying grace, must be relied on to be
realized. Jesus Christ insisted on simple faith, and emphasised it as the
only condition of salvation from bodily or spiritual disease. When the
leper came, worshiping, praying, and believing, Jesus did not hesitate a
moment, but healed him. “If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.”
There was the faith, and in a moment it triumphed; hut when the blind
men came, crying “ have mercy onus,” Jesus wanted to teach them that
faith was the indispensable condition of healing, and enquired if they
had it. They replied “yea Lord,” and as He touched their eyes, He made
the cure to depend, not upon His touch, but upon their faith. “ Ac-
cording to your faith be it unto you.” It is affirmed by one of the
evangelists that Christ could not do many mighty works, in His own
country, because of their unbelief. In a crowd that followed Jesus to
a ruler’s house, was a poor woman, whose peculiar complaint, had defied
all medical effort, and had drained her resources. She came behind
Jesus, and touched the hem of His robe, for she said within herself, “ if
I may but touch the hem of His garment, I shall be made whole.”
She said this within herself. It was not necessary that she should tell
Christ audibly that she had this faith. He found that out when she
touched him. She knew she had it, she exercised it, and that is all
Christ demands. Remember she received just what she believed for,
as in the case of the leper and the blind man. In each case the faith
was definite. It claimed exactly what was needed, it received exactly
what was claimed, no more, no less. This, brethren, is the example we
must imitate. That need, of which we have the most vivid conviction,
must be the burden of our prayer, and definite faith is the only instru-
ment that will bring it to our longing hearts. There is something
remarkable in Christ’s address to that woman. Thy faith, not thy
touch—though that was the formal cause, —not my power—though that
was the efficient cause of the cure, —but thy faith hath made thee
whole. May we not exclaim, wondrous power of faithful prayer. What
tongue can tell the Almighty grace. God’s hands are bound or open,
as Moses or Elijah prays. Let Moses in the spirit groan, and God


cries out let me alone. These hodily conditions are but the type of our
spiritual state, and certainly Christ’s method of teaching justifies this
use of them. He used the lower and material, to lead man to apprehend
the higher and spiritual truths. The woman of Samaria was met on the
lower ground of bodily thirst, and led on to realise a thirst that Jacob s
well could not satisfy. Leprosy is the type of impurity of heart, and
perfect submission, and perfect faith, the only condition of deliverance
from inbred sin. There is one passage which covers the whole ground
of our salvation, dealing definitely with every promise, from justification
up to the highest state attainable on earth. Jesus had withered a fig
tree by His word. His disciples, in surprise, called His attention to it.
He replied, this mountain would remove if commanded in faith, and
added, “ I say unto you, what things soever ye desire, when ye pray,
believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them.” Notice the
conditions. First desire, then prayer, then faith, followed by success ;
but you see that desire and prayer are only triumphant through faith.
Now, it is fair to include the blessing of a cleanheart in the list of what
things soever. If so, believe that you receive it, and you shall have it.
When 1 The very moment you believe. If your all is on the altar, just
believe that what God says is really true. “ I will receive you.” “ The
blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth from all sin,” God says it does. Do
you, by your unbelief, say it does not ? God forbid. He is pledged to
honour your faith. Draw near in full assurance of faith, and maintain
that faith boldly, with or without emotional evidence, if need be.
Remember you have to do with God’s “ I wills,” not with the feeling of
your heart. Just forget you have a heart or in fact, anything but
God’s promise to deal with. The teaching of the Apostles is on the same
lines as that of their Master’s. Paul points out that, while the Jews
sought the righteousness of the law by works, and failed, the Gentiles
sought and obtained it by faith; and in the first chapters of his epistle
to the Romans he affirms, that in the Gospel of Christ the righteousness
of God (i.e. His method of salvation) is revealed from faith to faith, by
which he means, a pure, a simple Jaith, and also that every definite act
of faith in a definite promise makes a fresh discovery of God’s power
and mercy to the soul. This righteousness, or saving power, is revealed
to faith—and to faith only. You may toil as Luther did, and there will
be no revelation of saving power to your poor sinking heart, but one act
of pure faith will bring a revelation of mercy, ample enough to meet the
soul’s deepest conscious need. To strengthen this declaration, the Apostle
adds, “ The just shall live by faith,” which must mean that the life of
God in the soul is produced, and maintained, at every stage of it, by
faith in God’s promises. The epistle to the Hebrews is addressed to
Christians, and in the fourth chapter, the writer speaks of a rest into
which God’s ancient people entered not through unbelief. He uses this
fact to illustrate an experience which he also designates rest, into which
he exhorts these Christians not to fail to enter after the same example
of unbelief, and he adds, we that have believed do enter in—not shall —


but do enter when w r e believe. Brethren, is not this the rest of purity,
the inheritance which they receive who are sanctified by faith in Jesus?
We believe it is.
“ A rest where all our souls’ desires
Are fixed on things above,
Where fear, and sin, and grief expires.
Cast out by perfect love. ”
In that discussion which arose about circumcising Gentile
converts, Peter declared it could not be necessary to their salvation, as
they were already saved, and had their hearts purified by faith, even
as the Apostles had. Faith according to Peter was the instrument of
their purification. If then, brethren, the promises are inherited by faith,
if God is the Saviour of them that believe, if faith gives substance to the
things hoped for and is the evidence of things not seen, if by it the
elder obtained a good report, and if without faith it is impossible to
please God, the natural conclusion is that no experience, however rich or
high, can be realised without the aid of faith. In writing to the Thessa-
lonians Paul tells them, that he was anxious to see them, that he might
perfect that which was lacking in their faith, in order that their hearts
might be established unblamably in holiness before God. Is not this
a perfect faith, producing perfect purity. They were already genuine
believers with a faith that had measured up to a good degree of bless-
ing ; but Paul desired to unfold the great inheritance of heart purity
or unblamable holiness to them, obtainable by faith.
There is one passage in the epistle to the Homans to which in con-
clusion I will refer you. “By grace are ye saved through faith.” How
much does the word saved include? Does it only include justifying,
pardoning, adopting, and regenerating grace ; or does it touch every
point, and cover all the ground of our experience from pardon right on to
glory? If so, and I believe it does, then purity is included, and that
word faith must accompany the word saved right on to the threshold of
glory. Justified by faith ; purified by faith; kept by faith. “Now
abicleth faith.” But brethren, be definite. Imitate the leper, the blind
man, the poor woman. When you came to Christ for pardon, you were
very definite, be definite now, as you seek for purity. God will not give
you stone, if you ask and believe for bread. Cry like Jacob, “ I will
not let Thee go.” Faith, mighty faith, the promise sees, and looks to that
alone ; laughs at impossibilities, and cries, it shall be done.
Rev. W. G. Taylor thought the one important question to be kept
in mind was, whether all that we consider included in the blessing
of holiness is obtained at the time of regeneration. If not, —
if it be a distinct and higher blessing, we must conclude
that it is to be obtained by faith. The whole tenor of Scrip-
ture teaches that all spiritual blessings come to us as the result of faith.
He had risen to state that since he came into the Church he had


referred to what the Rev, Richard Watson (for many years considered
to be the leading theologian of their Church) had said on this point.
The following extracts from Mr. Watson’s “ Theological Institutes”
were read by Mr. Taylor :
“ That a distinction exists between a regenerate state, and a state of entire
and perfect holiness, will be generally allowed. Regeneration, we have seen, is
concomitant with justification ; but the Apostles, in addressing the body of be-
lievers in the churches to whom they wrote their Epistles, set before them, both
in the prayers they offer in their behalf, and in the exhortations they administer,
a still higher degree of deliverance from sin, as well as a higher growth in Christian
virtues. Two passages only need be quoted to prove this : 4 And the very God of
peace sanctify you wholly ; and I pray God your whole spirit and soul and body
be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.’ (1 Thess., v.
23.) ‘ Having these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.’ (2 Cor.,
vii., 1.) In both these passages deliverance from sin is the subject spoken of;
and the prayer in one instance, and the exhortation in the other, go to the extent
of the entire sanctification of the soul and spirit, as well as of the flesh or body,
from all sin—by which can only be meant our complete deliverance from all
spiritual pollution, all inward depravation of the heart, as well as that which,
expressing itself outwardly by the indulgence of the senses, is called filthiness of
the flesh.” Vof. tv., p. 139.
“Not only the time, but the manner also, of our sanctification has been
matter of controversy : some contending that all attainable degrees of it are
acquired by the process of gradual mortification and the acquisition of holy
habits ; others alleging it to be instantaneous, and the fruit of an act of faith in
the divine promises. That the regeneration whioh accompanies justification is a
large approach to this state of perfected holiness, tfhd that all dying to sin and all
growth in grace advance us nearer to this point of entire sanctity is so obvious
that on these points there can be no reasonable dispute ; but they are not at all
inconsistent with a more instantaneous work, when, the depth of our natural
depravity being more painfully felt, we plead in faith the accomplishment of the
promises of God. The great question to he settled is whether the deliverance, sighed
after be held out to us in these promises as a present blessing. And from what has
been already said there appears no ground to doubt this, since no small violence
would be offered to the passage of Scripture already quoted, as well as to many
others, by the opposite opinion. All the promises of God which are not expressly ,
or from their order, referred to future time, are objects of present trust, and their
fulfilment noiv is made conditional only upon our faith. They cannot, therefore, be
pleaded in our prayers, with an entire reliance upon the truth of God, in vain.
The general promise that we shall receive 4 all things whatsoever we ask in prayer,
believing,’ comprehends, of course, all things suited to our case which God has
engaged to bestow ; and if the entire renewal of our nature be included in the
number, without any limitation of time, except that in which we ask it in faith,
then to this faith shall the promises of entire sanctification he given, which, in the
nature of the case, supposes an instantaneous ivork immediately folloxoing upon our
entire and unwavering faith.” Vol. iv., p. IjQ.
Rev. R. Caldwell (Balmain) thought that too little was often
made of the grace of regeneration. He was afraid many persons
thought themselves in a state of grace when only in a state of sin. They
should magnify the state of being in Christ, “ having old things passed
away, and all things become new.” He quite agreed with the paper
that every spiritual blessing is to be received by faith ; and he believed
that He who was their great Saviour was “ able to save them to the


uttermost.” Growth in grace, going on to perfection, the enjoyment of
perfect love, certainly come through the exercise of faith in the
finished work of the Redeemer; but they should live to the glory of
God even though they only professed to have regenerating grace.
The President said that upon the point just raised he would
remark that converting grace is a glorious thing. “ Whosoever is born
of God doth not commit siii” That is the duty and privilege of every
converted man. If a man, professing to be regenerated, is living in
sin, that man is a liar, and the truth is not in him. But God’s
Word addresses people who are in the enjoyment of justifying grace
to go on to something higher and more glorious. He thought that
many people who say they have been sanctified have really only been
reconverted. That, however, did not affect the doctrine of entire
sanctification. It is quite distinct from regeneration, as is clearly seen
in God’s Word.
The remaining time of the Session was given to a Bible Read-
ing by Miss Leonard on
“WHAT THE SCRIPTURES SAY.”
Slips of paper containing the following references to the Scriptures
were distributed amongst the congregation, and as they were read out
by those who held them Miss Leonard offered appropriate words of
explanation. Thus a most profitable hour was spent studying the
SCRIPTURAL HOLINESS.
God’s Will. —Eph. v. 17, 18 ; Col. iv. 12 ; 1 Thess. iv. 3 ; Heb. x. 9, 10.
God’s Command. —Gen. xvii. 1 ; Ex. xix. 6 ; Lev. xix. 2 ; Lev. xx. 7, 26 ;
Deut. vi. 5 ; Dent, xviii. 13; 1 Kings viii. 61; Matt. v. 48; Matt. xxii. 37 ;
John v. 14; Rom. xii. 1,2; 2 Cor. vii. 1; 2 Cor. xiii. 11 ; Heb. vi. 1 ; Jas. i. 4 ;
1 Peter i. 15, 16.
God’s Promise. —Psa. cxix. 1,3; Jer. xxxiii. 8; Heb. vii, 25; Heb. x. 16,
22; 1 John i. 7,9 ; 1 Thess. v. 24.
Sought by Prayer.—Psa. li. 2,7, 10; Hosea xiv. 2 ; Matt. vi. 10; 1
Thes. v. 28 ; John xvii. 17.
For this Life.—Luke i. 74, 75 ; Titus ii. 12 ; 1 John iv. 17.
Examples. —Gen. vi. 9 ; 2 Kings, xx. 3 ; 2 Kings xxiii. 25 ; Job i. 1 ; Psa.
xxxvii. 37 ; Luke i. 6 ; 1 Cor. ii. 6 ; Phil. iii. 15 ; 1 Thess. ii. 10; Heb. xii. 23,
Doctrine Implied.— Eph. iii. 16—19; Eph. iv. 12—16; Eph. iv. 22, 24 ;
Eph. v. 25, 27 ; Col. i. 28 ; Titus ii. 14; Heb. xii. 14 ; James iii. 2; 1 Peter i.
22 : 1 Peter ii. 6 ; 2 Peter i. 4; John xvi. 7, 13.
How Attained.—Rom. xii. 1, 2 ; Acts xxvi, 18 ; Acts xv. 3; 1 Cor. i. 30.
Promises for Keeping,— l Tim. vi. 12; 1 Cor. i. 8; Rom. viii. 35, 39;
John xv. 10; Isaiah xxvi. 3 ; 2 Tim. i. 12 ; 2 Chron. xvi. 9; Jude 24.


FIFTH SESSION— Thursday Afternoon.
After a service of praise and prayer, The Rev. J. Blanksby, Forest
Lodge, read the following paper on
“MISCONCEPTIONS CONCERNING HOLINESS.”
In writing a few lines upon the above subject, I take it for granted I
am writing for the purpose of clearing away, if possible, some of the
wrong notions upon the question of Christian Holiness, which are
proving stumbling blocks to those who may hold them. I further
presume that I write for honest, anxious, sincere, enquiring souls—
harassed by doubts and fears, and who, by the perplexities of their
faith, are robbed of real abiding spiritual joy, and are longing for a
more excellent way.
We may safely say that holiness is universally regarded as
obligatory upon the Christian, that the Divine Call is acknowledged as a
call to “inward and outward holiness.” But when we come to seek a
definition of the term holiness, we find varied statements and the
vaguest ideas, while the theory of those who in their teaching give
prominence to the subject is only too sadly misunderstood. Look at the
frequently expressed desires of Christian people : —“ That we may be
drawn closer to God,” “that the mind of Christ may be reproduced
in us,” “ that we may be made fruitful,” “ that we may be
as burning and shining lights.” What do all these mean ?
Surely they give token of personal dissatisfaction, of a consciousness
that individual lives are far below both duty and privilege. And
do they not indicate a recognition of the fact that the command ,
the call , the obligation of the Gospel is to be cleansed from sin, to walk
with God, to have the mind of Christ, to be fruitful, to let our lights
shine? But, agreed to this point, here we diverge. Some say these are
all goals to be strenuously sought, but are of necessity beyond
immediate attainment. But we hold that the life to which we are
called, the spirit to be exercised, and the graces to be displayed need
everyday circumstances for their manifestation. God’s call is to
immediate duty, the duty nearest at hand, the obligations of the present
moment. “Now is God’s accepted time,” and no vow or expectancy of
future devotement to and faithfulness in service can take the place of
immediate attention to present calls. And then salvation in its fullest
sense is by faith. “ According to your faith ”is the word. But faith
has no existence except in exercise, and is of necessity a present act.
There is no such thing as future faith, and hence it is within the
province of all to accept by faith here and now all the deliverance which
the soul may consciously need. “Now is the day (the moment, every
moment as present) of Salvation.”
1. “But,” says one, “you are going to make us perfect all in a
moment,” meaning by that we advocate ultimate 'perfection as immediately
attainable. But such a theory would be contrary to all known truth.


The world, the universe, and all its creatures are finite; the law of the
world is movement, progressive or retrograde—sometimes one, some-
times the other, speaking of details—but speaking generally, progressive.
And progress is most distinctly taught as the rule for Christian life.
Holiness is wholeness, soundness, not implying a perfect development,
but conditions which render development more possible and real.
We know the difference, both as to the present and as to the future
prospects, between a sickly child and a healthy one, between a fruit tree
with branches and leaves, which betoken vigour and health, and a
blighted, almost leafless, concern, with blotched fruit and a hopeless
future. The command is “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength.” But love to God may, and, we assert, does exist in many
lives without being as all-encompassing, as inclusive, and as conclusive
as is here enjoined.
“ To glorify God in body and in spirit ” is the duty of Christian
life, but there are persons the object of whose lives is, speaking in
general terms, to glorify God, but who have not yet learnt “ whatso-
ever they do,” whether eating or drinking, to do all as unto God and
not unto men. Here then is Christian perfection—full, complete love
to God—whole-hearted, continuous self-surrender to His service and
glory.
And in this soil will the graces of a Christian life grow, develop, and
mature, “ first the blade, then the ear, and after that the full corn in the
ear.” But men want to grow into holiness, or in other words, to grow
sin out of their hearts. The only way to get rid of weeds is to pull
them up. They say “ cultivate the better nature and by degrees the
other will die.” Just as well go to the poor fever stricken one, health-
broken, appetite gone, and say “ cultivate health and vigO'T and your
disease will fly.” The very disease prevents the growth of vigour. The
best soil in which to develop charity, long-suffering, forbearance, meek-
ness, humility, and all sister graces is full suri'ender, perfect love.
2. But others will persist in associating pride, independence, self-
sufficiency, with the attainment of perfect love. What a contradiction.
Love the root, pride, pharisaism, self-sufficiency, the fruit! The thing
answers itself. But the idea is two-fold. First, that the sanctified
man is in a position in which he no longer needs Christ, and second,
that a pharisaic spirit towards brethren is involved.
But, as we assert, no man can grow holy : he must be made holy by
the grace and power of Christ realised by faith. Is it not then evident
that no person can be conscious of perfect and continuous Salvation who
does not continuously exercise simple, unaffected and complete trust in
Christ? But faith and self-confidence, self-sufficiency, or pharisaism
cannot possibly co-exist. “ Where is boasting then ? It is excluded.
By what law? Of Works? Nay : but by the law of faith.” Can the
beggar boast of accepted and unmerited gifts ? He can honour and
praise, and bless the giver. “ Thanks be unto God for His unspeakable


gift.” John says most unmistakably that love to man is a necessary
consequence of love to God. Perfect love towards man must therefore
be the fruit of whole-hearted love to God. How can pharisaism
possibly be found in the sanctified heart ?
3. Another notion is, that the higher our ideal of a Christian life
and the walk at which we aim, the greater the danger of falling and
suffering relapses. That notion is the outcome of a current misconception
of Christian life, viz., that my sins being forgiven and my determina-
tions being to forsake sin and serve God, it is now my business to go on
and do my best in that direction. But is not Christ the Saviour ? The
question is not “Can I live this life?” but “Is Christ able to save me
fully and always?” Dare we assert that any change or combination of
•circumstances would make Salvation impossible to Christ ? “ Ah,” some
say, “ I know Christ can save, but it is according to my faith, and my
faith may fail.” Then unbelief is sin. Who gives us liberty to doubt ?
Paith is demanded by God, not a privilege alone, but a duty. But the
fuller the consecration, the completer the devotement, the more far-
reaching the faith in Christ’s cleansing power, the more loyal will be
the heart, the more continuous the trust, and unbelief the less probable.
Christ “is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless
before the presence of His glory with exceeding joy.”
Roots of evil within are far more dangerous than severest tempta-
tions from without; in fact, the former give power to the latter.
4. But some say that we make sin an impossibility. Certainly,
to the believing soul. But can a sanctified person not fall ? We answer
by asking “ Can he be tempted ?” He can and will be tempted from
without, but that is very different from being troubled with uprisings of
sinful.passions and desires within.
Others imagine that holiness involves a continuous ecstasy and a
never-changing delight. But feelings vary according to natural
disposition and temperament, and in the same individual according to
ever-changing circumstances. “ Peace is the key word of Christian
life.” 111-health, unfavourable changes in temporal affairs, troubles in
family life, and many other changes to which we are subject may affect
fhe surface joy, but the promise remains, “ Thou wilt keep him in
perfect peace whose mind is stayed upon Thee, because he trusteth in
Thee.”
How these difficulties arise mainly through looking at the blessing
or experience in abstract, as a something to be sought after. The object
of faith is Christ, our wisdom, our righteousness, our sanctification, our
redemption. His love demands full-hearted service, entire devotement;
His grace makes such a life possible to all.
Now is the accepted time, Now is the day of Salvation.
Rev. J. Oram said there was one beautiful point in holiness that
.attracted and encouraged him, namely, humility. Just as we became


holy we became little in our own view. That is a very wrong notion
which holds that if we become entirely holy we shall become proud, and
which makes this an objection to such a state of experience. He always
found the opposite of this true in his own experience.
Rev. T. R. McMichael directed attention to the same point,
urging the fact that the more w r e become like our ideal Christ, the
more should we glorify Him, and sink in our own estimation.
Rev. J. Cutler mentioned at length an interesting case of a pro-
minent manufacturer of America who, almost crushed by multitudinous,
business difficulties, sought and obtained rest for his soul in the blessing
of perfect love.
Rev. W, C. Taylor said one of the misconceptions that obtains
great hold in the minds of many intelligent men is the difference
between Christian perfection and absolute perfection. There was dif-
ficulty with some in getting a definition of what the doctrine really
meant. He had spoken, just recently, with some who had been per-
plexed by imagining that Christian perfection was equal to that enjoyed
by Adam before he fell. He thought a wise thing for such to do was
not only to study the Bible, but to take some reliable text book, such
as “Watson’s Manual,” and carefully master it.
Miss Leonard was glad that it had been so clearly stated that
entire sanctification did not mean exemption from temptation. On this
point there had been much misunderstanding among Christian people.
They confused temptation that came from the world and temptation
that sprung up from the heart. The man who was justified has tempta-
tions from the outside ; and, alas, he finds there is something within his
heart that responds to the temptation. A young man who had been
converted, and given up every form of sin, found that after about three
months he had to face the depravity of his heart, which he feared would
lead him back into his former sins ; but when he heard of the salva-
tion from the depravity within he determined to seek it, and ulti
mately was able to exercise the faith that brought a conscious cleansing.
After that he had very strong temptation from Satan : but he found
it was just as if a man was knocking at an empty house door. There
was nothing within to respond or sympathise with the temptation.
Perfect faith keeps the heart perfectly clean.
Rev. W. Sparling (Marrickville) remembered meeting a lady im
the old country who certainly had what he considered was a misconcep-
tion of Christian holiness. She told him she believed she had obtained
the blessing, and for a time she had lived above all thought of this
life. She did not want to have anything to do with the world, or to
concern herself with family matters whatever. After a while she gave
way to temptation, and lost the blessing. He did not believe in a
holiness that lifted them above all thought of earthly life. What had
helped him was an every-day trust in Jesus—a complete surrender to
Him as his perfect Saviour —not looking forward to what may be or
ought to be. Christian people sometimes deluded themselves with a


hope of what they will be. His conception of holiness was a present
entire surrender of himself every clay of his life.
Rev. R, Allen said many people had an idea that Christian perfection
meant absolute perfection, but there would always be the need of the
Saviour’s intercession.
“ Every moment, Lord, I need
The virtue of Thy death. \
And through perfect faith, they could realize
“ Every moment, Lord, I have
The death of Thy death.”
The life of holiness was a life of faith on the Son of God, conse-
quently there would always be the need of Christ as the object of faith.
After a brief period given to prayer, Rev. W. G. Taylor read the
following paper on
“HOLINESS AS TAUGHT IN OUR HYMN BOOK.”
The study of my hymn book in preparation for this paper has been to
me a rich mean of grace. The “ Collection of hymns for the use of the
people called Methodists ” is a book of which any Church might well
be proud. That Charles Wesley was inspired by God for his work is a
conviction that has grown upon me the more his hymns have been
studied. As expositions of the mind of the Spirit given us in the teach-
ings of Holy Writ; for mental grip, and nervous force, and as
possessing the true poetic genius ; for Ohrist-like tenderness, and as
indicative of a depth of piety in the writers ; and as grandly catching a
spirit of enthusiasm, Pauline in its character, I know of no Hymnals equal
to those used by the various branches of the great Methodist family.
I wonder not that the Old Methodists loved their hymn book so
ardently. It was next, to the Bible, the daily companion of many of
them. I fear we of the present generation read it not as often, and
love it not as intensely. I deplore such a taste that so often prefers for
domestic worship, and for public services, and for private song, the
doctrineless jingling rhymes that just now pass current as hymns, and
which let us fain hope, as they are the creation of an hour, will pass
from the Church as quickly as they have entered it.
Our hymn book, next to the Bible itself, is perhaps the finest
exponent we possess of the doctrine of holiness. Holiness is the atmos-
phere of the whole book. As I read my hymn book through, I find what t
A section devoted to the consideration of the doctrine of Full Redemp-
tion —and nothing more? Far, very far from that! I meet with it in
every one of the nine sections of the book ; facing me not only in the
portions devoted to believers, but in appeals to the unsaved, in des-
criptions of Heaven, in the prayers for repentance, in those pages-


devoted to mourners convinced of sin, and to backsliders praying for
restoration. Everywhere perfect love is the theme of the hook. How any
of our people can essay to doubt this great truth as a present privilege,
with our hymn books before them, I know not. Let us thank God for
this, that here, with a force that all who face it cannot but be moved by,
with a clearness that none can misunderstand, and with a constancy that
never flags from the first hymn to the last, this doctrine of Full Salva-
tion is taught.
In that beautiful hymn on Primitive Christianity (16 and 17), of
which it has been said that the saintly John Fletcher was so fond, that
he often read it till “ tears of joy and gratitude streamed down his
face;” in speaking of the character of the first followers of our Lord,
Charles Wesley thus speaks :
“With grace abundantly endued,
A pure, believing multitude ;
They all were of one heart and soul,
And only love inspired the whole. ”
And then bursts out:
“ 0 what an age of golden days !
0 what a choice peculiar race !
Washed in the Lamb's all cleansing blood,
Anointed kings and priests to God !”
From this as his text Wesley preaches a sermon on Holiness that
extends throughout the book. At once praying that upon us the spirit
of the Early Church might ever rest:—
“ 0, let us all Thy mind express,
Stand forth Thy chosen witnesses
Thy power unto salvation show,
And perfect holiness below.
From every sinful wriukle free,
Redeemed from all iniquity ;
The fellowship of saints made known,
And 0 ! my God, might I be one.”
In his definition of the doctrine Mr. Wesley is clear, yet guarded
That none should have right to presume, he sings (hymn 947) —
“Holy as Thou, 0 God, is none !
Thy holiness is all Thy own ;
A drop of that unbounded sea
Is ours—a drop derived from Thee.
And when Thy purity we share,
Thy only glory we declare ;
And, humbled into nothing, own
Holy and pure is God alone.”
And in his definition of this “ glorious hope of perfect love ” he thus
•describes it, in hymn 404, as—
“A land of corn, and wine, and oil.
Favoured with God’s peculiar smile,
With every blessing blest


and at once holds out his hand to grasp the coveted good—
“Now, O my Joshua, bring me in !
Cast out Thy Joes, the inbred sin,
The carnal mind, remove ;
The purchase of Thy death divide !
Give me with all the sanctified
The heritage of love. ”
That Entire Sanctification is a grace distinct from, and not a
development of, the royal blessing of regeneration, is, I think, clearly
taught in the Book of God— a fact as clearly taught in our hymn hook.
At your leisure, permit me to ask you to read over hymns 391, 392,
393, which appear as one hymn at the end of John Wesley’s sermon
on “ Christian Perfection,” and which he and John Fletcher were con-
stantly in the habit of quoting in their controversies with the opponents
of the doctrine of Entire Sanctification. And so again, in wise and
vigorous language, Charles Wesley sings (hymn 394) —
“Acceptance through His only name,
Forgiveness in His blood, we have ;
But more abundant life we claim
Through Him who died our souls to save,,
To sanctijy us by His blood,
And fill with all the life of God.”
“ Conviction for sin” is a term we are all familiar with; but not
so familiar with another—“ Conviction for holiness.” Is not the one as
necessary as the other ? Listen how 0. Wesley speaks of this in a hymn
that gives the experience of the justified person
“ But 0 ! the jealous God
In my behalf came down ;
Jesus Himself the stronger showed,
And claimed me for His own.
My spirit He alarmed,
And brought into distress ;
He shook and bound the strong man armed
In his self-righteousness.
Faded my virtuous show,
My form without the power ;
The sin-convincing Spirit blew,
And blasted every flower.
My mouth was stopped, and shame
Covered my guilty face ;
I fell on the Atoning Lamb,
And I was saved by grace.”
And then, as by natural sequence, there follows the ardent prayer of
the convicted soul—the prayer of the Christian conscious of the presence
of evil within :
“ I am all unclean, unclean,
Thy purity I want ;
My whole heart is sick of sin,
And my whole head is faint.


Full of putrifying sores,
Of bruises, and of wounds, my soul
Looks to Jesus, help implores,
And gasps to be made whole.”
All Methodist believers are prepared to accept that view of our
subject spoken of in Scripture as a going on to 'perfection, and many are
found who argue that this is the only perfection we are called to. As
one has said {Field), “ That there is to be this gradual growth to the
maturity of the Christian life is plain. Hence the commands and the
figures by which the work of grace is illustrated. But though there is
a progress towards perfection in every justified believer, yet its attain-
onent is not a mere ripeness insured by natural growth, hut is instantan-
eously wrought in the soul by the direct agency of the Holy Ghost.”
Nothing can be more definite than the teaching of John Wesley on this
point. When in London, in 1767, he wrote, “As to the manner of
obtaining this blessing of Christian perfection, I believe this perfection
is always wrought in the soul by a simple act of faith ! consequently in
an instant. But I believe there is a gradual work both preceding and
following that instant.” And you will remember how he used as illus-
trations the following, “ A man may be dying for some time, yet, he
does not properly speaking die, till the instant the soul is separated from
the body, and in that instant he lives the life of eternity. In like
manner he may be dying to sin for some time ; yet is he not dead to
sin till sin is separated from the soul; and in that instant he lives the
full life of love.” I have been greatly struck with the constancy with
which John Wesley was wont to urge this view of the doctrine through-
out his writings.
Now, what is the teaching of our hymnal on this vital point 1
Listen to Charles Wesley’s own personal testimony on this point (hymns
417);
“Tis done ! thou dost this moment save,
With full salvation bless ;
Redemption through Thy blood I have,
And spotless love and peace. ”
In that remarkable composition, a small part of which only appears
as hymn 95, there are several stanzas that teach that sanctification is
thus received by faith. Take the following, which clearly teaches that
which has been so well enforced in a previous paper (Holiness obtain-
able by faith) all the blessings of the Gospel are obtainable by faith
alone.
“ To him that in Thy name believes,
Eternal life with Thee is given ;
Into himself he all receives,
Pardon, and holiness, and heaven.”
And in that remarkable evening hymn (287), of which one has
written : “A more suitable evening prayer was scarcely ever done in
verse. It is matter of suprise if thousands of the Lord’s people have


not made daily use of this admirable summary of devotion and self-
dedication.” Occur these words :
“ Or if Thou my soul require,
Ere I see the morning light,
Grant me, Lord, my heart’s desire,
Perfect me in love to-night .”
[See also 364, part of which was sung with great power by the congregation, 141,
261, 356, and many others.]
On that view of this doctrine of full salvation that emphasises the
entire destruction of sin in the soul , our hymn book speaks out with no
manner of uncertainty. My difficulty here is as to choice of illustrations.
We have them literally in scores. Take this one—(hymn 34) :
“ Slay the dire root and seed of sin ;
Prepare for thee the holiest place ;
Then, 0 essential Love, come in !
And fill thy house with endless praise !”
And in the very next hymn—(hymn 342).
“ But is it possible that I
Should live and sin no more ?
Lord, if on Thee I do rely,
The faith shall bring the power.”
“ On me that faith divine bestow,
Which doth the mountain move ;
And all my spotless shall show,
The omnipotence of love ?”
And knowing how many then, as now, were not prepared to accept
this far-reaching truth, his soul bursts out —(345) :
“ Let others hug their chains,
For sin and Satan plead,
And say, from sin’s remains
They never can be freed ;
Rejoice in hope, rejoice with me,
We shall from all our sins be free.’
And further on—
“The word of God is sure,
And never can remove.
We shall in heart be pure,
And perjected in love :
Rejoice in hope, rejoice with me,
We shall from all our sins be free.
Hearken again to these familiar words (hymn 389)
“O Jesus, at Thy feet we wait
Till Thou shalt bid us rise,
Restored to our unsinning state,
To love’s sweet paradise.
Saviour from sin we Thee receive
From all indwelling sin ;
Thy blood, we steadfastly believe,
Shall make us throughly clean


Just once more, in language as forceful as it is Scriptural, he sings
(hymn 412) —
“ Consume our lusts as rotten wood,
Consume our stony hearts within !
Consume the dust, the serpent’s food,
And dry up all the streams of sin.
Its body TOTALLY DESTROY !
Thyself, the Lord, the God, approve,
And fill our hearts with holy joy,
And fervent zeal and perfect love. ”
Beloved, such is the teaching not alone of our hymn book. The
New Testament is full of it; and the standards of our Church are also
thoroughly explicit on the point. And is it not reasonable that it should
be so ? Think you that it is right to limit the Atonement to the ques-
tion of the forgiveness of past sin, and the renewal of the soul, only in
so far as it touches the power of outward sin ? Does it not rather
glorify the death of Christ to believe that by it we may be, here and
now , delivered from all inbred corruption, that the old man should not
alone be hound , but cast out , that the blood of Christ should literally
“Cleanse from all sm?” . . . Thank God for a Bible
that teaches this, thank God for a hymn hook that teaches this, and
thank God for Church standards that teach this, and with no uncertain
sound.
But this is only the negative side of this great doctrine. What of
the possibilities of the soul thus completely purified from sin ? Listen
(hymn 408) :
“ He wills that I should holy be ;
That holiness I long to feel—
That full Divine conformity
To all my Saviour’s righteous will.”
I cannot refrain from mentioning an incident touching this beau'
tiful verse:—“John Anderson,” says a certain writer (Stevenson)
“ from having been a gay, thoughtless, impetuous, worldly young man,
through the grace of God, became one of the most honoured and suc-
cessful preachers of righteousness which Methodism has known.
Early in his ministry a remarkable visitation from Heaven resulted in
the entire consecration of all his powers of mind and body to the service
of God, and in the entire sanctification of his nature. Ever afterwards
his soul was full of glory. ‘ One Monday,’ remarks Mr. Anderson, ‘ I
was musing on the past few days’ labours, and praying for a blessing.
The subject of Christ’s manifestation occurred to me. I fostered the
delightful topic. I longed for Jesus to come and dwell in me, I broke
out in praise to God. In this frame I took up our hymn book, and
read and sang the following hymn :
“ He wills that I should holy be ;
That holiness I long to feel,” &c.


Proceeding to examine other hymns in the same strain, I then fell upon
ray knees and prayed for the free gift of God in Jesus Christ, I soon
found the powerful visitation of the Spirit. I saw the glorious fulness
of Jesus Christ. I felt it was only by faith. Satan tempted, when I
was on the eve of believing, that I should not confess the blessing. I
saw the impious design, and in that moment my whole soul opened by
faith, and the plentitude of God entered in and took possession of my
heart. My full soul uttered, “ I can, I will, I do believe ! ” and it
immediately sank into a calm and heavenly state.’ Oh ! ” adds the
writer, “ oh ! for such a baptism on all the ministers of the Church of
Christ. The glorious manifestations of Divine power to save sinners
which attended his ministry ever afterwards should induce others of the
Lord’s servants to seek the same experience,” Mr. Anderson died 11th
April, 1884, aged 49.
This great blessing of Holiness is spoken of in the hymn book as
“full salvation ” in hymn 269, in the light of “ perfect love ” in such
hymns as 216 and 373, the latter of which, it will be remembered, is
one of John Wesley’s translations from the German of Paul Gerhardt,
and in which occurs this striking stanza :
“ 0 grant that nothing in my soul
May dwell but Thy pure love alone ;
0 may Thy love possess me whole,
My joy, my treasure, and my crown !
Strange flames far from my heart remove,
My every act, word, thought, be love. ”
And then we are taken to what I always have felt to be the highest
perfection attainable on earth— the actual subjitgation of our will in all
things to that of God. Listen, for instance, to those lovely poetic words
translated by Miss Winkworth from the German of that remarkable
man, “ excellent philologist, and true Christian,” Wolfgang Christian
Deszler, who lived in the 17th and 18th century (hymn 851) —
‘ I will not let Thee go, my God, my Life, my Lord ;
Not death can tear
Me from His care,
Who for my sake His soul in death outpoured
Thou didst for love to me,
I say in love to Thee,
Even when my heart shall break, my God, my Life, my Lord,
I will not let Thee go 1”
And in this connection we must not omit to mention that favourite
hymn of Charlotte Elliott (841) which touches this point in language so
sweetly touching:—
“ If Thou shouldst call me to resign
What most I prize—it ne’er was mine—
I only yield Thee what was Thine ;
Thy will be done.”
Our hymn book has much to say on what may be termed the
human element in the work of Christian perfection. For let us never


forget that there is a human side to this great doctrine. Our part is
that of unconditional surrender—of absolute consecration. Sufier the
question, Is it not just here that in many cases the real objection to
this doctrine is to be sought for 1 an objection really of the heart rather
than of the head 1 It is by no neans an easy thing to bring oneself up
to the standard of 0. Wesley’s Song of Consecration (hymn 430) :
“Take my soul and body’s powers,
Take ray memory, mind, and will;
All my goods and all my hours,
All I know and all I feel,
All I think, or speak, or do ;
Take my heart, but make it new.
Now, 0 God, Thine own I am,
Now I give Thee back Thine own ;
Freedom, friends, and health, and fame,
Consecrate to Thee alone ;
Thine I live—thrice happy I !
Happier still if Thine I die.”
But our hymnal goes further than this, speaking not alone of surrender ,
but of sacrifice. This is where the battle of the old nature is to be
fought. Hearken to these words from that splendid hymn of 0.
Wesley, originally written in more than 80 verses (286) :
“ Is there a thing than life more dear ?
A thing from which we cannot part ?
We can ; we now rejoice to tear
The idol from our bleeding heart.
Jesus, accept our sacrifice,
All things for Thee account but loss ;
Lo ! at Thy word our Isaac dies—
Dies on the altar of Thy cross. ”
And then, thank God, as everywhere else, so here, the royal law of
compensation comes in. Listen, ye timid souls, who tremble on the
threshold of this full surrender :
“ For what to Thee, 0 Lord, we give,
A hundredfold we here obtain,
And soon with Thee shall all receive,
And loss shall be eternal gain. ”
Might I suggest to all enquirers after the blessing, who have got
so far as this, the wisdom of adopting the old Methodist custom (a
beautiful illustration of which we have just had furnished to us in the case
of our late dear saintly Sister Moseley) the custom of putting to paper
the definite terms of this act of complete surrender : a practice referred
to by our own William Maclardie Bunting—son of the great Dr. Jabez
Bunting—who, whilst yet a youth of only eighteen, so far back as


the year 1824, wrote the beautiful hymn 909, one verse of which reads
as follows: —
“ This day the Covenant I sign,
The bond of sure and promised peace ;
Nor can I doubt its power divine,
Since sealed with Jesus’ blood it is ;
That blood I trust, that blood alone,
And make the Covenant peace my own, ”
Much has been said and much written as to whether or no the
Holy Spirit is given as a distinct witnesser to this blessing. Suffice it
here to say that our Church teaches it, and with no uncertain voice.
Our time is too limited; nor, indeed, is this the place to discuss this
point at length. Let me refer you to numerous definite statements by
John Wesley on this point as found in his ptain account of Christian
Perfection, and also to page 210 of that excellent Methodist work,
Field’s “ Students’ Handbook of Christian Theology ; ” to the
“ Compendium of Theology,” by Dr. Pope; to the teachings of that
remarkable book, “ Love Enthroned,” by Dr. Steele, a book of which it
is said that when recently put into the hands of our own Dr. Pope, he
was so thrilled by it that he sat up the whole night reading it through;
and also to the Scriptural teaching of Rev. W. McDonald , in his
“ Scriptural Way of Holiness.” Now as to the teaching of our hymn
book on this point. Two years after his conversion, 0. Wesley penned
his own experience in hymn 351—a glorious hymn to God the Sancti-
fier—in which we have this prayer :
* ‘ Thy witness with my spirit bear,
That God, my God, inhabits there.”
And further on—
“Come, Holy Ghost, all quickening fire !
My consecrated heart inspire,
Sprinkled with the atoning blood ;
Still to my soul Thyself reveal,
Thy mighty working may Ijeel,
And know that I am one with God.”
And yet again (hymn 377) —
“ Send us the Spirit of Thy Son,
To make the depths of Godhead known,
To make us share the life divine ;
Send Him the sprinkled blood to apply,
Send Him our souls to sanctify,
And show and seal us ever Thine.”
And still more gloriously (761) —
“ The cleansing blood to apply,
The heavenly life display,
And WHOLLY SANCTIFY
And seal us to that day,
The Holy Ghost to man is given ;
Rejoice in God, sent down from Heaven.”


Want of time prevents our referring to the teaching of our hymn
book on such important subjects as the connection between Entire
Sanctification on the one hand, and Temptation on the other. (See
hymn 359, &c.) As to how far we may hope to be delivered from our
human infirmities. (See 363, &c.) As to the close connection always,
maintained between holiness and usefulness. (See hymn 152, 433, &c.),
and as to the great question of after development, or the after growth of
the Entirely Sanctified Soul; and as touching the important thought of
Purity and Maturity. (See hymns 13, 193, 196, 200, 392, <fec.)
Much might be said on the question of Confessing the blessing.
On this point there have always been differences of opinion. John
Fletcher representing one school, John Wesley the other. But though
Wesley, at Bristol, in 1758, did advise his people not to speak of it to
them that know not God, nor to others without some particular reason f
without some good in view , yet further on , and at length, he urges that
to maintain a clear conscience, those who enjoy the blessing, must speak
for the glory of the blood of sprinkling as a witness to the power of
grace, and as an encouragement to others to seek the same blessing.
And so his brother in that hymn so full of “ the mental sacred fire of
the Hebrew poet,” thus expresses himself—(s6B):
“ My heart is full of Christ, and longs
Its glorious matter to declare !
Of Him I make my loftier songs,
I cannot from His praise forbear ;
My ready tongue makes haste to sing
The glories of my heavenly king.”
And again : In the hymn 524, having at first a personal reference to the-
friendship subsisting between John and Charles, we read :
“ Witnesses of the all-cleansing blood,
Long may we work the works of God,
And do Thy will like those above ;
Together spread the Gospel sound,
And scatter peace on all around,
And joy, and happiness, and love.”
And now, as we close we come again to the point, already given
prominence to, that all this great blessing is ours, now, but ours
only through the precious blood of Jesus. O, how much the hymn book
says on this great point. Take the following as illustrative of the
general teaching—(2s4):
“ The day of Christ, the day of God,
We humbly hope with joy to see ;
Washed in the sanctifying blood
Of our expiring Deity.”
“Spotless, sincere, without offence,
0 may we to this day remain,
Who trust the blood of God to cleanse
Our souls from every sinful stain)’


And again, (and this is our last illustration—s 23.)
“ Take the dear purchase of Thy blood ;
Thy blood shall wash us white as snoiv ;
Present us sanctified to God,
And perfected in love below.”
“ That blood which cleanses from all sin.
That efficacious blood apply,
And wash., and make us wholly clean,
And change, and thoroughly sanctify . ”
Brethren, such is my theme. I have hut given you glimpses of
this glorious truth as taught in our hymnals. Shall we put such hynms
as these where we put our curios, away in some glass case, to be admired,
but nothing more? No, no, a thousand times no ! These sacred rarities
must not be thought of as the mere poetic effusions of a pious but
aesthetic soul; they are practical realities to be aimed at, to be possessed.
And whilst down in the battle of work-a-day life to be lived out to the
glory of the great Sanctifier, to the untold good of the sanctified, and to
the endless benefit of this dying, sinful world. May this great blessing
he yours and mine this day ! !
Can we close better than by quoting a stanza from another of
our poet’s beautiful hymns 1 May the prayer thus offered be speedily
answered, in the case of the universal Church of Christ ! ! (27.)
“To love is all my wish,
I only live for this ;
Grant me, Lord, my heart’s desire,
There by faith for ever dwell;
This I always will require,
Thee, and only Thee, to feel.”
“ Thy power I want to prove,
Rooted and fixed in love ;
Strengthened by Thy Spirit’s might,
Wise to fathom things divine,
What the length, and breadth, and height;
What the depth of love like Thine,”
“ Oh ! give me this to know,
With all Thy saints below ;
Swells my soul to compass Thee,
Gasps in Thee to live and move ;
Filled with all the Deity,
All immersed and lost in love,”
Rev. J. Blanksby said it seemed to be given to the poet specially
by God to be able to speak more clearly and forcibly to the soul of man.
Although the truths contained in their hymns were commonplace truths
of Scripture, yet they seemed to come with fresh force and point and
power. Mr. Taylor had referred to the two points of conviction for
Holiness and the Witness of the Spirit. He (Mr. Blanksby) had no


quarrel with those who knew nothing of conviction for holiness, because
he held it to be possible that if the truth were presented to the most
unconverted and rebellious sinner in its fullest light, regeneration and
sanctification might take place at the same moment. If people said
there was only one blessing they must admit that it includes all that is
meant by both regeneration and sanctification. As to conviction,
everybody present professed, to some extent, a certain dissatisfaction
because they hoped for future growth and blessing. If he put the
question to everyone, “Do you think you are what you ought to be
now 1 ” the answer would be “No no.” He held, because it was an
evident fact in their lives, that there is such a thing as conviction for
holiness. There is such a thing too as the Witness of the Spirit to that
holiness. Consecration was one thing, and it was very easy to feel they
were willing to give up all, especially when singing
“Take my soul and body’s powers,
Take my memory, mind, and will.” &c.
but consecration was not all; it was but the human side. They must
have the witness that the consecrated offering was accepted.
Mr. W, Davies pointed out that the same great doctrine could be
gathered from the Sunday Scholars' Hymn Booh as from the Congre-
gational Hymnal. What astonished him was that since they had been
singing these glorious hymns of Wesley for a hundred years and more,
they did not hear more of the doctrine in other places.
Rev. W. 0. Hughes was very much struck with the large amount
of truth contained in their hymns with regard to entire sanctification ;
but he did not wonder at it because he knew that the writers of these
hymns were men that had searched the Scriptures through and through,
and who gave in their hymns pure Bible teaching. It was rather
curious that as congregations and families they had been singing so
many of these hymns without being made to feel as they should their
great want of this unspeakably precious blessing. In studying the
hymn book, since the subject of holiness had become all important to
himself this fact had much impressed him. He had felt the power of
the Hoi} 7 Spirit as Mr. Taylor had read with such feeling his excellent
paper. Mr. Taylor referred to other hymns used in families, and Bands
of Hope, and other meetings which were not edifying. He regretted
there were such hymns, but there is scarcely any hymn book that is
circulated, of whatsoever name, that has not some of the grand hymns
written by the Wesleys ; and possibly by these other books many people
who would never otherwise have come to read Wesley’s hymns had been
brought face to face with the light on this subject. Some of the best
people he had ever met had told him that the change they experienced
when they passed from justification to sanctification was as great and
distinct as when they passed from sin to pardon, and their after life was
quite in keeping with their statement.


Rev. J. S. Austin was thankful that a paper had been prepared
upon the hymn book. One advantage gained would be to lead to a
closer study of our own hymns, and he hoped it would suggest also the
singing of their hymns not ordy in the congregation but in their homes.
With reference to what had been said about conviction for holiness
a lady he knew, a devout Christian, of whom none would suspect of sin
for a moment, became convinced that she needed holiness of heart, and
sought diligently for it for some time. A few months back she came out
definitely seeking the blessing before God’s people. The great difficulty
was a matter of consecration. She did not think she would be able
to submit were God to take away one specially dear to her. At last,
with anxious broken heart she cried out “ O Lord, take everything, take
all,” and in that moment she realized the blessing, and had given most
unmistakeable evidence of its possession. He could not think why they
should doubt for a moment if the Holy Spirit could witness to their
justification He should not also witness to their sanctification.
Miss Leonard said some one had spoken about persons feeling a
( sense of dissatisfaction with themselves, and a desire for something
better. This was only vague, and conviction was something beyond
that. It came from God, and shewed that the experience of holiness was
to be obtained. It was an influence of the Holy Spirit, constantly deep-
ening until the subjects of it have no rest until they enter into the
enjoyment of perfect love. Let them ask for God to send a definite
and distinct conviction that God can sanctify, and sanctify wholly; and
if He gave this it would become an all absorbing thing. To such as
fully entered into the blessing there would come the clear unmistakeable
assurance of the Spirit of God Himself that He had sanctified them
wholly. It would be the duty of those who had received the witness to
this fact to witness to others to the praise of God.
Rev. J. S. Cutler said that in America it was found that just as
there was conviction of sin previous to conversion, so there was convic-
tion of the need of holiness—conviction deep and pungent, and then a
clear and blessed experience of the witness of the Spirit that the work
was done. He referred to several instances of prominent and learned
men of whom this was true.
SIXTH SESSlON —Thursday Evening.
There was a large attendance.
After the usual service of praise and prayer, and a brief address by
the President,
Mr. W. Davies addressed the meeting. Mr. Davies said he had not
spoken much at the meetings of the Convention, but he thought he could
gather up a few suggestions from the conversations that had taken place.
They had been told there was a danger lest in urging this higher blessing


of holiness, they should neglect to glorify God for their pardon. There
was some mistake in that. If there were anything for which they would
have to glorify God in this life, and the next, it was because God for
Christ’s sake had pardoned their sins. Without pardon there could be
no peace, no holiness, no heaven, and no crown of righteousness; and if
all these these were enjoyed they would never cause the child of God to
fail to glorify God, because of his pardon. Again, it was said, there
was a danger of their not recognising Jesus sufficiently in this great
work of holiness. Some mistake here also. Ho had been taught from
his short experience of the blessing, that it was “ Jesus the first and the
last.” Saved souls not recognise Jesus ! Some mistake somewhere.
The saved condition must be a myth if they did not recognise Jesus and
His righteousness in every stage of their experience. Then it was said
there was danger of falling away from grace if they were made holy.
But if there was danger here, there was certainly much more danger
before being made so. He feared many people fell away because they
trusted to feelings rather than to faith ; and he would exhort all those
who like himself had recently entered into this new life not to cast
away their confidence or to depend upon their emotions. The devil
followed them all the way through, and he would play upon their
feelings if he could. He believed that if they would always renew their
confidence in God in times of depression, and not parley with the devil,
they would have uninterrupted experience of this second and glorious
blessing. Speaking about growth , he must confess that up to the time
of his entire consecration to God, he had grown very little. If he were
not to grow at any faster rate than he had done for nearly 30
years, he was afraid there was little prospect in the balance of
life left to him of growing into holiness. But when he abandoned the
idea of growing into it, he became convinced that his conduct had been
inexpressibly mean. When he saw what were the possibilities held out
before him through entire consecration, he was degraded in his own
estimation. He felt he had not done justice to God, to himself, to his
family, to the Church, or to the world, and there was not much trouble
about his going forward to the penitent form to seek entire holiness;
he felt as much conviction about it as when he was seeking mercy. If
he did not grow much before his sanctification, he would say humbly, not
vauntingly, thank God he had grown since, and by God’s help he would
grow more and more, for God would take away everything that would
impede his growth. Talk about finishing when they got full salvation !
Why, that was just the start of the full Christian life. He should be
sorry in heaven that he did not realise the Christian perfection 20 or
30 years ago. How much glory he might have brought to God, and how
many sinners he might have helped to Christ if he had enjoyed the
blessing during those years ! He was very glad to repeat befox-e a large
audience that their Church in its Sunday school hymn book clearly brings
out before the children, and encourages them to seek for, this very
blessing of holiness. He believed the Church erred in not urging the
children to perfection.


Rev. J. Woodhouse said that one of the writers and preachers
of the doctrine of Holiness in England had published a tract some
years ago, in which he pointed out that the great need of the Church
then was a revival within itself—a revival of Scriptural Holiness.
Was not this, too, the great need of the Methodist Church in these
lands to-day 1 All present were prepared to admit the need of a
revival of some kind, and were ready to join earnestly in the prayer,
“ O Lord, revive Thy work; ” but they should be specific and definite
in their prayers. What kind of a revival did they want? A revival
in the Church of Scriptural Holiness was what was needed more than
eloquence, or wisdom, or ability, or outward prosperity of any kind.
Why ? First , because the increase of God’s work was always associated
with revived power in the Church, It is when the spiritual
barometer is low that there is a freezing atmosphere in the Church.
It is then the poor stranger, who happens to come inside with the hope
of getting warmed and refreshed, only finds that there is no fuel in the
fireplace and no provision on the table, and scanty welcome from the
household. It is then that the work of God languishes, that evan-
gelical effort is barren of results, that there is no advance in spirituality
or grace. It is while self-satisfied professors of religion “ sit at ease
in Zion,” enjoying the orderly worship of their sanctuaries, that men
“ die in darkness, without a hope to cheer the tomb.” But, on the
other hand, it is when the Church is fully alive to her high calling,
and especially when she is earnestly inquiring after the full salvation,
or rejoicing in the experience of the power that “ saves to the utter-
most,” that sinners are converted, and the borders of the Church are
lengthened, and God comes near to fill and inspire His saints. In
1760, when that extraordinary wave of spiritual blessing swept over
the Methodist societies in England, it began with believers being
brought into the blessed experience of Holiness. “ Wherever the work
of sanctification increased the work of God increased in all its
branches;” and, as Mr. Wesley wrote, “While Christians sought a
more entire consecration, the godless were awakened more numerously
than ever.” The present esteemed and eloquent editor of the Metho-
dist Magazine wrote not long ago; “The largest accessions to our
societies have always been contemporaneous with, or consequent upon,
the renewed cultivation of Holiness amongst us; ” and he refers to
the year in which, as a boy, he was converted to God, when an
increase of 26,000 souls was reported. That was a time for preaching
Entire Sanctification—a time of protracted and powerful prayer.
And it is certain that where the blessing of Holiness is definitely
•enjoyed there will be the spirit of earnest prayer, and the
inevitable result of revival will accrue—a revival of unity, and
peace, and combined effort to save souls. Oh ! the blessed effect that
has of soothing down harsh and grating feelings and tempers ! How
it breaks down reserve, and prejudice, and pride, and binds into heart-
felt sympathy and oneness those who possess it! What consideration


it extends to the imperfections and infirmities of others; and how it
keeps from judging and evil speaking. Of necessity, a church of this
character, is infinitely better qualified to do the Lord’s work and win
sinners than one of an opposite spirit. The revival that was needed
was a revival of Holiness, because (secondly) the most successful soul-
winners have enjorced and enjoyed the blessing of Christian Holiness.
What worker in the Lord’s vineyard has not looked upon the God-
honoured labours of those servants of God who have been' blest with
large results in the conversion of souls, and longed that he himself
might also be as useful ? With that coveteousness which covets
earnestly the best gifts there has been the strong wish for the same
power that has made those specially-honoured servants of God the
mighty instruments of usefulness they were. The secret of their power
was soon discovered. It was not in the possession of uncommon gifts
of eloquence, or argumentation, or learning. Others who far surpassed
them in these things had not such results. The explanation was found
in the fact that they were men wholly consecrated to God, possessed
by perfect love, and filled with the Holy Ghost. It was almost need-
less to mention names. They all thought of Stephen, and Barnabas,
and Paul; of the Wesleys, and Fletcher, and Bramwell, and Smith,
and Collins, and Hunt, and Oookman, and California Taylor. He
could not speak from personal knowledge of any o£ these; but of one
young man, a Conference Evangelist in England, whom he well knew,
he could speak with confidence. This Evangelist spoke clearly of a
definite and distinct blessing received after his conversion—a baptism
of the Holy Ghost —after which, he said, to the glory of God, he had
never for some two years preached in an evening without some persons
being converted. In one fortnight’s mission which he conducted, and
which Mr. Woodhouse had witnessed, 900 adult persons publicly sought
the Saviour. (3rdly.) The revival they needed was a revival in the
Church of Scriptural Holiness, because the state oj the Church in this
colony demands it. Of course there was much for which they could
only be devoutly thankful to God. They had peace and prosperity of
a certain kind. In N.S.W. and Queensland there were 140 or 150
ministers, 370 churches, and a similar number of other preaching places,
about 450 local preachers, some 7800 church members (all of whom
were regarded as disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ, and expected to be
endeavouring to bring others to a knowledge of Him), and some 60,000
attendants or adherents. With this large organization, and its mani-
fold agencies, they might well ask what was the result ? Last year
there was a reported increase of 481 members ; this year promised to be
lower than that. Now, could they say that this was an adequate
return ? Then look at the average state of their societies at the present
time. How many would they find of hearty, glowing, saintly disciples-
of Jesus? How many of the great number of classes meeting that
week were remarkable for the warmth and fervour of their meetings, or
for the holiness and usefulness of their members ? There were surely


sufficient grounds for saying that the state of the Church here demanded
a revival of Christian Holiness within herself. The last thing he would
say he said with great thankfulness. He believed that the revival had
begun. This Convention indicated that it had. God grant that the
blessing might spread throughout the whole colony. But let not those
who were enjoying heart purity rest satisfied with that. It was said
that John Fletcher regarded it as a comparatively little thing to be
cleansed from sin. They wanted a baptism of the Holy Ghost—an
enduement of boldness and power. And this was promised “ unto you
and to your children. Ye shall receive 'power after that the Holy Ghost
is come upon you.” And “if ye, being evil, know how to give good gifts
unto your children, hoio much more shall your Heavenly Father give the
Holy Spirit to them that ask Him.”
The President gave an illustration and confirmation of what had
been said by the last speaker in reference to Class Meetings, As he
and his ministerial brethren made the quarterly visitations of the classes
they were greeted again and again with the same lamentable story of
unfaithfulness—“ not living as near to God as we might be.” This
showed the need of something to revive and quicken the members of
the Church.
Hev. M. Maddern said the remarks he made would help them to
understand what they meant by Christian Perfection. There would be
some truth with a possible admixture of imperfection in its statement.
It was a great mercy that the Lord worked over again the miracle of
the loaves and the fishes, by making the barley loaves and few fishes—
our poor little go a long way as of old in feeding the multitudes.
It had occurred to him that the doctrines of Christianity, like other
truths outside of the Bible—if any truth could lay outside of the Bible—
were identified with particular periods of history, and particular men
and women who gave them prominence. In this sense there is an aspect
of the holiness question that is historical. For example, the doctrines
of human freedom, the brotherhood of man, and the equality of human
rights were always looked upon as cardinal truths of religion, but it was
not until the emancipation of the slaves had been purchased at the cost
of twenty millions British Money, and the Civil War in America
had emphasised these doctrines, stamped them in the mint of public
recognition, passed them into the common currency of thought and
speech, that they were lifted into prominence as household words, with
such names as Wilberforce, Clarkson, Buxton, Washington, Lincoln, and
Grant. The doctrine of justification by faith was distinctively enough
taught in the early Christian Church, but it was not until Luther’s,
eloquence thundered, and the martyrs splendidly went up to heaven in
their chariots of flame, that the grand old doctrine shot athwart the sky
of Europe, and illumined to all men’s eyes the Cross of Christ, as God’s
only remedy for sin, which was to be received, not by works, but by a
simple act of faith.


In the same way the doctrine of holiness, though as old as religion,
has only at occasional periods, and in the embodied experience of holy
men and women been brought prominently before the notice of the
Church. No one disputes that holiness is a Scriptural doctrine, and no
one disputes that it was not till the revival which is associated with the
names of Wesley, Whitfield, and Fletcher, that the doctrine took its
proper and pre-eminent place in the category of Christian teaching.
Through the dark night of godlessness and indifference the names of
Thomas a Rempis, Madame Guy on, Wesley, Fletcher, and others,
gleam out like bright particular stars to illuminate and beautify this
precious doctrine of purity of heart. Methodism, from the start, was a
revival of Christian holiness, and an organised effort to spread it through
the land. Its fierce conflict with the forces of evil, and its keen
controversies with error, supplied the requisite temperature which
crystallized the doctrine into a sharpness and precision of meaning,
which need not blush in comparison with the chemical law which forms
a crystal.
But though Methodism has scientifically defined and guarded the
doctrine from misconception, it is not exclusively a doctrine of the
Methodist Church. All the Churches in Christendom hold the doctrine
with variations to harmonise with their particular standards of truth.
They lift up an ideal standard, to which the best people in their
respective communions seek to conform their lives. The old mystics
had spiritual insight enough to glimpse the truth, though the errors
they associated with it made it a vague, far-away, and impracticable
achievement of the Christian life. The Ascetics likewise blundered by
making it the reward of isolation from Society, and the infliction of
severities upon their poor flesh in the shape of fasting, self-denial, and
torture.
Romanism in its own legal way sets up for attainment a lofty ideal
of perfection. That the faithful should ever reach it, as occasionally
they do, is not to be put down to the credit of Romanism as a system
but to the vitality of what little truth it has left struggling through its
many errors and operating in spite of them.
Presbyterianism practically believes in the doctrine of holiness, or
it could not have produced the seraphic saintliness and fervour of a
Robert Murray McOheyne, or the revivalistic successes of his kindred
spirit and companion, Dr. Sommerville, whose praise is in all the
Australian Churches. Reserved as Presbyterianism is on questions of
personal religious experience, now and then the pent-up fires of God’s
love in some intense nature will burst the barriers of Church-training
and credal properness, and prove the belief of a higher life, as volcanic
eruptions prove the existence of subterranean fires in the earth.
The collects of the Church of England affirmed the precious trutli
in such language as the following Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this
day from all sin. Cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of
Thy Holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love Thee and worthily magnify


Thy holy name.” Why oven our matter of fact and simple Quaker
friends believe in the doctrine. From the dead level of Quaker
simplicity a volcano has been thrown up, and through the crater has
been shot this blazing doctrine of Christian Perfection.
George Fox, the founder of the Society of Friends, in speaking of
his experience of this blessing, said that he was “ brought into the
Paradise of God, and knew nothing but pureness, innocence, and
righteousness, being renewed up into the image of God, into the state
that Adam was before the fall.”
Another eminent Quaker, called Barclay, says “ In whom this pure
and holy birth is fully brought forth, the body of death and sin comes
to be crucified and destroyed, and their hearts united and subjected to
the truth so as not to obey any suggestions of temptations of the evil
one, but to be free from actual shillings and transgressings, and, in that
respect, perfect. Yet this perfection still admits of growth, and there
always remaineth a possibility of sinning where the mind doth not
watchfully and dilligently attend unto the Lord.” One of the best
pamphlets he had read on Christian Perfection was written by a Quaker
Doctor, and he was glad to find that a good Christian lady had sent a
copy to every Wesleyan Minister in the colony.
George Fox, in his definition, places the doctrine far above the
Methodist level. As Methodists we do not believe in Adamic or
Angelic Perfection. Religion did not undertake to give a man a new
body or a new set of brains. Its province was not to reverse the
secondary effects of sin, but to kill sin itself, and make possible the best
life that could be lived in the flesh. It was just here that they differed
from the Oberlin view of perfection as represented by Mahan and
Finney. This theory contends that Christian Perfection involves a
perfect conformity to the moral law, but the Methodist view affirmed
that we are under the remedial arrangements and conditions of the law
of love in Christ Jesus, and that this law makes our perfection a relative
one, making allowance for our mistakes and imperfections of an
involuntary kind, and covering them all over with the infinite merit of
Christ’s atonement.
He had stated the day before that there was a revulsion of feeling
on the part of some when this doctrine was brought prominently forward.
He had felt something like it himself. He asked himself, “ Has it come
to this that I, a leader of the Sacramental Host of God’s elect, have all
these years been living below my privilege 1” It was a humiliating
thing to criminate himself in that way, and ho said I will lead the way
into this experience and then ask the people to follow me. He thanked
God that he was enabled to decide the question in that way. There is
a story told of an iron egg, which is said to be kept in a Museum in
Dresden. A Prince presented his betrothed with an iron egg, when
she, on receiving it with a woman’s indignation, deeming herself to be
worthy of some better present, threw it on the floor. The of the
blow opened a spring and out rolled a silver yolk. Her curiosity was


aroused, and, lifting it, she touched another secret spring, and 10, a
golden chicken appeared. While examining this new wonder, another
secret spring opened, and she had in her hand a magnificent diamond
marriage ring. There is something analogous to this when the privilege
of heart purity is urged upon the acceptance of a justified man. He says,
with more than an appearance of indignation, “ Am I to repudiate the
facts of my religious experience, my justification and regeneration.”
There is a temporary feeling of indignation and revolt against the
unwelcome truth ; but by and by it is found to be a silvern thing, and
then golden, and finally its stands revealed as a rare and precious jewel,
the ring and covenant seal of full salvation; and then the believing soul
allows Christ to put on him this ring of the soul’s total self-surrender,
and says, “ I take thee for better for worse, for richer for poorer, in
sickness and in health, and I am determined that neither life nor death,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present nor things to come,
nor height nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate
me from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus, my Lord.”
Many people have imperfect notions and misconceptions concerning
holiness. They judged people professing this experience by harsh
and unreasonable standards.
He told such people that men were very much like trees. Some
trees were straight in the barrel, they looked well and split easily.
Other trees were knotted and gnarled, and no amount of bending and
smoothing could get rid of these peculiarities. They were an integral
part of the tree, and there they would remain. About some men there
was a sweet reasonableness and beauty of character, which was
heightened by religion, while in others, again, there were oddities and
eccentricities which constituted the individuality of the man, and would
never be got rid of. But he would no more think of charging
eccentricities to moral defection and badness of heart, than he would
think of saying that nature was not governed on a plan, because of
occasional droughts and floods.
God dealt with us pretty much in the same way that a builder
dealt with an old house that had to be taken down and built up anew.
The building made out of the old materials would only be a patchwork
affair at the best. And when God took hold of our old bad nature,
damaged by sin, and reconstructed us, the result was the best possible
thing to be expected under the circumstances. And so when there was
a full consecration of our nature to God to have the best possible done
for us, this best was all that was meant by Christian Perfection.
At the conclusion of Mr. Maddern’s address a Prayer Meeting was
held, at which a large number of persons presented themselves as
seekers of the blessing of Holiness ; and before the service closed many
a heart was led to rest upon Christ for “ full redemption.”


SEVENTH SESSION— Friday Morning.
After time given to praise and prayer.
The Rev. J. A. Bowring, (Conference Evangelist) read the follow*
ing paper on
“THE CONNECTION BETWEEN HOLINESS AND USE-
FULNESS.”
The subject that I have been asked to address you upon, is one of the
most important that can engage our attention, viz., the connection
between the holiness and usefulness. 1 will first state what we mean
by the terms holiness and usefulness, and then endeavour to show their
relationship to each other. By holiness, we mean not only a life out-
wardly conformed to the will of God, but conscious possession of a heart
cleansed from sin. By usefulness, we mean a life of successful Christian
activity.
We, as a Church, are often found mourning over comparatively few
conversions, and slow progress generally. While we thankfully ac-
knowledge the blessing of God upon our past labour, yet we cannot
reflect upon the large membership we have, and the number of ministers
and laymen engaged in Christian work, without feeling that the pro-
gress we make is not commensurate with the means we have at our
disposal or the agencies we employ.
We are thus led to enquire whether there is not a large amount
of ability existing in the Church that is not employed, and why is it that
the efforts that are put forth are not more effective 1
Many professing Christians excuse themselves from engaging in
■Christian work by pleading want of ability, or that they have no time
to devote to it. Others, again, think that they can serve God better by
attending solely to temporal pursuits. Various reasons may also be
offered for the apparent want of success we sometimes meet with in
working for God.
Want of success may sometimes be justly attributed to the want of
wisdom and skill displayed in the use of means. Then we must ever
remember that we have’three powerful foes arrayed against us, viz, the
world, the flesh, and the devil. But if we would arrive at the truth
concerning this matter, we must be faithful with ourselves, and enquire
whether our usefulness is not frequently marred by an inconsistent life.
Some one has said “ God has no ultimate use for a man who is not holy,
and such a man does not become what he was meant to be. A rose tree
that does not blossom is of no use in a garden. A vine that bears no
fruit is of no use in a vineyard.” So a man destitute of the blossoms
of the Christian graces, and the fruits of holy living is of little use in
bringing the world to Christ. He may have education, culture, and
eloquence, but the one thing to make him effective in Christian
work is holiness. Just in proportion as a man leads a holy life himself,
will he be enabled to help others to do the same.


That holiness is essential to usefulness will be apparent from the
following considerations :
Ist.—Holiness means freedom from all sin, and therefore, the
removal of all inconsistencies of the life.
The inconsistencies of professing Christians always prove a serious
stumbling-block in the way of the unconverted. Pride, worldliness, and
bad temper in social life, and covetousness and questionable practices
in business life, and an uncharitable and unforgiving spirit in
church life, cripple a Christian’s influence, and make him feel it would
be inconsistent for him to engage in Christian work. Many with the
same wretched experience attempt to work for God, but they accomplish
little or nothing themselves, and often seriously hinder others. The one
remedy for all this is Scriptural Holiness.
Under the old dispensation the priests and all who ministered
unto the Lord were sanctified, or set apart to do a special work. Their
robes and ritual indicated the holiness that God required of them, and
the purity symbolized by their white robes God designs all Christians
should now enjoy. “Ye also as lively stones are built up a spiritual
house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to
God by Jesus Christ.” 1 Pet. ii 5. “ But ye are a chosen generation, a
royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that ye should shew
forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his
marvellous light.” 1 Pet. ii 9. When “ holiness unto the Lord ” is
written upon our hearts, and upon all our actions then shall we be
“ Vessels unto honour, sanctified and nieet for the Master’s use, and
prepared unto every good work.” 2 Tim. ii 21.
David prayed “ Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation; aiid
uphold me with thy free spirit; then will I teach transgressors thy ways,
and sinners shall be converted unto thee.” Ps. Ii 12, 13.
And when we experience the peace and joy that full salvation
brings then shall we not only labour with liberty, but with success.
2nd.—Holiness means willingness to work for God.
While many Christians desire to be useful, in some cases it amounts
to no more than a desire. They would like to see God’s work prosper;
they would even like to be the honoured instruments in God’s hands of
saving souls, and to share in the joy that such prosperity brings to Zion,
but they are unwilling to sacrifice their own ease and comfort to
minister to the spiritual necessities of others. Jesus said “If any man
will come after me let him deny himself, and take up his cross and
follow me.” This duty such Christians are unwilling to undertake. If
work for God involved no sacrifices then they would be willing to engage
in it; but they see that it means the sacrifice of some
wordly ambition, the loss perhaps of some cherished reputation amongst
a certain class in society, the enduring of some toils and hardships; and
these things they will not endure. Therefore they find that years
pass by, and they have not been the means of leading perhaps a single
soul to Christ.


But the Christian who would be used by God must be willing to be
used. His will must be subject to God’s will. As the passive tool in
the hand of the workman accomplishes his will, so the consecrated
Christian, alone, will be used by God to the salvation of souls.
Christ said, “My meat is to do the will of him that sent me.”
Paul said, he was “ ready to preach the gospel to you that are at Rome
also,” and though there was the prospect of stripes, bonds, and imprison-
ment, before him, still he was willing to endnre it all that the name
of Christ might be extended through the world and sinners saved.
With the life of holiness there is this willingness to do anything
and go anywhere for God. The believer has heard and obeyed the com-
mand “ present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto
God, which is your reasonable service.” Rom. xii. 1. As clay in the
hands of the potter he is willing to be made a vessel unto honour or
dishonour, i. e., to occupy a high or humble position in the vineyard of
the Lord. Isaiah cried out “ Woe is me ! for lam undone ; because I
am a man of unclean lips,” but when one of the seraphims laid the live
coal upon his mouth, and purged away his iniquity, then he was ready
to respond to the enquiry, “ Whom shall I send, and who will go for
us?” “ Here am I, send me.”
“ Send me Lord where thou wilt send me,
Only do thou guide my way ;
May thy grace through life attend me,
Gladly then shall I obey.
Let me do thy will or bear it,
I will know no will but thine ;
Shouldst thou take my life or spare it,
I that life to thee resign. ”
Surely such a devoted life cannot fail to be a useful one.
3rd.—Holiness brings with it singleness of aim.
In working for God self-seeking and unsanctified ambitions
sometimes mingle with better motives. We find ourselves choosing that
work which will exalt self most. There is sometimes a desire to shine.
We love the praise of men. We are anxious to know what others think
of our work. There is a jealousy lest others should be thought more of
than ourselves. It has been said that “ Service rendered under the
influence of such motives is not service for Christ but for ourselves.”
But the sanctified believer works with a single aim for God’s glory. He
asks himself “Which work will most promote the glory of God and the
salvation of souls ? ” He is less anxious for his reputation than for the
welfare of God’s cause. His motto is “ Thy glory be my single aim,”
and following the example of Christ, who “ pleased not himself,” he
labours with self-sacrifice and unselfishness for the Master. Such a
consecrated life will surely be honoured by God.
4th. Holiness means the spirit of tender sympathy and love. Such
a spirit is most essential to successful labour. Some Christians fail to
accomplish much good because of a harsh and unsympathetic tone and


maimer. The truth is spoken ; but it is not spoken in love. The sanc-
tified believer has had such views of the depravity of his own nature
that he has now more pity for the sinner; and, living in constant com-
munion with Christ, he has more of the loving spirit of the Master,
“ Whose heart still melts with tenderness,
Whose arms of love still open are. ”
How often has a kind sympathising word been the means of winning a
soul when a true, but cold and unsympathetic word, would have
repelled.
sth.—Holiness enables the believer to exercise strong faith in God.
“ Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence towards
God ; and whatsoever we ask we receive of Him, because we keep His
commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in His sight.”
1 Jo. iii. 21, 22. But a man living in conscious violation of the will of
God, knowing of the existence of cherished evil in his heart, how can
he, with confidence, ask of God to bless his labours'! He feels he is
harbouring an opponent of his Master’s Kingdom within, and therefore
he cannot look up with confidence for success. That such faith in God
is essential to success, we see taught throughout God’s Word. Four
times did the Lord exhort Joshua to “be strong and of a good
courage,” before entering upon the conquest of Canaan. David, going
to fight Goliath, was confident that God would give him the victory
over the uncircumcised Philistine. Jesus rebuked His Disciples for
their want of faith. When they asked Him, “Why could not we cast
him (the devil) out?” He said, “ Because of your unbelief; for verily
I say unto you, if ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed ye shall say
unto this mountain, ‘ Remove hence to yonder place,’ and it shall
remove, and nothing shall be impossible unto you.” Matt. xvii. 20.
Faith in God gives courage to reprove, rebuke, exhort. Courage to
face danger, opposition, and even death ; but before the believer can
exercise this strong confidence in God he must obtain that sanctification
of heart which will enable him to keep God’s commands perfectly.
6th.—Holiness ensures the gracious and mighty power of the Holy
Ghost in connection with Christian labour. The holiest and best of
God’s servants have always felt most that whatever good they
accomplished was through the presence and agency of the Holy
Spirit. Learning, eloquence, organisation, and labour of all kinds is
ineffectual to save a single soul without the life-giving spirit of God.
Learning may instruct the mind, eloquence stir the soul, and organisa-
tion give the semblance of life ; but it is the Spirit of God alone that
can impart spiritual life, and save the soul. How many there are who
are longing for the converting power of the Holy Ghost to attend their
labours. They read the promise, “Ye shall be endued with power,”
but they have it not. They wonder why their efforts produce so little
effect. Is it not because they have not tarried at Jerusalem 1 Though
Christ promised the Holy Ghost to His disciples, yet He was not given


until they were prepared to receive Him. And now, as then, only
those who are cleansed from all sin can be fit temples of the Holy
Ghost. We must first receive the Holy Spirit in His office as sancti-
fier, before we can know Him as the mighty Energiser of our feeble
efforts. Then, when the temple is cleansed, the glory of God will abide
there. Power will be given in prayers, testimony, reproof, or exhorta-
tion. His people will be filled with a quenchless zeal for the salvation
of souls that will calmly endure ridicule, opposition, and persecution.
It will be something more than a series of spasmodic efforts or a flash in
the pan;—there will be an abiding earnestness, the result of the
indwelling Spirit of God; and though the labourer may be illiterate,
poor, and uninfluential, yet God will own and bless His labours to the
salvation of souls.
But you are perhaps ready to ask where are examples of such holy
and useful lives to be found 1 The world has seen many of them. The
Apostles were mostly humble, illiterate men; and yet God used them to
the salvation of many souls. Every church furnishes examples of such;
but I would simply mention some names familiar to Methodism. There
is the revered founder of our Church, who not only preached Entire
Sanctification as a present privilege, but exemplified it in his life.
In his journal he attributes the coldness and the declensions he
sometimes found in the Societies to the fact that this doctrine had not
been clearly and strongly enforced. He said, “ I see that whenever this
is not done the believers grow cold and dead; nor can this be prevented
but by keeping up in them an hourly expectation of being perfected
in love, I say an hourly expectation, for to expect it at death,
or sometime hence, is much the same % as not expecting it at all.”
In October, 1765, he writes: “Monday, 30th, and the two following
days, I examined the Society in Bristol, and was surprised to find 50
members fewer than I left in it last October. One reason is, Christian
perfection has been little insisted on ; and wherever this is not done,
be the preacher ever so eloquent, there is little increase either in the
numbers or the grace of the hearers.” It was the faithful preaching
of this doctrine, and the loving exemplification of it by such men as
Thomas Walsh, John Smith, William Bramwell, Thomas Collins, and a
host of others that constituted the secret of their power and usefulness,
and that has made our loved Church what it is to-day.
But possibly some one will ask, am I to expect such results to my
labours as these men had ? I ask, why not 1 Is not God as able to
work now as ever He was ? Is His arm shortened 1 Can He not now
.as aforetime use a worm to thresh a mountain? “ According to your
faith be it unto you.”
But there are some who may make the mistake of judging of their
sanctification by the visible results of their labours, and because they
do not see as many souls saved as they desire, they doubt
whether as yet the work is completed. Remember, the cleansing of the
heart from sin is one thing, and being filled with the Spirit is another.


It is our privilege after full cleansing to receive increasingly abundant
baptisms of the Holy Ghost and power, so that our effectiveness as
workers for God will continually increase. Besides we are not all called
to the same work ; though we are all called to work for the salvation of
souls in some way. While some are called to preach the Gospel, others
are called to teach the young, others to distribute tracts, others to visit
the sick, and some simply to lie upou their sick beds and pray. Yet all
can and should aim at being useful. We have no sympathy with those
who are content to sing hymns all day, or with the ascetic style of holi-
ness of the ancient Symeon Stylite, who lived 36 years on the summit
of a pillar, the height of which was raised from time to time to bring
him nearer to Heaven as he approached perfection. No ! True holiness
will shew itself in usefulness of some sort. It may be in the use of the gift
of speech, of song, of money, of influence, or of all. Let us therefore
ask ourselves, am I doing all I can for the Master 1 ? Am I willing to
accept any service that His will appoints 1 Am I labouring with a single
eye to Hie glory ? Am I living in the indulgence of any known sin ?
Is there any gift, talent, or ability I have not laid upon the altar to be
used for the Master’s service h If you cannot answer these questions
satisfactorily, depend upon it you are still living an unsanctified life,
and are therefore not living up your full measure of Christian
usefulness.
Oh ! that every brother and sister in our Church would seek this
coveted blessing, consecrating all they have to God, and trusting in the
blood of Christ to cleanse them now from all sin. Then would our hosts
be as Gideon’s three hundred. Then the Church would become “ fair as
the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners.”
“ Thou must be true thyself,
If thou the truth wouldst teach ;
Thy soul must overflow, if thou
Another’s soul wouldst reach ;
It needs the overflow of heart
To give the lips full speech.”
“ Think truly, and thy thoughts
Shall the world’s famine feed ;
Speak truly, and each word of thine
Shall be a fruitful seed ;
Live truly, and thy life shall be
A great, and noble creed.”
The whole of the morning was given to an earnest and profitable
conversation upon the important subject introduced by Mr. Bowring.
Rev. R. Allen supposed they were all agreed that holiness and
spiritual power were in some sense synonymous terms. All Christians
would realize that inasmuch as they lacked holiness, they lacked spiritual
power over themselves, and over the world. It was in holiness they
realised power to plead and prevail with God. The history of their


church substantiated the statement made by Mr. Bowring. Some one
had once said that Methodists were like the early Christians, and he
thought that if the Methodist of to-day could become like the early
Christians, clothed with mighty spiritual power, they would like them
go forth, and as it was said of them, turn the world upside down.
Rev. W. 0. Hughes was much obliged to the author of the paper.
It did his heart good to listen to it. It was the evidence of the power
of the Spirit, as seen in the life and work of some of those who had
recently received the blessing of holiness, that gave him the conviction
of his own need, and of its being a real experience. He mentioned some
cases that had come under his notice.
Rev. W. G. Taylor said they all felt that this was a most appro-
priate subject to come after all that had been said in argument and
illustration respecting the doctrine. They had now to see that what had
been read that morning should be carried out in their own life and work.
He was glad to hear quoted the statement of Mr. Wesley in referring
to the work at Bristol, in which he emphasised the fact that the church
was not progressing because the doctrine of entire sanctification was not
being preached. He had recently heard a good deal about the work of
God in Canada. A number of ministers there, who felt that the doctrine
of entire sanctification had not been preached as it should, banded them-
selves together some 15 or 20 years ago for the purpose of publishing it
everywhere. Now the Connexionai journals of Canada are full of
holiness matter. Revivals are the natural order of things. The
increase of members in the Church for last year was 20,000, which was,
at least in part, attributable to the fact just mentioned. He was im-
pressed with the thought that if so much good could come from a few
men uniting together in Canada for such a holy purpose, equally blessed
results would follow if all those present determined to adopt a similar
course, and give themselves fully to God to seek the spread of holiness
in this land. He longed that the practical issue of the Convention
might be that they should all lay themselves out for fuller consecration,
and more earnest endeavour to promote holiness, and to win this colony
for Christ.
Rev. T. R. McMichael was sure that in the same proportion that
they honoured the Holy Sanctifier would He honour them and bless
their work. Personally he never had such success as since he received
entire cleansing. Some people who referred to the good old days of
Methodism said that the success of the preachers was in part due to the
fact that they preached new doctrines and their methods were novel.
But he did not think that any novelty of method or newness of doctrine
brought them success. Their intelligence was not greater than that of
workers in the Church to-day, but they had the power of the Holy
Ghost; and what was wanted most of all to-day was the baptism of the
same Holy Ghost, and with that nothing could stop them. They might
expect some to take objections to them, but if the Lord was on their


side no power on earth would prevail against them. He was prepared
to lose everything he possessed rather than lose the opportunity of
making this Colony resound with the doctrine of Entire Holiness.
God Grant that from this Convention there might go a glorious wave
of revival throughout the land.
Rev. J. S. Cutler said that those who read the papers and led the
discussions in that Convention had got the doctrine of holiness just as
the efficient preachers of it in England and America had it, and all they
needed was to throw themselves heartily into this work, and a wave of
salvation blessing would flood the colony. He could: confirm the
figures quoted by Mr. Taylor referring to Canada, and it was there that
the wonderful success was attributed as undoubtedly due to the publi-
cation of the doctrine of holiness. But the work had only just begun ;
there would be results far more wonderful yet. They had heard of
Thomas Harrison; he was about the last man they would expect to
become a mighty instrument for good. He was young, physically
small, and by no means specially educated ; but he was thoroughly
consecrated, recognising the old Methodist doctrine of Christian purity
and the baptism of the Holy Ghost as essential to carrying on the work
of God. What was the result? He goes among the fashionable city
congregations; ministers of culture and ability sit at his feet and co-
operate with him in his mission in their Churches, and there are such
works as were never known before in those places. In one city there
were some 2,200 or 2,500 conversions in a few weeks. In connection
with his work he seeks the sanctification of believers, insists upon it as
essential to their spiritual life. Among those who go out seeking
sanctification at the altar are often found side by side large numbers of
penitent sinners, and many ministers of the Gospel. This was but one
illustration of many others, and he had no doubt but that if the brethren
in this colony followed the same course they would have the same results.
Rev. S. Wilkinson was thankful to God that the Convention had
taken such a practical turn. Its excellencies would be measured by its
fruits. While the spiritual aspects were dwelt upon there should also
be the practical works of mercy and benevolence kept in view. Every-
body could understand the practical fruits of Christianity as they found
manifestation in the doing good to all men. One sentiment occurred to
him all through : that while they laid down the great principles of the
doctrine they were considering, they wanted more and more of a personal
Christ dwelling in them, that they might walk as Jesus also walked
below. Then would the world take knowledge of them.
Miss Leonard had been thinking that possibly there were laymen
and sisters present who were thinking that this holiness would be of
power to preachers, but it was beyond their enjoyment as they mixed
up with the trials of life. She would have it clearly understood that it
was for all, and those who had business and domestic difficulties would
find that it gave them wonderful help and comfort under all circum-
stances. She related a number of instances to illustrate this.


Mr. Kershaw (Grookwell) was thankful that this great blessing*
was not confined to educated people, that the lowest of the land might
obtain it by faith. He was much pleased with the paper read, and was
convinced that when a person got that glorious experience he could not
rest until he carried the news of it to his neighbours. God had given
him to see that this blessing was obtainable through faith. Just as He
promised pardon He promised holiness, and if they believed what He
said He would give them the one as well as the other.
Rev. John Clifton (Hyde) said, I think the idea of holiness in
connection with usefulness is a very philosophical one. The question
has come to me, What is the power that awakens men and leads them
to the cross of Christ 1 It is the power of the Holy Ghost, just that
power that brought light in the beginning, that moved upon the face of
the waters. If I am not fully consecrated to God, if my heart has
anything of sin or anything of the world in it, then it cannot be filled
with the Holy Spirit; and so I see the idea is truly a Scriptural one.
What moved me to my feet was looking over this congregation and
seeing several here that I can humbly claim as my children in Christ.
I thank God that I have known something of this power all through
my ministerial life. Most of you have heard of the very gracious work
we have had in the Hyde circuit. Such conviction of sin I have not
seen anywhere else; men and women rising at the bottom of the Church
and crying to the top of their voices “ Lord have mercy upon me,”
Night after night this has continued, and there has been an amount of
joy and thanksgiving such as I never witnessed. I am somewhat
surprised at the expression “giving up everything to God.” Never do
I remember a time since my new birth that I did not fully give up my-
self to God. I have just been examining my heart, and I know of
nothing in the world that I cannot give up for God. I know something
of the sanctifying power of the Holy Spirit. I believe there is a greater
fulness possible—that we may not only receive the Spirit, but be filled
with the Spirit.
Mr. W. Davies was very thankful indeed for the profitable paper
read that morning. He had been much moved in thinking of what a
prominent layman (Mr. Allen) had said in the British Conference, “ A
converted ministry may succeed, but a sanctified ministry must
succeed.”
Rev. J. Woodhouse quoted the remark of Thomas Collins (whom
they all knew as a most earnest and successful soul-winner), w*hen he
was asked, “ How is it many gifted, learned, and laborious men never
realize such results 1” the answer was, “Among the brotherhood lam
but a child, yet it sometimes seems to me that I could whisper even into
the ears of such men a more excellent way. Wesley tells it; the Bible
tells it; Let every Methodist Minister get , keep, preach , and press full
salvation. God woidd seal His sanctifying wordy


Rev. E. 0. Pritchard, F.G.S. had at one time allowed the fallacy to
enter his mind, that with the difference of circumstances in our time as
compared with the times of the early Methodists they cannot expect the
same measure of blessing. He had found that this was indeed a fallacy,
and that if they were endowed with the divine power, and fully given
up to God, as great blessing would rest upon them as upon their fathers.
EIGHTH SESSION.— Friday Afternoox.
A special meeting for prayer having been held the Rev. E. C.
Pritchard, E.G.S. read a paper on
“ EVIDENCES OF THE ATTAINMENT OF PERFECT LOVE.”
The last words Jesus spake on earth, before the heavens received
Him, were addressed to His disciples, and were these:—“Ye shall
receive power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you : and ye shall
be witnesses unto Me both in Jerusalem and in all Judea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.”
Ho w few Christians, comparatively, are there, who, if appealed to,
could quote the last words of Jesus upon earth 1
How suggestive ! how important 1 “My witnesses ,” after that power
had been imparted by the coming on them of the Holy Ghost,
The Saviour, in these words, shows that it is His design and desire
that His disciples should be witnesses unto Him in all ages and among
all peoples.
The persons He addressed were converted, were His disciples, knew
the truth, had received their commission to go into all the wsrld and
preach the Gospel to every creature, and yet they did not possess the
witnessing power, the Holy Ghost. Now, if the disciples who had
lived under the direct ministry of Christ for so long, and who had
received their commission direct from him, and who, therefore, could not
question their acceptance or their commission, needed the Holy Ghost
as a witnessing powey \ how much more do we need this endowment of
witnessing power, and will any one suppose that this gift will be an
unattested one, or that its possession will be an unconscious blessing ?
No Christian, at least no Methodist Christian, would for one
moment question the actuality of the evidence of pardon. So we must
conclude that God will not leave us without clear evidence of the work
of cleansing accomplished in us.
The Rev. Dr. Newman, in his excellent paper on “Scriptural
Holiness,” read at the Acumenical Conference, in City Road Chapel,
London, speaking of its nature and the evidences of it—quoting the
passage, “If we walk in the light, as He is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus, His Son, cleanseth us
from all sin” —says : “ This is more than pardon of actual transgression,
more than subjugation of inherited depravity, more than the deliverance


from the dominion of sin. It is the completion of Regeneration, it is
entire Sanctification. But this exalted state of grace is not immunity
from the infirmities incident to an imperfect body, or from the
mistakes inevitable to a weak understanding, or from the liability to
sin, or from the necessity and possibility of growth in grace. Structural
imperfections, disease and death imply man’s fall, and because of which
he cannot respond fully to the primal law under which he was created a
perfect being. These are defects not to be remedied by entire sanctifi-
cation, but by the resurrection of the just. ‘He knoweth our frame, He
remembereth that we are dust.’ Yet to the pure is given the grace of
patience and resignation to endure the ills of a body which is the temple
of the Holy Ghost. And it is a fact that by the sobriety it demands
by the restfulness it imparts, by the joy it creates, holiness tends to
health and length of days. ‘With long life will I satisfy him and show
him my salvation.’ Nor is this entire consecration to Christ inconsistent
with the possible errors which arise from an enfeebled intellect or from
limited knowledge. Such may not be separable from the purest intention
and the holiest life, yet liability to such will be largely diminished by
the presence of an informing and guiding spirit.”
Now, within the line of this statement, I find the experiences of
those who are in the enjoyment of this blessing generally to run. It is
not witness to an absolute or even Angelic, but a Christian perfection.
Although this state of perfect love may be said to be one, and all who
experience it have entered into the “ rest of faith,” yet what we may
call individual idosyncracies will obtain, and therefore we shall not find
the same expression of experience of the same blessing. And again, as
the evidence to the believer will be measured by his faith, we shall find
considerable difference in the manner of confessing it. A clear
intellectual conception, and a firm grip of the doctrinal truth of this
state, with a whole surrender to this truth, and the Cod, whose truth it
is, will bring any believer into the possession of this blessing. The Rev.
J. A. Wood (companion of Rev. J. S. Inskip) says, “The evidence of
purity will appear as unmistakably as that of pardon. God can so
thoroughly adjust the application of the truth to the soul by the Holy
Ghost as to meet all peculiarities; and then we shall have air experience
of this grace of purity peculiarly our own.”
To put experience into language is an acknowledged difficulty, and
such experience as perfect love needs the vocabulary of heaven, the
speech of the just made perfect before the throne, to do justice to the
theme, but we will record a few utterances of God’s people on this
question.
Professor Upham, D.D., a Congregational Minister of America,
who, in 1840, found this blessing, writes:—“One Sabbath evening,
February 2nd, I was greatly affected in mind, and tossed to and fro as
in a tempest, and it seemed to me that I could not easily stand where I
was but must either advance or retreat. But God’s grace was sufficient.
My faith remained unshaken, and on Monday morning I thought I


could say, with great calmness and assurance, ‘ Thou hast given me the
victory.’ I was never able to say before that time with sincerity and
confidence that I loved my heavenly Father with all my soul and all my
strength, but, aided by Divine grace, I have been enabled to use this
language, which involves, as I understand it, the idea of holiness or
Christian perfection. There was no intellectual excitement, no very
marked joy when I reached this great Rock of practical Salvation. The
soul seemed to have gathered strength from the storm which it had
passed through on the previous night, and, aided by a Power from on
high, it leaped forward as it were by a bound to the great and decisive
mark. I was distinctly conscious when I reached it. The selfish
exercises which had recently, and as it were, by a concentrated spasmodic
effort, troubled me so much, seemed to be at once removed, and I
believed, and had reason to believe, that my heart, presumptuous as it
may seem to some to say it, was now purified by the Holy Spirit and
made right with God. I was then, if I was not mistaken in my feelings,
no longer an offering to the world, but sanctified into the Lord—given
to Him to be His and no longer my own—redeemed by a mighty power
and filled with a blessing of perfect love. It is difficult for me to
concieve of any heaven but God’s presence, of any hell but his absence.
I realize that the cup of my happiness is full, whatever may be my
personal trials and sorrows, whenever and wherever my heavenly Father
is glorified in me. Accordingly it is my earnest and constant prayer
that my will may be wholly and for ever lost in the will of God, and
that I may never know self any more, except as the instrument of the
Divine glory.”
The Rev. J. Fletcher, the Yicar of Madeley, in Shropshire, was one
of the agents used of heaven in the revival of the last century. On one
occasion, before a select society of earnest believers in Leeds, he thus
related the facts of his Christian experience : —“ My dear brethren and
sisters, God is in this place ! I feel him here ! But I would hide my face
in the dust because I have been ashamed to declare what he hath done
for me. For many years I have grieved His spirit; but lam humbled,
and He has again restored my soul. Last Wednesday evening he spoke
to me by these words ‘ Reckon ye yourselves to be dead indeed unto-
sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord.’ I obeyed the
voice of God, I now obey it, and tell you all, to the praise of His love,
lam free from sin. Yes, I rejoice to declare it, and to bear witness to
the glory of His grace, that I am dead unto sin and alive unto God,
through Jesus Christ, who is my Lord and King. I received this
blessing four or five times before, but I lost it by not observing the
order of God, who has told us, ‘ With the heart man believeth unto
righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation/
But the enemy offered his bait under various colours to keep me from a
public declaration of -what my Lord had wrought. Now I resolve before
you all to confess my Master. I will confess Him to all the world, and
I declare, in the presence of the Holy Trinity, I am now ‘ dead indeed


unto sin.’ Oh, for that pure baptismal flame ! Oh, for the fulness of
the dispensation of the Holy Ghost!”
William Bramwell, a Wesleyan Minister, says in his letters :—“ I
never lived in so near a union with God as at the present. To retain a
constant sense of the presence of God is our glory in this world. It is
to live in Him, and always to feel it. This great salvation—salvation,
from all sin—salvation into all the Gospel glory, and to be changed into
the same image ! I am lost in wonder, love, and praise ! Oh. may we
drink deeper into these wells of salvation !”
John Smith, the Revivalist, of the same denomination, says in his
correspondence with his friends:—“Let us feast ourselves on Jesus.
Jesus is offered to me, I trust in Him, and lam saved; I continue to
trust, and am continually saved. God testifies this by His Holy Spirit.
All I want is in Jesus, and He is mine. I have power to give Him my
whole heart, and He takes it. His Spirit dwells in me, and reveals to
me the beauties of my Saviour. I rejoice with joy unspeakable, and
full of glory.”
As to my own personal experience, and thank God I have one on
this question I may remark that I have for 35 years believed in tht
doctrine of Christian Holiness, because I saw it clearly taught in God’s
word. For years I read all that had been written on the question, that
could get hold of, but still I stumbled. I, at times, seemed to be
entering this promised land, but was afraid to put my foot in the Jordan,
I wanted to see its waters divided. I often preached on the subject,
and always set it forth as the unquestioned right and privilege of the
believer, but I never entered the rest myself until June, 1881. I was
attending our Conference at Grimsby, Yorkshire, and on the Saturday
evening, while delivering the address at the Sacramental Service at
Oleethorpes, I got such an intellectual grip of the truth of the cleansing
power of the blood, and of the albsufficiency of Christ as a Saviour, as
my Saviour, that my soul said “ here is thy rest,” and at once, and
unreservedly I cast my soul on Him. I was immediately overwhelmed
with a sense of my Saviour’s presence and glory. I could not proceed
with the Service, but knelt there before the Altar, bathed in the Divine
glory. A brother Minister proceeded with the Service, but the glory of
God abode so mightily in the Assembly that it was scarcely possible to
minister at the Altar. I at once confessed my Lord, and, thank God,
have never lost the evidence. I have often since that blessed moment
been conscious of weaknesses and failings, but, thank God, not of sin.
My experience from that moment differed greatly from that of my
previous Christian life. I became blessedly conscious that all
controversy between my soul and God was at an end. I may further
say that the conflict between my intellect and God was at an end.
Previous to that, during my Christian life, I had many a severe mental
struggle, but thank God the struggle was for ever over. I had
surrendered myself —not my surroundings or belongings—but myself to
Jesus, to be His and His alone,


Now Christianity is to me a life, an estate, an inheritance, not
merely feelings or experience as commonly understood. Whatever my
surroundings or feelings, Jesus and all in Him is mine.
The evidences of my sanctification and sealing were much clearer
than even those of my justification. That might he partly accounted
for from the fact that I was blest with pious parents and a godly
training, and cannot remember the time when I had not the fear of God
before my eyes, and at a little over 14 years of age I gave my heart to
God. I find temptation and trial, after sanctification, quite a different
experience from temptation and trial before sanctification.
Then there were enemies within as well as without; now, thank
God, the stronger man has bound the strong and cast him out and
spoiled his goods, and no enemy of my Christ can dwell within. I have
temptation, but no doubt; trial, but no fear; duties various, but no rebel-
lion; not always joy, but always peace. My will is the will of my God.
A young man connected with the profession of the law was once at
a meeting for Christian testimony. He was sceptical on the subject of
personal godliness as a realized experience, and he did not practically
acknowledge the claims of Jehovah. As one after another related their
experience of saving grace, he took down, in shorthand, notes of what
they had to say on this important subject. His thought was that it
would afford amusement for himself and his companions. He had noted
the testimony of ten of these witnesses for Jesus. Looking it over, the
Spirit of God helped him to a few thoughts on the subject. It presented
itself thus:—“ Here is the evidence of ten credible witnesses. They
don’t speak in the same words, but they speak the same thing. They
are known as respectable men and women, and no judge or jury in the
country would dare to give a verdict which contradicted such evidence !”
Then the thought came, “ I have no such experience as this, but I must
have if I would answer the end of my creation here and go to heaven
when I die.” He did not rest till he was made a partaker of like
precious faith, and at another such meeting he was prepared to give his
own testimony. What, reader, will you do with the evidence given by
the foregoing witnesses 1 If it accords with the revelation and claims
of Jehovah, it is necessary for you. These witnesses testify that the
good promised in God’s Word is available to such faith as consecrates all
to God, and expects all from Him. You dare not say that the thing is
impossible unless you first try the promise and fail. None ever did
trust themselves to God for such good and failed. Are you not then
inexcusable if you possess not like precious faith 1
Rev. J. Oram said the paper referred to the matter of doubt as to
being kept after being brought into the state of entire conformity to the
Divine will. He believed this prevented many from making a full con-
secration, Sometimes the idea got into the mind, “If I make this
profession I shall fall, and be as I was previously.” He knew a friend
whom this thought had kept from declaring what God had done for
him. They must guard against this being a hindrance to them. If


God had kept them since they first came to him, surely he could keep
them to the end. He had been reading the life of Mr. Fletcher, by
Tyreman (a most excellent work), and found that Mr. Fletcher lost the
sense of entire holiness seven times. But what did he do 1 He at once
betook himself to the throne of grace, and the blood of sprinkling, and
sought until he regained the sense of entire sanctification. They must
not listen to doubt.
Rev. John Gardiner (Forest Lodge) had listened with pleasure to
the papers read that day. He remembered when Mr. Inskip conducted
a holiness mission in that dear old church, and it was a time of great
blessing to his soul. He was thankful for blessing, too, in connection
with that Convention, and wished he could have been present more
frequently. He was glad the standard of holiness was not placed too
high. It had been put higher than it was in the Bible by some people,
and many had been discouraged by that. But it should not be put too
low. As had been stated, it did not mean Adamic or angelic perfect-
ion, or the perfection of heaven. Nor was it something that shielded
them from temptation, or saved them from experiencing sorrow. Christ
was once exceedingly sorrowful. Neither was it to be regarded
as something which did not admit of higher growth, or as something
which they could not lose. It must be kept by great self-denial and
constant trust in God. He mentioned this because he was jealous for
this sacred doctrine, and he wished to encourage those who were seeking
it. Whatever it was, it was salvation from sin. It was to be lived down
here, and to lie manifest in all the outward conduct. He did not believe
in a man’s being sanctified, who was unkind to his wife and children, or
did not attend the prayer meeting, or was only content with special
missions and took no interest in the ordinary work of the church.
Rev. T. R. McMichael thought they would find, when they got
nto the enjoyment of it, that 1 Cor. xiii. contained all the evidences of
full salvation. For years he had been sailing over a tempestuous sea of
unrest and trouble; but since he had been enabled to take Christ as a
full Saviour he had known nothing of that. He had had perfect rest
of body and mind. He believed that ten or twenty years had been
added to his life by his entering into this rest of faith. Nothing wor-
ried or troubled him now ; and in that he found an evidence of perfect
love. Another thing was courage. He used to be a most timid and
fearful man, afraid of everything and everybody; but now he had
courage to testify anywhere—power to witness and make a fool of him-
self for Christ’s sake, if necessary. He wished something more might
be said on the question of temptation. The devil would be sure to
tempt them in all sorts of ways. They could not help that. Things
about them would suggest wrong thoughts about God and their own
circumstances; but these were injected by Satan. They were not theirs.
They had dothing to do Avith them. They rejected and disowned them
entirely. “ Thanks he unto God, who giveth us the victory


Miss Leonard said a difficulty arose with reference to temptation,
through persons not understanding the source of temptation. Many
said they were free from temptation when they only meant in reality
that there was nothing in their hearts that responded to the temptation
from without. Temptation meant a solicitation or inducement to eviL
When the inward depravity of the heart was removed there could he
nothing that would respond to temptation. The believer would be
conscious of the fiery darts of the adversary—perhaps more fiery than
before. He was tried by the world and by his friends. He may be
in heaviness through manifold temptations; but in all these there is
no answer in his own heart. The best plan, she believed, was to trust
God to give a discernment between temptation and the heart responding
to it. He would give that, and they would be always triumphant in
the midst of temptation.
Mr. W. Davies had not lived in this experience long enough to bn
a teacher. He wondered whether it would not be possible to lose the
sense of this great blessing without losing the blessing itself. But
whatever they lost let them at once seek to regain it, and they need
not be long in doubt. He must say he had no sympathy with that
hymn, “ I want to be an angel.” He didn’t want to be like the
angels or like Adam, or like anybody else but God. He wanted to be
a Christian man, sanctified wholly, and made in the image of Christ.
Bev. Robert Allen said there were outward evidences of
sanctification as of justification. A sanctified man was completely
distinct from anything of the world. This was clearly enjoined:
“ Be not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed by the renew-
ing of your mind,” &c. If they had more of this throwing off the
spirit and practices of the world they would exhibit clearer evidence
to the world of their Christianity.
Rev. J. Nolan (President), before calling for the next paper,
remarked that he believed it had been said of them that in that Con-
vention they were not in agreement with Dr. Pope. This was a serious
charge; but he could prove to them from Dr. Pope’s own words that
he strongly holds this doctrine of Christian Perfection as a great bles-
sing to be received and retained by faith. It may be that on some
minor details he differed from others—there was liberty for that; —
but in all essential points they would find him as firm and pronounced
as possible. He would read them an extract from an address on
“The Peculiarities of Methodist Doctrine,” delivered in the open
Session of the Irish Wesleyan Methodist Conference , June 19, 1873 f
by Rev. W. B. Pope, D.D.
Another doctrine which is in some sense peculiar to us is that which declares
the entireness of Christian sanctifiction, the most glorious privilege of the life of
faith upon earth. We believe that the Divine Spirit who administers redemption
is as mighty in administering it as the incarnate Son was in accomplishing it : the
atonement is not more certainly a finished work than the application of it is
finished, so far as concerns the removal of iniquity. But this implies the putting


away of sin in the present life ; for the atonement, as such, ends its history before
the return of Christ, who, when He comes a second time, will come without the
imputation of human sin, and without the means of its expiation. We need no
other argument: the Spirit’s “It is finished ” must needs follow the Son’s, and in
a voice that speaks on earth. Taking it as a whole, and in the various forms the
doctrine assumes, it is undoubtedly one of our prerogatives to defend and teach it.
I do not say, long may it continue so ; rather, may all Christian men soon join
with us.
Meanwhile, we must hold it fast, and declare it all the more tenaciously because
many -whose theology has been an honour to Christianity, and their lives an honour
to their theology, are our most determined opponents ; opposing us here, strange
to say, more vehemently than anywhere else. Let us, as guardians of Methodist
theology, teach it in our seminaries ; let us preach it from our pulpits : yes, preach
it, all of us, even though we preach it as a blessing which we see yet as it were
afar off; provided always that we have set the desire of our hearts where our ex-
perience is hoping to follow. If this profound desire is in our hearts, it is enough ;
otherwise, indeed, this and all other doctrines must needs be out of place on our
lips. If we are bent on knowing the full power and perfect work of the Divine
Spirit, then we must preach this privilege of the Christian covenant. In this case
the law is not, “ We speak that we do know, and testify that which we have seen,”
in our own personal experience. That law is not universal; ill for the Christian
dhurch if it were.
But we must be careful to learn from our enemies what those evils are in our
teaching that fairly expose the doctrine to misconstruction. We must preach what
we find in the Scripture on this subject, and as we find it there. There is no one
point on whicn we ought to be more careful of that precise fidelity to the Word of
God which is our safeguard. Where a tenet is disputed, let us adhere to Scrip-
tural phraseology : then we are safe. And in this case the Bible is our strength.
Let us not establish peculiarities beyond those which are forced upon us. Let us
not erect the means of attainment, the instantaneousness or otherwise, the
evidences which seal it, into doctrines of our faith. Suffice that we know that
the body of sin is to be destroyed ; that the perfected operation of the love of God
within us may enkindle perfect love in return ; and that the Word of God acknow-
ledges a state of perfect holiness as the result. The most exact New Testament
exposition will defend us at all points ; and we need not be afraid of any argument
that may be brought against us. Entire sanctification from sin, perfect consecra-
tion to God, and Christian or evangelical perfection of holiness are terms we need
not be afraid boldly to maintain. The world “perfect” is not one that any
Christian would use of himself ; but the term “perfection” we need not shrink
from, when protected by those two adjectives. With God all things are possible.
But the matter of supreme importance here is, to vindicate our doctrine by
making the attainment of this entire redemption from sin, consecration to God,
and holiness of life, the object of our steadfast pursuit. We may theologically
sustain our positions ; and it is our duty to defend this most precious provision of
the covenant of grace from the hands of its enemies. But the best argument in
its defence is the silent assertion of its truth in our lives. We must make a dis-
tinction here between the assertion of the doctrine and the profession of the
experience : we cannot too earnestly and openly profess our faith in the truth ;
but none among us should be in haste to make redemption from the corruption of
the heart, or his perfect love to God, the subject of his confession. The great
point is to reach this state ; not to declare that we have reached it. The only
confession it admits is the negative one : that of a life not inconsistent with the
fact. Let us then resolve, by Divine grace, to take courage from the promises,
and perfect holiness in the fear of God. Let us not despond because of many
failures ; we have failed, possibly, because we have not sought our privileges
in the right way. Either we have expected too much from the instant act of the
Spirit, or we have thought too much of our own effort. We must look for the con-
summation of grace to the more abundant effusion of the love of God in our hearts,


even to perfection ; and this is the sovereign act of Divine grace. But we must
look for it in the way of entire obedience, self-renouncing imitation of Christ in
charity, and the habitual dwelling in God by the devotion of living faith.
“ Herein,” says St. John, our great teacher on this subject, when speaking of these
three methods, “ is our love made perfectmade perfect, that is, not by our own
effort, but by divine power. Strong in the assurance, brethren, that our doctrine
is true, let us each intently resolve this day to prove its truth.
After prayer, Rev. J. S. Austin then read the following paper on
“HOLINESS, HOW RETAINED.”
When we remember what a large number of those who, having entered
into the possession and enjoyment of perfect love, have after a short
time returned to their old level of Christian life—a life marked inwardly
by much doubt and fear, and outwardly by inconsistency of conduct
and lack of energy in forwarding the interests of Christ’s Kingdom
the question, How holiness may be retained 1 becomes one of paramount
importance, and I could fain wish that an abler pen than mine had been
appointed to answer it. However, what I have written I respectfully
submit for your prayerful consideration.
In answering this all important question, I would say : first, let it
be a settled conviction of the soul, that there is not the slightest
necessity we should ever go back from the position we now occupy in
the Christian life ; but that it is our blessed privilege to hold fast that
whereunto we have attained, and still continue to “ grow in grace, and
in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,” rising higher
and higher till we reach the perfect life of heaven. In saying this, Ido
not mean that we can always have the same amount of joy that possibly
we may have at present, or that we shall always have the same freedom
from temptation, perhaps, that we have now, but that we may stand
fast in our present glorious liberty from sin all the rest of our days. And
surely we have no need to doubt this, for if God is able to save from sin,
He must be able to keep saved. But what saith the Scriptures? Hear
St. Jude —“Unto Him that is able to keep you from falling, and to
present you faultless before the presence of His glory with exceeding
joy.” (Jude 24). And Peter speaks of those “ Who are kept by the
power of God through faith unto salvation” (1 Peter i. 5). And again in
the prayer of Paul for the Thessalonians we find, he not only prays
that they may be sanctified wholly, but “ preserved blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.” (i Thess. v. 23). Here, then, we have
assurances of God’s keeping or preserving power, but this power is
pledged to us on certain conditions, or in connection with certain duties ;
hence in reference to the first passage I quoted, you will find in the
context some important exhortations to personal duty, one of which is,—
“ Keep yourselves in the love of God.” In the second passage, faith is
directly given as the means by which God keeps us; and in the third
passage the prayer is preceded by numerous exhortations to do our part.
But perhaps the fact that God keeps us conditionally is nowhere more
clearly set forth than in Christ’s words to the Church at Philadelphia—


“ Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee
from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to
try them that dwell upon the earth.” (Rev. hi. 10).
In order, however, to ascertain more clearly the conditions upon
which we may claim God’s keeping power, it will be necessary to
enquire upon what conditions we received this great blessing 1 what was
the form of covenant into which we entered with God ? The first thing
we did was to make a surrender, or transfer of our entire being, with all
its concerns, temporal and spiritual to God; there was a complete
transferrence of our proprietorship to Him, we simply remaining as
stewards to use all our powers, and all the means at our disposal accord-
ing to His direction, and for his honour and glory ; at the same time
standing ready to lay down at His command, a part or the whole of
what He had committed to our stewardship. This was fully implied in
our act of consecration. In addition to this we had to believe that thus
resigning ourselves to God, He accepted our gift, and in accepting,
sanctified or set it apart for His holy service, and that the Holy Ghost
now applied the blood of atonement to purify the offer. As soon as we
thus performed our part of the covenant, God did His, and gave us the
assurance that it was done. Here then we have the primary condition
upon which we may be kept, viz., a faithful carrying out of our part of
the covenant. We are now simply stewards, and God’s will must be the
rule of our life, and no matter how that will may cross our inclinations,
or thwart our purposes; no matter into what deep valley of humiliation
and shame His command may take us, there must be an immediate
compliance, as illustrated in the case of Abraham who was called to
offer up his beloved son. Hesitation and fear will bring darkness upon
the soul at once. If we put forth our hand to take back part of the
sacrifice, we shall pollute the whole. If we try to erase one of the con-
ditions of the covenant, we shall destroy it entirely, for “He that
offendeth in one point, is guilty of all.” Then, again, this prompt
obedience must be accompanied by implicit trust, saying in effect, tills
dispensation is very dark and mysterious to me, but it is right and good,
because my Master does it or permits it. He is infinitely wise, and
knows what is best, and “ Though He slay me, yet will I trust
in Him.”
In addition to this perfect trust in God’s wisdom and goodness in
conducting all our affairs, there must be a constant trust in the blood of
Jesus, not only to cleanse, but to keep us clean, a putting our own name
into the glorious assurance, and saying with unwavering faith—“ The
blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth ”me “from all sin.” But still farther
it is quite evident, 1 think, that if we are thus fully given up to God,
the interests of Christ and His Kingdom must then occupy the first
place with usj we must literally “ Seek first the Kingdom of God and
His righteousness. ” If we allow anything in this world to usurp the
throne of 'Christ within, the Spirit will be grieved, and darkness will
follow ; hence, we need to be very careful on this point; again, if we


would retain this grace, there must be no tampering with forbidden or
doubtful things ; “ the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life,” must be put far away. The command is “ come out from
among them, and be ye seperate saith the Lord, and touch not the
unclean thing,” and we cannot expect to retain our purity, if we
refuse to obey this command, and persist in touching the unclean thing.
Another important point for us to remember is, that there should
be a daily acknowledgment of our full surrender to God, and of God’s
claims upon us; we want literally to carry out the words we sometimes
sing—
“ High heaven that heard the solemn vow,
That vow renewed shall daily hear,
Till in life’s latest hour I bow,
And bless in death a bond so dear.”
Ho day should be allowed to pass without this solemn acknowledgment,
or renewal of our vows.
Another very essential point to be observed in order to a retention
of this blessing is, a wise confession of the same. I know there are
many who seem to shrink from a profession of holiness, as if it was
something akin to self-glorification; and I think it is very probable
that Satan has caused more sanctified ones to fall through this sugges-
tion than in any other way. The eminent John Fletcher confesses to
having lost the blessing four or five times through this very thing, and if
a man like him was so often overcome by it, we need not wonder that
many others have been ; but there is no necessity for it: the suggestion,
though full of subtlety, will not bear examination for a moment. Is it
presumption on the part of a man who has been cured of some dire
disease to go and tell his friends and neighbours that the physician has
healed him ? Does he take any credit to himself 1 Of course not, he
simply followed the physician’s directions, which any sane man would
do, and the result was he was healed; and the confession of that cure
is to the honour of the physician, especially if his physical appearance
and ability to labour proves the truth of his statement. If then it is
not presumption or self-glorification in the case of the body, why should
it be thought so in reference to the soul 1 The fact is, it is simply a
matter of duty to our great Healer to testify by word and life what
He has done for us, and so recommend Him to others; for “ With the
heart man believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession
is made unto salvation.” But some may ask, perhaps, When ought we
to make our confession 1 I believe as a general rule it should be done
in the presence of believers only, for the purpose of strengthening and
encouraging those who are already in possession of the blessing, and to
stimulate others to seek the same ; hence the Psalmist says—“ Come
and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare He hath done
for my soul.” Mark you, it is those who fear God who are to listen to
the recital of his experience. But still there may be times when it is
necessary to bear witness to full salvation in the presence of a mixed


•congregation, and in this matter we must seek God’s guidance, and if
we are living in close communion with Him, we shall have spiritual
discernment sufficient, I think, to tell us when and where to bear our
witness.
There are a few other points I might have dwelt upon, but as the
time is gone, I will simply mention them. One is, a diligent use of
the means of grace. We must not think for a moment that we can do
without the help of the means, either private, social, or public. Another
is, reading the scriptures diligently and prayerfully, in order to know
the mind of the Spirit, especially in reference to this great doctrine.
Next to the scriptures I would place the lives of those who have lived
and died in the enjoyment of Entire Sanctification, as also any other
books bearing on the subject, among which I would strongly recommend
the works of Mrs. Palmer, and the “ Guide to Holiness,’" edited by
Messrs. Palmer and Hughes. And the last thing 1 would mention is,
if we would retain the blessing ourselves, we should try and lead others
into the enjoyment of it. Our work is to “ Spread Scriptural Holiness
throughout the land,” and how are we to do that, unless we experience
it, live it, bear testimony to it, and get others to do the samel The
Lord “ grant that we, being delivered out of the hand of our enemies,
may serve Him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before Him,
all the days of our life;” “Holding fast that which we have received,
so that none shall take our crown.” Amen.
Rev. J. A. Bowring was glad Mr. Austin had emphasised the fact
that it is impossible for any one to continue in the Christian life without
using the means of grace. The loss of the evidence of entire sanctifica-
tion often arose because there had not been the taking advantage of the
means God had provided. They always exhorted young Christians to
this, and he always trembled when he heard old Christians speaking of
being able to do without the means. Not only the public but the private
means of grace, such as private prayer and meditation on the Word of
God, must be used. He was pleased, also, that the continuance of the
•conditions under which the blessing was first obtained had been insisted
upon. While with one definite act of faith they received, through the
Holy Ghost, the power of the blood of Christ to cleanse from
.all sin, they must still maintain the exercise of faith—the continued
committal of themselves to God, hour by hour, moment by moment.
He would like to emphasise, also, the evidence referred to by Mr.
McMichael at an early stage. He distinctly remembered when fifteen
years ago he experienced cleansing from sin, and perfection of love, that
the first feeling was the sense of rest, the absence of all fear, and also the
feature of courage. Another evidence was the sinking of self. He was
conscious of being naturally proud, but, oh ! when he realised the bless-
ing of holiness, that was all subdued. A further evidence was love.
How could they .love those who spoke evil of them and hated them, if
they were not sanctified 1 He hesitated to speak of this, but he thanked
God for His sanctifying grace, destroying the spirit of judging and


censoriousness. When tempted to believe he had been boasting he could
say, My soul shall make her boast in the Lord. In thus testifying to the
power of God’s grace in their souls they were glorifying God, and not
themselves.
The Rev. W. G. Taylor delivered an address, in which he ex-
presed his thankfulness for the manner in which the various papers had
been treated throughout the Convention. He urged upon all who had
found the blessing of holiness—(l). To bring themselves frequently face
to face with their consecration vows. (2). To be constant in their
attendance at the various means of grace, and (3), on all fitting occasions
to speak for the glory of Christ—of the great blessing received.
Rev. A. Hutchinson (Tarana) said that nobody could object to the
paper just read ; and those now enjoying holiness who observed the
conditions laid down therein would certainly make progress. There
must be progression in sanctification as well as in justification. He
trusted that all of those, who like himself, had recently found the
blessing, would never think of going back but onward, always onward.
He thought the importance of reading good books besides the Bible
should be enforced. The Old Methodists read much, and we needed to
do the same.
Rev. T. R. McMichakl said : One great thing in retaining this
blessing is to mind one’s own business, and simply to following the lead-
ings of God’s Spirit. Many people lose the blessing by watching how
others lose it. What does it matter to me if another brother does that
which I am doubtful about ? Whatsoever is not of Jaith is sin. A
religious young man came to me one day and asked, “ Would it be
wrong for me to go to a certain place ?” I replied, “ I would rather you
answered that question for yourself.” “Well,” he said, “I don’t think
it is quite right.” “ Then you should not go.” I found afterwards he
went because a minister had gone, and he thought he could not be doing
wrong in imitating a minister. About rededicating : —When we give
ourselves to the Lord, we ought to do it fully. When I give a present
to a man I don’t go again to him the next day to tell him I give him
the present over again. I have had a little experience in acting out my
faith. Coming back from England in a worse condition of health than
when I went, I had no immediate prospect of being able to take a circuit.
I, at last, took the matter to God, and said “ Lord I believe thou can’st
not only save me fully from sin, but also give me strength of body.” I
used to nurse myself as carefully as possible, until one day my wife said,
“You should act up to your faith and go to work,” I thought of this,
and then said, “ Lord, Thou knowest there is no hope for me in this,
world but in Thee.” I have tried all kinds of human treatment, and
am no better. 1 will trust Thee to heal me, and go to work right
away.” I went to a little carpenter’s work, and kept to it all day, and
then preached at a mission service that night. From that day to this I
have lived a wholly different life. I have trusted God for everything,
and my trust has been honoured. Though often tempted by Satan, still


I find that a momentary trust in Christ keeps me up. All glory be to
His name ! !!
Miss Leonard said her heart was bounding with joy at the result
of the convention thus far. She wanted to emphasize the point that
they should go forward in holiness. Individuals getting into this
experience had thought they would go forward if they could, but if out-
ward circumstances were unfavourable they would not strive against
them ; but if they formed the purpose to go straight ahead, they would
find themselves able to rise above outward circumstances. She referred
to a gentleman who determined never to live for five minutes, con-
sciously and willingly, below the highest experience he had ever known.
This determination would be a wise one for them all to adopt. Again,
they were to be careful not to watch the emotions too much; not to
depend upon feelings. Faith might become a habit. When a man
began to try to breathe he might perhaps strangle himself, and when a
man began to try to believe he was in danger of strangling his faith. A
sentence written by Lady Maxwell was worth remembering: “I am
to-day acting faith in the Lord for entire sanctification/' Without any
joy or emotion she was compelled to act her faith. In looking at the
emotions people lost the blessing. A friend of hers had a rose slip in
the garden; she pulled it up four times to see if it were still alive, but
at the fourth time she found it was dead—killed by her disturbing it.
Many persons pull up their experience, and ask, have I enough joy ?
have I enough peace? &c. Would that every Christian would learn to
look not at his emotions, or feelings, or work, hut to Jesus only.
Rev. J. Oram could not say how pleased and thankful he was that
their young men were coming forward and advocating this important
doctrine. It caused him to feel unutterable gratitude to be permitted
to take any part in that convention. He felt, “If I had my day to
begin over again, Oh how I would preach this doctrine ; with what
earnestness and frequency I would urge it upon our people ! ” Many
things had been said about the preservation of this blessing. The most
vital means was faith ; that covered the whole. He looked upon faith
not merely as a virtue, but as a means through which the Holy Spirit
operated to their preservation. Paul did not say “ I live by prayer,” or
“by watchfulness,” but “ I live by faith on the Son of God.'” He dwelt
much upon faith. In exhorting the Ephesians to u put on the whole
armour oj God,” he said, but above all put on “ the shield ofjaith.” St.
John said “ This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith.”
They had nothing to fear if they lived in the habit of faith on the Son
of God. He repeated that he was extremely thankful they had had that
convention. It gave him the greatest possible hope as to the future of
their church to see the young men coming out so strongly on this great
subject.
Rev. J. Austin would emphasise the two points referred to in the
discussion. He had said in the paper that there was not the slightest
necessity that they should ever go back from the.position they now


occupied in the Christian life. If they ever got to a position at which
they thought they could stop they would soon be back where they had
been before. There could be no standing still in spiritual experience.
As to the term “ re-consecration,” he carefully avoided using it. He
preferred to put the idea in the words, “ There should be a daily
acknowledgement of our full surrender to God.”
Miss Leonard pointed out with reference to what had been said
about the habit of believing, that there must not simply be the act of
believing, but the believing in something definite. Faith must have an
object. The soul that is justified keeps justified, because he believes
that God forgives and accepts him always; and so with the sanctified,
he believes that God cleanses him from all sin every day and hour.
Mr. W. Davies said this was one of the most important phases of
the subject that had been brought before them. If the blessing of
holiness could not be kept it was no use seeking it. It was very
important to remember that God could and did keep them, and not to
be troubling their minds with fears and misgivings. They should be
encouraged by the strength and fidelity of God, and not allow doubts to
disturb them. He would take the opportunity of thanking the
President for bringing before them those appropriate and convincing
remarks of Dr. Pope.
NINTH SESSION— Friday Evening.
HOLINESS LOVE FEAST.
The body of the church was crowded at this, the concluding
meeting of the Convention. The greatest heartiness characterised the
whole proceedings. It was a time never to be forgotten. From 60
to 70 testified for Christ, very many speaking in clear terms of their
possession of the blessing of Holiness. The following will be read
with interest :
The President was thankful to see that large gathering before
him. He thought they might have the best Love Feast ever held
in Sydney. He spoke of the Love Feast held in Christ Church
at the General Conference, when ministers and laymen from all the
Conferences testified to the enjoyment of this blessing of perfect love,
and urged upon them brevity and cheerfulness as the watchwords of
the Love Feast.
Rev. W. G. Taylor said, no one in the Church ought to feel more
filled with gratitude to God for the remarkable Convention now
coming to a close than himself. Thank God it was ever put into our
hearts to arrange for it. lam thankful that the President has been
with us, and for the definite and forceful words he spoke in his opening
sermon. lam thankful for the presence of the brethren from different
parts of the colony, and for the papers they have brought before us.


And one particular thing that pleases me is that, although the Conven-
tion has been open for discussion, we have had nothing like wild-
fire or extravagance. lam thankful, too, for the interest in this
Convention manifest in different parts of the colony. This has been one
of the happiest periods of my life. God has led me forward, although
I kept back and rebelled. There was at one time a feeling of revulsion
in me against this doctrine. My heart fought against it, in spite of
the fact that the Bible and our standards and hymn books were full of it.
My objection to it was supported by the inconsistencies of those who
professed it; but now that is all gone—all gone ; and lam now simply
resting on Christ for full salvation.
Rev. A. Hutchinson : I am sure if 1 went from this meeting
without having testified to my present and recent experience I should
feel condemned. I thank God I have been brought to this Convention.
I confess, with great humiliation, that I came with an antipathy to this
doctrine ; but after hearing some of the speakers I saw they had some-
thing I had not, and I determined to seek it. I sought it at the peni-
tant form on Wednesday night, but did not find it. I went home in
uncertainty; but, thank God, after weeping and struggling as I never
did before, I received the blessing. To-night 1 have not only the
witness that I am regenerated, but that here and now I have cleans-
ing from all sin. My desire is to live and preach perfect holiness.
Mr. W. Davies said, I never had any antipathy to the doctrine
of Christian Perfection, but was always anxious to experience it ; but
for many years I lacked sufficient light by which I could obtain it.
I do now give God thanks for the help which I received from Miss
Leonard on her visit to Goulburn. When I ascertained what was my
duty in perfect consecration and full surrender, then and there, at the
Throne of Mercy, I gave myself to God, and, as was the conversion, so
was the blessing of sanctification.
A Sailor spoke of his conversion, and afterwards of the sancti-
fication of his nature in the Rockdale Church. He was now determined
to go home to his native country, in the north of Europe, and preach
the gospel of a full salvation.
Mr. Outram said that what had been said about members of Class
having mournful experience just met his case. For a long time, whilst
converted, he had nursed his troubles, and had constantly felt some-
thing coming up and troubling him—some roots of bitterness remain-
ing ; but when on a bed of sickness, about six months ago, not
expecting to get better, he realised the power of Christ to save from
all sin; and, thank God, he had that blessed experience ever since.
A Sister said she was brought to the foot of the Cross about
ten years rgo, under the preaching of their President; but she had
been up and down the ladder, her heart troubled with things of time
and sense; but, thank God, during the past four months she had


enjoyed the blessing of holiness, and her soul was filled with peace and
joy. She laid her all on the altar, and Jesus accepted the sacrifice.
Mr. Smith said he could not go back to Liverpool without speaking
of the great “ enlargement ” of heart that he had received at that
Convention. That was the grandest meeting he had been in since
leaving the old country. He now felt he had a greater capacity for
knowing and enjoying God than he had at the beginning of the Conven-
tion.
Mr. Hall (Ashfield) dared not but believe in this doctrine. The
Bible was full of it, their theology was full of it, their hymnology was
full of it. To doubt it would be a reflection on the fulness of Christ’s
Atonement. He was thankful that he could and did intelligently and
reasonably accept Christ as his complete Saviour.
Mr. Tuke (Ashfield) felt he must tell of the light coming into his
mind during that Convention. He had been in early life much mystified
by the manner in which this doctrine had been presented to his mind.
Thank God that he now knew there was a full salvation from all sin
through faith in the perfect atonement.
A Brother (from Yorkshire) said he knew the young evangelist
Thomas Cook, referred to in a previous meeting, and had received much
blessing under him. After God spoke peace to his soul he had a longing
desire for something higher that he did not possess. But there was
something he could not give up. When at last he surrendered himself
and all he had, then he found the full salvation of the Gospel.
Rev. J. S. Austin said, I was converted to God when very young.
For two years I lived with the sense of God’s favour, and for two years
further I was without the evidence of God’s love, and then I obtained
again the assurance of peace. About twenty-four years ago I became
convinced of the necessity of a deeper work of grace, and I read every-
thing I could get on the subject of holiness. With prayer, fasting, and
weeping, I sought the blessing. In a prayer meeting I received it with
a clear assurance. I was without it for some years until one night in
our Samoan home at family worship 1 had again a deep conviction that
I must have this blessing. I made a full and formal consecration to
God, but there was one thing I could not give up, and for a long time
there was a struggle over that particular thing, until I surrendered, and
then the fire came down and consumed my sacrifice. I thank God this
blessing has kept me through many a sorrow, I know He is able to
keep because He keeps me. J am wholly His, and God helping me,
that which I have laid a sacrifice upon His altar shall be there for ever.
Mrs. Rowell (Mud gee) praised the Lord that He had made her
to hunger and thirst after righteousness, and He did fill and satisfy her.
She could testify that the Lord could cure a bad temper and cast out
irritability.


Mr. Canterill (Surry Hills) said, that twenty-one years ago last
October, three months after he was converted he found full salvation.
He was determined to find it and he did. The people laughed at him,
but in six months there were fifty souls brought to the Saviour, in-
cluding his wife. He and others went out preaching in various parts
of Melbourne, and holding open-air services, and God saved souls by
them. He felt that to-night, that Christ’s blood cleansed him from all
sin.
Mr. Booth (Parramatta) said, he was exercised in his miod during
the time of the Bev. Wm. Taylor’s visit to this colony about this full
salvation. He told his wife he had determined to seek it, and, thank
God, he entered into its possession. He was thankful for the class
meeting he was connected with, many of the members of which were
enjoying perfect love. He had to live by faith every moment.
Mrs. Ward (Secretary of the Sydney Woman’s Prayer Union)
testified to the power of God to keep from sin. She had known the
Lord about 18 years, but only for about 10 years had she known the
blessing of Entire Sanctification. It came to her in a simple manner,
through that word “ Ye are washed, ye are sanctified , ye are justified in the
name of the Lord Jesus , and by the Spirit of our God.” She just took the
Lord as her sanctification, and she felt that He had given her the power of
the Holy Ghost to speak a word for Him.
A Brother from the country said he was converted 14 years ago,
but only during the last two years realized the power of the cleansing
blood. He was led to it by the teaching of the Spirit. The same
Spirit that convinced him that he was a sinner told him of this, and led
him into it.
Mr. Jos. Walker, Jun. (St. Albans) said, he came from the
country to the Convention on purpose to find the blessing, and he
claimed and received full salvation last night.
Bev. J. A. Bowring’s testimony was that he enjoyed this blessing
for years. For a time he lost it, but before he was able to offer for the
ministry he consecrated himself, his future, and all his powers to God,
and since then had lived fully saved.
Bev. S. Wilkinson testified to the glory of God’s grace, that he
was “dead unto sin, and alive unto God through Jesus Christfor
him to live was Christ, and the blessed hope of his life was eternal
glory.
A Brother spoke of seeking the blessing last night, and finding
it after he got home.
Mr. Booth (Prospect) had been praying God ever since he saw the
announcement of the Convention to give him the blessing of holiness, but
he did not get what he was seeking until that day. He said “ I have
come some twenty miles every day of the convention, but this morning
I was tempted to attend to a matter of business first, but looking up to


God I felt I must let the business go, and come to the morning session,
for which I shall always thank God. Whilst we were singing
“ My body soul and spirit,
Jesus I give to Thee ;
A consecrated offering,
Thine evermore to be, ”
I laid hold of the blessing by faith, and realized that God did indeed
cleanse me from all sin. Now I rejoice in perfect love. When I went
to see after my business at dinner time I found that by not going at
the time I first thought of 1 had saved £6; and this I feel prompted to
give to the expenses’ fund of the Convention.” (Our brother has since
handed over the sum named to the Treasurer.)
After some hour-and-half had been spent in listening to such testi-
monies as those given above,
The President gave an earnest exhortation to those who were
enquiring after, and seeking holiness. A large number stood up to be
prayed for, and then the altar-communion was crowded by those who
publicly expressed their anxiety to be sanctified wholly.
The convention closed at 10 o’clock, p.m.
“ NOW UNTO HIM THAT IS ABLE TO KEEP YOU FROM FALLING, AND
TO PRESENT YOU FAULTLESS BEFORE THE PRESENCE OF HIS GLORY
WITH EXCEEDING JOY ; TO THE ONLY WISE GOD OUR SAVIOUR, BE
GLORY, AND MAJESTY, DOMINION, AND POWER, BOTH NOW AND EVER.’*
AMEN. Jude 25.
J. L. HOLMES & CO., Printers, 315 Pitt St,, Sydney.




Holiness Ijitei^atui^e.
“ What Books would you recommend us to read on the
Subject of Holiness t” is a question often asked.
Our answer to that question will be found in the following List of
FIRST-CLASS WORKS
On the subject, and which can be obtained from the
Wesleyan pook pepot, 413 George Street, Sydney.
Wesley on Entire Sanctification, Is.; posted, Is. 3d. (to arrive).
Hunt's Letters on Entire Sanctification, 35.; posted, 3s 4d.
Pipe’s Dialogues on Sanctification, Is.; posted, Is. 3d.
Pfarse’s Thoughts on Holiness, Is.; posted, Is. 3d. (to arrive).
Experience and Spiritual Letters of Hester Ann Rogers, Is.;
posted, Is. 3d • *
Perfect Love, by J. A. Wood, 3s. 6d.; posted, 4s.
Full Salvation, by Mrs. Palmer, 2s. 6d.; posted, 2s. lOd.
The Way of Holiness, by Mrs. Palmer, Is.; posted, Is. 3d.
Boardman’s Higher Christian Life, Is.; posted, Is. 3d.
Boardman’s Gladness in Jesus, Is. 6d.; posted, Is. 9d.
The Christian Secret of Happy Life, Limp Cloth, 25.; posted,
2s. 4d. ; Cloth, gilt, 35.; posted, 3s. 6d.
The HoiA r Life, by The Rev. E. H. Hopkins, Is.; posted, Is. 3d.
The Happiness of Full Consecration, Brief Memorials of
Emmeline Duncan, Is.; posted, Is. 3d.
Figgis’ Christ and Full Salvation, Is. 6d.; posted, Is. 10d.’
Kept for the Master’s Use, by F. R. Havergal, Is.; posted, Is. 3d,
McDonald’s Scriptural Holiness, 2s. 6d.; posted, 2s. lOd.
Steele’s Love Enthroned, 3s. Gd.; posted, 3s. lid.
Wesley’s Scriptural Holiness, Four Sermons, Is.; posted, Is. 3d.
Watmough on Entire Sanctification, Is.;, posted, Is. 3d.
Aids to Holy Living, with Questions for Self-Examination, -a
Companion for the Pocket Testament or Hymn Book, with
Introduction by The Rev W. G. Taylor, 2d.; posted, 3d.;
Is. 6d. per dozen; posted, Is. 9d.; 11s. per hundred.
