



1950-51.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
PROCEEDINGS
OF
ECONOMIC CONFERENCE
CONVENED BY THE COMMONWEALTH
GOVERNMENT
By Authority:
L. F. Johnston, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
(Printed in Australia.)
3964.
HELD IN
SYDNEY,
30th, 31 st JULY, 1951.




ECONOMIC CONFERENCE.
(CONVENED BY THE COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT .)
149 CASTLEREAGH-STREET, SYDNEY.—3Otii AND 31st JULY, 1951.
Members —
Commonwealth Government .. .. The Prime Minister (Mr. Menzies)
The Treasurer (Sir Arthur Fadden)
The Minister for Labour and National Service (Mr. Holt)
State Governments .. .. .. .. New South Wales—The Premier (Mr. McGirr)
Victoria—The Premier (Mr. McDonald)
Queensland —The Deputy Premier (Mr. Gair)
South Australia—The Premier (Mr. Playford)
Western Australia—The Premier (Mr. McLarty)
Tasmania—The Premier (Mr. Cosgrove)
Associated Chambers of Commerce . . . . .. Mr. W. J. Allison
Mr. A. E. Heath
Associated Chambers of Manufactures . . .. Mr. R. J. Webster
Mr. L. Withall
Australasian Council of Trade Unions .. . . Mr. A. E. Monk
Mr. R. A. King
Mr. J. H. O’Neill
Mr. R. R. Broadby
Mr. J. Shortell
Mr. W. Lewis
Australian Council of Employers’ Federations .. Mr. D. Fell
Mr. F. A. Johnston
Australian Wheat Growers’ Federation .. .. Mr. T. C. Stott
Australian Wool and Meat Producers’ Federation .. Mr. F. E. Hitchins
Churches —
Australian Council for the World Council of Churches Right Rev. de Witt Batty
Rev. Alan Walker
Roman Catholic Church .. .. .. .. Rev. P. J. Ryan
Federal Graziers’ Council .. .. .. .. Mr. W. A. Gunn
Metal Trades Employers’ Association .. .. Mr. A. R. Browne
National Council of Women .. .. .. Mrs. Herbert Brookes
Mrs. Gertrude Kumm




MONDAY, 30th JULY, 1951.
The conference opened at 2.30 p.m.
Mr. MEXZIES. —I thank all of you for coining here
to attend this conference from which, we hope, useful
public results will flow. I do not mean by that that
any of us will expect to go out of this conference with
.1 complete programme of action underlined. However,
I believe that we can have a frank exchange of views
which will be representative of those of a complete
cross-section of the people of Australia.
' In particular, we may exchange our views on two
matters which arise in connexion with the problem of
inflation. The first relates to the causes of the inflation.
Unless we grapple with the causes, we shall not travel
very far along the road towards prescribing the remedies.
The second relates to the practical remedies, so far as
they are capable of being applied in Australia. As you
all know, this problem is not peculiar to our own
country.
The conference is not designed to formulate policy
in the full sense. Policy will continue to be determined
by the Commonwealth Government and the State
Governments, each of which has its own responsibilities.
Policy will have to be thrashed out also by the trade
union movement and by representative bodies of
employers, industry and so forth. We may assist
ourselves very materially, however, by an exchange of
views at this conference. We are not constituted for
voting. 1 think it would pass anybody’s wit to discover
seme system by which we could conduct a majority
vote at a conference of this kind. Therefore, I do not
propose to take votes and there will not be any
resolutions.
1 emphasize that the problem of inflation is a grave
one, which affects every one of us. Some of us are
engaged in politics and others of us are not, but we
have not met merely to engage in a political discussion.
This matter goes beyond any considerations of party
and any considerations of the particular interests of
any one man or group of men. We are here to pool
our knowledge, experience and intelligence in relation
to one of the greatest problems that we have had to
deal with for a long time.
There is an inflation all over the democratic world.
We cannot speak dogmatically about countries in which
every aspect of community life is controlled. However,
we know that there is a great pressure of inflation in
every democratic country. We have only to open our
newspapers from day to day in order to learn that
the problem is exciting great interest in all of these
countries and that various measures are being devised
in an attempt to deal with it. I shall not rehearse
what is taking place in other countries because each
country has designed different ways of coping with
inflation according to its own background and its own
point of view. 1 emphasize that this is a world
problem, and that, whilst we are not undertaking at
this conference to solve the problems of the world, wc
must consider world inflation insofar as it has an
impact on ourselves.
There is a very good reason why we need not be too
partisan in this matter. Broadly, we all have some
responsibility for having got ourselves into this trouble.
Therefore, we all have some responsibility for helping
to get out of it. The truth is that we have tried to go
much further than our strength would allow. If
anybody were to ask me to explain in one sentence the
reason for local inflation during the last five years, I
think that my answer would be that we have been
trying to get all the things that we wanted at the one
time. As we have not the resources of men, materials
or equipment to produce all the things that we want
at one time, the result has been that every resource
at our command has been bid up by the pressure of
demand and that its price has risen. The price of
goods has risen; the price of labour has risen; the
price of services has risen; and the price of imports
has risen. The pressure has been caused by the
inequality of demand and supply, with demand
threatening to overwhelm supply.
This situation .imposes on us a very great responsi-
bility. We have probably the greatest unsatisfied
demand for goods and services that we have ever known
in Australia. Inflation is progressing rapidly and
dangerously. In a strict sense, the inflation began,
though its presence was not obvious, during the war.
Its effects were cushioned then. However, we emerged
from the war with an enormously accumulated amount
of spending power and vast arrears of the things
that we needed for civil purposes. The effect can be
illustrated by reference to one or two figures, though
I shall not weary you with many of them. If we
take the celebrated “ C ” series index, on which adjust-
ments are made to the basic wage from time to time
and which is regarded roughly as the index of retail
price movements, we find that it has risen by 100 per
cent, since 1939. The basic wage has risen by just
under 140 per cent, in the same time. The basic wage
has got ahead of the “ C ” series index largely as the
result of the last basic wage decision of the Arbitration
Court, which made an addition of £1 a week. That
£1 increase, of course, has been working itself out
since, to some extent, in quarterly adjustments of the
basic wage. I should say that, if all other factors had
been static, the basic wage addition of £1 would have
been responsible at any rate for 10s. of the subsequent
amount of quarterly adjustments. Therefore, we may
attribute at least 30s. a week to that decision. Recent
increases of the basic wage have been at a very
disturbing rate.
For some time—from about 1946 or 1947 —our costs
were rising at the rase of about 10 per cent, per annum.
The rise is now much more rapid, and, therefore, the
degree of inflation has become very much more
menacing.
I have made a note of six of the main effects of
inflation, and they may be useful for you to have in
your minds. First, there has been a reduction of the
living standards of those whose incomes lag behind price
rises. Inflation undoubtedly bears most heavily on
people with fixed incomes and those whose incomes are
not so flexible as they would be if they were completely
associated with a cost-of-living index. In the second
place, inflation has caused a diminuation of the value
of savings, insurances and other forms of provision for
the future. It is a sort of unseen capital tax-gatherer
in that sense. In the third place, it tends to convert
legitimate enterprise and investment into a gamble
because, in every consideration of investment, attention
must be paid to future alterations of the value of the
money that is invested. In the fourth place, it has
ECONOMIC CONFERENCE.


encouraged speculation at the expense of productive
investment. In the fifth place, it reduces the competi-
tive power of our products, particularly our manufac-
tured goods, in overseas markets. In the case of
primary products, with two or three conspicuous
exceptions, it has an adverse effect upon our capacity
to sell them overseas in circumstances in which other
countries may need them desperately. In the sixth
place, inflation adds enormously to the cost of all
government services and all benefits. You will
occasionally hear references to the upward pressure that
inflation exercises on the revenues of governments—in
particular the Commonwealth Government. But it is
also true that it exercises an enormous pressure on the
other side of the ledger. If you examine the history of
social services, repatriation benefits and other obliga-
tions to which the community is properly very deeply
attached, you find that there has been an enormous
increase of the liabilities of governments.
Having said that, I propose to refer now to what we
believe to be the major causes of this economic trouble.
One cannot fail to notice that there is a disposition
here and there to think that the causes of inflation are
irrelevant and that all we need is some rather simple
piece of government legislation to solve the problem.
That, of course, is fallacious. Nobody ever dreamt
of curing a disease by any such process. If we are
to attack this disease effectively we must understand
its causes.
The first cause of our present inflation is frequently
overlooked. Shortly stated, that cause is the last war.
It is still superbly true that wars must be paid for.
Some people pay for it by most frightful miseries, as
indeed many of our people have. Some people pay
for it by having their countries overrun, their work
destroyed and their fields ruined. Although others
escape much of the physical damage of war, when the
war is over this movement begins because of what
happened during the war. In the last war we became
a very highly organized community. Practically every-
thing in the community was controlled, and it was
controlled, very properly, for specific purposes. It was
controlled so that we might exercise our maximum war
effort, both in the field and in supply, and at the same
time preserve the greatest amount of stability for our
civil population. In consequence, during the war civil
production was more and more curtailed; but because
we had huge war expenditures, that is to say spending
money in the hands of the public, loans and war savings
certificates, savings bank and trading bank deposits
increased enormously. The result was that when we
came out of the war we had a minimum of civil sup-
plies and a maximum of spending power with which
to buy them. The truth is that the war-time controls—
and I do not criticize them, because on the contrary
I approved of them—merely postponed in the result the
operation of these inflationary elements until the war
was over and until controls could be taken off. It is
very interesting, as an illustration of what I have been
saying, to notice that if you take bank notes and
deposits, which are the most elementary forms of cash,
they have shown an almost frightening increase. In
1939 they totalled £612,000,000, but by 1950 they had
increased to £2,060,000,000. At the same time there
was an enormous increase of personal incomes. In
1938-39 personal incomes aggregated £748,000,000; in
1949-50 £2,186,000,000. So that on both those items
the original figure was multiplied by three. Incidentally,
that comparison is ba=ed on the last available figure,
which is, I have no doubt, considerably less than the
current figure.
Concurrently with the enormously increased purchas-
ing capacity there has been an enormously increased
demand for things that were postponed under war-time
controls. Again, to take an elementary example, the
number of dwellings, houses and flats, erected during
1940, the first year of the war, was 40,000, the number
erected during the subsequent years of the war under
the pressure of war-time events, dwindled almost to
nothing. The consequence was, of course, that after
the war there was an enormously accumulated demand
for houses; and I imagine that that demand was three
or four times greater than any possible capacity to
supply it. The effect of that enormous increase of
demand on building costs is common knowledge to us
all. Because of the scarcity of building materials and
skilled tradesmen houses could not be completed within
a reasonable time, and in the long run the cost of
building has been far greater than it would have been
if the capacity of the building industry had been equal
to the demand. In addition, the post-war demands for
related services such as water and sewerage, electric
power and transport have increased correspondingly.
Without occupying your time unnecessarily I point out
to you that all this terrific pressure after the war has
resulted in our productive capacity falling further and
further behind the demand.
Our roads and railway systems were run down during
the war, when no repairs or new construction could be
carried out. The condition of our roads and railways
to-day is, in itself, a matter for very grave concern,
and their restoration to their former efficiency would,
of itself, occupy a substantial part of the nation’s energy
and resources. We have, of course, a very much higher
percentage of employed persons now. Unemployment
before tbe war is now converted into what has been
described, not inaccurately, as over-full employment;
that is to say, we have far more jobs than we have
men to fill them. In addition to the factors that I
have mentioned you will bear in mind that the purchas-
ing power of individuals has been unequal to the cost
of goods and services in short supply, with the conse-
quence that there is now much more family employment
than there was before the war, and family earnings, as
distinct from individual earnings, have mounted in
consequence at an even greater rate.
All those factors have produced what we must describe
as an investment boom, leading to an extraordinarily
competitive demand for capital goods and equipment.
In 1945-46, the first post-war year, the number of
factories in Australia was 31,200. By 1948-49 that
number had increased to 40,100. In other words, 900
new factories had been established in three years. The
amount invested in fixed capital plant increased from
£90,000,000 to £160,000,000 during the same period.
It is clear, therefore, that there has been an enormous
upward pressure on fixed capital plant. Those figures
merely relate to the demand that was satisfied, but
everybody at the table knows how much of the demand
was unsatisfied. If our experience is any guide it is
quite clear that notwithstanding the enormous expansion
that took place, for every three people who were demand-
ing, only one was satisfied.
I mentioned to you about the great pressure on build-
ing. Taking one post-war year, 1947, I point out that
in Australia the number of dwellings completed was
39,000. In 1950 we completed 63,000 dwellings, which
is a far higher number than has ever been achieved in
the history of this country. Yet, the truth is that if
we are to cope with the demand for houses the minimum
number that ‘must be built annually is 90,000. Not-
withstanding the joint efforts of governments and
private organizations and the building industry gener-
ally our greatest achievement yet has been only 60,000
dwellings. That means that there is an enormous
unsatisfied demand for building materials and trades-
men, and the result is that, whether we like it or not,
building materials and skilled tradesmen are becoming
scarcer and building is becoming more expensive. That
state of affairs also characterizes many other industries.


I turn now to public works and private capital
investment. In this country public works are carried
out largely by the Commonwealth and the State Go-
vernments, and to a lesser extent by semi-governmental
bodies, who have in the post-war years come into the
picture far more than they did before the war —and
for very good reasons. Authorities such as the State
Electricity Commission in Victoria have demands for
capital, materials and men which are astronomical
compared with their demands before the war. In the
year before the war, 1938-39, the Public Works Bill was
£57,000,000, but by 1950-51 it had increased to
£312,000,000. That is an enormous increase. During
the same period private capital investment increased
from £109,000,000 to £405,000,000. Although it is not
always easy to appreciate such figures, it is clear that
the public works programme has increased during that
period more than five times and the private capital
investment demand has increased approximately four
times. However, we have not five times the people or
the plant or material to fulfil those demands. You can
all imagine, therefore, the terrific pressure of unsatisfied
demand that exists in those fields.
The effect of all the matters I have mentioned has
been to bring about an excessive demand for labour,
plant and materials, with resultant bottle-necks, high
competition for scarce resources, and bidding up for
scarce labour. One has only to look at the newspapers
to realize how little, in one sense, the basic wage has
to do with the realities of life to-day, because every
advertisement we see —and sometimes large advertise-
ments are inserted for matters of comparatively minor
importance—indicates a rate of pay which is far beyond
any fixed rate of pay, and is therefore a competitive
rate of pay. Therefore, on the whole, we have higher
incomes because high wages and high prices are paid
under the stimulus of competition. The net result is a
circle of high wages, high profits and high prices.
Another matter to which I shall refer quite frankly
—because although it is a matter for argument whether,
at a time of unparalleled shortage, it should have
occurred, there can be no argument about the effect of
its introduction—is the 40-hour week. It has inevitably
reduced production, except in some instances, and
even in those instances the cost of production has risen
because of increased rates of pay for the extra hours of
overtime. The introduction of the 40-hour week has
added more to the purchasing power of the people
than it has added to the resources available to meet
that purchasing power. The introduction of the
40-hour week in one State was followed by its inclusion
in an award of the Commonwealth Arbitration Court.
More recently a basic wage award increased the base
wage by £l, which, as I indicated before, has probably
produced 10s. of the subsequent quarterly adjustment.
That was a very definite increase of real wages, having
regard to the figures that I have already given you about
the “C ” series index and the basic wage figures. These
increases are excellent things—if we can embrace them
at a time of great shortage and demand and unparal-
leled monetary capacity to give effect to that demand —
but they all have their effect in accentuating inflation.
Every factor that I have mentioned has inevitably
reflected itself in higher and higher prices.
Another matter that has arisen since the war, and on
which there has been some public confusion, is the
migration programme. In the short run it is probably
true to say that the migration programme has an infla-
tionary effect, because the demand that is set up for
capital goods and services, for houses and accommoda-
tion, for more factory space, transport, water services
and so on, is very heavy for the first few years until the
migrant becomes in himself a contributor to the produc-
tivity of the country. But although that is true and
presents a problem that is always engaging the attention
of the Government and of my colleague, Mr. Holt, who
has given great thought to it, it must be discounted by
the important fact that migration has added materially
to the work force, particularly in places where it was
most needed. Mr. Gair, the Deputy Premier of
Queensland, will be well aware of the extent to which
migrant labour has helped to solve the harvesting
problems in the cane-fields. The sugar industry in
Queensland would have been in serious difficulty without
that added supply of labour. It has been possible to
direct large groups of labour to particular industries,
with resulting benefits, we hope, in the coal-fields, steel-
works, and other heavy industries. So, we have two
factors about migration which I want you to keep in
mind because neither of them must be forgotten in
estimating the nature of the problem. We have, as I
pointed out, the most grave shortages in the production
of coal and power. Coal is a commodity which, before
the war, had some reserve stocks. There are none
to-day. We are literally living from hand to mouth,
and, in the broad, we have a gross under-production of
coal. Of course, there may be many causes for that
under-production. I do not want to precipitate a
discussion on the coal-mining industry at this stage or,
for that matter,, at this conference; but I do want to
say that one of the causes of insufficient production of
coal has been a curious want of appreciation on the part
of many people of the importance of coal to the
Australian economy. Far too much absenteeism, far
too many quite unnecessary stoppages —and, for all I
know, too much mutual hostility between employers and
employees in the coal-mining industry. I am not
unaware of that fact because I have seen glimpses of it
from time to time. However, whatever the cause may
be, the fact is that our under-production of coal is one
of the biggest inflationary factors in our economy. It
means under-production of steel, and, in consequence,
the importation of steel, wherever we can get it abroad,
at prices four, five and six times greater than the price
of Australian steel. In turn, that means shortages and
irregularities right down the line in our big construc-
tional industries.
Another matter about which we must be quite frank
with ourselves is the general lag in production, which
is not, I am happy to say, universal. There are many
hundreds of thousands of people who work as hard, and
perhaps harder, than they ever did. However, if I may
repeat an observation that I have made publicly once
or twice, it is a regrettable feature of this age that as
men have tended, on the whole, to work less their wives
have tended to work more. I can speak for my own
household, although I am not conscious that I could do
many more hours a week than I do now. However,
there is a lag in productive effort, particularly in
certain places and in certain circumstances.
Since the war many of these things have been contri-
buted to and exacerbated by the Communists, strategi-
cally placed as they are in many key industries, and I
think that a great deal of under-effort—deliberately
planned under-effort —a great deal of absenteeism and
a great many completely futile and pointless stoppages
can be attributed to the activities of the Communists.
Then, on top of all that—and that is the last local
cause that I shall mention —we now have a demand
upon us for defence preparations that is far greater
than any similar demand that has ever been made upon
us in a time of peace. Let us make no mistake about it
—every time we withdraw 10.000, 20,000, or 100,000
people from civil production to produce munitions of
war, we do not reduce the consumer-demand by an
equivalent number but we do reduce by that number the
labour force available for the production of civilian
requirements. The United States has discovered that
fact, because it has engaged on defence preparations on
the grand scale, not only for itself but also for moat of


the free world. The effect of its war effort upon that
country has been to drive it to introduce a series of
controls that I do not think for a moment it would have
entertained at any other time. However, if we are to be
properly defended in what I believe is an era of
imminent danger we must be prepared not only to
make proper defence preparations but also to adopt
counter-inflationary measures to offset the effect upon
our economy of defence expenditure.
The matters that I have mentioned all deal with local
causes, but when we turn our attention to external
circumstances, we find two more enormously powerful
inflationary factors. The first is the great increase
of our export income since the war. I do not suggest
that export incomes have increased uniformly over all
industries, because they have not. However, increases
have been particularly marked in the wool industry, to
some extent in the wheat industry and to some extent
in base metals and certain other industries. Our income
from exports in 1946-47 was £309,000,000; but in
1950-51 it was estimated at £980,000,000. In other
words, we have the better part of £700,000,000 coming
into the country more than we had in the year after
the war. However, at the same time the cost of our
imports has also risen considerably. Taking the
average price of imports during the years 1936 to 1939
as 100, the price of imports for the first quarter of this
year indicates that the price has risen to 359. It is not
reasonable to assume that the price of imports can rise
to three and a half times the pre-war price and the value
of exports rise to several times the pre-war level with-
out affecting very considerably the cost of many of the
goods that we buy. So many of the things which we
buy are imported, and everything that we buy is bid
for by incomes available in Australia which include this
enormously increased export income. On top of all
that we have an influx of capital to Australia, which in
1946-47 was £29,000,000, and by 1949-50 had reached
£176,000,000.
I have taken up your time at some length in order
to tell you what I believe to be the central features of
the causes of inflation, because I want to make it quite
clear that to discuss alleged remedies which leave these
causes untouched is to beat the air. Unless we can do
something about the causes of inflation and introduce
some measures which will have some counteracting
effect upon the consequences of those causes we cannot
get very far. Therefore, apologizing for my long-
windedness, I shall now say something about possible
measures that I shall discuss with you to deal with those
causes that are local and not international. I do not
undertake to promote a debate about the international
scene or about what should be done in connexion with it.
First of all, I mentioned the enormous unsatisfied
demand for capital works in Australia, and that is a
tremendous factor. The Commonwealth Government
believes that there should be a very close review of all
public works programmes in order that we may con-
centrate upon those that will not demand more men and
materials than can be made available for them, and
which will, within a measurable time, increase our
supplies of coal, power, vital transport, basic materials
and needed foodstuffs. We believe that those are the
categories into which works ought to fit if those works
are to be carried out with the resources that we now
have. Let us make no mistake about one thing, and this
is a matter that I shall have the pleasure of discussing
with my colleagues, the Premiers, at the forthcoming
Loan Council, but in the meantime let us have no
illusions on this point.
We shall not get any public works programme done
merely by saying that it is a public works programme
and voting money for it. What we can do depends
entirely upon the men, materials and plant that we
have. If we go beyond that, we shall not get any more
work done, although we may attempt to do more. If
we attempt to do more than we can do, we shall merely
have half-finished jobs on our hands and not completed
works. The way to carry out a vital works programme
—and there is a works programme of tremendous im-
portance in Australia—is to increase supplies of men
and materials. Unless we have adequate supplies of
power, it is idle to talk about national development or,
for that matter, about preserving our standards of
living. In relation to power supplies, we are hopelessly
in arrears. Unless we have more coal, what is the use of
talking about increased power supplies? What is the
use of talking about open-cut coal mines if our transport
system cannot handle the coal that could be produced
in that way?
There is a vital public works programme to be done
in this country, but it must be fitted into the available
supplies of men and materials. To the extent to which
it is not, it will merely force up the price of both. If it
forces up the price of both, it will exert a vast infla-
tionary pressure which will find its way home through
the prices that people pay for ordinary commodities
across the counter.
I do not want any one to believe that 1 do not think
that we cannot expand our resources of men and
materials for those vital purposes. I believe that we
can do so. We can get some of the men from Mr. Holt
and his immigration scheme. We can get some of the
men and materials by bearing down upon industries of
lesser importance and detaching from them the men and
materials that are needed by industries of vital
importance.
That introduces one of the most complex problems in
the world. When the war was on, that sort of task
became a simple one. We had man-power direction and
control of materials. We had the closest possible grip
upon the capital structure. But who has man-power
control to-day? We have not. as the Commonwealth
Government. I suppose that, in a theoretical sense, a
State Government might have power to control man-
power, but nobody wants to see a control of that kind
in force in Australia. In this year of our Lord, nobody
wants to see people being given orders about what jobs
they are to do. Direct man-power control is not even
on the map, either in point of power or desire. Yet
it is necessary to detach men and material from less
important industries if the major or vital industries are
not to be starved. Therefore, we must resort to the
fiscal weapon. That is what the Commonwealth
Government will do in its forthcoming budget.
The indirect financial methods include a credit policy
of a more restricted kind in order to select more rigidly
the objects of bank credit. They include capital issues
control, which, in the face of this crisis, must become
quite strict. They include selective taxation. I shall
not attempt to anticipate the budget that will be pre-
sented by my colleague, the Treasurer, but I do not
really need to explain to any of you that if we desire to
effect a movement from one type of industry to another,
taxation is not entirely an inflexible weapon. We shall
need to have some control of consumer credit. I think
I know all the arguments that can be advanced in sup-
port of the great services that are rendered to the people
by hire purchase schemes and the like. I have no doubt
that in many instances they are valuable. But I am
equally certain that, in many thousands of instances, by
making it easier to buy, they increase the demand for
commodities. I do not think that any expert in the
world doubts for one moment that they are violently
inflationary in their effect. The United States of
America has not prohibited hire-purchase agreements,
but has selected groups of commodities and decreed
that, in relation to those commodities, there cannot
be a hire-purchase agreement unless the down-payment
is so much and the time allowed for the payment of the


balance is limited to a certain period. Controls of that
kind are very important in damping down the demand
for some commodities.
We have already announced the abandonment by the
Commonwealth of the special initial depreciation allow-
ances that were created to encourage investment in
business and manufacturing plant. They were designed
for that purpose, and succeeded to a great degree. They
had a very stimulating effect upon the purchase of
plant, because it was a very good start to be able to write
off 40 per cent, of the purchase price by way of initial
depreciation. We are going to discourage investment
of that kind by cancelling, as from the end of June
this year, that special allowance. I am talking only
about the special initial depreciation allowance. The
ordinary depreciation allowances will not be affected.
There is no better way of helping a basic industry to
get the men that it wants than by ensuring that it gets
the vital materials that it needs and that some irrele-
vant industry does not get them. Where the materials
are, the men will be. But materials control is not an
easy matter. We have an organization in existence now
that is designed to produce the greatest possible degree
of voluntary control of materials, especially where
there is a limited number of producers; but, under
the Defence Preparation Act, we have taken power that
can be used, if necessary to secure a proper allocation
of materials, some of which ought not to be wasted to
the extent of one ounce at this time.
So much for public and private works programmes.
I re-emphasize to you that the magnitude of those two
problems is such that it is a considerable factor in the
Australian price level and the Australian inflationary
problem. In relation to all industry, public and private,
we have under-production. I am puzzled about the
problem of production. It is a matter in respect of
which I hope to hear some useful suggestions made
before this conference concludes. After all, the right
way to combat an inflation that reflects a shortage of
goods is to produce more goods. How can we do that?
It seems to me to be a little ironical to go to a factory
in Hew South Wales —I select Hew South Wales merely
because we are meeting in that State—and to say,
“We want you to produce more ”, when we know
that the factory’s answer will be, “ We cannot do so
because we cannot get enough power. We are not
working even a 40-hour week at the present time.”
That brings us back to the power industry, which in
turn brings us back to the power side of the public
works programme, or to the production of coal, if we
are dealing with thermal power stations. I hope very
much that the employers and the representatives of
the trade unions who are present may, as the result
either of public discussion or private talk, be able to
give us some useful help upon this problem of how to
stimulate a greater sense of responsibility for produc-
tion in this country.
One of our difficulties is that we have become quite;
easy-going. Ho drug is more potent than money.
Because there is a lot of money about, people say,
“ This is all right; I have never had as much money
as this in my life ”. Under those circumstances, the
sense of individual responsibility begins to fall away.
Of all the times in our history, this is the time when
we should be working double shifts to produce our-
selves into a state of prosperity. We have never had
so great an opportunity for development as we have
now. The possibilities are almost limitless.
Another matter that falls into the lap of the Common-
wealth Government as a counter-inflationary measure is
budgeting for a surplus. There are all sorts of specu-
lations about what the budget will contain. I do
not mind that. I become worried about speculation
only when it is accurate. But there are many thousands
of people in this country to-day who are completely
3964.-2
bamboozled at the idea that anybody can talk of
increasing taxes at a time like this. I want to point
out that if we introduced a budget that disclosed a
deficit—in other words, if we had to go to the
Commonwealth Bank, get treasury-bill accommodation
for our deficit and create new money at a time like
this—we should be doing the most inflationary thing
that we could do. The problem to-day is not new money
but new goods. The problem is to bring demand and
supply into closer harmony. That cannot be done if
we have a government that is so careless as to say
that it will go to the Commonwealth Bank and let
the bank create more purchasing power. If the
Commonwealth Government did that, it might easily
undo all the good that had been done as a result of
some of the other policies to which I have referred.
A government can produce a budget surplus, which
is a powerful anti-inflationary measure, by reducing
governmental expenditure or by increasing taxes. A
reduction of governmental expenditure is something
that appeals to everybody. I am all in favour of it.
But there is a great deal of misapprehension about the
scope that exists for it. If I were to analyse current
Commonwealth expenditure, I do not believe that I
should have any- difficulty in persuading everybody to
agree that most of the large items of expenditure are
not capable of reduction at all. There is a current
notion that the Commonwealth spends hundreds of
millions of pounds upon ordinary administration and
upon the payment of armies of un-needed people. That
is not true. The biggest item in the last budget was
£133,000,000 in respect of defence. That cannot be
reduced. We shall most certainly increase it. Expen-
diture upon war and repatriation services arising out
of the last war was £104,000,000. Hobody will suggest
that that should be reduced. Similar expenditure in
respect of the first world war is still £25,000,000.
So far from reducing those items, it is quite clear that,
having regard to the present inflationary position,
they will, as a measure of justice, have to be increased,
just as age pensions will have to be adjusted. Expen-
diture from the Hational Welfare Fund, which is the
fund from which all social services other than repatria-
tion benefits are paid, was £127,000,000. Hobody
proposes that we should get out of our nresent troubles
by cutting social services. Payments to the States
amount to £111,000,000. If my colleagues, the
Premiers, are contemplating asking me to reduce that
sum, they have concealed that intention from me. I
confidently expect that within a fortnight we shall be
discussing whether it can be increased.
Mr. McDOHALD.—That is one thing that is very
certain.
Mr. MEHZIES.—That is as certain as anything
can be. The Commonwealth is engaged in a ruthless
examination of its .public works programme in order
to see whether any effective reduction of that pro-
gramme can he achieved. The administrative expenses
of the Commonwealth amount only to 4.6 per cent of
the total of the budget. When we announced recently
that, in order to set an example in the diversion of
labour, we should go through our administrative
services and see whether we could cut out unnecessary
functions or get rid of unnecessary employees, some-
thing mildly resembling an uproar occurred, at least
in one or two places.
Taxation has a definite anti-inflationary significance.
First, it avoids recourse to new money from the central
bank, which would be inflationary in effect. Secondly,
it reduces the amount of money that is immediately
available to compete for scarce goods and services.
Thirdly, because, if taxation is increased, people may
be assumed to effect economies in their expenditure,
not upon household necessities but upon other things, it
tends to reduce luxury buying and, therefore, luxury
capital investment.


Two other measures have been suggested, and perhaps
it will be convenient if I mentioned them at this stage.
I am not putting them forward, but they have been
mentioned and, before 1 conclude, I want to throw
a few words into the ring about them. I have heard
it suggested that there should be a wage freeze. It will
be interesting to hear views upon that matter. I am
not aware at the moment of any power that the
Commonwealth has to freeze wages. They are not
in our jurisdiction. Wages are in the jurisdiction
of the Commonwealth Arbitration Court, which is not
subject to direction by the Commonwealth Parliament.
I repeat that I am not aware of any power that the
Commonwealth Parliament has that would enable
it to freeze wages. But before people can begin to
discuss the freezing of wages, which may or may
not be a proposal of great merit, it is necessary
to consider three aspects of the problem. Docs wage
freezing include the idea of a suspension of the
quarterly adjustments? The quarterly adjustments
to-day arc so large that they are greater than most
increases used to be on straight-out awards of the
court. Does the wage freeze idea include the freezing
of margins for skill? I think I am right in saying
that most margins are still awaiting decisions by
conciliation commissioners. Assuming that we froze
wages in both of those aspects, what would we do
about competitive margins caused by bidding up scarce
labour? In other words, what should we do to
convert minimum rates of pay into maximum rates
of pay? I pose those questions in order that people
may have them in their minds. In the absence of
any compulsion, it may be that these things are
susceptible of voluntary agreement. I do not know.
We may hear something of use upon that point. It
might be possible, in respect of some of these things,
to get a court order, but there are many hundreds of
thousands of employees in Australia who are not
covered by awards of the Commonwealth Arbitration
Court. Would the percentage be one-half or two-
thirds, Mr. Monk ?
Mr. MONK.—I should say one-half.
Mr. MENZIES.—Another matter that has been
mentioned is the alteration of the exchange rate.
Because that matter keeps cropping up, like King
Charles’s head, I want to say one or two words about
it. The question of the exchange rate is always under
consideration by any Government that is responsible
for international finance and for central bank finance.
It is very well known that these matters do not receive
consideration only periodically, but are always under
consideration. Somebody starts the rumour that some-
thing is going to happen, and a lot of people start
sending “ hot ” money to this country, hoping to cash
in on an alteration of the exchange rate. It has been
said that all the arguments are in favour of an
alteration of the rate, and that there is a hopeless
political division in the Commonwealth Cabinet upon it.
We have considered this matter time after time in
its various settings and in the light of the various
circumstances that have arisen. The best and most
responsible economic advice available to the Common-
wealth Government, given by people whose official
responsibility is to offer us disinterested economic
advice, is against an alteration of the exchange rate,
and is against it on purely economic grounds. I say
that to you because it has been said so frequently that
all the economic argument is one way, and that there
is only some political argument to the contrary. The
advice given to us has been against an alteration of
the rate, and is still against it, on economic grounds
completely, detached from any political consideration.
I say to you in all gravity that, unless, by a great
community effort, led by governments and assisted by
the people and by organized masses of people, we
can grapple with this internal financial position,
some day there will be people writing articles about
devaluing the £l. I have referred to that problem
because I cannot allow it to be said that it has not
been considered. I myself have given as much con-
sideration to it as anybody else in this room. It
is not a problem that lends itself to useful discussion
at a meeting of this kind. The only people who
become stirred up in a discusson about revaluation
arc the currency speculators.
It has been suggested in certain places that the
answer to inflation is Commonwealth prices control,
i do not understand how Commonwealth prices control
could repair deficiencies of men and material or do
something about the volume of purchasing power
which between them, have caused this disease. Com-
monwealth prices control does not seem to me to be a
cure for the disease, but it has been put forward as
one. Commonwealth prices control was undoubtedly
broadly successful during the war. It began to be in-
effective when the other controls that supported it
were abandoned. By the time Commonwealth prices
control ended, the price level was rising at the rate
of about 10 per cent, per annum. In other words,
there was a substantial measure of inflation when
Commonwealth prices control was still operating.
Commonwealth prices control succeeded during the
war under conditions that no longer exist. Then
wages were pegged, but today wages are not controlled.
Then taxes were imposed at record rates, investment
was completely controlled and, owing to these factors,
government borrowings were high and easy. The
Premiers will agree with me that to-day they are not
easy. Then they were high and easy because of those
other circumstances. During the war, export and
import prices were relatively stable. We had long-term
contracts for the sale and purchase of a variety of
commodities. To-day export and import prices are
rocketing. Then man-power was directed, consumption
was controlled by rationing, and developmental works,
housing and transport maintenance and replacement
were virtually suspended. All of those concrete factors
existed when war-time prices control was a success.
That control rested upon those things and, in effect,
recorded the result that was produced by those other
things. In addition, there was a high degree of war-
time patriotism, and a wide sense of duty to obey the
law. 1 regret that I cannot detect at the moment
the same wide instinct to obey the law as existed then.
I have noticed that one of my colleagues in one of the
States has already encountered some difficulty on that
ground.
Unless most or all of those conditions are recreated,
prices control will be no answer to inflation, but will be
a more or less cumbersome machine for recording
increases of prices. It is true that it might have a
mellowing effect at this point or that, depending upon
how adequately it could be policed, but, broadly speak-
ing, unless you have the other stabilizing factors, it
will be a mere machine for recording price rises.
Suppose that none of those conditions existed and we
accepted a gift of power to control prices and nothing
else. Prices would go on rising every week. Nothing
could prevent them from doing so unless we had
hundreds of millions of pounds in the Treasury with
which to pay subsidies until we were subsidizing every-
thing that people bought. Of course prices would con-
tinue to rise, because import costs are increasing and
wages are running free. I have no ambition to assume
an alleged power to control prices and then have to
explain to the people in six months’ time why prices
have risen rapidly in spite of the control that has been
exercised. Price control deals with results. It cannot
affect causes. If you deal with the causes you can talk,
then, about price control as people did during the
course of the war.


I am at a loss to understand what power over prices
the Commonwealth could exercise which the States
cannot. It is the same power over the same people and
in relation to the same transactions. What, then, is
wrong with State price control? The answer may be
that it would not be administered as effectively as
Commonwealth control. I have not heard that said.
Is it said ? Is there any inherent reason why State
prices control should not be as effectively administered
as such a measure could be administered by the Com-
monwealth Government ? Is it the case that if the Com-
monwealth had that control it could pay subsidies?
The Commonwealth Government is already paying sub-
sidies to the extent of nearly £50,000,000 a year. If
the problem is one of deficient administration I see
no inherent reason why the States should not be able to
improve their administrative machinery so as to deal
with the position satisfactorily.
I ask you not to think of price control as a remedy.
It does not deal with the causes of inflation. If it were
possible to control prices by taking action in relation to
the causes of inflation, it might be possible to achieve
some stability, and it might then be possible to establish
a case for price control, such as existed during the war
as part and parcel of a total system. I have no instinc-
tive opposition to price control. I introduced it during
the war. It was one of my first children. So it cannot
be said that I have some instinctive antipathy to prices
control; but I have an instinctive antipathy to telling
the people that it is a remedy when I know that it is
not and when I know that in due course I shall be told
that I said it was a remedy and it has turned out to
he a failure. Better to seek the fountain head than
dissect the rivulets, if I remember my Latin correctly.
To seek the fountain head is to ascertain the causes of
the trouble.
I am indebted to all of you for having given me so
much of your time and so much more than my due share
of your attention.
Mr. STOTT. —Can you state, Mr. Prime Minister,
whether the conference will sit this evening?
Mr. MENZIES.—I thought that the conference
might sit this evening if it were convenient to every-
body. If delegates would like to consider some of these
matters privately this evening, we could meet again in
the morning. I arranged for the Hansard reporters to
attend the conference in order that a record of the
proceedings might be available for discussion later on.
The speech that I have just delivered will be avail-
able in the early part of this evening.
Mr. MONK.—Mr. Prime Minister, some of the
matters that you have raised are controversial and the
trade union representatives would prefer to have a
discussion among themselves this evening before the
conference resumes to-morrow morning.
Mr. MENZIES. —Under those circumstances, we
shall not sit this evening. I suggest that we meet
to-morrow morning at ten o’clock.
Mr. McGIEK. —I am not familiar with the formula
upon which you have convened this conference, Mr.
Chairman, but there are a number of organizations
that are not represented here. The Opposition in the
Federal Parliament is not represented. I think that
the Leader of the Opposition in the House of Repre-
sentatives should have been here because His Majesty’s
Opposition in that House represents half the people of
Australia. Local government bodies throughout Aus-
tralia might be considered as ranking next to State
governments, and they are very representative organiza-
tions. I think that they should have sent a repre-
sentative. The co-operative movement is a big orga-
nization and might well have had a representative here.
The Labour women’s organizations throughout Aus-
tralia might well have been represented. However, Mr.
Chairman, the conference has been convened according
to your formula and I only desire to express my regret
that these organizations are not represented.
I thank you for the invitation to attend this confer-
ence, Mr. Chairman, and welcome the opportunity of
engaging in these discussions because the Government
of New South Wales is very seriously concerned to
ensure that the people of this State should be protected
from the effects of an unbridled inflation of the cur-
rency. At the outset let me state that I shall submit
to my Government for its immediate consideration any
problem with which the Commonwealth may find itself
confronted and upon which it needs States guidance,
assistance or advice. The Government of New South
Wales, however, expects the Commonwealth Govern-
ment to do what it so far appears to have been reluctant
to do in the past eighteen months—that is, we expect
the Commonwealth Government to face up to the
responsibilities of a national government, and to grasp
some of the. thorny nettles which can be grasped only
by a national government. You have called us together,
Mr. Menzies, for a frank discussion, and I intend to
be frank and to state my views without reservation.
I have listened carefully to your remarks and
your analysis of the causes of the problem
we face to-day. But what you have not given
as a cause of our present difficulties—perhaps
naturally enough—is one which I quite frankly
regard as one of the main factors, if not the principal
factor which has caused prices and costs to spiral
upwards. That factor is the lack of any positive
action by the present Commonwealth Government over
the last eighteen months to control the economy and to
protect the savings of the people and the living stan-
dards of those who are on fixed incomes and pensions.
It is necessary to say this, Mr. Chairman, because
while it is now everybody’s concern that a common
front be maintained against the forces of inflation, the
calling of a conference such as this cannot be taken to
imply that it is every one’s responsibility that the
present state of affairs has come about. The Common-
wealth Government must accept a very large share of
the responsibility, just as it must assume the major
responsibillity for stabilizing the economy at this late
stage.
The present troubles are not the responsibility of all
and sundry, Mr. Chairman, because the present Com-
monwealth Government, in 1949, came to office on a
policy of “ put value hack into the £1 and away with
controls ”. Those two promises were not compatible,
and the people have so far been misled in the belief that
controls are not needed; that the economy will right
itself if left alone; that prices will find their own level;
and so on. In other words, the Commonwealth Govern-
ment put to the people in 1949 a policy which it has
subscribed to in the fast eighteen months, and which
is based upon outmoded laisser faire doctrines. Those
doctrines were completely discredited in the ’thirties.
It has been known for the last twenty years at least
that the economy will not regulate itself, either in a
depression or a boom, except by a very painful process
of adjustment which ruins the living standards of many
of our citizens. And so I say quite frankly that there
must be an honest approach to this question, and an
honest admission that mistakes have been made and
false doctrines preached. There must be no attempt,
by statements that it is now every one’s responsibility
to overcome these difficulties, to imply that the blame
for past inaction and errors of judgment rests upon the
individual citizen.
The Commonwealth Government must take a very
prominent part in controlling the economy and what is
wanted more than anything else is a return of con-
fidence amongst the people that the Commonwealth
Government will show itself as able and willing to


measure up to the true stature of a National Govern-
ment. The past record of the Commonwealth Govern-
ment is not encouraging. Although during the period it
has been in office the inflationary trend has been clearly
apparent, it is difficult to point to any concerted effort
made at any time during the last eighteen months to
arrest that trend.
Firstly, let us consider price control. Despite
repeated warnings by the States that Commonwealth
administrative and financial assistance was needed to
secure an effective system of control, and despite
requests for a direct participation by the Common-
wealth Government at a ministerial level with the
States as partners in this field, the Commonwealth has
not even yet agreed to one of its Minister’s consulting
and acting with the States’ Prices Ministers. Members
of the present Commonwealth Government opposed a
referendum to enlarge the powers of the Common-
wealth to embrace control of prices, and in the critical
period since 1949, during which the basic wage has
risen by almost 50 per cent., the attitude of the Com-
monwealth has apparently been to wash its hands of
responsibility, presumably with the idea of letting the
States take the full responsibility for inability to con-
trol the upward surge of prices.
Secondly, there was an undertaking in the policy
speech of the Liberal and Country parties in 1949 that
the Commonwealth Government would hold itself in
readiness to subsidize basic items which enter into the
cost of living. But all that the Commonwealth has
done, is to hold itself aloof from the problem! In
practically every case it has refused to subsidize items
which were not subject to subsidy when it came into
office. Even now, I have failed to discern any clear
policy or intention on the part of the Commonwealth
Government to stabilize living costs by this means. In
fact, under a scheme recently put forward by the Com-
monwealth in respfect to butter, the Commonwealth
proposes not to peg the present price but to peg its own
subsidy and let the price rise. In fact, I understand
that this very week, while we are called together to
discuss measures for stabilizing this cost of living, the
Commonwealth Minister for Commerce and Agricul-
ture is calling a conference to place the Commonwealth
Government’s scheme relating to butter before State
Ministers. The Commonwealth scheme provides for no
increase in Commonwealth subsidy and an increase in
the retail price of butter by about Is. per lb.
Mr. MENZIES.—Do you think that we should give
the butter away?
Mr. McGIER.—I heard you in silence, Mr. Chair-
man, and I think that you should hear me in silence.
Thirdly, although it was obvious that resources were
being diverted to the less essential industries and that
large capital gains were being made by private industry,
control of capital issues, although ready to hand for use
by the Commonwealth Government, remained a “ dead
letter ” until very recently, when most of the infla-
tionary damage had been done.
In the fourth place, although a brave announcement
was made long ago that excess profits would be taxed by
the Commonwealth, no such tax was introduced, and
no recent pronouncement has referred to this measure.
There has been some talk of wage controls by the
Liberal party and by employer organizations, but
precious little reference to profit control. Yet huge
profits and gains from capital transfers have been made
in the last couple of years and have fanned the flames
of inflation.
Fifthly, no action has been taken, and none appears
to be in contemplation, to limit dividends. Limitation
of dividends and a ceiling on share prices would have
curbed the stock exchange boom and diverted invest-
ment from speculation in stocks, which has been highly
inflationary in its effects.
In the sixth place, even in relatively small matters
such as the excessive taxation allowances for deprecia-
tion on private investment, no action was taken to
eliminate an obvious encouragement to excessive
expenditure by private industry in the last year or two
until the States drew attention to this at the Premiers
Conference held last month.
In the seventh place, it is recognized that immigra-
tion, which has taken place on a large scale in the last
lew years, is highly inflationary in its effect. Not
enough attention has been paid to the selection of
migrants, and too much attention has been paid to
numbers, irrespective of the productive effort which
they can make.
Lastly, the Commonwealth has not exercised control
of exports as rigidly as it should. One of the important
and largely uncontrollable factors in the inflationary
situation is that import prices have been very high,
and yet the Commonwealth Administration has per-
mitted steel to be exported when there is such a chronic
shortage of steel that imports at three times the costs
have been needed. Again, with respect to cement and
other basic materials such as lead, zinc, &c., exports
have been permitted at a level which has caused
shortages in this country, with all the consequent rises
in production costs caused by scarcity of materials and
delays in the completion of works. The present butter
shortage demonstrates the need for very careful control
of exports by the Commonwealth.
I point to these things, Mr. Menzies, not for the
purpose of raking over the past, but to suggest a
number of ways in which the Commonwealth should
now rectify mistakes in administration and judgment
which it has made.
First, the Commonwealth should assume full respon-
sibility for price control and put a referendum to
the people on this subject. In the meantime, the
Commonwealth should give full assistance to the States
to,maintain price ceilings which they have established
over a wide range of essential commodities, by pay-
ment of subsidies on the essential basic items entering
into the cost of living. As the Commonwealth Govern-
ment is at present collecting from the people of
Australia no less than £222,000,000 per annum in
indirect taxation—customs, excise and sales tax —a
large portion of these taxes, which add to the price
of goods, should be paid back in subsidizing the
essential items of food, clothing and services which
enter into everyday living costs of the Australian
family. As an alternative to a referendum, the Govern-
ments of New South Wales will be prepared to intro-
duce legislation to refer to the Commonwealth for a
period of five years power to control prices.
As a second measure the Commonwealth should
exercise a very tight control over capital issues of
less essential industries; it should without delay impose
an excess profits tax; and it should establish limitation
of dividends and ceiling prices for shares.
As a third step, the Commonwealth should imme-
diately pay attention to the question of ensuring that
migrants are selected on the basis of their productive
capacity. Only those able and willing to work in
important industries should be encouraged to come
to this country—-with their dependants, of course —for
the time being. Further, a much greater effort should
be made to secure greater numbers of migrants for
rural industries.
As a fourth step, I strongly suggest that the Com-
monwealth 'should examine very carefully the scope
and type of defence role which this country can best
play. The mounting of a direct military effort involv-
ing the withdrawal of resources of men, equipment and
basic materials from productive uses will definitely


intensify inflation. The Commonwealth should there-
fore detine in very precise terms the nature of the
defence effort, and should avoid adopting a narrow
concept of defence. The foundations of our economy
and our military strength are improved transport,
power supply and food production. If a narrow
conception of defence is adopted, the only result will
be to weaken and not strengthen the defence of this
country.
The fifth suggestion which 1 make is that before
limiting the use of resources for important works which
have a developmental and defence significance—trans-
port, power supply, water conservation and food
production—and capital works which are needed to
meet inei easing population and migration —schools,
hospitals, &c. —adequate safeguards should exist so
that if resources are released from important develop-
mental and defence works they will not be absorbed
by inessential industries. Private investment is at
present three times as great as public investment, and
a very big proportion of private investment is less
important from the point of view of a production effort
needed to mitigate inflation, and from the point of
view of development and defence, than practically all
of the public works now being carried out. That is
why the Government of Xew South Wales has requested
that plans for reducing less essential private invest-
ment and the production of less essential consumption
goods should be considered before, and not after, pro-
posals for limiting developmental projects, and par-
ticularly those with both a developmental and defence
significance.
My sixth and final suggestion is this: the matters
for discussion to-day concern the means of protecting
the economy and the individual against inflation.
Xo matter how effective any plan may be, it will be
some considerable time before its influence will be
felt. In the meantime, one group of people need
immediate protection. That group are the invalid and
age pensioners. The only immediate way of putting
value back into the £1 for these people who are suffering
and are likely to suffer most from inflation is to give
them more pounds. This is a matter solely for the
Gomm on wealth Government and well within its com-
petence. Pensions should be substantially raised with-
out further loss of time.
That is all that I wish to say, Mr. Chairman. I
reneat that the Government of Xew South Wales,
which I represent, is seised with the importance of
the matters under discussion at this conference, and
will play its part in endeavouring to meet the diffi-
culties we face. And I hope that as a result of this
conference there will be firm and decisive action on
the part of the Commonwealth Government.
Mr. McDOXALD. —I should like to inform you, Mr.
Chairman, that the Victoran Government is very
concerned at the financial position in which it finds
itself to-day. I want to assure you that some of the
things that yon have said are controversial. I do not
think that it will help us to go back over old grievances.
It should be our objective to ascertain what we can do
to remedy the situation. Australia is a federation of
governments. The Commonwealth Government operates
under certain limitations insofar as it operates
under the powers of the Constitution. The States are
more concerned with the domestic side of government.
Tt is very important to remember that fact. I believe
that together we can surmount our present difficulties.
I doubt very much if this is the place to settle the
problems of inflation. The Governments, State and
Commonwealth, have very definite responsibilities.
Thev should accent those responsibilities in a way that
will inspire confidence in our governments on the part
of every section of the community. I say that with the
greatest respect to all those present.
The great power in the land to-day and the great
problem is money. In the old usage of the term
‘‘ inflation ” it meant that certain things were done
deliberately in order to create.more money. To-day,
the problem is different. We are now concerned with
the problem of an excess of real money which has been
derived from the export of our goods. This has resulted
in the acquisition of new wealth which, a few years
ago, we should have been most anxious to obtain. It
is not many years since we were searching the world
to arrange trade agreements. We were looking for
markets and hoping that some politician or trade
commissioner would be able to effect a sale of our goods.
In those days, prices were low 7 . In many cases, they did
not equal the cost of production, based on Australian
standards.
The problem with which we are confronted has
resulted from the acquisition of new wealth, and whose
wealth it is that should be controlled is a very contro-
versial question. If the wealth were the property'of
the Commonwealth Bank or of other banks, or of
people who lent money on what might be termed a
banking basis, the problem might not be very difficult to
deal with. I cannot see that the existence of real
money poses any problem. There is no wrong in having
money. I think it-is a legitimate ambition for every one
in the community to have some wealth, w'hether to
provide for a rainy day or for other purposes. I wish
that we had another couple of thousand millionaires in
Australia, because if they had the money Australia
would be achieving greater production. The Prime
Minister said that the problem was to equate the
demand to the goods. Surely every effort should be
made to increase the production of goods rather than
devalue the real money in the community. That is the
point on which my Government’s views are based.
I think that the Prime Minister’s remarks concerning
power projects were correct. Because we have not the
necessary power in Victoria, we have not the means to
build factories and produce the materials that are
essent’al to the output of consumer goods. It has been
stated to-day that the production of those goods would
provide some answer to the inflationary condition of
the country’s economy.
We have many major works in progress and I believe
that we can continue with their development. We are
up to our schedule and my experts have advised me that
we can keep abreast of it, particularly if we receive a
little help from the Commonwealth and in future do not
lose so many of our officers as we have lost in the past
as the result of pinching by the Commonwealth, which
’’s able to offer salaries that we cannot afford to pay.
That practice is inflationary in itself. Victoria can
submit its works programme to expert examination
without fear. We are proceeding only with power
projects, schools, hospitals and houses. We are not
indulging in any wdnderful building schemes, and I"
cannot see any reason why we should discontinue our
works on the score of money shortage.
The Commonwealth’s revenues increased by
£261,000,000 last year, and I expect that the increase
this year will he about £300,000,000 of £320,000,000.
All of the borrowings for governments, semi-government
departments and municipalities throughout Australia
totalled £260,000,000 last year. That indicates just
what the increase of revenue meant to the Common-
wealth. I should like the Commonwealth Govern-
ment to announce as soon as possible the amount of
expenditure on capital works that it will make from
revenue. I should also like to know the amount of
money that the Treasurer is placing in trust funds.
We cannot discuss these matters intelligently unless we
know those figures. Our problems can he solved only
if everybody concerned discloses frankly all the facts in
its possession.


The receut £1 increase of the basic wage, and subse-
quent quarterly adjustments, represent an amount of
£12,000,000 a year in increased revenue for the Com-
monwealth, even after allowance has been made for
the reimbursement of the States for increased public
service costs. Those variations have involved Victoria
in a loss of about £4,500,000 a year. When the
Commonwealth Government is receiving increased
revenues, it can easily criticize the weaknesses of the
State governments which are dependent upon it for
their revenue.
If Victoria to-day had the taxing power that it had
in 1939, and if it taxed the same classes of taxpayers at
the same rates as applied then, revenue from income tax
would amount to £35,000,000. But Victoria received
only £17,500,000 from the last Premiers Conference.
We have not been able to obtain all the figures that
should be available to us, but our officers estimate that
the Commonwealth will receive about £100,000,000 in
income tax from Victorian taxpayers.
Mr. MENZIES. —Would you be good enough to
repeat those figures for my information ?
Mr. MCDONALD. —If Victoria had its taxing
powers and taxed the same classes of taxpayers at the
same rates as applied in 1939, it would collect
£35,000,000 from income tax. Last year its collections
would have been about £32,000,000. Our officers have
estimated from the facts available to them that the
Commonwealth will take £100,000,000 in income tax
from Victoria.
The States cannot continue to balance their budgets
if they have to rely on the judgment of the Common-
wealth Treasurer. They will not be able to continue
with public works or with the social services such as
education, hospitals and police, if they receive less than
one-fifth of the total wealth derived from the people.
That wealth, incidentally, has been produced chiefly
as the result of the activities of the State governments.
I was astonished to hear the Prime Minister say that
the Commonwealth Parliament could not deal with the
Arbitration Court in any way to provide for the freezing
of wages. I do not advocate wage freezing; I am
referring only to the point that he raised. I understood
that the Commonwealth Parliament had power under
the Constitution to legislate in relation to the Arbitra-
tion Court and therefore that, if it so desired and if
the Premiers and other interested parties agreed, it
would be able to freeze wages.
The Commonwealth certainly has control over the
monetary banking policy of Australia. It controls
export and import licences. It has the power to tax.
In passing, I express the hope that taxation will not be
so severe as to add a serious burden to the load that
is already carried by the taxpayer. We should try not
to create resentment. I should prefer a system of
compulsory loans for a period of years, to be repaid
later over a similar period, to any system of heavily
increased taxation.
Private industry took £685,000,000 out of the invest-
ment market last year. Authorized loan raisings
throughout Australia amounted to £360,000,000 of which
slightly less than £240,000,000 was used. Consider-
ing the extent of the activities of private enterprise,
it is not unreasonable to propose that those activities
should be restricted. The Victorian Government con-
tends that it cannot continue to permit private expan-
sion because we lack resources of power, fuel and
materials. Genuine relief could be afforded by restrict-
ing the use of money taken from the investment market
bv private industries.
If the Commonwealth Government and the State
governments agree that prices control can be employed
to lessen the effect of inflation, the Victorian Govern-
ment will agree to pass the legislation that would be
necessary to clothe the Commonwealth with power
over prices. We frankly admit that increased produc-
tion of coal and steel would have beneficial results.
However, while we are earning wealth from our exports,
we should not stand by and say that we should not
import equipment for the development of power
projects and other valuable works of that character.
We have been inducing British and European com-
panies to come to Australia in order to help us with
major public works. They have provided technicians
and a considerable amount of equipment. This will
have a good effect because it will lead to the increased
production of goods and will thus help to counteract
inflation. We must continue with our public works
at all costs. It is better to aim high than to say that
the task is beyond us. I do not believe that the task
is beyond us.
I hope that a new spirit will come out of this con-
ference so that everybody will do his job a little
better than he is doing it now. I hope that we can
induce the coalminer to recognize the importance of
his job, not only for his own well-being, but also for the
well-being of others. A development of such a spirit
would lead to an increased production of goods.
The subject of hire purchase credit has been men-
tioned. I am informed that the Commowealth Bank
has been the worst offender in the releasing of such
credit and has forced the private banks to compete
with it. I should like the Prime Minister to obtain
the figures in relation to these activities and make
them available to us before this conference ends. T
understand that the total amount of money that has
been made available by the Commonwealth Bank under
hire purchase agreements of all sorts is very substantial.
It is only fair that we should be fully informed on
such matters before we proceed to discuss them.
I am aware that life insurance companies and
similar organizations have not supported government
loans but have supported all kinds of developmental
schemes. The representatives of one major company
have discussed with me recently a very large land settle-
ment project that will cost millions of pounds. It is
good to know that their confidence in Australia, par-
ticularly in our rural industries, is so great that they
are prepared to invest money in such undertakings.
However, the fact indicates clearly that there is no
shortage of money. The problem is to decide upon the
projects that will give the best results. Production
might be increased to the level of demand if private
enterprise were clearly informed by the States that the
available resources were not sufficient to permit of the
investment of the volume of money that it now takes
out of the investment market.
I have very little to say about immigration. I
!nerely express the hope that the Commonwealth
Government will not alter the policy that it is now
pursuing. We must populate this land more quickly.
I consider that we might get a better classification of
immigrants than we have been getting, but I realize
that foreign countries want to retain the type of
labour that we need to help us with our public works
programmes. Continued immigration will mean that
our public works schedules will be maintained.
Victoria is importing houses. We have already
landed 2,200 houses from overseas. They are ver'v
costly, but the Commonwealth is assisting us to the
amount of £3OO for each house. Who would say that
such a housing programme was uneconomical? Vic-
toria will be happy to assist the Commonwealth
Government and the other State governments to arrive
at decisions for the combating of inflation and to
implement them.


Mr. GAIK.—It is my honour to represent Queens-
land at this conference. Like Mr. McGirr, I am
unable to understand what benefits the Prime Minister
and his Government hope to derive from discussions
at a conference of this sort, which cannot be claimed
truly to be representative of all sections of the com-
munity. Nevertheless, I conscientiously wish to assist,
to the best of my ■ ability, the belated attempt of the
Commonwealth Government to arrest the current
inflationary trend. It is true that inflation is not
peculiar to Australia. But that is no reason why the
national government and all sections of the com-
munity -should not make a genuine attempt to arrest
this influence, which is destroying the standard of
living of the people.
The Prime Minister gave a comprehensive outline of
the causes of inflation, of which most of us are no
doubt aware, and of the difficulties associated with
its correction. I could not help but think,
when the Prime Minister was speaking, that anybody
who would claim that he could restore the purchasing
power of the £1 could scarcely be conscious of all the
difficulties of our economic situation. However, a great
deal can be done to arrest the inflationary trend.
Governments may not be able to solve the problem
entirely, but at least there are many remedies that can
be applied for the purpose of reducing the spiral.
Inflation not only has a destructive effect on the
standard of living but also has a severe impact on
family life and society in general. Inflation during the
last few years has placed severe burdens on young
people trying to establish themselves in society. The
cost of building houses, for instance, has adversely
affected young couples who wish to marry. Many
newly married couples are obliged to live in flats, which
virtually prohibits them from raising families. Others
have to live with “ in-laws ”, which frequently has the
effect of breaking up unions.
Inflation has many aspects that could be discussed at
length. The Prime Minister dealt with all the contri-
buting factors but, unfortunately, he did not mention
any corrective action that the Government might have in
contemplation. We should have been very interested
to learn of his intentions. Inflation is somewhat like
a bushfire and must be checked on all sides. It can be
checked only if all sections of the community appre-
ciate their responsibilities and act accordingly. Some
of us are inclined to be sceptical of economists, but they
must be consulted in this matter just as lawyers are
consulted in questions of law. Economists, of course,
differ considerably in their approach to problems of
economy, but I hope that they will succeed in showing
us the way out of our present difficulties and will
thereby prove to be of greater assistance to the Com-
monwealth Government than they were during the
depression.
What should be done in order to relieve the pressure
of inflation? In the first place, I believe that a more
effective system of prices control would be beneficial.
1 do not believe for a moment that prices control would
solve our problems entirely, but it would do much to
check inflation. My own belief is that it should be a.
permanent feature of our economy. The Prime
Minister asked what advantages a Commonwealth sys-
tem of prices control would have over the present system
of control by the States. Although I did not approve
of the former Commonwealth system in its entirety,
I consider that it achieved excellent results. The defeat
of the proposal to continue that system, by means of the
decision of the people at a referendum, accelerated the
inflationary trend in Australia at that time.
The present system of control by six State govern-
ments lacks uniformity of administration, which
reduces the effectiveness of prices control. I was the
Minister in charge of prices control in Queensland for
over twelve months and I attended many conferences
on the subject. Therefore, 1 claim to have an intimate
knowledge of the administration of prices control. The
differing attitudes of the State governments under the
present system destroy uniformity of administration
and lead to instability of orice levels.
Following the defeat of the referendum in 1948 it
was evident that some States were disinclined to con-
tinue prices control, whilst others recognized that
there was a real need for rigid control of prices. The
State of Queensland, which I represent, has had some
form of price control ever since World War 1., and
the Queensland Government recognized the need to
continue prices control when the Commonwealth Go-
vernment relinquished it. The result is that prices in
Queensland are still lower than they are in the other
States. When the Commonwealth discontinued prices
control we imposed an even more rigid system than
the Commonwealth had operated. However, because of
the difficulties associated with prices control by a
single State, and because of the hampering effect of
section 92 of the Commonwealth Constitution, our
people often found themselves at a disadvantage as
compared with the people of other States in the matter
of the supply of goods, due to the lower price of goods
in Queensland than in other States. Administration
of prices control on a uniform system throughout the
Commonwealth and by the Commonwealth Govern-
ment would provide a much more effective system of
control in every State. As I have said, section 92 of
the Commonwealth Constitution causes special diffi-
culties because the operation of that section favours
the natural desire of the marketers of goods, which is
to sell on the best market, and no one can complain
about that natural desire. When we attempted to con-
trol the price of beef we found that we had to pay an
increased price or deprive our people of beef. The
price of beef in New South Wales is considerably
higher than it is in Queensland and, in consequence,
supplies of beef are much more plentiful in this State
than they are in Queensland. One explanation of that
fact is that the higher price of beef in New South
Wales attracts beef from Queensland. The Common-
wealth Government has powers which the State govern-
ments do not possess. One of the most important
powers of the Commonwealth is its control over the
import and export of goods, and it is undeniable that
that power has a very important effect upon the prices
structure. I do not subscribe to a policy of price
control that would include every commodity, any more
than I suggest that prices control should be limited
to the “ G ” series index, which only has the effect of
arresting the basic wage increases and of permitting
the price of de-controlled commodities to go completely
unchecked. I think that the only vegetables included
in the “ C ” series iydex are potatoes and onions, but
every one will agree that there are other vegetables of
equal importance to the community. Although many
people advocate the de-control of prices in the belief
that such action will cause commodities to find their
own level Ido not subscribe to that view. I believe that
even the present incomplete and ineffective system of
control has done a great deal to restrict the rise
of prices. • However, the Commonwealth possesses
power ,to implement an adequate system of prices con-
trol because uniformity throughout the States would
enable effective control to be exercised.
My experience, which is also, I am sure, the experi-
ence of almost every State representative present, is
that the price of commodities that have been decon-
trolled immediately rises. Indeed, I do not know of a
-ingle commodity which has decreased in price on being
decontrolled. In Queensland we recently decontrolled
onions because of the acute shortage of that vegetable.


Before we decontrolled the price of onions they were
about 7d. per lb. or perhaps a little more. To-day,
the price of onions in Queensland is about 2s. per lb.
and that price is not nearly as high as the price in
New South Wales. The price of onions in Queensland
certainly found its own level; but does any one suggest
that it is reasonable to expect people on the basic wage
to pay 2s. for a pound of onions?
In reply to the suggestion that control of prices by
the Commonwealth would not confer any advantage
over the present system of control by the States, I
submit that the Commonwealth could establish an
equalization scheme to control the marketing of a
number of essential commodities such as beef and wool,
and it could function similarly to the control and
equalization scheme that provides a reasonable price for
wheat, metals and certain other commodities. Ido not
suggest that the Commonwealth should control the price
of goods and services that are purely local.
Such matters as tram fares, hotel tariffs and other
things are properly matters for State authorities to
determine. The States could, if required to do so,
determine the retail margins of certain goods, but the
Commonwealth should control the wholesale prices of
goods produced in one State and shipped to another
for sale.
Another matter to which early consideration should
be given is the discouragement or regulation of the
amount expended on advertising. The Federal Trea-
surer could assist to reduce unnecessary expenditure
on advertising by refusing to permit rebates of tax on
excessive advertising. Much of the expenditure on
advertising by large firms to-day is quite excessive and
unjustifiable. I believe that Colgate Palmolive expends
£500,000 a year and Lever Brothers Limited expend
about £350,000 a year on advertising. I realize, of
course, that those firms would probably contend that the
cost of soap is increased by perhaps only one-half penny
per cake in consequence, but I suggest that the whole
principle of excessive expenditure on advertising, parti-
cularly of goods that sell themselves, is wrong and
immoral. The whole subject of excessive advertising
is one that could with advantage be taken into account
by the Commonwealth in attempting to regulate the cost
of living.
Some reference has been made to wage-pegging, and
I say at once that if I believed that wage-pegging
would solve the problem I would be quite prepared to
accept it. However, I think that effective control of
prices would automatically limit the increases of the
basic wage that have to be made every quarter, and that
in that way price control would dispense with the neces-
sity for wage-pegging. The last increase of the basic
wage in Queensland was 95., compared with 13s. in New
South Wales and Western Australia and 12s. in Vic-
toria. I suggest that the lesser adjustment necessary for
Queensland, where we have a more rigid system of prices
control than the other States, proves that efficient
control of prices does reduce the csot of living. In
Queensland we also believe in what we call “ profit
absorption”. That is to say, if a company is making
excessive profits we expect that company to absorb
increases in overhead expenses and so keep down the
price of the goods that it sells. Ido not kijow whether
or not that practice is followed in other States, but I
know that because of the attitude towards prices Control
adopted by the previous Government of Victoria the cost
of living in that State rose sharply. The Hollway
Government decided, instead of controlling prices, to
decontrol them, and an act was passed entitled the
“ Prices Decontrol Act ”. The effect of that peculiar
action was to increase immediately the prices of many
essential goods.
I desire to stress that the increases of the basic wage
that are being announced almost every quarter are
causing concern, not only to employers and governments,
but also to trade unions and workers’ organizations
which are naturally concerned about the welfare of
the workers of this country. The worker knows that
every time an increase of the basic wage is announced
it means that the cost of living has already risen sharply
during the preceding three months. Therefore, the
workers are under no illusion about the real value of
the wage increases. I was particularly pleased to hear
the Prime Minister say that the determination of wages
and standard hours was a matter for the Common-
wealth Arbitration Court, and we must at all times
respect and preserve the dignity and functions of
that court.
I believe that every reasonable person wishes to limit
profits. However, the practical means by which profits
can be limited is, of course, a matter of opinion. How-
ever, I say at once that if the price of a particular
commodity or service is excessive the price charged for
that commodity or article should be reduced so that the
public will have the benefit of obtaining its requirements
at a reasonable price. To tax the profits of companies—
and there is much to be said for it—would serve the
purpose to some extent, but I would prefer action to
encourage or compel firms to reduce the selling price
of their goods. For example, if the price of a particular
article has been determined by a price fixation authority
and it becomes obvious later that the manufacturer of
the articles concerned is making undue profits, the
proper course to pursue is to compel the manufacturer
to reduce the price of the articles. I realize, of course,
that the whole subject of taxation comprises a very wide
field, and the imposition of excessive or punitive taxes
may have the effect of limiting enterprise and destroy-
ing incentive. Primary producers will tell you that
they do not feel inclined to work any harder than they
are doing at present merely to increase the amount that
they will pay in taxes.
Similar considerations apply to industrial workers,
who are disinclined to work overtime because of tax.
However, I suggest that the difficulty may be overcome,
at least in part, by the introduction of some scheme
whereby a target of production is evolved, and when
that figure is exceeded the producer should be given the
benefit of it. That could be done by taxation on pro-
duction up to the target, and any production in excess
of the target be free of taxation or subject to a nominal
tax only. After all, more than anything else Australia
needs increased production, primarily of foodstuffs, but
also of many other goods and commodities.
I was pleased that the subject of immigration was
mentioned. I believe that the most careful scrutiny
should be exercised over those who come to this
country and that we should be reluctant to turn back
on our policy of immigration. We want people in
Australia to assist us in the development of the
natural resources of the country, and we believe that
they will mean, in the long run, security to this
country by increasing production. Whilst it is true
that immigration accentuates the shortage of houses and
goods and services available generally, I think that
the balance of probabilities suggests that Australia
will gain more from its immigrants than it gives to
them. What we want above all else is people to settle
on the land. Unfortunately, many of those who come
to this country have left the land. We need more
primary producers. If we terminate our immigration
programme it is true that we shall reduce the demand
on consumer goods and services and alleviate the
shortage of houses, but what effect will such action
have on the supply of labour?
There are other matters to which I should like to
refer, but before finishing I say that I am delighted
to learn that the Commonwealth Government is
conscious of the necessity of restoring capital issues


control. Indeed it is to be regretted that that control
was over lifted. Concerning the matter of hire-
purchase and cash orders, I point out that whilst
something may be said in favour of restricting
expenditure on luxury goods, it is important that we
should avoid inconveniencing unduly the housewives
and mothers of big families, many of whom can obtain
labour-saving devices only by availing themselves of the
time payment system. They are glad of the cash order
system because it enables them to obtain clothing and
school requirements for their children, and expenditure
for such purposes cannot be, regarded us luxury
spending. Whilst I fully appreciate the practical
difficulty of determining what expenditure is luxury
spending and what is not—and 1 suppose that every
expenditure can be justified as essential in some way
or other—l warn those who will administer the proposed
controls that they should be careful not to inflict
hardship on a large and deserving section of the
community.
Concerning the Prime Minister’s announcement that
the Government will drastically reduce the number
of government employees, 1 think that the public should
be conscious of the enormous expansion that has
occurred in the duties discharged by government
departments and authorities.
The growth of our population has entailed a vast
increase in the work of government departments and
agencies and, in consequence, the staffs of those
authorities have naturally been increased. However,
although some re-organization of staff may be necessary,
I do not think that the proposed dismissal of 10,000
public servants will contribute either to maintaining
the efficiency of governmental administration or to
reducing the cost of living. Without importing any
party-political bias into this discussion, I say that
there has been a tendency on the part of successive
Commonwealth Governments to encroach upon many
domains that should be purely the province of Staff*
governments, and a great deal of overlapping has
necessarily occurred. I am sure that much of that
overlapping could be avoided, and I understand that the
Prime Minister is giving his attention to that matter.
I summarize my remarks by stating, first, that, sale.-
by auction should be prohibited, because the auction
system has a definite tendency to inflate prices, and 1
feel that if some alternative scheme, such as the
assessment of selling prices by tribunals, could be
introduced it would have a markedly beneficial effect.
Secondly, I suggest that the export of frozen and canned
beef should be prohibited except to the United Kingdom
and for the fulfilment of the requirements of the armed
services. Such action would undoubtedly reduce prices
of meat in Australia, because the high price of meat
in Australia is undoubtedly due to the high price of
meat in the foreign markets. I also suggest that the
export of lead and zinc should be reduced by 50 per
cent., because that would provide more lead and zinc,
which are so badly needed for the local market. Then,
expenditure on advertising should be limited. The
payment of Commonwealth subsidies should be
increased to cover certain foodstuffs. In that connexion
I submit that we might go as far as the Government
of New Zealand has gone. The information that I have
received from that country is that subsidies are paid
on greasy wool, imported yarn and tops, wheat, flour
and bread, butter, milk, tallow and calf skins for
leather. A reduction of excise should also be made
where the incidence of excise is increasing the price
to the public of locally-produced commodities. I have
already outlined the need for some effective control
of profits and for the introduction of a more effective
system of prices control that would result in the
establishment of a central authority to control prices.
3964.-3
In conclusion, I shall mention a recent example of
the ineptitude of the present system of prices control.
Boys’ garments manufactured in Brisbane were being
sold at a lower price than the wholesale price ot
inferior quality goods made in Melbourne. Unfortu-
nately Brisbane does not manufacture sufficient articles
to supply the local demand and Brisbane housewives
depend on the manufactures of southern States.
The introduction of a uniform system of control
would obviate that sort of thing. Federal control
means uniform control, and special arrangements
could be made to adjust selling prices in accord-
ance with transport costs and other factors asso-
ciated with the sale of interstate goods. I conclude
by saying that the Government of Queensland believes
very sipcerely that a more effective job could be done
by the Commonwealth Government administering prices
control than is being done by the several State govern-
ments, and I am authorized to intimate that my
Government would be very pleased to refer the necessary
legislative power to the Commonwealth.
At 5.30 p.m, the conference adjourned to 10 a.m.
Tuesday, 31st July, 1951.
TUESDAY, 31st JULY, 1951.
Mr. PLAYFORD.—I appreciate very much the
action of the Commonwealth in convening this con-
ference. Although it is apparent that a conference of
this kind cannot pass resolutions or get down to doing
things, I believe that it will serve a very useful purpose
by clarifying the problems that confront us to-day. I
congratulate yon, Mr. Prime Minister, upon the very
masterly exposition of the problem which you gave us
yesterday.
The problem of inflation in Australia is not only an
economic problem. It is also a political one. Very
many people are deriving advantage from the present
high prices, and any action that is taken to reduce
prices will encounter political opposition. The problem
of inflation can be solved only by resolute and unified
action by the Commonwealth and the States. If each
of us attempts to give the unpleasant tasks to the other
side, we shall not get very far.
From the economic point of view, steps could be
taken speedily to alleviate the present position. You
said yesterday, Mr. Prime Minister, that the present
steep rise in prices was due to a shortage of labour and
a shortage of materials. Basically, that is the prob-
lem with which we are faced. It is true that prices
overseas have risen steeply, but the things that are
necessary for the welfare of a community, such as
houses, food, clothing, education, and health services,
can be provided in Australia by ourselves. I admit
that it is necessary for the Commonwealth to undertake
substantial defence preparations, but I maintain that
we control most of the things that are required for the
welfare of this comitry.
The shops in Sydney and other cities and towns in
Australia are cluttered with all kinds of expensive
luxury goods and gadgets that are not included in the
“ C ” series index and are not taken into consideration
by any Arbitration Court in determining wages. There
could be a big diversion of labour and materials from
the manufacture of high-priced unessential commodities
to the manufacture of essential goods. If we made that
diversion, we should be dealing with the basis of the
inflationary problem. I do not believe that there is any
constitutional difficulty in that direction. The States
and the Commonwealth, by using the fiscal weapon,
could deal directly with that matter.
I am speaking as a Prices Minister when I say that,
following the defeat of the prices referendum, the
States had prices control flung at them very un-
ceremoniously. It was handed to them in much the
same way as a rather smelly joint of meat is placed


before a puppy. The Commonwealth Government of
that day did not care very much whether the States
could digest it successfully. It said, “ Prices control is
a State problem. Let the States deal with it.” I
believe that the economic problems that face Australia
to-day are not State problems or Commonwealth
problems. They can be solved successfully only if the
State governments and the Federal Government accept
their respective responsibilities and act with goodwill
towards each other.
1 believe that 1 a.m expressing the opinions of other
Prices Ministers when I say that prices control can
ensure only that unwarranted expenses shall not be
passed on to the public, and that traders shall not take
advantage of a scarcity of goods to make unwarranted
profits. It is important to remember that the largest
factor in the cost of a commodity to-day is wages. The
State Prices Ministers have no control over wages. As
far as I can see, no governmental authority in this
country can control wages. The Arbitration Court can
fix a minimum wage, but I do not know of any con-
stitutional authority that could fix a maximum wage.
L'nder those circumstances, the State Prices Ministers
are confronted with the problem that, to a large degree,
they must hand over their responsibilities to outside
bodies over which they have no real control. I believe
that State prices control has in many ways not been
ineffective. On behalf of my colleagues, I express our
appreciation of the work that the Commonwealth
representative, Mr. McCarthy, has done at prices con-
ferences.
In Australia to-day we are trying to do more things
than we can do successfully. At the next Premiers
Conference, we shall have to decide what urgent and
essential works we can proceed with. We shall probably
decide that many programmes that we would like to
proceed with must be slowed down. South Australia is
prepared to co-operate with the Commonwealth and the
other States in tljat way. I make the reservation that
I should oppose cutting down my programmes if I saw
that the programmes of other States were proceeding
without let or hindrance. If there is to be a cutting-
down of programmes, it must be done upon a basis of
equality of sacrifice, having regard to the urgent
requirements of the community.
I believe that very useful action could be taken by the
States and the Commonwealth to prevent overlapping
of activities and duplication of effort. Much could be
done in connexion with terms and conditions of labour.
I have found from experience that some Common-
wealth departments are the worst black-marketeers as
far as labour is concerned. They will go to the extent
of ascertaining what an officer is being paid by a State
government and then offer him something more than
that in order to induce him to leave his present employ-
ment. That must be stopped. South Australia is quite
prepared to enter into an agreement with the Common-
wealth with the object of preventing the Commonwealth
from pillaging our labour resources and vice versa.
One unbalanced action can create much difficulty. In
my State, there is a very important Commonwealth
undertaking that is of the highest importance from the
defence viewpoint. It was said that the men engaged
upon that project suffered a disability as a result of
being employed in a certain part of the State, and a
disability allowance of £2 16s. a week was granted to
them. We have found that, in addition to receiving
that allowance, the men are receiving a further advan-
tage by reason of the fact that they are charged only
16s. a week for board and lodging. The inflationary
result of that action is obvious. In South Australia,
and doubtless in other States, government instrumen-
talities are trying to take labour from other instru-
mentalities. That must be stopped, because it is forcing
up the level of wages.
I am quite sure the representatives of the Australian
Council of Trades Unions will agree with me when I
say that the recent increase of the basic wage by 13s. a
week, which came as such a shock to the community, is
not in excess of what is being offered by many luxury
industries in order to attract labour from essential
industries. I believe that the State Prices Ministers
will have to revise the policy that they have been
following. When we took over the administration of
prices control, we set out to control only the essential
requirements of the community. We were short of
staff, and we decided that we would not attempt to con-
trol the prices of all the unessential goods and gadgets
that could be produced in Australia. We did not believe
that they had a great bearing upon the welfare of the
community. As a result of the non-control of those
unessential goods, the manufacturers of them have been
in a position to compete unfairly with essential indus-
tries in the market for labour and materials. The
essential industries have not been able to offer sufficiently
attractive prices for materials or high enough wages for
men because the prices at which they can sell their pro-
ducts have been tied down. The unessential industries
have made a great inroad into our resources of labour
and materials, with a detrimental result as far as essen-
tial production is concerned. I believe that our prime
task is gradually to divert labour from unessential
industries to essential production. If we can ensure
that the people of this country shall have, at a reason-
able cost, houses, food, clothing, education facilities and
health services, we shall have gone a long way towards
preventing the large increases of the basic wage that
are now occurring so frequently.
I believe that a high rate of sales tax must be
imposed upon unessentials. As this is a political
problem, that policy will have to be made acceptable
to the public by paying substantial subsidies
in respect of essential commodities. We must tax
luxuries and subsidise essentials. If we do that, we
shall have piade a start towards putting the economy
of this country upon a proper basis. It will be neces-
sary for the States to broaden the scope of their prices
control policy in order to deal with the prices of
non essentials. By these direct means, we can all
make a big contribution to the solution of the problem
of inflation.
Our difficulties are not caused by a lack of money.
We have overseas sterling balances of a size that is
almost embarrassing to us. Doubtless at the next
Loan Council meeting the State Premiers will be told
that they must cut down their programmes, because
it is impossible for the money market to provide suffi-
cient money for essential works. It is anomalous that
the Commonwealth Bank would gladly lend money
to me as a private person to buy a motor car upon
time payment, but would not welcome making advances
to me as a person charged with the responsibility of
making available electricity and water supplies. That
policy seems to me to be wrong.
I offer my co-operation to the Common wealth in any
of these matters. I assure you that South Australia is
prepared to accept its full share of responsibility for
giving effect to a programme that will stabilize
economic conditions in this country.
Mr. McLAKTY. —Our thanks are due to the Prime
Minister for his very clear exposition of the causes of
inflation. He gave us a number of points upon which
to ponder. For that reason alone, the conference will
be of considerable value.
It has been stated that political action will be
required to implement any conclusions that we reach,
but I feel that if we left this room with the feeling
that only political action could get us out of our
difficulties we should not get very far. There is great


scope to-day in all industries for greater mutual under-
standing and co-operation. Reference was made yester-
day to the plight of people who are in receipt of
what arc called ‘‘ fixed incomes ”. We are all very
concerned about them because their sufferings are
greater than those of any other section of the com-
munity. The Prime Minister said yesterday that
pensions will have to be increased, and we all know
that the basic wage is increased from time to time.
T here is a large section of our people who do not
receive pensions or wages. They have put their
small savings into Commonwealth Bonds, War Saving
Certificates, or savings banks. They are becoming
more alarmed about their position as each week passes.
The achievement of a greater mutual understanding in
industry and a better feeling between employer and
employee .would do more to assist them than any
other remedy that I can suggest. This is a matter
to which the representatives of the employers and the
employees might well give consideration before they
leave Sydney. I believe it would be. advantageous if
the employers and employees in various industries
met together weekly and discussed the production
figures for each week. If there had been a reduction
of output, they could find the cause of the trouble
and decide what means should be taken to increase
production.
Mention has been made of wage-pegging, hours of
work, incentive payments and profits. Representatives
of employers and employees are attending this con-
ference. If they could get together and thrash those
matters out between them, it might be possible for
them to reach some understanding that would assist
us in finding a solution of the problems that we are
now discussing.
The Prime Minister stated the causes of the infla-
tionary spiral and also suggested a number of remedies.
Some of them affect the States, and it is from that
aspect that I desire to speak. It has been said that
prices control is not of itself a remedy for inflation.
I agree that that is so. I do not believe that prices
control of itself, no matter by whom it is administered,
can provide a solution of the inflationary problem with
which we are now faced.
It has been suggested that the States should transfer
the power to control prices to the Commonwealth.
I am not prepared to agree to the power to control
prices being transferred to the Commonwealth per-
manently, but if the Commonwealth Government
desires the transfer of temporary powers to deal with
the present emergency, and if tbe constitutional diffi-
culties in regard to temporary powers can be resolved,
I shall be prepared to submit such proposals to my
Government. But I should like to have a clear
definition of “ temporary powers ”. When the States
transferred their taxation rights to the Commonwealth
they understood that they would receive them back
eventually but those powers w'ere subsequently regarded-
as having been permanently transferred. It has been
argued by some people that there is no provision in
the Constitution for the transfer of temporary powers,
while others say that power could be transferred tem-
porarily. Yon, Mr. Prime Minister, may he able to
clarify that point.
You dealt at some length with the public works
programmes of Australia. Tremendous sums are being
spent on these programmes. At present one State
of the Commonwealth would be spending more than
all the States spent a few years ago. Costs are con-
tinuing to rise, and I think that we should be extremely
careful what we do in regard to our loan programme.
We might take action now to curtail loan pro-
grammes which would get us into serious difficulties
in the not too far distant future. I think that everv
effort should be made to continue with those loan
works which are considered to be absolutely essential.
You mentioned that the subject of defence was
important. With the international position as it is,
I feel that it is inescapable that provision must be made
for defence. But many of those great public under-
takings that have been mentioned here are very closely
linked with defence. If they were curtailed it would
affect the defence of the country.
In my own State, three vital public wmrks involve
almost the whole of our expenditure. They are the
provision of water supplies; the improvement of rail
transport; and the extension of power schemes. I
do not know how I could agree to limit any of those
works. They have already been limited because of
the extreme difficulty in regard to man-power and
shortage of material. Recently, when I visited some
of the districts where a comprehensive water scheme is
being put into effect, I was urged to have extensions
made to some of the projects. I was told that there
was not enough water there and that for hours in each
day the only water that they had was salt water.
There were complaints about difficulties connected with
having a bath and cultivating a garden. Due, in part,
to the immigration policy, these towns are growing
rapidly. Yet, there is not sufficient water to cater for
the needs of those who are already there. During the
last war, the Government of Western Australia was
asked to transfer a proportion of its population away
from the metropolitan areas, but it was not possible
to do that because the people could not have been
supplied with adequate water outside of those areas.
Transport is closely associated with defence. The
transport position in Western Australia is acute. I
suppose it is causing you concern, Mr. Prime Minister,
that Western Australia has a very costly railway
rehabilitation programme. If we do not set out to
improve our transport facilities, particularly those of
the railways, our transport system may almost come to
a halt. You can imagine the difficulties that that would
present. It would certainly not help curb the infla-
tionary spiral. It is necessary to cart pyrites hundreds
of miles in Western Australia. It is necessary to trans-
port our coal a long way and also our wheat and farm
produce generally. All these problems are bound up
with the subject of transport. We must ensure that
our railways are kept in safe working order and that we
have adequate rolling stock and locomotives. Con-
sequently, so far as expenditure on transport is con-
cerned, I can only promise you that a very careful
watch will be kept on such expenditure and that nothing
will be spent unless it can be fully justified.
I think that you agreed that works necessary for
the production of power must be continued.
Mr. MEHZIES. —I do not wish to be misunderstood
on that point. I think that power supply should have
an enormously high priority. Whether all the power
projects desired can be proceeded with at the same time
is a different matter. Even within a high priority it
may be necessary to establish some further priority in
order to get the job done.
Mr. MrLARTY.—I think that you said, yesterday,
that you would exercise fiscal powers in order to control
the distribution of material. I hope, in this connexion,
that the peculiar difficulties of Western Australia will
be recognized. Being, in the main, a primary pro-
ducing State, Western Australia does not produce many
of the materials that are required for its development.
My State is a long way from the source of supply and
shipping is a constant difficulty. However, the State
Government does control the distribution of building
material and I hope that when the Commonwealth
Government exercises its powers there will be no over-
lapping of this work.


L realize the importance of increasing the population
of Australia and, particularly, of my own State, but I
think that there is a limit to the number of people that
can safely be admitted to the Commonwealth in any one
year. Australia’s natural increase of population is
fairly rapid. At 30th June, 1950, the birth rate was
23.18 per thousand. That figure represents a fairly steep
rise compared with the figure which obtained a few
years ago. Whilst I recognize the need for increased
population, I think that immigrants must be selected
more carefully and must be placed in industries where
they will be usefully employed. It is no use admitting
them in a haphazard fashion. Surely the countries
from which immigrants come could do something to
help Australia in regard to its shortage of materials.
As we are relieving them of their excess population in
order to help them out of a difficult position, surely they
should do something to help us to overcome our shortage
of materials.
Expenditure on defence is undoubtedly one of the
causes of inflation, but I know that that is unavoidable.
The Commonwealth Government has responsibilities to
shoulder in regard to defence, but I think that sugges-
tions that have been made at this conference as to the
best means by which Australia might contribute to the
defence of the democratic world should receive further
consideration. I know that it would be very difficult
for you to have to state that Australia has not any men
that it can spare for the fighting line in the event of
another war, but that they could be used in other ways.
However, I think that consideration should be given to
obtaining the greatest value from our man-power from
the defence point of view. Should we be unfortunate
enough to be involved in hostilities in the future, one of
the greatest needs of all the democracies will be a supply
of food. From that angle, I think that you might make
representations to the other nations with which you con-
fer in order to let them know that our potential for food
production in Australia is very great and that if only we
could secure the necessary materials, wo could make a
great contribution in that way to the defence of this
country and of the democracies.
As far as possible, the Western Australian Govern-
ment wants to co-operate with the Commonwealth
Government in order to assist it to overcome these
difficulties. I have just returned from other parts of
the world and I found that the question of inflation
was a great problem in every country that I visited.
All governments were trying to grapple with it, but, as
far as T could see, none of them was doing so success-
fully. Australia is fortunate that it has not an unem-
ployment problem. In other countries they have to
grapple with unemployment as well as inflation. I
should like to co-operate with you, Mr. Prime Minister.
I realize the difficulties that confront you and I believe
that with mutual goodwill we can achieve something
worthwhile. I think that you are to be commended for
calling this conference.
Mr. COSGROVE.—I have listened very carefully
to the speeches that have been made so far, and it
appears to me that this conference is in the nature of
a preliminary gallop before the Loan Council meeting
and very little more. The amount of capital that the
Government intends to spend on various works is very
important, and must be taken into consideration
together with other expenditure by private enterprise.
I should not have been so concerned about the inflation-
ary spiral had it not been for the very rapid increase
that has occurred in prices during the last twelve
months and particularly during the March/June quar-
ter. If prices are to continue to increase at that rate,
there will be a 35 per cent, increase in costs every twelve
months, which will mean a doubling of costs in four
years. I think that the most we can hope to do is to
stabilize prices at present levels rather than try to
adopt some method of deflation. Governments have
tackled the problem of deflation in the past with
unhappy results. Everybody in the community has
been penalized—some more than others —and a large
percentage of the community has been ruined when
deflation has got out of control. There is no lack of
money in Australia. There is no need for the Prime
Minister to call upon bank credits in order to finance
public works or defence expenditure provided that the
money which is available is used on essential projects
and for defence and provided that unnecessary pro-
duction is eliminated.
I agree that inflation began during the last war, Mr.
Prime Minister. But I differ from you insofar as
I consider that inflation began during the last war
because of the introduction of the cost-plus system of
production. That system involved the production of
goods irrespective of the industry’s capacity to produce
them at an economic price. The system led to a
breaking down of managerial supervision. It resulted
in the use of outdated methods. Naturally, workers
followed the lead of management, and became slack in
their work. These conditions have been carried into
the post-war period and while there are some efficient
industries, there are many inefficient industries in
Australia. The sole object of some of those industries
is to produce goods and sell them at a profit. Goods
could be produced more cheaply and more rapidly
had we more efficiency in industry. When the people
at the top of an industry become slack, the people who
are employed in it become slack in their work. Aus-
tralia is not producing the same amount of goods per
man-hour as the United States of America or Canada.
In my opinion, that is primarily due to the controllers
of industries in Australia and not altogether due to the
men who are employed. I do not wish to throw a
spanner into the works, but this problem must be faced
coldly and calmly. I know that workers absent them-
selves and that there have been strikes. I know, too,
of the very grave responsibility that management has
to see that industry works efficiently. It is no use
management making excuses that men are not at work
or that they are slacking. The first responsibility of
management is to see that their employees are satisfied
and that they are working with the employer. Until
that position has been achieved, it will not be possible
to overcome production problems. I think that those
problems can be overcome if we are prepared to face up
to our responsibilities.
I know that there are severe shortages in the basic
industries. That is the first problem to be overcome.
According to figures contained in the returns of the
Commonwealth Statistician, the average profit made by
the heavy industries—iron and steel, &c.—in 1939 was
9.3 per cent. In 1950 the interest on capital investment
in those industries dropped to 6.8 per cent. In the
wholesale distribution trades the profit rate Increased
from 7.1 per cent, in 1939 to 11.1 per cent, in 1950. In
the retail trades, which include softgoods, foods and
drugs, the profit rate increased from 7.8 per cent, to
11.3 per cent, over this period. The rate of profit on
motor cars, furniture, wirelesses and similar commo-
dities increased from 6.6 per cent, to 19.9 per cent.
Pastoral finance companies increased their profits from
3.6 per cent, to 12 per cent. Those figures relate to
average increases. The inducement that has been held
out for the development of basic industries has not been
very great. To some extent, that state of affairs may
have resulted from the desire of prices Ministers to keep
a very close control over essential industries while they
allowed non-essential industries to operate free of con-
trol. But there was also a reduction in the productive
capacity of the basic industries. At present those


industries are not producing at the full capacity of
their machines. That is a very important factor in
the development of the inflationary spiral. How are
we to overcome this problem? In the first place, 1
think that it is a matter for industry itself to deal
with. From the political point of view, I think it
would be best to follow the suggestion of the Prime
Minister in regard to taxation, and I think that taxa-
tion should be imposed after regard has been paid to the
essentiality of the goods produced.
Capital issues should be controlled. During the last
few years the amount of fresh capital raised has
increased enormously. Of the industries that increased
their capital during the last twelve months, about 50
did so by £38,000,000! That figure does not include all
increases and does not include money absorbed in new
flotations of companies.
We must pay attention also to the growing practice
of issuing bonus shares. From February, 1950, to
February, 1951, 27 bonus issues to the value of
approximately £12,000,000 were made by various com-
panies. That is not a complete list. Those issues repre-
sent profits that are being made by the companies and
we must consider whether they should be allowed to
go scot free. Bonus issues are presents to the investors.
They are even more in the nature of gifts than will be
the Commonwealth shares in Amalgamated Wireless
(Australasia) Limited. A price of 465. per share
against a market value of 545. is not a bad present to
investors.
Mr. MENZFES.—WouId you like to try to sell
500,000 shares at 545.?
Mr. COSGROVE. —I would not sell them at all.
Mr. MENZIES.—-That is a different matter.
Mr. COSGROVE. —The amounts of company
dividends should be limited. Companies should not
have the unrestricted right to sell their products at
prices which afford them larger profits than the average
industry warrants. The Commonwealth Government
should step in to prevent the charging of prices that are
too far above costs.
I refer now to public investments. The newspapers
continue to urge governments to reduce capital expendi-
ture on works as a means of checking inflation. The
truth is that governments spend money for the develop-
ment of the country and the benefit of the people, but
not for profit. The total amount of expenditure by
Governments, including local-governing bodies, is a
little over £400,000,000 annually. Private expenditure
exceeds that amount by about £2,200,000,000. But the
press does not toll the people that private expenditure
must be reduced. If we are to tackle the problem of
inflation successfully, we must approach it from that
point of view also.
I repeat that the capital expenditure of the States is
for developmental purposes. Unless we develop the
nation we shall not be m a position to defend it. We
shall not have power for our industries and they will
not be in a position to produce goods that we need.
Transport industries will not be able to operate effi-
ciently, and this will hamper, not only defence, but
also trade and commerce.
The coastal shipping situation is so serious that one
can only be amazed that the shipping companies are
allowed to carry on as private companies. They are
not giving the service that they should provide for the
people. The services that they provide are so expensive
as to make the transport of goods from one State to
another uneconomical. Australia is a maritime nation,
and therefore, the shipping situation should be one of
the first problems tackled by the Commonwealth Go-
vernment. Freight charges should be reduced to
reasonable levels.
The cost of living cannot bo hold in check by means
of price control alone. Inflation can be restrained to
some degree by prices control, but it must be operated
on- a Commonwealth-wide basis with uniform adminis-
tration. I have never agreed that the States could
effectively control prices. Divergences of opinion must
occur under the present system with six different
authorities trying to administer the machinery of
prices control. The position is such that the authorities
in each State must accept the invoice value of goods
that are manufactured in other States plus transport
costs as the basis of retail prices. Tho Commonwealth
can do better than that. Prices should be fixed at the
source rather than at the end. To fix retail prices but
not the prices of raw materials is merely to beat the
air. Prices control must be operated in such a way
as to encourage basic industries to increase production.
The Government of Tasmania will willingly co-operate
with the Commonwealth Government in order to imple-
ment a satisfactory system of prices control.
As a result of previous experience, I am very doubtful
that the Parliament of Tasmania would agree to
transfer powers to the Commonwealth, but I believe
that a referendum proposal to give the Commonwealth
power to control prices would be approved by a very
large majority of the people and by a majority of tho
States. I emphasize that the Tasmanian Government
will help the Commonwealth Government to deal with
this problem. We shall not always agree with the
proposals of the Commonwealth, and doubtless the
Commonwealth will not agree with all of our pro-
posals. Nevertheless I am convinced that most of our
economic difficulties can be overcome by means of co-
o)>eration between all States and the Commonwealth,
provided that the employers and the trade unions do
their best to increase production. The main problem,
after all, is that of producing more goods at reasonable
prices instead of devising legislation for the purpose
of bringing about artificial alterations of prices and
imposing restrictions on the classes of goods that are
manufactured.
Mr. MENZIES.—The discussion now passes from
those of us who figure in the political arena. Perhaps
Mrs. Brookes will now speak on behalf of the National
Council of Women.
Mrs. BROOKES.—Tho National Council of Women
has subsidiary councils in all States and at Canberra.
As soon ns we received tho invitation to be represented
at this conference, wo asked our councils in all States
to make suggestions in relation to the best means of
dealing with inflation. I have here a precis of the
reports that we received from the States. I shall not
discuss eUch report in detail, but I shall indicate the
number of State councils that support each suggestion
as I mention it.
All seven councils advocate the following proposals.—
1. Curtailment of fhe production of luxury goods by
control or taxation, or both. 2. The need for women to
be represented on the body that decides what shall be
classified as luxury goods. 3. Consideration of the
introduction of measures to cover the manufacture of
basic utility clothing of good quality and cut, as is being
done in Great Britain.
Four State councils are in favour of reduction of the
Public Service. Reductions can be effected where
duplication and overlapping with State Public Service
organizations exist. The number of temporary officers
can be reduced. The Australian Broadcasting Com-
mission special news service can be curtailed and some
of the activities of tho News and Information Bureau
can be discontinued. The four councils also propose
that costly advertisements for goods that are in short
supply should be eliminated and that the manufacture
of unessential goods should be reduced to a minimum,
by means of special legislation if necessary.


Four of the councils also advocate a longer working
week. One proposal is that we have a 40-hour week
in which everybody works efficiently for the full
period of 40 hours. Another is that there should bo
a 42-hour week with the object of determining in the
light of experience the effect of the extra working
time on production. A third proposal is that we should
return to the 44-hour week and, if necessary, pay extra
wages for the period worked beyond the present 40
hours. Additional workers might be obtained by
raising the limit of the allowable earnings of pen-
sioners and widows. Better use should be made of
people who have passed retiring age. An appeal should
be made to them to help the nation in its hour of
need. The immigration programme should be main-
tained. Public servants who are removed from the
Commonwealth pay-roll by means of the reductions
that have already been suggested can be diverted to
productive employment. A survey should be made of
the effect of the introduction of the 40-hour week. I
believe that the Arbitration Court indicated, when it
instituted the 40-hour week, that its decision would
be revised if the innovation were found to be
preiudieial to the Australian economy. Employers are
asked by the four councils with whose suggestions I
am now dealing to co-operate through Chambers of
Commerce and Ch°mhers of Manufactures in order
to eliminate competition for labour with its consequent
increased costs.
Three of the councils propose that hire purchase
finance should be investi'rated. Hire nurchase agree-
ments should be authorized only on a selected basis for
the financing of houses, farms, utility furniture and
so forth.
Three of the councils have made suggestions in
relation to taxation. Thev nropose that taxation
revenue should be increased by means of heavier
indirect instead of heavier personal taxes and
bv heavier taxes on luxury goods. There are large
irntarned sources of income tax th«t arise from work
that is dene out of normal working hours and from
undeclared earnings. Searching ins-'petiong slmnld he
made of the accounts of wo’-k that is being done on
building permits. Deductions for income tax nuruoses
in re°upct of insurance or nrovident fund contributions
should he increa c ed by at least £lOO above the nresent
£2OO limit in order to encourage saving. The 40 per
cent, allowance for deurecistiou of canital eouipment
in the first year of its use should he abolished. That
pronosal is stronglv suunorted. Tf rebates continue to
he allowed for depreciation, they should be applied
at the end of the period of usefulness of the equipment
instead of during the first year. Income tax on over-
time earnings should he calculated not at the rate
which applies to the higher income group hut at the
rate which is applicable to the normal wage scale.
Three councils suggest that production should he
increased by encouraging men and women to increase
their Their part in helping to achieve delation
should he made clear to them. Production could he
improved also hv introducing incentive payment and
profit-sharing schemes.
Two councils believe that publicity should be used
in order to induce men and women in all walks of
life to co-operate in the task of overcoming inflation.
A simple statement of the basic points of the economic
campaign should be dissemin°ted by all available
means of publicity. Use could he made of the sort of
slogans that were during the war so as to
urge individuals to reduce luxury spending, increase
production and assist the defence programme.
Individual councils have made each of the following
prouoagls. marketing should he strictly policed
and black marketeers should be punished without the
option of fines. Interest' rates should be raised.
Essential commodities should be sold at uniform prices
throughout Australia. A compulsory national in-
surance scheme should be established in order to draw
off surplus spending money. If compulsory national
insurance did not meet with general approval, some
other saving scheme could be instituted. The wool
sales deduction scheme should be continued. All com-
pulsory savings of this character should be frozen,
and should not be used by any government. The prices
of all basic foodstuffs should be controlled. Primary-
producers should be able to obtain loans at the same
rates of interest as apply to government loans. If
prices should fall as the result of any of the measures
that have been proposed, the basic wage should be
reduced in the quarter immediately succeeding the
fall. The currency should be revalued. The percentage
of profits allowable to big trading concerns that are
not strictly essential to the stability of the economy
Should be carefully examined with a view to a
reduction. The slow turn-round of ships should be
investigated with a view to reducing the present
excessive freight charges.
The National Council of Women considers that this
is a crisis in Australian history. Whatever our politi-
cal opinions may he and in whatever walk of life we
are situated we must do our best to help the Com-
monwealth Government to achieve what it is setting
out to achieve for the benefit of the people of Australia.
Unless we do so we shall not deserve the privilege of
living in a democracy. We must he prepared to make
e aorifices because we have passed the adolescent stage
of our national development. Patriotic citizens should
be prepared to do in peace what they were prepared
to do in war for the good of the nation. Australia
will look very small in the eyes of other countries,
particularly those that are not under democratic
governments, if we cannot pull ourselves out of our
difficulties by means of sustained and united efforts.
The National Council of Women will do all that lies
within its power as an organization of women to help
the Government at this time.
Mr. GUNN.—I thank you. Mr. Menzies. on behalf of
the Federal Graziers Council, for your invitation to
attend this conference. I have not come here with any
preconceived ideas. The council approaches th-’s discus-
sion in a spirit of co-operation. Its members are just
as vravelv concerned about inflation as are other
sect : ons of the community. I represent two industries —
the wool industry and the meat industry. Both of them
have distinct problems that affect governments.
First, I refer to the'beef industry. The production
of beef must be increased. Queensland continues to be
the maior beef-producing State of Australia, but it is
distressing to note that its cattle population to-dav is no
greater than it was 30 years ago. That must d : stnrb
everybody. Australia will be short of meat in the very
rear future unless we can improve beef production.
The beef -'ndustw was in the doldrums for twenty years
prior to World War 11. To-day it enjoys reasonable,
but not excessive, prices. I have been concerned to hear
su.g(restions for the introduction of an equalization
scheme for the industry and the discontinuance of the
sale of heef by auction.
Many anomalies would arise if the sale of beef on the
hoof by auction were eliminated. I believe that the
quality of the meat would deteriorate immediately in
favour of bulk. Any suggestions of that kind should he
carefully examined.
The proposal to establish an equalization scheme
represents an attempt to subsidize the consumer at the
expense of the industry. Too much consideration is
given to consumers in the application of price controls
and not enough attention is given to producers, par-
ticularly the producers of foodstuffs. The price of meat


has been largely influenced by the export price that is
laid down under the contract with the British Ministry
of Pood. Since the beginning of the war, that has been
a negotiated priee and all increases have been made
entirely on the ground of increased costs of production.
Unless compensation for such increased costs is allowed
from time to time, the industry must retrogress. That
is why I am disturbed by the announcement of plans
for the introduction of an equalization scheme for beef.
Costs of labour and materials have made increased
production costs inevitable. The only sources of supply
of materials such as fencing wire to-day are to be
found overseas, and the prices of imported products are
beyond the reach of most producers. Large companies
can bear those costs, but most of our beef is produced by
small holders who cannot afford to buy at such high
rates.
I am pleased to know that there is no suggestion
that the immigration programme should be terminated.
We realize that immigration has an inflationary effect,
but its advantages outweigh its disadvantages.
It has been said that the quantity of meat that is
exported, apart from the shipments that are made under
the contract with the British Ministry of Food, has been
responsible for increased local prices. I have not been
able to obtain the precise figures, but I believe that,
when they are available, they will show that the
quantity of such exports is so small that it could have
no effect upon the home consumption price. Trial
shipments are being sent to North America, but they
are being sold at the British Ministry of Food contract
price. Certain quantities of meat are being sent, under
the terms of the contract, elsewhere than to the United
Kingdom for the feeding of troops and for other
purposes at the standard contract price. All such
slrpments. therefore, can have no effect on the home-
consumption price.
I hope that the beef industry will not be called upon
to subsidize local consumers through an equalization
scheme. Already two by-products of the industry—
hides and tallow—are being sold at prices that have been
fixed at the 1939 levels. They are subsidizing the hoot
manufacturing industry and the soap industry. Thus,
the cattle industry is helping to subsidize two com-
modit’es that affect the “C” series index.
Nobody will deny that the wool industry is pros-
perous. In view of what the Prime Minister has said
about taxation, it is possible that this industry will be
chosen for selective taxation. I shall not discuss the
pros and cons of selective taxation in relation to the
industry, but I ask the Government to consult the
organization that I represent before it takes any action
of the kind that the Prime Minister has foreshadowed.
The Federal Graziers’ Council will co-operate with the
Government in any scheme that it considers to be just.
Had we co-operated more closely in the preparation of
previous budgets, manv political issues that have given
rise to dissension would never have arisen. I believe
that a great majority of wool-growers now accept the
principle of the wool sales deduction scheme, which at
first considered to be unjust. However, I hope that
it will not remain in operation any longer than is
necessary.
Various cons’derations arise in connexion with
monevs that are due, or may become due, to the
industry, but those are domestic issues in regard to
which we may consult the Government at a later date.
Reference has been made to the auction system of
selling wool. I believe that those who have suggested
that the svstem be discontinued have no knowledge of
the difficulties that would have to be overcome in order
to put their plan into operation. It is not necessary for
me to discuss those difficulties at this conference.
1 repeat that 1 have no formula for the solution of
the inflation problem, but I assure the Government that,
provided it attacks its task resolutely, it will have the
support and co-operation of the Federal Graziers’
Council.
Mr. MENZIES.—I did not understand Mr. Gair to
say that ho had the auction system of selling wool in
mind. Is that so, Mr. Gair?
Mr. GAIR.—On the contrary, I referred specifically
to the sale of wool by auction.
Mr. IIITCHINS.—I thank you on behalf of the
Australian Wool and Meat Producers Federation, Mr.
Monzies, for your invitation to be represented at this
conference. 1 admit at once that we do not claim
that we have found the answer to the problem of
inflation and that we have not brought a blue print to
the meeting. However, it is apparent from the discus-
sion that has taken place that all sections of the com-
munity realize the significance of the evil and the neces-
sity for finding remedies. The remedy is unlikely to
be found in this room. However, there is plenty of
evidence of willingness to look for remedies. The cure,
of course, will not be pleasant when it is found. We
hope that in relation to the matters that specifically
affect us we shall have an opportunity for discussion
with those who must find the cure.
I support what Mr. Gunn said about price fixing in
relation to our branch of industry. We do not ask
for any special preference to be extended to us or to be
exempted from the operation of anything that is con-
sidered to be necessary in the interests of the com-
munity as a whole. We are prepared to do what is
required of us, always bearing in mind that it appears
that the present period of prosperity for the primary
industries has passed its peak.
Our industry buys all the goods and services that it
requires to enable it to carry on, but it has no voice
whatever in the matter of the price that is charged for
those goods and services. Consequently, it is only
logical that it should have a voice in the matter of the
price at which its products are sold to the rest of the
world.
Mr. McLarty struck a very proper note when he said
that he believed that the remedy for inflation lay in
co-operation between the two sections of the industrial
community that are responsible for the production of
the goods that we need. No great favorable change
in the situation can occur speedily unless that co-opera-
tion is achieved and the two sections of the industrial
community work together in a spirit of goodwill, avoid-
ing recrimination about the past and with a determina-
tion to produce more goods for the people at a lower
cost.
I am grateful for the opportunity to attend this
conference. My organization is ready at all times to
assist in the task of finding the solution of this very
pressing problem.
Mr. STOTT.—I thank the Prime Minister for the
invitation that has been extended to the Australian
wheat-growers to be represented at this all-important
economic conference. We cannot suggest any complete
answer to the difficulty with which Australia is faced
to-day. I do not think that anybody here would say
that he could put his finger upon the cause of the
trouble and say that to overcome it we must do this
or that. It is a matter in respect of which we must
have the co-operation of all sections of the community.
The Prime Minister is to be commended for having
convened the conference, at which all sections of the
community will be able to make a contribution to the
discussions, with the object of uniting the people in a
more determined effort.
During the past decade the wheat industry has made
a tremendous contribution to the economic welfare of


Australia. It has made available wheat for Hour and
stock feed in this country at prices considerably lower
than the ceiling price of 16s. Id. a bushel under the
International Wheat Agreement and the free export
price of 18s. 6d. a bushel. The industry has contri-
buted over £70,000,000 to the community, and it is esti-
mated that at the end of the year 1951-52 the figure
will have reached £90,000,000. Surely it cannot le-
ashed to make any further great sacrifice.
The wheat industry agrees that a further effort
should be made to produce more wheat. Between 1980
and 1941 the internal consumption of flour in Aus-
tralia was about 33,000,000 bushels a year. By 1950,
the internal consumption of wheat for flour had reached
the figure of 36,000,000 bushels a year. The amount of
wheat used for stock feed has increased from 15,000,000
bushels to 23,000,000 bushels a year, and it is esti-
mated that before December of this year the figure will
have reached 24,000,000 bushels. The amount of wheat
used for breakfast food and other articles of diet has
increased to over 500,000 bushels a year in three years.
The immigration target is 200,000 migrants a year. If
that be achieved, by 1960 we shall need 88,500,000
bushels of wheat a year to meet our internal require-
ments. That means that, if production continues at
the present rate, no wheat will be available for export.
In 1945 the Australian Wheat Board acquired
38,600,000 bushels, in 1942 it acquired 92,000,000
bushels and in the other years 90,000,000 or 89,000,000.
Last year 230,000,000 bushels were acquired, and the re-
cord figure was 240,000,000 bushels. Even on the figure
of 240,000,000 bushels, no wheat would be available for
export, because during the good years we would have to
store wheat for use in bad years. In addition to the
greatly increased internal Consumption of wheat due to
the immigration policy, consumption has increased
because of the natural increase of the population.
Taking that natural increase. into consideration, if
wheat production continues at its present level we shall
reach the position that we have no wheat available for
export, not in 1960 but in 1958.
I agree that in relation to immigration a more Selec-
tive policy should be followed, with the object of attract-
ing a greater number of rural workers to this country.
But one of the difficulties with which farmers are faced
to-day is that of providing accommodation for their
employees. They are unable to obtain the cement and
steel that they need for houses. I visited the Scan-
dinavian countries last year. I formed the opinion that
the Scandinavians were the right type of people to
encourage to come to Australia because they have, so to
speak, their fingers in the soil. The governments of the
Scandinavian countries were- interested in a suggestion
that they should work together with the Commonwealth
Government with the object of persuading Scan-
dinavians to come to this country as rural workers and,
before they came, to work in industries engaged in the
manufacture of pre-fabricated homes in order that
homes for the immigrants could be sent to Australia.
If that were done, the rural industries would get addi-
tional man-power and additional accommodation for
employees.
Under the International Wheat Agreement, Australia
is committed to make available for export each year
87,000,000 bushels of wheat. That agreement has made
a great contribution to the solution of Australia’s
economic problems. But production costs in the wheat
industry are increasing year by year. Under the Inter-
national Wheat Agreement a ceiling price and a floor
price for wheat are proscribed, which will enable the
wheat industry to come somewhere near recovering its
costs of production when the floor limits are reached.
If there were no floor price in the agreement, the Com-
monwealth Government would probably he faced with
the prospect of subsidizing the wheat industry to an
enormous degree if the price of wheat fell to, say, 4s. or
ss. a bushel. We are rapidly approaching the stage
when we shall be unable to honour our commitment-
under the International Wheat Agreement, because by
1959-60 all the wheat that we produce will be required
for internal use. We must increase our wheat pro-
duction, but growers are faced with the difficulty of
ever-increasing prices of the commodities and the
machinery that they require. They are being force ;
to buy cement, wire and machinery from overseas, for
which they must pay prices considerably in excess of
those charged for the Australian products. Two year-
ago, the dollar shortage was such that it was impossible
to buy modern agricultural machinery from dollar
areas, and great difficulty Was encountered even in
obtaining spare parts for machinery. Because farmers
cannot get additional labour to enable them to increase
their production, many farmers are now what we cal!
one-family units. Farmers, in order to maintain pro-
duction, are compelled to buy labour-saving machinery,
but the price of that machinery has increased tre-
mendously. In addition, orders for some machine-;
have to be placed two or three years ahead.
It will be seen that the wheat industry will be placed
in a very difficult position if the 40 per cent, initial
depreciation allowance is abolished. Owing to a
shortage of rural man-power, some farmers placed
orders for labour-saving machinery two or three years
ago. If the 40 per cent, allowance is discontinued, that
will discourage farmers from purchasing new machinery
and thus increasing their production of wheat. I do
not say that the proposal to abolish the initial depre-
ciation allowance should be dropped altogether. It
may be possible for the Commonwealth to apply the
allowance only to certain types of machines that are
Urgently needed. The wheat industry does not wish
to adopt a selfish attitude in this matter, but I point
out that the abandonment of the allowance may have
an adverse effect upon our economy. The figures that
I have cited show that wheat production in this
country must be encouraged, but the cessation of the
payment of this allowance would have the effect
of discouraging production.
As I have said, the costs of the articles that farmers
require are constantly increasing. Let us examine the
position in regard to cornsacks. The Indian Govern-
ment, in its wisdom, knowing that Australia was
charging 16s. Id. a bushel for wheat—the ceiling price
under the International Wheat Agreement—said, “ We
must do something about the high prices that we are
being charged for wheat ”, and imposed an export duty
of 850 rupees upon cornsacks. As a result, cornsacks
in Australia now cost 695. 6d. a dozen. Under the
marketing system of the Australian Wheat Board,
wheat-growers were able to recover that to some degree
by charging a bagged price for wheat. A great anomaly
lias arisen to which the Commonwealth should give
consideration. Last year, hundreds of farmers who
had oats for sale had to purchase oat sacks at 375.
a dozen. They filled their sacks with oats and sold them
to the merchants. The sacks then became the property
of the merchants. In other words, the farmers gave
them to the merchants for nothing. The merchants
milled the oats into oatmeal, stored the product in
their sheds and waited until the 1951 price for second-
hand cornsacks was announced. To-day it is 675.
a dozen. Oat farmers will be forced to buy this year
at 675. a dozen the sacks that they gave to the merchants
last year for nothing. Surely, the merchants are
making what can only he regarded as an undue profit.
I believe that the administration of prices control
should he in the hands of the authorities, which are
responsible for the payment of subsidies. Let me
refer to the dairying industry to illustrate the diffi-
culties in which the Commonwealth Minister for


Commerce and Agriculture, and the Commonwealth
Treasurer find themselves at the present time. They
say, in effect, that the basic wage has increased and
they cannot continue to dip into the Commonwealth’s
coffers in order to subsidize butter. They maintain
that the States, which are responsible for fixing prices,
should incroase the price of butter. The Common-
wealth says, quite rightly, that it has no power to
control tho price of butter, and that that is a matter for
the States. I believe that it would bo better if the
States decided that the Commonwealth should be
responsible for prices control, owing to the fact that
it is responsible for the payment of subsidies.
This year 23,000,000 bushels of wheat will be sold
to the pig and poultry industries for 7s. lOd. a bushel,
notwithstanding that that wheat could be exported
for 16s. Id. a bushel, the ceiling price under the Inter-
national Wheat Agreement, or 18s. 6d. a bushel on the
free market. I think that the Premiers who have tho
responsibility for legislative action in this connexion,
should examine the possibility of the payment of further
subsidies upon I cannot see that wage freezing
alone will afford a solution of the problem unless the
price of the articles listed in the “ O ” series index is
also frozen. 1 suggest for the consideration of the con-
ference that increased subsidies should be paid upon
those articles, upon whicli the basic wage is based.
That would he of great advantage to the States and
to the Commonwealth.. Air. Playford told me last
week that the recent increase of 13s. a week in the basic
wage should cost the South Australian Government
€1,000,000 in wages alone. As a rough estimate, the
annual coat of the increase to all Australian govern-
ments will he £16,000,000 to £18,000,000. If the
articles in the “ G ” series index were subsidized,
further increases of the basic wage would be unneces-
sary. I go so far as to suggest that, if necessary, the
finance for the subsidies should be found by means of a
treasury note issue. It may be said that that would be
an inflationary action, and undoubtedly it would be to
some degree, but if the “ C ” series index articles were
subsidized the basic wage would be reduced, and the
wages bill of the State governments and of the Common-
wealth Government would also be reduced. The money
expended upon subsidies would be offset by the decreased
wages bill. If that were done, I believe that it would,
so to speak, put the lid on inflation. It would not be
a complete cure but at least it would put the lid on
rising costs of food and avoid the present ridiculous
position in which wages are chasing prices and nobody
is getting anywhere.
I do not propose to say anything about the 40-hour
week except that the wheat industry completely dis-
sociates itself from the statement that was made last
week by the Australian Primary Producers Union. I
agree with the Prime Minister that that was a most
irresponsible statement. The Commonwealth Govern-
ment has no power in respect of hours of work in
industry. That is a matter for the Commonwealth
Arbitration Court. The wheat industry and other
primary industries abide by conciliation and arbitra-
tion. I have had some discussions with the trade
union representatives upon working hours in our
industry, and I know that they should be only too
willing to endeavour to work out a solution of the
problem of attracting rural workers to this country from
overseas in order that we may achieve maximum
production.
Primary industries cannot operate on the basis of a
40-hour week unless we put zippers on cows’ udders
during the week-end or hypnotize into a Rip Van
Winkle sleep the pigs and other stock that must he fed
during the week-end. If the butter industry worked on
the basis of a 40-hour week, the cost of butter would
be in the vicinity of ss. 6d. a pound. Rural workers
arc entitled to improved amenities and better condi-
tions of employment, but the difficulty with which the
man on the land is placed is that of feeding his stock
during the week-end. If he had to pay hig men over-
time rates on Saturdays and Sundays to feed and
milk cows, the cost of production of butter and milk
would rise considerably. The same remark applies to
wheat.
The suspension of the quarterly adjustment of the
basic wage in accordance with rises or falls of the prices
of articles in the “ C ” series index has been mentioned.
Before that matter is examined, I suggest that the Com-
monwealth examine my suggestion of subsidizing those
articles. I believe that if that were done the basic
wage would be reduced. The Commonwealth then
Would not be anxious to suspend the quarterly adjust-
ment, but would he eager to see the effect of the subsidies
upon the basic wage.
I do not believe that public works should bo curtailed
to a greater degree than is absolutely necessary. Some
public works programmes have reached the stage at
which they are drawing off too much comont, steel and
other materials from industry and probably the cur-
tailment of some programmes will be necessary in order
to allow industry to pick itself up.
I am pleased to hear that the Commonwealth has
boon advised that there should be no appreciation of
the Australian £l. The appreciation of the
currency in Sweden, Canada and New Zealand has not
had the effect that was hoped. If import prices are
reduced by 20 per cent., it would appear at first sight
that internal prices would bo decreased to the same
degree, but in the Countries that I have mentioned the
reduction has been only of the order of 5 or G per cent.
The question of increased taxes must bo examined
from the angle of primary industry. I agree with Mr.
Gunn and Mr. Hitohins that taxes should not reach a
figure that is dangerous as far as primary production
is concerned. If they are increased considerably, some
farmers will say that although they produce more
wheat, wool or butter, most of their increased income is
returned to the Treasury. We must be careful lest
increased taxation has the effect, not of increasing pro-
duction but of decreasing it.
The figures that I have cited for the wheat industry
apply also to other industries. By 1958-51), lamb pro-
duction will have to be increased by 34 per cent, milk
and butter production 'by 27 per cent, and wheat pro-
duction by 10 per cent, if we are to supply our internal
requirements for 1959-60. It is a tragedy that to-day
the progeny of stud cows, for the sires of which high
prices a're paid, are being used for beef and chops,
tinder present conditions, it does not pay the farmer
to produce milk and butter. A halt must be called to
that.
We welcome oportunity of engaging in a frank
discussion of the problems that Australia is facing
to-day.
The wheat industry has played an important
part in the economic welfare of the nation. It
will continue to do so. The wheat industry has no
objection to providing cheap wheat for the milling of
flour; but it has strong objection to producing cheap
wheat to he used as stock feed. That amounts to the
wheat industry subsidizing other industries, and it is a
state of affairs that those who are engaged in the
wheat industry wish to have rectified.
I feel that this conference is achieving a good purpose
because it is enabling an exchange of views between the
various responsible sections of the community before
the Premiers and the Prime Minister who have the
responsibility of taking legislative action.
Mr. WEBSTER.—I should like to associate myself
with the compliments that have been paid to you at


tills conference, Mr. Prime Minister. We have gained
a greater appreciation of the tremendous task which
faces you and the Premiers, and as we have listened I
think that we have been drawn under a spell and have
felt that you have the work so well in hand that per-
haps tlie rest of us could just go home. However, I
have now removed the spell and believe that we could
make some suggestions that may be worthy of considera-
tion. My organization believes that the problems
relating to production and prices will not be solved to
a great extent until such time as problems relating to
power and coal supply have been solved. Those matters
are in the hands of the various governments and they
are the only bodies that can handle it in consultation
with the interests concerned. But much can be done
by industry and those who work in the industry, by
consultation between employer and employee. Mr.
McLarty referred to the necessity for consultation
between management and workers and other speakers
have mentioned it. In fact this is already done over a
wide range of industry. Management and workers in
the industrial sphere do not altogether live a dog and cat
life. Consultations are constantly occurring between
those who control manufacturing industries and the
representatives of those who work in the industries.
Most of our problems are solved in that way. I think
that most industries represented here to-day and most
of the trade union representatives are not very much in
favour of industrial troubles. We encounter some
problems that we cannot solve. Some concern prin-
ciples and some result from misunderstandings on both
sides.
There is no doubt that the introduction of the 40-
hour week seriously reduced production. I believe that
its restoration would be a great contribution to the
welfare of the country. The question of reintroducing
the 44-hour week is one of the long range policies which
this conference cannot deal with. But this country’s
industry would receive a great impetus if employees
would work a 40-hour week. My organization has
recently had a survey made of hours worked in industry,
and it is astounding to find how many hours short of
forty are worked every week. A 34-35-hour week is
not uncommon. In the majority of cases productive
industry has to stop for ten minutes in the morning and
ten minutes in each afternoon for afternoon tea. . The
cessation of work for twenty minutes a day results in a
loss of 100 minutes a week or 83 hours a year.
Under modern conditions, it is claimed and accepted
that the workers should have a share of the leisure that
machinery makes possible and our courts have incor-
porated that principle liberally in awards. Workers
receive two weeks’ annual leave, a week’s sick leave
every year, and nine or ten days in statutory holidays.
In addition, they have the 83 hours a year that I have
mentioned. That takes more out of industry than the
annual holidays, the sick leave, or the statutory holi-
days. There is no reason why people may not have
afternoon tea while the mill works. It is shocking to
see a mill worth £750,000 coming to a standstill every
morning and afternoon so that people can have after-
noon tea. The theoretical loss is great, but, in actual
practice, it is much greater because machinery cannot
be started again at the tick of a clock. The elimination
of these cessations of production is something that
might be arranged by agreement between industry and
organized workers. I hope that the Australian Council
of Trade Unions will lend its assistance in that regard.
Everybody has been shocked by the addition of 13s.
to the basic wage; but other costs are being added which
have no relation to wages or production capacity of
workers or management, and the Government is in
a position to do something about this. I refer to
imported raw materials. A big part of the inflationary
spiral has been due to the ever-increasing cost
of raw materials. The price of pome of them has
risen eighteen and twenty times. The rise in the
cost of raw materials has cost industry many times more
than increases in wages. Many illustrations of this
over a range of industry could be given. I will confine
myself to one or two, in regard to which I am familiar
with all details. Australia is the only country
that has been deprived of cheap American cotton ever
since the war. Whatever may have been the position
at one time, the availability of dollars is not now a
problem in this connexion. The result has been to
impose tremendous costs on the Australian community.
The sale value of the commodity produced by local
industry would be, at current rates, about £20,000,000
per annum. This matter is of considerable impor-
tance to the working man who must at the present
time pay 17s. more for a pair of overalls than he would
have to pay if they had been woven from American
cotton. The added cost of those overalls result-
ing from the 13s. increase iu the basic wage
is only about 4d. on the same basis of comparison.
If the Government would pay some regard to the views
of industry on this matter these additional costs could
be avoided to some extent. They could not be entirely
avoided because it would probably be impossible to
obtain all Australia’s cotton requirements from
America. The Commonwealth Government has this
information in its possession and the Ministers who
have been contacted by representatives of industry
have been very approachable. The facts have been
placed before them, but the machinery has not worked.
There has been so much circumlocution, the Depart-
ment of Commerce and Agriculture, the Depart-
ment of Supply and the Department of Trade
and Customs all being concerned in the matter,
that the machinery has not moved. There
is no reason that I can ascertain why this country
should not have the opportunity to import cheap
commodities which are obtained by every other coum-
try in the world. Yet, although the Government has
made dollars available, we have not been able to obtain
the material. If the Government had taken steps that
should have been taken some time ago, industry would
now be receiving the materials and some of these
tremendous increases in cost could have been avoided.
This is the position so far as a lot of commodities are
concerned. Chemicals are also affected in this way.
I know that Ministers and heads of departments can-
not go into the finest details of these matters but there
appears to be a hard and fast rule in the administration
of the departments concerned, that cost is not a con-
sideration. If the Government would examine this
matter I am sure that it would find some way of over-
coming the difficulty. If other countries can obtain
these materials, Australia should be able to do so.
Practically every textile manufacturing country in the
world which asked for American cotton has received
substantial quantities, with the solitary exception of
Australia, to whom a small allocation was recently
made. At this time, the only country in the world
receiving a lesser allotment of American cotton than
Australia was Lebanon. I know there are great diffi-
culties to overcome but there does not seem to be an
answer to the fact that every other country in the
world, except Australia, has in the past and still con-
tinues to overcome whatever difficulties exist. Aus-
tralian importers have bought commodities from
Japan at four times the price at which they are avail-
able from hard currency countries and when the goods
have arrived here it has been found that they came
from hard currency areas in the first place. I think
that everybody will agree with the Prime Minister
that drawing off money by way of taxation is a way
of avoiding inflation. However, experience has shown
that it also has an inflationary effect. There is not
the slightest doubt that if the worker is deprived of a
substantial part of bis pay the same results will not


be achieved in production. 1 am sorry to say that that
principle applies, almost with equal force, to every-
body who receives money, and I am sorry to say that
it applies to many industrial companies. As taxation
is increased there is a growing tendency to disregard
costs. Additional money may be spent in advertising
and in other ways. In the long run, the increased taxa-
tion leads to inefficiency. The inflationary effect of
heavier taxation might be found to be greater than is
generally believed.
The present Government, when in Opposition, was
critical of the number of people employed in the
Commonwealth Public Service. It may have had
every justification for that criticism. I suggest
that the Prime Minister should have a specialist
examine the staffing of one department. I think that
he would, be astounded at the result. If he is not,
he will be justified in saying that the Public Service
is not over-manned. In industry, specialists from out-
side an organization are given the job of surveying
standards and personnel, not only in the mill, but in
the administrative offices. The results, even in the most
efficiently run companies, have been astounding.
Experts from outside the company have shown how
vast improvements could be made in the organization
of a mill where the manager who had been in charge
for many years did not think that any improvement
was possible. I do not suggest that there should be
a wholesale dismissal of public servants. But if
tbe Government ceased to engage additional staff and
redistributed any surplus staff, it would do away with
the talk about the thousands of public servants who
should be producing. I believe that the Public Service
engages about one thousand people a month. If those
people did not have to be employed by the Government,
that would result in a contribution towards the solution
of labour problems.
I think that the control of prices by the States has
been very effective. The State systems have had
their shortcomings, but so had the federal price-
fixing administration. I do not think that the Com-
monwealth could control prices any better than the
States. I think that the majority of people are suffi-
ciently patriotic to co-operate with the Governments
in that class of work. The same class of people who
want to carry on black marketing when there is State
price control will do it under Commonwealth control.
They did it during the war when they might have been
expected to refrain from black marketing through
patriotic motives. People found difficulty in retaining
their labour because it was taken away from them by
black marketeers. My organization would not like to
see price control administered by the Commonwealth
because if the Commonwealth takes over this responsi-
bility it may retain it permanently. If the power
remains with the States, it is more likely to be aban-
doned when its abandonment is justified. It is a fact,
as Mr. Gain has stated, that Queensland controlled
prices for a long time prior to the war, but it was a
very benevolent control and was only rarely brought
into operation. The members of my organization
believe that price-fixing leads to inefficiency and waste
and we hope that this power will not revert to the
federal authorities because it might remain with them
for all time.
I suggest that some means be devised for encouraging
peonle to keep their savings in the savings banks.
I think it would be worth while considering paying a
higher rate of interest on savings bank deposits and
treating such interest as non-taxable income. That
would take money out of circulation and, combined
with other measures, would probably be a substantial
means of reducing inflation.
Mr. Gair referred to the “ less essential industries ”,
and I think that this is a term that should be used
in place of “ non-essential industries ”. There are
really few goods and services that might be called
useless luxuries and it will not be possible to do much
about those which do exist —such as dog races. Any
manufacturer who produces something that people use
does not generally operate a luxury industry. Existing
industries of all kinds can be used for some type of
useful production. In America the government is not
closing down industries, but is helping them to produce.
I know that it may become necessary, from a defence
point of view, in order to obtain man-power, to declare
some industries to be more essential than others. But
the establishment of industry in this country has been
a slow, laborious process, and those pioneers who have
undertaken it have had a long and bitter fight which
is not yet over. Once an industry has been destroyed,
it is very difficult to re-establish it. Industries should
only be interefered with to the extent that may be
necessary to utilize their labour and materials in
connexion with the defence plan. I suggest that the
Commonwealth Government should ensure that action
of this kind is not taken so far ahead of the implementa-
tion of defence plans that it will not be able to use the
man-power that may be released.
i believe that something could be achieved by some
further subsidizing of those items on the cost of which
the basic wage is fixed. I know that there is a difficulty
in that regard, as the Premier of New South 'Wales
has pointed out. But if other items are subsidized as
well as those associated with the fixing of the basic
wage, the worker will be in a better position.
It has been suggested that these matters should
be linked with Commonwealth control of prices.
They may have their place from a psychological
point of view, but nobody can produce figures
to show that profits really have any major effect on this
spiral of prices. Commonwealth figures show that
between 1939 and 1945 the manufacturing industries’
profits deceased from 8.5 per cent, to 8.1 per cent. —that
is profit on shareholders’ invested funds. However,
that will not make much difference to many of the other
causes of inflation. .If you take £1 of sale va l ue in the
general run of commodities you find that profits rarely
exceed 9d.; so that, if the Government collected the
whole profit made, or prevented any profit being made,
it is obvious that such action would not have much
effect in reducing the cost of goods and commodities.
I point out also that any profits made by any
manufacturing concern are subieet to taxation. In
conclusion, I assure you, Mr. Prime Minister, that
the Government’s efforts to deal with these problems
wi l ! have the full support and co-operation of industry
in this country.
Mr. W. J. ALLISON.—I represent the Associated
Chambers of Commerce at this conference, and I join
with the other delegates who have spoken in thanking
you, Mr. Prime Minister, for the invitation to come
here. We have been anxious to have such a gathering for
ouite a long while, and we believe that it will be all to
the good. We are conscious, too, of the tremendous
importance that the public attaches to this conference.
We have come here without any inhibitions and with
a very high sense of responsibility. We have no set
policy because we have come with a completely
open mind, ready to make what contribution we can.
However, we have ideas that may be of assistance to
the conference.
Various sneakers have pointed out that inflation
is a world-wide malady, and we must accept the fact
that Australia cannot escape from some degree of
inflation no matter what she does. The extent of infla-
tion in Australia since 1939 has been roughly in line
with America and Britain. However, what causes
us particular concern is that in this country inflation
is accelerating at a greater pace than it is in other


democratic countries, and that is one of the reasons, 1
assume, why we are meeting here. It is clear, however,
that our problem is not local and we must bear that in
mind in considering any suggested solution.
We must also remember that w r ages have increased
more than prices, and that on the whole the community
is better off than it was before the war. At this stage
1 shall refer to profits made by companies. Reference
has been made to excess profits, and it is true that some
companies have shown remarkably good results. It is
also true, of course, that some primary producers have
shown some remarkably good results. However,
we must take the figures over the whole field. These
figures, which I shall quote, show that the percentage
of profit to shareholders’ funds of companies, after
providing for taxation (because companies pay tax on
profits before they are distributed as well as
the shareholders who receive those profits) has
risen since 1939 from 6.8 per cent, to 8.6 per
cent, in 1950, which represents an increase of
1.8 per cent. That percentage increase is, I
suggest, a very modest rise in view of the general fall
in the \alue of money. Another point that has been
commented on at this conference is the important
matter of the exchange rate. Whilst I know, Mr.
Prime Minister, that you have had the best advice,
and that your experts advise you that the exchange rate
should not be varied, I am bound to say, on behalf of the
Chambers of Commerce, that there is a strong body of
opinion that there should be a free rate of exchange
between Australia and the United Kingdom. We
appreciate the quality of your advisers, but we point
out that eminent economists have expressed the opinion
that appreciation of our currency would benefit this
country. We also advocate increasing the flow of im-
ports and so reducing the shortage of goods. We are
opposed to the payment of subsidies of any kind. Sub-
sidies are linked with price controls. Much has been
said at this conference about price controls, but we say
that the imposition of price controls is no answer to the
problem confronting us now. Many people look upon
price controls as something new. The fact is
that price control was first tried out 4,000 years ago
in the days of the kings of Babylon. It has been
tried on various occasions over the centuries, and
on every occasion it has proved to be a failure.
It simply will not work. Neither do we favour
wage-pegging. In fact, we are opposed to
wage-pegging. We feel that wage-pegging would
place a maximum on the earnings of the worker.
After all, some of the best contributions to the com-
munity are made by those who work harder than their
fellow men and are rewarded for doing so. The system
of wage-pegging would not be possible without defeating
our main objective which is to produce a greater flow
of goods. In our opinion both wage control and price
control would have a retarding effect, and, in any event,
an army of people would have to be withdrawn from
industry to police the enforcement of those controls.
Therefore, we say that price control, supported by wage
control and other artificial restrictions, is not an answer
to the problem. To impose price control without the
supporting controls would, of course, be sheer nonsense.
As we see it, the basic requirements of the nation
are fuel, power and transport. Without adequate sup-
plies of these necessities even our defence programme
must be jeopardized. If these can be built up. greater
production all along the line will follow. For that
reason we support a policy of diversion by the means
that you have outlined rather than the imposition of
controls. Ido not propose to go over all the points on
which you have touched in the course of your opening
address, but I take this opportunity to say that we
view inflation as Australia’s greatest problem short of
war. It is also a psychological problem. We have not
yet convinced the Australian people that the answer to
our problem lies in the main in a greater production of
goods. We must make the people believe the truth,
which is that the present struggle is not one between
States, or between the States and the Commonwealth,
or between sections of the community, or between
management and labour; the real and deadly struggle
in which we are engaged is one between the forces of
inflation and the entire community. I appeal to the
Government to launch a campaign to toll the people the
facts about these things. The truth is that there
is no easy way out. We want value restored to
the £l, but that can only come about if we all
make an effort to restore value to the £l. The
Government must bring before the people the truth that
all must assist to combat the inflationary forces con-
fronting us. In conclusion, we offer you our complete
support and we shall be only too happy to play our
port in assisting the Government on any committees that
may be formed to combat the inflation that now
besets us.
Luncheon adjournment.
Bishop DE WITT BATTY.—In the presence of so
many persons who are specially conversant and quali-
fied to deal with the economic aspects of the problems
before the conference, I am naturally reluctant to deal
with those aspects, nor am I qualified to deal with
them. However, the problem is really political rather
than economic, and even more ethical than political.
It is political because I suppose every one realizes the
causes of inflation and the kind of remedies that ought
to be adopted to stem it, and if there was any doubt
about those matters that doubt should have been dis-
pelled by the extraordinarily lucid exposition of the
subject given by the Prime Minister when ha opened
the conference yesterday. I take it the Government is
not in doubt, therefore, as to the kind of remedies that
ought to be applied but it may be in doubt whether it is
politically possible or expedient to employ them.
We all know what causes inflation. It is a dislocation
of the ratio between the amount of purchasing power
and the volume of goods available for purchase.
In other words, too much money in circulation
and too few goods to buy, so that prices
are forced up by the competition of buyers
to obtain them. Therefore, the remedy for inflation
lies along the lines of such measures as will either
reduce the amount of money in circulation or
will increase the volume of purchaseable goods. I think
it is generally recognized that greater production is
one of the chief methods of overcoming this difficulty.
I also believe that it is generally recognized that by
increased production we can bring about a reduction
of the cost of living. Indeed, I would go further and
say that there is a general feeling in the com-
munity that unless there is increased efficiency in
management and increased production by the workers
we are threatened with a serious and sub-
stantial reduction of our standard of living. Those
matters are common knowledge. The only obstacles to
overcoming those difficulties are political rather than
economic.
One condition of attaining economic health is, I
think, the laying aside of partisan prejudices and sec-
tional interests for the time being. That is what I
mean by saying that the matter is political rather than
economic. It has been represented to me that
the position in Australia to-day is that there
are certain economic groups on both sides
in industry which although numerically quite small
when compared with the total population are neverthe-
less strong enough in themselves to prevent the Govern-
ment from applying any remedy that they dislike. It
is clear, therefore, that the problem is not only political


but ethical as well. Any measure that is calculated
effectively to curb inflation is bound to call for a con-
siderable amount of self-sacrifice on the part of those
whose interests it. affects. And it will be effective as a
remedy only insofar as it can secure the unselfish co-
operation of the great body of citizens. 1 regard the
present crisis as a moral crisis, ae a challenge to the
Australian people to think and act as one people and
not merely as a loosely knitted agglomeration of interest
groups. I think we should be asking ourselves to-day
not “ Who is right? ” but “ What is right? ”.
When I ask myself that question I find certain prin-
ciples which I think are hardly open to question. Per-
haps tho first is that the producers are entitled to a just
price for what they produce; but they arc not entitled
to the excessive profits w-hich become possible when the
nation is engaged in intensive defence preparation.
In the second place, the trade unionists are entitled to a
wage that is definitely related to the cost of living, and
they are entitled to a rise of living standards that is
proportionate to the increase of their production;
but they are not entitled to exploit the situation
which is created when the demand for labour
greatly exceeds the supply. In the third place,
I would say that trading and manufacturing
interests should regard themselves as being under
a moral obligation not to declare high dividends. I
believe that economists agree that the actual effect of
high dividends on inflation is uot very great indeed.
However, the fact remains that the psychological effect
is very considerable and is of particular importance at
a time like the present. When the people are feeling
the economic pinch it seems to me most dangerous from
a psychological point of view to accentuate their discon-
tent by paying out excessively high dividends. There is
a grave feeling that despite continuous and substantial
increases in the basic wage, the workers are actually
losing ground economically, and that with every
increase of the basic wage the worker finds himself even
worse off. I believe that there is a growing body of
opinion amongst trade unionists themselves that some
restraint of wages is necessary if the economy of the
country is to be stabilized. Of course, it would
not be morally just to ask tho workers to accept
restriction of their earning capacity unless every sec-
tion of the community were prepared to accept similar
restrictions. In other words, there must be a restriction
all round. Fourthly, just as the economic groups must
be prepared to think less of their sectional interests and
more of the national interest, so we as a nation ought
to be prepared to co-operate with other nations in
securing a just distribution of the burdens of rearma-
ment and a just allocation of the materials that are
necessary for defence preparations. I should think that
those four propositions really cannot be controverted,
but here is one that may be. If some lowering
of the living standard is inevitable it should come
about by the equitable method of rationing and not
by the inequitable method of inflating prices. You can
ration food either by government regulation or by
allowing the price to rise so high that only the well-to-do
can afford to buy it. When I was in England in 1948,
food was scarce, but the government rationing system
was distributing the scarcity fairly over the total
population; the restrictions were the same for all. But
when I went to Ireland where there was at the same
time little or no rationing, I found that I could buy
all the food I desired if I was prepared to pay the high
prices demanded for it. But I knew that the shortage
of food amongst the poorer sections of the community
was much more acute than any I had seen.
I know that the idea of controls is repugnant to some,
but I think that the alternative' to controls is injustice.
By that I mean that in a time of scarcity there
cannot he proper distribution and reasonable prices
unless we have some form of controls. For that
reason I think that the present crisis demands the intro-
duction of certain controls.
I regard the present crisis not merely as one that
confronts Australia but also as one that confronts the
whole cause of democracy. If democracy is to prevail
against the challenge of the totalitarian, it must be
able to show that with its free institutions it can secure
the same measure of national unity and national
efficiency as the Communists can secure by means of
their secret police and concentration camps. Of
course, the Communists contend that this cannot be
done, and it is for the people of Australia and the
other democratic countries to prove that it can. In
conclusion, I say that if the Christian churches can do
anything to prove that democracy can survive without
doing injustice to any section of its community they
will most readily do it.
Mr. MENZIES. —Since the subject of migration has
been mentioned by a number of speakers, I think that
it might be convenient at this stage if I asked my
colleague, the Minister for Immigration, Mr. Holt, to
put this matter in some balance before you.
Mir. HOLT.—I thank you, Mr. Prime Minister and
ladies and gentlemen, tor the opportunity to place
before you certain facts concerning the important
subject of immigration. Although various political
proolems arise from the subject of discussion at this
conference, attention has naturally been focused upon
the economic problems, and it is understandable, there-
fore, that migration should have been discussed only-
in relation to its economic background, and that only
those aspects of migration that appear to be con-
tributing factors to the general inflationary problem
should have been mentioned. In order to restore
immigration to its proper perspective in our national
outlook I think that we should recall at once that
migration is directed to the achievement of national
objectives of the highest order. For example, defence
and development are dependent upon migration. It
can be established that if we are to improve the defence
of this country, and if we are to develop it, the only
alternative to the introduction of complete regimenta-
tion and industrial conscription is the augmentation
of our work force by migration. I stress the tremendous
importance to defence and development of an adequate
flow of migrants. We shall do this country no service
if, in order to save ourselves from the discomforts of
some temporary inflation, we abandon our migration
policy. What greater contribution can we make to
the defence of Australia than by constantly and regu-
larly adding to our own resources men and women
who can help us defend this country if we should
be attacked or find ourselves involved in a war? By
the same token when we have these vast developmental
projects ahead of jis, how can we hope to implement
them without an adequate migration policy unless we
are prepared to reduce our standard of living and
agree to the most radical diversion of man-power and
resources. On this matter of inflation, I point out
that the people of the new State of Israel are willingly
and freely accepting an inflation that makes ours look
puny. They are doing so because they believe that
course to be necessary for their survival as a nation,
and as part of the price that their people must be
prepared to pay.
I have mentioned the importance to Australia of
its work force, and I return to that subject now
because Mr. McLarty when dealing with immigration
stressed the buoyant rate of natural increase of popu-
lation in this country. Although we are all
tremendously appreciative of the increase-in our birth-
rate. which in recent years has risen as high as
180,000 a year and has resulted in a rate of natural in-
crease of 1.8 per cent., I must point out. that those babies


will not augment our work force for another fifteen to
eighteen, years. In the meantime our national work
must go on. I do not think that any Premier or
representative of any State present at this conference
will deny that we have a very acute problem in
augmenting our inadequate work force. Certain pro-
jects must he carried out whatever test of essentiality
is applied to them, and at present most of them are
being starved for labour. The only way in which we
can provide the requisite labour is to bring people to
this country. The addition to our work force from
people of Australian birth in 1950 was only 16,000.
That number, of course, represents the excess of new
employees in industry over those who had died or
retired. However, from migration we added 71,000
people to our work force. At present there are more
than 125,000 vacancies in industry registered with
the Department of Labour but, perhaps, when we
consider the real demands of the Australian com-
munity the extent of our deficiency of man-power is
nearer 200,000 or 250,000. It is clear that for many
years to come tremendous pressure will be exerted
upon our economy because of the inadequacy of our
labour force. Even if governments embark on a
policy of diversion of labour almost to the point of
ruthlessness it will be a long time before Australia
obtains all the labour that it needs for essential tasks.
I frequently encounter criticism, not so much of
the Government as of myself, to the effect that we have
a passion for numbers in our immigration policy and
that we are concerned solely with numbers. It is
true, as was mentioned by one or two speakers, that
some time ago we did set ourselves a target of 200,000
a year, and that at the time that target was fixed it
did not seem too great in the light of our huge national
developmental projects. However, subsequent economic
developments have compelled us to restrict our original
target, and although there may be a general impression
among the public that migrants are pouring into this
country and that the present intake is greater than
it has ever been, I point out that during this year the
number of migrants to be admitted to Australia will be
considerably less than during the preceding years. In
the last year of office of our predecessors the number
of migrants admitted to this country was 167,000, and
during our first year of office 174,000 came to this
country. However, this year I will be surprised if the
total reaches 150,000, and I believe that it is more
likely to be approximately 140,000. Of course, those
are figures of gross intake, and leave out of account
the losses by departure. During recent years about
20,000 people have been leaving this country annually.
Since the numbers that have been admitted to this
country in the last two or three years have been con-
siderably greater than in earlier years it is only reason-
able to suppose that more than 20,000 people a
year will leave Australia during the next few years.
In fact, the rate of departures is more likely
to be in the vicinity of 25,000 or 30,000 in the
years ahead, and we must set that figure against
our intake in order to obtain a realistic picture of the
effect upon this country of our migration policy.
At least two of the Premiers suggested that we
should be more selective in choosing migrants. I do not
know to what types of people that criticism is directed.
The usual tendency, of course, has been to criticize those
who were admitted under the displaced persons scheme
and the Southern Europeans. However, the displaced
persons scheme has come almost to an end, and, in
any event, I do not think that any Australian can
feel anything but pride in the programme which has
done so much not only to extend the hand of humanity
to the suffering victims of the war but also to assist
to solve the tremendous social problem that has con-
fronted Europe. After all. when we bring 170.000
human beings to a strange country it is not to be
wondered at that a small proportion of them should
prove to be undesirable.
We take suitable action when • the presence of
undesirable persons comes to our notice. I have had
occasion to deport some of them in the past and no
doubt i shall deport others in the future. But people
often refer too loosely to “ undesirable ” immigrants.
Mr. McGirr spoke of getting better types. I remind
him that 37 per cent, of the displaced persons in
directable labour in Australia to-day are working in
New South Wales. Even that percentage does not
nearly fulfil the requirements of either the State
Government or the private industries of New South
Wales.
Most people do not realize that the Commonwealth
Government has not assisted Southern Europeans to
come to Australia. The general conception is that there
is a great government scheme under which almost every
person who comes to the country is assisted, financially
or otherwise, by the Commonwealth Government. That,
of course, : s a false conception. For instance, 67,000
persons who will enter Australia this year will not be
assisted in any way by the Government. Of these,
30,000 will be full fare paying British immigrants, and
about 35,000 will be full fare paying immigrants from
other countries who will be assisted by friends and
relatives. Is it suggested that we should not permit
the entry of fwends and relatives of persons who are
already settled in this country, which is crying out for
greater population ? As it is, we limit the intake of such
individuals by imposing certain age limits and making
exceptions only for the parents or other close relatives
of persons who are already in Australia and others
who have strong claims for sympathy on compassionate
grounds. We have considerably restricted the influx
of persons even when they are prepared to pay their
full fare and have accommodation awaiting them
in Australia.
The Prime Minister has already indicated that the
Government proposes to make a critical review of the
immigration programme with the object of determining
the degree to wdiich we can use the benefits of immigra-
t on in order to restrain the effects of inflation. We
shall endeavour to place immigrant labour wherever
it can be used best to ease our economic difficulties.
I do not want you to underestimate the difficulties
that confront us when we try to place arbitrary limits
upon the intake of new settlers. For instance, every-
body agrees that we should have as many British
immigrants as we can get. Sociolog'cally and politi-
cally, the ideal method would be to bring in as many
British immigrants as we need and to eliminate the
intake of Europeans. However, in the light of the
economic problems with which we must deal, we must
face the fact that we get fewer dividends in economic
terms from Brit’sh immigrants than we get from other
immigrants, particularly in relation to those schemes
for which the Government makes its own selection.
If we sought to provide accommodation for all
selected British immigrants, we should have to provide
an average of five beds for every effective worker in
order to obtain the sort of craftsmen and tradesmen that
we need. In other words, the numbers Of s’ngle men
and married men with a I’mited number of dependants
available in the United Kingdom for immigration are
totally inadequate. Last year we gained a total work
force of 71,000 persons by means of immigration. Had
we brought that number of workers entirely from the
United Kingdom, we should have had to bring a total
of 350,000 persons. That would have been imprac-
ticable.
Other powerful reasons of a political nature prevent
us from obtaining classified labour from the United


Kingdom instead of from Europe. The basic industries,
which are the most starved for labour, are those to
which we have to direct European migrants who cjjuu
here under contracts of engagement. Therefore, in
order to obtain as much man-power as possible for those
industries, we are obliged to reduce the iu.ake of British
immigrants considerably. The dilemma is obvious.
Several speakers at this conference have mentioned
the need for bringing more rural workers to Australia
in order to boost food production. The Department of
Immigration is already endeavouring to obtain a higher
proportion of rural workers in the immigration pro-
gramme. But we cannot get such men from the
United Kingdom. On one occasion, in my innocence,
I announced that the Government intended to recruit
more rural workers from Great Britain. That almost
created a diplomatic incident between Australia and the
United Kingdom. The primary producers of Great
Britain rushed to their Government to point out that
they were already conducting a recruiting campaign
with the object of gaining more labour for their own
industries. We also wanted to bring coal-miners from
the United Kingdom, but the Government of the United
Kingdom was not sympathetic to our needs because it
was then bringing thousands of Italian coal-miners to
Great Britain in order to boost coal production there.
Thus, although it is easy to talk in general terms of
reviewing the immigration programme, in practice the
task of obtaining the required dividends in terms of
production from our basic, secondary and primary
industries is very complicated, both politically and
economically.
Much has been said at this conference about the
demand that the immigration programme makes upon
our economy, but very little has been said about its
contribution to the economy. I shall not weary you
with figures, but a very impressive story could be told
of the enormous contribution that is made to the basic
structure of our economy by the importation of labour,
especially from European countries. The research
officers of the Department of Immigration have reached
the conclusion that the migrants who come here in any
year immediately set about producing the consumer
goods that they require for themselves and about one-
sixth of the quantity of the capital goods that they
require. Therefore, after a period of six years, if
immigration were maintained at the same rate, we
should reach a point at which production by immigrants
balances their demands on capital goods. Eventually
immigrants must make a net contribution to our pro-
duction of such goods. We shall build about 70,000
housing units this year. That will provide accommoda-
tion for 280,000 people, which will exceed our net intake
of new settlers as well as the natural addition to our
population. Therefore, we may take some comfort from
the results that we have achieved already.
I ask those who would rush too speedily into a scheme
of retrenchment to remind themselves of the history
of the United States of America. The population of
that country in 1810 was less than Australia’s present
population. By the time of the Civil War, it had
increased to 30,000,000 Yet, after the devastation and
disruption of that war, that country was able to add
33,000,000 persons to ite population in the next 50 years
by migration alone. I doubt very much whether there
would be a free world to-day if we had not been able to
draw upon the industrial resources and the man-power
potential of the. United States of America at the
critical periods of World War I. and World War IT.
Had the public men of the early days in America
listened too much to the critics of non-British immigra-
tion and those who considered that immigration was too
heavy a burden, it is very doubtful whether w-e should
be living in a free world now.
1 hope that Australia will take heart from the
example of the United States of America and will press
ahead with its immigration programme, not in an
over-ambitious way, but at least in sufficient degree to
meet the needs of our vital defence and developmental
objectives.
Air. A 1 OiSK. —in view of the controversy that has
occurred since this conference was mooted, I shall not
thank you, Air. Menzies, for having invited me to attend
it. However, the fair exposition of the factors that
have caused inflation which you have given to us has
been very helpful and has enabled us to gain a fuller
grasp of the magnitude of our economic problems. It
is not necessary for me to analyse those factors closely.
I merely mention the fact that they have had a
cumulative effect.
Sectional interests in the community very often
blame others for the difficulties that confront us. They
tend to overlook the fact that we are being forced to
pay a price for having allowed demand to exceed
supply. We undertook a gamble with our immigration
programme and with our plans for economic expansion.
One of the penalties of such a gamble is a period of
severe growing pains.
The trade unions have no quarrel with the expan-
sionist policy of the Chifley Government and the
present Commonwealth Government in relation to im-
migration. In fact, I have the temerity to suggest that,
but for the whole-hearted co-operation of the trade union
movement with those two Governments, the immigration
scheme would not have been nearly so successful as it
has been. I have been in close touch with immigration
in its relation to the trade unions and I have marvelled
at the manner in which displaced persons and other
migrants have been assimilated in the factories ami
workshops, on the farms and elsewhere in the working
community. There has been a minimum of friction.
The trade unions consider that the immigration pro-
gramme should not be cut down substantially. Our
source of supply of new labour amongst displaced poi-
sons in Europe is exhausted. We are now turning our
attention to Italian, Dutch and English workers. On
the advice of technical experts, the trade unions un-
satisfied that there will be better selection of immigrant
labour in the future than there has been hitherto.
Those who have criticized the programme on the score
of bad selection need have no great misgivings.
Trade union officials know that, but for the intake of
displaced persons who were directed to both private
and government employment, the supply of building
materials and other essential commodities would have
been far l6ss than it is now. Our housing programme
would have been even more meagre than it has been.
I shall refer to one illustration. Owing to the lack of
amenities, the brick-making industry is hard pressed
for labour. The weekly turnover of both Australian
and displaced person labour in that industry represents
25 per cent, of its total work force. Many people con-
tend that displaced persons should be forced to remain
in an industry to which they have been directed. But
it ’would be beyond all reason to expect a displaced
doctor or lawyer to remain in the brick industry
without seeking to obtain exemption on medical
grounds.
Coal-miners and wharf-labourers are too freely
blamed for shortages of commodities. Our deliberate
expansion in Australia has imposed great demands
upon the economy. That fact must not be overlooked.
Even if every coal-miner worked every day, we still
would not be able to get enough coal to meet our
needs before 1956, if then. Other factors must also be
considered. Even if every coal-miner in Australia
worked every day for the rest of this year, we should
not be able to move all the coal to the seaboard for the


use of industry. Our transport systems could not carry
it. About 100,000 tons of coal would be at grass at
Newcastle by Christmas. I do not say that the coal-
miners are blameless, but responsibility for every
strike in the community cannot justly be laid at their
feet.
The waterside workers, too, are unfairly blamed for
many of our troubles. Our antiquated methods of
handling shipping in Australia are a disgrace. Mr. Holt
called a conference last year with the object of bringing
the various interests associated with shipping together
in order to solve some of our transport problems. But
what happened? Instead of considering the problems,
each section blamed the others for the troubles of the
industry. The facts are that ships are bringing more
cargo to us every week. There are many factors asso-
ciated with the slow turn-round of ships, for which the
wharf-labourers are unfairly blamed. You have asked
a technical expert to come here to advise you on this
problem. We hope that we can be of some assistance
to him in his investigations.
During the course of your remarks yesterday, Mr.
Prime Minister, you mentioned capital issues control.
I believe that the decision to re-introduce capital issues
control has, to a great degree, been left too late. Some
persons always blame our section of industry for lack
of proper behaviour, but may 1 suggest to some of my
friends on the other side that it is up to them to ensure
that when necessary controls such as capital issues con-
trol are attempted to be introduced the people associated
with their section of industry will not rush to the
High Court to upset it. If necessary controls must be
introduced, we are not going to be on the receiving
end all the time. Generally speaking, you cannot say
that it is the trade union movement that has rushed to
the High Court to upset decisions of the Common-
wealth Government.
I say frankly that we will not accept direction of
man-power in a period of peace. We accepted it during
a war, I venture to say that, as a result of the deci-
sions that you have made, there will be a large change
in the incidence of employment in the near future.
Obviously defence preparations will bring about a
quick change of the employment of many Australian
workers. I believe that at the present time there are
about 5,000 workers employed in munition factories,
and I should imagine that in another few years you
will have up to 20,000 in munitions factories. The
implementation of capital issues control will lead to a
change in the incidence of employment to some extent.
What will change it to a greater extent is the decision?
that the Premiers will make at the next Premiers con-
ference upon the priorities that are to be established
for the carrying out of public works. If you introduce
your selective taxation system, that also will have some
effect.
The peremptory decision of the Commonwealth Go-
vernment to dismiss 10,000 workers from the Com-
monwealth Public Service has had a bad reaction upon
a number of the trade unions that we represent. We
feel that the organizations that will be vitally affected
by the decision that you have made should have been
consulted by you before you made the decision.
Generally, you conform to the policy of conferring with
Australian Council of Trades Unions officials upon
major matters, and we believe that you should have
done so in this instance. It must not be believed that
a substantial number of these 10,000 public servants
will be absorbed into munitions factories or employed
upon defence preparations. Most of them will be not
manual workers, but clerical workers or professional
men.
We will not subscribe to a policy of wage-pegging at
the present time. Under present circumstances, wages
are really the only things that are pegged, although I
admit freely that there is an exception in the case of
luxury industries that pay black-market rates for
their labour. However, the vast majority of Aus-
tralian workers are not paid black-market wages. Men
who are employed by public undertakings, government
departments and municipal councils receive only the
wages prescribed by wage-fixing tribunals. Those
workers form a substantial section of the community.
I do not subscribe to the view that real wages have
increased. One of the employer’s representatives said
that the recent increase of the basic wage by £1 a week
represented an increase of the real basic wage. A large
section of the workers of this country did not receive
an increase of £1 per week. In some instances the
increase was as low as 6s. Cd. or 7s. 6d. a week because
of the offset that the Arbitration Court decided should
be made in cases where men had previously been receiv-
ing more than the basic wage. To that extent, the real
increase has been cut down very substantially as far a?
a large portion of the workers of this country arc
concerned.
We cannot accept the proposition that the automatic
adjustment of the basic wage should be abolished. It
is true that the basic wage in Sydney was increased by
13s. a week, but we must bear in mind that there was a
substantial lag during the three months that preceded
the increase. That happens in the case of every quar-
terly adjustment. It is unreasonable for any one t
suggest that we should accept a suspension of the
automatic adjustment.
My mind goes back to the basis of the automatic
adjustment of the basic wage and to what used to be
known as the “ Powers 35.” After the 1914-18 war,
wages were adjusted on a yearly basis. There was no
automatic adjustment. In 1923, when the workers were
receiving the benefit of that twelve monthly adjustment,
Mr. Justice Powers decided that there should be a
quarterly adjustment. That robbed the workers of the
benefit of the twelve-monthly increase. As an offset, he
introduced what was known as the “ Powers 35.” to allow
for any increase that might occur during the quarter.
That went on merrily until the depression years, when
the employers went to the court and said that the
workers had been receiving money that was not neces-
sary, and out went the “ Powers 35.” Since then, the
workers have had nothing to offset any increase that
occurred during the quarter. As things stand at the
moment, the worker, is losing more and more with each
successive quarterly adjustment. To suspend the
quarterly adjustment would be to impose a burden upon
the worker that he should not be called upon to bear
and which would not be imposed upon any other section
of the community.
That brings me to the vexed question of prices control.
You will recall, Mr. Prime Minister, that in May, 1950,
we brought to your notice the drift that we thought
was likely to occur in the economy of this country and
asked you to hold a referendum in order to see whether
the people were prepared to agree to the reintroduction
of federal prices control. You refused at that time to
hold the referendum. 1 agree with the speaker who
said this morning that if the pepole were given an
opportunity to express their opinion upon this matter,
they would vote in favour of federal prices control.
In my earlier remarks, I overlooked one matter.
Although it is contended that the nominal wage has
increased, in point of fact the skilled worker is now
relatively worse off than he has ever been. During
the depression, the engineers’ margin was reduced to a
level lower than ever before. Now we find that, because
margins have not been increased in accordance with
rises of the cost of living, when the automatic adjust-
ment begins in the first pay period in August the skilled


worker will be 3 per cent, worse off so far as his margin
is concerned than he has ever been previously in the
history of this country.
Dealing with the question of profit control, it is
suggested that we should agree to a freeze or, as they
term it in Britain, a restraint of claims for increased
wages. The workers of Britain were promised that if
they agreed to that system, profits control would be
properly administered. The British Trades Union
Council attempted honorably to carry out its under-
taking to agree to a wage restraint, but the opposition
to it is so great, because the workers in the factories
were not satisfied that profits control was being adminis-
tered properly, that at the next meeting of the congress
the resolution was defeated when it came back for
reconsideration.
We feel that prices control is necessary. We agree
that it will involve difficulties. We agree also that
there must be some elasticity in the system of control,
in the same way as there was some elasticity, when
wages were pegged during the war, in order to avoid
anomalies. On the mechanics of prices control, we
appreciate that it will not be easy for the Common-
wealth to provide for the top men to come back
automatically into the prices control administration, or
to obtain as efficient a staff as it had previously. But
the fact that there will be difficulties does not mean
that the prices control should not be introduced. We
strongly urge you, Mr. Prime Minister, to give further
consideration to the suggestions that we have made.
There is another factor that we must bear in mind in
considering the present trend of events. Who would
say that the shopkeepers and manufacturers are not
anticipating vrhat is likely to occur when the next
quarterly adjustment of the basic wage is made? We
think that prices are being increased to a degree greater
than is justified by wage increases.
Mr. Webster suggested that production had declined
because of the introduction of the 40-hour week. With
the overtime which has been worked, the average work-
ing week is more than 40 hours. Mr. Webster dealt
with the matter on a theoretical level and said that so
much time should be deducted for meal breaks and
other things like that, but in fact the hours of work in
manufacturing industries at the present time are about
43 hours a week. It is true that overtime rates are being
paid for time worked in excess of 40 hours, but we have
the advantage of those working hours.
We should view with great apprehension any move
by the Commonwealth Government materially to inter-
fere with the hire-purchase system. The only way in
which a worker can buy a home is by making use of
that system. We must bear in mind that he now has to
pay as much for his furniture as previously he paid
for a house. If there were no hire-purchase facilities
available, many persons in the community would suffer
great hardship. I agree that some regulations could
be made as to the size of down payments and the time
allowed for payment of the balance, but we feel that
the system should not be interfered with materially.
The conditions under which primary producers should
be able to engage labour is becoming a hobby of mine.
Men employed in the grazing industry and upon fruit-
picking are covered by federal awards. Mr. Holt said
that he proposed to see whether we can get more labour
from overseas for employment in Australian primary
industries. No legal rate of wages is prescribed for the
ordinary Australian farm worker. He is one of the
exclusions. The only case that I know of where that
exclusion has been remedied was in Victoria recently.
Generally speaking men engaged in agriculture, horti-
cultural and viticulture have been excluded from the
jurisdiction of wage-fixing tribunals. In Victoria, a
wages board is sitting at the present time and, will
attempt to fix rates for farm labourers.
I am not going into the question which was raised
this morning of what would happen if agricultural
employees worked a 40-hour week. That is a matter
that could be discussed before the appropriate tribunal.
My real quarrel with what is happening in Australia
is that no legal rate of wages is fixed for the farm
worker. If you bring in thousands of migrants and
expect them to work on farms when no legal rates have
been fixed for them, you will strike a lot of trouble. The
Department of Labour and National Service says that,
the rate at which they should be paid should be, gener-
ally speaking, the rate applicable to the district in
which they are working. That is intimated to the
farmer, but it is not a satisfactory way of doing it
because the wages cannot be policed.
Mention has been made of taxation as a means of
depleting the amount of surplus cash that a worker
or anybody else has. It has also been suggested that a
compulsory loan system should be instituted. You
cannot have it both ways. You cannot have both
compulsory loans and high taxes. You must leave the
worker something.of his wages.
The trade union movement has made it perfectly
clear that it is in favour of increased production, not
only to maintain our living standards, but also to
increase them. When the £1 a week increase of the
basic wage was announced by the Arbitration Court, i
made a statement in which I set out the attitude of the
trade unions. I said that we wanted to make the
increase a real one by achieving the best possible pro-
duction. That statement was endorsed by the Labour
Councils of Australia and represents the policy of the
Australian Council of Trades Unions. We do not
stand for any one deliberately slacking on the job or
not doing a proper day’s work, but w T e cannot be expected
to have imposed upon us a special burden that we con-
sider to be unnecessary.
The Kev. ALAN WALKER.—Mr. Prime Minister,
the Christian Church has a limited but, I believe, in-
valuable contribution to make to this national economic
conference. It is to emphasize the human values which
lie behind inflation and to sound as clearly as possible
the moral and spiritual issues which are bound up with
this tremendous problem. The Church has neither the
experience nor the technical knowledge to advocate any
particular economic solution. It is not the function of
the Church to take this role on itself. But it can and
must speak of the great moral principles which must
be accepted and obeyed if any technical planning is to
be sound and effective.
To recognize this limitation of the Church is not to
say that our place is secondary or relatively unimpor-
tant. There are obviously two aspects to the problem
that this conference is facing. One is to know what to
do, the other is to find the spirit of unity and sacrifice
which will make it possible to do it. After listening to
the discussion thus far, I am convinced that the finding
of a power within the nation and ourselves to over-
come inflation is the greater need. Only a new spirit,
a heightened spirit of service to one another, will make
decisions nationally possible of realization.
A passionate concern for the people who are already
suffering and will suffer to a far greater extent must
dominate our minds. Inflation is already striking
heavy blow's at our greatest national assets, the homes
and the lives of the people. The Church may well claim
to represent certain groups in the nation which can so
easily be forgotten because they are not organized and
are without great political significance. It makes claim
to be the voice of the voiceless—the pensioners, lower


income families, fixed income people and the children.
Let us recognize clearly that some of these are suffer-
ing an economic anxiety only paralleled during the
great depression. Christian compassion compels us
to remember them.
Inflation is undermining the home life of the nation.
Rising home costs mean that our young people cannot
build their own homes and family life is being
grievously restricted. No nation can live above the
quality of its family life. The increase of the number
of working wives and mothers ; brought about by infla-
tion in many cases, is robbing children of proper home
care. It has already caused something of a social
revolution for which, in some of its aspects, we shall
pay dearly in future years. It is obvious that unless
action is taken, inflation is only just beginning. Unless
bold and urgent action is taken now, not to-morrow,
great misery will fall upon us all, after first crushing
those who are least able to withstand it. A prayer
should be in our hearts, Mr. Prime Minister, “The
people, Lord, the people ”.
We must remember that inflation can be stopped, but
only by the application of intelligent planning and the
spirit to see it through. The very purpose of this con-
ference is to seek a plan. If one emerges, it will un-
doubtedly mean some restriction of personal liberty for
most of us. Here, some great words of William
Temple are not without relevance: “The chief enemy
of freedom to-day is not an intelligent plan but the
irresistible pressure of blind forces. We must gain
control of those forces and that involves planning ”.
In a crisis such as this, human nature cannot be left to
itself. Human self interest, following its own dictates,
will not lead to social well-being, but to social disaster.
Controls are distasteful to most of us, whether it be
control of wages, profits or prices, but 1 am convinced
that in an hour such as this, man’s acquisitive instinct
canot be allowed to do as it likes. We accept that such
powerful human drives as «ex and anger must be
restrained by society and so must man’s innate, sinful
desire to look after himself first be controlled for the
sake of the whole. This is only being realistic and is in
accord with the Christian interpretation of human
nature.
The nation must get its values straight if it is to
resist the perils of this hour. Inflation is something
of a judgment upon us. Too many Australians have
made an idol of money. We have wanted money almost
more than anything else in the world. It is the stan-
dard by which we have judged success or failure. Well,
now we are getting it —plenty of it. Attention has
rightly been drawn to the need to divert man-power
from the less essential to the absolutely essential in-
dustries. The vast wastage that is occurring in the
liquor and gambling traffics of this land should not be
overlooked. During the war liquor manufacture was
reduced by a third. The liquor trade should again be
curtailed. Nothing is so parasitical in a community as
gambling. It produces nothing, yet keeps thousands
from productive employment. Because of the ease with
which it is obtained, no money exerts a greater infla-
tionary pressure than the gambler’s winnings. Before
the war, absenteeism on the coal-fields was always
greater on Wednesday when there was mid-week racing.
Recently, France banned the operations of all book-
makers. Restrictions imposed on gambling at this
time would greatly serve the nation.
There can be no solution to the problem of inflation
without a heightening of the spirit of unity and sacri-
fice in the whole community. If controls are not im-
posed, the absence of such a spirit will merely mean
that in all too many cases it will be each man for him-
self. If they are imposed, the absence of such a spirit
will merely mean a great expansion of blackmarket
practices.
There is but one principle that will succeed. It is
the equitable distribution of sacrifice. There can be
no solution to inflation, as the Bishop Of Newcastle has
said, without a heightening of the spirit of unity and
sacrifice. There can be no solution to inflation with-
out a price being paid by the whole community.
Glaring inequalities arc becoming mere apparent.
Some sections of the community, such as pensioners,
are carrying far too great a burden while others are
escaping and even iqaking fortunes. Action must be
taken at many points. The greater its distribution, the
more likely it is to succeed. You yourself, Mr. Prime
Minister, suggested that price control succeeded during
the war because there were many other factors surround-
ing it. While the war-time situation cannot be re-
created, the whole nation must be drawn into an anti-
inflationary effort. Control of prices, wages and pro-
fits—all three —would be more likely to succeed than
the imposition of any one of these measures. The task
of statesmanship is to demand sacrifice from the whole
of the Australian community. Australia needs to hear
a deep-throated, moral and spiritual challenge. The
representative of the women’s organizations suggested
the use of propaganda weapons. They could be well
employed. Our people are not deaf to high sounding
appeals if they are convinced that strong and courageous
political decision.? have been taken and that all are
sharing in the price to he paid and that no section of
the nation is escaping. The Christian Church has a
large part to play in any such appeal for a spirit of
unity, sacrifice and service. It can only sound that
challenge if it is patently clear, through any plan, that
the whole nation is speaking to the whole of the nation.
If these conditions are fulfilled, I can speak for the
Council of Churches in saying that the Christian
Church will gladly play its part and I believe that
none will be disappointed with the response that the
people of Australia will give.
Mr. FELL.—I feel sure that the Prime Minister has
our very sincere congratulations in so ably analysing
the cause of inflation and in offering some very con-
structive remedies. It is apparent to all of us that
every individual is seized with the responsibility of
finding a solution to the problem. I believe also that
we are nrepared to deal with first things first and to
go to the root of the trouble. It is no use trying to
apply palliatives, nor to put the lid on the pot after
it has boiled over. Let us got to the root cause of these
troubles. We are all very sensible people in this room
and, for that matter, the average Australian is a sensible
person. We know very well that our real trouble is
under-production—whether it be by manual or mental
effort. It is no use having recriminations as to
whether the coal-miner is producing enough or concern-
ing whether there are sufficient vehicles to transport
coal. Let us ask ourselves why it is not possible to
produce more coal. Why is it not possible to establish
better and bigger transport systems? Australia is a
large continent with a small population. Because of
factors beyond our control we have, over the past
couple of generations, outstripped ourselves in the
development of secondary industries. Let us continue
to develop them, but it is esssential to have pairs of
hands to do so. Those hands must be prepared to do a
fair day’s work for a fair day’s pay. There is no doubt
that we must have increased population. Our secondary
and primary industries must be developed. There is no
turning back. I suggest that, after the conclusion of
this conference, committees should be formed from the
representatives of employers and trade unions under
your chairmanship. Mr. Prime Minister, or under the
chairmanship of a Minister appointed by you in order
to go into ways and means to deal with this problem
and make recommendations to the Government.
There is no doubt that the Government must declare
a priority system for industry, and determine which


ure essential and which are less essential industries—
to use Mr. Gair’s phrase. If such a priority system is
established, then this 40 per cent, depreciation figure
must be applied and allowed to remain in the case
of essential industry where people are keen to intro-
duce new equipment at a very high cost. In my opinion,
production can only be achieved if there is understand-
ing between employer and employee organizations. We
must discuss our problems at round table conferences
and ascertain the causes of dissatisfaction which from
rime to time arise and result in misunderstanding.
My organization feels strongly on the subject of
wage-pegging. We do not believe in wage-pegging. We
believe that every man is worthy of his hire.
We- do not believe in control of prices unless that
control is introduced purely as a temporary measure.
With regard to the remarks of the Rev. Walker, 1
firmly believe that the moral fibre of this community
must be restored. I believe that the Australian people
have all been far too apathetic. The moral fibre of the
community must be improved. We are all responsible
for this situation. There should be no recriminations.
I feel that we can well work longer hours than we are
working at present. If we could work for 40 hours
a week, that would be good, but it is no use just appear-
ing for that length of time. The problems that I have
mentioned are all our responsibility and we can solve
them together.
Mr. A. R. BROWNE. —Although the invitation to
me was addressed to me in my capacity as president of
the Metal Trades Employers Association, I desire to
inform the conference that, with the leave of the Chair-
man, I appear also on behalf of the Australian Metal
Industries Association. I attended a meeting of the
latter body in Brisbane last week, at which metal
trades employers from Queensland, New South Wales,
Victoria and South Australia were present, and, after
considerable discussion of the purpose of this con-
ference, I was authorized by those who attended that
meeting, to represent them at this conference. I also
take this opportunity to point out to the conference
the importance of metal trade products to all other
industries. Agricultural production, transport, hous-
ing, processed foodstuffs, the manufacture of textiles
and many other vital aspects of the Australian economy
are dependent upon the production of the metal trades.
Although I approach this conference with every inten-
tion of rendering assistance, and with an open mind,
I point out that no one can approach the conference
with a completely open mind because his opinions, no
matter how sincerely they may be held, are necessarily
influenced by his knowledge of Australian industries
and his experience in that particular field. Since the
representatives of employers and employees at this con-
ference represent various phases of industry it follows
that our views must be influenced by that knowledge,
and to that extent we have not a completely open
mind.
The organizations that I represent feel that the
current inflationary spiral will end in only one of two
ways. Either it will run its course, to the ruin of
the whole community, or it will be halted by some
firm action taken here and now. We certainly prefer
the latter course. Yesterday you, Mr. Prime Minister,
said that inflation was a grave problem affecting the
entire community and that this conference should
approach the matter free from, and beyond, sectional
interests.
Undoubtedly, we are confronted by a tremendous
national problem, and I repeat now what has been said
previously about the gravity of the hardships inflicted
upon pensioners, widows and all those who are depen-
dent on fixed incomes. I have in mind a widow with
two children whose only income is derived from a
former investment of a couple of thousand pounds,
which returns her about £l2O a year, on which she
has, of course, to pay tax. Out of that small annual
sum she has to clothe herself and her two children,
educate them and maintain a home. Of course, it is
quite impossible for her to do so, and she has to do
dressmaking in order to help her to carry on. Her
case is typical of tens of thousands throughout the com-
munity, and they are the people whom we must keep
in mind in all our deliberations. As we all know, the
ordinary wage-earner suffers terribly from inflation.
It devalues his wages and jeopardizes the standard of
living of himself and his family. However, I think
that it is but fair to say that the Government was
awakened to the magnitude of inflation only by the
very substantial nature of the recent increase of the
basic wage. Had that increase been limited to a few
shillings, I have no doubt that this conference would
never have been convened. However, the employers’
organizations have been aware for some considerable
time of the danger to the whole community of the
current inflation, and again and again we have warned
the community of the consequences if inflation went
unchecked.
After all, high wages and high prices are not a
cause of inflation'but a consequence. Although it must
be admitted that the quarterly adjustments of the basic
wage act also as a cause as well as being a consequence
of inflation, the fact remains that they only reflect
the general trend. Mr. Monk referred to wages chasing
prices. Although high prices appear to be a cause of
inflation they are, in reality, merely a consequence.
We say that if inflation is halted pegging of any sort
will be unnecessary. If we fail to halt inflation and
we have to resort to pegging, we believe that it will
be unjust and impracticable. We recognize, of course,
that price-fixing can act as a short-term palliative but
it is not a cure, and still less does it remove the cause,
of inflation. We fear that the increases of the basic
wage will become greater and greater. Such increases
have a cumulative effect, and we must put the brakes
on now. One matter to which I draw attention, in-
cidentally, is the pay-roll tax. Although that is com-
paratively a small tax, 6d. in the £l, it has an
important effect on the cost of living because, despite
everything to the contrary, it does go on to costs and
prices.
We do not believe in the direction of man-power.
We believe that such interference with human liberties
is wrong. Viewed from the practical aspect, we say
that although you can take a horse to water you
cannot make him drink. One willing worker is worth
50 unwilling ones. The real value of wages should
be held, if possible, not reduced. The periodical
adjustments of the basic wage should cease and should
be subject to review by the court instead of being
made automatically.' In any event, at this juncture
wage margins should remain unaltered. You referred
yesterday, Mr. Prime Minister, to the problem that
would arise if wages were frozen, and I think you
had in mind the “ attraction ” margins that are paid
by many employers. However, we must not forget
that any increases awarded by the court will be added
to the “ attraction ” margins, so that the relative
position will remain unaltered. If wages are increased,
either by regular periodical adjustments or by special
increases of margins, then over-award payments will
increase.
The whole matter of wage fixation must be decided
because it is fundamental to our economy. This con-
ference cannot make that decision, nor can any other
body, because that is a responsibility of the Govern-
ment. The only bodies that are empowered to make
decisions on matters affecting wages are the industrial
courts, which decide the base rate of wages, special


margins, and standard hours. However, the Govern-
ment has a most important responsibility in that it
decides such matters as the supply of materials, the
payment of subsidies, the limitation of export quan-
tities and import requirements, the imposition of duties
of customs and excise and it also administers the
general power of taxation. The Commonwealth Govern-
ment also possesses the power to tender evidence before
industrial tribunals on matters that may affect the
national economy. We say that the Government
should ask the Arbitration Court to authorize it to
investigate the effect on the national economy of such
important matters as the 40-hour week, automatic
increases of the basic wage and the effect of direct action
upon costs and prices. For the information of Airs.
Brookes, who raised the matter this morning, I shall
quote from the judgment of the Commonwealth Arbitra-
tion Court in the Standard Hours ease. The judgment
leads, in part, as follows: —
What the Court has done in this decision is. as the
employers have indicated, to make a major social judgment
whirl) will ha\c very great and inqiortant consequence-.
A decision the other way would also he an important social
judgment. It ha- involved tremendous preparation. We
have had all the assistance 'with which the best minds could
provide ns. For the use we make of it, ours is the responsi-
bility, and it is trite to admit that we feel it very heavily.
One "comfort, however, remains, that is, if experience show s
that we have erred, and contrary to our best judgment the
economy docs suffer, or, if because of unforeseen world
conditions unanticipated results threaten ns, then the Court
can take such necessary steps as will best protect ami
preserve onr community against any such untoward
possibilities.
And also —
Perhaps this decish n completes what can safely he done
for the time Iteing and for the immediate future: the
economy must now ho allowed to digest and assimilate all
these changes and will of course be closely and coiitinnou-ly
under observation by the Court and by the Office of Economic
and Industrial Research to he set up in terms of section
81 aa of this CommoHKealth ('o)irilinlio) i nnd Arbitration Art
1904-1047.
The Office of Economic and Industrial Research has
not been established. We submit also that the Govern-
ment should present evidence concerning current
economic trends before Conciliation Commissioners in
cases where wage margins arc involved. As a footnote
to that, I point out that a claim is now being considered
by one of the Conciliation Commissioners which, if
granted in full, may involve the Australian economy
in the payment of possibly £230,000,000 a year when
the increase has ultimately been passed on to the
consumers. The Government might well invite the
Chief Judge to convene a conference of State arbi-
trators to consider means to halt the present inflation.
We also believe that the Government should restore
by legislation the authority of the Federal Arbitration
Court to determine marginal rates in order to remove
the anomalies that are inherent in the determination
of such rates by a number of Conciliation Commis-
sioners. If that is not practicable we submit that the
Government should at least re-introduee the right of
appeal from decisions of the Conciliation Commis-
sioners.
Yesterday I understood the Prime Minister to
suggest that the Government has no power to determine
wages and hours in industry and that that power lies
solely with the court. With the greatest respect 1
submit that the Government has complete power to
make representations concerning matters affecting the
public interest when claims are being decided by the
court, and that it should not stand aside and allow the
public interest to suffer.
Mr. MENZIES. —I was referring to the power
directly to fix wages and hours. I was not referring to
any indirect power.
Air. BROWNE.—I also understood you, Air. Prime
Minister, to say that the 40-hour week and the periodic
increases of the basic wage were both inflationary.
That argument was placed "by employers before the
Arbitration Court at the appropriate time, but I think
that the Commonwealth Government might well have
gone into the court and also placed the facts before the
tribunal.
The Prime Minister also made reference to the hours
of work and the will to work. Of course, if our com-
munity were living an existence completely isolated
from the rest of the world we could adjust our hours
of work in accordance with our requirements. If we
occupied some remote island in the South Seas it might
not be necessary for us to work more than fourteen
hours a week, but if we inhabited some desolate region
in the .North Atlantic we might not be able to subsist
even if we worked 100 hours a week. I mention those
extremities in order to point out that the minimum
working hours for the community must necessarily be
determined by our economic surroundings and
“ climate At present we are living under extremely
arduous conditions, and 1 can quite believe that if most
of those present at this conference could reduce their
weekly hours of work to 60 hours they would be very
pleased.
Although the organizations that 1 represent believe
that the court is the only proper authority to determine
wages and standard hours, I repeat that the Govern-
ment should intervene in all claims that arc likely
adversely to affect the interests of the community in
order to place the facts before the court.
We agree with the Government that first things must
come first. Locomotives are quite useless without coal
to propel them, and refrigerators are of no value unless
we have sufficient electric current to operate them. We
maintain that the basic problem confronting Australia
to-day is under-production of the essentials of life.
At the same time we hope that the Government will
not allow any plans it may make based on that fact to
ignore the importance of all phases of production.
Although the lack of sufficient electric power may
render refrigerators temporarily useless and washing
machines idle, the withdrawal of those engaged in the
production of those machines will not of itself increase
the production of our power houses. We believe that
under any re-organized system of distribution of
materials it will he necessary to direct some materials
to those industries rather than to put them out of
business. Furthermore, in deciding priorities we think
that the Government should bear in mind that it is
preferable to have one new power station in actual
operation rather than to distribute materials on the
con.-truetion of 50 power-station projects.
Concerning the suggestion that I made previously
that the Commonwealth Government should exercise
its power to intervene in proceedings before the Arbitra-
tion Court whenever it believes that the economy of the
country may be threatened. I omitted to mention that
Mr. Webster has authorized me to say on behalf of the
organization that he represents that that organization
agrees with the view that I have expressed.
A great deal has been said about the alleged inade-
quacy of production in factories. In general, the
production per unit employed is good, but it is limited
by the lack of essentials such as coal, power, steel and
other basic raw materials. The inadequacy of supplies
also has the effect of lowering the morale of managers
and workers. If we have a pile of work before us to
complete we naturally work harder than we do when
the work trickles in from time to time. The inadequacy
of basic supplies also has other serious effects upon
production. In the first place it is not possible to plan
as efficiently and economically as managements wish.


Secondly, the entire organization of production is dis-
organized and the inevitable result is that the costs of
the finished product are increased.
The organizations that 1 represent are most willing
lo pay their workers by results, and surely that is
evidence that we are not trying selfishly to retain all
the benefits of increased production. I must agree very
heartily with Mr. Gair that taxation should avoid the
extreme whereby it removes incentive. However, 1
disagree just as emphatically with his. suggestion that
manufacturers are trying to retain all the benefits from
increased production. Reduced costs mean better
management, better equipment, faster production and
better work. They also mean better rewards for
employees. It is only fair and equitable to share any
reduction of costs between employees, shareholders and
consumers, and in that way the whole community
benefits. The incentive to improve production by
installing modern machines and better layouts unfortu-
nately is nearly nullified in some instances by the
resistance of some workers to the use of such methods,
f appeal to our friends in the trade unions to try to
remove the darg in the interests of the country. We
are acutely conscious that our employees arc our ulti-
mate customers and that their real purchasing power
determines our individual prosperity. That underlies
all our reasoning.
I shall refer briefly to capital control and taxation.
I appeal to the Government not to ignore the enhanced
value of stocks and work in progress, which is costly to
finance and administer. Replacements of obsolete
machinery in essential industries are fundamental to
the maintenance of production. The cost of such
replacements is high and apparently it will go very
much higher yet. Moreover, it must come from profits.
Unless costs are taken from earnings, more share
capital must be raised and that will produce an infla-
tionary effect. On the subject of dividend limitation,
I point out that my company is suffering at present
from an overtime ban which was imposed as the result
of a refusal to concede a wage demand of 30s. a'week.
Had that demand been conceded, the cost would have
been greater than the amount that my company paid
in dividends and taxation last year. That fact shows
the the absurdity of the claim and indicates the infla-
tionary effect of that sort of pressure.
As Mr. Fell has said, this conference can be of great
value. It can be the starting point for useful action.
1 believe that the interests which are represented here
and other interests, can well confer with Commonwealth
Ministers and their advisers and place at their dis-
posal the real wealth of experience that has been gained
from their long-term day-to-day experience with
problems that we have been discussing. Such experi-
ence can be obtained from no other source. It will he
placed at the disposal of the Government willingly,
co-operatively and constructively.
Mr. SIIORTELL. —Mr. Monk, who spoke first on
behalf of the Australian Council of Trades Unions,
attempted, as did many other delegates, to keep the
discussion on an academic plane without descending to
parochial issues. However, it is necessary sometimes to
deal with parochial matters in order to explain specific
points of view.
I agree entirely with the comments that were made
by Mr. McGirr about the composition of this confer-
ence. Mrs. Brookes submitted an excellent case on
behalf of the National Council of Women. She must
have devoted a great deal of time and energy to its
compilation. But it was not the sort of case that
would have been submitted by a Labour women’s
organization.
Many inaccurate statements have been made at this
conference about the situation in industry. The
majority of workers in industry have their wages con-
trolled by the Arbitration Court. If the court does not
actually carry out wage-pegging, it goes very close to
doing so in connexion with most of the big industries.
It is very difficult to obtain increases of margins
through the court, even though there is no difficulty
about proving that margins are lagging and causing the
production effort of the workers to be retarded. Mar-
gins affect the production effort in an important way
which may not be apparent now but which certainly
will become apparent during the next five or six years,
which will be a vital period in Australia’s history.
When a lad of sixteen or seventeen years can take
advantage of what has been called the black marketing
of labour in order to earn as much as £lO a week, he
will think twice before he becomes indentured to a
trade, the margins for which are falling below the rela-
tive level of 1939. Mr. Browne must give serious con-
sideration to that circumstance.
I refer now to taxation. Although the basic wage
to-day is high in terms of figures, it is the minimum
wage that the Arbitration Court prescribes. The Go-
vernment takes about £22 10s. a year directly from a
married man with no children when he is on the basic
wage. Therefore, that man’s income is reduced below
the basic wage level. If he works overtime, he is ele-
vated to a higher taxation group and is taxed very
heavily. Such factors must be taken into account when
we consider incentive schemes.
Mis-statements have been made during this discussion
about the 40-hour week. Ido not think that employees
in the sugar industry, with which I am associated,
work a 40-hour week. In fact, they work almost a
60-hour week. Anybody who is acquainted with the
manufacturing industries must be aware that many
men have two jobs. I know of many employees in the
sugar'industry who work a permanent night shift and
do other work during the daylight hours. I repeat
that workers are working a 50-hour or 60-hour week.
Perhaps they are receiving penalty rates, but what is
wrong with that? Surety nobody will suggest that
companies cannot afford to pay such rates.
Mot sufficient consideration is given to the point of
view of the workers in relation to production. Mot-
withstanding all the phrases about employer-employee
co-operation, the truth is that workers who try to co-
operate in the conduct of the industries in which they
are employed find that their help is not wanted. The
only sorf of co-operation that the employers want is
co-operation in banning strikes and agreeing to un-
limited overtime work. They also seek the co-opera-
tion of the workers in not pressing for increased wages.
They want men to follow the procedure of applying to
the Arbitration Court, and everybody knows that, after
filing a log of claims, a union must wait for eighteen
months or two years to have its application heard.
Any worker who tries to tell the employers of ways
in which industry can be conducted more efficiently is
ignored. They tell us that such matters are not our
responsibility.
Great prominence has been given during the last
three months to the shortage of refined sugar in Mew
South Wales. The story given to the newspapers by the
company is that the shortage is due to the lack of coal.
The implication is that the miners are not doing their
job, but everybody knows that the miners have been
making production records during the last three
months. Why is there a shortage of coal? Twenty
years ago in Mew South Wales there were about 40
vessels known as “60 milers ”, which were engaged
exclusively in the transport of coal from Newcastle
to Sydney. There are not more than five such colliers


to-day. As the vessels have outlived their usefulness
or have sunk along the coast, no attempt has been
made to replace them. The result is that, whenever
we have bad weather for two or three days on the
coast, the sugar refinery at Pyrmont is forced to close
down or to curtail operations because of the lack of
coal. That situation is beyond the control of the
unions. Conferences will not alter the situation until
the shortage of colliers is rectified.
The coal-handling facilities at Pyrmont are the same
to-day as they w r ere 40 years ago. They have not been
improved in any way. Therefore, when the valuable
collier tonnage comes into Pyrmont, it can be discharged
only at the same rate as applied 40 years ago. . The
slow turn-round of the colliers can be expedited only
by installing up-to-date coal-handling plant. The
workers have absolutely no say in relation to the
disability, which retards production. Numerous other
•instances of such backward conditions in relation to
the sugar industry could be cited, and I am sure that
there must be hundreds of such disabilities throughout
all industries.
No advance on the old horse-and-dray system has been
made at Pyrmont during the past 40 years. Sugar is
unloaded into 5-ton motor lorries, but the weighbridges
at Pyrmont will not accommodate such vehicles. The
result is that, instead of loading and moving over the
weighbridge at the wharf to the storage shed, they have
to proceed by a roundabout route through the streets to
weighbridges that will accommodate them and then
return to the storage place. This, of course, is more time-
wasting than the old horse-and-dray system. Recently,
they started to install a new weighbridge for motor
lorries, but no effort is being made to complete the job
quickly. When a boiler broke down, three shifts were
worked in order to repair it, with the result that a job
which normally would have taken about six weeks was
completed in about one week. That was done with the
co-operation of the workers. The job was rushed
because the breakdown affected production. But no
attempt has been made to expedite work on the weigh-
bridge, although that job is essential to the efficient
handling of cargo. The work may take three or four
months to complete. That sort of inefficiency is
prevalent in industry to-day.
1 listened attentively to Mr. Webster, who made a
valuable contribution to the discussion. He talked
about morning and afternoon tea for workers. This
matter was examined thoroughly during the war, and
it w'as proved conclusively that a person who was
provided with morning and afternoon tea was a more
efficient worker than he would otherwise be. That
fact, incidentally, was not determined by the workers
themselves. It was established scientifically. Mr.
Webster complained of the necessity for stopping
machinery while men had morning or afternoon tea.
It should be a simple problem to devise a system that
would obviate such stoppages. Perhaps tea could be
served to the men on the job.
Mr. WEBSTER.—We need the moral support of the
Australian Council of Trade Unions.
Mr. SHORTELL.—You may get it if you sincerely
try to eo-operate. We have been trying for twelve
years to get a canteen in our industry so that the
men can obtain hot meals, but so far w r e have met with
no success. At present, a man who works a sixteen-hour
shift is handed a tin of bully beef and a couple of
biscuits and is charged the full retail price for them.
Yet employers talk about co-operation and the need for
greater production! How can they expect to increase
production in those circumstances?
It is the Prime Minister’s job to tackle these problems.
During the war years some excellent sections of the
Commonwealth Public Service engaged on such tasks.
Perhaps some of the 10,000 officers that the Government
contemplates dismissing could be usefully employed
in providing for the welfare of workers.
Mr. Browne referred to Mr. Monk’s statements about
the recent basic wage increase. It is a fact that the
additional 13s. a week was granted in order to cover
cost increases that had occurred during the previous
three months. In other words, prices had risen before
the increase was granted. But the rise will be used by
all and sundry to justify further price increases, thus
accentuating the inflationary trend.
Our discussion was not assisted by the quotation of a
small portion of the 40-hour week judgment. We could
produce extracts from the judgment to give strong
support to our contention that the reduction of working
hours was granted as the result of the increased
productivity of Australian industries which resulted
from the efficiency of the workers.
Previous speakers have tried to dodge the major
issues that are involved in a proper consideration of
the subject of inflation. Nobody has mentioned man-
power controls directly, but several delegates have
discussed means of imposing such controls. The subject
of wage-pegging has been treated in the same evasive
manner. Mr. Browne has suggested the pegging of
wages by indirect methods. We shall not get anywhere
if we dodge important issues and try to disguise
unpalatable ideas with fancy phrases.
It would be far better to use the appropriate word.
We could brawl over it and break up the conference.
We could go away and think about it and decide
whether we had anything upon it to put before a
subsequent conference. That would be better than
pulling one another’s legs.
Mr. Browne suggested that a conference of arbitra-
tion authorities should be held for the purpose of
limiting wages.
Mr. BROWNE.—Co-ordinating them.
Mr. SHORTELL.—You can have it any way you
like. . That would be an indirect means of pegging
wages. It would mean that the arbitration authorities
would meet together and agree, say, that there should be
no more than a ss. increase. Then there would be no
cases of one conciliation commissioner giving a 10s.
increase and another an increase of 17s. 6d.
Mr. Browne said that a demand was made upon his
company for an increase of 30s. a week and that because
the demand was not met a ban was imposed upon
overtime. How did that demand come to be made
upon his company ? The men got a 10s. a week increase
from one of the members of his association under the
threat that if they did not get it the member would lose
his labour. He was so keen to keep his profits up that
he gave in, and the minute after he gave in other
members of the association were approached and asked
for increases. The workers in the big industries, whom
I represent, are not favorably situated in that regard.
Every time you people grant an increase of that nature,
you put us further behind the rest of the field. You are
making the position of my workers worse than it was.
Mr. Browne shakes his head, but that is a fact, whether
he likes it or not.
This conference agreed unanimously to the admission
of the press, which has a great responsibility in con-
nexion with the matters that we are discussing
to-day. The press could do a far better job than it is
doing now in regard to the coal-mining industry. It is
silent about the wonderful job that the coal-miners are
doing on the northern coal-fields, but it makes front-
page news of every silly stoppage. Let there be some
little hostility between employers and employees on
the coal-fields and the Herald will have it on its front
page for three or four days in order to give as much


adverse publicity to the coal-miners as it can. The
time has come, Mr. Prime Minister, when you must say
to the press, that you want a better deal from them in
regard to the problems with which Australia is faced.
You will not be able to deal with them if the press
continues to hinder you in the way in which it is
hindering you to-day.
The problem of incentive payments has been a very
controversial issue as far as the Australian Council for
Trades Unions is concerned. When you wore in opposi-
tion and since you have been in power, Mr. Prime
Minister, you have expressed your belief in incentive
payments. Now you have the greatest opportunity of a
lifetime to give us some proof of your sincerity in
regard to this matter. There has been a great deal of
talk in the press about the sale of Amalgamated Wire-
less (Australas'a) Limited shares. Ulterior motives
have been imputed to you. Some people have said that
if you do not get anything out of the sale, at least your
friends will do so.
Mr. MENZIES.—There is plenty of dirty talk
everywhere.
Mr. SHORTELL.—To kill that talk, 1 suggest that
you make those shares available to the workers in the
A.W.A. factory at par price. If you do that, those
workers will show the rest of the Australian workers
what they can do when they are working in their own
industry. If they are not able to pay cash for the
shares; let them buy them under some form of hire
purchase agreement. They will be able to pay for them
out of their increased earnings as the weeks go by. I
put that suggestion forward sincerely. You have the
opportunity of a lifetime to show that to give workers a
greater share of responsibility for the running of their
industry will produce results. If it be proved that that
can be done successfully in one industry, then our
friends on the other side of the table will be only too
pleased to follow' that example and to give shares in
their companies to their workers if they know that by
do : ng so production will be increased. Wo have been
told that increased production is required to halt
inflation. Therefore, I hope that my suggestion will
receive serious consideration. If you cannot make the
w'hole of those shares available to the workers in
Amalgamated Wireless (Australasia) Limited then
make at least a fair parcel of them available.
Mrs. KUMM. —During the last few months I have
been in touch with hundreds of women in four States.
All of them are extremely concerned about the infla-
tionary problem, which, as other speakers have said,
does affect the home. In order to combat inflation, the
women of this country are prepared to accept priva-
tions through increased taxes. We believe that essential
services must be maintained and we agree that, in
order to aclreve that objective, unessential goods should
be subjected to a high rate of sales tax. In the discus-
sions relating to what are luxuries or unessential goods,
women must have a voice. One speaker has said that
washing machines and electric cleaners are necessities.
During the last war, corsets were almost unprocurable,
but a corset is just as much a necessity for a woman as a
collar and tie is for a man. The women believe that the
Australian £1 should be revalued, despite the advice that
the Commonwealth has received from its economists.
The ordinary housewife works about 72 hours a week.
Indolence, neglect or procrastination in the home make
for an unhappy household. In the national sphere, they
make for an unhappy nation. We need increased pro-
duction. If obsolete machinery is impeding that
increase then it is time that we did away with it.
Mr. HEATH.—Personally I take a very grave view
of the present inflationary position. During a long
residence abroad I have had some experience of both
war and inflation. On one occasion I discussed the
problem with Dr. Schaeht, the man who rehabilitated
the German currency when it went awry, and reached
the stage at which the postage fee on an ordinary letter
was about 2,000,000 marks. I asked him to tell me the
first step he took and he replied that it was to close the
parliament. He humorously commented that whilst the
parliament was on one occasion discussing why the
exchange rate was say 1,000,000 marks to the £1
sterling, it rose to 2,000,000 marks. 1, of course,
disagreed with what he said, but having here heard the
various political views that have been expressed at this
conference, I reserve the right to look into that decision
again.
1 support Mr. Browne's suggestion that the Arbitra-
tion Court should reconsider the 40-hour week, as they
themselves indicated might have to be necessary.
At this conference I have heard it said time and time
again that this government or that government states
that some change is going to cost it so much money. I
respectfully • point out such is not the case as it costs
the government nothing, as the government can only
get it from the people, that is, you and me. The burden
is borne by every ind.vidual in the community from the
Brime Minister down to the office boy, and it is only
from the people that the governments can get it.
As the Bishop of Newcastle has said, people are
bewildered at the present trend of events. I wish to
avoid repetition but as I look at it, it is something like
this. A few years ago we emerged from a sad and
terrible war. Anybody who has been in Europe since
the end of the war or who was there during the war
realizes what a shocking calamity it was. When,
happily, hostilities ceased, every decent thinking person
throughout the world said, “ Let us have peace; let us
restore; let us comfort the suffering; let us heal; and
above all let us expand ”. We set about doing that in
a right willing way and I think it is only fair to say
that, thanks to the generosity of the United States and
the general co-operation through the w r orld, a grand
job was done. This is all proceeding, with a course set
to that end, when suddenly on the 18th June, 1950, war
breaks out In Korea. It is true there had been tensions,
doubts and misgivings, but this incident in Korea
brought us all to the grim realization that we had to
change direction. If 1 know anything about the inter-
national situation the order was then imperative and
was given, “ turn about ”, and from that moment we
had to and still have to re-organize ourselves.
What is our problem? The late Lord Stamp,
formerly Sir Josiah Stamp, a great English economist
and a greater businessman, said that the wealth of a
nation, its production, activity and resources, could be
summed up in the word “ heap ”. It was the heap of
goods and services that any nation by its energy and
application and from its resources built up, on which
they lived. The basic fact as far as Australia is con-
cerned is that this heap is not big enough. Whatever we
may think of social security, what is our absolute neces-
sity at the moment is national salvation as without it
there can be no social security. To the extent, therefore,
that the heap we make available, whether for payment
of social security services or for defence or for living,
that and that alone we will have, and that lies in our
own hands.
It is quite idle to assume that inflation or price
increases will stop now, because the impetus is too great
to allow that to happen and whatever we do to correct it
will take time. I had the opportunity of observing the
operation of the 40-hour week in France from its
inception in 1935 until almost the outbreak of the war
and I saw France die under it. I defy any one to
contradict this. We Australians must approach this
as a team. We are a team and we must act together.
I would quote the writings of another as summing this


up, namely: “ That the basic factor in our lives is not
really how much we can improve our standard of living,
but how first of all, in these critical hours, we can begin
to live together without sorrow, conflict and torment
The cause of this disturbance so far as the outside is
concerned is due to the action of a gentleman with a
long moustache who is far away from us, but here in
Australia the fault lies with us. It is useless recrimin-
ating ; it is useless going over the old bad road. As the
Prime Alinister said, we are all responsible and we can
only get out of it by pulling together.
As to methods, two have been mentioned that can be
adopted to drain off surplus purchasing power. I
reluctantly agree that such a draining off is necessary,
subject to the proviso that the swamp we drain will be
improved in the way in which we want it to be improved
and that the drainage from there will not find its way
into another swamp which will cause not less but more
trouble.
'1 here is keen competition for labour in this country.
1 agree that labour has every right to sell its services on
the market to the highest bidder. That is the law of
supply and demand, and if it claims that right then it
has no right to endeavour to pin anything else down
and neither has it any right to insist that this or that
condition must not be disturbed. I have already
mentioned the 40-hour -week.
1 had intended to say something about migration, but
the Alinister more than fully covered the points I had
in mind. Housing is one of the greatest social problems
with which we are faced, and as has been repeatedly
pointed out here, it is a vital factor in migration and the
natural increase of our population. Timber that can
bo used for building houses is lying unused in the
country mill yards owing to the lack of transport and
shipping. This applies to both rail, road and sea
transport. Air. Shortell has made much of the shortage
of modern equipment and particularly stressed ships
and handling appliances. I have no knowledge of
shipping but I have some knowledge of the handling of
timber in the Port of Sydney and I admit fully and
freely that a shortage of lighters in the Port of Sydney
has something to do with the slow turn-round of ships
there, but where do you get the capital equipment and
the material? I ask Mr. Shortell where, when and how
we can get lighters built. It may interest him to know
that before the war a lighter cost £I,OOO, but a few
weeks ago we let a contract for the building of six
lighters at £5,500 each, subject to the usual rise and fall
clauses. We are promised delivery of one within twelve
months and goodness knows when we shall get delivery
of the others, and many more than six are required.
The interests I represent oppose price control for
various reasons, and I add a reason that has not been
made apparent here. It is that they are not being
enforced. In my industry and many others that I
know of, the only people that are being controlled and
are obeying the law are those who are consenting to do
so. In my own particular industry, nothing short of a
royal commission would reveal what is going on in rela-
tion to the supply of building materials and I say this
covers the Forestry Commission of New South Wales
and every phase of the winning of timber. If controls
are to be re-introduced, it would be necessary to take
similar measures to those which applied during the war.
I had some experience of the prohibition racket in
America and the only cure that I could ever see would
have been the impossible one of having a policeman in
every house and I say that price control in peace-time
is only possible if one could have those policemen.
If it could be shown that profits are excessive, my
chamber will co-operate with any government in taking
action in relation to such profits. Much nonsense has
been and is being talked on this subject. Limitation of
dividends is also mentioned. On what basis will anv
government limit dividends? If the purchasing value
of money has fallen, it has fallen whether it be paid in
the form of a dividend or a wage. I should agree with
the imposition of a tax on excess profits if somebody
cun define what excess profits are, and no satisfactory
definition has ever been available. How is the great
question of replacement of capital equipment and
assessment of excess profits to be calculated on the basis
of a sub-standard pound. However, a Commonwealth
Taxation Committee has been examining this question
and from complete evidence submitted to that com-
mittee, you might, Mr. Prime Alinister, be guided in
arriving at a reasonable formula to deal with the prob-
lem, but I have my doubts.
Mr. Shortell has argued that the 40-hour week is a
nominal one only and gave instances of men working
excessive hours. lie also made some remarks complain-
ing about employers in their competition for labour
paying more than award rates, but here I got lost in his
argument and could not follow him. Reverting to over-
time, 1 thought it was argued before the Arbitration
Court that anything more than 10 hours a week was too
fatiguing for employees to work. I have examined
certain overtime figures relating to various employees
on the waterfront. Here are the examples.
The ordinary or basic wage rate wages received by
employee No. 1 for the year ended 30th June, 1951,
amounted to £BO2 and his overtime amounted to £355.
1 should correct that statement by saying that the
employee was paid £1 above the ordinary award rate for
his calling.
The ordinary earnings of No. 2 employee at his award
rate plus the £1 per week, were also £BO2 and his over-
time amounted to £324.
The ordinary earnings of No. 3 employee were £BO2
and his overtime amounted to £258.
In a further case the ordinary pay was £731 and the
overtime was £284.
Mr. MONK.—Where are these men employed?
Mr. HEATH.—On the waterfront. I have no objec-
tion to payments such as these, but I think it utterly
wrong that men should be working long and fatiguing
hours. Here is another case where a man in order to
help us get a ship away worked 86 hours. His ordinary
pay for 40 hours would have been £l4 9s. His total pay
for the 86 hours, including ordinary pay, was £SO 10s.,
to which of course, naturally meal money was added. I
respectfully suggest that these things make no contribu-
tion to a reduced cost structure and only aggravate it.
Having had some international experience, I view the
situation in Australia as one that , calls for a complete
lack of recrimination and going back over old sores and
that we should all co-operate in the way that you, Mr.
Prime Minister, have asked of us.
Mr. Webster has just reminded me that I wished to
say something in regard to the initial depreciation
allowances of 40 per cent. I respectfully point out
that that figure was written into the Income Tax
Assessment Act and was to apply until 30th June, 1952.
Many commitments have been entered into on the basis
of that provision and many contracts made. The main
commitments are in regard to capital equipment which
will increase efficiency. I think that one of the argu-
ments in the court on the occasions of the hearing of the
40-hour week and the basic wage, and with which I
agreed, was that any advantage arising from the
modernization of plant and equipment should not fall
entirely in favour of the employer and that employees
should benefit either in the reduction of hours or other
advantages from that modernization.
I suggest that, following the court’s judgment, there
was a large and proper movement towards moderniza-
tion and I further suggest that at least for the years


already laid down in the Act the present position should
not be disturbed because companies are now-working on
the basis of their equipment being subject to this
depreciation. I know there is another side to it, namely
that if the depreciation has been or is taken when
the rate of taxation is say 6s. in the £l, there may be a
disadvantage because the depreciation has been taken
and then not being able to get it when this rate increases.
I agree with Mr. Fell and with the representatives
of the churches that we have to pull together. There is
no other way out. I suggest that at the earliest possible
moment, you, sir, should call the respective people con-
cerned together in order to examine the questions that
have been raised here.
I should have mentioned that over an industrial life
of 30 years I have always believed that the basic wage
was not calculated in a safe and sound manner from the
point of view of the worker because I have never been
able to find a given moment of time when it had
stability. Anything without stability is not sound. It
has been said that belief is necessary, as is knowledge.
The main necessity in dealing with the problems that
confront us is wisdom, and surely there is amongst us
sufficient wisdom to forget our political dislikes and
deal with actual conditions. May I perhaps be per-
mitted to give the words of an old song that we used in
our “ rugger ” days, even if, Mr. Prime Minister, they
do not appeal to you because of the peculiar game you
play in Victoria. They were—
On the ball, on the ball
Come forwards, three-quarters and all.
Whilst sticking together
We’ll play on the leather
And shout as we win
On the ball.
The fact remains that if we do not act now tve will be
forced to act later and the axiom is still true, if we do
not hang together we shall hang separately.
Dr. RYAN.—I should like to express to the Prime
Minister the thanks of the Catholic Church for his
invitation to send a representative to this conference. T
should like to assure him and, through him, the people
of Australia, that the Catholic Church is prepared to do
everything in her power to assist in dealing with this
crisis which is affecting every section of the community.
In various social justice statements which have already
been published the Church has put forward a number
of positive proposals, many of which have been brought
forward to-day.
The problem of inflation will test the moral stamina
of our citizens as never before and will determine, not
merely whether high living standards are to be
preserved, but whether we deserve to have them
preserved. The first consideration in dealing with a
bush fire is to put it out. The fun and games of
apportioning blame can begin after the danger has
passed.
In a conference of this kind, much depends on the
spirit in which the problem is approached. This con-
ference is a test of the sincerity and patriotism of all
representatives. The organizations represented here,
having direct influence on the country’s economy, can
show their sincerity and patriotism, not by making
demands on other sections of the community—which is
easy and futile—but by stating what sacrifices they,
themselves, are prepared to make in order to save
Australia. This conference has been called for a
'• frank ” discussion of the problem. But has it been
frank, in the sense of being wholly honest and sincere?
I do not know. I have noticed that while many people
have promised co-operation with the Commonwealth
Government they have put forward remarkably good
arguments against any proposals which would have
adversely affected them and have put forward good
arguments to support proposals which, while being of
advantage to them, would weigh more heavily on
others. These arguments sounded impressive. Perhaps
they were sound. I*do not know. But by temperament
and training, I suspect arguments which fit in rather
too closely with one’s personal interests and feelings.
Assuming, for instance, that revaluation of the £1
is a desirable anti-inflationary measure, would graziers,
primary producers and others who, for a time, would be
adversely affected, be prepared to support such action
as their contribution to the solution of the problem ?
The Government’s economists have advised against
revaluation, but some* highly-qualified men are in
favour of it.
Are the trade unions prepared to do their part in
stepping up production as a vital contribution to the
safety of the nation and the safeguarding of living
standards of Australian workers ? Increased production
means more work. Are the unions prepared to imple-
ment the policy of the Australian Council of Trade
Fnions and eliminate loafing on the job? I do not
mean to say that loafing takes places throughout
industry. I do not mean idleness enforced through
blackouts and shortages. I refer to the habit of doing
as little as possible over as long a period as possible
and demanding as much as possible for it. The
workers who adopt this attitude have no reason to be
surprised if their wages decrease in value. Every hour
wasted takes value out of the pay envelope. Are the
trade unions willing to stamp out Communist intrigue
and sabotage in the shape of irresponsible stoppages,
rolling strikes, bans on overtime, go-slow policies,
ostensibly introduced for industrial reasons, but in
reality for the purpose of destroying the living
standards of the workers and wrecking the economy in
the interests of a foreign despotism bent on world
conquest? The Communists are to blame for a very
big percentage of wreckage and sabotage in industry
and this is part of an organized plan which is linked
up with military aggression abroad.
In passing, let me state that before taking my seat
at this conference I received a letter from a body
calling itself the “ Anti-Conscription Council of
Victoria ”, urging a suspension of the military call-up
to increase Australia’s productive capacity.
Knowing the affiliations of people prominent in this
body, and their close association with the spurious
Communist Peace Front, I suspect that their real
objective is to disarm and demoralize Australia and
leave her helpless in the face of red aggression, rather
than to increase production.
Apparently the authors of the letter regarded
delegates to this conference as fools or traitors. If so,
they have misjudged them.
Are employers prepared to treat their employees
not as hands hut as human beings ? A satisfactory pay
envelope is not the only essential requirement in secur-
ing the co-operation of the workers. Are employers
prepared to give prompt and sympathetic consideration
to the requests of genuine Labour leaders, instead of
fighting them tooth and nail and granting only such
concessions as are forced upon them hy the ruling of the
courts or by direct action, thereby playing into the
hands of the Communist wreckers? Are they willing
to give the worker a personal stake in industry by
sharing without in any way interfering with
present conditions? In this connexion I think that
the Government should give serious consideration to
Mr. Shortell’s proposal concerning Amalgamated
Wireless (Australasia) Limited.
Are manufacturers prepared to accept responsibility
for increased efficiency necessitating more streamlined
methods of production and distribution which would


be necessary say, as a result of a drastic downward
revision of the tariff? Would they be prepared, when
there is an increase in wages, to pass on to the consumer
no greater increase in prices than that required to
cover the increase in the cost of labour and raw
materials? Are they prepared to resist the temptation
to increase profits by making the consumer pay out of
all proportion to what might be justified as a result of
a given wage increase? Arc business interests pre-
pared to accept the pegging of prices and profits and
are the unions prepared to accept the pegging of
wages in a manner that will ensure that wages are
ahead of prices? It seems to me, however, that such
negative measures can do no more than stall off the
evil day. Positive measures are required as a long-
range policy.
The Government has announced its intention to dis-
miss 10,000 public servants and transfer them to indus-
try. That is to the good, provided that they are really
surplus and provided that the transfer is effected in a
manner which will result in a minimum of hardship to
the men and their families. The Prime Minister has
also mentioned the establishment of controls over
a wide field. It would be farcical to dismiss 10,000
public servants and then employ an extra 20,000 regu-
lation-happy bureaucrats to push people around. If
controls must be introduced then let them be adminis-
tered by a much reduced Public Service and a minimum
of red tape.
Whether the measures suggested, singly or collec-
tively, would meet the situation, I am not competent
to judge. I mention them only as examples of what
might be imposed on various sections of the com-
munity. It seems obvious that some such drastic mea-
sures will have to be taken if the economy is not to
collapse. The taking of such measures will mean con-
siderable sacrifice by all. The success of any plan will
depend on the willingness of all sections to play their
part and make the required sacrifices. In other words,
the real problem is not economic but moral: a test
of genuineness, and unselfishness of moral stamina
and worth on the part of all sections of the community
and of the Government itself.
In the last analysis, it will be the duty of the Com-
monwealth Government, in conjunction with the States,
to make plans and take whatever steps are necessary
to overcome the crisis. It will be the duty of the
Government to see to it that, as far as is humanly
possible, the burden which must be borne by all, shall
be justly and fairly distributed. I do not say
“ equally ”: you cannot impose “ equal ” burdens on all
sections of the people because they are not all equally
able to hear it. Equality is not to be identified with
justice. The major portion of the burden should be
borne by those best able to bear it. The burden should
not be allowed to weigh too heavily on the shoulders
of the poor, on the fathers of large families, on the
wage-earner with family responsibilities. It seems
to me that young unmarried people to-day could bear
a considerable extra burden of taxation, for they have
plenty of spending money and in most cases, few
responsibilities. Least of all should the burden be
allowed to weigh on the shoulders of pensioners and
others who are already suffering cruelly as the result
of inflation. If there is to be any exception in the
cutting down of government expenditure, it should
be hero. The needy must be relieved, even if it means
greater expense to people in more comfortable
circumstances.
The yardstick to be used in apportioning the burdens
to be borne by all should not be economic expediency—
I sometimes think economists are not human—but the
justice and charity of Christ.
Previous speakers have spoken of the necessity of
taking into account the “ psychological factors ”, or
the “human element”, which i.s a secularized and
emasculated version of the same thing.
Justice: lo each his due. There is considerable
anti-inflationary wisdom in the Divine Commandment:
“ Thou shalt not steal ”. The worker who wastes his
employer’s time, the employer who cheats hi.s workers
of their full due and overcharges for his products,
the middle man who defrauds the producer and charges
exorbitant prices to the con-timer, the government
which bows to the pressure of vested interests and
neglects its duty to the whole community and, particu-
larly the poor, are all violating that commandment—
and increasing inflation, to speak of one evil
consequence only.
The charity of Christ: The self-sacrificing service
of our fellow men as part of our duty to God; as a
factual demonstration of our love of Him, who is the
Source and the Goal of all that is good, the Lord and
Father of all.
It seems to me that what this country needs is not
so much education in economics as education in the
requirements of the Ten Commandments and the
Sermon on the Mount.
The fathers of our Australian Commonwealth
humbly and realistically base their hopes for the future
of Australia on the blessing of God. But entrenched
selfishness, rampant greed, suspicion and hatred, will
bring not a blessing but a curse —and the destruction of
Australia.
While I have no reason to doubt the sincerity of
delegates to this conference, 1 am afraid that the
selfishness which is apparent in the community will
prevent it from achieving very much. Nevertheless,
I think that the conference has accomplished something
of value by bringing a good cross-section of the com-
munity face to face with a problem which concerns
all. I notice, however, that the Government has not
committed itself to take the slightest notice of any
advice from the conference. Whether that advice is
worth taking, I am not competent to judge, but I do
think that serious consideration should be given to it.
In conclusion, I believe that in dealing with inflation,
as in dealing with anything else, we must make good
in practice, as well as in theory, our claim to be a
Christian country.
Mr. MENZTES. —Would any one else present care
to add something?
Mr. F. A. JOHNSTON.—I represent the Australian
Employers Federation. One aspect of our economy
which, in my opinion, has not received sufficient
emphasis is the terrible effect of the current inflation
upon the commodities listed in the “ C ” series index
upon which the whole basic wage structure rests. If
the present system of making quarterly adjustments in
the basic wage continues, we might be confronted before
long with a further increase of 12s. fid. a week. How-
ever, even if the increase is only one of 4s. or 55., it will
be enough to disorganize almost completely the whole
economic structure upon which every one depends.
Most people would welcome a personal investigation
by a special committee of Cabinet with representatives
of the trade union movement and of employers’ organi-
zations of the present economic situation in order to
ascertain whether everything possible is being done to
increase the production of coal. After all, our whole
economy is dependent upon an adequate supply of coal.
If it is not possible to get more coal the Government
should consider importing it in order to stimulate the
production of other basic commodities that are in
such short supply. Another matter to which the


Government should direct special attention is the very
serious increase of the price of foodstuffs, some of
which is due, undoubtedly, to seasonal shortages. T
shall not occupy the time of the conference at any
length at this stage, but I suggest that Mr. Fell’s idea
of establishing special committees under the chairman-
ship of responsible economists is of paramount
importance. A conference such as this is not fitted
to explore such matters.
Finally, I think that in certain industries we must
promote the idea of the production of utility goods,
which would assist to alleviate the pressure on the
“0 ” series index. After all, all other considerations
are merely ancillary to that problem.
Mr. MENZlES.—Because of the views that have
been expressed and the course that the conference has
taken, 1 feel it incumbent upon me as chairman of the
conference and as leader of the Commonwealth Govern-
ment to make a considered resume of the views that
you have expressed. For that purpose I propose, with
your concurrence, that the conference should adjourn
until 8.30 p.m.
{Conference adjourned at 6.50 p.m.)
Mr. MEUZIES.—What I should like to say to you
in my concluding remarks falls into three parts. Tn
the first, I want to offer some general observations. In
the second, I shall make a few comments on certain
points that have arisen in the discussion which lend
themselves to a little further statement at this time.
Tn the third, I want to say somehing about the pro-
gramme of the Commonwealth Government, which 1
do not profess to regard as being complete at this
stage but about which I propose to say something
before we disperse.
This conference was not designed, as I think you all
realize, to produce some social patent medicine. I.
for one, did not anticipate that, as a result of the
gathering together of a group of people widely repre-
sentative of all sections of the community, we should
solve our problems out of hand. I wish our problems
were as easy of solution as that. But I did believe—
and I am in no sense disappointed—that we should
have a very valuable pooling of ideas and that many
of us would have an opportunity that does not occur
every day to hear the point of view of somebody else.
I am bound to say that the conference has shown a fine
disposition to listen to the views of others. T have
been greatly assisted by the discussion.
I am certain that those who represent what are,
unfortunately, sometimes regarded as contending
interests in Australia, have heard each other with
advantage. It is wise that we should get to know the
point of view and the background of people who have
great responsibilities in such matters. The conference
has been remarkably successful, not because it has
answered the problem, but because it has assisted all
of us to answer that portion of the problem for which
we have responsibility.
I am delighted that we have had the presence of
representatives of the churches at the conference. I
have the firm belief that we do an ill service to our
country by setting up artificial distinctions between the
work of the churches, the work of our parliaments, the
work of trade unions and the work of great employing
bodies. The great issues of modern times are becoming
more and more moral issues. I think it was Father
Ryan who said that the purpose of the conference could
be summarized by saying that we must observe the
injunction, “ Thou shalt not steal ”. How true that is!
Inflation is stealing. There may be no accused in the
dock, but the crime is the crime of theft. Inflation
steals from everybody. ,
There may be a few clever people who can prof
from inflation, but decent people tend to suffer very
badly from it. It is the unseen theft that counts. The
simple truth is that the undue taking of profits the
exploiting of the public, and going slow on the job arc
forms of theft however they may be dignified by long-
winded terms. They are simple dishonesty. We are
indebted to the distinguished representatives of the
church who have attended this conference for having
recalled our minds to the high nature of the problem
that we have been considering.
This, as I have said, is not a party political problem
and 1 do not propose to say anything of a party politi-
cal kind. I shall not even deal with any party politi-
cal argument that may have been advanced, and I am
happy to say that there have been very few of them.
It might be very easy on a problem of this kind for one
government, or two, three, four or five governments to
be destroyed, but, if the only reward for the destruction
was that Australia should still be destroyed, we should
be no further forward.
I, like you, ladies and gentlemen, am an Australian.
I hope that I shall always be found to prefer the
interests of my country to my own interests. If wc
approach this problem and every remedy or partial
remedy in that spirit we shall go a long way. I believe
that, if the complete record of this conference )<•
printed and made available widely in Australia, it will
be a great source of education to the public and will
enable many thousands of Australians to concentrate
their minds upon the real questions at issue with ;
desire to help their country at this time. For that
reason I am particularly indebted to the press for th
extensive reports of the conference with which they
have provided the people. Those reports will be o f
immense value in making known the causes of the
trouble and the various aspects of the various possible
answers to it.
We may say with pride that, though we may fre-
quently go wrong in ignorance, we have never yet
been faced with a problem of great magnitude which
we began to understand clearly without having faced
it and overcome it. What we must say around this
table is that we accept our responsibilities, remember-
ing that the problem will not be solved if the Com-
monwealth Government, the trade union movement, or
any other group alone accepts its responsibilities.
Only by pooling all our efforts can we solve the
problem, and, to the extent to which any one of us
contracts out of the responsibility, so will the respon-
sibility rest more greviously on the others. This is
a clear case for a joint effort.
I shall now make a few particular comments. I
have made extensive notes during the course of this
discussion, but I shall not engage in the wearisome
pastime of endeavouring to say something about every
point that has been raised. However, certain matters
require a little statement additional to what has been
said about them so far.
One representative said that we should perhaps
scrutinize our conception of defence having regard to
the fact that defence is so large an inflationary element
in the present situation. It must be so for the reasons
that I have already mentioned. The Commonwealth
Government, of course, has supreme responsibility for
defence policy and we have not been vague in our
minds, or with the public for that matter, in dealing
with that responsibility. I have on several occasions
stated categorically what is involved, in terms of army,
navy, air force and equipment, in making the country
ready for defence.
There may be those who do not agree with the
estimate that we have made of the danger of war.
nevertheless I say to you with all humility, but with


firmness, that we must be the best judges of the quality
and extent of that danger. Nobody else can possibly
have access to all those sources of information which
enable such a judgment to be formed. Grievous though
the fact may be, I believe that the danger of war in this
world to-day is as imminent as any danger that wt
have faced, short of actual war, in our life-times.
We must remember that, in preparing our section of
a world system of defence, we must consider, not only
soldiers, uniforms, munitions of war and other such
matters, but also food, the maintenance of a civil
population, and economic stability. I have at no
time put forward a narrow interpretation of defence
preparations, and we have all those things in mind.
They are under active discussion between ourselves
and those who stand with us in this world. However,
important though food, the civil economy and other
matters may be, the fact is that wars are won by
soldiers, sailors and airmen. If the fighting men are
defeated in the field, a war is lost.
We do not entertain any conception of a war effort
that would convert Australia into a kind of benevolent
neutral. We have, and we must continue to have, great
actual fighting responsibilities. Therefore, the defence
programme, as something that is unrelated to civil
activities, must be large and growing. To the extent to
which it is large and growing, to just that extent will
there be a subtraction from what would otherwise he
our civil production, and to that extent our efforts to
avoid inflationary pressure on what is left become all
the more necessary.
The Premier of Victoria said something that i
thought might well bo used as a national slogan at this
time. He said that if we all did a little better in our
own jobs, all would he well. That is remarkably true.
In the greatest periods of productive expansion in the
history of this country, the increase per annum prob-
ably was not more than of the order of from 3 per cent,
to 8 per cent. I doubt whether you could find very many
people in Australia who could not put forward 10 per
cent, more effort without suffering any injury in the
process. If we all did that, we should in one year have
a degree of expansion of productive effort without
parallel in the history of Australia.
I turn from those matters of immense national
significance to look at one or two matters of detail
which have cropped up. I shall take them in chrono-
logical order. One of the minor means of dealing with
the inflationary pressure is the discouragement of
spending by methods of deferred payment, hire pur-
chase, and the like. 1 do not want any one to suppose
for a moment that we have in mind some sadistic idea
of wiping out hire purchase or deferred payment.
What we seek to do is to make it selective —to make it
have a bearing upon this problem and upon the problem
ot concentrating labour and resources upon vital indus-
tries. That is what is being done in the United States
of America and in other countries.
Dealing with that matter, somebody said that the
Commonwealth Bank was the worst offender. Although
I am the Prime Minister of this country, I do not mind
having a crack at the Commonwealth Bank myself if
opportunity offers, but I must say that I was a little
horrified to hear it said that the Commonwealth Bank
was the worst offender in this connexion, because, in
terms of money, the Industrial Finance Department of
the Commonwealth Bank undoubtedly has large engage-
ments in hire purchase and other systems of deferred
payment. I asked the Treasury to provide me with a
statement on the matter, and it is important that I
should put you in possession of the information that
has been supplied to me. The Industrial Finance
Department of the Commonwealth Bank was estab-
lished on the Ist January, 1946. It has made hire pur-
chase advances spread over a wide range of industrial
undertakings, including engineering, manufacturing,
timber getting, transportation, building and contract-
ing, primary production, earth moving, textiles, print-
ing and mechanization for coal mines. You will sec
that, although that is hire purchase, it is hire purchase
directed to elements of production in Australia. The
Commonwealth Bank docs not finance any items of
household goods. Furniture, refrigerators, radios,
washing machines and all these other things that we
have heard about do not come within the ambit of the
Commonwealth Bank. Therefore, the bank stands aside
trom a great deal of the problem that wo have been dis-
cussing. All that 1 need add is that even the bank’s
highly considered policy has been more and more
tightened up in recent months, so that, on the whole,
its deposit terms and its maximum period terms are
more severe than those that are available outside. 1
mention that so that there will be no belief, which
would be a very disturbing belief indeed, that the Com-
monwealth Bank is itself aggravating the problem that
we are sitting here endeavouring to solve.
The moment that we begin to talk about prices con-
trol, there is a very natural disposition to say that all
that you need to do is to control the prices of essential
things and that you do not need to control the prices
of the lot. Here is the greatest paradox in the world.
If you control the prices of household necessaries and
do not control the prices of luxury goods and those
prices run free, the luxury goods trades will be able to
bid up for the labour and the materials that they want,
and the industries that produce household necessaries
will tend to languish for want of man-power and
materials. I really do not see, if you are going to use
prices control in an inflationary period, how you can
avoid the proposition, if you believe that prices control
can bo effective, that it ought to deal with the whole
range of commodities. Whatever commodity you leave
free will be loft free to buy its labour and to buy its
materials on a market that is fixed for it only by the
public’s willingness to pay, and by no price rule what-
ever.
Another aspect of the same problem was mentioned
a good deal later on in the proceedings. It is some-
times said that the right thing to do is to raise money
by some means or another and subsidize items in the
“ C ” series index, the idea being that if you do that
you will either damp down or eliminate the quarterly
increases of the basic wage that have become so
tremendous a feature of our industrial and social life
1 point out to you that the “ C ” series index is not
based upon a universal list of items, but upon a sample
of items. If the sample ceases to represent the bulk,
it ceases to be a sample. The Commonwealth Statis-
tician has always been extremely jealous of the integrity
of the “ C ” series index. It must be a representative
sample, or it is nothing. I do not want anybody to
suppose that it would be just a simple piece of mechanics
to make a list of the items in the “ C ” scries index
and to subsidize those, so that one vegetable would be
cheap because it was subsidized, and another vegetable
of the same type that did not happen to be in the index
would sell at some fantastic price. Whatever we do
about these things, so long as we profess to adjust
wages on an index figure, let us at least ensure that that
index figure shall have an integrity of its own and be
really representative of the true cost of living.
It has been said that, although we arc now operating
capital issues control, we should never have abandoned
it. That induces me to make the comment that we live
in a federal community and under a federal constitution.
There is no government represented here to-day that
is not in practice a government of limited powers.
It is quite true that, on paper, the Government of
Queensland, for example, has unlimited powers within
its own area. But whatever powers it exercises are


exercised subject to the exercise of a certain list of
powers by the Commonwealth Parliament. To that
extent, it is not a government of unlimited power.
Nor are we. One of the odd things about a federal
community is that you live in a state of duality.
First, you try to make up your mind about what Is the
right thing to do, and then you send for the lawyers to
discover whether you can do it. Ido not want this to
be used against me on any future occasion, but the
lawyers do not know. The only lawyers who are right
on these problems are those who speak last.
The fact is that capital issues control was abandoned
in pre-Korea days, at a time when we were advised
that, if it were challenged in the High Court, it could
not survive. We have since then, in post-Korea days,
reinstituted capital issues control. It is at this very
moment under challenge in the High (?ourt. 1 do not
think this is an occasion for throwing stones at each
other. The fact is that as soon as we thought we could
legally uphold this control, we reintroduced it. Time
alone, and rather more than time, will tell whether we
were right in thinking that we could reintroduce it.
"We have had discussions about freezing wages. The
word “ freezing ” has obtained great currency. Can
the Commonwealth Parliament freeze wages? The
answer is that it cannot do so. Can a State parliament
freeze wages? The answer is that it can freeze some
wages but that it cannot do anything about wages that
are governed by the Commonwealth Arbitration Court,
and they constitute an enormous proportion of the wages
that are paid in the Commonwealth of Australia. We
do not want to be directing our minds to those rather
dramatic headline things like freezing wages without
having asked ourselves whether they can be done. If a
thing cannot be done, then, as sensible people, we ought
to devote our energies to something that can be done.
It is quite true that something can be done about wages
if the Arbitration Court chooses to do it. That is why
I said in my opening remarks that if you analyse the
problem you will realize at once that what you are
talking about is some suspension of the quarterly adjust-
ment, some suspension of the granting of marginal
increases, or some conversion of the minimum rate
into the maximum rate. All these are matters that are,
from the Commonwealth’s point of view, pertinent to
the Commonwealth Arbitration Court. Naturally, if
we feel at any time that some application to the
Arbitration Court needs to be made on one or all of
these matters, the responsibility will be on us to
institute such proceedings, or upon employers who are
bound by awards. Wages cannot be frozen by any
simple sweep of the hand.
Reference has been made to freezing dividends and
to putting a ceiling on share sales. lam not aware of
any power that the Commonwealth has to tell people
that they shall not pay dividends at more than a certain
rate. It is very easy to draw false analogies from other
countries. In Great Britain, some arrest order has
been put on dividends, but Great Britain has a parlia-
ment that has unlimited power. It was once said by
a jurist of some wit that the Parliament of the United
Kingdom could do anything except convert a man into
a woman, or a woman into a man.
Mr. KING. —That is not impossible in these days.
Mr. MENZTES. —Not having followed these matters
with your keen interest, 1 do not know. All 1 can say
is that if actions of that kind are to be taken directly,
they are certainly not actions that can be examined by
the Commonwealth Parliament. If any other parlia-
ment can examine them, well and good. Insofar as we
are to deal with trading corporation or with business
concerns, we can deal with them directly only through
the proceeds of their businesses. In other words, we
have the fiscal weapon. As I indicated to you earlier,
we shall, in the course of our budget, indicate precisely
how that is proposed to be used.
Mr. Cosgrove put before us some interesting figures
about the profits made in heavy industry, in the retail
trade and in other industries concerned with motor cars,
furniture, and the like. I was interested in those figures
because they showed, as Mr. Cosgrove pointed out quite
clearly at the time, that the increase in the rate of
profit has not been in the basic industries. It has been
in the industries that are not basic. Indeed, the nearer
you get to what may be called a luxury industry, the
greater becomes the percentage of profit. I venture
to suggest to you that the extent to which luxury goods
have been uncontrolled and other goods have been under
some measure of control may have some relation to
that. In other words, the limitation has produced the
opposite effect to the one being aimed at.
Mrs. Brooks put forward an interesting proposal
for a publicity campaign in order to show ordinary
people how they could help to counter inflation. I
am very much engaged by that suggestion. I think it
has very great merit. However, that is not merely
a matter of publishing the report of this conference.
Such a report would he too long to be read by people
in the ordinary course of events, but we shall certainly
consider putting in the form of popular reading the
main points concerning the duty of the ordinary
individual. If that were done and every housewife
in Australia had that document in her possession the
result would be very far reaching because although, in
my experience, men become terrifically expert at
spending millions it is only their wives that have any
knowledge of spending £2 to advantage. It has been
of great assistance to have you ladies here as repre-
sentatives of the National Council of Women.
Various points have been made concerning civil
.servants. It is quite true that the Commonwealth
Government has announced some substantial economy
in the use of Commonwealth employees. I do not want
anybody to suppose that that indicates that the Govern-
ment has any hostility towards civil servants. No man
who has ever been in Parliament, and certainly no
Minister, has any lack of appreciation of the qualities
and skill of the civil servant in Australia. Unfor-
tunately, when the Statistician publishes figures about
Commonwealth employment, they find their way into
the public print under the caption “ Growth in the
Civil Service ”. Every bricklayer and carpenter
engaged in building a house for the War Service Homes
Division becomes a civil servant and every temporary
officer engaged in handling immigration matters be-
comes a civil servant, as do the people employed on
the Snowy Mountains scheme, the first unit of which
1 hope will provide this city and this State with a
much needed addition to its electric power within
two an a half to three years. Of course, those people
are not all civil servants. They are Commonwealth
employees. They are on the Commonwealth pay-roll.
They are not really “ civil servants ” as people
normally understand the term. The number of people
engaged in the administrative service of the Common-
wealth of Australia is, I think, somewhere about 25,000
or 26,000, whereas the total number of people on the
Commonwealth pay-roll would be nearer 200,000. It
bas not been announced that the Government will prune
the number of its employees just for the fun of it.
The Government believes that there is some overlapping
between Commonwealth administration and the admin-
istration of the States and considers that it is time that
it ended. Therefore it may be found that we have
surplus employees. We believe that certain functions
are being performed by the Commonwealth which,
while useful, are not of such importance that they
should be maintained at a time of great economic trial


such as the present. We also believe that the re-
organization of departments or works can always pro-
duce some increase of efficiency. Ido not want anybody
to suppose that if the Government’s object is achieved
he will not find that, in some other aspects of activity,
Commonwealth employment is growing. While we
seek to set some proper example in the diversion of
man-power from what is non-essential to what is
essential and productive, the Government .will, in the
course of its defence programme be compelled to
engage thousands of people for employment in factories
in order to carry out the defence programme. There-
fore, the day will come when somebody will say,
“ They got rid of 10,000 and, bless my soul, they have
taken them on again ”. That will not be right. The
Government will have eliminated unnecessary
employees, but it will not refuse to put any more people
on to its pay-roll. If the international crisis thickens
in the course of the next year or two it may be
necessary to put thousands of people on to the Com-
monwealth pay-roll. With the co-operation of private
enterprise, the Government may need to put thousands
of people in private industry on to work connected with
war preparations. It has been said here that the
Government could deal with that problem by stopping
the intake of civil servants. Ladies and gentlemen,
every great organization that recruits its staff and
gives them a long course of training and experience
so that eventually they may assume the duties of heads
of departments and be skilled administrators who are
in great demand by private industry must carry on that
recruitment constantly. Otherwise, the day will come
when it will reach a “ dead patch ” resulting from a
period when no new recruits were brought in. Recruit-
ment has to be conducted in an orderly manner. The
Commonwealth Government hopes to set a decent
example in the elimination of what is unnecessary and
in concentrating upon what must be done. We shall
do that with no personal pleasure. The members of the
Government are well aware of the human problem
that is involved in a man going from one task to
another. Practically every one present has spoken of
diverting labour from non-essential to essential indus-
tries. Every time a man goes out of the job he is
doing and goes into another he may leave a job that
he likes and find himself in a job that he does not
like half as much. But unless we are prepared to
face this human problem there can be no diversion
and if there is no diversion in Australia in the next
two and half years there will be no defence preparation
worthy of the reputation of Australia.
It was suggested by Mr. Fell and, I think, by Mr.
Johnston, that it would be a good thing if committees
of employers and employees could be established so that
discussions of a more frank and intimate kind than
this might be held. I do not want to ask anybody to
go into that matter at this stage because I feel that it
would serve no good purpose, but the Government will
certainly consider that proposal. lam very much dis-
posed to see some merit in it. As you will realize, it
is not a matter that can be dealt with out of hand at a
conference such as this.
I want to emphasize that the programme that the
Government has been pursuing is, and must be, merely
a partial programme. I am thankful that this con-
ference has established that no one government or group
of people can solve this problem. We must do our
best —all of us. I hope that this conference may have
dislodged the idea—“ Here is a nasty problem. What
is the Government going to do about it ? ” That is not
the spirit that made this country nor is it the spirit that
inspired its greatest servants in peace or war.
The State Premiers, the Commonwealth Treasurer
and I shall be discussing the subject of public works in
Canberra in a few days’ time at a Premiers conference
and Ido not wish to anticipate that occasion. However,
believing that works programmes ought to be dealt with
on their merits and not merely by applying some finan-
cial yardstick, we established a steering committee of
Commonwealth and State representatives some months
ago which finally created, with the approval of the State
governments, a series of individual committees of expert
people who will examine the power projects, the water
supply projects, the agricultural projects and the trans-
port projects that have been contemplated and ascertain
how construction programmes can be arranged so as to
concentrate on those projects which will produce the
greatest results within the next few years. In other
words, these people will have one eye on defence pre-
parations in the particular sense and determine what
works ought to be given their appropriate priority.
Although one or two difficulties have been met with I
hope that these committees will commence work within
the next few days. I should much prefer to have a
list of works drawn up according to their merits rather
than go to a conference and announce that, regardless
of what works are desired, there is only a certain
amount of money available. The Government wishes
to use all the men and materials that it can find to do
all the real jobs that ought to be done if this country
is to be made strong and stable within the next two or
three years.
The Government has re-established capital issues. 1
do not wish to say any more on that subject at present.
The Commonwealth Bank which is the instrument of
government policy concerning the using of credit under
the existing law is exercising credit control and that
control has been tightened considerably during the last
year. We have for discussion with the States the con-
trol of consumer credit which relates to the matter
I was discussing a few minutes ago. In the last
session of Parliament a Defence Preparations Act was
passed which has given rise to quite a stimulating
controversy. I have been accused of being a fascist for
institgating such a monstrous piece of legislation.
People have allowed their fancies to run riot on
bureaucrats and controls until one seems to be living
in a perfect cocoon of them. How the power contained
in that act will be exercised must depend entirely on the
extent to which industry is prepared to co-operate in
proceeding with the job of which I have spoken. I do
not want to have a lot of controls or officials who have
to be referred to about everything. If there is a war
we may have to accept some such measures but in a
time of peace that is the last thing that I want to have.
For some time we have been setting up committees of
expert representatives of industry in order to determine
what aspects of industry should have priority in the
supply of materials. I should feel that it was intoler-
able to have four out of half a dozen suppliers of some
vital defence material co-operating with the Govern-
ment while the other two stood aloof and refused to co-
operate. Controls were not made for good men. They
were made for bad ones. I hope that there will not be
too many bad ones to require the rain to fall on the just
and the unjust alike. I am certain, from the spirit
that has been exhibited at this conference, that we shall
obtain a high degree of co-operation.
1 anticipate the budget with all the decent feelings
of horror that a Prime Minister ought to experience
when he has a shrewd idea that somebody will not like
it. You have begun already to guess its outlines.
1 referred earlier to the depreciation allowance. This
allowance was brought into existence in order to
stimulate investment in plant. To-day, investment in
plant is so overwhelmingly great that it is necessary to
direct it. I think that Mr. Fell mentioned that, in
Canada, ordinary depreciation allowances were being
suspended for a period of years in the case of industries
which have not been certified to be of real importance.


Industries of national importance continue to receive
the allowance.
Another counter inflajionary measure with which
I had some association was the securing of a very large
dollar loan from the United States. I am sure that Mr.
Webster will remember that the procurement of dollar
goods is conditional upon a number of factors one of
which is the availability of dollars. The dollar crisis in
the sterling world has been a very grievious one.
It showed great sense of improvement until recently,
but the great difficulties of the United Kingdom, which
are perhaps more acute than the difficulties suffered by
any other country at this moment, have unfortunately
recurred.
In other words, there is once more a slide in the dollar
position, and we must be frugal of dollars because we
are members of a team who pool their dollar earnings
and draw’ their requirements from that pool. To supple-
ment all that we went on a frolic of our own, with, of
course, the blessing of the United Kingdom—because
we were not walking out on our partners. We bor-
rowed 100,000,000 dollars, and the result was to bring
a considerable amount of relief, particularly to govern-
ments in Australia which needed heavy plant of various
kinds, including diesel locomotives, in order to get on
with their great task of laying the foundations for more
productive effort.
Coal and power remain the two deadly problems.
They are really the most tremendous problems. If
to-morrow, by a wave of the band, we could have all
the coal and all the electric power we need, we would
not need to have another conference. We have very
limited authority over these matters. Nobody has a
great deal of authority over them. The Commonwealth
lias only a very sketchy authority. However, I have
invited one of my colleagues, Senator Spooner, who is
the Minister for National Development, to make these
two matters one of his prime responsibilities. We work
in collaboration with the Government of New South
Wales through the Joint Coal Board. A lot of work is
being done on open-cut. In recent months we have
authorized programmes of expansion in open-cut
mining running into many millions of pounds; but the
moment you do that you are up against the problem
of transport. When we raise this matter with the New
South Wales Government it very naturally says; “ Our
transport is run dow r n ”. What can we do about that ?
We have done what we can, through the expenditure of
dollar resources to procure locomotives and rolling-
stock. I do not believe that we can solve either of
those problems until we get the most tremendous
awakening of conscience on them and until we are able
to concentrate men and material on breaking those two
bottlenecks instead of men frittering away their time on
what must be regarded, at a time like this, as utterly
irrelevant occupations.
Finally, we have initiated, and are in course of
carrying through, highly controversial action against
the Communists, All I want to say is that we propose
to carry it through. I do not believe that the Com-
munist ought to be treated as if he were a normal trade
unionist. I believe in the trade unions and I believe in
that contribution that they make to this country; but 1
do not believe in people who will use trade unions or any
other instrument for the sole purpose of breaking down
production in Australia. It is not as widely understood
as it ought to be that the Communist technique in this
world to-day includes the stimulation of inflation in
democratic countries. If the head-quarters of commu-
nism can ruin the economies of the democracies in
advance, then the democracies will not fight—at least,
that is the theory of the Communists; and if that
happens, the war is won before it begins.
We have these tremendous tasks before us. Indeed,
we have a triple task. We must be strong to defend
ourselves in the event of a war and to be with our
friends. That is an enormous task for a country,
assuming everything else is normal. We must overtake
the arrears that came upon us during the last war and
which left us with battered transport systems and
inadequate supplies of coal and power. We must
overcome all those things so that we may have
a proper foundation for the future; and while doing
both those things we must be prepared to deny our-
selves luxuries and trivialities.
We must be prepared to save money instead of throw-
ing it away so that we may have stability in our
economy, and those who serve their country at home and
abroad will not find, the savings of their lifetime
disappear in thin air under the depredations of this
unseen thief to which I made reference earlier. Those
are the three tasks that this country has to face. No
other country has three. The other countries in the
democratic world have two tasks. We are the great
undeveloped democracy in the world, and therefore we
have a third task. It has always been said about
Australians—and I have heard it said in many parts
of the world—that when difficulties arise two Aus-
tralians can do the work of three men. All right. Let
us go awav from this conference determined that we
will.
Mr. McGIRR. —I feel that the many delegates to
this conference would appreciate it if, on their behalf,
I moved a vote of thanks to you, and a very sincere vote
of thanks for the way in which you have conducted
this meeting. You invited the delegates to a full and
free discussion of various matters, and all delegates
have been given an opportunity for full and free dis-
cussion of the matters that they considered it necessary
to raise. I feel that they are all deeply grateful to you,
and it is my pleasure to convey to you their sincere
thanks.
Mr. MENZIES.—Thank you, Mr. McGirr, and
ladies and gentlemen. All I want to say in reply is that
the obligation is all on my side. I am deeply grateful
indeed, as are my colleagues, to all of you for coming
here. You have enriched our minds on this important
problem, and I believe that you have been of great
assistance to us in determining the action that we shall
take.
Conference concluded nt p.m.
Authority: L. F. Johnston, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
