

CONVENED BY THE CHAEITY OEGANIZATION SOCIETY OE
MEEBOUENE.
11131.




PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
§tconb
CONFERENCE ON CHARITY,
HELD IN MELBOURNE,
From 3 7th. to 21st November, 1891.
CONVENED BY THE CHARITY ORGANIZATION SOCIETY OE
MELBOURNE.
ghi :
ROBT. S. BRAIN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.




A) 5155/P 80?
TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Preface ... ... ... ... ... ... ... v
Copy of Circular convening Conference ... ... ... ... ix
Report of “ Suggestions Committee ” ... ... ... ... xiii
Inaugural Address, by Professor Morris ... ... ... ... 1
Discussion and Resolutions ... ... ... ... 7
Paper —“ State Children in Queensland,” by Mr. Horrocks... ... 14
Paper—“ The Industrial Schools and Boarding-out System in New
Zealand,” by Mrs. Twopeny ... ... ... 17
Paper—“ Homes for Destitute Orphans,” by Mr. E. Exon ... 22
Paper—“ Children of the State in New South Wales,” by Hon. Dr,
Renwick, M.L.C. ... ... ... ... ... 28
Discussion ... ... ... ... ... ... 37
Paper—“ Prahran Creche,” by Mrs. Fuller ... ... ... 42
Paper—“ Charitable Work in New South Wales,” by Mr. S. Maxted 42
Discussion ... ... ... ... ... ... 125
Discussion—“ Deserting Husbands ” ... ... ... ... 53
Discussion—“ The Responsibilities of Relatives ” ... ... ... 54
Discussion—“ General Booth’s 1 Darkest England Scheme,’ ” Address
by “ General” Booth ... ... ... ... 57
Paper—“ The Female Refuge, Carlton,” by Mrs. Nightingale ... 69
Discussion ... ... ... ... ... ... 70
Invitation and Resolution—The Third Conference ... ... 72
Paper—“ The Consumptive Sanatorium at Echuca,” by Mrs. Serjeant 72
Discussion ... ... ... ... ... ... 74
Paper—“ National or Compulsory Providence,” by Miss Spence ... 77
Discussion ... ... ... ... ... ... 85
Paper —“ Centralization in Charita.ble Work,” by Lady Windeyer ... 86
Discussion ... ... ... ... ... ... 87
Paper—“ Nursing the * Sick Poor ’in their Homes.—A Pertinent
Question,” by Miss Frances Gwillam Holden ... ... 89
Discussion ... ... ... ... ... ... 91
Paper—“ The Unemployed,” by Mr. J. Goldstein ... ... 93
Paper “ The Rev. J. D. Langley’s Labour Home,” by Rev. H. L.
Jackson ... ... ... ... ... ... 101
Paper—“ Workmen’s Colonies for the Unemployed,” by Pastor Berlitz 107
Discussion ... ... ... ... ... ... 114
Paper—“ Slum Life in Melbourne,” by Miss Sutherland ... ... 120
Discussion ... ... ... ... ... ... 124
Paper—“ Mission or Ragged Schools,” by Mr. Hitchcock ... ... 129
Paper—“ Inebriate Asylums,” by Alderman Crouch ... ... 130


Paper—“ The Queen’s Jubilee Pund,” by Miss Martin
Discussion
Discussion on Ladies’ Benevolent Societies
Votes of Thanks
President of the Third Conference
Appendix—
“ Boarding out Children with Widowed Mothers ”
“Housing the Aged and Infirm Poor”
“ Drunken Parents and their Children ”
Suggestions
List of Delegates
Societies represented


PREFACE.
Not many prefatory remarks are necessary in explanation of
the Proceedings of the Second Australasian Conference on
Charity. The organizing committee is well content with the
measure of success attendant on its labours, and it feels that little
is needed by way of apology or extenuation. A large number of
well-informed workers in the cause of charity, truly and worthily
representative of many fields of labour, have met, have tem-
perately yet fully discussed important questions from different
points of view, have agreed on certain recommendations, and
have separated with the determination to meet again after an
interval spent in closer study of the questions which were under
discussion.
i
If this had been all, the Conferences would well have justified
their existence. But facts more hopeful and of greater signifi-
cance may be urged. New ideas have been evolved, and will, in
the future, take definite and useful shape. Changes of method
have been suggested in so gentle a manner, yet with such air of
authority and reasonableness, that the defenders of old systems
have been put on their mettle without hurt to amour propre, and
with every resolve to accept what promises well in the new, and
to retain all that has proved to be good in the old. Intelligent
interest in many important sociological questions has replaced
apathy in the minds of a wider circle.
Conferences on Charity were designed to stimulate this attitude
of receptivity towards new ideas, of intelligent yet sympathetic
criticism of old methods, of recognition of the magnitude of
existing problems, and of future perplexities and dangers. So
far, therefore, the organizers of the Second Conference may look
back with pride and pleasure on their work and its results.
Those impatient spirits who are ever anxious to urge immediate


action, and who pant for rapid results which may be tabulated in
statistics and quoted with triumph, who complain that in a month
or a year all has not been rectified that seemed to them to be wrong,
are reminded that the questions dealt with demand lengthened
study, that it is not well to apply violent and sudden remedies to
correct evils which are of slow and gradual growth. Such
remedies may sometimes destroy the good which is intertwined
with the evil. The delegates at the Conference were not
intrusted with executive powers. Rightly considered, these
Conferences are on their highest plane when the attitude of study
of facts, of comparison of results, and of investigation of new
ideas, has been rigidly maintained. What is to be done must be
left to those empowered to do ; watchfulness and deliberation are
as important to victory as action and movement. The delegates
have performed one great duty by pointing to defects and by
suggesting remedies. Pressure of public opinion will soon induce
action.
If the Conferences may be held in any way to have fallen
short of success, it can only be for the reason that the study of
facts has been partial because the facts have been presented in an
incomplete manner. What is here implied will most readily be
understood by a study of the circular convening the Second
Conference, especially the section marked “ D,” which suggests
the preparation of complete statements of what is being done or
aimed at in each colony in such a form as to admit readily of
study, analysis, and comparison. The work is onerous and
difficult, especially if undertaken by voluntary effort, but, once
performed, it would be comparatively easy to correct the state-
ment periodically, and present at each Conference a comprehensive
survey of the whole field as it appeared at the date of the
observation. Perhaps, in view of the importance and difficulty
of this necessary preliminary task, it would be well if at the next
Conference the question should be considered whether it is wise
for the present to hold annual intercolonial Conferences, or
whether it would be preferable to alternate them with local
Conferences held simultaneously in each colony.


The hope that all papers would he in the hands of the organ-
izing committee four weeks before the Conference was not fulfilled.
This is to be regretted, as it would have been distinctly a benefit
if papers could have been printed beforehand, and circulated
immediately after they were read. In many instances the papers
contained proposals and statements of too important a nature to
receive full justice in an extempore debate.
While these defects are pointed out in the hope of their being
remedied at future Conferences, nothing that has been said can
be held to lessen the belief which the organizers maintain that
the Secoud Conference was a notable gathering, and was graced
oy valuable papers and important discussions. Apology must be
made to those who took part in the debates that the limits of
space allotted to this publication have necessitated extreme con-
densation of the reports of speeches, and occasional omissions.
The grateful thanks of the Organizing Committee are here ten-
dered to the Hon. James Munro, Prime Minister of Victoria, for
his kindness in sanctioning the publication of this book by
the Government Printer.
The committee tenders its thanks to the almoners of Sydney
for their support, and for their cordial invitation to hold the
Third Australasian Conference on Charity in their city. It
offers its congratulations to the Hon. Dr, Renwick, M.L.C., the
President of the Third Conference, and expresses the hope that
the gathering may prove worthy of the beautiful city which is to
be its site, and of the honorable reputation of its president.
EDWARD E. MORRIS,
President.
JACOB GOLDSTEIN,
Honorary Secretary .
Melbourne, January, 1892.




COPY OF CIRCULAR CONVENING THE SECOND
AUSTRALASIAN CONFERENCE ON CHARITY.
The Charity Organization Society of Melbourne,
29 Collins-place, Exhibition-street,
17th June, 1891.
Dear Sir or Madam,
I have the honour to remind you that, at the final meeting of
the First Australasian Conference on Charity, held on 17th
November, 1890, the delegates present resolved that the Second
Australasian Conference on Charity be held in this city in
November of this year.
In accordance with this resolution I have the honour to invite
you to place the matter of appointing delegates to attend the
Second Conference before your committee at the earliest possible
date after receipt of this circular, and to exert all your influence
in securing proper representation, both of your own society and
of any neighbouring society or institution which may have been
unrepresented at the last Conference. Immediately after the
appointment of such delegates it will be necessary to send a note
of the fact, giving full name and address of representatives
appointed both to me and also to the members of the standing
committee of your colony (see page xiv of accompanying
Proceedings of First Conference).
It is suggested that the local “ standing committee ” of each
colony should then, at once, proceed to organize a committee for
the whole colony, whose duty it will be to secure adequate repre-
sentation for the colony at the Conference, to arrange for papers
to be read thereat, and to appoint a president and secretary for
the colony.


The following is recommended as a basis for the organization
of the Second Conference :
That the following be the subjects for consideration :
1. Charity Organization. —(i.) Co-operation, (n.) Inquiry,
(m.) Registration, (rv.) Exchange of Information.
2. District and friendly visiting.
3. Responsibilities of relations.
4, The Unemployed.—(i.) Labour test for vagrants, (n.)
Labour colonies.
5. Deserting husbands and parents.
6. Private efforts for destitute and neglected children,
7. Inebriates’ retreats.
8. Homes of the poor.
1. That papers for the Second Conference should not occupy
more than twenty minutes in delivery, and that all papers reach
the hands of the Victorian Committee four weeks before the
opening session.
2. That each paper accepted be printed, so that proof sheets
may be distributed among delegates immediately after it has
been read.
3. That no speaker to a paper be permitted to occupy more
than seven minutes.
1. That the Second Conference be held at the Melbourne
Town Hall (with the permission of the Right Worshipful the
Mayor).
2. That His Excellency the Earl of Hopetoun be invited to
become patron of the Second Conference.
3. That the Second Conference meet for six days, commencing
on November, 1891.
4. That the first day be devoted to the opening ceremonies, to
include the addresses of the President of the Conference and the
presidents for each colony.


5. That the sixth day be devoted to business matters in con-
nexion with the Second and Third Conferences, the adoption of
resolutions, and the reception of reports from colonies.
6. That during the intervening four days there be held two
sittings daily, each sitting to be, so far as possible, devoted to
the papers or discussions on the one subject.
That the secretary for each colony prepare a report giving the
following particulars with respect to the field of charity in his (or
her) colony, such report to be in the hands of the Victorian Com-
mittee four weeks before the opening session of the Second
Conference.
Ascertain, so far as possible, the facts for the whole colony.
(Bear in mind that a trustworthy estimate is always preferable
to an incomplete statistical return, but that complete statistics are
the most to be desired.)
1. The number of hospitals (private and public) and homes
for convalescents.
2. The number of institutions for the reception of aged or
destitute persons.
3. The arrangements for destitute and neglected children.
4. The number of retreats or refuges for the fallen or im-
moral.
5. The number of organized societies for dealing with out-
door relief, such as ladies’ benevolent societies, special
charities, Government or municipal relief.
6. The arrangements for the blind, deaf, or dumb.
7. Other information suggested by the special conditions of
each colony.
Give the following particulars under each heading :
(a) Number of beneficiaries last financial year.
( h ) Cost of—(i.) Management. (n.) Relief (total and
average cost).
(c) Method of obtaining funds —(i.) Government subsidies,
(n.) Private annual donations. (m.) Endowments
and bequests, (iv.) Other sources.


A good deal of money will be required to conduct the business
of the Second Conference satisfactorily, and the local committee
of each colony is asked to arrange for the collection of funds to
defray unavoidable expenses. The Victorian Committee will
appoint a treasurer.
I beg to urge you to throw yourself heartily into the move-
ment, so that the gratifying success of the First Conference may
not only be repeated, but be experienced in a much greater
degree.
You are asked to induce the local Press to notice and aid the
movement in every possible way. It is hoped that the published
Report of the Proceedings of the Second Conference may serve as
a guide-book on the subjects under discussion for students on
social questions within and beyond the bounds of Australasia.
I have the honour to be, dear Sir or Madam,
Your obedient servant.
EDWARD E. MORRIS,
President Second Australasian Conference
on Charity.


REPORT OF THE SUGGESTIONS COMMITTEE TO
THE FINAL MEETING OF DELEGATES TO
THE SECOND AUSTRALASIAN CONFERENCE ON
CHARITY.
Saturday, 21st November, 1891.
Professor Morris -presiding .
The Suggestions Committee of the Second Australasian Con-
ference on Charity has the honour to recommend :
That the committee now existent in Sydney, with Lady Win-
deyer and Rev. H. L. Jackson as joint honorary secretaries, be
appointed Organizing Committee for the Third Australasian
Conference on Charity ; and that, in order to render it possible to
carry the following suggestions into practice, appointments of
corresponding honorary secretaries for each colony be made, as
follow:—Corresponding honorary secretaries for New South
Wales, Rev. H. L. Jackson and Mr. Sydney Maxted ; corre-
sponding honorary secretary for Queensland, Rev. A. E. David ;
for South Australia, Miss Spence ; for New Zealand, Dr. Mac-
gregor; for Tasmania, Rev. J. W. Simmons ; for Victoria,
Professor Morris. It is also suggested that a corresponding
honorary secretary be selected, if possible, for Western Australia
by the President, Professor Morris.
The following suggestions are recommended for adoption :
1. Deserting Husbands.
The Second Conference re-affirms the fifth suggestion adopted
by the First Conference, on 17th November, 1890, viz.:—
“ This Conference suggests to the legislative bodies in each
colony that maintenance orders, made in any one colony
against deserting husbands or fathers of families or
putative fathers of illegitimate children, be enforce-
able in any other colony on the original order; and that
power should be given to issue maintenance orders
where intention to desert is shown, or in defendant’s
absence if he have left the colony; and that power
should be given for the issue and enforcement of main-
tenance orders against deserting mothers.”


And suggests that petitions be presented simultaneously, and as
early as possible, to the Legislatures of each colony, praying for the
enactment of regulations to give force to this suggestion; and
that, in view of the opinion of the honorary solicitor to the Charity
Organization Society of Melbourne that each petition should
suggest the specific clause or clauses to be amended in or added
to existing Acts in each colony, the “ corresponding honorary
secretaries ” should arrange for the assistance of counsel in pre-
paring the special petition which the condition of the law may
render advisable in each colony.
2. Obligations of Relatives.
This Conference suggests the enactment of laws by legislative
bodies of the colonies (where necessary) to make it incumbent on
near relatives, who in the opinion of proper judges are able to do
so, to support or assist in supporting their indigent relatives.
3. Labour Colonies.
This Conference strongly re-affirms the desirability of estab-
lishing, in each colony, labour colonies somewhat on the German
plan, to which able-bodied mendicants and unemployed persons
could be referred. The added experience of the successful work-
ing of the German “Workmen’s Colonies,” together with the
additional proofs of the imperative necessity for similar institu-
tions in Australia which have been amassed during the preceding
year, render it peculiarly desirable to establish these labour
colonies without delay, - .
The Conference also suggests that each city in Australasia
should strive to establish for the labour colonies receiving houses,
which should also supply a labour test for destitute persons
found publicly begging ; and that steps be taken without delay
to urge upon the Governments of the several colonies the desira-
bility of reserving areas of agricultural land for the purposes of
such labour colonies.
4. Incurable Consumptives.
This Conference suggests that the attention of the medical
societies be directed to the many cases of indigent patients in the
incurable stages of consumption, who are sent to Australia in the
vain hope of recovery, and whose death is often accelerated by


the hardships and privations of the sea voyage, who reach these
shores to die in public institutions or dependent on strangers.
This Conference earnestly requests the medical societies to make
an organized attempt to cut off the supply at its source, by
securing the co-operation of the faculty in Great Britain and
elsewhere.
The Suggestions Committee desires to recognise the kindness
of delegates who have submitted suggestions for its consideration,
and, while fully admitting the great value and practical nature of
these suggestions, thinks it wise to confine the attention of this
Conference to the foregoing. It fears that the adoption of a
larger number would tend to weaken the concentration of effort
necessary to give effect to those now recommended.
(Signed) EDWD. E. MORRIS,
President Second Conference.
The foregoing is the form in which the Report of the Sugges-
tions Committee was adopted by the final meeting of the Second
Australasian Conference on Charity.
JACOB GOLDSTEIN,
Hon. Sec. Second Australasian Conference on Charity.




PROCEEDINGS
SECOND AUSTRALASIAN
CONFERENCE ON CHARITY.
FIRST DAY:
(Tuesday, 17th November, 1891).
INAUGURAL MEETING,
HELD IN THE
WILSON HALL, MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY.
His Excellency the Earl of Hopetoun, Governor of Vic-
toria, occupied the chair; and, in opening the proceedings, said :
I have been desired to give a hearty welcome to those ladies and
gentlemen who have come over herefrom the other colonies to attend
this Conference. I think it is agreed on all hands that co-opera-
tion is an absolute necessity to charity organizations. I look
forward to the time when a closer union will exist between the
charity organizations of the different colonies. It is a matter of
importance that, if our friend the professional beggar finds things
made too warm for him in Melbourne and goes over to Sydney
to seek “ fresh fields and pastures new,” he should he known as
well over there as he is in Melbourne. I think, too, that a great
deal can be done by these organizations working together, because
it can be thus seen which systems answer best; and all that is
good in each organization can be taken and embodied in a central
organization of a federal character. I have much pleasure in
calling on the President, Professor Morris, for his inaugural
address.
Professor Morris then delivered his Inaugural Address.
He said ; Ladies and Gentlemen, —It is my pleasant duty to bid
you welcome to the Second Australasian Conference on Charity.
It opens under better auspices than last year’s Conference, in
that a part is being taken in it by colonies which last year were
either ■ unrepresented or almost unrepresented. When a little
11131. B


more than a month ago the executive committee found that
delegates had not been appointed by New South Wales or Queens-
land, it was determined that missions should be sent to Sydney
and to Brisbane to see whether it would be possible to stir up
an interest in those two important cities. Mr. Goldstein, the
secretary of the Charity Organization Society, went to both. I
took advantage of a little holiday to visit Sydney, but I had not
time to travel further afield. We both have the same tale to tell.
We were both received with great kindness. Neither found any
opposition, only perhaps at first indifference and a need for
explanation, soon replaced by a good deal of zeal and enthusiasm.
For my own part, I feel nothing but gratitude for the kind way
in which I was received in Sydney. In the midst of a political
crisis the Governor found time to take the chair at a meeting on
the subject. Had it not been for long-standing engagements
Lady Jersey might have been tempted to be with us to-day, so
strong is her sympathy with our effort. Sir Henry Parkes, on
what was almost the last day of his political career, accorded a
long interview to the secretary and myself. The present Premier
has acceded to our wish that Mr. Maxted, the Director of Govern-
ment Charities, should come down to represent the Government.
The Primate attended two meetings—a preliminary and the larger
meeting'—and gave us the benefit of his English experience. But
I must not mention more names, for every one with whom I was
brought into contact was kind and sympathetic and most willing
to help. I welcome especially those who hail from Sydney. We
have much to learn from Sydney. For instance, the Prince
Alfred Hospital is the finest in this part of the world, and we have
much to learn from it. The new Labour Home is a most valuable
experiment. The work amongst factory girls is very interesting.
I should like to add gently that I think there are points in which
Sydney can learn from Melbourne. I am sorry I could not visit
Brisbane, but Mr. Goldstein’s account of his experience in that
city repeats what I have said about Sydney. W e now know with
whom to communicate on charitable matters in either of those
two cities. Whilst we have gained support in Queensland and
in New South M ales, and have the same good attendance from
Tasmania, I am sorry to say we have lost in South Australia.
The charitable institutions of that colony were well represented
last year, but I gather there was a certain feeling of disappoint-
ment with the results of the Conference. There was partly a
feeling that a second Conference was not wanted so soon, and,
perhaps, that it should not have been held in the same place.
lor my own part, I hope that the next Conference will be held
in Sydney, from which town I expect an invitation, and that the
Conference after next will be in Adelaide. I think also that this


Conference should consider the question how often it is advisable
that these Conferences should be held. Meanwhile, as Miss
Spence is with its, Adelaide is well represented. New Zealand
sends us only one representative, the same as last year. Whilst
we remember that New Zealand cannot but be to us “ the land
that is very far oft,” we yet wish that colony could be strongly
represented, because New Zealand has fought its way through
many troubles that oppress us now, and has a settled
charitable system based on municipal governmeut. Perhaps
those who organize next year’s Conference will be able
to secure the presence of Dr. Macgregor, the able and
philosophical inspector of New Zealand charitable institutions.
Wq have been twice disappointed of him. It is not usual
to hold a Conference like this for two consecutive years in
the same place. I wish therefore to explain that Melbourne was
selected for this year by the Conference itself last year, and not
on the votes of Melbourne delegates, and that at the same time
I was chosen to be president. With neither of these acts did I
personally agree. I thought then, and still think, that it would
have been better to go elsewhither. Could I have had my own
way I would have had another place and another president. In
addressing you I feel myself confronted with a two-fold difficulty.
In the first place I “ shot my bolt ” last year, and am afraid lest,
with every effort to avoid it, I shall be found to repeat myself.
W~ell, if I do, you will probably have forgotten, and some topics
will hear repetition. Secondly, as a member of the Victorian
Royal Commission on Charities, now drawing nigh its report, I
feel a little hampered by the necessity that is laid on me to avoid
such topics connected with the subject as are likely to be dealt
with therein, and yet these have been of late uppermost in my
thoughts. After all, however, the field is wide, and there are
many matters culled from the vast field of charity on which if I
discourse no clue can be obtained as to the views of myself or my
brother commissioners. Please don’t let us he impatient for
results. The chief use of such a Conference as this is the inter-
change of ideas and experience, and I venture to think that to
deride such an interchange as unpractical is a grave mistake and
a misunderstanding of the part played in the word by ideas. We
cannot by our discussions alter the laws, nor can we direct the
administration of charity; but we can influence, we can make
people think, we can perhaps guide thought. Now and then
people are to he met in these colonies who count our institutions
perfect, as if all were arranged for the best in the best of all
possible worlds. But these are not generally people who have
travelled much beyond very narrow bounds —either literal travel-
ling, so that the bodily eye may see what is being done in other


places; or metaphorical travelling, by means of reading and on the
wings of thought. The particular branch of sociology which
deals with charitable effort is one of the hardest of all sciences,
bnt because it is hard it is not to he abandoned. It offers no
panacea, but requires patient observation of facts continued during
years. Like science, like philosophy, it seeks to know the causes
of things. To deal wisely with the thriftless poor calls for the
co-operation of many, requires record and registration, interchange
of information and intelligent comment, reasoning heads as well
as philanthropic hearts. This difficulty is in many respects,
though not altogether, modern. At any rate, a novelty has been
introduced into questions of charity by the aggregation into big
towns, and this seems constantly increasing. A charity which
was easily and wisely dispensed in villages or small places, where
every man was known to his neighbours, becomes impossible in
the great cities of modern days. It is quite true that charitable
help is better left to neghbours, but in a huge city, with a constant
going to and fro, a new point is given to the old question—“ Who
therefore is neighbour to him that fell among . . . strangers?” The
provision of true neighbours, who can and will help, is one of the
first acts of modern charity. Again, where the true knowledge of
neighbours ceases imposition begins, and the fear of being imposed
upon is one of the greatest hindrances to modern charity. Then
comes in the need for organization. In all other departments of
life, system, method, organization are valued ; why not in this ?
Thinking, as I do, a good deal on the problems of charity, 1 am
more and more impressed with the need that there is for co-
operation and co-ordination of effort. It is not more money that
is the special need, not more general good-will; hut sorting of
the tangled skeins, direction, guidance. It is quite possible to
imagine that there should be too much charity, in the sense of
charitable relief. At times in history, and at some places now,
the independence from which industry springs has been sapped.
Pauperization is infinitely worse than poverty. Let me dwell a
little on a dream I have sometimes had, that in one city charity
should be really and truly organized. Let me have my dream
to-day. In a great city there should be a central office where all
information with respect to charitable work could be procured.
This building would be provided with committee-rooms for
general use, whilst in it all charitable institutions could have their
offices, so that help could he readily accessible. Each society
would have its independence respected, but all would aim at
working in harmony—nay, not only in harmony hut in cordial
co-operation. Of assistance rendered there would be a general
system of registration, such as I saw at work in New York.
The object of this is to prevent “over-lapping,” and I need


hardly tell you that if in charitable distributions one gets too
much others suffer. A case for hospital treatment or a case for
a benevolent asylnm is brought to the central office. It should
be possible to discover in a few minutes in what hospital there is
a vacant bed—in what institution there is room. Take the night-
shelters. It is quite right there should be night shelters for
unfortunates, but there should be careful observation of the
inmates, lest it be found that some not willing to work prefer
regularly to loaf upon the charity of society. At present it is
easy for a man to make a round from shelter to shelter, obtaining
free meals and beds, and so escape work altogether. There ought
to be provision for casuals, but casuals should not be permitted
to turn into regular inmates. We have all heard the definition
“ Those who go about the country seeking work and devoutly
hoping they may not find it.” Night-shelter work is admirable,
if only it be properly checked and supervised ; it is dangerous
otherwise. Next take outdoor relief —the visiting and relieving
of the poor in their own homes. Every home should have one,
and only one, agency to which it can apply for such relief.
Relief should only be given when it is necessary, and then it
should be sufficient. It should be given sympathetically, but its
object should be to help out of trouble, not to pension. Constant
and continuous doles are moat unsatisfactory, and yet this is the
most usual form of outdoor relief. It is sometimes said that the
newer methods of charity, which have spread with startling
rapidity over the world during the last two decades, and
especially in the last few years, tend to destroy the personal
relations between the poor and their more fortunate brethren.
The charge is made in ignorance. The personal relations have
been destroyed by the change in social conditions —by the modern
facilities of locomotion and our consequent aggregation in cities.
The newer charity seeks to restore them. It believes in collec-
tive effort, in the wisdom of taking counsel and of basing counsel
upon facts well ascertained and certified; but it desires also to
use the power of individual sympathy, and to induce the stronger
to support the weaker. In proof I quote what is known in the
States as the “friendly visitor” system. May I urge once more
the superiority of this to district visiting ? On the latter method
a lady may have the supervision of a hundred families or more.
There is always a reluctance to divide a district, and the work of
a district cannot but be a great burden to an individual. Many
who would be unwilling to undertake so grave a charge would
yet gladly take in hand the duty of helping a few families, or
even one. If the American system were once organized I believe
that at least a thousand such helpers in this city would register
their names. Week by week the executive of the Charity


Organization Society hears of cases, and deals with them as best
it can; but in case after case I simply long for helpers such as
I describe. I long for people who would say —“ I have not much
time for charitable work, but if your committee will tell me of
one case, and advise what I can and ought to do, I will try my
best with it.” For instance, one case is reported as satisfactory.
There is nothing against the man, but he is shiftless—unable
to battle with the world. What he wants is a friend with
stronger will to make good the deficiency in his own will. Here
is another : The old, old story, drink—not steady soaking, but, to
use an Australianism, occasionally “ going on the burst. ” What
this man wants is some one with patience who will watch him,
and not once nor twice pick him out of the mire and set him on
his feet again. A third is a woman, whose heart were best
opened to some sympathetic woman, who would undertake to
defend her from herself. It were easy to mention a score of such
cases. For all this workers are wanted, and I often think the
fault of our associations is that they ask too much of their workers
but divide the work amongst too few. They would do wisely to
distribute the work more and enlist more helpers. How many a
man and woman in Melbourne would be glad of a definite message
—“Here are three families at present in receipt of public relief
(only half-a-crown a week in each case). Be it your endeavour
to raise them above taking even that. Foster a feeling of pride.
Find places and work for the children as they grow up, and point
out the duty of children to help parents. Give advice or procure
advice. Should money be needed to put a family on a higher
plane, or to restore them to it, make all inquiries first, and be sure
of your plan ; then help liberally if you can, or collect. To help
those who have fallen to rise is of much more value than the mere
dole which keeps alive.” But I should like to add that money is
in many ways the worst form of help. I can remember years ago
a wise clergyman in Bethnal Green making me promise not to
give money at all. Some weeks ago I was present at the opening
of a mission-house in North Fitzroy, which promises to be a
remarkable centre of usefulness. The clergyman who has been
the life and soul of that mission mentioned that there was a bed-
room set apart for a man to come from Toorakto spend a fortnight
or a month in work amongst the poor. lam sorry to say there
went up from the audience—not from one or two —a loud un-
believing laugh. Often have I pondered over it since. It was a
saddening laugh. Those who laughed evidently could not believe
that our young men with “ great possessions ” —it may be of know-
ledge, of brains as much as of money—cared or could be made to
care for those less fortunate than themselves. Were they ignorant
of what has been done in England and Scotland and the United


States ? Have they never heard of Toynbee Hall—of the various
universities’ settlements ? Are w eto believe that our young men
are cast in a different mould from their cousins across the seas ?
Speaking in this hall I think I have a right to say that our
educated young men and women will be found every whit as
willing to place their shoulders beneath the national burden if
only the way be shown them. And once more I repeat that the
problems connected with charity need our best brains—the trained
intellects of students as well as the “level” heads of sagacious
men of business. “ Heart, with brains,” is the right mixture for
charitable workers. (Applause.)
DISCUSSION.
The Hon. Jas. Munro, M.L.A. (Prime Minister of Victoria),
moved :—“ That the charitable workers of Melbourne cordially
welcome the representatives of charity from other parts of Vic-
toria and from the neighbouring colonies .” He said : 1 have
much pleasure in moving this resolution, as I think it a matter of
very great importance that encouragement should be given to the
workers in this cause, and I have no doubt it will receive cordial
support from the ladies and gentlemen of Melbourne who are
present. The work you are engaged in is of very great importance
indeed. The Victorian charitable institutions at the present time
are on a very unsatisfactory basis. A large grant is given to
them, but the money is expended in a very unsatisfactory
manner. From all parts of the colony there is a demand for an
increased expenditure, whilst the Inspector of Charitable Institu-
tions reports that the money is not always expended in the most
satisfactory manner. In the very near future steps will have to
be taken in Victoria to put such institutions on a much more satis-
factory footing ; and I have no doubt that, on receipt of the report
of the Royal Commission on Charities, measures to secure this
result will immediately be adopted. But the work for which
the delegates have met in Conference is to give the information
necessary in order that the executive of the Legislature may put
these institutions on a proper basis. Not long ago I received
most valuable assistance from the Melbourne Charity Organization
Society. You are all aware that at certain seasons claims are made
upon Parliament to find work for the “ unemployed.” Last winter
I received large deputations asking that work should be given to
those who were willing to work. I was informed that there
were in Melbourne between 5,000 and 10,000 willing workers
who could not find employment. With the assistance of the
Charity Organization Society that number was reduced to some-
thing like 300 or 400. (Cheers.) To these employment was


given, and they were found to give entire satisfaction. I therefore
wish every success to this institution, and also to the institu-
tions in the various colonies who have representatives present,
and I hope that the Conference will he entirely successful.
(Hear, hear.)
Mb. E. L. Zox said : I have very much pleasure in seconding
the resolution. At all times Victoria is desirous of welcoming
strangers, but I know of no occasion upon which strangers would
be more welcome than when they have in view the laudable
object of endeavouring to assist in the formation of an organization
by which not only the Victorian charitable institutions should be
established on a more favorable basis but also those of the
adjacent colonies. I have no hesitation in saying that good
results must accrue from a mutual interchange of thoughts and
ideas upon such an important subject. When the multifarious
duties performed by the ladies and gentlemen present in their
various vocations is taken into consideration I think it reflects
the greatest credit upon them that they are able to come to Mel-
bourne for the purpose of doing good to those who unfortunately
are often in the position of requiring help. Professor Morris has
pointed out in his opening address that to a certain extent our
utterances are shackled, because we are connected with a Royal
Commission that within a few days has to report to the Govern-
ment the result of its investigations ; and it is, therefore, impossible
for me to dilate on the question to any great extent. This much
I may say. It is easy enough to find fault, but to devise remedies
is a matter of greater difficulty ; and the minds of earnest men
and women will have to be brought to bear upon the question
before the cure could be effected. I have much pleasure in
seconding the resolution, and hope the result of your deliberations
will be to have the charitable institutions better managed and
worthy poor aided. I say “ worthy poor,” because it is necessary
to make the distinction ; and, in my opinion, great credit is due to
the Premier, who, when applied to for employment, had availed
himself of the Charity Organization Society to make inquiries as
to whether the applicants were worthy poor or not. And what
had been the result ? He found that the greater number of them
wanted to foist themselves upon the charitable institutions of the
State. And there were hundreds and thousands who availed
themselves of State aid when, if they only exercised their energy
and perseverance, they would be able to obtain a living for them-
selves, their wives, and children. Besides this, there is the bad
example they set their families ; children follow the footsteps of
their parents, and get into the habit of flying to some charit-
able institution in the event of the slightest difficulty occurring.
I most cordially welcome the ladies and gentlemen present, and


trust that when their deliberations are concluded they will be able
to say they had done good work on behalf of the charitable insti-
tutions of Australasia, (Cheers.)
The resolution was carried unanimously.
Miss Spence returned thanks on behalf of South Australia.
She said : I regret extremely that I have been unable to induce
others to come with me. I have spoken to many workers, who,
however, say they thought the Conferences are too frequent and
do not yield much practical result. This last objection is heard
everywhere. A writer in the Argus hoped the Conference would
do some practical work. What practical work can a Conference
do ? It is not intended to do that class of work. It is designed
to gather together the opinions of workers in different places,
with different methods and different views, and somewhat dif-
ferent hopes and aspirations. In order that the Conference may
lead to practical results, therefore, it is necessary that the
members should come with open eyes and ears, not refusing to
entertain new ideas, but, whilst willing to bring forward their
own, willing at the same time to listen to arguments by which
their own opinions might be modified or possibly refuted. The
practical results of a Conference are to be seen elsewhere, in the
improved manner in which the charitable workers carry on the
work in their own departments. Parliament itself is but a
talking shop. (Laughter.) Of course it has the power to legis-
late, but a Conference could not do that. People say they see no
practical outcome, but I am quite sure that we have had more
hold upon deserting husbands and fathers since the last Confer-
ence and since a modification of the laws which have arisen out
of that Conference. I feel very strongly that union amongst the
colonies for charitable purposes is invaluable, and that interchange
of information with regard to the character of people moving from
one place to another is of the utmost importance. It is not, after
all, such a mistake as is supposed to hold the Second Conference
in Melbourne. The Third Conference may very well, as sug-
gested, be held in Sydney ; and, as to the Fourth, I think I can
promise the delegates a warm welcome in Adelaide. lam myself
a very insignificant person, from a financial point of view. Ido
not talk of myself as a “benevolent lady lam simply a poor
woman who has gone through very hard times in the old days of
the colonies, and who knows what hard times mean. I would
like to see all women of all ranks bestowing charity free from the
great evil of patronage. (Hear, hear.) They should respect the
poor, and endeavour to educate the poor to be wise; and then
poverty will gradually diminish, until at last there will be some-
thing like heaven on earth.


Mr. S. Maxted (Sydney) said: I beg to return thanks on
behalf of the delegates from New South Wales for the kind
manner in which we have been received. The Victorian associa-
tions may rest assured that they have the cordial co-operation, not
only of the Government charitable institutions, but also of the
voluntary institutions of New South Wales in the efforts that are
being made at the Conference. The President (Professor Morris)
has been very modest indeed in recounting what he has done to
secure the co-operation of the other colonies. The fact was, I
am ashamed to say, Professor Morris was received rather coldly
in Sydney at first, but he aroused their interest in the matter, and
induced a degree of enthusiasm which will bear fruit in years
to come.
Mr. A, Solomon, in returning thanks on behalf of New Zea-
land, said: I expect to find considerable benefit arise out of these
occasional Conferences. It seems to me that a meeting of men
and women who have taken a practical part in the distribution of
charitable aid in the various colonies is likely to lead to very
beneficial results. Some complaint has been made that the last
Conference had not ended in anything practical, but how can any-
thing practical be expected from one Conference ? What practical
result has there been up to the present time from the Conference
on Federation? The field of charity is as wide as that of Federa-
tion. There can be no question that practical results will arise
from the Royal Commission on Charities, and I am looking
forward to the report of that commission with some impatience.
The Premier said that money spent in charity in Victoria was
not wisely spent. In ray opinion the failure, to a very great
extent, was due to the fact that, although the colony spends
£120,000 a year on charitable institutions, the Government has
no voice whatever in the management of such institutions; and
until the Legislature interferes, and gives the Government a voice
in the matter, the Premier, without a doubt, will continue to find
the same fault. We have all a very great deal to learn in the
matter of the management of charitable institutions and of the
manner in which funds could be equitably raised for their support,
and I do not think any colony has more to learn than Victoria.
It seems an unsatisfactory thing to a visitor that in a wealthy
colony like Victoria the management of the largest public hos-
pital should be compelled to threaten to close some of their wards
because they had not the money to keep them open. Then there
is another magnificent institution—the Alfred Hospital, on the
St. Kilda-road—where they have glorious wards, but have no
money to open them or to keep them open. Such a state of
things could not exist in New Zealand. It is impossible for any
hospital or charitable institution to be in financial difficulties as


regards maintenance. The institutions there are supported partly
out of the consolidated revenue and partly out of the rates.
Every man there has to pay towards the support of hospitals and
charitable institutions, whether he likes it or not. I was very
glad to hear the Premier say that legislation would be initiated
which would have the effect of placing the Victorian institutions
under Government control and providing for their support. lam
very much obliged to you for the cordial manner in which you
have received the resolution proposed by the honorable the
Premier. (Applause.)
Mr. R. Edwards (Queensland) said : I am very glad to have
the privilege of attending the Second Conference on Charity, and
also to see such a large number of the general public present,
showing the interest taken in the management of your charitable
institutions. As a delegate from Queensland, I desire to express
my gratitude for the kindly reception afforded to the delegates
from the other colonies. As Queensland delegates we have not
come with any idea of being able to teach others, but, indeed,
have come with the view of being taught and of getting as much
information as we possibly can in connexion with the manage-
ment of the various benevolent institutions; and I trust we will
not go back disappointed. At any rate, lam sure we will go
back with some knowledge that will be of practical use in the
management of such institutions in Queensland. Brisbane is a
comparatively small city. It is not nearly so large as Mel-
bourne, and apparently is not so prosperous ; yet Brisbane is
rich in its benevolent and charitable institutions. Indeed, I am
inclined to think that during the last few years these have been
multiplying rather too rapidly in proportion to the population of
the colony. The successive Governments during the last 22
years, whether Liberals or Tories, have generously supported the
charitable institutions. Ido not know that that is a good trait
in the character of a Government. I think it has a tendency to
make the general public a little less self-reliant than they ought
to be. However, I will not enter into that question to-day, but
will simply express my gratitude for the kindly reception given
to the delegates. (Applause.)
The Rev. J. W. Simmons (Hobart), in returning thanks on
behalf of the Tasmanian delegates, said : I have just returned
from England, and, having had the opportunity of inspecting
some of the charitable institutions, I have to confess at once that
I have found a plentiful supply of good works. The trouble we
experience is that men will come to the towns on the slightest
possible pretext. They cannot be kept on the land. I hope
before the Conference is ended we will listen to something in the
way of a perfect revolution of our charitable systems. With the


best of intentions, we are wasting money by thousands in all our
colonies. The English House of Commons, in the year 1772,
passed a Bill which had for its object the giving of pensions
to the aged, but that Bill was thrown out by the House of
Lords. The tendency of modern thought in England is to go
back to the principle of pensions. It seems to me to be a
splendid thing to be able to say to a young person—“ If by the
time you are 21 you will place the sum of £l3 in the Post-office
Savings Bank, and allow that to accumulate until you are 65 years
of age, there is ss. a week for you for life.” Besides the indirect
gain which results from this plan in the direction of teaching
thrift, it is cutting the enormous sums spent on charity right
down by the very root and changing the whole system. How-
ever, this is not a time for the discussion of such schemes, and I
will therefore content myself with thanking you very heartily for
your welcome. (Applause.)
The Rev. Canon Goodman (Geelong) said : In Geelong we
are looking forward with extreme interest to the results of this
Conference, and especially to the report of the Royal Commission
on Charities. We are looking forward to building a new hospital
and to re-organizing the benevolent asylum, and are anxious to
do this great work in the very best way possible and avoid all
the mistakes that have been committed during the half century
that this colony has existed. We find now that charity has in it
a great scientific element ; for instance, Emerson said—“ If I
help my brother by giving him money, I am simply giving him a
promise to pay. lam doing nothing for him ;I am simply doing
what is most convenient for myself—putting my hand into my
pocket and giving him a little money. But it will not succeed in
raising him in the scale of humanity,” To raise the fallen in the
scale of humanity is what we have to do. I have been intrusted
with the resolution—“ That the thanks of this meeting he tendered
to the Council of the University for its kindness in granting the
use of the Wilson Hall." lam quite sure that if Sir Samuel
Wilson could see the gathering here, under the presidency of His
Excellency the Governor, he would feel thankful that this hall
has been devoted to such a purpose. Sociology is gradually
growing into a science, and it is worthy of the University that it
should study that science in all its bearings. As a clergyman, I
have less to do with the scientific aspect of the subject. We find
it difficult to bear what all impostors might put upon us—to
believe what impostors might say to us ; it is not always possible
to do much with a poor hopeless vagabond or to endure all he
puts upon us. But if we can only first of all make ourselves
fully acquainted with the object of our charity, then we may
hope all things with regard to him ; we may bear all things, and


believe all things. lam quite sure that the purpose to which the
hall is being put is perfectly consistent with the very highest
objects of the University, and I have great pleasure in proposing
a vote of thanks to the Council of the University. (Applause.)
The Rev. A. S. C. James (Bendigo) seconded the resolution.
He said : It seems to me to be a very graceful and proper act
on the part of the Council of the University to afford us an
opportunity of meeting in a hall with which was associated pre-
cision of thought, earnestness of purpose, and breadth of culture.
It seems to me to be, to a certain extent, an indication of the
spirit in which we ought to try to do the work. The methods
of charity in these colonies are not at all precise. Some are
extremely loose ; and I look forward to obtaining, as a result of
the Conference, information which will enable me personally to
be more discreet in the exercise of assistance towards my unfor-
tunate suffering or poverty-stricken fellow-creatures. (Hear,
hear.)
The resolution was carried unanimously.
Mr. George Pallett (Bendigo) proposed a vote of thanks to
His Excellency the Governor for presiding at the meeting. He
said : I can testify to the great assistance we have received from
His Excellency and Lady Hopetoun, who, on the unfortunate
occurrence of accident in the mines, are often the first to send
telegrams of sympathy and practical help. (Applause.)
Mrs. Moubray seconded the resolution, which was carried by
acclamation.
13


SECOND DAY:
Wednesday, 18th November, 1891.
MORNING.
COUNCIL CHAMBER, TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE.
Professor Morris presiding.
Mr. Horrocks read a paper on—
State Children in Queensland.
As this is the first time Queensland has been represented at
the Conference on Charity, it may not be out of place to briefly
describe the methods adopted by the northern colony in dealing
with its neglected and deserted children.
The causes of admission are very similar to those of the other
colonies. The desertion of the fathers is on the increase ; this
is becoming a serious blot upon our community, demanding the
earnest attention of all interested in social questions. Instead
of placing these men in gaol, which is no punishment to them,
and thus still further increasing the burdens of the country, what
seems to be required is to “ arrest the wages ” of the head of the
family, and thus force him to-contribute towards his
support.
The parents’ contributions amounted to £2,200 last year, and
for the ten months of the current year to £1,700. Considering
the source from whence this money is derived, this is not satis-
factory. Guarantees are signed on admission, and the “ inquiry
department ” is constantly at work until the offending parent is
brought to book.
The illegitimate contingent is also steadily increasing every
year, a fact which social reformers should note.
The Boarding-out System is in a transition state at the present
time, and has only been adopted in connexion with the Diaman-
tina State Orphanage in Brisbane. On account of the absence
of a suburban and farming population in the northern and central
divisions of the colony boarding out there will not be possible or
successful for some years, and the two large Catholic institutions
have not given it a trial, prefering to bring up their children
under the guiding influence of the “ Sisters of Mercy.”
In the southern portion of Queensland, including East and
West Moreton, Darling Downs, and Wide Bay Districts, boarding
out has proved highly beneficial. The physique of the child
invariably improves after it has been in a foster-home for a time


{especially in the country), its sympathies are enlarged, and it
learns to take an intelligent interest in its surroundings. The
feeling that it is to some extent a pauper living on charity
disappears, and a more self-reliant and sturdy spirit is engendered,
which cannot fail to be advantageous hereafter. The natural
affections of the little one are stirred and find an outlet in the
home circle, and its characteristics are taken greater note of in a
family than in an institution.
Diseases common in orphanages, such as ophthalmia, measles,
scarlatina, &c., are almost unknown amongst boarded-out children.
There are 472 thus boarded, an effort having lately been made
to place them as much as possible in healthy country localities,
away from evil influences, care being taken to secure the proximity
of a school, attendance at which is compulsory. Out of this
number none have died during the current year, and all have
improved in health.
There are two indispensable conditions without which experience
has shown boarding out cannot be satisfactorily worked. One is
choice of proper foster-homes, and the other a vigilant and con-
stant system of inspection. Extraordinary precautions are taken
in our colony to secure none but the best and most suitable
homes. The applicant’s references do not carry much weight. As
a rule the department institutes minute and searching inquiry
into each case, and every home is visited by the Inspector of
Orphanages before the children are placed. As to inspection, too
much care cannot be bestowed upon this important item, which
may be termed the mainspring of the system ; unless it is carried
out with tact and firmness, the inevitable result will be a general
laxity, and ultimate failure. To secure increased efficiency in this
respect, ladies’ district visiting committees have been appointed
from residents in the different localities, whose duty it is to visit
monthly and to report to head quarters at once should it be
necessary. These committees are doing good work, and the
ladies composing them have shown commendable zeal in the dis-
charge of their self-imposed duties ; but the time has now arrived
when it is absolutely necessary to appoint a boarding-out officer
who shall be responsible to the department and keep in constant
touch with every boarded child under supervision.
There is one drawback to boarding out which should be men-
tioned—that is, the constant interference of parents, which
generally ends in the withdrawal of the children from their home,
and tends to unsettle them and to disgust the foster parents. A
good home is often lost in that way.
When girls reach their thirteenth and boys their twelfth year,
whether residing in an orphanage or boarded out, they become
liable to be hired out for a period of five years on a sliding scale


of wages. There are now 175 girls and 183 boys, total 358, at
service. The boys are doing remarkably well. Most of them are
on farms in the country, and it is found that on discharge they are
readily absorbed into the general population.
The girls, as has been found in the other colonies, are much
more difficult to manage, give more trouble, and are constantly
changing their situations.
This is a difficult question to deal with, and deserving of the
consideration of this Conference. These girls are found to be
full of passive resistance to authority; they are disinclined to
work, disrespectful, and disobedient. How to counteract these
rather formidable faults is the problem which we are called upon
to face.
The root of the evil appears to be in want of proper training.
The admirable home at “ Brookside ” seems to have supplied a
long-felt want, and cottage training homes apparently answer
admirably.
Such homes have been recommended, but have not yet been
inaugurated. In the meantime we have to compromise by allowing
the boarded-out girl one year’s training under the supervision of
her foster-mother ; but this has not proved very successful, as
many of the mothers are not fitted to impart the needful instruc-
tion.
At the end of last year these children had £5,299 to their
credit in the savings bank, which has since considerably increased.
One-fourth of these accumulated savings may be handed to the
child on discharge, the remainder stands at interest until it is
21 years old.
Only one case of ill-treatment of a service girl occurred this
year. Proceedings were promptly taken, and the employer sen-
tenced to six months’ imprisonment and his wife was fined £5.
There are no countries where more generous support is given
by Parliament towards reclaiming and rearing these children than
in the Australian colonies. Whatever method, therefore, is best to
transform them into good citizens deserves careful and full con-
sideration. Although the outlay is considerable, it must not be
forgotten that every year the State regains a moiety of these
children, who in the majority of cases are turning out well,
instead of swelling our criminal population, which probably
would have been their fate had they been left to their own
devices.
16


Mrs. Twopeny read a paper on —
The Industrial Schools and Boarding-out System in New
Zealand.
Your President having asked me to contribute a paper on the
Industrial Schools and Boarding-out System in New Zealand, I
shall endeavour to relate the result of a six years’ experience—
-1884 to 1890—as a local visitor under the boarding-out system
in Dunedin. But, as I have no official reports at hand, I am
unable to give any statistics and must rely upon personal obser-
vation.
There are three industrial schools and reformatories in New
Zealand—one at Kohinamara, near Auckland ; another at Burn-
ham, near Christchurch; and a third at Caversham, close to
Dunedin, Besides these there are several orphanages, and a
Roman Catholic school at Nelson, subsidized by the Government.
The industrial schools were originally established by the pro-
vincial Governments of Auckland, Canterbury, and Otago, but
were taken over by the colonial Government upon the abolition
of the provinces in 1876, and are now under the control of the
Education Department.
Until 1886 they were supported entirely out of the consolidated
revenues, but in that year the whole charitable aid system of
New Zealand was revised by Parliament, and part of the charge
for the support of the indigent as distinct from the criminal
children was thrown upon the district rates.
This has caused some friction between the charitable aid
boards and the Government. The boards consider they have a
right to a voice in the control of the expenditure of the schools,
as they are called upon to contribute towards the support of the
children. The Government reply that the greater part of the
children in the schools are committed by the magistrates as
criminals, and supported entirely by the colonial taxation. One
result of the indigent children being paid for out of local rates
has been that fewer children have been sent to the schools. The
pressure of local public opinion makes magistrates more chary of
committing children for indigence unless it is very clearly proved
that there is no other means of providing for them.
The boarding-out system in New Zealand has not been extended
so far as in Victoria. Only children under ten years of age are
boarded out. The elder ones are kept in the schools until they
have passed the fourth standard, when they are licensed out to
service. This rule leads to the breaking up of families. The
privilege of home life might, with advantage, be extended to
elder children. As soon as the children are formally committed
as indigent to the industrial school they are taken straight to
11131. C


the school in their own district—except a few Roman Catholics,
who are sent to Nelson. Many children do not stay for more
than a day in the school. They only require to be thoroughly
washed, and to receive the little outfit provided by the Govern-
ment before going to the foster parent's home. No regular
uniform is provided, but every child is neatly dressed in the
ordinary way. A uniform would mark them among other chil-
dren as industrial school waifs, which is the very thing to be
avoided. The whole essence of the boarding-out system as
against the barrack system is to give the children the advantage
of family life, and to amalgamate them with the ordinary popula-
tion. Everything is done to make them the same as other
children.
The boarded-out children are under the charge of the lady
superintendent of each district. She is paid by the Government,
and is responsible for all the children boarded out from the school
in her district, finding the home, and having charge of all the
arrangements. Under her work a small voluntary band of local
visitors. These ladies visit the children every month, and report
upon them to the superintendent, their reports being sent to the
Education Department. One defect I found with this system of
reporting was that I had no means —beyond the foster parent’s
assertion—of ascertaining that the children were sent regularly to
school, yet I had to report monthly upon the regularity of their
school attendance.
The local visitor is always welcome in the foster parent's
home, as she brings the monthly payment with her. This is in
the form of a postal order, signed by herself and the superinten-
dent, and it can be cashed at the nearest post office.
Foster parents are paid 6s. per week for each child, except
infants or very delicate children, who require more care and
attention; for those the pay is Bs, to 10s. per week.
There is now no difficulty about finding good homes ; indeed the
superintendent has always far more applications than she has
children to supply. The best homes are those of the small settlers,
where the children can learn something of farm life ; and the
Government have given orders that, as far as possible, the
children are to be sent into the country. There is a little diffi-
culty, however, in obtaining suitable local visitors. People in the
country are more on an equality than in towns, and foster parents
often object to being supervised by some one they consider in their
own station of life, and neighbours’ quarrels are sometimes the
result. In towns the best homes are in artisans’ families, where
the father is in regular work, but these sort of homes are difficult
to get. The next best are widows and deserted wives. These
people, having been through trouble themselves, generally show


more sympathy with the faults and failings of the little ones.
Homes where the woman’s own children are the same age as those
boarded out are to he avoided ; it is almost against human nature
that a mother should not show preference to her own children. If
these are groAvn up it is very likely to be a comforable home. They
take an interest in the children afterwards, and can often help
them to get on. Besides this they are generally earning some-
thing towards the support of the household, and the woman takes
industrial school children as a means of keeping the home
together. For instance, if she gets four children at 6s. per week,
her eldest son may be earning £1 per week, her daughter 95., and a
younger son 10s. £3 3s. is enough to enable them to live com-
fortably, and if the woman is clever with her needle she can cut
down the elder children’s clothes for the little ones. Foster
parents have often told me that it does not pay them to take
children if you have to buy all their clothes. Local visitors
must be constantly on the look-out against the family which tries
to live out of the boarded-out children’s money. Charitable
people often say—“ Could you not send Mrs. some children ;
she is so poor ?” It is difficult to make people understand that
this very poverty is a reason against sending children. Six
shillings per week is not a munificent sum to feed strong healthy
children and clothe them decently. The local visitor has to see
that the parent keeps up the outfit provided, and returns the child
with clothes in the same condition as it came to her. The article
of clothing I had most trouble with was boots. By the regula-
tions I was bound to see that each child had two good pairs.
The foster parent is supposed to train the children, and do all she
can to make them good citizens. I seldom noticed any careless-
ness in this respect; if anything there was a tendency to fuss too
much over small offences, particularly if the child’s antecedents
were known. The superintendent often has some trouble before
she can place the children in the home most suitable for them. I
remember one woman who was an excellent foster parent for
babies, but she could not manage older children. Another very
gentle woman had three delicate little girls sent her. These throve
well under her rule, but unfortunately their mother —a most dis-
reputable individual—found them out, and they had to be sent
to a distant home in the country, and three boys were sent in their
place. These boys nearly drove their foster parent mad. She was
utterly unable to control them, and their rough ways and coarse
language horrified her. She returned them to the school, and they
afterwards learned to behave themselves well in a settler’s home.
They required much rougher discipline than their first foster
mother could give them. She now gets only babies and delicate
children.


If any children are ill they are visited by the industrial school
doctor or the Government pays a country doctor to attend them.
But there ia seldom anything the matter with them. Every year,
when the industrial school doctors send their reports to the
Education Department, they praise the boarding-out as compared
with the barrack system. The percentage of illnesses and
deaths (particularly amongst infants) has fallen in a marvellous
degree.
It is almost impossible for children to remain in an unsuitable
home without some one detecting it. Neighbours are constantly on
the look-out to see if the children are ill-treated, the local visitor
pays her monthly visit, and the superintendent and the master of
the industrial school visit constantly. Then the sergeant of
police and the members of the Education Department can pay
surprise calls whenever they like ; and, as there are still many
opponents of the boarding-out system, they naturally make good
use of their opportunities.
I have visited children during every hour of the day ; and have
seen them at their meals, at their play, and in their beds, and
have seldom seen anything that the most fastidious could cavil
at. Indeed when one thinks of the sort of homes they came out
of, and the neglect most of them were subject to by their parents,
one feels thankful that they are able to get such good care and
training, I know of one child, now adopted by her foster parent,
who has everything she can possibly wish for ; but she remembers
the time when her only food was what she could pick up out of
dust buckets and gutters.
When a child is twelve years of age the pay to the foster parent
ceases, and if the child has passed the fourth standard he or she
can be licensed out to service. Generally the foster parent shows
some anxiety to find the child a comfortable situation near her
own home, so that it can feel it has a home to come to on holidays.
Here the advantage of sending the children to the country settlers
shows itself. They are often glad to keep them themselves and
pay them wages, or it is very easy to get them places in the
district.
I have mentioned that the pay to foster parents ceases at the
age of twelve, but the Government has provided that the chil-
dren must pass the fourth standard before being sent to service.
Indigent children are not often famous for scholastic attainments ;
they are generally the offspring of drunken and dissolute parents,
and their brains have been dulled by cruelty and neglect in infancy.
Thus the majority are not able to pass the fourth standard at the
required age, and have to be sent back to the industrial school
unless foster parents will keep them without payment. This they
very often do rather than let them go back to the school to get


through their standards. The reason is that respectable people
have a horror of the upper classes in the school, as' they consist
almost entirely of criminal children. Year after year the Inspector
of Prisons asks to have one of the industrial schools given over to
him as a reformatory, but so far he has asked in vain. Every
youthful delinquent over sixteen has to go to the common gaol;
all under fifteen are kept in the industrial schools, and are brought
up with the indigent children who are beyond the boarding-out
age. The practice of sending children back to the school is a
most iniquitous one. There are many children who have been
boarded out since their infancy, and have been carefully brought
up in respectable homes. A few do not even know that they were
ever in the industrial school. They have learned to look upon it as
the children's prison, which it really is.
Practically the Government makes it a penal offence for the
boarded-out child not to pass the fourth standard. The same
punishment is meted out to him as to the most hardened young
ruffian that ever stole a horse or picked a pocket or the girl
who has voluntarily taken up the life of a prostitute. All are
sent to the industrial school together.
Nearly every year the question of the propriety of keeping
criminal and indigent children together is brought up in Parlia-
ment, but no one seems to take enough interest in the subject to
thrash it out. All the members say “it is very improper, and very
sad that it has to be done,” and go on to a more interesting
debate. There is a strong feeling that crime with children should
not be punished by a reformatory, but that a strict training in an
industrial school and removal from bad influences is all that is
wanted to make many of the criminal children into good citizens.
This is very true, but in reforming the criminals the indigent
who associate with them may learn to become criminals. The
only remedy under present circumstances is to largely extend the
boarding-out system. All indigent children might be boarded
out, and they ought never to be returned to the schools unless
under exceptional circumstances. At present numbers are sent
back in order to be placed out at service or removed from one
foster-home to another. Even now it would be quite easy to keep
them apart from the criminals during the few days they remain
in the school. All that is really wanted for the indigent is a
receiving depot, whence they are drafted to other homes.
This mixing of criminal and indigent children is the great blot
upon a system which is otherwise working successfully.


r Mr. Exon read a paper on—
Homes for Destitute Orphans.
No subject can be more worthy the earnest and anxious regard
of benevolent persons than the discovery, application, and con-
tinual improvement of the most effectual methods of supplying
orphan children with the best possible substitutes for the father-
hood and motherhood of which they have been bereaved. Dif-
ferent opinions upon this subject have prevailed, and still continue
to prevail. The controversy between advocates of different
systems has sometimes been very sharp, because it is difficult in
matters respecting which we feel deeply, and act strenuously, to
avoid being betrayed into adopting one-sided and extreme views.
This paper is intended to give an account of the results of
experience gained by the managers of the Melbourne Orphan
Asylum in the past thirty years, during which they have
endeavoured to obtain a practical acquaintance with the best
methods known either in the colony or elsewhere. They have
sought advice from every quarter —have attentively examined
every theory presented to them—have not been tied to any one
method, but have fairly tried all those which seemed to give the
best promise of success, and the result of their experience has
been to persuade them that no one single system can meet all the
requirements of the different circumstances and varying mental
and bodily constitutions of all classes of children, but that the
best results are to be obtained by a judicious use in combination
of the best parts of several systems.
They believe it necessary at the present time to proclaim this
belief, backed up, as it is, not only by their own experience but
also by that of the conductors of one of the largest, if not the
largest and most successful of the organizations for the care of
orphans and destitute children in England. In the light of that
experience, they join issue at once with those who propose that
all existing orphanages, cottage homes, and similar institutions for
orphan children should be abolished, and that entire dependence
should be placed on the boarding-out system. The attempt to bring
about this exclusive establishment of one system only and the
sweeping abolition of the others is much to be deprecated. Even if
it were possible for it to succeed, such success would work badly
for the boarding-out system itself, as will be shown further on.
Boarding out is a most excellent plan for a great portion of the
work, but it does not suffice for the whole, and requires to be
supplemented by something more complete and efficient than mere
receiving and distributing houses. If there had been no institu-
tions between foster parents’ homes under the boarding-out regula-
tions and Government reformatories, many boys and girls too


turbulent for foster parents, yet not vicious in the sense of requir-
ing penal treatment, must have been sent to the reformatories, and
thus have fallen to some extent under the shadow of a criminal
character who have escaped that fate by means of such institu-
tions as the cottage homes of the Melbourne Orphan Asylum at
Brighton, the Cottage Home Farm at Lillydale, provided mainly
by the benevolence of Messrs. Wiseman Brothers, Mr. Cherbury’s
Homes of Hope at Collingwood and Ocean Grove, and other
similar institutions established under the care of religious and
charitable organizations or private persons, both Protestant and
Roman Catholic.
It is a great error, besides being very unfair, to do that which
often has been done by those who advocate the boarding-out
system, and oppose other institutions for orphan children, viz., to
speak of the institutions last mentioned as if they were to be
placed in the same category with large State pauper establish-
ments in which children formerly were massed in large numbers
under the cold and mechanical discipline of State officials—known
only by number instead of by name —drilled into a dull uniformity,
and crushed out of all human individuality.
Such institutions, for the most part, have been very properly
abolished, and no one wishes to see them revived ; but they are
not for a moment to be compared with the modern cottage-home
system. The experience of the past thirteen years has proved
that a combination of the boarding-out system with the cottage-
home system produces better results than either system worked
alone, and that, when these are further combined with a third
system (to be hereafter described) for dealing with destitute
fatherless children who have living mothers of good character, a
very complete and workable system has been attained.
Boarding out is one of the best systems, but farming out is,
without exception, the very worst. There is a continual danger
of boarding out degenerating into farming out, and a constant
tendency in that direction. The only difference between the
two is in the character of the homes in which the children may
be placed. In spite of the utmost vigilance occasional mistakes
are unavoidable. This danger is kept in check only by the
wonderful and never-to-be sufficiently praised zeal and exertions
of the voluntary local ladies’ committees, who watch over the
children in the different boarding-out districts. The official visits
of paid travelling inspectors would not be sufficient.
No doubt, some foster parents deserve the characters sometimes
attributed to them of being influenced by pure affection and
benevolence in taking charge of the children. It is also true that
some who begin by taking them as a matter of business end by
becoming warmly attached to them, but it is useless to deny or


ignore, as is sometimes done, the fact that the majority of the
applicants for children expect to get the full value of the cost of
their maintenance either in money or services. There is another
danger attending the boarding out. Well-meaning but mistaken
persons seek to make it a means of affording pecuniary assistance
to poor persons who are unable to provide for themselves without
charitable aid. This never ought to be done, but it sometimes is
done. It is expressly contrary to the best printed regulations.
It should be an invariable rule never to send a child to be boarded
out with any persons who are not provided with at least fairly
comfortable means of subsistence before applying to receive
children on payment.
The cottage-home and the boarding-out systems have been
found to work admirably together. The elder children who are
being taught tailoring and boot-making in the cottage homes
assist in providing the outfits of clothing required for children
boarded out. In event of the removal of a child from a foster
parent’s home being necessary, if there should be no other
foster parent’s home available at the time, then the cottage homes
provide a safe and good refuge ready at any moment. The need
for such a refuge has often been evident. The transfers and
returns to the institution have been numerous. Out of a total of
1,312 children sent out to foster parents, there were 280 transfers
from the original homes to other foster-parents, and 323 returns
to the institution. These figures prove that the constant watch-
fulness above mentioned is most urgently needed.
In connexion with a large number of boarded-out children,
well-appointed cottage homes in a healthy situation have proved
to be of great value as a sanatorium for children who may be
temporarily or permanently in weak health. It is neither safe
nor practicable as a rule to leave such children under the care of
foster-parents.
Before referring more particularly to the third system above
mentioned, it is necessary to define what we are to understand by
the term “ orphan.” A child may be orphaned or bereaved
wholly or partly by the death of one or of both parents, or by the
disease, neglect, or criminal character of the parents. The
means of the Melbourne Orphan Asylum are limited, and the
area over which its work extends is large. It receives and pro-
vides for orphans from all parts of the colony of Victoria, except
the towns of Ballarat and Geelong, where district orphanages
have been established.
It has, therefore, been compelled to adopt for its own practical
purposes a rather limited meaning of the term “ orphan.” It places
in the first rank as claimants for admission destitute children who
have been deprived by death of both parents, and no orphan of


this class has ever been denied admittance. Secondly, children
deprived by death of one parent, the surviving parent being unable
to maintain them through hopeless disease or insanity, may be
admitted ; or thirdly, one or more of the numerous family of a
destitute widow; but it is made a condition that such widow, if
in good health, must have at least two young children remaining
dependent upon her, that is to say, if she has three children, the
Orphan Asylum will relieve her of one ; if she has four, of two;
and so on, according to the number of children under twelve or
thirteen years of age. No doubt, there are many other classes of
poor children outside the limits of these lines who urgently need
charitable aid, but these have to be left to other organizations
specially adapted to meet their cases. The three classes above
named are the special care of the Orphan Asylum.
In addition to the boarding-out and the cottage-home systems,
there is another which, for the third class of children above men-
tioned, is the best of all ; although it is attended with so much
danger of being abused that it was adopted with much hesitation,
and is carried on under the most rigorous conditions of constant
watchfulness.
This plan is applicable to the cases of fatherless children who
have mothers living, provided that the mothers are of good
character and able to exercise proper control over their children.
In such cases, instead of separating the children from their
mothers and placing them in the Orphan Asylum, or boarding them
out with strangers, a weekly sum of money is granted to the
mother for the maintenance of each child. This may be rather
less than would be paid if the child were boarded out with
strangers, and yet be a greater assistance to the mother than
taking the child away from her, seeing that she is compelled to
keep her home together for the sake of the remaining children.
The two chief objections to this plan are—(l) It may be called
a branch of outdoor relief, and is likely to be sought after by
many widows who would not place their children in an asylum or
have them boarded out in strange homes ; and, therefore, the
adoption of this practice is calculated to lead to an increase in
the demand upon charity. The second objection is that many
mothers are unfit to have the care of their children. Some are
morally depraved, and others, though good in character, are over-
indulgent, and unable, when the children have lost their father, to
supply the firmness of control necessary to preserve boys and
girls from falling away into evil courses. To guard against these
dangers, the mothers who are paid for their own children are placed
under the care of local ladies’ visiting committees, subject to
the same regulations for visitation and street supervision as are
provided for the protection of children boarded out with strangers.


If the children are not kept regularly to school, properly trained
and well cared for, or if the home discloses objectionable features,
the matter is reported to the general committee by the local cor-
respondent. Special visitation is made by an officer from the
institution, and, if after the warning the causes of complaint are
not removed, the pay to the mother is discontinued ; but the
children may he either taken into the Orphanage or removed to
the care of foster-parents under the boarding-out regulations. To
meet the difficulty of the tendency to an increase in the demand
upon the charity caused by this plan of paying mothers for the
support of their own children, all such cases are placed on the
books only for one year at the farthest. The order for the ad-
mission of the child or children terminates on the last day of the
year, and can only be renewed on a fresh application, accompanied
by a special report of the visiting agent or local committee show-
ing that the circumstances of the case are still such as to justify
the committee under the rules of the institution in continuing the
grant in aid. This constant visitation, reporting, and reviewing
entails an enormous amount of work, but being conscientiously
performed it is a reasonably sufficient safeguard against abuse of
the charity, and after thirteen years’ experience the committee
are assured that they possess in this method a very valuable one
for the class of destitute children for whom it is intended.
True it is that many widows receive help in this way for their
fatherless children who would not accept charity in either of the
other forms of having them boarded out with strangers or placed
in an institution ; they would almost rather starve and see their
children half perish with them than he parted from them ; but
true also it is that many such widowed mothers are more worthy
of help than any others. Spite of all vigilance, in some few cases
no doubt abuse may occur, but on the other hand the committee
has had numerous convincing proofs that in no other form could
charity have been more worthily and effectually applied. Picture
a worthy woman with a large family of young children bereaved
of the bread winner, the savings of better times exhausted during
the period of sickness. To many such the institution has brought
timely help just at the sorest need—relieving the widow from utter
despair, putting heart into her to struggle on, keeping her children
about her until, as the elder ones grow up and are able to share
her industry, she is able to do with less and less assistance until,
to their credit be it spoken, at least some of them will even
anticipate the decision of the committee that the time for depend-
ence on charity has altogether ceased. Very delightful to the
committee have been some of the testimonies of gratitude received
in this way. This is the best form of charity —helping the poor
to help themselves.


I should be sorry if anything in this paper were understood, or
rather misunderstood, as being against boarding out. Nothing
could be further from my intention. The committee under whom
I act value the system very highly, and use it for the greater
portion of their work. But they consider it in more danger from
some of its most enthusiastic advocates than from its adversaries.
There is always a danger in extremes. Public opinion has been
kept in a somewhat excited state in favour of this system by
reflections, not always just, cast »on other systems, and by con-
stantly published glowing accounts of all the successes of board
ing out and no accompanying hint of the failures. Now, if any
person with much experience on the subject asserts there have
been no failures, I must suspect him, or her, of having occasionally
(unintentionally, let us say) winked with one eye at least, if not
with both.
If only one or two of these failures should become suddenly
notorious, and such a thing might very easily happen, the excite-
ment of public opinion might turn the other way, and boarding
out might be as unduly blamed as it has been extravagantly
praised. Better it is therefore that we should keep fairly and
squarely before our own eyes and those of other persons the fact
that boarding out, like all other human institutions, is a thing of
mixed good and evil.
It was my privilege in 1888, after 28 years’ service at the
Orphan Asylum, to obtain a year’s leave of absence and a com-
mission from the committee to visit as many institutions for the
maintenance of destitute and orphan children as I possibly could
in Great Britain, on the Continent of Europe, and in America.
I did so, and was pleased to be able to report that the largest, the
best, and most successful of them appeared to work on the same
varied lines as those adopted in a much smaller measure by our
own committee. Dr. Barnardo, with his 4,000 children, practises
boarding out pretty largely, but he has also his work-shops and
schools for training elder boys, his nurseries and babies’ castles
for young children, his houses for crippled and unhealthy children,
his farm schools, and, perhaps best of all, his cottage homes for
girls at Ilford in Essex. After visiting these homes, and writ-
ing from notes taken on the spot a description of what I saw, it
struck me that, word for word, except as to the number of
the cottages, the same description would apply to the cottage
homes of the Melbourne Orphan Asylum at Brighton,
Now, with this experience of their own, joined to that of such
an excellent example elsewhere, it is too much to ask the Orphan
Asylum Committee to abolish their cottage homes, and to trust
entirely to boarding out. While they have several good methods
at command, why should they be asked to tie themselves to one
27


only ? Such a course is so far from their intention that they
purpose, as soon as they can obtain means, to add another, by
establishing a cottage-farm home in the country for the purpose
of training elder boys to a good knowlege of agriculture. With
this addition, their arrangements for the benefit of the orphans
under their care would he as complete as they can at present see
their way to making them.
Me. Sydney Maxted read a paper by the Hon. De. Renwick,
M.L.C., on—
Children of the State in New South Wales.
I am, as president of the principal benevolent societies of New
South Wales, so intimately connected with all charitable organiza-
tion and administration in that colony, and each department of
the work is, in my opinion, so worthy of finding a prominent
place in the records of this Conference, that I feel somewhat at
a loss as to the particular division to which I should address
myself, so that the selection shall not be considered invidious
by the societies whose particular branches may chance to be
overlooked. I should first like to say that the objects of this
Conference, as I understand them from the published reports of
its proceedings last year, have my most cordial sympathy; and I
think that the opportunities for interchange of thought and
experience which these meetings afford must prove of the highest
value eventually, in connexion with any uniform system that may
be adopted with the object of consolidating and perfecting our
various methods of charitable administration. I think I cannot
do better than present a paper on the national system of dealing
with State children in New South Wales, which I have had the
privilege of directing from very small beginnings up to its present
vigorous stage of development; and I make this selection with
peculiar pleasure, because of the determined opposition, and
innumerable prognostications of failure, which attended the
establishment of the boarding-out system in that colony; and
further, because there is no department of social science of greater
importance to the community than that which governs “ the
children of the State,” upon whose proper training the happiness
and comfort of society so largely depends. As you are aware,
Victoria was considerably in advance of us in this matter ; and
had largely tested the possibilities of the system before it
obtained root in the mother colony; and there can be no doubt
that the success which it attained here, and the similar example


afforded by other older communities, first caused practical
attention to be given to it in New South Wales some time before
it was dealt with by the Legislature. However, if we were
slower to take up the movement on our side of the border, we did
not, after testing it thoroughly, hesitate to carry it on with
unabated vigour ; we have, indeed, advanced it further towards
its legitimate conclusion than has been the case anywhere else ;
and there are at present no destitute children in New South
Wales, apart from the boarded-out children, except those in the
reformatory and industrial schools, supported from the consoli-
dated revenue.
A brief history of the boarding-out movement, and its various
adjuncts, will not be uninteresting. My reports upon this subject
have been presented to Parliament for ten years consecutively ;
and the information which I now present has been principally
collated from them. It is not necessary to expatiate at length
upon the principles or details of the system, because they are
now thoroughly understood in all the colonies. It was in 1879
that a society of ladies for boarding out destitute children was
formed in Sydney ; was helped by a Government subsidy of £2OO
for that year ; and a larger sum of £4OO for the next year ; and
at the end of 1880 57 children—selected principally from the
Benevolent Asylum, which then was, and still is, the National
receiving-house of the colony—had been placed in families in
various districts, chiefly in the country. The results attained
showed that it was quite possible to insure, under the artificial
relationship of foster-parentage, the happiness and advantages of
family life for those destitute little ones who had from a variety
of causes been deprived of their own parents. The work of the
committee continued until 1881, when the Statute under which
the State Children’s Relief Board was appointed was passed by
the Legislature, and the system was placed under regular official
control. I was a member of the New South Wales Parliament
at that time ; I had for many years had practical experience
of the methods under which children were massed in great
institutions until they were sent out to take part for themselves
in the battle of life ; and it was my observations of the results
of these methods that led me to take such an enthusiastic part as
I did in passing the Act, and, as president of the department
which it created, in pushing forward the movement subsequently,
I should like to be clearly understood in regard to this matter,
however. I know there are present at this Conference some
estimable workers in connexion with institutions which still exist
for the training of children. My objection is to the genius of
that system, and not to the mode of administering it. I have
always admitted that the utmost kindness might be, an i no doubt


was, displayed towards the inmates of the great institutions upon
which the State Children’s Relief Act operated ; indeed, I do not
think it is the nature of humanity to be cruel to children in a
general sense ; but the life of the asylum is not family life ;
nothing could make the barrack a true home or lend it influences
found in homes alone. It was Lord Macaulay who wrote,
“ I would rather hear a boy of three years old lisp all the bad
words in the language than that he should have no feeling of
family affection ; that his character should be that which must
be expected in one who has had the misfortune of having a
schoolmaster instead of a mother.” In my first report to Parlia-
ment I used the following words : —■“ Life in the barracks is not
the changing scene which it is in the family, but a period of dull
regularity in which the powers neither of the body nor the mind
are fully drawn out.” “ Admit,” says a celebrated writer on this
subject, “ that the workhouse is conducted in the best possible
manner, that every care that can be taken is taken of these
children, that the schoolmaster and mistress are kind zealous
persons, anxious to do their best towards those placed under their
care ; admit all this, and yet what must be the state of a child’s
mind who has been for thirteen years almost incessantly immured
within the walls of an asylum ? And remember, that this is not
at a time when the faculties, both physical and mental, are formed,
but in the early spring of youth, when the mind is in a plastic
state, ready to receive and retain any impression that is made
upon it ; when pure air, freedom of thought and action, variety
of impressions, something in the shape of childish joyousness are
necessary to bring the mind as well as the body into a healthy
state.”
“ Hence children passing from the asylum into the world are
constrained to learn anew, when their nature has received strong
bent already by the asylum training, the lessons that the activities
of society have to teach. They begin, under grave disadvantages
after an artificial discipline, to take their place in the natural order
of things. And experiences combine to show that the relapses
into pauperdom, or descent in gross vice, in the case of children
so nurtured, are in proportion frightfully large to the whole
number. In this way, as the Royal Commissioners on Education
say, pauperism is hereditary, and the children born and bred of
the pauper class furnish the great mass of the pauper and criminal
population. The boarding-out system strives to supply to children
thrown upon the public bounty such a share in family life as shall
give them a natural training. It cannot wholly replace fathers
and mothers who have died, or who have been compelled by
circumstances to neglect their natural obligations ; but it can
rescue orphans from the colourless stiff life of the asylum, and


introduce them into select homes, where they may consort on
equal terms with the children and share in the ‘ praise, blame,
love, kisses, tears, and smiles ’ which diversify their path. That
is Avhat is done under the system. Every step of the process is
attended with careful oversight. Certain well-ascertained con-
ditions are essential to success ; neglect of them is sure to entail
shipwreck.-” These words embody the views which the State
Children’s Relief Board have always held, and the public sentiment
has during the decade which has passed since their publication
been so far educated by their practical application that it is not
too much to say that they are now universally accepted.
The boarding-out system has, since that period, advanced by
leaps and hounds. At the end of the first official year there were
59 children in homes ; at the quinquennial period there were
1,026 boarded out; on sth April, 1891 (the end of the tenth year
of the system), the number stood at 2,369, of whom 1,373 were
paid for by the State, the remainder being placed out as appren-
tices or for adoption. This latter feature, I may mention, serves
to illustrate the perfection of the system under proper administra-
tion. It was soon apparent that many suitable persons could be
found to adopt children without payment —childless women who
yearned for a little one to brighten their home-life, or women
whose families had married and left them companionless in old
age. But in dealing with this feature it was necessary to exer-
cise great caution to avoid placing children with a class of
persons who, it was evident, desired to obtain cheap servants.
The board accordingly decided to confine the adoption division to
children under seven years of age, and in this way 158 children
are placed out, the majority of them with well-to-do guardians,
from whom they will one day probably inherit property. There
is here a direct saving to the State of upwards of £2,000 per
annum on maintenance account. Another striking feature in
connexion with the system has been that it has not materially
increased the number of children classed as destitute in the colony,
but has rather had the opposite effect, the increase having been
altogether below the usual proportion to the increment of popula-
tion prior to the passing of the Act. The reasons for this are
that many parents who did not object to place their little ones in
central institutions, where they could frequently see them, had a
very decided objection to allow them to go to strangers in far-away
districts, and they consequently struggled to keep their homes
together with the help of outdoor relief from the Sydney Bene-
volent Society ; and again, the closer scrutiny exercised over
applications tended to keep down the number of dependents.
This is a fitting opportunity to say a few words, without offence,
in reference to the class of persons who endeavour to obtain State


children, either for the sake of the value of their labour or of the
Government subsidy only. It is in this direction that the one
great danger to the system lies, and I have no doubt that the
experience of other colonies is similar to that of New South
Wales in this particular. The facility with which clergymen
and magistrates in my colony have, notwithstanding repeated
warnings year after year, recommended unsuitable persons as being
in every respect suitable for guardians is simply marvellous. The
board has from the outset of its operations had to reject 20 per
cent, of the applicants upon the reports of its own officers, and I
have in my mind one particular meeting at which no less than 27
were refused on the ground of immorality in the homes, the dis-
closures in some cases being shocking. As soon as the boarding-
out period of the children expires—that is, when they reach twelve
years of age —the Act makes it imperative that they should be
apprenticed; and in connexion with this a defect to which I have
frequently drawn attention still exists. It is necessary that the
section relating to apprenticeship should be amended to bring it
into harmony with the Public Instruction Act, which requires chil-
dren to attend school until they are fourteen years of age. It will
be seen that they at present have to attend during two years of their
service period, which is undoubtedly hard upon the children and
also unjust to their employers. There were at the end of last
year 838 children in the service division, and it is an eloquent
commentary upon the results of the system that the majority of
these children have remained with the guardians who previously
had them as boarders, and that, although under their indentures
they nominally become the servants of such guardians, they eat at
the same table, attend the same school as and in all respects enjoy
the same comforts and advantages which the homes may afford to
the foster parents’ own children. No better proof of the bene-
ficial action of the boarding-out system could be presented than
this division and the adoption element combined. It has afforded
a field for the cultivation of an artificial parental and filial love
nearly as genuine and quite as practically useful as the love
between parents and children united by the ties of nature, and I
know that similar illustrations can be drawn from English, Vic-
torian, and South Australian experience. There is one department
which has been attended with splendid results in the mother
colony, and I draw particular attention to this because it is a most
important matter, and I know we all wish to learn the lessons of
experience. In my report for the year 1884 I pointed out to
Parliament that there were in many of the then existing public
institutions unfortunate victims of disease, inherited or acquired,
whom no foster parent would care to have, and for whom barrack
life was more unwholesome —mentally, morally, and physically—


than it was even for robust children. The Government, as a
consequence, in the following year gave the board authority to
place these unhappy little ones in cottage homes under the care
of motherly women, to surround them with all requisite comforts,
to provide them with suitable companions, and at the same time
subject them to the same vigilant supervision as the ordinary
boarded-out children. This adaptation of the boarding-out prin-
ciple to special circumstances has proved singularly successful,
and there must be several gentlemen present who have seen its
practical operation, and can speak therefore from their own
observation. Eight of these homes are now under the control of
the board in healthy country districts, where they can be easily
visited, and where medical skill is close at hand if required.
Their object is quite in harmony with the fundamental principle
of boarding out. The cottage home is simply a means whereby
children temporarily diseased or chronically infirm who cannot be
at once or at all placed in healthy families can either be nursed
into health sufficient for them to be boarded out or can be nur-
tured permanently under conditions which alleviate, in some
measure, their hard lot. In either case for them the life in a
cottage is the nearest approach to family life which can be
achieved. I have thus fully particularized this experiment
because I am really anxious to see it adopted in other colonies.
It cannot fail under proper conditions, and these are, with regard
to the home itself, a healthy locality and good sanitary surround-
ings ; and, with regard to the qualifications of the mothers,
housekeeping skill, tact, patience, good temper, some knowledge
of nursing, and experience in the management of children.
Altogether 607 sick and delicate children have passed through
these cottage hospitals; 491 have sufficiently recovered to be placed
in homes under ordinary boarding-out conditions, and 116 still
remain inmates, which is about the number for which there is
proper accommodation.
If New South Wales has this advantage, however, she is at one
great disadvantage in another important particular which does
not exist in any other colony. In Victoria and South Australia
one department deals Avith all the Government institutions for
dependent children. In New South Wales there are several
agencies. For instance, the boarded-out children are under the
control of the State Children’s Relief Board, the Colonial
Secretary being the Minister. The benevolent asylum (the
national receiving depot) is managed by an irresponsible board ;
the industrial schools and the reformatory for girls are not under
any boards, but are controlled by the Department of Public
Instruction, and the Department of Justice respectively. It is
unnecessary for me to point out to the experts now present how
11131. D


undesirable such an arrangement as this is. It is inharmonious in
the highest degree, and does not exist in the interest of the
children. I have no doubt whatever that if the departments of
the reformatory and industrial schools were under the control of
the State Children’s Relief Board, as they ought to be, the admin-
istration would be less costly, and the number of children who still
remain in asylums would be considerably reduced. There are no
different conditions existing in New South Wales to make the
experiment likely to be less successful than it has been in
either Victoria or South Australia. Another defect in our system
is that we have no power at present to place children as boarders
in special cases with their own mothers. In Victoria I understand
that a number of children are thus placed out, with the happiest
results, and in a way that effects a considerable saving to the
State. This division of the system enables deserving widows to
keep their own little homes and families together, and at less cost
to the Government than if they were placed with strangers; and
the plan adopted is altogether more natural and humane than
boarding out in the regular manner. lam aware, of course, that
it is surrounded with danger, but this could be provided against by
careful administration ; and the same objection may really be
raised, and similarly answered, in connexion with every other
division of the system. The New South Wales Act is quite
silent upon the subject, but three Attorneys-General have declared
that to board children with their own mothers would be in direct
contravention of the spirit of it, and so my board has not attempted
to try the experiment. I understand also that the voluntary
element prevails more largely in connexion with the management
of the children in Victoria than it does in the mother colony, and
lat once freely admit the value of this agency. We have some
very valuable local committees and individual visitors, but the
closeness of the official supervision by the paid inspectors has led
the honorary visitors to be somewhat lax during the past two
years; and recently the board found it necessary to take special
steps to infuse some of its own enthusiasm into a branch of the
service which, although it is purely voluntary, has an enormous
power for good, and without which the system cannot be perfectly
successful. Again, in comparing and analyzing methods, I find that
both South Australia and Victoria are in advance of the older
colony in regard to reformatories. I have for ten years strongly
urged this matter upon the attention of successive Governments,
but so far without any practical results, although the public mind
has been so educated in consequence that the necessity for a refor-
matory is generally admitted. We have a girls’ reformatory, but
we have not yet a reformatory for boys ; and our young criminals
are still either sent to gaol or transferred by irregular methods


to *that excellent institution the industrial school ship Vernon,
which is not the right place for them as it is at present consti-
tuted. The criminal boys and the industrial school children
should he much further apart than the limits of a ship can place
them. I have in all my reports entered very fully into the
various aspects of this important question. The absence of a
reformatory undoubtedly lessens the quantity of material on
which the State Children’s Relief Board might act. Lads who
would pass through the purification of a reformatory into the
family life of the community, and thence into the world, are now
of necessity passed into the gaol, where the bulk of the number
is lost to society. How unnecessary this method of sending
erring boys to gaol is in many cases was demonstrated recently
in connexion with two cases which are now under control of the
New South Wales Board. A lad aged twelve years was
charged with burglary, and a boy of fifteen was charged with
criminal assault. They were arraigned at the Central Criminal
Court before Sir William Windeyer, who entertains, as I do, very
strong views in this matter. His Honour received the boys’ plea
of guilty, the cases were perfectly clear; and his duty in the
ordinary way was to send the boys to imprisonment. An
arrangement was come to, however, by which the principal officer
of the State Children’s Relief Board entered into personal recog-
nisances for the boys’ good behaviour for a year, and they were
then handed over to his custody. Special homes were selected in
which there did not exist temptations to commit offences similar
to those they had been convicted of; and, although eight months
have since passed, they have not again lapsed into vice or crime,
and there are no better hoys under the control of the system.
In my report for 1883 I furnished a complete outline of neces-
sary new legislation in connexion with the government of State
children, which political exigencies and the various conflicting
interests involved in any change have thus far prevented from
being carried out. There are 40 clauses in this proposed
measure, and they contain provisions which, it is admitted, will
make the management of all dependent children fairly effective.
The necessity for such legislation still exists, and it is my intention
to make an effort to have it dealt with before my departure for
Chicago next year. Briefly stated, the projected Act contained
the following sections, and it will not be out of place to submit
them now for consideration and discussion :
Provision for the transfer of all Government institutions for the young
to the control of one directing body, in order that they may he re-organized
with a view to their more economical management; to the proper classifi-
cation of the inmates ; their instruction in industrial pursuits in schools or
reformatories ; their subdivision into families in such institutions ; and
preliminary training in these altered circumstances in such a way that their


segregation in homes under the boarding-out system would he attended vftth,
few after-difficulties, and transfers from family to family, which tend to
unsettle children, would be of rare occurrence.
Power to proceed legally against the parents of illegitimate children for
the recovery of maintenance moneys, father and mother to he liable
separately or jointly.
Power to require mothers of illegitimate children charged upon the State
to make declaration as to the paternity of such children, and penalties for
refusal or false declaration in such cases.
Power to establish one or more model farms, at which some of the elder
boys may be instructed in the theory and practice of agriculture.
Penalty upon parents who vexatiously visit the homes of their boarded-
out children, and interfere with and annoy the guardians.
Power to deal criminally with persons who leave illegitimate or other
children with people under promise of payment for their support, and then
desert them.
Imposition of penalties upon unlicensed foster-mothers.
Deserving widows or deserted wives to be permitted to retain their
own children as State boarders, at the discretion of the board.
Exemption of State apprentices from school attendance, or, otherwise,
apprenticeship at fourteen instead at twelve years of age.
Insolvency not to relieve employers of indebtedness to State apprentices.
Pi’ovision for the transfer of apprentices, cancellation of indentures in
cases of ill-treatment of children or other sufficient cause, and in such
cases power to re-apprentice such children.
Penalty upon employer for discharging apprentice without consent of
board.
Power to police or any officer of the board to arrest without warrant
absconding apprentices, or boarded-out and adopted children, or children
who have been illegally removed by parents.
Step-fathers to be liable for the support of their wife’s children, whether
legitimate or illegitimate, at the time of their marriage ; and, as in another
colony, the “grandmother and grandfather, and the children and grand-
children,” in addition to the fathers and mothers, to be liable, according to
their several abilities, to be charged for the relief and support of their
children who may be under State control.
Board to have power over moneys or properties to which State children
may be entitled, for the benefit and maintenance of such children as may
be decided.
Penalties upon persons who may obtain relief from the charge of their
children under false pretences, or who may succeed by false pretences in
having children placed with them as boarders.
Parents reclaiming boarded-out children to pay the costs incurred by the
Department when able.
Parents surrendering children for adoption to have no control over them
subsequently.
Provision for home education of children ; affidavits, in such event, to be
made by teachers and guardians that the child has been instructed a speci-
fied number of days in every half-year ; daily record of instruction to be
kept.
All institutions for children which may be supported by public donations
to be subject to official supervision, with a view to the proper treatment of
the children.
Power to place boarded-out children, in case of their serious illness, in all
hospitals wholly or partially supported from State funds.
Power to supervise all children for three years after their official period,
of boarding out, or adoption, or apprenticeship has terminated.


The foregoing are the principal points of legislation necessary
to consolidate the various divisions for State children into one
harmonious whole and to remedy defects in existing laws. It is,
of course, not possible to deal more fully with all these important
matters in the compass of a short paper ; but what has been said
will furnish sufficient food for thought, and should, I think, bear
good fruit under the influence and action of this Conference in
the time to come.
I now conclude by expressing regret at my inability to be
present at your deliberations, and by again conveying to you an
expression of my most earnest sympathies with the exalted charit-
able and philanthropic principles you are seeking to give effect
to by means of constitutional and intelligent agitation and free
discussion. And I trust that I may be able to personally take
part in your deliberations in New South Wales next year.
DISCUSSION.
In reply to questions, Mr. E. Exon said that altogether 438
children were at present under the care of the Melbourne Orphan
Asylum—B7 were at the cottage homes, 92 were boarded out
with strangers, and 259 had been placed with their own mothers.
He, however, thought the State would be very much imposed
upon if it adopted to any great extent the principle of boarding
out children with their parents, as it could not exercise the same
vigilant supervision. As to the distinction between “ farming
out” and “boarding out,” farming out was the term applied to
that system in which the children, instead of being treated as
members of the family, were treated as drudges, out of which as
much money was to be made as possible. A child might be con-
sidered to be boarded out if it were taken honestly into a family
as a member of that family. There was a little difference between
the rate allowed to a mother for her own child and that allowed
to strangers. The idea was that the foster mother should
be paid for her trouble, whilst with the mother it was supposed
to be a matter of love. The cost of boarding out children, and
of keeping children in institutions, was about the same; 6s. 6d.
per child per week was the average cost under both plans. The
mother, however, could in addition receive aid from the local
benevolent societies. There was a clause in their rules which
said that “no foster mother shall take children who is in receipt
of charitable aid,” but this did not apply to mothers.
Rev. S. C. Kent (Melbourne Orphan Asylum) said that
when children were placed with their mothers care was taken to
ascertain that the mother bore a good character, and the child was
as carefully supervised as if it had been placed with a foster
mother. They were careful to see that children were not placed


in the charge of extremely poor people, but that there was reason-
able prospect of their being well fed and clothed and cared for.
The papers that had been read that morning seemed rather to
contrast the two systems of boarding-out and industrial homes.
Perhaps sufficient attention had not been given to the cottage
system. He would admit that the families in the cottage homes
at Brighton were rather large, ranging, as they did, from 20-30
in a family ; nevertheless, they were admirably cared for, and
he was sure that if he could show them over the cottages they
would be all in favour of the cottage system. It might not be
desirable for the State to adopt the system on which they them-
selves were working, but he thought it the duty of the
Melbourne Orphan Asylum to continue their efforts on the same
lines. (Hear, hear.)
The Honorary Secretary said that it seemed to him, as the
secretary of a Charity Organization Society, that there was, with
regard to the matter before them, a broad underlying question of
principle, which appeared to have been evaded in the discussion.
Mr. Exon, of the Melbourne Orphanage, had told them that 60
per cent, of orphan children were boarded out with their mothers.
The chairman of the Ballarat Orphanage once remarked to him—
“ People die happy here, because they know their children will be
well provided for. An old friend of mine said—lf my children
go into the Ballarat Orphanage I will die happy.” The question
was how far was society justified in making the condition of
those who failed to perform their duties in life by providing
properly for the little ones dependent on them better than that of
those who were provident, careful, and self-reliant. Was not the
objection as applicable in regard to providing for destitute
children as it was in the case of most charitable effort ? Ought
we to do anything which would remove incentives to providence ?
He thought this a subject well worthy of discussion.
Mr. J. Roseby (Sydney) said he did not think the children
should be allowed to suffer because of the improvidence or
dissipation of their unfortunate parents. (Hear, hear.) He was
very strongly in favour of the cottage system adopted by the
Melbourne Orphan Asylum in conjunction with the boarding-out
system. He also approved of the principle of boarding out
children to their own mothers when the latter were worthy and
competent. He thought it a great hardship that the children
should be parted from worthy and affectionate mothers. On the
other hand, where the mother was unworthy, and the children
had unhappy and demoralizing surroundings, it was not to be
tolerated. He thought their deliberations might assume a
practical aspect if a resolution were moved affirming the
desirability of encouraging the establishment of cottage homes


similar to those in existence in Victoria, and strongly recom-
mending that where a widow mother was found to be worthy and
competent an allowance should be made to her to enable her to
retain her children.
Professor Morris pointed out that the Conference was not
of a sufficiently representative character to pass resolutions. The
object of the Conference was to circulate information and venti-
late views.
Mrs. Harcourt (Bendigo) said that she had been a correspon-
dent in a large district for some years in connexion with the
boarding-out system, and would certainly condemn boarding out
children with their parents. Of course there were exceptions,
hut her experience gained by a connexion with charitable institu-
tions was that people who were willing and anxious to keep their
own children were able to do so without any help at all. Where
a mother was capable of bringing up her own children, and had
sufficient control over them, she would generally manage to keep
them together without any other aid. Of course there were
exceptions, but they ought to be made exceptions; and she would
he very sorry to see it made a rule that State children should be
boarded out with their parents. (Applause.)
Mr. G-. E. Ardill (Sydney) said that most of those who had
had anything to do with neglected children believed that the
barrack system was not advantageous for their well-being. All
practical workers to whom he had spoken were in favour of the
boarding-out system, but in New South Wales they experienced a
difficulty at times in securing proper homes for the children, and
there was also lack of proper supervision, notwithstanding the
admirable help rendered by the ladies’ committees in the various
districts. This difficulty could in a measure only be got over by
adopting for a time the cottage home system, and thus enabling
the institution to retain the children until suitable homes offered.
Professor Morris said the boarding-out system had pre-
vailed during the last few years because it was the natural system
for bringing up children. As to what had been said about it being
necessary to give a child a bit of institution life, he did not
believe it for a moment. He believed that a rescued child would
be better under the care of a good woman than in any institution.
(Hear, hear.) Mr. Exon did not like the term “barrack
system,” and no doubt his barrack was a comparatively small
one. But if there were 87 children in three or four cottage homes
close together he did not think he could be let off the name. All
those who knew anything whatever about the two systems had
maintained that the boarding-out system —the family life—was
superior to the barrack system, and he hoped it would not go
forth as the voice of the Conference that they were going back


upon conclusions that had been reached elsewhere. lie had been
astonished to hear that as many as 260 orphan children had been
hoarded out to their mothers by the Melbourne Orphan Asylum.
He could only say it would be a most dangerous example for the
State to follow. Dr. Renwick had stated in his paper that
clergymen and magistrates were in the habit of giving certificates
to people to receive other people’s children. Would not these
gentlemen exert themselves to get this pay given to mothers to
support their own children, and when once that system was
introduced the duty that heaven placed upon the mother of
looking after her own children would be removed. No doubt
there were cases in which the mother could not earn a livelihood
and support her children; but were they going to make that a
general rule ? Mr. Roseby said “ Take care of the children,” but
if that principle were carried a little further it would end in taking
care of all the children of the State, and they would be on the
high road to communism.
Mr. C. Cock thought that it was a misnomer to talk about
children being “boarded out” with their own parents. They
were not boarded out at all; they were at home, and the mother
was assisted to keep them there and make the best possible chil-
dren of them. He thought the plan an excellent one. It was
what they were trying to imitate in the boarding-out system.
They were trying the give the child, in the absence of home
surroundings, the best substitute.
Mr. C. CRNeill quite agreed with Mr. Roseby, and thought
it was wiser to err on the side of being too generous. (Hear,
hear.)
Rev. J. W. Simmons said that if he understood the discussion
rightly it would appear that they had simply met together to
degrade people. If they educated people into a system of charity,
and to apply to have their children supported by the different
benevolent institutions, it would soon come to this that the
working man would not think it worth while to save anything.
(Hear, hear.) Their greatest trouble was to get men to respect
themselves, and to make some provision for themselves and their
families.
The Rev. H. L, Jackson (Sydney) said he thought the point
brought forward by Mr. Goldstein one which ought not to be
overlooked. He did not altogether sympathize with what had
fallen from the lips of Mr. Roseby, and thought there was a
danger lest their exceeding good nature should lead them astray
in the matter of administering relief.
Mr. Horrocks, in reply, said that the system of placing
children with their own mothers had been tried to a limited ex-
tent in Queensland, but it was not approved. A State department


would have to treat all alike without distinction. Then there
was the serious objection of expense. It was unjust to take
the money from the boarding-out vote, and to give it to mothers,
which was granted by Parliament for boarding out pure and
simple. Besides, if it became publicly known that this policy
was adopted, the numbers of applications for such relief would be
enormous.
Miss Spence said that in South Australia it was a rule never
to hoard out children with their parents, but a sort of outdoor
relief was granted to poor persons who wished to retain their
children.
Mr. E. Exon, in reply, said he did not think the Government
should undertake to board children with their parents, as the
Government was more easily approached than an institution, and
the system more likely to be abused. Still, as to its operation in
his own institution after thirteen years’ experience, he would be
sorry if it should be discontinued.
41


AFTERNOON SITTING.
The Key. H. L. Jackson (Sydney) presiding.
Papers.
Mr, Goldstein read a paper by Mrs. Fuller on the
Prahran Creche.
Mr, Maxted (Sydney) read a paper on—
Charitable Work in New South Wales.
As one of the prime objects of this Conference is to secure
uniformity of administration in connexion with the charities of
Australasia, by means of intercolonial legislation, it has occurred
to me that a necessary preliminary step is a thorough acquaint-
ance on the part of representatives with the existing methods
of dealing with the various public institutions in the different
colonies, in order that the knowledge and wisdom of many minds
may combine, under the most favorable conditions, to formulate a
uniform policy for consideration by our respective Governments,
if any agreement in that direction is eventually arrived at, I
therefore propose to first explain, as clearly as is possible in the
limits of a paper which must necessarily be brief, the present
methods of administering charity in all its branches in New South
Wales ; and then to respectfully throw out some suggestions,
based upon a practical experience extending over nearly fourteen
years as well as upon an accurate knowledge of the details of
several important departments not under my own control, but
which will doubtless be more fully referred to by other delegates
now present.
The adoption of one national system of charity organization
and administration for these colonies—and it will be'seen presently
that the term “ charity ” is used in its broadest sense—is beset
with difficulties which are, after all, more imaginary than real.
They may indeed be summed up in two words, namely, self-
interest and conservatism. It is now almost as much a platitude
as a truism that projected reforms are always regarded with
suspicion, which generally develops into very active antagonism
when the changes proposed are radical, in character or where
they tend to disturb vested interests, as they must do in substitut-
ing uniformity for diverse methods of government. Apart from
these obstacles, however, which are not founded on any principle,
the desired goal should be easy of attainment. The conditions of


our national and social life throughout Australasia are not in any
important particular dissimilar in any division of it. Official
statistics indicate that the poor and unfortunate of all classes are
about proportionately equal to population in all the colonies, if
we make due allowance for occasional variations arising from
special causes. And if we all freely admit (as I venture to think
we ought to do) that each of us has something to learn from the
other, it should be a simple matter to select all the best features
in our various charitable systems; and upon their lines to draft a
universal policy that should prove acceptable to the authorities
who will have to deal with it finally.
There is probably no part of the world in which dependent
persons of all classes, whether in the divisions of charity, lunacy,
or correction (and I think all three should come within the scope
of the deliberations of this Conference, under the comprehensive
term “ charity ”), are more tenderly or generously dealt with than
in these colonies. This statement is based upon a careful study
of the economic systems of several of the principal charitable
departments of British and foreign countries. Those which
assimilate most closely to ours in the respects indicated appear to
exist in the American States; but even there the harder condi-
tions of existence, which are always inseparable from older com-
munities, have made the application of the principles of social
science in their most economic aspects to provision for the depen-
dent classes a matter of the highest importance to the common-
wealth ; and the official returns from some of the States show
that, wherever the best results have been secured, it has been by
means of conferences on charity similar to that which was so
successfully initiated and carried out in the colony of Victoria
last year, and of which the present more numerous assemblage of
representatives is the outcome.
Having said so much by way of preface, I will now proceed to
explain the present position of charitable work in New South
Wales. The institutions of that colony are divided into three
classes, namely :
(1) Those wholly supported from the consolidated revenue.
(2) Institutions maintained by Government aid and voluntary
contributions jointly.
(3) Institutions altogether supported from private charity.
In analyzing methods and statistics, two points which should
be borne in mind in connexion with the New South Wales chari-
ties are the enormous disproportion of the Government assistance
to the voluntary contributions ; and the lack of direct interest
manifested by the public in the management of the principal
institutions of the country and the welfare of their inmates. There
are, of course, a number of noble bequests from rich colonists and


other benevolent persons, without the interest from which it
would not be possible to carry on the societies and asylums classed
as No. 2 and No. 3 ; and the statement just made refers distinctly
to the collections from the general public. For example, the
Government payment last year for maintenance of inmates of the
asylums for infirm and destitute was £46,296, and for boarded-out
children £27,189, or a total of £73,485 ; and under the existing
system not a shilling was contributed by subscribers to either of
these objects. Then take the hospitals for the sick. The Govern-
ment vote was £104,000, and the subscriptions from all sources
(including payments for patients) were only £17,500; and it may
be mentioned here that this is the largest proportion of private
charity to State aid in any department, the cause doubtless being
that subscribers to hospitals as a rule enjoy the privilege of passing
in patients, so that the exercise of their benevolence is attended
Avith some tangible result to them. Next there is the State grant
for benevolent asylums and other minor charities, which was last
year £30,300; and here again the private subscriptions amounted
to something under £6,000. Indeed, the gross charges upon the
public estimates for maintenance and management only for the
three great departments which directly affect the social life of the
country —I allude to lunacy, charity, and correction (exclusive of
the police force), with the contingent department of health—
amount to not less than £396,477; or, with the cost of new
buildings, £255,582, added, to £676,617; Avhile the subscriptions
from all sources (including the £17,500 already mentioned under
the heading of hospitals) was only £24,558. Thus while pay-
ments through the taxes for benevolent purposes, inclusive of
buildings, were at the rate of 11s. lOd. per head of the population
of the colony (which, in January of this year, was approximately
estimated at 1,145,000), the purely philanthropic contribution was
not more than sd. per head. These figures are perhaps a little
tedious, but they are necessary to illustrate the argument which
follows. This apparent lack of the divine virtue of charity among
one of the wealthiest and most prosperous communities in the
world, where the proportion of paupers to population is as only
1 in 199 to 1 in 41 in Great Britain, is happily not real, however,
but arises solely from that defect in our system of charitable
organization which leaves the bulk of the pauper population to
be supported wholly from the general revenue, and closes the
most important avenues for the exercise of benevolence against
the philanthropist and the reformer.
Briefly stated, the institutions included in class 1 are the Go-
vernment Asylums for Infirm and Destitute, the State Children’s
Relief Department, and the Reformatory and Industrial Schools.
The first and last mentioned are maintained, managed, and


controlled solely under Government officials, who are responsible to
their respective Ministers only. The department for children is
a purely Government institution, administered by State officials
under the control of the State Children’s Relief Board. The
asylums accommodate the dependent adults of the colony, of whom
there are, of both sexes, about 2,700, including 1,000 inmates of
the hospital divisions for chronic cases, such as cancer, consump-
tion, heart disease, paralysis, and senile decay, which are not,
because of their incurable character, admissable into the general
hospitals of the colony. The State Children’s Relief Department
controls 2,400 boarded-out children, including 120 in eight cottage
hospitals for invalids, and it is a branch of the Government De-
partment of Charitable Institutions. There are a Girls’ Reforma-
tory, with an average of 40 inmates, who have all been convicted
of crime ; and a Girls’ Industrial School at Parramatta, where
there are 100 inmates, convicted of street wandering or associating
with bad characters, who are not classed as criminals. There is
not yet a boys’ reformatory, in which particular (judging from the
operations of the Ballarat Reformatory) New South Wales is still
very far behind Victoria. The industrial school ship Vernon
continues to do good work among an average number of 250
wayward lads and others of criminal tendencies who have been
dealt with under the Industrial Schools Act; but it is a blot upon
our judicial code that the balance of our juvenile criminals are
still sent to prison, where the best provision possible is made
for their separate treatment, but where, notwithstanding, we
deliberately put the gaol brand upon them (in defiance of an Act
of Parliament which provides a more merciful alternative), and
thus unnecessarily swell the criminal statistics of the colony, as
well as inflict a moral wrong on society and also upon the lads
themselves. The voluntary element—either in the form of sub-
scriptions or boards of advice—is altogether absent from the
foregoing divisions, except the State Children’s Department, as
already described, and here the State bears the whole cost.
Asylums of class 2 include the metropolitan and country hos-
pitals for the poor who are actively suffering from diseases (in
contradistinction to the chronic cases which are forwarded to the
Government asylums); the Sydney Benevolent Asylum, which
distributes out-door relief to indigent persons of all classes and
creeds, and is also a public lying-in hospital and reception-house
for State children before they are boarded-out; the Hospital for
Sick Children ; the Asylum for the Deaf and Dumb and Blind
Children, which is practically a boarding school for little ones
thus afflicted ; the Montefiore Home for Destitute Jews, with
about half-a-dozen inmates ; the Goodlet Home for Consumptives,
which is wholly supported by Colonel and Mrs. Goodlet at a very


large expenditure, and has usually from 30 to 40 inmates ; the
Industrial Home for Blind Women, and the Industrial Blind
Institution for Men, at both of which inmates are sufficiently
instructed in industrial occupations to enable them to earn a
livelihood ; the Ashfield Home for Infants, the objects of which
will be best understood by the following quotation from its last
annual report: —“ The admissions were —25 mothers with a first
illegitimate child ; children of widowers, 8 ; children of deserted
wives, 8 ” ; the Sydney Charity Organization Society, which dis-
penses (but does not organize) charity among deserving needy
persons who require temporary relief, and is also a very useful
adjunct in other ways to the work of benevolence generally ; and
a few country benevolent societies, which distribute relief and
maintain a limited number of adult inmates of the better class,
whom it is not thought desirable to send to the central Govern-
ment institutions. All these asylums are under the control of
honorary boards ; and, although the State is a very large, and in
most cases the largest, contributor to their funds, it has no voice
practically in the management beyond the power to see that the
Government subsidies are not obtained otherwise than by means
of genuine subscriptions.
The institutions under class 3 are the Randwick Asylum for
Destitute Children, with about 200 inmates, which does not draw
Government subsidy in consequence of all State children having
been removed under the boarding-out system ; the School of
Industry for about 50 girls ; the Sydney Female Refuge, with an
average number of 50 fallen women ; the Church of England
Home for Fallen and Dissolute Women, with 30 inmates ; the
Sydney Night Refuge and Soup Kitchen, for homeless adults ;
the society engaged in rescue work and aiding released prisoners,
under the direction of Mr. Ardill ; and the well-known St.
Vincent’s Hospital, with an average of 80 to 100 inmates. These
institutions are likewise controlled by honorary boards, and, as the
Government does not contribute, it has not power to interfere in
any particular with their operations. There are, in addition, a
number of institutions for children and fallen women and several
for the relief the destitute poor—notably the Society of St.
Vincent de Paul, of which an esteemed representative is present
to-day, controlled and administered by Roman Catholic agencies ;
but of these I am unable to furnish details, although they all set
a very worthy example to other classes of the community in their
particular departments of charitable work and of social reform.
Now, here we have a number of methods of management,
diverse enough in character and possessing both perfections and
defects, which it would surely be well to revise and consolidate
under one comprehensive and well-devised policy, equally adapted


to the requirements of all the colonies, after consideration of the
needs and circumstances of each. The first question to be decided
is, which system of government will be beet in view of the
enormous financial responsibilities of the State and the much
more limited obligations of individuals and societies ? Should it
be purely honorary, or solely responsible in character, or will it
be advisable to combine both principles ? The question is one
which doubtless affords considerable opportunities for discussion
and difference of opinion also ; but having viewed it in its valued
aspects, I with some diffidence state the conviction I have arrived
at, which perhaps may be modified by any discussion of this
paper. In the evidence afforded by the greatest commercial
establishment of the colony—the Railway Department—there is
some warrant for the belief that government by a responsible
independent commission is the most desirable where great
patronage, as well as large expenditure, is concerned ; and it
appears to me that there is no reason why this principle should
not be extended to the charities of the colony, in which both these
prominent features of railway administration are paramount, pro-
vided that there are added safeguards to meet the different social
conditions involved. The voluntary element might be made a
very valuable, indeed an almost indispensable, auxiliary in a
manner to be presently pointed out; but irresponsibility should
not be the prime feature of the system. I have not presumed to
touch the details of the Departments of Dunacy or Correction
beyond referring to their very large annual expenditure ; but they
are so interwoven with our social fabric and, indeed, are indirectly
so closely connected with the charitable institutions of the country
that they ought to be included in any general policy that may be
adopted. At present the Departments of Lunacy, Charity, and
Prisons, which combined will a few years hence probably control
an annual expenditure of nearly a million of money, are vested in
separate officials who have an individual responsibility to the
Government, which in turn has the same relationship to Parliament.
If these three great divisions were consolidated into one Depart-
ment of Lunacy, Charity, and Correction and administered by
three commissioners, the senior of whom should be chairman—if,
in fact, they were re-adjusted on precisely the same lines as the
Railway Department commercially, and with the necessary varied
conditions socially, under an Act of Parliament giving clearly
defined powers with regard to contracts, buildings, appointments,
and expenditure generally, management would probably be more
efficient and economical, patronage would be wisely exercised and
expenditure altogether better regulated, and there would be an
end to the outside interference and political influences which, even
if they have not any effect practically, are too often the means of


embarrassing a Government and so harassing the most conscien-
tious officials in the public service, who have responsibilities of the
highest importance to the State to discharge, that the firm and
honest performance of their duties is a matter of extreme difficulty.
Take for example such cases as the following, which are not at
all supposititious, and many others which can be cited, different in
detail perhaps but precisely the same in principle. A local
manager or matron of a large asylum is alleged to have peculated
public and private funds, is harsh to sick inmates, neglectful of
duty, and altogether unreliable. A Royal Commission first recom-
mends this officer’s discharge ; but another chance is given, very
improperly no doubt. A year afterwards similar practices are
discovered ; the head of the department recommends suspension,
and the Government then dismisses. The official goes to a solici-
tor, who says, “ You have not a leg to stand on legally, but if you
go in for a Parliamentary Select Committee you may knock
something out of the Government.-” There are the inevitable
friends in Parliament—dishonest officials, as a rule, appear to
possess plenty of friends everywhere. The committee is formed,
and for nearly two years this mode of investigation is carried on,
at an enormous cost to the State. The first report of the com-
mittee affirms, in effect, that the Government acted rightly, but
before this can be dealt with Parliament lapses. After the
general election another committee is formed by the same chair-
man. It meets ; no fresh evidence is taken ; four out of nine of
the former members are not upon it; a distinctly different report
is brought up, recommending that the dismissed official shall
receive compensation; but before it can be dealt with by Parlia-
ment the committee’s chairman is sentenced to seven years’
imprisonment for fraud. And this is the present stage of the
matter. During all this period the time of the principal official
of the department and others is almost wholly occupied in con-
ducting a case which a Supreme Court Bench would probably
have disposed of in twenty-four hours. And there is the con-
tingent cost of shorthand-writers, solicitors, witnesses, printing
evidence, and so forth, which entails a large and unnecessary
expense upon the country. Again, in re-organizing a large
department it is discovered that certain country hospitals which
are subsidized from State funds on the distinct condition that they
treat the sick poor locally without fees are transferring their
obligation in a wholesale manner to the central charities. There
is no local poor rate, so that the provincial district is not charge-
able with the cost of transferring pauper patients or of their
maintenance in the Government asylums afterwards. So marked
has this abuse become that it is necessary to adopt a special
safeguard against it, which provides that before patients are


eligible for transfer as described they must be—(l) destitute ;
(2) not suffering from curable disesaes ; (3) physically and
mentally fit to travel; (4) have no relatives in their district legally
responsible for their maintenance. The stringent enforcement of
these conditions reduced the admissions into the central Govern-
ment charities from the country hospitals (which are all managed
by voluntary boards) to the extent of 40 per cent, in nine months,
and consequently effected a saving to the State of nearly £5,000
per annum, besides which the sick poor were protected against a
practice which was both inhuman and dishonest. But mark
what follows. The local boards represent to the Government
that they are improperly dealt with and that urgent cases cannot
be treated locally, because the institutions are not relieved of
chronic cases ; and then the Parliamentary representatives of
the districts concerned take up the cudgels in their behalf.
Fortunately, the Government official has a wise and firm under-
secretary and a courageous Minister to fall back upon, and his
action is upheld ; but what might have happened under opposite
conditions is obvious. Some of these patients were in such a
condition physically when they were forwarded from the country
hospitals that they died from exhaustion consequent upon the
journey by rail or coach soon after their admission into the central
asylums. This is a digression, however, which is only warranted
because it points a moral. An independent board of com-
missioners should, under legal enactment, have powers large
enough to place them above and beyond any influence of this
character. They should also be experts in the several depart-
ments of charity committed to their control ; and their collective
wisdom would be of mutual help in all matters of administration,
besides which they would possess a united force in dealing with
abuses or maladministration or in controlling agencies of manage-
ment such as no single individual could ever hope to exercise ;
and in this combination there would also be a guarantee for purity
of administration that could not attach to any one man, no matter
how high his personal character or official reputation might be.
Every chief of a great department has no doubt realized at times
how powerless his efforts to do the rig'ht thing have been in
opposition to the combined influences of interested bodies or of
political interference | or, if he has had the moral courage to brave
all this (as I am in a position to know has been the case in more
than one large department), there are subsequent processes of per-
secution that he may be subjected to which must tend to destroy
his efficiency for work, and to a certain extent also his power of
control or of preserving discipline. Such commissioners should
not have arbitrary powers. There might be a mode of appeal in
certain cases to be specified, which would keep them in the right
11131. E


track and at the same time relieve the Government from em-
barrassment. The favorite method at present is to appoint
Parliamentary Select Committees or Royal Commissions, both of
which are open to grave objections on the ground of expense and
for other more important reasons which are too obvious to require
particularizing. It would be better, on grounds of law and equity,
as well as of economy, to refer important investigations where
questions of redress or alleged injustice are involved to a Bench
of Supreme Court Judges, who could deal with them finally at
reasonable cost to the country, solely in the public interests and
in a manner that would be above suspicion.
Under such a re-adjustment ample provision could be made for
combining the voluntary assistance with the official control in
such a way as to secure the best results possible under that dual
method of government. Indeed, I do not think any system of
charitable administration would operate efficiently without the
generous help and oversight of those philanthropic ladies and
gentlemen who, to their honour be it said, are always ready to
devote their time, means, and abilities to ameliorating the condi-
tion of their suffering fellow-creatures. There should be a
Central Board of Charity Organization and Advice (apart alto-
gether from the controlling and relieving body), which should have
power to communicate directly with and advise the commissioners,
to recommend the appointment of local visiting committees, and
above all to see that the overflowing stream of charity is directed
into proper channels, so that the highest attribute of humanity is
not made a source of mischief instead of advantage to those whom
it is intended to relieve. It is very easy indeed to pauperize by
distributing relief indiscriminately, and very difficult to restore
self-respect or the spirit of self-reliance to the professional pauper
after he is once steeped in idleness and fed and clothed at the
public cost. My own association with the State Children’s Relief
Board of New South Wales for the past ten years has made me
fully acquainted with the practical value of such organizations
when they are properly constituted, and I am happy to say that
there are other societies doing equally good work of a cognate
character, although in a lesser degree, in that colony. You have,
however, so fully had demonstrated the value of charity organiza-
tion in Victoria, in connexion with the work of your own society,
that it is unnecessary for me to expatiate upon it here.
One great evil of separate agencies is the danger they incur of
creating too many charities, and so wasting means and force. It
can be said advisedly that charity would be more efficiently dis-
tributed without destroying the spirit of independence in the
community if several benevolent organizations in New South
Wales ceased to exist, and their energies and financial resources


were, under restrictions, bestowed in other directions and controlled
by one agency. There are, in fact, too many societies doing pre-
cisely the same kind of work. The present system of excluding
private donations from the maintenance of the Government chari-
ties, which support, as I have shown, the great majority of
indigent persons in New South Wales, has no doubt diverted
enormous private bequests and donations into other channels
which, under different conditions, might have been devoted to
precisely the same purpose, but in a way that would have lessened
the burden of the State and perhaps the number of dependent
persons also. There can, of course, be no other reason why the
public heart and pocket should be so freely opened as it is for the
relief of all other forms of human necessity and suffering, and so
firmly closed against the claims of the aged sick and poor and
those other State dependents who are legally classed as State
children. One main effort of charity organization might be to
obtain contributions from the benevolently disposed towards the
support of the Government asylums, and while the demands upon
the public Treasury would thus be considerably reduced, subscribers
would insensibly be educated through the medium of their pockets
into taking a direct interest in the welfare of those whom they
thus assisted to support, which could not be attended with other
than the most beneficial results.
It is necessary, before taking leave of this subject, to say a few
words, in the way of recapitulation, upon the kind of legislation
required to create a comprehensive system of control of such a
character that friction with regard to existing organizations will
be avoided. It would probably not be necessary to alter
materially the laws and regulations relating to lunacy and
prisons, except to make them harmonize with a general code.
But entirely new laws are required for the Government chari-
table institutions, which, singularly enough, nothwithstanding the
enormous annual expenditure upon them, have never been
governed by either legislation or regulations ; the method of
administration being entirely discretionary with the head of the
department. Any new Act of Parliament would require to
consolidate and adapt all existing laws relating to every depart-
ment of charitable work. It should provide first for a uniform
method of government; and, if the proposal for commissioners
is adopted, for the appointment of a Board of Charity Organiza-
tion and Advice, with its assistant committees throughout the
country. The powers of all these bodies would have to be clearly
defined, in order that the harmonious working of the system
should not be liable to disturbance. The manner of disposing of
all revenues should be specified and provision made for dealing
with buildings, contracts, appointments, internal economy and


administration, classification of inmates and their industrial
employment, so that idleness —which we have truly found to be
the mother of mischief—should not continue to be a feature in the
system ; and in this way the institutions might be made largely
self-supporting. Stringent provisions are necessary for preventing
imposition on the part of professional mendicants, who, it is
alleged, travel from colony to colony, and obtain admission into
the institutions of each place they visit, according to their desire
for change, although I fancy the statements which are published
of this character are a good deal exaggerated. There should be
a clause giving the Charity Organization Society power to so
scrutinize the distribution of relief that it could not be extended
to the same individual from more than one society at the same
time. A section is also required dealing more efficiently with
desertion cases ; and another defining the liabilities of persons
having near relatives in the public asylums. Provision might be
made for payment from local rates for patients transferred from
subsidized country hospitals or districts to the central asylums ;
there is no clause of the kind in the proposed Local Government
Bill, although it provides for the liberal endowment of munici-
palities. Provision should also be made for a special division to
be set apart for the treatment of inebriates. This is a subject
which opens up a wide field of discussion ; and it is one that we
all feel very strongly upon. It is a positive inhumanity to treat
drunkenness as a crime in the first instance, instead of a disease ;
and I do not think there could be a much better method of
reaching the unfortunate, who is vulgarly known as the “ gutter
drunkard,” than to place him for a time in an asylum for the
infirm, failing a special inebriate asylum, in which the habitual
drunkard might and should be forcibly detained for a sufficient
period, and where he probably would, under healthy influences,
regain his will power, and at the same time be so employed that
the cost of his reclamation would be inconsiderable. Reference
has already been made to the wisdom of delegating certain matters
to a judicial body, and this could also be arranged under a new
law. Many minor matters would also have to be made the subject
of legislation, but this is not the place to go elaborately into
points of detail. Most of them are specified in my annual report
upon the charities of New South Wales for last year.
I am reminded, however, that this paper, which is necessarily
discursive, has already extended over the period of twenty minutes
allowed to contributors; and I will therefore now further only
thank you for the patience and courtesy with which you have
received it, and express a hope that the various points it has sub-
mitted for discussion, together with the very valuable suggestions
which will doubtless be made from other quarters, will receive


the fullest consideration at this and subsequent Conferences, in
order that the praiseworthy objects which we all desire to secure
may be consummated in the near future. I desire to say, in con-
clusion, that the sentiments I have so freely expressed are merely
my own as an individual, and are not to be regarded as in any
sense committing the Government which I have the honour to
represent.
(After some discussion it was agreed that an effort should be
made to have the paper printed, and another opportunity taken
for its discussion .)
DISCUSSION.
Deserting Husbands.
The Honorary Secretary introduced the question of desert-
ing husbands. He said that at the First Conference all the dele-
gates who spoke on the question were unanimous in pointing out
the misery caused by the ease with which legal and natural re-
sponsibilities could be evaded, by merely changing the place of
residence from one colony to another. The most carefully con-
sidered suggestion (No. 5) adopted at that Conference had
reference to this subject. It ran thus—
“5. This Conference suggests to the legislative bodies in
each colony that maintenance orders, made in any one
colony against deserting husbands or fathers of families
or putative fathers of illegitimate children, be enforce-
able in any other colony on the original order; and that
power should be given to issue maintenance orders where
intention to desert is shown, or in defendant’s absence if
he have left the colony; and that power should be given
for the issue and enforcement of maintenance orders
against deserting mothers.”
To give effect to this the Conference had elected standing com-
mittees in each capital. In some instances, owing to the want of
complete colonial representation, these standing committees were
perforce elected in the absence of the members composing them.
Owing to this it had been found impossible to secure co-operation
in all the colonies. As the evil was one which affected the whole
of the colonies, the remedy, to be effectual, must not be partial.
The Melbourne committee had gone to the length of drafting a
petition to be presented simultaneously to all the colonial Legisla-
tures. For the reason given this course was found to be imprac-
ticable. It had therefore been resolved to postpone action, and
he had now the honour to introduce the question to the delegates
present, in the hope that the Second Conference would see its way
to complete solution of this grave difficulty.


The Responsibilities of Relatives.
Mr. S. Maxted (Sydney) read the following minute on—
The Responsibilities of Relatives.
I have been requested to prepare a minute on the responsibilities
of relatives, by which is understood their liability to support, in
one form or other, those allied to them by ties of kindred who
may need help.
The only legislation upon this matter in New South Wales
compels a husband or parent to support a wife or legal infant,
whether they be inmates or not of the public asylums, but there
is no provision for compelling any person to contribute, either
wholly or in part, towards the maintenance of other relatives in
the charitable institutions of the country, no matter how close the
tie of kinship may be. Several other colonies represented at this
Conference are precisely in the same position in this respect as
New South Wales ; and it would be well, therefore, to consider
how this peculiarly discreditable abuse of charity is to be
remedied.
In my colony the abuse complained of had become so great that
I considered it a public duty to publish some of the cases in
detail, suppressing names only, in my last annual report on the
charitable institutions of the colony ; and the particulars disclosed
a degree of heartlessness among a number of well-to-do persons
that would have been quite incredible if the official records had
not afforded such undoubted proof of it. (The speaker here
quoted a number of very gross cases in illustration. All these
were from official and undeniable records.)
The matter of wife and child desertion, as you all know,
unfortunately prevails to a large extent in all the colonies. New
legislation should be made sufficiently comprehensive to deal more
effectually with this phase of the matter than it does at present.
It is true it is possible, under a very cumbersome legal process, to
follow up deserters of these classes ; but there is no method of
tracing them, and they need now only cross the border or the sea
in order to secure immunity from punishment, after leaving wives
and families to the mercy of the world. I heard a gentleman at
this Conference yesterday remark that so far as child-deserters
Wore concerned he had had no difficulty —that no matter in which
colony the offender might be he has been arrested and brought
back. I regret to say that the experience of my own department
is quite contrary to this, and of the many warrants which have
been issued from it during the past ten years not o per cent,
have been executed. Legislation should make registration at some
central point (indeed this might be a branch of charity organization


work) compulsory on the part of any person removing without
his family from one colony to another, and also with regard to
his change of residence after such removal, say for a period of
one year. Again, the penalty upon deserters should be more
severe than it is now. It is really, apart from the degradation,
which counts for very little with such persons, no punishment to
offenders of this class to go to gaol. In my colony the penalty is
merely imprisonment. There is no hard labour attached to it, so
that the State usually has to keep the parent in comparative idle-
ness, at a cost, perhaps, of £4O a year, in addition to supporting
his family.
Mr. C. O’Neil (Sydney) said that Mr. Maxted’s minute re-
vealed a melancholy and deplorable lack of family love. He was
of opinion that the laws on this subject should be altered, and in
this matter they could not do better than follow the example of
New Zealand. The Destitute Persons Act (1877), and the
Amending Act of 1887, made it a misdemeanour punished by
twelve months’ imprisonment for any person charged with the
maintenance of relatives under the Act to leave the colony. He
thought this Act included all that was necessary, and any of the
Legislatures of the other colonies would be willing to pass a Bill
formed on the same lines if approached on the matter.
Mr. Linklater deprecated the existing state of things, and
said that reciprocity of action by the Governments of the various
colonies was the only way of dealing with the matter.
Mr. Roseby (Sydney) said the institution he represented was
supporting about 60 deserted wives. The present state of the
law affecting such cases was very unsatisfactory. If the
man were arrested and could not comply with the order made
against him (of which there was little chance), he was sent to
gaol, where he was a burden to the State and did nothing to sup-
port his family. His institution was supporting no less than
twelve wives whose husbands were in gaol for non-compliance
with orders made against them.
Mr. J. B. Whiting (Adelaide) said that in 1872 an Act had
been passed in South Australia on the same lines as the New
Zealand Act, and therefore, so far as South Australia was con-
cerned, they had all the power they required. They could bi’ing
back a deserter from any British dominion. He thought it would
be a difficult matter to collect orders in one colony that were made
in another, because there would be considerable difficulty expe-
rienced in establishing identity.
Mr. Goldstein pointed out that the difficulty of identification
existed in both cases, whether a man was identified for the pur-
pose of being sent back or for the purpose of being forced to pay
up. Sending a man back often involved considerable expense,


which would not he incurred if he were simply made to pay as
ordered. He did not think the question of identification an insur-
mountable difficulty.
Mr, Maxted said his paper contained a suggestion that people
going from one colony to another should be registered in some
manner, and in that respect intercolonial action was necessary.
The Hey. J. W. Simmons said he thought one of the purposes
of the Federal Council was to render practical a uniformity of
working in regard to such matters. If such were the case, would
it not be desirable to apply to the Federal Council before ap-
proaching the Governments of the different colonies ? With
regard to making people pay for the support of needy relatives,
the English law did not make it necessary to support pauper
brothers and sisters, and would not interfere in that case.
Colonial law followed the English law in this respect. With
reference to deserters being placed in prison, he did not see
why they should not work in prison, and so support their wives.
Husbands who, because of drunkenness, could not support their
families in the days of their liberty should be compelled to do so
in the days of their bondage.
Dr. Strong said it always appeared to him a very absurd plan
to put the husbands in gaol and leave the public to support their
wives and families. He thought that if some scheme could be
adopted for making prisoners support their families it would be
a step in the right direction. W ith regard to the degree of
relationship within which people should be responsible for their
poor relatives, he thought the English law a very just and right
law. Much poverty in Melbourne was caused by wife desertion,
and there was no method of bringing back a deserting husband.
He therefore thought that some intercolonial legislation was
necessary, by which it would be within the power of the law to
bring back the deserter. He thought the proposal that this
matter should be brought under the notice of the Federal Council
a most sensible one, because a question of this kind could only be
treated from a federal point of view.
Mr. C. Cock said, with regard to the proposition that the men
should be made to work in prison for the support of their families,
that if a man would not work outside he did not see how they
could compel him to work inside the prison walls, unless they
starved him to death. An attempt had been made in Victoria to
pass a Bill similar to that in force in South Australia, but at that
time Victorian legislators did not see fit to adopt the system.
Mr. E. Exon suggested that they might pass a law in Victoria
by which well-to-do sons might be compelled to support their
fathers. A father had a moral claim upon a son, and that claim
should be made a legal one.
(The Conference then adjourned.)


THIRD DAY:
Thursday, 19th November, 1891),
MORNING :
<
Professor Morris presiding.
Discussion: “ General” Booth's “ Darkest England” Scheme.
Professor Morris in introducing “General” Booth to the
delegates said that the General in a private conversation had
expressed himself as being not altogether in sympathy with
Charity Organization Societies, because they were inclined to be
critical. In reply to the remark that criticism was a good thing,
the General had admitted that this was so, provided the criticism
were honest. He was prepared to say that any criticism to which
General Booth would listen in that room would be honest.
(Hear, hear.) They had all heard of General Booth’s work and
would greet him not only respectfully but cordially. (Loud
applause.)
General Booth said, Mr. Chairman, I think you have used
me rather hardly. I know I sometimes talk a little at random
and on the spur of the moment, and am not always sufficiently
careful to guard what I say. What I feel with regard to the
Charity Organization Society is that it seems to be a little too
critical, and a little wanting in heart and practice. I do not
shrink from criticism —if I did, what a torture my life would be.
I am criticised from head to foot by night and by day by all
classes of the community. When I speak of honest criticism
I mean kindly criticism, the criticism that strives to know really
what it is criticising before it speaks; that is all I ask. Strike
as hard as you can, only know what you are striking at. Three
parts of the antagonistic criticism that has been launched at my
book and at my scheme has been launched at something altogether
different to what I ever intended, or to what that scheme really
means.
I rise this morning with very great pleasure and with very
great regret. I regret that lam not sufficiently prepared to speak
before so thoughtful, intelligent, and practical an audience as I
have before me. It has been the desire of my life-time to meet
with a people—l am not sure whether I have found them now—
who will look at my work—at my social work, for instance—and
judge it according to its own merits. I want my scheme to be


judged in the light of its bearing upon the welfare of the poor
people whom we all wish to benefit, I suppose there is not one
of us who would not be willing to give up his plans in exchange
for better ones. I am sure I should be willing to give up any
plan or purpose of mine, and would be glad to do so if I only
thought that I had been mistaken in it, or that any other person
had got a better plan. lam obliged to take the best plan for the
work that I have to do, and if any other person has a better plan
than mine, I would not work on a plan that was behind any one
else’s on any consideration. My work is to save the bodies
and souls of men. I have just come from our printing estab-
lishment, We went through Europe to buy the best machine we
could find in the market to give to the people here to print their
War Cries on, and we bought in Paris a machine that is in the
first rank for doing that kind of work. If I would seek the best
machinery for printing my paper, I would seek the best machinery
I could find for helping poor humanity. (Hear, hear.)
Now, it seems to me it is not exactly my scheme that should be
considered here, hut the principles that underlie it; because if the
principles are right we are bound to adopt those principles, and
then if the methods are wrong we can change and modify the
methods. In the first place, we shall be agreed, I presume, on
this principle, that society ought to aim at permanently relieving
every suffering human being, irrespective of the causes that led to
that suffering. (Hear, hear.) In that principle I know I some-
what differ—although I am not quite sure that we understand
each other —with some of our Charity Organization friends in the
old country. Ido not wish it to be supposed that the Charity
Organization people as a whole are opposed to me in the old
country; there is a division in the camp, and a very large number
of them (and, of course, I think the most sensible part of them)
(Laughter) agree with me, lam not one of those who believe in
the judgment of the majority; I think common sense ought to
prevail, but the majority of the members of their council, I am
afraid, went against my scheme. I think that society ought to
aim not merely to ameliorate but to permanently relieve every
suffering human being irrespective of the causes that led to that
suffering.
My second proposition is, that this relief to be effective must
deal efficiently with the causes of the distress. For instance, if a
man is insane, his reason must be restored ; if he is diseased, that
disease must be cured ; if his distress proceeds from his circum-
stances, if he is out of work, you must find him some kind of
employment; if his misery proceeds from his vicious habits,
whether it be drunkenness, sexual immorality, or crime, you must
relieve him, and you can only relieve him by helping him to reform.


Now, my plan, as is well known, proceeds on these lines. As
to those whose suffering proceeds from want of work or other
causes —from what we might call misfortune —we say, you must
take these people and place them in circumstances in which such
causes will vanish. If it proceeds from their vices or vicious or
criminal habits, you must change those habits—you must change
their nature, and make bad people into good people.
Now, here of course that seems impossible. If I were talking
to my own people, there is nothing they would cheer louder,
nothing they would believe in as more possible than that this
latter class can be so dealt with ; but, when I speak to other
portions of the community, they are so exceedingly sceptical that
it is impossible for me to convince them. But it is a matter of
fact that these people can be really reformed. Of course, we are
all agreed that if a man’s distress proceeds from his misfortunes—
if he belongs to what is known as the decent poor—he ought to be
helped, and Governments should make it their business to see
that no needy or deserving men who ask for work should be left
to perish. I say they cannot be left to perish without a charge
of murder being brought against those who are responsible and
who have left them to their fate. But what I suppose we shall
not all be agreed upon is the method. But we shall glance at
that presently.
With respect to vicious people, I say that there are forces and
motives which I think are effective in dealing with them.
In the first place, I would appeal to human love, nay, I would
go further back and appeal to self-interest. What you want is a
scheme which would enlist the people’s self-interest in their own
reformation. That is what I propose. I say to a man, “ Here
you are, come along, there is no need for you to be hungry any
more, to suffer any more. If you have any desire to reform your
character and be a man, there is the opportunity to you to do it.*’
In the second place, I say, human love. We can enlist a great
and mighty army who shall rise up and put their arms round
these poor people and help them because they love them.
In the third place, I fall back, as you know, upon the Grace of
God. I fall back, as an encouragement and as a guarantee of
what will be, upon what has already been done. What has been
accomplished as a fact is a great encouragement to my own heart,
and enables me to look the world in the face and say, “ This can
be done.”
We have, as is well known, a reformatory work amongst the
homeless poor which has been very largely carried on in London
during the past seven years, although commenced in a very
small way and amidst all sorts of difficulties —every penny having
to be begged, and every worker having to be made. Nevertheless,


we have so far succeeded that we can hand you a list of the names
and addresses of 3,000 girls who have been fetched out of the
street, and whose habits and hearts we think, to a certain extent,
have been changed, and who are now living lives of virtue and
working for their own living, mostly in domestic service ; many,
it is true, having gone home to mothers and fathers, and some
back to husbands, and others, not fit for service, being employed
in our own factories. (Applause.)
Ladies and gentlemen, you know this class. I should think
there are those around me who have made such efforts many a
time, and who have known somewhat of the despondency and
heart-breaking that result from efforts to reform these girls.
I began myself many years ago, and gave up in despair. My
darling wife began, and she gave up in despair. She said, “It is
no use my pulling them out of the abyss except some one will go
to work and save the men, for if you save this girl, the demand
will create the supply, and there will be another.”
Afterwards I went into this work, led by the good order of
God’s providence, and I was assisted by a beautiful and devoted
woman, the wife of my eldest son, who undertook this business.
You know something of London life—the gaiety, the whirl, the
excitement—drink, drink, drink, morning, noon, and night. You
know the whole thing. We take these girls in, indeed they come
to us and we cannot always take all that knock at our doors. We
take these girls, and in six months we lose say 25 per cent, and
save 75 per cent. Of the 25 per cent, that go away, a number
return ; but at any rate we reckon we save 75 per cent. What are
we to do with that 75 per cent. We have nothing for them but
domestic service. A few cannot go to service, because they are
so diseased and broken down, and these are employed in our
knitting factories, and make all sorts of articles of clothing.
Sixty per cent, go to service, and we lose 10 per cent, again. Is
it not a wonder we do not lose more ? We have nothing for them
but domestic service, and in England domestic service is not the
merriest form of life for these girls. We cannot, as a rule, send
them into families. My own people are charming, they will
take these dear lassies without wages for three or four months
when they go out of the home, and then they have a sort of
character. But these are mostly elderly or widow ladies, who
are very charming when they are Salvationists, but not always so
when not Salvationists. (Laughter.) I mean to say, their home
is not a very lively one. Their mistresses are widows and
sorrowful women, there are no children to enliven the house, and
these girls, fresh from London life, have to endure the monotony
of what is more or less drudgery, with one night out a week, and
perhaps they cannot get that because the old lady has “got


rheumatics.” Perhaps, she is not allowed to go to the Salvation
Army meetings lest she should be corrupted. Now, is it not a
a wonderful thing that we do not lose more than 10 per cent, of
these girls ? Of these we get 5 per cent, again, so that we reckon
we save 70 per cent. There are 30 failures out of each 100
cases. I just mention that to encourage you as to what you may
hope for in the way of reformation.
With respect to my scheme, we have homes in the city and the
doors are opened night and day. Any one can come in. It is all
nonsense to talk, as they have done in England, about this being
indiscriminate charity, and say that a man who has been thieving
the night before can come into our place and be washed and
sheltered and taken care of. Of course, he can, but he has to pay
for it ; and I contend he has as much right to come in there and
have a bed and supper and breakfast if he pays for it as some
scoundrel of a lawyer who has been robbing some respectable
person in the country, and comes up to town with the proceeds of
his misdeeds, and goes to the Grand Hotel with his neighbour’s
wife on his arm.
I say it is foreign to the very essence of humanity and to the
principles of Christianity to say that we are not to take them in.
First, we make them pay for what they have, and secondly, they
get a great deal more than they pay for, for we put prayers in
(and there we beat the Grand Hotel) and they are talked to and
give their experience, and very often made to cry and promise to
give up their sins and go back to the wives they have abandoned
in the country. If men come to us and say, “ I want to be good,”
we say, “ All right, we will help you to be good; will you work?”
“Yes, I will do anything.” “Will you obey orders.” “Yes,
anything. I want to be good. Take hold of me and make me
good.” We take him in and we say, “ What can you do ?” “Oh,
anything” (which generally means nothing). We say, “Very
well, come along.” We get to know something about him and fix
him up, and if he has no trade we teach him one. The boots I
have got on are as good as can be made in Australia, and they were
made by an Italian Nihilist, who used to carry his revolver in his
pocket ready to blow the brains out of any Governor, Queen, or
Cabinet Minister he came across. He is now earning his own
livelihood. We teach them trades, we put them into factories, and
we watch them. If a man or woman has worked for six months
without wages—if so far as we can judge they have spoken the
truth, are honest, and really are supposed to do anything they can
to save themselves—l think they are worthy of being helped still
further. We then pass them on to the farm colony, and on the
farm colony they go to work again. We have on the farm colony
to-day some 20 rough carpenters who are able to do anything


required from them in any back-block or settlement—able to build
a shanty or anything of that description, who, when they came to
us, could do absolutely nothing. They were sent to chop wood,
and so they learnt to handle the saw and the axe, and there they
are working away for 3s. 6d. a week—if they are in the first class.
First of all, we only give them just sufficient food to keep them
going. If they do well, we give them plenty ; if they do better,
we give them Is. a week ; if they do better still, 2s. 6d. ; and
if better still, they get into the tip-top class, and they get 3s. 6d.
a week and their food. Out of this 3s. 6d. they pay for their own
clothes ; and if they have not been made into Salvationists and
given up smoking, we give them a trifle for tobacco. They find
their own clothes, and the balance is saved for them in the bank,
to help them at some future time. Now, I want to know if men
and women who have stood this sort of thing for twelve months- 1 —
six months in the city and six months on the farm—are not worthy
of having a further chance ? (Hear, hear.)
For that further chance we say, “We will send you to another
land.” lam not quite certain about this other land —I am not,
indeed. I think that any other land ought to be pleased to get
such a batch of people so trained and educated, I have changed
my attitude altogether. Instead of coming on hands and knees and
praying, “ Dear Australia, do give me a place in the mighty
wilderness you have got lying idle into which I can bring my
people out of Egypt. Do let me have a place that I can make into
Canaan, into which I can put them down and help them.” Instead
of that I will say, “ Here is a great Emigration Association, with
a capital of £120,000 to begin with, and £30,000 a year income,
with agents all over the world, with people who understand
human nature, who will select such people for emigration as the
country wants, who will guarantee that they shall go on the land
and work on the land, and be content with getting a living out of
the land, who shall convey them safely over the sea and prevent
their being corrupted on the way, and look after them when they
get here and prevent them from being corrupted by the naughty
Australians. Even when they get into this new country, we will
be behind them, and if they fall we will lift them up again, and
look after them, and be a father to them all the way through. v
If I thus pose before the public as the leader of a great emigra-
tion system, I have no doubt I should have half South America
applying to me immediately and offering all sorts of inducements.
I think my scheme is economical. It is true, I admit that in
London—in the cities —we have to pay the first cost of buildings
and machinery so far as we can see at present. After that our
shelters maintain themselves. I suppose we have in London now
in our shelters at least 3,000 people of all classes, but mostly of


the lowest, because we began with the lowest. It is not the
lowest class of people who compose the 3,000,000. Two million
three hundred thousand are decent hard working people, who only-
want a chance and are crying out for work. But we began with
the lowest, and we have 3,000 of these people under our charge,
and we find that after the first cost —the rent of the buildings and
the putting down of the machinery —after that, the labour of the
people and the twopences and pennies of the people paid the
entire working expenses. No such economical way of treating
the poor was ever invented before.
Then, I say that the farm colony is economical. I have given
something like at the rate of £lB per acre for the land—for a
beautiful sunny slope, 6 miles on the London side of Southend,
with a river frontage and a railway running through it. Land
alongside it was offered to me for £lB per acre last December.
They are now asking £4O or £5O for it. I am prepared to buy
all the land around there which comes into the market so far as
my funds will allow me at £lB or £2O per acre. I have had the
opinion of an eminent agriculturist who examined this land. He
said that at the present rate of culture, without the buildings, the
land will be worth £4O or £5O an acre in three or four years ;
and he has known this estate for 40 years. Only think what it
will be worth as a property when we have covered it with orchards
and fruit trees, when we have cultivated to the very uttermost
with the spade, when we have got our tramways and jetties and
everything done by this free labour. We are not only keeping
these people, but we are making a property from which we shall
receive a tremendous income, all to be expended in carrying out
the same mode of relief in days to come. (Applause). We are
making a machine that will go on by itself, that will want no
more subscriptions.
I can give you an illustration of this. The Shoreditch Board
of Guardians asked us if we would take some of their able-bodied
paupers. We said we would take them on condition that they
volunteered. My officer was sent round, and out of 25 men, when
they were told they had to work, eighteen volunteered. Those
eighteen able-bodied paupers were taken over into our factories,
and the last letter I received said that they were working happily
and with very great promise. (Applause). Now, those eighteen
able-bodied paupers will earn all they get. They will not feel
that they are paupers. They will go climbing up the ladder, the
architects of their own fortunes. They will begin to dream at
night of what they are going to do in the future—they will dream
of the cottage, and the garden, and the children and the pig, and
the sty, and the cow, and the meadow —only think ! having cream
for tea. They will not only earn all they cost, but they will be


making that estate, which in times to come will be productive and
will help other people.
The British people spend £10,000,000 a year in charity. No
civilized nation has ever done such a thing. No matter what
may be said about the old country —that she is worn out and all
the rest of it, as you Australian people are pleased to think—there
has never been a nation who has put her hand into her pocket and
drawn out £10,000,000 every year for the relief of her poor,
(Applause.) For the relief, mind, for the palliation, not for the
destruction of the misery. Then charity gives £10,000,000 more
—the socialists say £20,000,000, but I put it down at £10,000,000.
So that £20,000,000 every year go for the relief of the poor ; and
at Christmas, 1891, there will be as many people in the abyss as
there were at Christmas, 1890. Twenty millions ! I will let you
off for £10,000,000 ! Give my scheme £10,000,000. Of course,
you cannot do it all at once, but as we get the agents ready, and as
we get the thing going, you give us £10,000,000 a year for ten
years, and, at the end of that ten years we will not only have
taken all out of the abyss who are able or willing to be rescued,
hut at the end of that ten years there shall be a property created
—a money-producing property —that shall be ample to maintain all
the widows and orphans and all the unavoidable poverty that you
must have with the wear and tear of a great nation. (Applause.)
This would apply to a colony over the sea. Generous offers
of land have been made to me by leading men from certain colonies,
and co-operation has been promised by certain Governments.
When we get it, it is bare land, but how will it look when it has
been cultivated for 20 years after my notion of cultivation, that is,
on the Chinese plan, every inch being made productive ? I, there-
fore, say we have got an economical plan. We hope to make these
people produce, after a certain preliminary expenditure, all that
they cost. There is the cost of transit. At first this may be
considerable, but not necessarily so. No doubt, if the plan proved
successful, every Government would lend us steamers. I am
quite sure we will get co-operation in all directions if the thing
is the success I anticipate; and if it is not, we will give it up.
Even if we have to pay for transit, one ship could bring 1,000
people across at a very small rate. You bring the people across and
make them earn what they have cost for transit; and while they
are doing that they are fixing up their own farms, cutting down
their own wood, building their own shanties, keeping their own
cow and pig, and everything else. You put them on the land,
and they pay you back again all that they and the preparation of
the land have cost you.
That is a very rough outline so far as the economy of the
scheme is concerned; hut you can readily see that if the fee-simple


of this land is kept in the power of the community, it will
return a magnificent income, which will go on for years, and
enable the same form of work to be carried on. (Cheers.)
In reply to questions, General Booth said he thought that five
acres, with the right to run his cow or horse or a few sheep upon
a common, would be quite enough for each settler, and as much
as he could properly cultivate. It was not the amount of land a
man had that produced the income, but the amount of work he
put into it; but the man should not be isolated. The idea was
that he should be independent, but have the advantage of living
in a community.
With regard to the difficulty that when the settlers arrived in
the colony they might leave the settlement —go elsewhere and get
better pay—this would be got over by allowing each man as wages
what he was worth. But out of this he would have to pay what
he was indebted for his education, &c. After that, however, he
was entitled to earn from the land.
Mr. Godfrey asked whether the men should become ultimately
joint proprietors of the estate?
General Booth said that these were details which could be
arranged as circumstances required. The idea was that the men
were at school until they were pronounced worthy of going out of
school on their own responsibility.
One of his great ideas was co-operative farming. He thought
co-operation would be the great ultimate remedy for the strike
between capital and labour.
As to the disposal of the produce, he proposed that the settlers
should eat it themselves. Why should they be selfish? W'e were
not born to buy and sell, but to eat and drink, serve God and be
happy.
Mr. Blashki asked what would be done if the men on arrival
refused to work, and were thrown as burdens on the colony ?
General Booth replied that that certainly was a difficulty;
but they must take some risks. When a man took a wife it was
for better or for worse, and they would have to take his bride in
the same way. He would guarantee, however, that there should
not be a quarter of the “ breakages ” that the ordinary system of
emigration landed on these shores.
Pastor Herlitz asked upon what experience the General
based the statement that the men would be self-supporting ? In
Germany such colonies had been founded for nine years, and were
still depending largely upon contributions from the public and
the State.
General Booth stated that the Dutch and German colonies
were worked on a different plan to that which he proposed. The
Dutch colonists had been placed upon a sandy waste, which they
11131. F


had turned into a garden. Then, again, they were simply beggars,
and if a beggar Avas seen in the streets the magistrates sent him
to the colony. The man did not go there with any desire to
reform himself, and it was simply a species of penal servitude.
The reason why the Salvation Army was successful Avhere
others failed was that, not only had they reformatory methods,
but they brought their religion into it. His latest advice was that
the 200 men on the English farm colony were already earning all
they had cost.
Mr. Godfrey asked whether the men would ultimately become
the proprietors of the land they were engaged in cultivating ?
It had been found desirable that each man should have his own
homestead as an incentive to use all his energies in making it a
success.
General Booth admitted this was one of the difficulties of his
scheme, and he would be very glad if any one could show him a
way out of it. Supposing he took a few thousands of acres in one
of the colonies to begin with, when the man had paid for his
cottage and implements he would then only have to pay a small
ground rent in proportion to the value of the land. The land on
which the cottage stood, however, might become the centre of a
great city, and be worth so much per inch. He thought it reason-
able that a man who had been picked out of the gutter, and made
into a well-to-do farmer, should be content with that; and while
he would be entitled to any improvement in the value of the land
due to his efforts, he would not be entitled to any increase in its
value for which he had not toiled in any way. The increase in
value should be used in bringing other poor people to some other
colony. He had no objection to the men selecting land for them-
selves and becoming farmers. That would be no great evil.
Mr. S. V. Winter asked whether the monotonous life of the
farm would not lead the men to drift back to the cities ? When
the novelty had worn off, the men would simply have before them
a life of toil, with no incentive, such as the ownership of the soil,
to toil for. They would drift back to the cities, and become as
bad as they were in the old country.
General Booth said that the drifting from rural districts to
great cities was the bewildering problem that society would have
to face. But he did not propose anything short of a township.
His idea was to bring at least a thousand families, and place them
within reach of each other, with some common centre, in which
there would be a school of arts, and recreation grounds for those
who were not Salvationists, where they could indulge in football
and cricket. Salvationists would be very much occupied in
kicking the devil about, for he supposed there would be the devil
there to fight with. He proposed at first to bring a hundred men


out, and these would have a brass band. There was no monotony
about a brass band. They got not only morality and spirituality
out of their religion, but amusement as well; and no one who bad
seen a good Salvation Army “ free and easy ” would talk about
monotony. As to the men having an incentive to advance, bis
fear was that they would be corrupted by the naughty Australians
coming and saying, “ Why are you slaving here ? Why don’t
you go into the city and edit a newspaper ?” or something of that
sort. (Laughter.) “Itis an interesting and profitable business.
Why don’t you go and be a member of Parliament ? ” If they
did that they would have to take the consequences, but he would
do his best to make the men contented with their lot. They
simply provided them with a living for themselves and their
children. If they were successful with their 5 acres, they could
go elsewhere and buy 50 acres if they wished.
Mr. Lamb Smith would try this plan of colonization with re-
gard to the submerged tenth of Melbourne and Sydney, and if it
proved successful, working men would see that it was a good
thing, and be ready to assist in bringing others from London.
Working men in these colonies were conservative, and if they
saw others likely to usurp their places in the sphere of labour
they would be inclined to stick up a placard with the words
“No working men wanted here” inscribed thereon. In reference
to the question asked by Mr. Godfrey, he thought the colonists
should be made freeholders on the builidng society principle. If
they came to the cities, the freeholds could revert to their fellow-
colonists who were left behind.
General Booth said it was proposed to establish colonies as
soon as possible similar in character to those in England. They
would be very glad to take the criminals or the poor women off
the streets on a small scale in Australia on the same plan as that
he proposed to adopt for Great Britain. A start had already
been made. It was no part of his plan that the colonists should
not be freeholders, but he preferred that they should not own the
land simply because he was so poor. He wanted to do good on a
large scale, and to get an income from the farm colonies, and he
wanted the men to be willing to work, not only for themselves
but for the benefit of others. They would be supplied with a
cottage, cattle, and implements as they were to be trusted, and if
they proved good fellows they would be promoted and get higher
rank. To carry this plan through, they would have hundreds of
officers ; and these men, if they proved themselves worthy, would
he made officers and would help to carry this plan throughout the
world.
Mr. Linklater said the presumption was that there were a
number of these colonists who had never seen a farm in their


lives, and he asked if, after they were brought out here, they
would be left to themselves, or if they would be instructed and
superintended in their work.
General Booth said that 60 per cent, of the people they
were seeking to benefit had been brought up as agricultural
labourers, and, therefore, would have some knowledge of what they
were doing. The others would be shoemakers, blacksmiths,
carpenters, &c., and would make shoes and so on for the rest of
the colonists. They were not going to be left like orphans; they
would be helped if they got into difficulty. He did not propose
to bring out 3,000,000 of people in one fleet. He only proposed
to bring out 100 people at the most at the outset, and if the plan
was found not to answer he would not attempt to proceed with it.
Mrs. Glenn suggested that 50 of the first 100 should be
domestic servants, as they were suffering in this colony from want
of domestic labour.
General Booth said he could understand that, as he was
suffering from the inconvenience caused by three servants at the
house in which he was staying having announced their intention
of leaving. Somebody had told him in Sydney that if he would
bring out 5,000 domestic servants they could place them in that
colony alone. He had no doubt he could supply domestic servants
to any amount. There were thousands of girls in England who
would be delighted to come out, but they would not come alone.
Even the poor rescued girls would not come alone. If the ladies
desire servants, let them subscribe for them. “ How much would
it cost ?” might be asked. Supposing it cost £2O to prepare the
girl and send her out here, and that the wages were to be £35
per year, would those wishing for servants advance the £2O in
each case ? During the first year the £2O might be deducted
from the girl’s wages. If the girl left them they could get
another, so as to get services to the value of what they had
subscribed. If they agreed to such a project it would, of course,
be understood that the servants were to be at liberty to attend
the meetings of the Salvation Army and wear the uniform. There
were thousands of lasses who would be glad to go anywhere
provided they were allowed to wear the uniform.
The statesmen, the Christians, and the philanthropists of
Australia were with him in his scheme. The only real
objection was raised by the workingman. The eight hours
question would be discussed at the conference to be held at the
Trades Hall later on in the day. He proposed to meet the
difficulty by showing that when the working man became bis
own master he could work what hours he liked.
The Rey. J. W. Simmons (Tasmania) moved a vote of thanks
to General Booth for his kindness in meeting the Conference and


communicating the information with which he had favoured them.
Although they might not agree in the conclusions at which
General Booth had arrived, his plan deserved their sympathy.
The Hon. Mr. Sternberg seconded the motion, which was
carried with acclamation.
General Booth, in returning thanks, said that if he had been
able to communicate anything of interest with regard to his
scheme he was grateful for the opportunity. He honestly wanted
to lessen the amount of human suffering. He thought he had
grasped the principles which, if applied, would be effectual in
doing so.
The General then withdrew.
Mrs. Sugden read a paper by Mrs. Nightingale on—
The Female Refuge , Carlton.
As I have had the honour of being asked to act as a delegate
at the Charity Conference, and so represent the Protestant
Refuge, it gives me great pleasure to write a very short paper on
the subject. I have only been a member of the ladies’ com-
mittee for a few months, having lately come to reside in Mel-
bourne. My strong impression is that the institution and its
management and work only needs to be known to be valued, and
liberally supported.
It is a sad sight, indeed, to see poor young girls—disgraced,
dismissed from service, and forbidden to return to their natural
home by angry parents —begging to be taken in and cared for,
and a chance of recovering their character given them. This we
see constantly as we admit these poor young girls at their own
request —often weeping and repentant —for a year’s residence in
our refuge.
I will briefly state the objects of the refuge for the informa-
tion of any here who may feel sorry for these young sisters,
and desire to help them to begin life afresh.
1. To give girls who have fallen for the first time a chance to
recover.
2. To give the girls, during a year’s residence, a thorough
training as domestic servants.
3. To teach them to care for and support their children, thus
preventing them from becoming a burden on the State.
The committee has the satisfaction of seeing a large number of
those received and trained in the institution turning out really
good servants, others returning to their families, and some
happily marrying.


I should like to add that the refuge is in no sense of the word,
a prison. It is a home, and the head matron is a mother to the
girls, who frequently express their attachment to her.
At the expiration of a year, if not taken home by relatives,
suitable situations are found for each inmate, who is provided with
a thorough outfit of clothing on leaving.
I would call special attention to the good work which the
institution is doing in caring for the children. We have an average
of 30 babies in our home, and the mothers learn to love their
children during the year they are with them, and after they are
separated from them work willingly for their support. In some
cases situations are found where the girls are allowed to take
their children with them, but in most they are put to nurse with
some respectable woman whose character is vouched for, the
mothers paying the nurse.
Now, in many cases, if not all, these illegitimate children would
become a burden on the State if not supported by the mothers, as
maintenance is often difficult to recover from the fathers, though
every effort is made in this direction by the honorary solicitor.
Now, if these 30 babies were all committed to the State, they
would cost it, I believe, 12s. 6d. a week per head. In a year this
would amount to £975, or about two-thirds of the total yearly
expenditure of the institution.
The committee thinks that on this ground alone the refuge
deserves liberal support, leaving out of consideration for the
moment the fact that many of these girls would probably sink to
the lowest depths were not a friendly hand held out to help in
their hour of deepest need.
DISCUSSION.
Mrs. Sugden, in reply to questions, said that if a girl applied
a second time their rule was to refuse her, but whether this
rule was adhered to or not depended on circumstances. They
could not have more than 40 in the institution at one time, and
were often compelled to refuse applicants through want of room.
When they left the institution they were allowed to visit the
matron, which they frequently did. They had no organization
for supervising the girls passing through their hands.
Mrs. Edwards said : In Brisbane we have a female refuge
and infants’ home, with an average of from 15 to 20 inmates.
Many have been restored to friends, or placed in respectable
situations where supervision is kept up. On entering the home
the girls are expected to help in the duties of housework, sewing,
and laundry. Nearly all the inmates work cheerfully, and make
rapid progress in their training. The earnings during the past
year have more than counterbalanced the expenditure. The


period of probation is fixed in the case of each inmate by the lady
superintendent. We have also an industrial home, conducted on
much the same lines as the other. In this home there is a steam
laundry, and girls do similar work as in the other home. Good
influences generally prevail, and many are rescued from lives of
shame. At the beginning of the years 1890 and 1891 there were
24 adults and 17 infants in this institution. It is maintained by
private subscriptions, and subsidized by Government.
Mrs. Glenn said that, in connexion with her work at Ballarat,
she had felt for years the great necessity there was for providing
a place for receiving half-witted girls.
Mr. Maxted said he had inquired into the matter of idiot girls
in New South Wales about three years ago, and had found that
no provision was made for them, and they were in most cases
refused admission to the various asylums, and had to take their
chance of obtaining employment as servants. He had set apart
a division for girls of this class at the lunatic asylum. They did
what work they were capable for, and in that way were pretty
well self-supporting. No compulsion was used to retain them,
but, as a rule, they did not want to go out, and no effort was
made to send them away.
Mr. Guillaume strongly affirmed the importance of the pro-
posal made by Mrs. Glenn, of having suitable provision made for
the protection of young half-witted girls who were not bad enough
to gain admission to the asylums.
Mr. Godfrey said that these girls were generally strong in
body, and would be very useful in the different institutions as
servants, where they would also be under the supervision of the
matrons of such institutions at the same time.
Mr. Ardill said the difficulty with regard to half-witted girls
had been felt in institutions with which he was connected. He
thought some legal enactment should be brought about which
would give them the power of sending these girls to the various
institutions, where they would be preserved from the temptations
of city life.
Mr. E. Exon thought the suggestions made were really the
solution of the difficulty. It was difficult to make even kindly
people understand the peculiar deficiencies of these half-witted
boys and girls, who should therefore be placed in an institution
where they would be treated by experts. He thought the estab-
lishment of a small country cottage home, with persons specially
trained to deal with such cases, would be an excellent way of
meeting the difficulty.
71


The Third Conference.
The Rev. H. L. Jackson (Sydney) moved —“ That the Third
Australasian Conference on Charity he held in Sydney .” He
said that he had the honour, on behalf of an executive committee
in New South Wales, to invite the Conference to hold its next
meeting in Sydney. If that invitation were accepted they would
endeavour in Sydney to do something in the way of recipro-
cating the hospitality which had been so courteously and
generously extended to them in Melbourne.
Mrs. David seconded the motion, and earnestly hoped they
would all go to Sydney next year, so that the people there might
have the opportunity of showing how much they valued their
company and the suggestions they brought to aid them in their
charitable work.
Mr. Roseby said the New South Wales people would be pre-
pared to accord all friends from the other colonies a cordial and
hearty welcome.
Mr. Edwards (Brisbane) supported the resolution, and ex-
pressed the hope that the Fourth Conference would be held in
Brisbane.
The motion was then 'put by the Chairman, and carried unani-
mously, amid cheers.
Professor Morris, as President of the Conference, thanked
the Sydney representatives for their invitation.
Mrs. Serjeant read a paper on —
The Consumptive Sanatorium at Echuca.
As co-founder of the Victorian Sanatorium for Consumptives,
situate at Echuca, I am glad to speak of the work it is doing for
needy sufferers from phthisis. On coming to this colony with my
late husband, Dr. Serjeant, in 1888, as we had been for so many
years connected with leading medical charities in England, our
attention was drawn to the similar charities in this colony. Our
astonishment and pain was great to find the large number of
friendless consumptive cases vainly seeking admittance to the
wards of the general hospital. On making inquiry we found
no special institution existed for them. As perhaps you may
know, a ward of a general hospital is no place for a consumptive
patient. Indeed, he is not wanted there. All the beds are needed
for cases that can be treated and cured, and are not to be filled
month after month, perhaps for a year or more, by a helpless


chronic case, needing better food than the ordinary hospital gives,
and shutting out a dozen cases that might be cured in that time.
Then there are the cases of incipient phthisis, which if sent to a
general ward would be helped, by the atmosphere there to develop
active mischief. Some very sad cases coming under our notice,
and seeing the need to provide a sanatorium, such as are to be
found at Bournemouth, Eastbourne, the Isle of Wight, and Tor-
quay, and, finding nothing of the sort where we could send them,
we asked ourselves this question if it were not possible to start
such a home? and “Verily, with God’s help,” we said “Yes.”
At that time we had taken a cottage in Echuca, in order to pass
the winter in its balmy climate, for my husband’s health was bad.
So marked an improvement took place, and we met with so many
other sufferers who came there year after year, and who attributed
their prolonged lives to the dryness and purity of the atmosphere,
that there seemed the place to provide poor consumptive patients
with a sanatorium. After seeing a suitable vacant house, and
speaking to a few friends in the neighbourhood, we wrote to Mrs.
Henry Varley asking her if she would help. She at once gladly
consented, and we both set to work to collect funds. We took an
eight-roomed house, with large garden, bought the furniture,
received six patients, and with a working matron and my super-
vision we continued for the first seven months. At the end of
that time, so numerous were the applications for admittance, a
larger house being vacant we secured it, where we could receive
thirteen patients ; a committee being formed in Melbourne, with
Theo. Kitchen, Esq., as chairman, to raise funds, and a board of
management in Echuca to weekly visit the home, advise the
matron, and report to the central committee. In order not to
pauperize any, a scale of charges is graduated to meet the circum-
stances of each case. The highest charge is 255. a week, which
includes all medical attendance ; but by far the greater number
go up quite free, while the rest contribute about 10s. to 15s. per
week. The cases are investigated before sending, besides being
medically examined. Some of the leading medical men of Mel-
bourne kindly act as medical examiners free of charge ; and our
esteemed medical attendant at Echuca, Dr. Ord Smith, daily
visits the home and gives us his valuable attendance. We have
a matron, a trained nurse, and a cook resident ; and our bon.
secretary, Mrs. Varley, and myself periodically visit the home.
Most cheering results are forthcoming in incipient cases, the
symptoms leaving; and in further advanced cases the progress of
disease is arrested, valuable lives lengthened—some, who for two
years have been unable to work, have again started in fair health.
We have the consolation in the cases who do not recover of
brightening the pathway to the tomb, by pointing them to the


city where “ none shall say lam sick.” Quite recently a con 7
sumptive wing for incurable cases has been opened at the Austin
Hospital, but the climate of Melbourne is quite unsuitable for cases
that may be cured, hence the need of our further enlarging our
borders, as we have double as many applications for admittance as
we have beds for. The Government inspector, Mr. Brett, lately
visited us. On the recommendation of the late Inspector of
Charities, Captain Evans, a grant of £2OO for building was given
us. Mr. Brett reports his satisfaction on our work, and again
recommends us for assistance. What we long to see is a building
of our own, large enough to deal with the increasing number of
sad cases, both colonial and imported from the home country. Our
expenditure this past year has been £661, and we have received
of this £IOB 4s. 3d. from patients. We provide exceptionally
good food, and plenty of it. Very little alcohol is used, and that
strictly as a medicine and not as a beverage. It is conducted on
Protestant evangelical principles. There are prayers night and
morning, but no compulsion to attend, and it is open to all creeds.
We have received many Roman Catholics. The priest is com-
municated with, and the patient left quite free to follow his faith.
We have to record with thankfulness God’s great goodness to us
in His attitude as Jehovah Jireh. We have looked to Him, and
He has not failed us.
DISCUSSION.
Professor Morris said he had visited the institution at
Echuca as a member of the Royal Commission, and could testify
that the work Mrs. Serjeant and her friends were doing was a
most valuable one. There were, however, two considerations he
would like to press upon her attention. The first was that it was
not quite fair a thing that the sick from the other side of the
world should be sent here for the charitable in Melbourne to deal
with. Mrs. Serjeant in her paper had informed them that some
amongst her patients were Australian born. He thought the
number was not one in five. The question was how were they
to prevent the people in England sending out consumptives ?
They ought, as far as possible, to cut off the supply at the source.
He had done his part in that matter as long ago as 1883, when he,
published an article in one of the English magazines, drawing
attention to the great mistake made in sending out consumptives
in the second and third stages of consumption. The people they
had a right to blame were the London doctors, who ought to be
attacked in their own home. They ought to be told it was not
a fair thing to the colony or to the patients to send them out.
Although the house was small some difficulty had been experienced


in raising the money required, and he thought the reason was a
sort of feeling that we were having the burdens of other people put
upon our shoulders. He would, therefore, ask any one who had
influence to try and stop the deportation of consumptives from Eng-
land. The next consideration was as to whether consumption had
not been brought into the colony by consumptives sent from home.
In this connexion they had the experience of a certain town in
Europe, which was known to be a very healthy spot, with a
climate peculiarly suitable to consumptives. English consump-
tives had flocked to this place in such numbers that the natives
of the town were getting consumptive. The disease had not
appeared in Echuca yet, but were he a native of Echuca he
should feel a little nervous. As to the home itself, excellent as
the management was, the premises were unsuited to the require-
ments of a hospital, and he hoped a generous public would sub-
scribe to the building fund rather than the maintenance fund at
present.
The Honorary Secretary said that, as secretary of the local
Charity Organization Society, he had investigated four cases of
consumptives sent out to this colony, and was grieved to say that
in no less than two cases out of the four (50 per cent.) he could
not help the conviction that the unfortunates had been sent out in
the hope that they would die on the voyage. One case was that
of a young man, son of a well-to-do tradesman in London, who,
in the last stage of consumption, had been sent out unattended in
the steerage of a Nord-Deutscher Lloyd vessel, and had died
within two or three weeks of his arrival. He thought this
system should be condemned in the strongest possible terms in
the English press.
Mr. Ross concurred with the remarks of the speakers who had
preceded him, and described other cases of a similar nature which
had come under his notice.
The Rev. R. Keith Mackay (Bendigo) said he would join
in making a vigorous protest against the medical men in England
sending out such patients from their homes and friends to die
amidst strangers in a strange land. However, there were a good
many consumptives in the colony who had to be relieved, and he
could add his testimony to the excellent management of the home
and the kind treatment the patients received. He was sure it
waß worthy of the best support.
Mr. Maxted (Sydney) said he had charge of an institution
which had control of the dependent consumptives of New South
Wales. Quite 50 per cent, came from home to die.
Mr. Chas. O’Neill said he believed consumptives were
not sent in order that they might die at sea, but to give them
a chance of life and of becoming strong and well in a new
75


country. He thought they should not he so ready to condemn
the doctors, for, after all, the people had a right to come if they
chose.
Mrs. Edwards (Brisbane) did not think the doctors were to
blame, but objected to these people being brought to Queensland
as emigrants at the public expense.
The Key. Canon Goodman said the consumptive patient
was a free agent, and he believed the various professions in the
colonies had benefited by delicate persons being sent out and
becoming strong. He thought they might leave the matter alone,
and that they derived just as much benefit on the one hand as
injury on the other.
Mrs. Glenn suggested that those who had relatives in the
medical profession in England might ask them not to send friends
out when in the last stage of consumption.
Mr. George Kerr thought the shipping companies were as
much to be blamed as the doctors, and that consumptive passengers
should be examined before taking passage.
Professor Morris said that the patients spoken of by Mr.
O’Neill and Canon Goodman were in the first stage. He had
only referred to those in the second and third stages. The
medical men here should inform the profession at home of the
unsuitability of the colony for such patients, and that would cut
off the supply.
Mrs. Serjeant, in reply, said she was a medical man’s
daughter and widow and was intimately connected with the
medical world. She had written home to the medical press, and
the editor of the British Medical Journal (to whom she was
well known) had kindly printed her papers, in which she urged
medical men not to send out the advanced and hopeless cases.
She felt it was her duty, however, to gather others around her to
help those who were here, and many who had seemed quite hope-
less when taken into the home were now conducting their own
affairs apparently quite cured. (Applause.)
(The Conference then adjourned.)
76


AFTERNOON SITTING.
Ret. J. W. Simmons presiding.
Miss Spence read a paper on—
National or Compulsory Providence.
In the Proverbs of Solomon we read these words —“ The rich
man’s wealth is his strong city : the destruction of the poor is
their poverty.” If they were true in these old days they are quite
as true now. The very poverty of the poor offers obstacles in all
directions to their escaping from it. The small savings or spar-
ings gain the lowest interest, the small purchase is proportionately
dearer than the large, the small allotments sell for more per foot
than the large, the small borrowings pay the highest interest, the
insurance against sickness and old age which is within the means
of the small wage-earner gives less for each pound so hardly saved
than for each pound from the well-to-do. These points were
forcibly brought to my mind when I was an active worker on our
Adelaide Charity Organization Society, some five or six years ago.
I then found that Adelaide pawnbrokers charged, besides the
penny for the ticket, Id. a week for a loan of 25., 2d. a week for
os., 6d. a week for 205., and 2s. a week for £5. When I remon-
strated with the pawnbrokers they said it was a poor trade, that
there were too many in it, and that if they had not the right to
sell up after three months’ non-payment of interest they could not
exist at all. In England there is a limit of 25 per cent, for small
loans, and in Victoria one of 80 per cent. A recent Act passed
in South Australia has made things about the same as in Victoria,
but the Catholic countries which have Monts de Piete lend at
much lower rates, 9 per cent., with a small percentage for the
official valuator, allow a longer time for redemption, and in other
ways safeguard the rights of the borrower. The pawnshop is the
only bank where the poor man can obtain an overdraft, for the
savings bank, though a good custodier, makes no advances, and it
gives the lowest interest, though its security is unquestionable.
In the matter of co-operation I find the people who would be most
benefited by it shrink from even co-operative consumption, because
they cannot ask for credit, in case of sickness or of being out of
work, from the stores, and need not try to ask for it elsewhere if
their ready money had been given to the stores. Co-operation
has not made the headway in the colonies that it should have done.
I belong to a society which numbers 1,766 members, the largest
in Adelaide, but they are chiefly middle-class people and some
highly-paid artisans. The wives are generally the members, and


the dividend is their perquisite; but I am told that, as a rule, the
wives of working men spend this as it accrues, and do not leave
it to accumulate. Ido not call your Mutual Stores co-operative,
for the profits belong to the shareholders-and not to the customers.
Another way in which the destruction of the poor is their poverty
is that when living in a rented house, chomage, the French com-
prehensive term for out-of-workness, is far more depressing and
demoralizing than where a man has a house and garden of his
own. A man whom I employ for my garden, who was so very
prudent that he delayed marriage till past his prime and till the
death of his old mother who was dependent on him, and who has
a young family (only three, however), is making his house his own
by paying Bs. a week for twelve years—four still to run. He has
many off-days, but he is always doing something to improve the
house and little garden. He has put £5O worth of work on it,
and says that it keeps him in heart to work for his own property.
It is the middle class, too, who get almost all the advantage of
cheap goods at the half-yearly season sales. The casually and
irregularly employed rarely have the money to lay out when it
goes the farthest. One of the greatest advantages a girl who
enters a middle-class family has is that she generally sees the
most made of everything, and purchases delayed till they can be
made to advantage. Charles Booth says that the surest sign of
direst poverty in a London street is the quantity of bread trodden
into the gutters. A woman came before our school board of
advice pleading extreme poverty, and asking for the remission of
school fees. The usual questions were made about the family,
and we found her daughter had left her place because the mistress
was that mean. The mistress happened to be the chairman’s
mother, and the meanness resolved itself thus—that the old lady
objected to a shoulder of mutton off which three persons had
dined being thrown into the pig-tub. Every mistress will tell
you that the girls from the poorest homes are the most wasteful.
The savings bank is a great boon, but I am not so sure that it
holds so large a proportion as people think of the savings of the
working classes. When I read the other day at the breakfast
table of the numbers of depositors and congratulations on the
increase, I looked up from the newspaper and asked how many
depositors were present. Out of seven, I was the only one who
had no savings bank account ; three were children who were not
voluntary savers, three were adults, but did not belong to the
working classes. I think that the savings of the working men
go into building societies or into the purchase of a house, or for
stock-in-trade, or in country land, rather than into the quiet coffers
of the savings bank, and that a large proportion of savings bank
deposits are made by well-to-do people for the sake of the interest,


which ordinary banks do not give except on fixed deposit.
Domestic servants generally save through the savings bank, but
often through building societies, which give higher interest. An
excellent girl in my own employment and her sister saved through
a building society duing five years as much money as put up and
furnished two good stone rooms to add to their parents’ house, and
made the old folks a present of it.
The friendly society is a beneficent agency, but it floats too
much at the top of the industrial population instead of building
solidly from the bottom. Trades unions have expended too much
money in fighting to have yet reached their possibilities for
providence.
Providence has several distinct aims in view. First against
sickness and accident ; second against chomage, loss of employ-
ment ; and third against old age. The friendly society or lodge
meets the first, if it is not too protracted, allowing the maximum
for three months, half-pay for three months more, quarter-pay for
six months, after which it ceases altogether. It is like the
ordinary hospital, which refuses to take incurable and chronic
cases. And if, by reason of loss of work, the members are in
arrear, many years of past payments will not suffice to make good
the lapsed claim for relief in sickness. “ Bad in the books ” was
the usual note as to those of our applicants—a small minority—
who had belonged to a lodge. Very few friendly societies take
up the question of old age, and many have suffered from the
greater amount of sickness to be provided for as the members pass
their prime.
The trade union takes more account of chomage than any other
organization, because strike pay during trade disputes is at the
very root of the union, and they help men out of work in one
place to move to some other locality where there are reasonable
hopes for employment.
But for old age —for the years of declining strength —when it
is impossible to earn a full livelihood, there must be solid savings,
dependence on relatives, or recourse to public or private charity.
Nothing has so much discouraged thrift in England as the know-
ledge that, if absolutely destitute , people can claim to be supported
by the rates, but so long as they have any property at all they
cannot have any aid. The possible saving of £SO or £6O is
discouraged, while the saving of a sufficient sum seems, and really
is in most cases, impossible. I heard the other day of a widow
whose husband had left her £2OO, which she thought would keep
uer till death; but she lived longer than she expected, and at the
end of twelve years she saw nothing for her but the destitute
asylum. Perhaps she would not have liked to have sunk the
money in an annuity; insurance offices in Australia do very little


business in that line, and do not offer great advantages over
ordinary investments. The well-to-do people who preach thrift
to the working classes in England remind them that it is in their
power to save through the Post Office Savings Bank, and commute
the lump sum for an annuity for old age. Now what does this
cost ? A man of 24 must pay £2 Os. lOd. a year for £IOO at the
time of death, and a higher premium if payable at 70, 65, or 60.
This £IOO affords, on Government security, a pension of £9 7s. 4d.
for a man, and £8 6s. 4d. for a woman, at 60 ; if taken out at 65
the rates are £lO 6s. lid. and £9 13s. 7d. This is less than
private companies give, but the purchase of annuities is very rare
among the working classes themselves. And yet ray own forecast
of the future is that provision for old age will become the only
necessary provision, and that it should partake of the tontine
principle, a smaller sum being levied from all, because only one-
third of the children born pass the age of 60. If insurance were
made, up to a minimum for bare subsistence, compulsory on all,
while only those who became incapacitated for work by age and
accident, and who were in a position to need it, claimed it, it would
cost less than a third of what it now costs the individual, and the
tax would in ten years become popular. In the Labour World of
the 16th May a calculation was made, on the basis of the tontine
calculations of the Equitable Life Assurance of the United States,
that £5 paid in at the birth of each child would suffice to assure
£lO a year to all survivors above 60, This had, however, the
disadvantage that, whoever paid the money, it would take 60 years
before the annuities were due, and for the present old men and
women the country must provide in the present unsatisfactory
manner. The fact that the cost of paupers over 60 is £2,600,000
a year, or £lO 10s. lid. a head, and that the industrial insurance
companies receive £6,000,000 a year, 47 per cent, of which is spent
in cost of management and collection , that £500,000 is paid by
employers to insurance companies for the contingencies of their
Liability Act, and no one knows how many millions a year in the
various forms of providence by working men, made the Labour
World assert that national insurance would be cheaper for the
community; but I demur to his proposal that it should be entirely
defrayed at the cost of the general revenue. Canon Blackley has
the credit of opening up this subject and calling public attention
to the costliness and insecurity of the various working men’s
methods of providing for the future. His plan was that each
young man (he did not deal with young women) should make his
own insurance against old age in the years between 18 and 21.
This would not be claimed by the middle and wealthy classes, but
they would benefit in another way by the vast reduction in the
cost of pauperism; but he calculated that £lO paid in at 21 would


provide an annuity of £lO a year for all over 70. This I think
is too late an age to fix, for agricultural labourers and working men
generally are past self-support before then. We have an illustra-
tion of compulsory providence in our State Children’s Department.
Those children who have been in service for three years between
13 and 16 have often £lO to their credit at the end of their time,
and with girls who stay till 18 under our care there is generally
£5 more saved. I have often longed to impound it for old age,
but the law does not allow us to withhold it from them. It is
hoped that the possession of the bank-book will encourage further
savings, but this is not true in the majority of cases. Parents
and relatives often get a large share of it, and the young people
themselves do not feel the same attachment to the credit balance
as if they had themselves exercised the self-denial necessary for
When visiting a poor woman the other day, a well-dressed man
called for 3d., her weekly contribution for three children to the
Citizens’ Assurance Company, and I saw how possible it might be
that the expenses should reach 47 per cent, on the poor man’s
insurance. If the cost of new business were deducted from the
expenses of the Mutual Provident, the management would be
very cheaply accomplished. Many old-established companies in
England have only 3or 4 per cent, of expenses. That of the
£6,000,000, £2,700,000 should be absorbed in this way is mon-
strous. Nothing is more cheaply administered than the savings
bank, and nothing could be cheaper than national insurance.
The German system of dividing the cost of insurance for sick-
ness, accident, and old age into three portions, one to be paid by
the workman, one by the employer, and one by the State, has
great advantages, but in many cases a man has such a variety of
employers that it would be hard to get that third. From Mr.
Blackley, I should be inclined to borrow the principle that the sum
to be paid by every man and woman for his own insurance should
be paid at an early age, and public opinion, the strongest motive
force in the wgrld, would soon lay down the law that this should
be done before marriage. lam not satisfied with Mr.
position, that the well-to-do classes paying in when they do not
draw out is sufficient. I shall here quote from an unpublished
book on the “Ethics of Political Economy,” written by my late
brother, who was one of the most conservative of thinkers :
“ Considering the great danger which all civilization runs from
the existence of a large, dissatisfied, hand-to-mouth population, it
is reasonable that the State should subsidize the individually
small, though in the aggregate large, sums paid in by the poor.
As compulsory vaccination to protect the community from small-
pox is done for the poor at Government expense, as compulsory
11131. g


education is either paid entirely out of the public revenue or paid
for out of rates which fall most heavily on those who do not
educate their children in the State schools, so might the pill of
compulsory providence be gilded by a grant-in-aid. This might
offer a parallel to the killing of the prudent sou’s fatted calf to
celebrate the return of the prodigal. And if this representative
elder son is wiser and more Christian-hearted than his prototype,
and enters into the spirit of the Great Common Father, he will
voluntarily offer to kill his fatted calf himself as an inducement
for the prodigal to change his life, and better habits will be
developed in the prodigal himself. If the propertied classes were
to offer a bonus to supplement the savings put into a national
insurance fund, many would gladly save who are in no way
tempted by the ordinary terms of a commercial investment.
While political economy maintains that the conservation of capital
is of more consequence to the poor in a civilized community than
to the rich, and that the reduction of capital by unproductive
charity injures the poor themselves, contributions by the rich to a
scheme of universal and compulsory insurance would increase
instead of diminishing the available capital of the world, and
would tend in the long run to raise wages and to diminish profits.
The benefit of such large accumulations at the end of 20 or 30
years, which must be actively employed in reproductive public
works or in the diminution of the national debt, would not be
greater than the moral gain from the habits that will be acquired
in youth of laying aside a portion of one’s earnings. Habit is
said to be second nature, and in all good training good habits are
made compulsory at first, but after a while they are followed from
choice, as something that it would be foolish, and even disgrace-
ful, to neglect. If commonplace sneers are thrown out about
making people thrifty by Act of Parliament, one may reply that
we do succeed in making people in general honest by our criminal
law. No one can tell how much the moral sense of a people is
educated by the equitable administration of just laws. When
kindly disposed philanthropists think it a hardship for working
men and women to provide for their own future out of their own
earnings, they forget that to deny to these the obligation to exer-
cise forethought and self-denial for worthy objects is to deny
their right to the highest and most distinctive duties and privileges
of human beings.”
The Charity Organization Review sees many lions in the path
barring the way to such insurance, the chief being that, as in the
parallel case of education, if the State began to aid the contributions
of the poor, political pressure would be put on to make the State
bear all the cost. And the Charity Organization Review says
that the wastrel class, the real danger of society, would not


"be so well provided for by an annuity of £lO a year as by the
workhouse board and lodging and supervision, which costs a
fraction more. But it is a pity that, because of the wastrel class,
the honest, sober, worn-out working man should have no other
refuge than the workhouse or benevolent asylum. You know
that when the old soldiers in the fine hospital of Chelsea were
offered ss. a week to live outside most of them preferred it,
though the conditions and the companionship were excellent, far
and away better than those of the workhouse. There is no
reason why the dole should not he paid weekly, so as to lessen
the temptation to extravagance, or it might be mainly given in
kind. Our laws must not be made for the worst specimens of the
great class they are meant for. It is because of the undeserving
and the wasteful that the administration of the poor law presses
so cruelly on the ordinary industrious old man and woman. In
Charles Booth’s invaluable work on “Labour and Life in London,”
which I have been lately studying, he tells of the constant flow
of the young and vigorous into the cities, because wages for
men were only 11s. or 12s. a week, and lads got much less in
proportion while women could not find employment at all, owing
to the decrease of labour employed on the laud—l 7 per cent, on
the best farms. Now these wages to bring up a family on do not
offer a margin to provide an adequate annuity for old age, and
even the tax for sickness paid to a lodge is felt to be too much
till the man grows oldish, when the lodge will have none of him.
Mr. Frederic Harrison, in his address at the Industrial Remunera-
tion Conference in 1884, said, “ Trades unions may be said to be,
as an efficient movement, about 50 years old, co-operation 40;
most of the benefit clubs are in the second and third generation.
We see in such towns as Rochdale, Leeds, Halifax, Newcastle,
and Oldham, where all these are in full force, an altogether dif-
ferent world from that of the average town and country labourer,
who on Friday night may be the possessor of a few shillings and
£5 worth of old furniture. There is, after all, only 5 per cent,
of our whole working population beforehand with the world, and
almost all of these are factory artisans, who alone, by their higher
wages, by the continuity of their work, and by the employment
of whole families, can afford the needful weekly subscriptions.
Ninety per cent, of the English working people have neither
house nor garden of their own.” The pathetic way in which a
man talks of the loss of his home , meaning the selling up of tho
£5 worth of furniture, has often struck me. Things are not so
bad with us here in Australia. I should like much if the census
could tell us how many of our working people own their own
houses. The return would, however, be imperfect if we did not
also find out how much money was still due on the property


nominally theirs. In the boom, rents rose so -much that very
many men were tempted to buy a block, and build when land and
labour and materials were at the highest. Many have lost the
home because they had mortgaged too heavily, and many are
struggling to keep up payment of interest. You are going
through in Melbourne and its suburbs now what we went through
several years ago. But it is too apt to be the case that in such
financial crises the rich man entrenches himself in his wealth as
in his strong city, and he comes out of it richer than before,
because he can buy in the depressed market while he has been
selling in the boom ; while the destruction of the poor is their
poverty, which induces them to buy when things are dear, and
forces them to sell when they are cheap. The new political
economy has more socialistic leanings than the old, and the ques-
tion of national compulsory insurance has entered upon the arena
of practical politics by the example of Germany, and by the
sense that the treatment of the aged poor in civilized countries
may be immensely improved by quite different methods and
organization.
ADDENDA.
Since writing ray paper, more light has fallen on the subject,
so I may be permitted a few words more on Mr. Chamberlain’s
suggestions, that if a person saves £3 by the time he is 25
towards provision for old age the State should credit him with £8
in aid. In the case of Scotland, which has already made educa-
tion free, but which is entitled to over a quarter of a million a
year (its proportion of the grant for free education), and is not
disposed to fritter this bonus on reduction of rates, there is a fund
available for this end that might warrant a grant of £l5. At the
age of 65 this £l5 would have grown to £4O ss. at 2\ per cent.,
and would represent a pension of 2s. a week, a valuable addition
to what a man could save for himself.
By allying itself with the voluntary agencies, friendly societies,
trades unions, and funds established by the large employers of
labour the Government subsidy might benefit the working classes
even more than by keeping separate. A certificate of the deposit
of £3 in any such funds in a sound society would be the warrant
for the subsidy. As such societies earn per cent., weekly
would go as far for an annuity as 3-|d. in the Post-office Savings
Bank. By weekly an additional 2s. a week pension at 65
could be earned, making up the minimum of 4s, a week, and this
not on the tontine principle at all, each man paying the full
value in contributions and subsidy. In that case the heirs should
have some claim in case of death before 65.


The funds at the disposal of Scotland will allow of somewhat
more liberal treatment for those who are too old to take advantage
of the bonus for £3 paid before 25. '
I should be disposed to offer strong inducements towards the
deposit of a larger sum in the earlier years, and I should like to
see women included in the beneficent net. Unfortunately women’s
wages are lower, and their lives are longer, but, on the other
hand, their requirements are less. The German minimum of
national insurance is £6 a year for men, £4 for women, and to
secure this, even paying only one-third of the cost, is found
difficult. In Germany, as in almost all other countries in the
world, the irregularity and uncertainty of employment is a
greater drawback than the normal low wages.
The Australian Mutual Provident Society calculates on a
higher interest than per cent. Three shillings and fourpence
a quarter, or 13s. 4d. a year, paid from the age of 20 will secure
£lO a year, payable at 65, which seems cheap enough, all
premiums returned without interest if annuitant dies before 65
quite within the reach of Australian wage-earners.
What I should like to see is a statement of how much would
be needed to be paid before 25 to secure this minimum under the
Mutual Provident regulation and rates of interest. But men at
20 do not think of old age at all, and, I fear, will not think of it
if not made compulsory.
DISCUSSION.
The Chairman mentioned that in England a society existed
which was then engaged in soliciting the opinions of statesmen on
this question. He had in his possession a copy of a Bill which
passed the English House of Commons as far back as 1872,
wherein it was proposed that certain sums should be vested in the
guardians of the various parishes out of which they could award
ss. per week after the recipient had reached 65 years of age. He
did not consider that any one here would care to vest the money in
boards of guardians, but would prefer to utilize the post-office. In
a paper published by the National Providence League was the
following statement: —
“ The risk of old age. —Some people think that comparatively
few reach advanced years. Reference to Dr. Ogle’s Tables of
Mortality gives the following as the figures of survival. Of
100 persons who reach their 21st birthday, the number who
reach—
60 years of age will be ... ... SLO
65 „ „ ... 43-9
70 „ „ 32-8.”


The Australian contribution to charity was large. In the small
colony he represented, with its population of 150,000, the volun-
tary contributions were very large, while the Government provided
annually £57,000. Supposing a system of national provision for
old age were established, the charitable grant could be consider-
ably lessened. The present generation should provide for the
next, and in teaching the young to make provision for old age
they were not only encouraging thrift but were actually lessening
the taxes on the people. Miss Spence's paper deserved their
warmest sympathy.
Me. Roseby considered something should be done to foster a
system of State insurance, as advocated in Miss Spence’s paper.
Miss Spence said she supposed the subject would be dealt with
at the next Conference to be held in Sydney, and in the meantime
it would no doubt receive attention.
The Rev. H. L. Jackson read a paper by Lady Windeyee,
of Sydney, on —
Centralization in Charitable Work.
The right administration of charity is one of the largest ques-
tions of the day, one which implicates what is supposed to be the
question of all others, the .righteous adjustment of the claims of
rich and poor.
In dealing with any of the branches of this great subject we
must consider the work to be done, those for whom it is to be
done, and not least those whose generosity provides the means
without which it cannot be carried out.
Principles of justice and thrift demand that the gifts of this
generosity should be honestly applied to the work for which it is
given. Circumlocution, red-tape, weakness, bad management, and
fraud combine to frustrate this end. It must be confessed, with
regret, that those who endeavour to relieve want and misery
often commit mistakes of extravagance and shiftlessness akin to
those which have caused the misfortunes of the subjects of their
benevolence. The injustice of this state of things affects the
donors as well as the recipients of charity. It is an accepted
maxim that every act of charity is requited. Beyond the subjec-
tive reward of self denial, its recompense is in itself. But it is a
fraud when the gifts of the rich, given perhaps in the hope of dis-
charging their debt to their poorer neighbours, are made of no
effect through the maladministration of their agents. The obli-
gation is laid on us to combine, on the ground of our common


humanity, to promote in ourselves and others not only the
influence of kindness and charity but the exercise of thrift and
practical union in good work.
There are many of the unthinking rich who have a vague pity
for the suffering which they know exists, but of which they know
nothing particularly; and who, if they could feel that their
interests were conserved, would very willingly give for the allevia-
tion of this general misery of which they are conscious. Any
system for obtaining the help of the now non-giving public would
he excellent in itself, as it would give charity larger funds than
at present are at its disposal ; and it would be also excellent
because it would give organization the power of the purse which
would enable it to direct and supervise the operations of individual
charity. It would he still more excellent because the gracious
economy which should be the law of natural society ordains that
the giver is more blessed than the receiver.
It is a truism to state that the temporary aid which in some
cases would re-establish an active useful member of society may,
otherwise bestowed, encourage pauperism and tend to sap the
inherent vigour of men and women still capable of good work.
The best benefit which charity can bestow is “ humane and
sympathetic instruction.” May we not say that this instruction
is needed by the rich as well as by the poor ?
As a matter of fact, the money now bestowed comes from a very
small minority, who are literally beset with applications for assist-
ance to every sort of charitable or religious object.
Most donors give to several charities, i.e., to the collector of
each individual institution. Such collector takes a heavy per-
centage on what he collects. This percentage would be saved
were the money voluntarily paid into a charitable exchequer.
Or if the collection of funds were submitted to a central agency,
the percentage would be greatly reduced. The greater the number
of institutions combining, the greater would be the reduction in
the cost of collection. It has been argued that, by adopting such
a course, the separate and additional benevolent impulse which
every separate gift brings would be lost to the donor. To the
tender hearts and compassionate care for the poor of these donors
the subjective reward cannot be lost if, by giving all gifts into
one charitable exchequer, the time and trouble of repeated appli-
cation to the cheque-book be spared. M ant of time prevents me
from the clearer indication of a scheme, the details of which may
be easily conceived.
DISCUSSION.
Miss Spence said that the suggestions contained in the paper
would, if carried out, tend to a reduction in the number of charities.


There was an enormous number of charitable institutions in Vic-
toria and New South Wales, but in South Australia there were
not so many in proportion to the population, and the fewer separate
agencies there were the better it would be.
Mr. Goldstein said that in the evidence given before the
Royal Commission on Charities great stress was laid on the large
leakage in the shape of collectors’ commissions. Some hospitals
allowed 15 per cent, to their collectors, and in some instances
collectors received 5 per cent, or 10 per cent, on municipal grants.
The society of which he had the honour to be secretary disliked
that form of leakage, and preferred putting up with a smaller
income to employing a collector. A business man had seriously
suggested to the Commission the employment of one firm of
agents at a smaller commission than usual to do the collections
for all the charities, leaving the donors to specify the particular
charities they desired to benefit. He thought Lady Windeyer’s
plan an excellent one.
Mrs. Docker understood that Lady Windeyer’s proposal was
that the central organization should dispense the funds according
to the needs of the charities to be benefited, but not altogether as
the donor might wish.
The Chairman said that in London young ladies made an
excellent living by collecting for charitable institutions. They
earned 3s. 4d. in the £l, and there was no doubt that, but for
their efforts, many £5-notes would not be subscribed.
Mr. Rosebt said the institution he represented in Sydney
gave its collector a fixed salary and a very small percentage. It
was in his knowledge that the wealthy classes did not subscribe
so well to Sydney charities as the middle classes.
Mrs. R. Edwards stated that in Brisbane most of the sub-
scriptions for charitable institutions were obtained from the busi-
ness people, many of whom gave over and over again.
Mrs. J. E. Edwards said that she represented the Bendigo
St. Vincent de Paul’s Society, and the collections were obtained
by the lady members. The great difficulty they experienced was
that children would not assist in supporting their parents. She
considered that a law should be passed to compel children to
contribute to their parents’ support. (Hear, hear.)
Rev. W, L. Jackson said he had been informed by Lady
Windeyer that the paper just read was to be followed by another
on a similar subject.
Mr. H. W. Hammond said his experience in connexion with
hospital management extended over 30 years, and he was of
opinion that more money was obtained by voluntary contributions
than by paid collectors. He was of opinion that the law should
be altered so as to compel children to support their parents.


Rey. H. L. Jackson read a paper by Miss Francis Gwillam
Holden, of Sydney, on—
Nursing the “ Sick Poor ” in their Homes. —“ A Pertinent
Question
It appears to be granted by most that to multiply, enlarge, and
beautify hospitals to provide unlimited accommodation for the
sick of the country is, in the very nature of things, to do a good
work ; and that those who help on that work by donations and
subscriptions are to be regarded with approbation. It is the pur-
pose of this paper to traverse such an assumption almost in toto.
It is certainly worth while to ask the question—to ask seriously
—if it is a real good thus to encourage the nursing of the sick of
the working classes away from their own homes and home circles ;
or is it to a great extent only a superficial good, with an under-
lying evil, propagating steadily and surely the very ills it is
intended to cure? The question is specially worth asking in
Sydney, because we have spent and are spending lavish sums on
hospital maintenance for the “sick poor;” while the “sick
poor,” in the meaning of the term as used in the old-world cities,
hardly exists.
The saying that “ Evil is wrought by want of thought as well
as want of heart ”is strikingly applicable to this subject. “ Why,”
it will be asked, perhaps indignantly, “ where can the evil be ?
How can the rich better employ their surplus wealth than in
providing for the comfort of their poorer brethren ? ” Well, there
are two or three ways of looking at that. As to the evil : some
time since it did not appear an evil to give shillings to beggars at
doors, now it is universally conceded to be a great evil ; and it is
not the rich alone who support hospitals out of their wealth, but
the poor also who support them out of their poverty. But let
that pass. Waste of money is not the primary objection here
urged, but loss of something much more valuable—the inde-
pendence of men and the tenderness and helpfulness of women.
It is true that the rich cannot employ their surplus wealth
better than in caring for the poor, always provided that it be done
judiciously and in strict accordance with the truest and deepest
needs of those cared for ; in other words, that it shall help them
to attain to a higher elevation, moral and physical, or aim towards
that end at least.
But some of us have had our eyes opened to see that from
several distinct points of view wealth is not judiciously employed
in facilitating the nursing of the'so-called “sick poor” in hospital
wards.
There are some sick persons (a small percentage of the sum
total treated in hospitals) who really have no home, and for these,


and some exceptional cases besides, to provide comfortable hospital
accommodation is a plain Christian or human duty ; but to provide
it largely beyond this limit is a pernicious evil.
To nurse one’s sick and suffering is an invaluable part of life’s
education alike for head, heart, and hand. What woman worth
the name would be without it, were the choice given her, were
social machinery so adjusted that she could choose without detri-
ment to her sick. A sick child in a family is a constant and
powerful incentive to self-denial, self-sacrifice, and sympathy, and
under proper technical supervision helps towards a knowledge of
sanitation and hygiene. Is this all unneeded in Sydney ? Are
the gentler and tenderer emotions of humanity so well developed
in our city that no wise cultivation by the daily facts of life is
required ? The experience of the most unobservant among us
will surely show the contrary. How great, then, the loss to
parents, brothers, and sisters—how cruel the wrong to sisters
especially—to be deprived of all this educative agency towards
future full womanhood.
Some sentimental, nay, some sensible, persons may think it abso-
lutely cruel to suggest that it were better to nurse the sick of the
working classes in their own small, and perhaps, uncomfortable
homes, than in beautiful hospital wards ; but what is the truth ?
That comfort and discomfort, to begin with, are comparative
terms ; and that to many it is a bitter trial to leave a small home
for a fine hospital—as it ought to be. And that it is, moreover,
a matter of statistical fact that the percentage of deaths in
fine hospitals is greater than the percentage of deaths in poor
homes.
Numbers who are now treated at great expense to the country,
and, far worse, at great moral and practical loss to the community,
in hospitals, might and ought to be nursed at very small expense,
and with better results—the requisite machinery once provided—
in their own homes and by their own people.
This multiplication of hospitals is a mistake and an evil, alike
from a sanitary, a monetary, and a moral point of view ; and that
it is so needs the more insistence, because it is a case of an angel
of darkness appearing as an angel of light, of a bane disguised
as a blessing, of an evil, stealthily and steadily undermining
moral characteristics, and yet regarded as an unalloyed good.
We, in Sydney, are guilty of a double folly in this matter ; we do
those things which we should not do, and leave undone those
things which verily we should do. We tempt, nay, almost coerce,
to the hospital those sick who might and ought to be nursed in
their own homes ; and we practically insist upon the nursing in
private houses of those very cases of infectious disease —measles,
scarlet fever, &c. —which should be rigorously isolated in buildings


set apart for the purpose. Why is this wealthy city of Sydney
without a fever hospital ?
But to return to ordinary sickness. The machinery necessary
for the proper nursing of the labouring classes in their own abodes
is the establishment of dispensaries, not in a slipshod and perfunc-
tory fashion, to give prescriptions and medicines, but to afford
careful and thorough treatment of every kind required as given in
hospitals, the patient coming, or, if a child, being brought, at
prescribed intervals to receive this treatment, but being wholly
cared for in the interim at home, the wife or mother receiving
constant benefit and instruction from the doctor’s comments and
directions.
It may be said that although this sounds very well it would
not work. Now it is just because it has worked, and worked
well, that this paper is written. It is not merely a pretty elusive
theory, but downright actual fact. The plan has been put in
execution and worked admirably in France, both as to individual
results medically and diffusion of sanitary knowledge (and there-
fore prevention) generally, as a highly suggestive paper read at
the late Health Exhibition, London, by Dr. Gibert, of Havre,
demonstrates to absolute conviction. Capital operations even were
performed at this dispensary, and yet during nine years not one of
them were lost in home nursing, while as to cost the details are
astonishing. There were treated during 1883 2,153 ailments, in
the comprehensive manner pre-supposed, at a cost of 3s. 6d. per
head per annum, or 2gd. per child per day, each child averaging
fifteen visits. In Sydney we pay an average of about £lO per
annum per child to perpetuate, in many cases, the great moral
e vil of depriving families of the first duties of tending their own
sick, while in France they pay an annual average of 3s. 6d. per
child, and confer the inestimable boon on social and domestic life
of cultivating these valuable qualities which enable their women
to bravely, because intelligently, face suffering and disease, and fit
them to be happy and triumphant victors in the battle.
Surely Dr. Gibert has a right to say to Sydney, as he has said
to England, “ I show unto you a more excellent way.”
What they have done in Havre can we not do in Sydney ?
DISCUSSION.
Mr. Guillaume held the opinion that the existing system of
massing disease in hospitals was a bad one, but its maintenance
would always be advocated to supply a training ground for the
doctors. The system was a bad one also because it induced
pauperism. A great social reform would be effected if the sick
poor were nursed in their own homes.


Mrs. Serjeant said she was a trained nurse, and at present
assisting at a free dispensary for the poor at Collingwood, where
there were other trained nurses besides herself. They taught the
mothers how to act in cases of accidents to their children, and
they went to the homes of the sick poor and gave them all the
attention that was necessary. They had a great deal of ignorance
on the part of the mothers to contend with, and there was no
doubt that the people whose homes they visited received lessons
in sick nursing which would stand them in good stead in time of
sickness.
Mr. Goldstein said that the misuse of hospitals by people
able to provide private nursing, who crowded out the sick poor,
was a great grievance. He did not, however, agree with the
opinions of the writer of the paper. He would go in the
oppposite direction. He considered we should encourage the
erection of hospitals, but that they should be provident hospitals.
It was of the utmost importance to the State that the citizens
should be healthy and vigorous. The first duty of the real
philanthropist was to conduce to such a condition, and he felt
inclined to think it would be preferable to encourage the worker
to rest and submit to treatment at the first sign of a breakdown.
The principle, however, by no means involved the gratuitous
treatment of those able to pay.
Dr. Workman considered that trained nurses were of great
value to the doctors. Any system would be a boon which
provided for the nursing of the sick in their own homes in
preference to their being sent to the hospital. In connexion with
the hospital in England to which he was formerly attached,
a staff of trained nurses was available for any emergency, and
there were many calls for their services outside the hospital as
paid nurses, while the poor also received attention at their hands.
Mr. Roseby said that many poor people recovered in hospitals
who would have no chance in their own homes.
Mr. Hammond considered the suggestions contained in the
paper were impracticable. Girls should be educated in nursing
before they became wives and mothers.
Mrs. Twopenny said that, perhaps, the reason that the per-
centage of the deaths in hospitals was greater than in private
homes was because the worst cases were naturally sent to the
hospitals. Besides, there could really be no reliable data for
comparison.


FOURTH DAY:
(Friday, 21st November, 1891),
MORNING.
Mr. R. Edwards presiding.
Mr. J. Goldstein read a paper on—
The Unemployed.
Of late the “ unemployed agitation ” has threatened to become
a chronic trouble in Melbourne. For years past each succeed-
ing winter has brought with it an outcry that there are large
numbers of industrious workers who cannot secure employment
despite their utmost efforts, and whose wives and children are in
consequence starving.
People have felt it necessary, therefore, to assemble daily
in large crowds on some unoccupied plot of ground in the city
—the nearer to the business centre the better—where they are
harangued by young gentlemen who draw highly-coloured pic-
tures of their distress, magnify their numbers with the most
charming liberality, and make radical recommendations for the
cure of the disorder. The meetings are usually carefully watched
by the police, and occasionally the oratorical effervescence of the
speakers brings them into collision with those guardians of the
public peace. Denunciations of public men and suggestions of
heroic measures for the relief of distress then meet with prompt
dramatic punishment in the shape of “ bolts from the blue,' I '' and
the little comedy ends with a tableau in the police court.
Then are witnessed long processions of men parading six
abreast, each with a pipe in his mouth (indicating, probably,
“ smoke-oh ” at the wharves). With manly self-assertiveness the
“ unemployed ” march down the principal streets, displacing the
ordinary wayfarers. With what is intended to strike the observer
as a grim satire on our civilization, they display a preference for
the resorts of the “ butterflies of fashion/’ from which the usual
frequenters are driven in dismay. These processions are most
imposing during “ knock-off ” time at the various large factories
near the river banks, and are always accompanied by an honorary
escort of constables. When all this happens, the Melbourne
citizens awake to the knowledge that they are again in the throes
of the “unemployed” trouble.
Fifty years ago New South Wales had a very bitter experience
of the “ unemployed ” disorder. Reckless issuing of “ immigra-
tion orders ” filled the streets of Sydney with hundreds of


unfortunates who were strangers in a new land, friendless, home-
less, and penniless. The cause of the trouble was obvious. The
remedy equally so. We all know of Mrs. Chisholm and her
noble work.
Twenty-five years ago our own colony knew what was meant
by the term “ unemployed.” A sudden era of almost delirious
prosperity was suddenly followed by depression. Alluvial gold-
digging became unproductive. Thousands of hardy energetic
men of all trades were hard put to it to live. Here again an
obvious cause, and people found the remedy. For good or ill
(according to the political school to which the observer belongs),
the policy of “ protection ” was introduced, avowedly with the
aim of facilitating the return of these digger-handicraftsmen to
their own proper trades.
Twelve to fifteen years ago began an “ unemployed agitation ”
for which no obvious cause could be found. People wickedly
said that rival politicians, of otherwise high character, had
organized these demonstrations in order to prove how unsound
was the policy of the party in power. Whether this be true or
otherwise deponent knoweth not. Perhaps some day a student
endowed with the ci’itical and historical faculty will elucidate this
dark point.
Four years ago we had a period of fictitious excitement, mis-
called “prosperity.” Everybody was to make his fortune by
vending land and building large terraces of houses. Who were
to purchase this land, and who to occupy those houses? “No
matter, the world will last our time ! Down with croakers ” was
the fashion of public thought. It is to be remembered that this
“ boom ” period was almost immediately preceded by unusual
depression in other colonies, notably in New Zealand and South
Australia. This depression was, it is worthy of remark, the
reaction from just such “ booming ” as was then working us to
fever heat. Naturally all those who were suffering in the other
colonies were attracted here.
One fine morning we opened our eyes to the fact that “ the
boom had burst.” We heard of failures of over-confident specu-
lators, we saw rows of unfinished houses —at which the builders
had been working “ but yesterday ” —silent, deserted, with the
“ dressed ” threshold stone lying unregarded, yards away from
the unfitted door-sill. We saw, in distant suburbs, rows of
cottages built regardless of all sanitary conditions, on the align-
ments of unmade streets, tenantless and hopeless of tenants,
or temporarily occupied by vagrant, drunken, or criminal
“ squatters ” who paid no rent, and, but for the vigilance of our
police, would have established in our midst miniature copies of
the Alsatia in the London of the Stuart days.


* When, therefore, the newspapers informed us that a petition
had been presented to the Legislative Assembly of Victoria, in
July, 1889, in which nearly 700 unemployed men prayed for
relief, few were hardy enough to express any doubt that there
was a large area of disturbance. There was an obvious cause.
On the face of it there should be much distress after our boom
experience. So widespread was this feeling that when the police
made quiet and rapid inquiry into the bona fides of the signers of
the petition, and found that 55 per cent, had given fictitious names
and addresses, that 20 per cent, were in work, that 5 per cent,
were worthless people, and that only the remaining 20 per cent,
were deserving of attention, it was not considered politic to make
these results public. Certain philanthropic citizens helped the
“unemployed” to form a committee from their own number,
subscriptions were freely sent in, and the movement went on
merrily for a while, and then “ sizzled out ” at the approach of
the summer months, what time the “ unemployed committee ”
took to giving each other in charge, and accusing the remaining
constituents of spending the funds in cigars and pocket-money.
In spite of all this, the feeling existed that there must have been
much distress caused by want of work, and those who gave to
relieve this distress could only hope that part of their money at
least reached its proper destination.
In March, 1890, the cry was again raised. Grown warier, the
general public refrained from helping “to any great extent.”
In June, therefore, outside management was invited, and the
Salvation Army took up the question. A fortnight afterwards
665 names were registered. Yet another fortnight and there
were 1,050 names. Two months later and 3,200 names were on
the list. At the end of this period 890 men had received free
passes up country, and situations were found for 1,210 men.
(What became of the 1,100 remaining has, so far, not been ascer-
tained. All these figures are those given by the “Army.”)
’Pending the disposal of the 2,100 cases referred to, 4,500
rations were granted to families and 40,000 meals to men.
All this was done with £9OO, the right to issue free passes, and
the loan of a hall fitted up by the Government. Evidently,
therefore, a very rigid spirit of economy prevailed.
But as the leaders of the Salvation Army have admitted that
they themselves were not satisfied with their methods of dealing
with the unemployed, and pleaded the necessities of the case in
extenuation, it may be permitted to me to say that this amazing
increase from 600 to 3,000 in the course of ten weeks, this
uncertainty as to the 1,100 remaining unaccounted for, the
enormous number of 900 free passes, the 40,000 meals, and the
4,500 rations were all not too satisfactory features.


On the Ist July of the present year I was guilty of an unpar-
donable piece of presumption. I heard that at a certain hour the
Premier of this colony was to receive a deputation from the
“ unemployed.” Nobody expressed any desire that I should be
present, yet I walked in “as bold as brass ” at the heels of the
deputation. It was soon evident that the deputation was of two
component parts. There were men who did not seek work for
themselves, and said so, but were there as spokesmen for the
rest. And there were men who said they were seeking work and
were in distress for want of it. Three speakers stated this. I
can tell you somethiug of these men. One was a stonebreaker by
calling. He could have had constant work, but he objected to a
certain stipulation by his employers (the Harbor Trust) which, he
rightly considered, necessitated increased effort to enable him to
keep up his average earnings. It was the easiest thing in the
world to get him work, and it was done for him ; I am convinced
he could have secured it just as readily for himself. The second
was a butcher who had become insolvent a fortnight previously,
after 25 years in business. He was an elderly man with grown-
up children. He soon obtained a billet in his own trade, and has
since confessed to me that he was ashamed of his participation
in the agitation. The third was a confectioner, an old man, with
a comfortable home and adult children. He had been a member
of the “ Unemployed Committee ” of 1889, and had refused to
return to an old employer up country who was willing enough to
give him work.
The deputation thus composed told Mr. Munro that there were
thousands of men out of work. The Premier pooh-poohed the
statement. The deputation offered to bring 5,000 unemployed
men within two hours to interview him. He accepted the
challenge. Let the unemployed register their names and addresses,
and if there were really any cases of deserving men who wanted
work he would assure every one of them employment.
The next day two clerks were, for seven hours, set to register
names. At the end of that time only 589 names were recorded.
This list was handed to the Charity Organization Society to deal
with. The Cabinet, after the experience of 1890, had very wisely
and humanely kept back contracts which would give employment
to 1,000 men, and had let these contracts just at this time. The
Premier very naturally thought that with work provided for 1,000
men, and only 600 men out of work, it would be the simplest of
matters to give those 600 men six-tenths of that work, and so
settle the difficulty off-hand. But he reckoned without his host.
Accompanied by Mr. John Traill, of the Charity Organization
Society Committee, I called on the largest of the contractors. He
spoke of the unemployed in a very unkind manner. He did,


indeed. Shockingly unkind. He had given work to some of the
“ Salvation Army’s ” proteges in 1890, and his remarks about the
“unemployed” were quite unquotable. In fact, it was soon
evident that nothing was to be hoped for from the contractors.
They had “ been there before,” and, like the burnt child, dreaded
the fire.
In this dilemma, the Railway Department promised to give work
to 100 men at stone-breaking. The Charity Organization Society
undertook contracts which would provide for another 100. A
large laud-holder up country undertook to give work to 50 men.
With work for 250 men thus assured, the Charity Organization
Society entered on its somewhat arduous task of ascertaining the
facts and educing the underlying lessons of the “unemployed
agitation” of 1891.
I had originally hoped to prepare a detailed analysis of the facts
of the 844 cases investigated—for, besides the 589 on Mr. Munro’s
list, the society dealt with 255 other cases sent by clergymen,
mayors, members of Parliament, and charitable workers—which
would be published as an appendix to this paper. But about the
same time that I realized that, with the extremely limited spare
time I have had for many months past, this course would not be
practicable, I also remembered that the committee of the Charity
Organization Society had not presented its final report to the
Premier, Seriously, I cannot well give these statistics in
anticipation of that report.
Briefly then, about one-third on Mr. Munro’s list were, on
inquiry, ruled off as not deserving attention. They were actually
in work, or were not without ample resources, or had given
fictitious addresses. Of the two thirds who were offered work
only half accepted. Of these not more than half remained at
work long enough to testify to their necessity for appealing to
the Premier.
The “ unemployed ” deputation told Mr. Munro that there were
5,000 unemployed. I myself heard the leading agitator declare
that there were quite 15,000. I read in the papers that a prominent
member of Parliament had publicly asserted that there were
10,000. Under the microscope of Charity Organization Society
inquiry these statements were seen to reduce themselves to about
100 on Mr. Munro’s list, and 100 of those sent from other sources.
Taking the whole 844 cases, about 25 per cent, were really steady
men, reliable and industrious.
Quite a large percentage of this 200 odd, were old or elderly
men. There was a sprinkling of men who had fallen through
crime, and a larger number whose failing had been drink. The
residuum was composed, as was to be anticipated, of men con-
nected with the building or furnishing trades —carpenters, joiners.
11181. H


masons, plasterers, and bricklayers. I regret to say that there
were also a few sufferers from the strike of 1890. I confess to
have given these unfortunates the first chance in every instance.
When I was in Brisbane last month, Mr. Parry-Okeden (who,
by the way, I hoped might be induced to be with us as a delegate),
the Under-Secretary for Queensland, very kindly gave me an
interesting report which he had published in 1887. He was then
“ immigration agent” for his colony, and in 1886 had dealt with
the “ unemployed ” there—not on Charity Organization Society
lines and, therefore, I venture to believe, not in a wholly satisfac-
tory manner. But he is a shrewd, sober-minded, just man, and
his report is very valuable. Let me quote a few sentences from
it:—
“ Notwithstanding that I had found a large number of men
able and willing to work at fair and reduced wages, and very
many cases of real need, close observation led me, from suspicion
to certainty, that the unemployed excitement last October was
worked up to the proportions it assumed, and unduly sustained,
by many persons who distinctly profited by it.
“ I had noticed at the outset that the movement was apparently
only capable of being successfully agitated on half-holidays and
Saturday evenings after work hours.
“ That a large percentage of the men who daily hung about my
office, often threateningly abusive, and insolently refusing work
at reasonable wages, was made up of town loafers and idlers.
“ That the real unemployed, who preferred hard work any-
where to easy idleness in town, were found in the background.
“ That the worst cases of distress were those of the ‘better
class,’ such as clerks thrown out of employment by commercial
depression, and who instinctively shrank from parading their
distress.”
This experience of the unemployed in Brisbane, in 1886, might
with some little alteration be taken as a statement of the experi-
ence in Melbourne in 1891.
Of the “ unemployed ” here the largest number were loafers,
agitators, or fairly decent men who lent themselves to a factitious
agitation in the interests of the leading agitators. These last
were men who hoped to float themselves into political power on
the wave of excitement caused by their adroit manipulation of the
distresses, real or pretended, of their neighbours. It must have
been obvious to the most casual observer that the “unemployed”
movements lately have been organized and sustained by leading
members of the local “Nihilistic” club, the “Social Democratic
Society,” or the “ League for Teaching our Grandmothers how to


Suck the Political Egg.” As claimants for Government aid, qua
“ unemployed,” surely these men are not to be taken seriously ?
How heartily one can sympathize with the outspoken vexation
of Mr. Munro, looking at the results of the Charity Organization
Society inquiry ! His complaint was that these unfounded out-
cries, this fictitious distress, did infinite harm to the colony’s
credit abroad. With all its wonderful recuperative power the
colony’s most mischievous enemies were found within its own
borders. Fifteen thousand starving workers were alleged to be in
our midst. The statement was exaggerated one hundredfold.
But how was the public creditor to know that ?
Touching the loafers. Are they men for whom Governments
should start relief works ?
I have spoken in a somewhat light strain hitherto, because the
humorous side of the “ unemployed ” movement is very funny.
Who could remember the case of the man whose wife was heiress
to £5,000, and who could at any time be helped by her relations,
or raise money at bank interest on her expectations, and who
yet was one of the most troublesome of Mr. Munro's men, without
seeing the ludicrous side of it ? Do you blame me for my hearty
enjoyment of my recollection of the old fellow who was stated to
be the possessor of a fertile farm, a block of city land, and the
cottage in which he lived, and who displayed an ardent desire to
punch my head for exposing him ?
But if I have striven to handle the subject with a light touch,
it is not because I fail to recognise the gravity of the problems
underlying some of the aspects of the “unemployed” agitation.
These hundreds of loafers, tramps, drunkards, criminals, broken-
down and “ masterless ” men, and invertebrate creatures who
formed not only so large a proportion of the “ unemployed ”
movements the last three years, but who are always present in
these colonies, and who are a standing menace to our civilization,
what about them ? They are not welcome in our individualistic
social arrangement. Though they are the counters in the game
played by the so-called “ social democrats,” they could not for a
moment be tolerated in a socialistic community. In self-defence,
any form of socialism would have to stamp out these unfortunates.
It is the main objection to socialism that it must be unrelentingly
cruel to the weaker human products.
If we give these poor creatures alms, we do too much, for our
charity is simply wasted. If we turn them away empty and
unregarded, we are after all guilty of what is very like a cowardly
evasion of a manifest duty. Whence do they come ? Partly
they are our own manufacture. Mainly they are the kind gifts of
older communities. The old classic myth fables that a jealous
goddess sent two serpents to devour the young Hercules. He


strangled both. Every young community has two deadly serpents
to encounter. They are ignorance and pauperism. With the first
we have dealt in the heroic fashion. We are just noticing the
presence of the other.
What is the cure for this dangerous class of loafers, this disease
of our circulation ? Perhaps our wise and good friend, Pastor
Berlitz, told us last year of the only cure, and will again tell us of
it presently. To my mind the only possible remedy is the
Arbeiter Kolonie. Our colony has a great absorbent power, a
splendid digestion, in the way of assimilating human labour. But
this particular food needs a little “ cooking ” and preparation by
skilled hands.
We have now to deal with the elderly men, and the sufferers by
the land boom and the strike. W’hen we consider how wide-
spread was the commercial disturbance caused by these two
factors of our present dulness ; when we compare the actual
resultant distress with what might reasonably have been expected,
I think we have cause for pride in the wonderfully elastic
resources of our young colony, and are justified in high hope for
the future if such storms can shake us so slightly.
But, speaking from the social and charitable point of view, we
have not done enough for these poor elderly men. They are not
so feeble that they are proper subjects for institutions. But they
are shouldered out by younger and stronger men in the close com-
petition of the labour market. What is the remedy ? Pastor
Herlitz’s proposal, or the other I shall presently make ?
Touching these carpenters, masons, &c. ! Did we do enough for
them ? We are always ready to dole out relief —if we have any
funds left after wasting our alms on loafers and “ ne’er-do-weels ” !
But doles, the giving of rations, free meals, and second-hand
clothes, are they not something of an insult in cases where the
desert and real desire for work have been satisfactorily proved?
I like the wise German saying “ Arbeit statt almosen ” (“ Work
rather than alms”). The idea is not unknown to the English
world. It is the fine underlying principle of the Elizabethan
laws which might have done so much good for the English poor,
had not the political convulsions of the succeeding reigns starved
this vital principle.
German or English, the principle is the right one. Last year the
Salvation Army gained great credit for giving 40,000 meals (and
so many “ shake-downs”), at an average cost of seven farthings per
meal. Now, premising that the case to be helped is a genuinely
meritorious one, I would rather that the bed had cost a shilling,
and the supper and breakfast had each cost seven pence, if the
recipient had then been enabled to go straightway and earn the
2s. 2d. which had been lent to him.


Is it at all possible to deal thus with these men ? Suppose the
200 found this year were all of this class, could we have helped
them without degrading them ?
I answer —Yes ! Each man, each family, might have been
provided with a wise, open-handed, warm-hearted, helpful, and
sympathetic friend, who could have found the father work, the
children situations, the wife counsel and assistance.
In the old days, all roads were said to lead to Rome.
To the secretary of a charity organization society all trains of
thought inevitably conduct him to the goal of organized effort.
Here is my panacea. Organized effort by private persons so
banded together that they work steadily and intelligently to a
common result, subdividing the labour, co-operating cheerfully,
and constantly comparing results, yet each at liberty to deal with
one or two particular cases in the manner shown to be most use-
ful after inquiry and a study of the case, the one stipulation being
that the person should learn so to discipline his or her own
impulses as not to injure the case by unwise forms of relief given
as much to ease the burden on the giver as to benefit the
receiver.
Governments and politicians cannot handle such problems as
our late unemployed trouble without aggravating the mischief,
because their actions can never be truly self-sacrificing, their
motives never really altruistic. Their hands are tied by a hundred
considerations, not the least difficulty being that of resisting unjust
demands by politically influential persons. Scattered charitable
associations can only palliate the evil. The remedy for such a
social disease as widespread distress caused by want of work lies
in a community like ours with all the individuals of that com-
munity—each one lending a hand, and each watching what his
or her neighbour is doing.
The Rey. H. L. Jackson read a paper on —
The Rev. J. D. Langley’s Labour Home.
My friend and neighbour, the Rev. J. D. Langley, was one of
the gentlemen who (as I stated at the last Conference) formed
themselves, about eighteen months ago, into a committee for the
purpose of considering, and attempting to deal with, Pauperism
as it exists in Sydney. Not only was he one of our most active
members, but it would seem that he devoted a considerable amount
of time to an independent inquiry into the question in all its
phases. Early in the present year he took independent action.


Having elaborated a three-fold scheme, he convened a public
meeting by circular, and laid his proposals before a tolerably large
and fairly representative audience.
Mr. Langley’s proposals were as follows. The establishment
(I copy from his circular) of—
1. A free labour bureau or registry, where all who need
employment can enter their names without charge, and
where efforts will be made to find them employment.
Such registry to have branches throughout the country
and the suburbs.
2. A labour home, where persons who are destitute and
willing to work shall be found temporary employment,
and in return shall be supplied with food and shelter.
Every effort will be made to aid the inmates spiritually
and morally. If this can be established it will at once
give people who desire to help the needy an opportunity
of doing so, with much less risk of being imposed upon.
3, A farm settlement in the country, where those who prove
themselves willing to work can be drafted off, and kept
employed until suitable openings occur for them. At
such a settlement ample work can be found for willing
hands, and, once established, might be expected to meet
its own financial requirements.
The third of these proposals —in my opinion the best of the
three —has not as yet been acted upon. Mr. Langley has not,
however, abandoned that part of his scheme which relates to the
establishment of a farm settlement. He is still aiming at it, and
he hopes before long to surmount certain difficulties connected
with the acquisition of a suitable block of land, and the raising
of sufficient capital.
The first proposal has already been carried out, and a labour
bureau is actually in existence. It will be briefly referred to later
on. Perhaps I may here repeat a criticism ventured by me some
months ago, when commenting on Mr. Langley’s scheme as a
whole, viz., “that such a bureau might be extremely useful—up
to a certain point—but that it would hardly create employment.”
We come to the second proposal. Mr. Langley’s labour home
is an accomplished fact. It commenced its operations informally
in July last. A few weeks later came the public opening.
I proceed to give some account of this labour home.
First, as to the premises. These are situated in Harris-street,
Ultimo—some ten minutes walk from the railway terminus at
Redfern. They consist of what was once a factory, of a good-
sized yard with a shed, of a small dwelling-house. This last is
not, however, used for the purposes of the home, but is rented
from the management by a private tenant.


The old factory is the “ home ” proper. It is a large two-
storied building. Above is the sleeping accommodation —some
33 cubicles separated by canvas partitions, containing each a
truckle bed and nothing more. And these tiny bedrooms are so
arranged along the walls as to leave an oblong room in the centre.
This is fitted up as a chapel, and is used for services in connexion
with the Church of England. Although optional, there is, lam
informed, a fair attendance.
The lower, or ground, floor is almost entirely given up to labour
purposes. We notice, however, a bath and a fumigator, the use
of both of which is compulsory. There is also a small kitchen,
and meals are served three times daily, at a long table. A corner
is boarded off, and is used for office purposes.
It may here be stated that every stroke of work needed to
convert the quondam factory into the labour home was done by
those for whose benefit the home was started. There has, of
course, been some expenditure. Reserving the details of receipts
from all sources and working expenses for subsequent treatment,
I had better say at once that Mr. Langley began his operations
with a sum of £287 subscribed, and that contributions —some of
which are to be continued annually—have since come in, making a
sum total of some £4BO.
I pass on to speak of the terms of admission, of the number of
men who have been admitted, of the work which is done on the
premises.
Provided there be room for him (and I am given to understand
that, while the home has been always full, as many as 30 have
been turned away in a single day for want of accommodation), a
man who is destitute and unable to obtain employment is
admitted on application to the paid foreman—an apparently
shrewd and capable individual. Preference is given to those who
present a subscribers’ ticket, but the presentation of such a ticket
is not a sine qua non. The rules and regulations (a copy of
which I lay upon the table) have first of all to be subscribed, and
then, as a general rule, the newcomer’s mettle is tested by his
being told off for work in the wood-cutting yard. If he turn out
a loafer he is promptly sent about his business ; granted that he
show himself a deserving character, he is put, at the end of about
a week, to other occupations, which will be described presently.
Eight hours work per diem is exacted, in return for which there
is provided food and shelter. In the apparently rare cases,
where the man has a wife and children, he returns to them at
night, and is given a certain amount of food to carry to his
lodging.
During the first few weeks of the home’s existence the men
were allowed to work out their food and shelter, and, this having


been done to satisfaction, they were free to go about seeking for
employment. This plan, however, has not been found to answer,
and the rule now is that each man shall do his eight hours’ work
in the home, unless leave of absence be specially granted by the
foreman. Inmates are, at the same time, free to go into town
before the breakfast hour (8 a.m.) to look through the advertise-
ments in the daily papers, while, as will be seen presently, every
effort is made to obtain employment for them.
I gather that, since the opening of the home, there have been
182 inmates. These, as may be imagined, have been of all sorts
and of all conditions. The majority have belonged to the ranks of
unskilled labour. There has been more than a sprinkling of
artisans, e.g ., carpenters and coopers, upholsterers, weavers, and
wheelwrights. No less than fifteen clerks have been admitted,
while the books are now being kept by a reporter. At least one
clergyman has been assisted.
It is no part of my purpose to state the causes which, in the
respective cases, have led to destitution. They are, as may be
expected, various ; some may readily be guessed. In not a few
instances fault, and not misfortune, is the sufficient explanation.
Perhaps it may be instructive to add that some seventeen men
have been discharged from the home for the simple reason that
they were found vagabonds. So far as Mr. Langley’s undertaking
is concerned such are, of necessity, left to “ gang their own gait.”
As to the occupations engaged in on the “ labour-home ”
premises. As may be imagined, the principal occupation is that
of wood-cutting and wood-selling, and I am told that there is a
fair demand for fuel. But there is plenty of work going on of
other kinds. A large and paying business is done in chair-caning.
Fruit-boxes are also manufactured, and, although just now the
stock in hand seems heavy, the foreman informed me that he
anticipated a rapid sale with the commencement of the season. A
bootmaker has some outside business besides his task of repairing
the boots and shoes of his fellow-residents. Ladders and flower-
stands and book-cases are made and sold as occasion offers.
I proceed to speak of the amount of success achieved by the
home as a means of assisting deserving characters to find employ-
ment outside. Merely remarking that 18 have left without notice,
that 10 have been transferred to the hospital or asylums, that 17
have been dismissed for intemperance, loafing, or bad conduct, I
notice that no fewer than 51 have found billets through their own
efforts. It is a question, however, whether they would have
found them so readily had it not been for the timely help afforded
in the shape of food and shelter.
Here is the place to make brief allusion to the labour bureau.
It began its operations at the same time as the labour home and


is worked from the game office. Its existence is only now
beginning to be recognised by the public generally, but the results
are already far from discouraging. Temporary employment has
been found for 40, and permanent situations for 39. Of the 79
who have thus been helped all but 10, it is reported, have turned
out well. No fee has so far been charged to either party,
employer or employe.
I may say here that the average number of inmates per diem is
32. Of these 6 are employed in the wood-yard, 7 in chair-caning,
4 in making fruit-boxes, 3 in the kitchen, washing, &c., 2 in bed-
rooms and library, 3 with the carts and horses, and 7 outside the
home.
As to finance. The weekly expenditure is as follows :—Pro-
visions, £3 10s.; rent, horse-feed, foreman, &c., £5 ; material,
e.g.j wood, canes, &c., £l4 ; making a total of £22 10s. It is
estimated that, what with the sale of fuel and the profits on chair-
caning and fruit-box making, the weekly receipts should come to
some £2O. There is thus a weekly deficit of some £2 10s.,
which has to be met by subscriptions. This estimate is, lam
told, based upon the transactions of the last seven weeks.
The preliminary expenses are not included in the foregoing
statement. It may be added that the foreman only receives
wages, and he but 10s. per week. The director gives his services
gratuitously, while a young friend of Mr. Langley has taken up
his quarters on the premises and gives a helping hand generally.
Mr. Langley is, of course, commander-in-chief, but there is a
committee of management who meet weekly. They came into
existence at a public meeting and will, I gather, be re-appointed
annually. A men’s committee exists also, but its functions are
limited to making suggestions for the good of the undertaking.
Such is a brief description of the labour home which owes its
existence to Mr. Langley and to those who have backed him up
by supplying the necessary funds. It is,- you will remember, the
description of an outsider. I have no connexion whatever with
the management, nor have I seen my way to render more than a
very qualified support. My position, in short, is that of one who
is watching the undertaking with considerable, if slightly dubious,
interest.
And I may add that the description is from personal observation.
As for the details, they are in every case strictly accurate, for I
have gone to head-quarters for my information, and my paper, up
to this point, has been submitted to Mr. Langley. I have his
word that the statements to which you have listened are absolutely
correct.
This being so, I may venture a few very mild, I hope not
captious, criticisms. Let me direct grave attention, in the first


place, to the fact that the “labour home ” is, to all intents and
purposes, another “ charitable institution.” It could not have
been started without the successful appeals to private bounty.
It cannot, as the balance-sheet shows, be carried on —at present
at any rate —without donations and subscriptions. The profits
do not cover the working expenses.
Again, it is, I believe, intended to develop the different
branches of industry now engaged in on the premises ; of course,
with the view of rendering the home as soon as possible self-
supporting, This, no doubt, is, from one point of view, most
desirable. At the same time, it must not be forgotten that the
result will be merely the establishment of another business to
compete with those which are already in existence—to compete,
too, so to speak, on exceedingly favorable terms. I mean in this
way. The very fact that it is a charitable institution will induce
custom from the charitably disposed. It hardly suggests “ com-
petition in the open market ” to learn that the wood-selling
business has prospered as personal friends of the management
have simply transferred their orders from their former tradesmen.
This danger, for I venture to think that it is a danger, was
hinted at by one of the “ Labour M’s.P.” who spoke at the public
opening. I question whether it be sufficiently realized by the
management; perhaps they do not regard it as a serious danger.
In any case they do not shrink from inviting custom on the ground
that those who give it will be aiding a good work. Such, at
least, is the inference to be drawn from certain notices which
appear in a little periodical which is issued in connexion with the
home.
There is another point to which I must call attention. Mr.
Langley’s undertaking “ has met with the deep appreciation ” of
the Trades and Labour Council —I quote from a letter received
by Mr. Langley from the secretary. At the same time I cannot
forget a remark made by another “ Labour M.P.” when the home
was opened ; a remark to the effect that nothing should be done
which was calculated to lower the rate of wages. When I find
that those who do their eight hours’ work at the home receive in
return for it their board and lodging —but nothing more—the
question occurs to me whether the development of the labour
home industries may not, in some way or other, bring about a
collision with the trades unions.
One last criticism. I make it with some reluctance. Believing
most firmly, with Mazzini, that religion must not be banished
from our work, I cannot at the same time refrain from expressing
the opinion that there is a flavour of religious sentimentalism in
many things which may be seen in the labour home. I am glad
to see the chapel, and glad to see it well and brightly furnished.


I should like to see a great deal more ornamentation in the home
generally than there is at present. Much might be done in this
way to bring out “the buried life,” to raise the moral tone, to
refine the character. But I confess I doubt the wisdom of
hanging up texts —here, there, and everywhere.
I must rapidly draw to a conclusion. Not only with regard to
the labour home which has been described in the preceding pages,
but viewing Mr. Langley's three-fold scheme as a whole, I would
say of it that it is exceedingly valuable as one of the many evi-
dences that there is a sincere and wide-spread desire to remedy
existing evils. Society cannot be too thankful to those who, after
careful reflection, come forward with various schemes for the
improvement of society. In the multitude of councillors there is
wisdom, and Mr. Langley may certainly take his place among
those whose work is helping us to a solution of existing
problems.
I cannot, however, persuade myself that in his undertaking is
the full and final solution. It will, beyond a doubt, have an
experimental usefulness. At the same time it seems to me that
the root of the matter is still untouched. The measures adopted
are palliative rather than remedial.
There is this, however, to be urged in their favour. In spite of
what was said at the opening, the labour home with its labour
bureau is a charitable institution, and, in so far as its existence
depends upon voluntary contributions, every one of its inmates is
a recipient of charitable relief. But the relief is afforded in such
a way as to lessen as little as possible his self-dependence and
self-respect. Up to a certain extent, as an inmate, he may be said
to earn his living.
And, beyond all question, a large number of men have been
helped to rise when, had it not been for the labour home, they
might have sunk to lower depths of pauperism. So at least it
would seem from the information afforded me, for these last
remarks are not based upon my own personal observation. I have
not been able to ascertain the exact facts of the case in respect to
each and every individual who has profited by Mr. Langley’s
labour home.
Pastor Herlitz read a paper on—
Workmen's Colonies for the Unemployed.
Last year, at the First Australasian Conference on Charity, I
had the honour to read a paper on the same subject, which was,
at the time, favorably received, and is printed in full in the report
of the proceedings of that Conference. Returning to the same


subject this year I wish to state at the outset that this paper is,
to a great extent, only to be regarded as a supplement to that of
last year, founded on fuller and more recent reports kindly placed
at my disposal by an absent member of this Conference, to whom
I here thus publicly desire to express my thanks.
In my former paper I gave, as typical of the others, a full
description of the manner in which the colony of Wilhelmsdorf,
near Bielefeld, in Westphalia, is conducted. Of the 23 such
colonies at present existing in Germany, Wilhelmsdorf was the
first founded. I think it will be interesting as well as instruc-
tive to this Conference to be made acquainted with the circum-
stances, as related by the founder, Pastor von Bodelschwingh,
which led to its establishment. His statement, somewhat abridged,
is as follows :
“ Outside the westerly gates of Bielefeld there existed only a
few years ago a narrow hollow way, leading through precipitous
hills up to the institutions for our epileptic patients. That hollow
way is now considerably widened, and the hill on our side is sloped
down and fenced in by a roughly-made thick stone wall. You can
see at a glance that that wall has not been erected by able workmen,
but by dilettanti. Yet, such as it is, it has to be designated as
the birth-place of our workmen’s colony. And it happened in
this way. Ever since the opening of our institutions it was a
rule that poor travellers, on asking, should receive a meal. For
years numbers were thus treated, especially at dinner-time, and
the more single households we established for the ever-growing
numbers of our patients the greater became the number of appli-
cants for meals. There was no control whatever exercised, and
our kind-hearted sisters did, consequently, not notice that some of
their guests used to return after a week, and perhaps a second
and a third time after a fortnight and three weeks. We had at
that time eight different kitchens, situated at good distances from
each other, and on an average from 20 to 25 meals a day were
thus given by each of them to travellers. It did not occur to
any one that this was anything but true charity, for who was able
to say whether the applicants were lazy vagabonds or deserving
but poor people ? And when such a poor fellow, after having
eaten his meal, showed his torn boots or shirt, was it not charity
to give him better boots or a whole shirt ? Who was to know
that the same man would, on the very next day, apply at the next
kitchen door in his former old rags and ask for the same charity
as the day before, having meanwhile sold the things given to him
and spent the money in drink? We afterwards ascertained that
in one instance a fellow successfully repeated this trick five times,
day after day. It took a considerable time before it was found
out that a number of our guests used to go from one of our eight


kitchens to the other, commencing at the first again after they
had been at the eighth, and even repeating the same process three
or four times. We felt obliged, in order to defend ourselves
against such abuse, to look about for work to be got out of our
visitors ; and that precipitous hill, from which our epileptics were
always in danger of falling down into the hollow way, offered a
splendid opportunity to get an hour’s work in return for a meal.
Spades and pickaxes were bought, and we commenced to widen
the hollow way, to slope down the precipice, to break out the
stones and to erect a wall with them. From the time that we
made the rule “First an hour in the quarry, then your meal”
affairs were changed like by magic. Instead of 20 to 30 as
hitherto, only two or three came to each kitchen. But these were
willing to earn their dinner honestly, and performed their task
faithfully, even in the hottest weather, though we could see that
some of them had never before tried their hands at such work.
But then these men would ask us, “Do not send us away at
once; give us some more work to do. Where are we to go ?
Work we cannot find, and yet we do not like to beg.” We felt
in a painful position. Had they been epileptics, there would have
been no difficulty; then we could have kept them. But were
they not indeed, they sometimes pleaded, quite as, if not more,
unfortunate than our well-cared-for patients ? Without a home,
without work, forced to live the life of, and likely to become,
vagabonds. So we tried from time to time to find shelter for
some, at least, who pleaded with us most earnestly. In most
cases, however, the clothes of these applicants were in such a
state that our managers justly hesitated to receive them into the
institutions ; so w© had to supply them with others, and did it on
condition that they should pay for them with their work. And
most of these people did not disappoint us, but worked honestly
and faithfully and got on very well by degrees, showing that there
are really men who can be helped, if only help of the right sort
be offered to them. We could well have gone on in this way
but for a new difficulty arising. The news that poor travellers
could get support from us for work spread very rapidly, and by
degrees, especially at the beginning of each winter, so many un-
employed came to us, asking only for food and shelter, without
any further payment in return for honest work, that we could not
by far provide for them all. And yet, at times, we kept from 40
to 50 such strangers in our institutions, having to decrease, not
without pangs of conscience, the space allotted to our patients.
But we had to draw the line on that number. We had neither
space nor work for more. So we had to say to many, “ G-o on,
we cannot help you.” This painful condition of things at last
compelled us to give up our excellent rule, “First work, then food.”


Just because we knew that a number of these people, at least,
would really much rather work than beg, we could not refuse
them food when we had no work to offer. And behold ! as soon
as we relaxed that rule our old bad lot of vagabonds re-appeared.
Of course we then knew full well that to a number of these men
it was not charity to give them meals. But, without work, how
was it possible to discriminate between worthy and unworthy
applicants ? It was this difficulty which, when we had finished
the work mentioned before, made us turn our eyes to the then
almost desert land which now forms our colony. We knew that
by dint of very hard work, by trenching it from three to four feet
deep, this desert, as shown by a friend of our institutions on his
own land, could be changed into a veritable garden. True, com-
mercially speaking, it would not pay to undertake such work.
But seeing that in our province of Westphalia alone from 3,000
to 4,000 marks (£l5O to £200) were daily being thrown away,
not only in useless but actually in hurtful alms, would it not, we
calculated after all, be a good stroke of business to collect at least
part of that money, and by cultivating the desert with its help to
be able to offer work to all who applied for it? Even if our
colonists only earned half of what they would cost us, would we
not, after all, save at least half of the money which otherwise
would be simply thrown away ? And would we not, at the same
time, be enabled thereby to discriminate between the habitual
lazy vagabond and the man who is willing to work ? We would
then no longer be under the necessity of supporting nine vaga-
bonds for fear of wronging one deserving man ; nor to leave one
deserving man unsupported for the sake of nine who do not
deserve any help. These were the considerations which led us
to acquire the land and found our colony.”
Thus far Pastor von BodelschwinglPs narrative. I have
repeated so much of it because it so clearly and instructively
states the reasons and circumstances which led up to the
establishment of his, the first, labour colony. The same circum-
stances and reasons, combined with the success attending the
first experiment at Wilhelmsdorf, soon led to the establishment of
a number of similar institutions, so that, at the present time, only
eight years after the founding of the first, there are 23 such
labour colonies spread over the whole of Germany, of which two
(those at Berlin and at Diisseldorf) are town establishments,
where the inmates are employed at wood cutting, carpet beating,
carpentering, broom and brush making, straw plaiting, mat
making, and similar occupations not requiring a long time to
learn nor much bodily strength.
As early as 1884 it was found necessary to form a central com-
mittee, consisting of delegate members of the different associations,


who meet as often as required and consult together about any
subjects connected with the management of the colonies. In
their first meeting they unanimously agreed on the following
general principle:—
The labour colonies are not State or municipal establish-
ments, though they may be supported by both, but free
Christian charities. Their aim is not selfishly to rid
ourselves of a plague, nor to serve as a mere pretext to
send poor wanderers away from our doors, but they are
intended, without any by-thought, truly to help our
fellow-men, and that not only for the moment but
lastingly, not only bodily but also morally and spiritually.
With regard to the management, they passed, amongst
others, the following resolutions :
All the colonies are, in the main, to be managed in
accordance with the same rules.
The lodging and boarding of the colonists should, as
far as possible, be on the same scale in all the
colonies.
The time for work is to be so arranged that the
working capabilities of each colonist are fully made
use of.
Payment for work done must, under all circumstances,
be made on a perceptibly lower scale than the usual
wages.
Asa rule, there is no other punishment for the colonist
but dismissal, especially for introducing strong drink
into the colony. In exceptional cases, however,
payments may, instead, be stopped for a certain time.
Every one, without exception, who feloniously leaves
the colony without having paid for the clothes
supplied to him is to be prosecuted for theft.
In accordance with these resolutions, every applicant who is
still able to work (without regard to his religion, position, or
personal worth) is admitted to these colonies, to be there
employed in agricultural or other labour until he can either pro-
vide himself or else be provided with something better. On
his entering, the conditions of admission and the rules of the
colony are read and explained to him, and he has to sign them.
The “ house-father ” (manager) decides the kind and quantity of
work each colonist is expected to do daily. He keeps a register,
showing the number of days worked by each colonist, the kind
of work he was engaged in, the wages earned by and the clothes
supplied to him. No cash payments are made to a colonist during
his stay, but the wages earned by him, deducting therefrom a
certain amount (about 6d. daily) for his board, are entered in a


book for him, and any sum to his credit, after payment for clothes
supplied to him during his stay, is handed over to him when he
leaves. Thus many, whose ragged appearance had before com-
pletely deprived them of any chance to get employment, leave
the colonies decently equipped and are thereby again enabled to
find engagements for work.
Since the commencement of the movement up to the end of
last May 46,088 persons had passed through these 23 colonies,
of which large number at that time 1,721 remained (an average
of 75 in each), whilst, on an average, each of them has room for
122 inmates. Thus, nearly 1,000 persons more could have been
accommodated in May. Very likely in winter all these places
are filled up, and sometimes extra accommodation may even have
to be provided.
Financially the colonies appear, after they have once surmounted
the first difficulties, to get on satisfactorily. My information
enables me only to speak of some. But their reports are certainly
very favorable. Wilhelmsdorf states that the past years of
cultivating work are commencing to bear good fruit. Almost all
the necessary provisions are now grown on the spot, and the
amount realized by the sale of cattle and pigs alone during the
year was £225. Madgeburg, after the second year of its existence,
produces already all its vegetables, expects soon to derive a good
income from the 800 fruit trees planted, and closes the year with a
credit balance of £l7B ; and the two town colonies at Diisseldorf
and Berlin show credit balances of, respectively, £75 and £9B. Of
course all the colonies are, as yet, partly depending on contribu-
tions from the public, which come in liberally, and some are also
aided by the State or by municipalities. But even then the
financial aspect of the movement appears to be encouraging.
And what are the practical results of it ? Last year, the latest
report in my possession being only one of 1886, I spoke of these
colonies yet as of an experiment which was still on its trial. But
now, with five years’later information, I unhesitatingly assert that
the movement has passed out of the experimental stage into that
of a decided success. Within these five years ten new colonies
have been founded, which would scarcely have been the case if
the then existing thirteen had not proved successful. Another
and an exceedingly striking proof of success is the following :
Whilst in 1885 the number of persons sent to houses of correction
because of habitual vagabondage amounted to 22,940, there were
only 13,467 dealt with in the same way in 1890, being a difference
of 9,473, showing more than anything else the decrease of
vagabondage by means of these colonies. With regard to the
conduct of the inmates themselves during their stay and after
they have left, the Central Committee state “ The reports from


the labour colonies are favorable throughout. It happens pro-
portionately but seldom that colonists have to be dismissed for
breaking the rules, and then mostly in consequence of their having
in some way obtained strong drink. And the greater part of
those that have passed through the colonies give satisfaction
afterwards as far as we are able to learn.” In consequence of
these favorable results, many who at first from various reasons
opposed or at least greatly doubted the success of the movement
have now become its warm friends and supporters. And to-day,
in Germany, excepting confirmed vagabonds, who look upon these
colonies as places to be shunned and hated, there will be very few
people who do not heartily wish them and their managers “ God
speed.”
In the paper read by me on the same subject last year I tried
to show, and I hope I succeeded in showing, not only that very
urgent reasons for the establishment of similar labour colonies
exist here in Australia, but that we could establish them under
far more favorable conditions than obtain at home. The result
was a resolution of the Conference then sitting, “ Tliat the ex-
pediency of establishing labour colonies somewhat on the German
plan, to which able-bodied mendicants and unemployed could be
referred, should be brought under the notice of the charitable in
the different colonies.” I hope that this Conference will re-affirm
that resolution, and re-affirm it so warmly and earnestly tliat
practical results will spring from it. Our Melbourne Charity
Organization Society has not only had this important matter under
consideration, but has already, some time ago, secured from the
Government the promise of a suitable piece of land for the purpose.
Had it not been for the heavy work we were asked by the Premier
to undertake in connexion with the “ unemployed ” last winter,
our labour colony would perhaps have been established by this
time. However, the experience gained in dealing with hundreds
of unemployed has only confirmed us in our purpose. We hope, at
least I hope, that we shall be ready to receive colonists before the
next winter comes round. We will confidently appeal to the
public of Melbourne and of Victoria for liberal contributions for
the purpose, telling them, “We do not wish to saddle you with a
new charity or to get more money out of you, but we wish to
help you to save your money. You give away thousands a year in
alms to able-bodied mendicants who say that they cannot find work,
without affording any real help to them. Why, then, squander
such large sums ? Why not rather collect that money and use it
for offering shelter and employment to those whom you wish to
assist ? You would not knowingly support a lazy man in idleness.
But in reality you often do it by indiscriminate alms-giving.
Withhold then your money from all able-bodied beggars and entrust
11131. I


it to us, that we may be in a position to help those who really wish
to work. By doing this, half the money at least that you have
hitherto given away without any satisfactory result will be saved by
becoming available again for the help of other unemployed.” The
good opinion I have of the intelligence of our fellow-citizens
would be very much shaken if such a convincing appeal did not
meet with a liberal response. And if, when reporting to the next
Conference that we have succeeded in opening a labour colony in
Victoria, we were to be met by the reply, “ And we have
done, or are going to do, the same in New South Wales, in
Queensland, in South Australia, in Tasmania, in New Zealand,”
what better proof could there be that these Conferences do not
end (as, indeed, we have received a friendly warning the other
day that they must not end) in mere words, but that practical
results, good and valuable work, will ultimately be the outcome
of them.
DISCUSSION —THE UNEMPLOYED.
Mr. Flynn (who spoke by special permission of the President,
Professor Morris) said —
I venture to assert that no subject which has been considered
by this Conference approaches in importance and urgency the
problem which is designated in brief as the unemployed question.
In order that the Conference may form some idea of the remorse-
less competition for employment in this colony, I shall quote
some figures bearing upon the subject. Between June, 1884, and
May, 1890, 50,615 applicants presented themselves for examina-
tion to fill 5,431 vacancies in the Railway Department, or an
average of nearly 10 to 1. In June, 1889, this average had
increased to 18 applicants for each situation, and the same ratio
obtained in May, 1890. The Richmond Council advertised for a
hallkeeper, whose salary was to be £lO4 per annum with house,
fuel, &c., and the result was that, on 31st July, 1891, the council
received nearly 500 applications for the position, among whom
were to be found clerks, bankers, local preachers, and tradesmen.
This prize was competed for by applicants from the other
colonies, and almost every country township in Victoria was
represented.
With reference to what Mr, Goldstein said regarding the
unemployed during the last three or four years, I do not think
that gentleman could always give chapter and verse in proof of his
assertions. As far as I am concerned I distinctly deny the
insinuation—for which Mr. Goldstein had no warrant —that the


leaders of the “unemployed” had personal ends to gain, or that
“ anarchists ” were interesting themselves in the labour movement.
With regard to the statement said to have been made to Mr.
Munro by one of the leaders of the unemployed, that he could
produce 5,000 unemployed in two hours, would any man outside
a lunatic asylum make such an assertion ? It was preposterous.
Mr. Munro had said that he would find employment for all who
came to him personally within a week and asked for work.
Instead of having the names of applicants taken by officers of the
department, the Premier had handed the matter over to the
Charity Organization Society. There are thousands of men in
this city who have an unconquerable aversion to the Charity
Organization Society, because they want justice and not charity,
and nothing else will content them.
As to the manner in which the unemployed should be dealt
with, I advocate the creation of a Minister of Labour or Industry,
whose function it will be to look after the interests of labour. In
the department of the Minister of Labour I would have a State
Labour Exchange, with head-quarters in Melbourne and branches
in all the centres of population, on the plan of the Municipal
Labour Exchange of Paris. Persons out of employment would,
as a matter of course, register their names, and employers who
wanted workmen would thus be well informed as to the exact
number out of employment, and it would be impossible to get up
fictitious unemployed movements. The Government would then
realize the great number of men constantly out of work, and would
probably feel compelled to adopt such measures as those proposed
by Pastor Herlitz, which I think are excellent. The unemployed
artisans might also be utilized in erecting sanitary dwellings for
the poor.
Mr. Goldstein said that the statements contained in his paper
were truthful statements of facts.
Mr, Exon said the figures quoted by Mr, Flynn had not proved
the lack of employment, but the rooted aversion every one has to
country life as opposed to town life. (Hear, hear.) This was
really the root of all the miseries of civilization. He thought the
establishment of labour colonies was the only way to cure this
evil. The colonies, however, should be confined to agriculture,
and should only be intended to supply men with food and not for
paying wages. It was the duty of the community to see that men
did not starve, but not to see that they earned wages or saved
money. Nothing should be done to tempt men to leave their
employment to seek work on the farm colony. The surplus pro-
duce should not be sold in the market in competition with the
farmers, for this would be unfair, but should be reserved for
charitable uses.


Miss Spence said that no paper read at the preceding Confer-
ence had impressed her so much as Pastor Herlitz’s. (Hear,
hear.) The standing difficulty of our civilization was to distin-
guish between the needy man who was willing to work and the
vagrant who would not work under any circumstances. A plan
by which the former class could be sifted from the latter and
raised to better things, leaving the impostor to be dealt with by
the criminal law, seemed to be the desideratum of society. The
tramps who begged from “ station ” to “ station ” and house to
house were swelling the imaginary numbers of the unemployed.
She was of opinion that the Australian tramp made a good thing
out of the numerous race meetings. (Hear, hear.) It was the
dulness and monotony of country life which caused people to flock
into towns and compete for positions which had the character of per-
manence. The isolation of men, each to his square mile, in South
Australia was reducing them to savagery. She therefore thought
General Booth’s idea of a community in which the men could work
shoulder to shoulder, and make markets and amusements for each
other, if carried out, would thin Melbourne a lot. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. Roseby (Sydney) thought the discussion should be directed
to what could be done to ameliorate the condition of men and
women who were anxious to work but could get no work to do.
Despite the somewhat sarcastic remarks of Mr. Goldstein, there
were such people. He thought facilities should be given to them
to settle on land, where they would have the advantage of civiliza-
tion. He thought the farm colonies suggested by General
Booth would meet the case, and the sooner these were established
the better it would be for society. He trusted the result of their
deliberations would be to wake the public up to the importance
of providing facilities for the honest unemployed.
Colonel Goldstein said it was ridiculous for Mr. Flynn to as-
sume that because 500 people apply for a billet they are unemployed
and starving. It only proved that there were plenty of people
who would give up good billets to get one in town at £lOO a year
and free quarters. Of the 600 men who had, at the Premier’s
invitation, enrolled their names as being out of work and in need
only two cases were absolutely in want, and of one of these it was
perhaps hardly correct to use the word “ absolutely.” He thought
the paper on the Rev. Mr. Langley’s labour home a most valu-
able one, as giving the results of an experiment which several had
desired to make. He quite agreed with the opinions expressed
by the winter of the paper as to the likelihood of failure, and
thought that Mr. Langley had begun at the wrong end, and should
have started the farm colony first.
On the motion of the Rev. H. L. Jackson, seconded by Mr.
Goldstein, the discussion was adjourned.


AFTERNOON SITTING.
Professor Morris presiding.
The Discussion on the Unemployed Question was resumed.
Mr. H. W. Hammond described the preliminary steps that had
been taken to initiate the Rev. Mr. Langley’s home. He had no
doubt that ultimately a labour colony in the country districts would
be established in connexion with the home, and he had much
pleasure in supporting this movement.
The Rev. R. Keith Mackay was in favour of cultivating the
land around the worked-out mines, and so finding employment for
those who honestly wanted to work. Men should be taught to
utilize their spare hours in the cultivation of fruit and vegetables,
which would be found to yield an income when other employment
could not be obtained.
Mr. Edwards (Brisbane) said that a labour bureau had been
established in Queensland to assist men out of employment to
secure work if possible, and an officer had been appointed to inquire
into the circumstances of men who complained of want of the
necessaries of life.
The men out of work in Queensland did not consist of the real
working man. Anyway, not many men willing and desirous to
work need be long out of employment if they would only make
up their minds to go away into the country and work for the
ordinary rate of wages instead of crowding into the towns. The
majority of the unemployed in Queensland were men who greatly
disliked work, who, apparently, were always looking for work
and praying that they might never find any. Mr. Goldstein had
referred to a statement made in the Queensland House by Sir
Samuel Griffith, and the speaker would like to draw attention to
another statement of a similar character : —“ Mr. Grimes took
advantage of the motion to ask the Chief Secretary if there was
any further information with regard to the -working of the labour
bureau. He had heard that men were rushing from the country
districts to the town and enrolling their names as unemployed.
Some men had left his own employ who had been earning 395. a
week at cane-cutting, and he had since seen them in the crowd at
the labour bureau, and he had reason to believe that their names
were on the roll there. He had employed something like fifteen
men from the bureau. These men said that they and their wives
and children were starving, but they were not content to work at
the rates that agricultural labourers w r ere getting in the country
districts. One man, who said he was actually in want of bread,


worked a fortnight and then left, another worked for six days and
then gave notice, while others left without notice. Out of the
fifteen there were not three who were even second-rate men.
They all wanted better wages rather than bread, and he did not
think it was advantageous that persons of this kind should have
free railway passes given them to wander over the country.”
But, as a pleasant contrast to this quotation, he would mention
that, after the shearers’ strike, a number of men formed themselves
into a co-operative settlement on the Alice River, and the
following was the latest report from that settlement. He trusted
that many more would follow their example :—“ While out west,
the secretary of the Australian Labour Federation visited the
Alice River Co-operative Settlement, and expressed surprise at
the marked improvements made in the little village. The men
are doing very well under the circumstances, though no rain has
fallen for the last two months. The irrigation plant which has
been laid down, however, enables them to some extent to cope
with this dryness, and the forward nature of their crops bears
evidence to their energy and perseverance. In all there are
32’acres securely fenced and cultivated, and this bright spot forms
a strange contrast with the surrounding thickly-timbered country.”
Mr. Guillaume said the impression left on his mind by the
address of General Booth was that the land was the resource for
the surplus unemployed labour. The fierce competition for any
employment in the towns that promised to be permanent was due
to the large proportion of unskilled labour, and it would remain
so until the education provided by the State taught men the use
of their hands, and included manual and technical training.
Mr. C. O’Neill thought the work carried on by Mr. Langley
an admirable one, and worthy of support. It was all very well
to say a farm should have been started first, but the matter of
expense was a serious consideration.
The Rev. S. C. Kent was afraid Mr. Langley’s work in Syd-
ney would bring him into collision with the labour party. It was
most desirable there should be a place to which persons who were
willing to work could be sent, and he trusted'something would be
done for Victoria similar to that which Pastor Herlitz had de-
scribed as being done in Germany.
Mrs. David said that, although much had been said about
finding employment for those who were willing to work, no one
had suggested a plan for dealing with those who were too ignorant
or vicious or helpless to help themselves. Many of these people
were spreading misery and disease, and ought to be dealt with for
the good of the community. She would suggest that Pastor
Herlitz’s scheme should be modified, and farms established on which
drunkards and others should be compelled to work for their own


support. The -women might be gathered off the streets and made
to work in State laundries or something of the sort; at all events,
they should be kept away from the men, and not allowed to
increase the misery of the future.
Mrs. G-lenn said the Discharged Prisoners’ Aid Society of
Ballarat was doing something to help people of the class men-
tioned by Mrs. David. The women were provided with baskets
and tapes and cotton, which they sold from house to house. Some
of them had regular customers, and were going on satisfactorily.
Pastor Herlitz said that, doubtless, there were many people
who would not work unless forced to do so, and in Germany these
people were sent to houses of correction, where they were taught
to labour. Under the law there, people who reduced themselves
by gambling or drink or idleness to such a condition that they
were forced to ask relief might be detained in these institutions for
any period up to two years. He did not agree with Mr. Flynn,
and thought the Government should have nothing to do with the
management of the farm colonies beyond subsidizing them. In
regard to Mr. Exon’s remark that no wages should be paid, he
pointed out that the wages might be very small, so as not to tempt
anybody. Industrious men should have the opportunity of pro-
viding themselves with clothes, and leaving the colony with a few
pounds in their pockets in search of more lucrative employment.
Some speaker had objected to town colonies for the reason that
the produce would be sold in competition with that of tradesmen.
But this need not be so. In Germany the town colonists were
employed in working in straw, and making such articles as were
not thought profitable by the tradesmen, but which were found to
give a fair return.
The Rev. H. L. Jackson said he had hoped his paper would
have been a little more criticised. He thoroughly sympathized
with Colonel Goldstein when he said that instead of going on with
the labour home he should have started the farm first. With
regard to the unemployed, although he had met with cases in
which men found it absolutely impossible to find work of any
kind, he thought statements which represented the number of such
cases as exceedingly large were considerably exaggerated.
Mr. Goldstein regretted that Mr. Flynn had not directed his
attention more to his proposed remedies for the existing state of
things rather than to attacking the indisputable facts contained in
his paper. But Mr. Flynn had briefly made some suggestions
worthy of note, and he (Mr. Goldstein) was not sure that it would
not be a good thing to establish a Bureau of Labour and Labour
Statistics. With regard to the Labour Exchange, however, he
thought this should only be worked in connexion with branches
of the Charity Organization Society in each city working with


the central office in the metropolis. The cases would all require
investigation, or else people would put themselves down as out of
work in the hope that some better occupation than what they
already had might turn up, or the registers would be filled up with
the oft-repeated names of indolent impracticable men.
He would close by saying one thing. It was perhaps one of
the most noteworthy things in the Conference that Mr. Flynn had
written for permission to address it. He had been delighted when
the permission had been accorded. It was good for the delegates
that Mr. Flynn should address them. It was good for Mr. Flynn
that he should hear the delegates. For instance, he (the speaker)
had been charged with denying the existence of “unemployed.”
This was not true. They had all heard him speak of 200 steady
workers who were without employment. Most of these were
married men. They had heard him admit that we had not done
enough for them. The blame rested with the leaders of the “un-
employed” movement. For every tear shed by those 200 poor
men’s wives, for every time that a child cried for food, he held the
“unemployed agitators” responsible. The charitable public would
have helped generously, wisely, and spontaneously were they only
assured that the cloud of extravagance and falsity surrounding the
outcry had been dissipated. (Applause.)
Rev. A. M. Whitton read a paper by Miss Sutherland on—
Slum Life in Melbourne .
In my opinion, no work among the poor of Melbourne is more
beneficial than that of the Melbourne District Nursing Society.
It employs trained nurses to attend to the sick poor in their own
homes, thus preventing the breaking up of households and the
severing of family ties, which might occur if the mother or the
breadwinner were taken to an hospital.
The Nursing Society took its origin in the conviction of a few
humane people —a conviction founded on experience—that there
are many cases such as cancer, consumption, or other chronic
diseases where the services of a trained nurse are of inestimable
value, which are yet either unsuitable for treatment in hospitals,
or, on account of being chronic complaints, are liable to be refused
admission, I may be allowed to refer to a few cases coming
under the observation of those who founded the society referred
to.
Many hundreds of cases might be cited to show the need for the
society.


Let me refer to two cases in which the benefits conferred by the
society are illustrated, and these are typical of a great number.
(1) R.W. and his son, living together in poor circumstances,
were both seized at the same time with typhoid fever of a
malignant type. The wife and mother was dead. They were
carefully tended by one of the society’s nurses, and they recovered
and were sent to the “ Convalescent Home.” In a short time
both were fit to return to work.
(2) W.Gr., recently from India, was in poor circumstances; he
had a wife and five children ; he became afflicted with abscess on
the liver, and was found by one of the nurses in a sad state of
suffering and misery. After three months’ careful nursing he
recovered, and is now doing well.
These cases suffice to show what is needed in the field where
the society’s work lies ; but to meet the wants of the whole
metropolis each suburb would need to have its own organization.
For the sick poor are always and everywhere with us. The
lessons which our nurses teach of the importance of cleanliness,
ventilation, and suitable diet are extremely valuable, and form
the only instruction on these and kindred subjects that the poor
of this city receive. And the direct benefits conferred on the sick
poor are not the only advantages resulting from the operations of
our society. It has to be viewed from another side. It spreads
a kindlier feeling among the poor regarding the rich. It
diminishes the death rate, and prevents the increase of confirmed
pauperism. Nor should the Christian and philanthropic view of
the work be lost sight of. Its operation is a factor in the allevia-
tion of the sorrows of the poor, whose fate it is to dwell in, or
near, what are commonly called the “ slums ” of Melbourne ; and
as these slums are the outward and visible signs of poverty,
disease, and vice it may interest some to know what life there is
really like.
There is an idea abroad that, owing to church work, city mis-
sionaries, the Salvation Army, and other agencies, the “ slums ”
have been almost improved out of existence, and that back
streets and lanes are no longer the haunts of vice and misery.
This idea is a delusion. In this great city poverty and wealth
increase together, and the chief place for poverty and vice is the
back streets. It is true that many of the worst houses have been
condemned as unfit for human habitations, and that the landlords
have been compelled to pull them down; but this action has
rather intensified than cured the evil —for the landlords have
erected large warehouse-like buildings, and let them out in flats.
Or where the old dilapidated buildings have not been pulled
down, they have been let to Chinese tenants, who disregard all
laws relating to ventilation, space, and drainage. The solitary


apartment, which is ostensibly a shop or work-room, serves also
for opium den and gambling hell, where numbers of Chinamen
and Indian hawkers may be often found crowded together.
These gambling dens are also frequented, not by the larrikin, as
one might suppose, but by young men well dressed and seemingly
respectable, as any one may see by paying a visit to Little Bourke-
street on a Saturday night. But gambling is not the only pur-
pose to which these dens are devoted. Many of them are houses
of ill-fame of the lowest kind, where young girls are brought
to ruin, from which they are seldom reclaimed. On entering one
of these places lately, I found three young girls (two of them
sisters), aged 14, 16, and 18 years respectively. Two young
men of respectable appearance had brought them there, but fled
when I entered, and the Chinese proprietor closed the door and
refused to let the girls go until he was paid the usual charges.
The girls were orphans, and had cost the Government and private
charity some hundreds of pounds for their bringing up. Such cases
are of frequent occurrence.
Besides the opium den and other agencies of evil, a common
feature of the back streets is the “ slum ” public-house. In many
of these streets nearly every second house is a drink-shop. In
the City Police Court, on a recent Monday morning, there were
61 cases dealt with —50 were for drunkenness, and the other 11
for assaults committed when under the influence of drink.
There is a prevalent opinion that these dens are owned by men
of wealth, and it is known that many of the hotels are the
property of brewery companies. Some of the shareholders in
breweries are legislators and so-called leaders of society. Thus
the vested interests connected with the slums reach far and wide
and make it hard to carry out improvements. The landlord in
one of these slums, in reply to the question as to why he accepted
such tenants as he had, replied, “ Oh, it pays me well to do so,”
as if that were a satisfactory reason. Doubtless the high rents
to be got from vice tempt the landlords, but the honest poor have
to suffer in consequence. The struggling widow gets only one
room where she should have three, and so, she and her family
being crowded into one room, vice and disease are propagated.
Thus, even to get such house accommodation as the slums afford
is beyond the means of many. They could earn a livelihood, but
not a livelihood and an exorbitant rent. The church has been
always a good worker among the poor, and the Salvation Army has
had ten years’ trial at reform. The law is provided with elaborate
machinery. All sorts of agencies for improvement abound, and
yet I believe that matters grow worse year by year and more
nursing and more relief are being called for. How is the root of
the evil to be got at? How is it to be made possible for the


honest poor to secure such dwellings as will make decency and
health possible for them ?
The erection of suitable houses at reasonable rents is the first
step towards reform. But how is the erection of these houses to
be accomplished ? Who is to undertake the task ? Well, the
civic authorities should see that these rat-riddled dens, breeding
fevers and moral pestilence, are destroyed, and sanitary dwellings
erected in their stead. And surely the municipalities which receive
the licence-fees and taxes should do something towards housing
the poor. Would not much of the money spent on useless charity
be better employed if laid out in building houses that could be let
to widows and other needy people at a nominal rent ? Or, if
capitalists would be satisfied with the modest return of 7 per
cent, they might do much towards mitigating the evil under
which Melbourne is suffering. A successful experiment in erect-
ing buildings for the poor upon commercial principles is afforded
in “ Our Lodgings,” in Little Bourke-street, which according to
the last balance-sheet returned 10 per cent, to shareholders.
I have referred to evils connected with the slums—their
insanitary condition, their bad moral surroundings—and shown
that from them poverty, sickness, and ruin flow as streams from
a fountain. But there is another source of evil which at first has
no connexion with the slums or their surroundings. Every strike
throws a certain proportion of tradesmen out of employment.
They sink down, lose heart and hope and self-respect, neglect
their families, and they and their children become a burden on
the community. Yesterday, a man who had worked for a certain
company and borne a good character while employed by them,
and who had gone out on strike, came seeking assistance for him-
self and family. They had been turned out of house and were
starving. His case is only an example of hundreds that come
under my notice where men who have lived in decency and com-
fort for years have come to poverty by “ going out on strike.”
The public who hear of the successful operations of so many
societies for the relief of suffering, and who listen to the blowing
of so many trumpets to call attention to the success of those who
are engaged in exterminating evil, may think that charity will
soon have no work left to do. But the work to be done is
increasing faster than the agencies for doing it, and as long as
drunkenness and immorality abound their fruits, suffering, poverty,
and ruin, will be produced. Charity guided by wisdom and
experience, and inspired by a deep and tender human sympathy,
may do much to mitigate, though it cannot remove, the evil that
is in the world.
I began this paper by stating that one of the objects sought by
the society I represent is to save the “ home ” from being broken


up. I cannot close Avithout again referring to the ruin brought
to wife, children, and husbands by anything that deprives them
of a “ home.” Eleven years’ experience of my Avork among the
poor of this city has convinced me that the total ruin of most of
the families that have become a burden on the State or on private
charity began Avhen their little belongings Avere sold off to pay
rent in arrears. They go to the night shelters, they mix Avith
the vilest, learn their ways, and rapidly sink. Their children are
cast as a burden on the State or private charity, and the family
ties thus broken are seldom, if ever, re-united.
DISCUSSION.
The Honorary Secretary read the following letter from
Rev. Dr. Strong :
“ Dear Sir,
“I feel honoured by your request that I should read a paper before the
Conference on Charity. I would comply with your request, but I find that
I have not the time at my disposal to prepare a paper such as I would care
to read before the Conference.
“ There is one question to which I would have liked specially to call atten-
tion—the ‘ housing of the poor ’ —though I am not sure that you will regard
this as a subject which the Conference should discuss. One of the best
‘ charities ’ would be to give the people decent houses to live in. I don’t
see how this is to done unless we get either private companies or the muni-
cipal councils to take the matter up.
“I would have liked also to ventilate the question of co-operative kitchens
in poorer localities, where those who have only small homes of one or two
rooms could get their food well cooked for a small sum, and where cooking
could be taught.
“ Would it not be well at future Conferences to widen the area of discus-
sion, and have one day set apart for discussing general questions of social
reform, including the abolition, if possible, of the evil of poverty—and
charity ?
“Believe me,
“ Very truly yours,
“CHARLES STRONG.”
Mr. Guillaume suggested that those who had the management
of the various hospitals should be asked to organize a staff of
nurses for A'isiting the sick poor, and nursing them in their own
homes.
Mrs. Morris said the tenement system Avorked by private
companies in Boston had been found to be very successful. The
business was conducted almost entirely by women, who let the
rooms and collected the rents. There were also lady visitors, who
saw that the rooms were kept clean and tidy, and their influence
seemed to be largely felt by the tenants. There was a good
supply of water, and baths and all conveniences, and sometimes
the very poorest people lived in these places. Besides being a
success as regards the housing of the poor, these houses returned
a very fair profit from a business point of view.


Miss Spence said that Mrs. Morris’ interesting account of
what was done in Boston had reminded her of what Miss Octavia
Hill had done in England in a similar direction. She thought
there was a great field in these colonies for the housing and nurs-
ing of the poor as carried out by Miss Hill in London.
Pastor Herlitz said the District Nursing Society was doing
excellent work, but suggested that it should add to its staff a
number of women who would be capable of taking the sick woman’s
place in the household for a time.
The Rev. A. M. Whitton suggested that each municipality
should appoint an officer whose duty it should be to inspect the
small streets, and insist upon landlords keeping the tenements in
good order and condition, and should have the power of imposing
fines if this were not done.
The Rey. W. E. Addis said it was a very depressing experience
for a stranger to come from London and see the miserable and
insanitary housing of the poor reproduced in this young country.
As to the possibilities of setting this right by legislation, his ex-
perience had been that there were many opportunities in any such
plan for corruption which were taken advantage of. He lived for
ten years in a London suburb, in which excellent laws had been
passed with regard to the sites upon which houses might be built,
yet houses were erected on swamps, whilst a great deal of corrup-
tion went on with persons who were charged with the supervision
of such matters on behalf of the corporation. He thought it an
excellent thing to build houses by charitable means which they
could let at a low rent, but it had been found in London, in con-
nexion with the Peabody Buildings, that the respectable class
availed themselves of these dwellings, whilst people for whom
they were designed were uureached.
THE ADJOURNED DISCUSSION ON MR. MAXTED’S PAPER.
The Honorart Secretary said the discussion had been
adjourned to enable them to study and digest the entirely new
proposals by Mr. Maxted that Commissioners for Charity should
he appointed, who would have the power of regulating the
management and, to some extent, the methods of the charities ;
that they should have the power of looking after the finances of
the charities; that there should be attached to the Commissioners
office a Government Board of Charity Organization and Advice,
whose duty it would be to organize committees throughout the


country, collect and record information, and do all this from funds
entirely apart from those devoted to charitable purposes, and have
the standing and influence of Government officers. The private
organizer of charity had a thankless and difficult task. His efforts
were met with the question, “ Who are you, that you should come
and teach me how to better the work I have been doing for 30
years with credit and satisfaction T } It was difficult to persuade
people that they were connected with charitable institutions which
were mischievous when they established those institutions from
noble motives, and had devoted time and labour and thought to
the work. But if an official board composed of men of unques-
tionable standing, acting with the weight of parliamentary
recognition, were formed, the secretary of such a board, in
expressing its views, would have greater power to rectify any
mistake that had been made, while whatever good was to be done
in inducing co-operation and organization might be done more
effectively than by a private society. The proposal seemed a
good one, provided that nothing should be done to interfere with
individual effort in the field of charity. It should rather be a body
from which every charitable worker had a right to demand assist-
ance and advice. It should be the servant of every almoner.
Whilst he was opposed to putting everything on the shoulders of
the Government, he thought great Aveight and effectiveness
would be added to the noble work of organizing charity if
the central recording and advising body were under the Govern-
ment. But there were difficult questions in the way, and he
hoped the Conference would be able to consider and perhaps
solve them.
Mr. Brett expressed approval of the paper which Mr. Maxted
had read, and said he had felt gratified in reading it in the news-
paper, because its publication would strengthen his own hands
materially in carrying out his work in Victoria, which was similar
to that of Mr. Mnxted’s in New South Whales. He entirely agreed
Avith Mr. Maxted that individual effort should be encouraged as
much as possible as regards private contributions and local
management, under the official control of a central authority. He
was glad to say that in Victoria individual effort had been deve-
loped to the fullest extent, and the liberality of the public in
subscribing to the institutions was most notable. There was also
voluntary effort in the management of all the charities, so that in
these respects Victoria had nothing to learn. But as yet there
Avas no adequate official control, no centre round which the charities
could rally, no one who could speak with authority on behalf of
the Victorian charities. Another important suggestion was that
departments of kindred character should be brought under one
head. Such an arrangement Avould be very useful. Mr, Maxted


suggested commissioners, but the Victorian public would probably
be more in favour of placing them under a Minister of the Crown.
He hoped the result of the labours of the Royal Commission would
be a recommendation that the whole of the charities should be
dealt with in a comprehensive Act of Parliament, which should
also include the important point of official control. He was
entirely in favour of freedom of action on the part of the people,
but he would have an intelligent and sympathetic control exer-
cised by a central authority.
Colonel Goldstein thought the great fault of the colonial
system of charitable effort was that it tended to shut the door upon
the exercise of benevolence and philanthropy on the part of the
public. The error was on the side of a too extensive State
aid. He was afraid the report of the Royal Commission would
recommend the establishment of a poor law, which would be
about the worst thing that could happen to the country. (Hear,
hear).
If a municipal rate was started the result would be that private
people would not be inclined to give, because they would feel that
the State supplied the money. He thought the charities should
be thrown entirely on the public for the funds which were neces-
sary for their support, and that the Government should confine its
attention solely to direction. As to the establishment of a central
committee, he thought it hardly necessary. It would simply
amount to a State-appointed Charity Organization Society. If
the Charity Organization Society was properly constituted, and
received the support of all charities, it would really amount to
the charitable bodies looking after their own interests in a united
form, and by means of co-operation they would obtain a general
insight into the working of ail other societies, which would pre-
vent overlapping and needless expense.
Miss Spence (S.A.), as representing a colony which always
had a poor law, differed from Colonel Goldstein’s fear that private
charitable effort would cease if a law were passed compelling the
ordinary citizen to aid the sick and destitute of the colony. She
considered that a law which got some money out of the unwilling
was a very good law. She had heard it said that 5,000 people
maintained all the hospitals in Melbourne. Why should the
burden fall upon 5,000 willing people ? Although there was
such a law in South Australia there was plenty of room for
private philanthropy ; there were still some charities to be sup-
ported, and visiting to be done ; and she maintained it was not
right that all the assistance of the poor and sick should come from
the charitably disposed. People were frightened at the mention
of a poor law, but a poor law properly managed was a very good
thing.


Mr. Maxted, in reply, said he was glad to find that the recom-
mendations contained in his paper had met with general approval.
Colonel Goldstein had expressed the opinion that it was not
necessary to appoint commissioners to govern the charities. If
the paper were carefully considered that would be found to be the
very genius of the system he proposed to establish, and unless
that were done things would remain as they were now, without
desirable improvement.
(The Conference then adjourned.)
128


FIFTH DAY:
(Saturday, 21st November, 1891),
CLOSING SESSION.
Professor Morris presiding.
Papers by Mr. Hitchcock on “ Mission or Ragged Schools ”
and Alderman Crouch on “ Inebriate Asylums” were taken as
read.
Mission or Ragged Schools.
The advent of a free system of education in Victoria in 1872
led at first to an impression that the mission or ragged schools
then in existence in the colony would be no longer needed ; that
with school fees abolished, the State school would be equally
suitable for the neglected or gutter children as for those of a higher
grade. For various reasons, this was soon found to be an erroneous
conclusion. The public schools, however well adapted for children
accustomed to parental control, as well as to the proprieties and
kindly influence of a well-ordered home, would not meet the case
of the lower classes referred to, unhappily to be found in the
large centres of population. These require special treatment;
children poorly fed, without boots, badly clothed, and often utterly
neglected by their natural protectors, ought not to be thrust into
the ranks of clean tidy children, even if they wished it, which they
do not. Hence the necessity and importance of the mission school.
One conspicuous disadvantage this class suffers from in their
homes is the absence, with few exceptions, of that moral influence
which alone can keep the child virtuous and good. The public
school children are in the matter of religious teaching, so far as
the State is concerned, very badly treated, no adequate provision
being made to secure this priceless boon ; but there is the pre-
sumption that in many cases the Sunday school, as well as home
training, accomplishes something in that direction. But a secular
system would leave the morals of the gutter children absolutely
neglected at the public school as well as at the home. In the mission
school, on the other hand, the children not only secure, without
payment, a fairly good primary education, but also the advantage
of biblical lessons and unsectarian religious instruction, thus teach-
ing them their duty to their God, as well as to their neighbour.
They are also provided with a daily meal, besides boots and other
clothing for the most necessitous, voluntarily supplied by certain
charitable residents of the town. In the Geelong Mission School,
11131. K


which is here specifically referred to, it is stated, in the 14th
Annual Report furnished to the Education Department, there are
75 scholars on the roll, with an average attendance of 55. The
expenditure being £l4O 55., of which £l2l 3s. was for teachers’
salaries, and the balance for school requisites. The school is
entirely supported by voluntary contributions, receiving no aid
from the Government, though, undoubtedly, as a charitable insti-
tution it is fully entitled to assistance from the State. It has a
Sunday school, which is well attended, with a devoted band of
Christian workers as teachers, who do all in their power to make
the Sabbath hour spent together both pleasant and profitable.
A leading Geelong citizen does himself the honour, and the
children the great happiness, of arranging for and collecting the
necessary funds for an annual excursion to the seaside, which is,
of course, greatly appreciated. Many of the scholars have in
past years gone to situations and have done well, whilst others,
as their surroundings improved, have been transferred to the State
schools.
Inebriate Asylums.
The boast of this nineteenth century is, that the afflicted in
body and mind receive the greatest thought and Christian
sympathy possible. No sensible or scientific suggestion is made,
be the cost what it may, but it is given a fair trial in the hopes of
still further relieving poor suffering humanity.
We have become so imbued with the spirit of Christ in that
respect, that we pride ourselves we shall at the day of final
account receive the commendation, “I was sick and in prison
and ye visited me,” and “ Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of the
least of these, ye did it unto Me.”
We point with becoming pride to our hospitals, and boast of
the liberality that maintains them so efficiently. We refer to the
noble army of lady nurses, who follow the example set by
Florence Nightingale.
Then for those deprived of reason, what gentleness is exercised
now in contrast with the harsh treatment of the olden time.
Of more recent years, we have asylums for the inebriate.
For those who have so indulged in the use of intoxicating drinks
that they have lost all self-control, and, while perfectly conscious
of the madness of their conduct, are quite powerless to alter
their course. Notwithstanding all the improvements in the
drinking customs of society, there are still thousands of dipso-
maniacs. There are sundry reasons for this which did not exist
in the days gone by. First, we live in a “ railway age,” and thus


the brain is easier affected. Competition is rife, and there is no
time to ease down or rest, and as the pace has to be made, we fly
to stimulants—anything to keep the tired body and weary brain
going, reckless of the penalty incurred and of the price sooner or
later to be paid.
Then, as shoddy goods find a ready sale, and give larger profits,
so sellers adulterate their liquors with vile compounds to an
extent beyond belief, and scarcely any attempt is made to check
it. Years ago the man who got drunk became jolly, now the
man who gets drunk goes mad.
Essences of all kinds of spirits can be purchased anywhere,
Is. worth of which is sufficient to make a gallon of drink.
Now, though the inebriate is to blame, we must be charitable.
Who knows that he may not have inherited the disease from his
parents ? He has seen it taken, in moderation, at his father’s
table, and no harm result ; perhaps he learnt the taste at college,
and before he was aware the habit had fastened upon him. He
may often cry, “Oh ! save me from this curse but the will-
power is gone, and on, on he goes, pushed into the eternal world,
conscious that his doom is certain, because the Bible says, “ No
drunkard shall inherit the kingdom of heaven.”
To save such as these there are only two courses open. One is
to take them away from the drink, the other to take the drink
away from them. The former is much the easier course under
present existing circumstances. These sufferers are as much
deserving of sympathy and help as the lunatic or person suffering
from bodily disease, and the sooner they are taken in hand the
better for themselves, for their families, and the State, and the
more easy to effect a permanent cure.
The man is mad—though sane on all subjects save the drink ;
but he should not be placed with lunatics. He is suffering from a
disease, and insane from drink, and therefore unsafe to be placed in
an hospital ward, hence the necessity to have separate buildings
and special treatment to obtain a cure. Valuable lives must be
saved, let the cost be what it may. Let the patient have protec-
tion from himself, give him occupation and social intercourse with
his fellows to help him to outlive the craving desire, and thus
enable him to redeem the past, and give some return for the care
and attention bestowed on him in the “ Retreat.”
The other course is prohibition. Leave the man to attend to
his duties, to business, his family, and his country, without the
temptation or possibility of getting the drink. But are we ripe
for such a course ? The amount of money invested in the trade
will be too great a sacrifice to make, though it would save thou-
sands who are victims, and thousands more who are sure to
follow. Should it be so ? Should money and souls, health and


happiness, be weighed in the same scales ? Christ says, “ What
shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul ?” It is admitted on all sides that intoxicating drinks are
the chief agents used by Satan to rob heaven, and hence those
in the trade will have to take the responsibility of thousands of
lost souls.
However, as the millennium is not yet in sight, we must use every
means in our power to reclaim the fallen, and no better mode has
been devised than the establishment of inebriate asylums. But
we must remember that “ prevention is better than cure,” and,
while reforming the unfortunate, let us try and save the young,
pure, and virtuous from getting entangled by this snare of the
tempter.
Professor Morris read a paper by Miss Martin (of Sydney)
on—
The Queen’s Jubilee Fund.
The second annual report of the Queen’s Jubilee Fund con-
tains an account of the work accomplished during the year 1890.
The details must necessarily be the same year after year, varied
only by the number of applications for relief. The amounts
expended for the relief of applicants will increase as the income
increases ; at present, it is only possible to give small sums to
each applicant, and since the first distribution in May, 1889, no
sums have been voted under £l, nor exceeding £lO. It is the
wish of every member of the council to be in a position to vote
a sum of money, say, £ls or £2O, to a case where it is apparent
that the money would entirely relieve the distress, and would be
the means of enabling the applicant to earn her own livelihood.
In voting money to applicants, the council have always endea-
voured that the help given shall put the woman in the way of
earning her own living ; for instance, if a woman has been left
suddenly destitute by the death of her husband, with a family to
support, and thinks she could earn a living by washing, but has
no mangle, or tubs, &c., the council would vote money for that
object, which would be given either to some one in the district
who recommended the case, or to a member of the council who
would see that the money was properly expended. If a woman
is desirous of earning her living by taking in needlework, a
sewing machine is bought in the same way ; or, again, if a woman
wishes to open a small shop, is in great distress, and has no
money for outlay, the council will vote money for that object, care
being taken that the money is used for the specific purpose men-
tioned. Machines and mangles are branded with a distinguishing
mark, and a nominal rent of one shilling a year is imposed, to


provide, so far as the law will allow, against seizure of goods
under a bill of sale, &c. In addition to the above-mentioned cases,
money has been voted in payment of arrears of rent; in payment of
debt, where an article has been purchased on the time-payment
system, and through falling into arrears with the payments the
woman is liable to lose the article, and, of course, the money
already paid. Assistance in a case like this is directed towards
putting a woman in full possession of the article in question.
Assistance has also been given towards passage-money, and where
the amount required is larger than can be given from the fund, a
sum of money is voted to be paid, provided that the remainder is
collected by the applicant or otherwise. Assistance has been
given for the purpose of buying goods and clothes, though this is
an instance of a case hardly coming within the province of the
fund, and has only been entertained on account of extreme distress.
It is, of course, necessary that careful investigation should be
made into every case coming before the council, and to this end
great assistance is rendered by Mr. Sidney, Secretary of the Charity
Organization Society, who personally investigates all applications
from in or around Sydney. To all other applicants a printed form
is sent, which has to be returned with full information respecting
the case, and signed by one or more prominent local persons to whom
the money is forwarded, if voted. When an application is
rejected, a printed letter is sent to that effect, giving no reason
for such refusal.
DISCUSSION.
Mrs. Morris, in opening the discussion, explained the man-
agement of the Queen’s Fund in Victoria. The money expended
on each case was not limited to any specific amount, but varied in
accordance with the necessities of the case. The machines, tuba,
and mangles supplied were branded with the Queen’s Fund mark,
so that should the people get into difficulties again they would
not be seized by the bailiff, and would be returned until better
days arrived.
In reply to Mrs. Richardson, Mrs. Morris said that no help
was given to a woman who was supporting a drunken husband.
The Queen’s Fund was meant for women, not men.
Professor Morris said that the Queen’s Fund in Sydney
was much larger than in Melbourne. In Sydney the endowment
stood at £17,000, whilst considerable difficulty had been
experienced in Melbourne in reaching £lO,OOO.
Mrs. Edwards said that in Queensland the Queen’s Fund
was only £750, and did not seem to increase much. It had been
suggested that when it reached a thousand pounds it should be
invested, and provide a scholarship for the higher education of
women.


DISCUSSION ON LADIES’ BENEVOLENT SOCIETIES.
Mrs. Morris in opening the discussion upon this subject
suggested that the ladies present should keep before them the
u Friendly Visitor ” system. All honour was due to the ladies
who worked so hard in the different ladies’ benevolent societies,
and who were frequently overworked because of the size of their
districts. But the largeness of their districts and the number of
families they had to look after frightened away people who would
be otherwise willing workers. It impossible for a woman to
be a “ friendly visitor ” to more than six families, and three would
be preferable. There were many women in Melbourne and the
country districts who were well educated and well off, who had
no interest in charitable work, and who ought to have an interest.
She thought it was every woman’s duty to give not only her
money, but also some of her time to such work. She knew many
women, and doubtless those present knew many more, who would
take up the work if they were interested by being taken to a
family that wanted a little help, perhaps not so much monetary
help as advice and consolation, and perhaps encouragement.
Perhaps it would be the case of a woman whose husband was in
the hospital, and who needed not patronage, but sympathy and en-
couragement ; and when the man came out again possibly he would
need employment. In this way, many women would take up the
work in small quantities, when they could not be prevailed on to
take charge of a district. This plan worked well in America, and
ought to do so in Melbourne. She would like to see it put into
operation in connexion with the various ladies* benevolent
societies. It was not desired that there should not be any
opposition to these associations, but it was felt that they were
rather too much like a close community. They had their districts,
and people did not like to take up work in them for fear they
should be looked upon as working in opposition. It was desirable
that they should make their districts smaller, gather more workers,
and so do more individual friendly visiting. (Applause.)
Mrs. Turnbull said it was difficult to get members to join
a ladies’ benevolent society. Ladies declined to join because they
were afraid of the work, and it required so much time. There
was no doubt that just now members were sadly overworked, and
one lady was sometimes obliged to take three districts. There
were generally about twelve families to be visited in each district,
but sometimes a lady, in acting for other districts besides her
own, would have charge of 30. At their fortnightly meetings they
had 500 or 600 cases to discuss, which took from ten in the
morning till three in the afternoon.
In reply to Miss Spence, Mrs. Turnbull said the relief given
varied with the circumstances of each case. They endeavoured to


get each case off the books of the society as soon as possible by
giving something which would help them to help themselves.
Sometimes, of course, cases such as that of a widow with young
children remained on the books for fourteen or fifteen years ; but
lately one woman had saved up a sum equal to all the money she
had received, and had returned every penny of it. (Applause.)
The Honorary Secretary said the society with which Mrs.
Turnbull was connected did its work regularly and scientifically,
and kept its records well; but the weakness of the system seemed to
lie in the crushing amount of work thrown upon the members, and,
perhaps, that was the reason why they could not induce ladies to
take up the work at all. • Each lady, when asked to join, felt
perhaps that she was being asked to replace a lady who had grown
weary of the work. But if a system could be inaugurated by
which those who were willing to do a certain amount of work
would not be called upon to do more than that amount, the
difficulty would be overcome. All that was necessary was that
the districts should be subdivided, and that the “ friendly visiting ”
method should be grafted on to the older one of “ district visiting.”
Mrs. Turnbull said the advantage of the district system was
that when a case of distress was reported the committee knew
whom to send.
Professor Morris suggested there should be a central office
to which each lady could apply.
Mrs. Glenn thought that 30 cases would be terribly hard
work. When cases were discnarged from the female home in
Ballarat they were visited in a friendly way. Each lady took
about three cases, and it was found that three cases took up all
the time they could spare.
Mrs. Docker asked Mrs. Munce whether it would not be
possible to train under her, for the work, young unmarried women
who had no household cares.
Mrs. Munce said that her society would be glad to limit tbe
cases to six or two if they could only get the workers. If inex-
perienced persons did the work it would necessitate older workers
going with them.
Mrs. Harcourt said that the young ladies of the congregation
of two of the churches in Sandhurst were working somewhat in
the fashion suggested by Mrs. Morris. Each young lady had not
more than three families, which she visited regularly once a week.
If anything wanted doing about the house they did it, as some of
the people they visited were blind or lame, and incapable of doing
such things for themselves. There were numbers of young ladies
who would be glad to help older workers, and the latter might
take charge of cases with which they were best fitted to deal, and
give the young ladies those they could manage.


Mrs. Glenn said that, so far as she could see, the mothers
were very hard workers, whilst the daughters seemed to take no
interest in charitable work. In England the young people were
trained to charity.
The Rev. S. C. Kent suggested that Mrs. Turnbull should
take one or two “ curates ”of both sexes as apprentices. He was
informed that in Collingwood young men were employed to go
where it would not be convenient for women to go.
Mas. J. D. Edwards (Bendigo) said the young ladies of the
St. Vincent de Paul Society assisted in visiting, but they never
went alone. They always went with the older ladies,
Mrs. David suggested that the investigation of new cases
should be left to ladies who had the necessary experience, and
such cases as merely required friendly visiting should be handed
over to young girls.
Mrs. J. D. Edwards explained that that was done in the St.
Vincent de Paul Society.
Mr. T. Harlin said it was plain that the ladies were over-
worked, and thought the suggestion that young men should be
trained to the work a good one.
Mrs. David said that in Sydney the young ladies of the uni-
versity had formed themselves into a society, and were literally
begging to be given something to do.
Mrs. Murray (Ballarat) thought that if the work were more
divided ladies would find it very much nicer, and there would not
be such a burden upon those who had large districts to work.
Miss Spence said the young people would have to begin to
learn at some time or another, and it was not marriage that trans-
formed a girl into a clever capable woman. (Applause.) She
had always regretted that in these colonies charitable work was
left in the hands of middle-aged and elderly persons, and thought
it highly desirable that the young should be invited to co-operate.
Mr. Ardill (Sydney) said the discussion had plainly proved
the necessity that existed for organization even in connexion with
ladies’ work.
Mrs. Morris closed the discussion with the suggestion that the
“ Suggestions Committee ” should consider the advisability of
recommending the appointment of a Royal Commission to inquire
into the housing of the poor.
Report of the Suggestions Committee.
(See page xiii.)


VOTES OF THANKS.
Miss Spence proposed a vote of thanks to Professor Morris,
the President of the Conference. People often said with regard
to great reforms that it was necessary to catch enthusiasts. The
Australasian Conference on Charity had certainly caught an
enthusiast in the person of Professor Morris, who was practical
and persevering, and whose endeavour it was to teach charitable
effort in the colonies to be more consistent, more elevating, wiser,
and less wasteful. (Applause.)
Mr. Roseby, in seconding the vote of thanks, said that Pro-
fessor Morris’impartial and intelligent conducting of the affairs of
the Conference had given unbounded satisfaction. (Hear, hear.)
The motion was carried hy acclamation.
Professor Morris proposed a vote of thanks to the Hon. James
Munro, Premier of Victoria, for his kindness in authorizing the
printing of the report of the “Proceedings ” of the First and Second
Conferences.
The Rev. H. L. Jackson (Sydney) seconded the motion, which
was carried unanimously.
The Rev. H. L. Jackson proposed, and the Rev. S. C. Kent
seconded, a vote of thanks to the Right Worshipful the Mayor of
Melbourne, for his kindness in granting the Conference the use of
the Council Chamber for its meetings.
The motion was put and carried unanimously.
Votes of thanks were also passed to the Press, and to Mr. J.
Goldstein, the honorary secretary.
THE PRESIDENT OF THE NEXT CONFERENCE.
Professor Morris said he thought that the Conference should
elect a President for the ensuing year. He had consulted the
Sydney delegates, who were of opinion that the Hon. Dr. Renwick
would be the right man to elect to fill the position. He had,
therefore, much pleasure in moving—
“ That the Hon. Dr. Renwick be elected President of the Third
Australasian Conference on Charity
Dr. Renwick had been connected with charitable work for a
quarter of a century, and it would be exceedingly hard to get a
better President. (Applause.)
Mr. R. Edwards (Brisbane) seconded the motion, which was
carried unanimously, amid cheers.
137


APPENDIX.
BOARDING OUT CHILDREN WITH WIDOWED
MOTHERS.
Mrs. E, Nolan, a delegate, wrote that her want of practice in
debate had prevented her from expressing her opinion on the
above question at the Conference, when the subject was under
discussion. Her experience as a member of a “boarding-out
committee ” for eleven years encouraged her to take a favorable
view of the practice. She wrote : “In one case the father was,
and is still, I believe, an inmate of the lunatic asylum, and the
mother had four children. Two of these were boarded out to
her. She only received assistance for three years, and now she
is supporting them by her own exertions. The second case was
a widow, with two children, one of whom was boarded out with
her. The third case is a widow, now receiving pay for her
children. She is thoroughly deserving.” Mrs. Nolan admits
that there is a danger of imposition, but urges that in all our
transactions in life we are subject to the same danger. “ Surely
it is better to be imposed on four times out of six, than that
one deserving loving mother should be separated from her little
ones.” Her experience as a member of the receiving depot at
the Royal Park is also adduced, “ The monthly inspection of
the children there is the most disagreeable duty I have. If my
readers could come with me, and see the poor little ‘tots,’ as I
have seen them, watching the door with pitiful faces, looking
at every stranger, hoping to see the mother who, from stress of
circumstances, had to part with them, they would feel with me that
it is best to err on the side of mercy.” She urges the Conference
to appeal to the Government not to make a hard-and-fast rule of
its resolution not to board out children of the State with their
relations.
HOUSING THE AGED AND INFIRM POOR.
The Rev. J. C. Corlette, D.D., incumbent of St. John’s,
Ashfield, Sydney, wrote that he desired to suggest an improve-
ment on the ordinary methods of housing the aged and infirm


poor. “ They are now sent to large institutions of a more or less
barrack character, which, admirable as they often are in their
management, have at least the objections—(l) That they remove
from the circle of former acquaintance and out of reach of local
sympathy and friendly offices from those who have known or
who might he interested in single cases. (2) That married couples
are separated just at that time of life when, if there is any real
wedded affection, each needs it most to soften and comfort in the
pains and isolation of declining years. (3) That there is a loss
to the public of the benefit of having a personal interest evoked
in the poor, and an exercise of local charity for their benefit by
individual contact or observation.” The writer argues against
removing the destitute from the circle of their acquaintance, and
casting them to live in communities among strangers. He
suggests that in place of centralizing all our accommodation for
the poor there should be instituted the system of “ cottage or
parish almshouses.” After pointing out many advantages which
he anticipates from the change, the writer proceeds “ something
of the kind proposed has been already done by charitable indi-
viduals for poor persons of a higher social grade ; but it seems
to me that the time has come for extending work of this sort to
individuals and couples of a lower social scale.”
DRUNKEN PARENTS AND THEIR CHILDREN.
Mrs. Mart Love, joint secretary for the Brisbane Committee
for the Conference, wrote expressing her great regret at her
inability to attend as a delegate. She continued, “ Since you
were here a soup or dinner kitchen has been organized. My
great fear is that we are giving too much, and are not encouraging
sufficiently the self-helpfulness which would be infinitely more
valuable to the poor. This, I hope, will be remedied in time.
We have much yet to learn, and in these matters experience is a
good teacher. My greatest difficulty is how to deal with the
wives and children of those who spend all they can get or earn in
drink. We have many such men. lam sorry to say that there
are many women who do the same. Are we to encourage these
people in vice by maintaining their families for them, or are we
to allow the children to be punished for the sins of their parents ?
It is a pity we have not some law by which the earnings of these
men could be made available for the support of their families —
could be claimed, in fact, for them, on account of the evil use
which these earnings are misapplied.”
139


SUGGESTIONS.
Suggestions were received, by the committee appointed for
dealing with them, on the following subjects :
Discharged Prisoners. —Recommending the appointment of
ladies’ committees to visit all female prisoners, and take them in
hand on their discharge.
Truancy. —Recommending the regulation of children street-
hawkers, and more stringent laws for dealing with truants.
Neglected Girls of Weak Intellect. —Recommending the
appointment of philanthropic persons or associations as guardians,
after certificate of mental weakness by two qualified medical
practitioners.
Visiting Nurses. —Recommending the appointment of trained
visiting nurses for the poor in connexion with every hospital.
Boarding out Aged Couples. —Recommending the boarding
out of aged couples.
Convalescents, —Recommending more adequate provision for
convalescents.
140


LIST OF DELEGATES
APPOINTED TO OR PRESENT AT THE SECOND AUSTRAL-
ASIAN CONFERENCE ON CHARITY HELD IN MELBOURNE.
Abbott, Hon. J. H., M.L.C. Bendigo Hospital.
A’Beckett, Mrs.... ... Brighton Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Addis, Rev. W. E.
Ardill, Mr. G. E.
Arnold, Mrs.
Astley, Mr. Wm.
Austin, Mrs. Thos.
Balderson, Mr. R.
Barnet, Mr. J. ...
Bartlett, Mrs. ...
Bayne, Mr. Alexr.
Belcher, Mrs. F. A.
Bennett, Mrs. ...
Bennett, Miss ...
Birchall, Mr. A. W.
Blashki, Mr. P....
Bon, Mrs.
Bowden, Mr. John C.
Boyd, Dr. James
Brett, Mr.
Brooks, Mr. E....
Brooks, Mr. S. W.
Burr, Mrs.
Campbell, Mrs. A.
Clendinning, Mrs.
Close, Mrs.
Cock, Mr. C.
Cole, Mr. J. H....
Connell, Mrs. ...
Coombs, Commissioner ...
Crouch, Mr. G. S.
Daniel, Mrs.
David, Mrs.
Davidson, Rev. A.
Davies, Sir M. H.
Dickson, Mrs. ...
Docker, Mrs. Wilfred
Ducker, Miss A. M. F.
Dunn, Mrs.
Australian Church Social Improvement Society,
Melbourne.
Society for Providing Homes for Neglected
Children, Sydney.
Dunolly Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Richmond Public Dispensary.
Geelong Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Old Colonists’ Association, Melbourne.
Jewish Philanthropic Society, Melbourne.
Port Melbourne Dorcas and Benevolent
Society.
Bendigo Hospital.
Geelong Bible Women’s Association.
Ballarat Ladies’ Clothing Society.
Richmond and East Melbourne Creche.
Launceston Benevolent Society.
Jewish Aid Society, Melbourne.
Austin Hospital for Incurables, Melbourne.
Balranald Hospital, New South Wales.
Bendigo Benevolent Asylum.
Melbourne Charity Organization Society,
Old Colonists’ Association, Melbourne.
Brisbane Organizing Committee.
Daylesford Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Geelong Bible Women’s Association.
Prahran, &c., Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Port Melbourne Dorcas and Benevolent
Society.
Melbourne Benevolent Asylum.
Melbourne Charity Organization Society.
Australian Church Social Improvement Society,
Melbourne.
Salvation Army, Melbourne.
Hobart Benevolent Society.
Richmond and East Melbourne Creche.
Sydney Organizing Committee, and School of
Industry for Girls, Sydney. .
Geelong Female Refuge.
Melbourne Charity Organization Society.
Australian Church Social Improvement Society,
Melbourne.
Church Home and Infants’ Home, Ashfield,
New South Wales.
Hawthorn Ladies’ Benevolent and District
Visiting Society.
Melbourne Ladies’ Benevolent Society.


Earl, Mrs.
Eddy, Rev. W. J.
Edwards, Mrs. ...
Edwards, Mr. J.
Edwards, Mrs. J. G.
Edwards, Mr. R.
Edwards, Mrs. R.
Ellery, Mr. R. L. J.
Exon, Mr. Edwin
Earrelly, Mr. B. P.
Puller, Mrs.
George, Mrs,
Gibbs, Mr; E. M.
Gilbert, Mr. T...
Glenn, Mrs.
Godfrey, Mr. F. R.
Goldstein, Col. ...
Goldstein, Mr. Jacob
Goodman, Rev. Canon
Goodman, Mrs....
Gray, Rev. E. .
Grey, Mr. J. S.
Grice, Mr. John
Grondona, Mr. C. H.
Guillaume, Mr. Geo.
Gurr, Mrs,
Haddon, Mr. F. W.
Hague, Mrs. Geo.
Haines, Mrs.
Ham, Hon. D., M.L.C.
Hammond, Mr. H. W.
Harcourt, Mrs. ...
Harlin, Mr. Thos.
Hartnell, Mr. Wm.
Herlitz, Rev. Pastor
Hitchcock, Mr. G. M.
Hitchcock, Mrs.
Hope, Mrs. Geo.
Hopkins, Mr. Alliott
Horrocks, Mr. ...
Houston, Miss ...
Hudson, Mr. C....
Isaacs, Mr. W. B.
Port Melbourne Dorcas and Benevolent
Society.
Geelong Eemale Refuge,
Port Melbourne Dorcas and Benevolent
Society.
Clunes Hospital.
St. Vincent de Paul Society, Bendigo.
j- Brisbane Organizing Committee.
Alfred Hospital, Melbourne.
Melbourne Orphan Asylum.
Launceston Benevolent Society.
Prahran, South Yarra, and Toorak Creche.
Brunswick Relief Society.
Victoria Eye and Ear Hospital, Melbourne.
Clunes Hospital,
Discharged Prisoners’ Aid Society and Female
Home, Ballarat.
Melbourne Charity Organization Society.
Convalescents’ Aid Society for Men.
Melbourne Charity Organization Society.
Geelong Infirmary and Benevolent Asylum.
Geelong Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Clunes Hospital.
Geelong Infirmary and Benevolent Asylum,
and Protestant Orphan Asylum.
Melbourne Hospital.
St. Vincent de Paul Society, Melbourne.
Neglected Children’s Department, Melbourne.
Geelong Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Melbourne Charity Organization Society.
j- Geelong Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Ballarat Benevolent Society.
Hospital for Sick Children, Sydney.
Bendigo Organization Committee.
Melbourne Charity Organization Society.
Immigrants’ Aid Society’s Home, Melbourne.
Victoria Stiftung, Melbourne.
Geelong Homoeopathic Dispensary and Pro-
testant Orphan Asylum.
j- Geelong Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Geelong Infirmary and Benevolent Asylum.
Brisbane Organization Committee.
Richmond and East Melbourne Creche,
Melbourne Homoeopathic Hospital.
Jewish Philanthropic Society, Melbourne.
Jackson, Rev. H. L., M.A. Sydney Organization Committee.
Jacobs, Mrs. C.... ... Melbourne Charity Organization Society.
James, Rev. A. S. C. ... Good Intent Society, Bendigo.
Jaffray, Mr. W. R. ... Melbourne Benevolent Asylum.
Jamieson, Mrs.... ... Daylesford Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
142


Jamieson, Mrs....
Jennings, Miss ...
Jones, Mr. David
Kennedy, Rev. James
Kennett, Mrs. ...
Kent, Rev. S. C.
Kerr, Mr. Ge 0....
Kirby, Mr. E. W.
Lang, Mrs. Matthew
Leeper, Dr.
Levien, Mrs.
Levy, Mr. Leonard
Linklater, Mr. Jacob S. ..
Mackay, Rev. A. Keith
Macvean, Rev. A.
Mahony, Mrs. ...
Marshall, Rev. A.
Maxted, Mr. Sydney
McGillivray, Mrs.
Menzies, Mrs. ...
Meyers, Mrs. J. E.
Milburne, Miss...
Moline, Mrs.
Moloney, Mrs. ..
Moorehead, Miss
Morris, Professor
Morris, Mrs. E, E.
Morris, Miss
Moss, Mr. R.
Moubray, Mrs. .
Munce, Mrs.
Nankivell, Mrs....
Nicolson, Sir Arthur, Bart.
Nightingale, Mrs.
Nolan, Mrs.
Norman, Mr. R. C.
O’Connell, Rev. J. H.
Ollard, Mrs. R. D.
O’Meara, Mrs. ...
O’Neill, Mr. Charles
Orchard, Mr. F. S.
Osment, Mrs. ...
Oxley, Mr.
Pallett, Mr. Geo.
Paton, Mrs. J. G.
Pennington, Mrs.
Perks, Rev. C. T.
Permewan, Mr. J,
Puckle, Mrs. W. S.
Rawson, Mr. Hugh
Reed, Mr. A. R.
Reid, Mrs.
Melbourne Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
St. Kilda Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Cambrian Society of Victoria, Melbourne.
Richmond Friendly Brothers’ Society,
Port Melbourne Dorcas and Benevolent Society.
Melbourne Orphan Asylum.
Hobart Benevolent Society.
Bendigo Benevolent Asylum.
Convalescents’ Aid Society for Men.
Melbourne Charity Organization Society,
Convalescents’ Aid Society for Men.
Jewish Philanthropic Society, Melbourne.
Kyneton Hospital.
Good Intent Societ}', Bendigo.
Brunswick Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
St. Vincent de Paul Society, Bendigo.
Melbourne Charity Organization Society.
• Government Charities, New South Wales.
Daylesford Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Ballarat Women’s Prayer Union.
Clunes Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Good Intent Society,. Bendigo.
Melbourne Hospital for Sick Children.
Melbourne Charity Organization Society.
Eaglehawk Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Melbourne Charity Organization Society
Jewish Aid Society, Melbourne.
Melbourne Charity Organization Society.
Women’s Hospital, Melbourne.
Victorian Infant Asylum, Melbourne.
Caledonian Society, Melbourne.
Protestant Refuge, Carlton.
Brunswick Relief Society.
Melbourne Charity Organization Society.
Melbourne Charity Organization Society.
Stawell Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Richmond and East Melbourne Creche.
St. Vincent de Paul Society, Sydney.
Geelong Infirmary and Benevolent A sylum.
Prahran, &c., Creche.
Brisbane Organizing Committee.
Bendigo Benevolent Asylum.
Ballarat Women’s Prayer Union.
Convalescent Home for Women, Melbourne.
Richmond Public Dispensary.
Ballarat Hospital.
Protestant Refuge, Carlton.
Kyneton Hospital.
Geelong Infirmary and Benevolent Asylum.
Richmond and East Melbourne Creche.
143


Eenwick, Hon. Dr., M.L.C.
Rhind, Mrs.
Richards, Mrs. J. F.
Eicbards, Mr. W.
Eoberts, Sir Alfred
Eoberts, Mr. W. H. Loyd
Eobinson, Mrs
Eobinson, Mrs. Gresham
Eoseby, Mr. J....
Eoss, Mr. Samuel
Salmon, Mrs.
Sandford, Mrs. F.
Seabrook, Mr. G. S.
Serjeant, Mrs. ...
Shields, Mrs. ...
Simmons, Eev. J. W.
Skinner, Mrs. ...
Smith, Mrs. J.
Smith, Mrs. J. B.
Smith, Mr. W. Lamb
Solomon, Mr. Abraham ...
Southwell, Mr. W. A. ...
Spence, Miss C. H.
Stelling, Mrs. ...
Stephenson, Mr. John ...
Sternberg, Hon. J., M.L.C.
Strong, Eev. Dr.
Strong, Mrs.
Strong, Mr. James
Sugden, Mrs. ...
Sully, Miss Jane
Hospital and Deaf and Dumb and Blind
Asylum, Sydney.
Melbourne Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Hawthorn Ladies’ Benevolent and District
Visiting Society.
Clunes Hospital.
Sydney Charity Organization Society.
Melbourne Charity Organization Society.
Bairnsdale Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Maternity Aid Society, Melbourne.
Sydney Benevolent Asylum, Night Eefuge,
and Eeformatory.
Benevolent Society, Newcastle, N.S.W.
Port Melbourne Dorcas and Benevolent
Society.
Bairnsdale Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Hobart Benevolent Society.
Consumptive Sanatorium (Echuca).
Women’s Hospital, Melbourne.
Hobart Benevolent Society.
Young Women’s Christian Association, Mel-
bourne.
Port Melbourne Dorcas and Benevolent
Society.
Dunolly Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Convalescents’ Aid Society for Men, Mel-
bourne.
Otago Benevolent Institution, Dunedin ; and
Lunacy and Hospitals, Wellington.
Young Men’s Christian Association, Melbourne,
State Children’s Department, Adelaide.
Women’s Prayer Union, Ballarat.
Launceston Benevolent Society.
Bendigo Hospital.
Convalescents’ Aid Society for Men, Mel-
bourne.
Australian Church Social Improvement
Society, Melbourne.
Geelong Infirmary and Benevolent Asylum.
Protestant Eefuge, Carlton.
Australian Church Social Improvement
Society, Melbourne.
fatherland,' Mrs.' Alex. I!! } Maternl ‘y Aid Melbournc -
Sutherland, Miss
Swinborn, Mr. J.
Syme, Mr. David
District Nursing Society, Melbourne.
Elizabeth Fry Eetreat, Melbourne.
Melbourne Charity Organization Society.
Tatchell,Mr.W.F.,M.L.A. Dunolly District Hospital.
Tayler, Mr. Lloyd
Taylor, Mr. John
Testar, Mrs.
Thomson, Mr. John
Thomson, Mr. Wm.
Thornley, Mrs....
Society for Assistance of Persons of Educa-
tion, Melbourne.
Kilmore Hospital
Melbourne Hospital for Sick Children.
Alfred Hospital, Melbourne.
Kyneton Hospital.
Collingwood Creche. ■
144


Throssell, Mrs. Isabel ... Malvern Ladies’Benevolent Society.
Tozer, Hon. Horace ... Brisbane Organizing Committee.
Traill, Mr. John ... Melbourne Charity Organization Society.
Trew, Mrs. J. S. ... Stawell Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Turnbull, Mrs. W. M. ... 'j
Turner, Mrs. H. G. ... [-Melbourne Charity Organization Society.
Twopeny, Mrs.... ... J
Consumptive Sanatorium (Echuca).
South Yarra Home.
Varley, Mrs. ..
Veal, Mr. J. W.
Warton, Mr. H. R. ... Maryborough District Hospital.
Warton, Mrs. ... ... Maryborough Ladies’Benevolent Society.
Waters, Mrs, Edward ... Hawthorn Ladies’ Benevolent and District
Visiting Society.
Watkins, Rev. Dr. ... Victorian Deaf and Dumb Institution
Wheatland, Mr. B. W. ... Geelong Protestant Orphan Asylum.
Whiting, Mr. J. B. ... State Children’s Department, Adelaide.
Whitton, Rev. M. M. ... District Nursing Society, Melbourne.
Wilson, Mrs. Henty ... Richmond and East Melbourne Ladies’ Benevo-
lent Society.
Windeyer, Lady ... Sydney Organizing Committee.
Workman, Dr. ... ... Melbourne Charity Organization Society,
Worthington, Mr. R. ... Gippsland Hospital, Sale.
Young, Mrs. ... ... Horsham Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Zox, Mr. E. L., M.L.A. ... Discharged Prisoners’ Aid Society, Melbourne.
SOCIETIES REPRESENTED.
New South Wales.
Balranald Hospital.
Newcastle Benevolent Society.
Sydney—Benevolent Asylum.
Charity Organization Society.
Church Home, Ashfield.
Government Charities, N.S.W.
Hospital and Deaf and Dumb and Blind Asylum.
Hospital for Sick Children.
Infants’ Home, Ashfield.
Night Refuge.
Organizing Committee.
Reformatory.
St. Vincent de Paul Society.
School of Industry for Girls.
Society for Providing Homes for Neglected Children.
Queensland.
Brisbane Organizing Committee.
11131.
145


South Australia.
Adelaide State Children’s Department.
Tasmania.
Hobart Benevolent Society.
Launceston Benevolent Society.
New Zealand.
Dunedin —Otago Benevolent Institution.
Wellington—Lunacy and Hospitals.
Victoria.
Bairnsdale Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Ballarat —Benevolent Asylum.
Discharged Prisoners’ Aid Society.
Female Home.
Hospital.
Ladies’ Clothing Society.
Women’s Prayer Union.
Bendigo—Benevolent Asylum.
Good Intent Society.
Hospital.
Organizing Committee.
St. Vincent de Paul Society.
Chines —Hospital.
Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Daylesford Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Dunolly—Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
District Hospital.
Eaglehawk Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Geelong—Bible Women’s Association.
Pemale Refuge.
Homoeopathic Dispensary.
Infirmary and Benevolent Asylum.
Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Protestant Orphan Asylum.
Horsham Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Kilmore Hospital.
Kyneton—Hospital.
Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Maryborough —District Hospital.
Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Sale —Gippsland Hospital.
Stawell Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Melbourne—Alfred Hospital.
Austin Hospital for Incurables.
Australian Church Social Improvement Society.
Benevolent Asylum.
Brighton Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Brunswick Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Brunswick Relief Society.
Caledonian Society.
Cambrian Society of Victoria,
Charity Organization Society.


Melbourne—Collingwood Creche.
Consumptive Sanatorium.
Convalescent Aid Society for Men.
Convalescent Home for Women.
Discharged Prisoners’ Aid Society.
District Nursing Society.
Elizabeth Ery Retreat.
Friendly Brothers’ Society, Richmond.
Hawthorn Ladies’ Benevolent and District Visiting Society.
Hospital for Sick Children.
Immigrants’ Aid Society’s Home.
Jewish Aid Society.
Jewish Philanthropic Society.
Malvern Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Maternity Aid Society.
Melbourne Hospital.
Melbourne Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Neglected Children’s Department.
Old Colonists’ Association.
Orphan Asylum.
Port Melbourne Dorcas and Benevolent Society.
Prahran, South Yarra, and Toorak Creche.
Prahran, South Yarra, and Toorak Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Protestant Refuge, Carlton.
Richmond and East Melbourne Creche.
Richmond and East Melbourne Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Richmond Public Dispensary.
Salvation Army.
Society for Assistance of Persons of Education.
Society of St. Vincent de Paul.
South Yarra Home.
St. Kilda Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Victorian Deaf and Dumb Institution.
Victorian Eye and Ear Hospital.
v IA-tuiictii ctiiu jMcti xiuapita,!.
Victorian Infant Asylum.
Victoria Stiftung.
Women’s Hospital.
Young Men’s Christian Association.
Young Women’s Christian Association.
By Authority: Robt. S. Brain, Government Printer, Melbourne.


# •
■
%
i
