

THE COLONIAL SOCIETY.
| wtM Jin J5
AT THE
INAUGURAL DINNER, MARCH 10,
AND THE
INAUGURAL MEETING, MARCH 15, 1869.
LONDON:
PUBLISHED AT THE OFFICE OF ?THE EUROPEAN MAIL?
COLONIAL BUILDINGS, 44a CANNON STREET.
18 G9.


#


THE COLONIAL SOCIETY.
AT THE
INAUGURAL DINNER, MARCH 10,
AND THE
INAU6UEAL MEETING, MAECH 15, 1869.
LONDON:
PUBLISHED AT THE OFFICE OF ?THE EUROPEAN MAIL?
COLONIAL BUILDINGS, 44a CANNON STREET.
1869.


LONDON: PRINTED BY
SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STKEET SQUABS
AND PARLIAMENT STREET


THE COLONIAL SOCIETY.
PRESIDENT.
THE RIGHT HON. LORD VISCOUNT BURY, M.P.
VICE-PRESIDENTS.
HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF ARGYLL.
HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM AND CHANDOS.
HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF MANCHESTER.
THE MOST NOBLE THE MARQUIS OF NORMANBY.
THE RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF CARNARVON.
THE RIGHT HON. EARL GRANVILLE, K.G.
THE RIGHT HON. THE LORD LYTTON.
THE RIGHT HON. VISCOUNT MILTON, M.P.
THE RIGHT HON. C. P. FORTESCUE, M.P.
THE EIGHT HON. SIR STAFFORD NORTHCOTE, Bart., M.P.
THE RIGHT HON. C. B. ADDERLEY, M.P.
THE RIGHT HON. EDWARD CARDWELL, M.P.
TRUSTEES.
THOMAS BARING, Esq., M.P.
GEORGE GRENFELL GLYN, Esq., M.P.
THE HON. ARTHUR KINNAIED, M.P.
JAMES SEARIGHT, Esq.
COUNCIL.
ARTHUR N. BIRCH, Esq.
HENRY BLAINE, Esq.
THE EIGHT HON. STEPHEN CAVE, M.P.
THE RIGHT HON. HUGH CHILDERS, M.P.
LORD ALFRED CHURCHILL.
MAJOR-GENERAL SIR WILLIAM DENISON, K.C.B.
JOHN ELDON GORST, Esq.
LORD WILLIAM HAY.
HERMAN MERIVALE, Esq., C.B.
THE RIGHT HON. VISCOUNT MONCK.
HUGH E. MONTGOMERIE, Esq.
SIR CHARLES NICHOLSON, Babt.
MAJOR-GENERAL SIR HENRY RAWLINSON, K.C.B.
SIR FREDERICK ROGERS, Babt.
GEORGE VERDON, Esq., C.B
WILLIAM WALKER, Esq.
EDWARD WILSON, Esq.
SIR HENRY DRUMMOND WOLFF, K.C.M.G
LEONARD WRAY, Esq.
JAMES A. YOUL, Esq.
THE RIGHT HON. SIR JOHN YOUNG, Babt., G.C.B.
[Governor-General of Can ad
TREASURER. SECRETARY.
W. C. SARGEAUNT, Esq. . A. R. ROCHE, Esq.


.
.


THE COLONIAL SOCIETY.
The Inaugural Dinner of the Society took place on Wednesday
evening, March 10, at Willis?s Rooms, King Street, St. James?s.
The chair was occupied by Viscount Bury, M.P., the President of the
Society.
About 200 noblemen and gentlemen sat down to dinner, among
whom were his Excellency the Hon. Reverdy Johnson (the United
States? Minister), the Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone, M.P. (the Prime
Minister of Great Britain), his Grace the Duke of Manchester, the
Most Noble the Marquis of Normanby, the Right Hon. Earl Gran-
ville, K.G., the Right Hon. the Earl of Albemarle, the Right Hon.
Lord Alfred Churchill, the Right Hon. Sir John Pakington, Bart.,
M.P., the Right Hon. Hugh Childers, M.P., the Right Hon.
Sir Stafford Northcote, Bart., M.P., the Right Hon. Chichester
Portescue, M.P., Sir Bartle Frere, Sir Charles Nicholson, Bart.,
Sir George E. Cartier, Bart., Sir Charles Clifford, Sir John
C. Lees, the Hon. William Macdougall, C.8., the Hon. George
\ erdon, C.8., the Hon. Arthur Kinnaird, M.P., the Hon. Dudley
Fortescue, M.P., Lieut.-Col. Loyd-Lindsay, M.P., V.C., the Hon.
R. H. Meade, Colonel Maude, R.A., C.8., V.C., Mr. Benjamin
Moran (Secretary to the American Embassy), Mr. Molineux, Dr. Lear-
month, Mr. Learmonth, Mr. Henty, Mr. Cunningham, Mr. Leveson, Mr.
I. A. Du Croz, Mr. Charles McGarel, Mr. Charles E. Levey, Mr. George
Macleay, Mr. John Peters, Captain Charles Sturt, Captain Napier Sturt,
Mr. James Youl, Mr. J. A. Bernall, Mr. H. Gilbert Smith, Mr. Henry
Ingles, Mr. George Duddell, Mr. Charles Broad, Mr. F. C. Cundy, Mr.
Francis Parry, Mr. A. Morris, Mr. F. N. Gisborne, C.E., Mr. J. B.
Darvall, Mr. W. C. Wentworth, Mr. G. PI. Chambers, Mr. Archibald
Keightley, Mr. Edward Wilson, Mr. Lachlan Mackinnon, Mr. Lachlan
Mackinnon, Jun., Mr. William Killim, Mr. Charles Killim, Mr. Edward
B. Neill, Mr. Allan Spowers, Mr.- Arthur N. Birch, Mr. F. G. Good-
liffe, Mr. F. W. Rae, Mr. A. R. Roche, Mr. John Reeve, Mr. R. Brere-


ton, Mr. H. Blaine, Mr, J. T. Dobson, Mr. J. W. Probyn, Mr. T. C.
Wallbridge, Mr.E. G. Birch, Mr. G. Salting, Mr. W. C. Sargeaunt, Mr.
Bernard Rodyk, Mr. McDonald, Mr. Leonard Wray, Mr. Leonard Wray,
Jun., Mr. Cecil Wray, Mr. Clifford, Mr. H. E. Montgomerie, Mr. Jas.
Searight, Lieut.-Col. Manby, C.E., Mr. Charles Youl, Mr. William
Edmonstone, Mr. Octavius Vaughan Morgan, Mr. Alexander Croll,
Mr. James Stevens, Mr. R. T. Firebrace, Mr. W. Burnley Hume, Mr.
Thomas Southey, Mr. James Coates, Mr. J. A. Joseph, Mr. William
Westgarth, Mr. E. A. Mac Fie, M.P., Mr. St. Barbe Sladen, Mr. John
Morrison, Mr. H. A. Edwards, Capt. Gilmore, Mr. E. G. Barr, Mr. H.
J. Arnold, Mr. William Walker, Mr. Charles Hutton Gregory (Pre-
sident of the Institution of Civil Engineers), Mr. A. Mac Arthur, Mr.
James Eae, Mr. William Duncan, Mr. H. Caldecott, Mr. J. S. Hill,
Mr, Charles Du Croz, Mr. Thomas Briggs, Mr. F. Gonnerman Dalgety,
Mr. Charles Hoare, Mr. F. Larkworthy, Mr. Nicholas Pauw, Mr. G.
Middleton Kiell, Mr. James Blackwood, Mr. H. W. Grace, Mr. A. J.
Fickling, Mr. E. G. Price, Mr, Hankey, Mr. Gairdner, and others.
The objects of the Society are to provide a Place of Meeting for all
gentlemen connected with the Colonies and British India, and others
taking an interest in Colonial and Indian affairs ; to establish a Reading
Room and a Library, in which recent and authentic intelligence upon
Colonial subjects may be constantly available, and a Museum for the
collection and exhibition of Colonial productions ; to facilitate the in-
terchange of experiences among persons'representing all the dependencies
of Great Britain; to afford opportunities for reading papers, and for
holding discussions, upon Colonial subjects generally; and to undertake
scientific, literary, and statistical investigations in connection with the
British Empire. The Rules do not permit of any paper being read, or
discussion being held, tending to give to the Society a political or a
party character.
The dinner was served in the large Hall, and the cloth having been
removed, the following toasts were drunk and responded to :
Chairman. ?My Lords and Gentlemen, I have to ask you to drink a
toast which in all assemblages of Englishmen is always greeted with
the greatest enthusiasm. It is usually proposed without one word of
comment, and I shall follow the good example; but I must say, that if
ever there were an occasion upon which that good rule should be
broken through, it would be upon this, when from every part, and from
every corner of the earth, subjects of Her Majesty are assembled in
one room to drink her health. I might say, without fear of contradic-
tion, that this assemblage is absolutely unprecedented, and I am quite
sure that .the toast which I propose, namely, 1 The Health of Her


Majesty the Queen,? has never before been drunk with more enthusiasm
than it will be now. (Loud cheers.)
The toast was drunk with much enthusiasm.
Chairman. ?My Lords and Gentlemen, I have now to propose to
you the second toast upon our list?namely, ? The Health of the Prince
of Wales, the Princess of Wales, and the rest of the Royal Family.?
(Cheers.)
The toast was drunk amidst cheers.
Chairman. ?My Lords and Gentlemen, the next toast which I have
to propose to you is ? The Prosperity of the United States? (cheers), and
I have the honour of coupling with that toast the name of our distin-
guished guest ?Mr. Eeverdy Johnson. (Cheers.) Of all the colonising
nations which went forth as soon as the New World was discovered,
Great Britain, if not the foremost, at any rate was one of the foremost.
She planted a people in the West who eventually became a great
nation. Since the time when the Pilgrim Fathers first landed in the
New World, a nation second to none upon the earth has grown up
there. (Cheers.) There have been between that nation and the
Mother-country quarrels, but they were but family quarrels, and were
always succeeded by friendship still more cemented than before.
(Hear, hear.) In process of time our country sent forth outshoots in
otheir directions. Their descendants are gathered around this table to-
day. The descendants of Great Britain?s younger sons, greet the Repre-
sentative of the eldest born ! I give you ? Prosperity to the United
States of America.? (Loud cheers.) Short speeches are to be the
order of the day, and I think, Gentlemen,' that I need not add one
single word to make you drink with the greatest enthusiasm the toast
of ? The United States.? (Cheers.)
The toast was warmly received.
Mr. ReVerdy Johnson rose, and was received with cheers.
Mr. lleverdy Johnson. ?My Lords and Gentlemen, for the toast
which my Lord has offered, and for the manner in which it has been
received by the company, I return you my sincerest thanks. The
people of the United States can never be indifferent to the opinion of
such gentlemen as those in the presence of whom I now stand, repre-
senting, as I am told, nearly all the Colonies of your kingdom, and
having amongst them those who have conducted your Imperial
Government with an ability, which it is believed, as far as oratory at
least is concerned, was never excelled. The people of the United
States will hail with delight the fact that, in the person of their Repre-
sentative, you have done honour to them; and I beg you to be assured
that, however it may for a time appear that, owing to the natural
effervescence of feeling incident to a republic, and owing also to causes
to which I only dare to allude, there may be considerable evidences of
unkindness to the Mother-country, you may be satisfied that in the


hearts of the sober and reflecting people of my country, there exists a
fixed and determined love and adoration for England. (Cheers.) I
am not acquainted, my Lord, as well as I should be, with the colonial
system by which your forty or fifty Colonies are governed, my attention
having been called almost exclusively to the duties connected with my
profession at home, and to my public duties there as a senator of the
United States; but I know this, that it can be a system only which
recognises the great principles of freedom upon which the structure of
the Imperial Government itself rests. (Cheers.) In that the Colonies, as
well as the Mother-country, differ but in name from my own country;
but they all rest upon the same foundation, and I trust in God that
they will continue so to rest until the end of time, diffusing the
blessings of liberty throughout the world, and extending other advan-
tages to as great a perfection as humanity is capable of. (Hear, hear.)
We, my Lord, have now no Colonies. I say ? now.? , In the begin-
ning of our Government doubts were entertained ?not doubts, perhaps
I should rather say settled opinions were entertained, that under the
Constitution of the United States there was no authority whatever even
to enlarge the territorial dominions which then belonged to the United
States. But those doubts have long since been removed, and now the
opinion of all is, that the Government of the United States has the
power, either by conquest or by treaty, to obtain territory anywhere,
whether continuous or not. And, my Lords, it is possible with your
consent, but not without (God forbid that any attempt of the sort
should be made without the consent of both parties !), that some of the
Colonies which now flourish under the dominion of Her Majesty, and
have so much reason to be proud of that dominion, may in process of
time find themselves under the stars and stripes of the flag of the
United States, where, if they shall come, they will soon find that there
also they will have a country of which they and all Englishmen may
have occasion to be proud. But that day I trust is far distant. (Hear,
hear.) God forbid that any part of the dominions of Her Majesty
should be curtailed ! The worldjives if the Government remains as it
is: the happiness of mankind is that it should remain as it is. Civili-
sation, and that highest of all civilisation, Christian civilisation, would
receive a sad blow, if, by any disaster, God should afflict the world
with any injury to the power and glory of England. (Hear, hear.)
The United States, my Lord, have passed through a dreadful trial.
It gave rise to differences of opinion at home and elsewhere ; but these
are now at an end. Our Government is at this moment stronger than
it ever was, and, however insane the effort was thought to be when it
was made in 1861 to destroy it, it would now be considered even more
insane if the attempt should be made, and no such attempt is to be
anticipated. We will therefore go on prospering and to prosper. But,
in order to be prospering and to prosper, it is / in my judgment,


essential that we should be the firm, sincere, and constant friends of
Great Britain. (Cheers.) And this is to be the case. With such
gentlemen as now adorn the Government of Her Majesty, giving to the
highest stations which they fill even more honour than those stations
confer upon them, it is impossible but that they shall see that their
Government is as much interested in the continuance of peace as the
Government of the United States. (Hear, hear.) And seeing that
they will extend the hand of friendship to us, which will be seized
with avidity and with sincerity; and in the end (and soon too will that
end come), all the small clouds which now hang above us will be dis-
persed, and nothing will be seen but that glorious sunlight which I
trust may ever shine upon the two countries. (Cheers.)
Chairman. ?My Lords and Gentlemen, the next toast which I have to
propose is ? The Health of the Army, Navy, and Volunteers.? That toast
requires no preface from me, and no preface shall I give it. I shall
call upon to respond to the toast for the Navy, the Eight Hon. Hugh
Childers, who is personally known to many here as having been con-
nected with a common country far from this. (Hear, hear.) The Eight
Hon. Hugh Childers, who is the representative of our Navy, was for
many years of his life an inhabitant of one of our most distant
Colonies, and in fact took the most prominent part in its administration.
It is upon that ground, I believe mainly from old recollections, that
Mr. Childers has consented to honour our board to-night, and to
appear not only as a member of the Colonial Society, but in another
capacity ?as one of its most honoured guests. (Hear, hear.) With
regard to the Army, and to the Volunteers, we have among us a Gene-
ral Officer who commenced his career at Waterloo. (Cheers.) I allude
to Lieut.-General the Earl of Albemarle. (Cheers.) And as a repre-
sentative of the Volunteers, we have one who as a Guardsman won his
Victoria Cross at the Alma. (Cheers.) With three such, representing
the three Services, you will at once agree with me that no great preface
of mine is necessary. I call upon you, Gentlemen, to drink to the ?Health
of the Army, the Navy, and the Volunteers.?
The toast having been drunk,
The Earl of Albemarle said: ?In this free country there is one
anomaly, namely, that the Chairman is a despot during his reign, and
all family associations are turned upside down. I have, therefore,
nothing to do but to obey the Chairman?s command in the fewest
words possible, and to return thanks for the compliment which has
been paid to the profession to which I belong. I have had a private
command from the chair, which I shall also obey, and the propriety of
which you will clearly see. I will not repeat the exact words, but
this was the substance : ? If you .have got a speech cut it very short,
for I have on my list a lot of bigwigs, whom they are very much more
desirous of hearing than you.? I therefore will not trouble you with any


of my own Colonial remembrances, although I have passed many happy
years in the Colonies ; but I will return my thanks to you, and I wish
every success to a Society for which, you may naturally conceive, I
feel a parental affection. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. Childers rose, and was received with cheers.
Mr. Childers. ?My Lord Bury, ray Lords and Gentlemen, I feel it a
very great honour to be allowed on this occasion to return thanks for
the Navy, because in an assembly of colonists it is peculiarly agreeable
to myself, who am a colonist, to come forward as such, and, as has been
stated by you, my Lord Bury, to once more claim the rights of an inhabi-
tant of one of our most prosperous though distant dependencies. My
Lords and Gentlemen, I return you most sincerely my thanks, on the part
of the Navy, for the manner in which you have drunk the health of
that gallant Service. The Navy has always been associated with our
Colonies. ? Ships, Colonies, and Commerce ! ? was an old toast often
given in this country; and of all the Services with which the Colonies
are connected, and of which they are proud, there is none of which
they are more proud than the Navy of England. (Hear, hear.) And,
my Lords, all we colonists at all times look with fond affection to what
we call ? Home.? We do not look upon the sea as that which separates
us from home, but as that which connects us with home?(hear, hear) ;
and looking upon the sea in that way, we always feel the greatest
affection for that which carries us over the sea, and above all for the
British Navy, the pride of the ocean. (Hear, hear). Therefore, in this
assembly, as in all other assemblies of colonists, there is no toast which
it is more pleasant to give, and there is no toast which it is more agree-
able to respond to, than that of the Navy of England. I thank you,
gentlemen, most sincerely for the manner in which you have received
the Navy. (Cheers.)
Colonel Loyd-Lindsay. ?My Lord Bury, my Lords and Gentlemen,
I assure you that I consider it a high honour to be a member of a
social board of our own countrymen, and upon an occasion of this sort,
when are assembled together, not exclusively those who have been
born in these Islands, but those who are still fellow-subjects with us of
Her Majesty the Queen, the honour is still more appreciated by us. I
assure you that it is a high honour, which we as Volunteers are very
proud of, that the example which we have set of training our citizens as
soldiers, has been followed, and followed successfully, by the colonists;
and, although I cannot speak from my own experience, yet I am fre-
quently assured by distinguished officers in the Army, that the
Colonial Volunteers are, in their energy, and in their determination
to acquire a knowledge of the use of arms, even more active and
more zealous than our Volunteers at home. My Lords and Gentle-
men, permit me to say that I sincerely congratulate my old comrade
in arms, Lord Bury, upon this successful gathering of this as-


sembly of distinguished persons. (Hear, hear.) As Volunteers we
know well the value of the old proverb, which says ? Union is force ?; and
I believe, that whatever may be the secondary motives of this great
Society, at all events one motive, and one prominent motive, is to ren-
der more close the union between the Mother-country and the Colonies.
(Cheers.) I sincerely hope this union between the two, which has been
so well commenced, may prosper and may go forth, and be of great ad-
vantage both to the mother and to her children. Gentlemen, I thank
you for drinking the health of the Volunteers. (Cheers.)
Chairman. ?My Lords and Gentlemen, the next toast which I have to
propose is one which is very important in its character: it is that of Her
Majesty?s Ministers. (Cheers.) It would be idle for me to say that we
have assembled around our board to-night men of all political opinions,
if in that phrase only those political differences be included which charac-
terise these Islands. We have not only the Whig and the Tory (to dis-
tinguish them by their ancient names), but we have representatives from
all our Colonies, and of all shades of political opinion which divide parties
in those Colonies. I suppose that, if we were to try to sum up the diver-
gence of political opinions which actually subsists among us at this
moment, we should be frightened at the aggregate amount. (A laugh.)
It is therefore, perhaps, fortunate that a fundamental rule of our Society
prohibits us from talking party politics. We must obey that rule in its
utmost strictness. But we cannot but remember that we have here
present four Cabinet Ministers, who have done us the honour to assist at
our board to-day. (Cheers.) lam sure that, regarding them as the
Executive of the Great Council of this nation, we can, without any
admixture of political difference, cordially unite to drink their healths.
(Cheers.) And when among those who are present we have the Prime
Minister of this country ?(cheers) ?the man to whom, in a great crisis of
our history, a great constitutional question has been referred for settle-
ment ?the man who, distinguished among all his compeers by his elo-
quence and by his talents, stands foremost in the councils of our beloved
Queen ?a man of whom we can all be proud, as a citizen of our com-
mon country, distant though some portions of that country may be ; and
though seas may roll between the place in which we are now assembled,
and the native homes of some who sit around me, yet w r e all claim with
Mr. Gladstone a common citizenship and a common allegiance to our
Queen. (Cheers.) Gentlemen, as the representative of the Executive of
our country, as its first officer, as its chief, and as its head?as a man of
whom, whatever our political differences, we are proud, and whom we are
delighted to see amongst us?l ask you to drink 1 The Health of Her Ma-
jesty?s Ministers,? and I couple with that toast the name of Mr. Gladstone.
(Cheers.) ?The toast was drunk amidst prolonged applause.
Mr. Gladstone rose, and was received with loud cheers.
Mr. Gladstone. ? l thank you, my Lord, and I thank you, my Lords


and Gentlemen, on my own behalf and on that of my colleagues, for the
manner in which this toast has been both given and received. At the
same time, while I appreciate that manner, I completely understand the
grounds upon which we appear here, and I should be the first to pro-
test, if protest were necessary, against any attempt to fix what we should
call a political colour to a company of this nature. I fully recognise
that, in drinking the health of the Government of the day, you pay a
token of respect to that executive authority which, happily, in this
country enjoys the respect, as the executive authority, of the entire com-
munity. (Hear, hear.) My Lords and Gentlemen, I find in the mode in
which you are enabled to receive such a toast, a most gratifying testi-
mony to the fact that, although differences of political opinion are per-
manent, and must be permanent, among us, and although at peculiar
junctures of the national fortunes they may be wide and deeply
marked, yet, so far as regards the vital article of Colonial Policy, there
has for many years past been a happy approximation in the opinions
and convictions of public men, of whatever party, which has led us far,
and very far indeed, towards the attainment of a great Imperial object?
namely, the removal of the fortunes of the colonists from all the minor
and, so to speak, local troubles of the internal affairs of the Mother-
country. (Hear, hear.) And we have, my Lords and Gentlemen, the
belief that we, having acceded to office with certain professions of
opinions and pledges with regard to our conduct, shall do that which
every body of English gentlemen will be forward and zealous to do ?
namely, to redeem those pledges, and to act upon those principles to the
utmost extent to which our powers and opportunities may go.
My Lord, having said that for myself, I am very thankful to you, even
if I feel myself little worthy of thehonour, for the permission which you
have given me to propose to this company the toast which signalises
the occasion on which we are met together : I mean ? Prosperity to the
Colonial Society !? (Cheers.) It is so long, my Lord, since I was per-
mitted to plead any special interest in colonial affairs, that probably
the circumstance of my ever having had a title to plead such an
interest has passed from the memory of those who ever knew it, and to
most of those who sit at this board it will be totally unknown. It is
thirty-four years since I was first a member of the staff of the Colonial
Department ; it is twenty-three years since I last held office in that
department. If I advert to those dates, it is not for the sake of gratify-
ing an antiquarian curiosity, nor for the sake of pointing out what I am
afraid is a truism as well as a truth?namely, that those who once have
been young are apt in the course of time to grow old. It is for a very
different and for a worthier purpose. Looking over those years, no
one can fail to be struck with the great change (and that change I will
venture to say has been all improvement), which has in the interval
passed over the spirit of our Colonial Policy. In the days when I was


accustomed to wear out with my footsteps the stairs of the Colonial
Office, that office was haunted by a disembodied spirit, which spirit re-
ceived a painful distinction under the title of ? Mr. Mother Country ?;
and while that description conveys no inaccurate idea of the narrow tra-
ditions which still hung about the conceptions of English statesmen,
more or less, although they were in process of being discharged at that
period, on the other side of the water also, in every British Colony, there
was a party, which I rejoice to think has since been totally extinguished,
under the name of the ? British Party.? (Hear, hear.) I believe that
I speak within the hearing of those who remember the circumstances
and struggles of those times, and many of us in this country were
taught to believe, or at least efforts were made to teach us, that upon
this ? British Party,? which invariably represented an insignificant
minority, depended the whole hope of maintaining the connection
between England and its Colonies, and that if anything were done to
offend that ? British Party,? or to recognise the vast majority of the
colonial community as having a claim upon our sympathies and our
actions, such a policy was certain to be fatal to the Colonial Empire.
(Hear, hear.) My Lords and Gentlemen, this was a state of things so
strange, that to recall it now seems like bringing back from the grave
the spirits of the dead, so wholly is that state of things without a repre-
sentative in the condition of affairs which now exists. I rejoice, my
Lord, that you have succeeded in gathering round this board, to enjoy
your hospitality, the representatives of the entire British family, and
that a great branch ?possibly the greatest branch, but at any rate one of
the greatest branches?of that family is Here represented among us by
one who, though numerically but an individual, yet has in him a heart
which beats warmly with the sympathies which belong to the origin
from which he derives his name, and the traditions of his country, and
who, in a manner inferior to none that have gone before him, is qualified
to represent that spirit of brotherhood which ought to unite throughout
the world the whole British race. (Cheers.)
There is no degree of latitude and no degree of longitude, upon the
whole surface of the globe, I may almost say, which has not offered its
contribution to this meeting; and I rejoice, my Lord, that the time has
come when it is fully recognised that, while the affection between Eng-
land and her Colonies grows stronger and stronger, the nature of the
relation between them is also better and better understood : a relation
undoubtedly associated with great Imperial interests, but founded upon
something yet higher and deeper than interest, founded upon honour
and affection, and having, above all, for its basis the essential principle
of freedom?a departure from which, or the slightest impairing of which,
in the policy which governs the conduct of this country towards her
Colonies, would at once destroy both the charm and the value of the
connection which subsists between them. (Hear, hear.) lam glad to


think that the time has come when those facilities of communication,
which now bring into neighbourhood the remotest quarters of the globe,
have enabled you to organise a Society, which will have the hope of
quickening, by constant personal intercourse and feelings of neighbour-
hood, the relationship which ought to unite all our Colonies. Other
clubs, my Lord, have in view the maintenance of a relation between
friends and classes. Your Society contemplates a nobler object, that of
handing down from generation to generation the great and noble tradi-
tion of the unity of the British race. I drink to the health of the
Colonial Society ! (Cheers.)
The toast was enthusiastically drunk.
Chairman. ?My Lords and Gentlemen, I rise on the part of our
Society to return my grateful thanks, in our united names, for the toast
which has just been proposed. For the eloquence which stirs the
blood, for the kindness which moves the heart, commend me to my
right hon. friend who sits upon my left. lam sure that no one can
have heard those stirring words which he has a'ddressed to us ?no one
can have heard the way in which he spoke of the ties which ought to
bind all the scattered dependencies of our Mother-country together ?
no one could have seen how the heart of the man translated itself into
burning words, but knew that there at last he heard the ring of that
true eloquence which, coming from the heart of the orator, strikes deep
into the heart of a people. (Hear, hear.) Gentlemen, I have, I be-
lieve, as Chairman of this meeting, consulted your views and your
wishes in saying as feAV words as possible of my own. On this occa-
sion I will not enter, as in your presence it would be useless, into the
reasons of the formation of the Society, and the part which the Society
is destined to fulfil. On Monday next our Inaugural Meeting will be
held, and until then that discussion may be most properly adjourned.
We are now met together for a merely social purpose : we are met to
celebrate the commencement of our Society, and I say that it has been
worthily begun when it has been opened by words of eloquence like
those to which we have listened. (Hear, hear.) Gentlemen, I return
thanks to Mr. Gladstone, and to Mr. Eeverdy Johnson, and to our
other distinguished guests, for the way in which they have drunk the
health of the Colonial Society ; and I will say, in its name and in my
own, on behalf of that Society, that I hope there is a career of useful-
ness before us, and that we shall never disgrace the commencement of
the Society which has been inaugurated to-day. (Cheers.)
Mr Chichester Fortescue. ?My Lord Bury and Gentlemen, the toast
with which I have been charged to-night is that of * Representative
Institutions,? a toast which I need hardly say would require a volume
of written or spoken eloquence to do it the smallest justice. But, Gen-
tlemen, at the same time I believe that there can be no occasion upon
which this toast could be more suitable than the present. We are met


to do honour to the inauguration of a Society which is intended to be a
place of union and meeting for all parts of the great British Empire,
and we are met in a country and in a city which are the model and
the cradle of Representative Institutions all the world over. Gentle-
men, it may safely be said that the ancient Parliament of Westminster
?which has lately renewed its youth, as we all hope, and drawn fresh
strength for the future, by a new contact with its native soil?is the ex-
emplar and the model of the representative system all over the civi-
lised world. That representative system is, as we all know, one of the
greatest of human inventions. It is distinguished from the system
which prevailed in the free commonwealths of the ancient and medi-
aeval world, when the citizens managed their own affairs in person
upon a very small scale?communities which were brilliant in their
history and achievements, but small and limited in their size. But the
representative system, which I have called an invention, but which
would be more truly described as a natural outgrowth of the needs of
political and social man, has been the means, and the only means yet
discovered by the human race, which enables great societies and great
nations to govern themselves; and of that system, I venture to say,
without fear of contradiction, that the ancient Parliament which sits at
Westminster is the mother and the model. (Hear, hear.) That
example has been followed, although imperfectly and fitfully, by some
nations upon the Continent of Europe. But (and this interests us more
upon the present occasion) that great example has been fully and ad-
mirably followed in another and a newer continent. The only rival of
the Parliament which sits at Westminster is the great body which sits
at Washington. (Hear, hear.) That model has been followed by all
the representative institutions which cover the soil of America, and
which culminate in the Congress of the United States; and that model
has been followed even more faithfully, and more literally according to
our British ideas, in the Parliaments which now, I rejoice to say, rule
all over the Colonies, properly so called, of British origin and of British
race* in every quarter of the world. The first of those Parliaments, I
need hardly tell you, is the Parliament of the Dominion of Canada
(hear, hear) ?which I am happy to think is worthily represented at our
board to-night. (Cheers.) But the Parliamentary system of Great
Britain is not confined to Canada 5 it is now enjoyed by every commu-
nity, as far as I know, large or small, of British origin all the world
over; and in spite of all drawbacks, and all troubles and difficulties, of
which we sometimes hear too much in this country, my belief is that the
Parliamentary system is triumphing and succeeding in all communities
which are of British origin.
Gentlemen, this art of self-government is one of those many physi-
cal and moral arts which are not to be taught from without. No
amount of good advice from the Mother-country, no number of leading


articles in our leading journals, will teach our Colonies the art of
governing themselves : they must learn it by practice, and they are
doing so, in spite of all drawbacks, in spite of all temporary and mo-
mentary failures, and in spite of all troubles and difficulties; and they
are fighting their way towards the great and supreme art of free and
independent administration. I therefore, Gentlemen, augur in connec-
tion with this toast of ? Representative Institutions,? a brilliant future
for that system throughout the Colonies of the British Crown. And,
Gentlemen, before I sit down, I may be allowed to say one word with
respect to the special object for which we are gathered together to-
night. It so happens that I have taken a warm interest in the origin
of this Society. (Cheers.) I have been latterly engrossed by duties
nearer home, which leave no time to any man to attend to any other
objects; but it delights me, having seen the first beginnings of this
Society, to see the brilliant company which is gathered around this
board to-night, to do honour to its inauguration; and I can only say
that my hope and my firm belief is, that the Colonial Society will be
one of the most valuable and important Representative Institutions of
the colonial system. (Hear, hear.) I have only, in conclusion, to say
that, in order to return thanks for this toast, I call upon the Duke of
Manchester to return thanks for the House of Lords, upon Sir John
Pakington to return thanks for the House of Commons, and upon Sir
George Cartier to return thanks for the Colonial Parliaments of the
Empire. (Cheers.)
The toast was enthusiastically drunk.
The Duke of Manchester. ?My Lord Bury, I am really proud that
it should be my good fortune to have been called upon to-night to
return thanks for one of the Representative Institutions of the British
race, on this first occasion when the representatives of the British race
are assembled. With regard to the House of Lords, although I believe
that its constitution has lately been questioned, the only fault which I
wish to find with it is, that it has no representatives of the Colonies
among its ranks. For myself I would go further. I say that you
colonists have a right to be represented in the Constitution as you are re-
presented here to-night. (Hear, hear.) I think that we of the Parliament
of Westminster have no right, without consulting your opinions, to
influence the policy which is guided by one who has lately addressed
you in most eloquent terms. I think that you colonists are, as we may
say, the children of ? Mr. Mother Country,? as has been lately said.
You are our descendants, now grown to man?s estate ; and if any foreign
war with a Continental power were to arise, probably the Colonies
would suffer more from it than the Mother-country. I therefore say
that the Colonies have eminently a claim to pronounce their opinion,
and give their advice, on the policy of the Empire. I hope that this
social gathering may, at some future day, lead to a Council in which


the Colonies and Great Britain may be represented in due proportions.
As I have said before, I am very proud of the opportunity of having
been called upon to return thanks for one of the Representative Institu-
tions of the British race, and I only hope that at some future day, all
the representative and legislative bodies of the British race, represented
as they are at these tables, and which, we may say, encircle the globe,
may find some central body in the Constitution of the Empire, with
effective legislative power, and a power and an influence over the
destinies and the laws of the country.
Sir John Fakington. ?My Lord Bury, my Lords and Gentlemen, I
obey the call which you have done me the honour of making upon me
to respond to the toast of ? The House of Commons ?; and in fulfilling
that duty, I will endeavour not to forget his Lordship?s caution that
brevity is the order of the day. Gentlemen, I regard this toast as
relating to one of the greatest, and the noblest, and the most peculiar
national institutions of this country, rather than to that House of
Commons which has recently been elected, and the members of which,
having been only recently elected, have scarcely yet entered upon the
arduous duties which they have undertaken. But, Gentlemen, I will ven-
ture to say this much for the present House of Commons, although I fear
I can hardly approve of the political complexion of that House as some
of those gentlemen approve of it whom I have the pleasure of seeing
round this table at the present moment; and, Gentlemen, it is with
sincerity that I say that I have the pleasure of seeing them, for I think that
you will agree with me that there never was an occasion when anything
like party-feeling was more out of place than at the present moment.
(Hear, hear.) Notwithstanding this fact, Ido with confidence express
my hope, and my belief, that looking to the constitution of the present
House of Commons, and looking at the materials of which it is com-
posed, it will honestly discharge those high functions which devolve
upon the representatives of this country in Parliament, in a manner
which may not be unworthy of their predecessors in the House of
Commons of this great country. (Hear, hear.) Gentlemen, simultane-
ously with the rapid increase of wealth and population and prosperity
in this great Empire, which has been so remarkable during the pre-
sent century, the labours and duties of members of the House of Com-
mons have undergone at least an equal, if not a greater increase. The
public at large are little aware, from what they read in the daily news-
papers, of the enormous amount of business which the House of
Commons transacts, or of the exertions and the labour which the
transaction of that business requires. And I confess that lam one of
those (I believe that I am one of not a few) who have sometimes been
disposed to feel apprehensive lest those who by their education, and by
their independent position in life, are well fitted to take part in the
councils of the nation, should be deterred by the great increase of the


work which devolves upon the members of the Legislature, from
seeking the honour of seats in that Legislature. But I rejoice to say
that, as regards the recent elections, we have seen nothing to confirm
those fears. It is, I think, greatly to the national honour, that not
only leading merchants and manufacturers and professional men, but
the highest of our nobility, and the highest and the wealthiest and the
most distinguished of our countrymen, have shown themselves as eager
as ever to bear the fatigues and to share the honours of Parliamentary
life. (Hear, hear.) Gentlemen, long may that spirit continue ; and so
long as that spirit does continue, we may feel assured that, whatever
may be our Parliamentary differences, the legislation of England will
be conducted in a patriotic and an honourable spirit. (Cheers.) I think
I may venture confidently to say, that amongst the high duties which
devolve upon the House of Commons, they have not neglected, and I
feel very sure that they will not neglect, to pay attention to those
questions which relate to the welfare of our Colonies ?(cheers) ?and I
hope, and I trust, that the example of that great and distinguished
assembly the British House of Parliament (that mother and model, as
Mr. Chichester Fortescue has called us, of Representative Institutions),
will not be lost upon those noble dependencies of the British Crown
which are now rising to maturity in all parts of the world. It is with
no small pleasure that I have upon this occasion the honour of renew-
ing, I may say, my friendship with many eminent statesmen from the
Colonies. I see here Sir George Cartier, I see Sir Charles Nicholson, I see
Sir Charles Clifford, and other gentlemen, distinguished in their respec-
tive Colonies, and it is delightful to see them upon this occasion. It is
to such men that we must mainly trust to impress upon our fellow-
countrymen the real value of British institutions; and thus to draw
closer those ties of amity and of kind feeling which ought to exist
between the members of the Anglo-Saxon race in all parts of the
world. Gentlemen, I believe that there is nothing which we can better
do here at home to draw nearer those ties of amity and kind feeling
than by the institution of such a Society as we have now inaugu-
rated. And in closing these few remarks, let me thank you for the
honour which you have done me in asking me to take a part in this
Inaugural Meeting, and let me express my hope that this Society may
be productive of every benefit which its promoters can possibly an-
ticipate.
Sir George Cartier. ?My Lord Bury, my Lords and Gentlemen, I
must say at the outset, that it requires from me a certain amount of
boldness to address you after the eloquent speeches which have been
made, and particularly in the presence of the Premier of England,
who stands in this country not merely as the premier in the political
world, but who also stands as one of the foremost in eloquence, and as
a scholar. Asa matter of course, if you expect anything eloquent


from me, I must tell you at once that you will be disappointed. At all
events, I will do my utmost, and I am sure you will excuse my short-
comings. My name is connected with this toast as relating to the
Colonial Parliaments, I regret very much that the selection fell on me
to answer for the representative bodies, as applied and carried out in
the Colonies which have the happiness to be connected with the British
Empire?with the Mother-country. (Hear, hear.) With regard to
us, when we formed our Confederation, namely, the Dominion of
Canada, we were allowed by the liberality of the English Parliament
and the English Government to set our brains to work, in order to
present our own scheme of representation to the English Parliament
for adoption. The Constitution which we enjoy was enacted by us,
though it is by virtue of an Imperial Act. It was not the initiation of
the British Parliament, or of the British nation; we were allowed by
the liberality of England to do it ourselves. (Cheers.) We came
before the English Government?we came before the English Parlia-
ment?we presented a system which was of course a representative
system; and it is a great source, I will not say of pride, but a great
source of encouragement, to the public men who then took part in that
great scheme, that it was adopted by the English Government and by
the British Parliament without, I may say, a word of alteration. (Hear,
hear.) We feel grateful for the freedom of action which was given to
us on that occasion. When we had to consider what would be the
Eepresentative Institutions which ought to rule the great Dominion of
Canada, we had, as a matter of course, to look into the past or the
present history of nations which had enjoyed, or were enjoying, Repre-
sentative Institutions. We came to the conclusion that a legislative
body, to be useful, ought to represent the sense of rectitude of the
nation, but not the passions of the nation. (Hear, hear.) Conse-
quently, we adopted a system of representative government which
allowed to the representatives elected a certain length of Parliamentary
life, in order to achieve great things. We did not like that the Par-
liamentary trust should be a mere species of power to last for only one
session, and then to have another election. We wanted that there
should be a trust, in order that the electors themselves should show
that they had confidence in those whom they elected; and then that
those who were elected should show, in return, to those who had elected
them, the realisation of their promises, made in honour, that they would
legislate according to the interest and the welfare of the community at
the time.
Monsieur Guizot, I think, said on one occasion, that ? common sense
rules the world in the long run.? It is so, and consequently a Par-
liament of small duration, an annual Parliament, or a Parliament of
too short duration, can never do any great work. With regard to us,
we do not find fault with our neighbours. We are good friends with


our neighbours, and at this festive board, in the presence of the illus-
trious Minister who represents that great nation?(hear, hear) ?I am
glad to have this opportunity of telling him that with regard to him,
and with regard to ourselves, we are as fully in the exercise of our
freedom as anyone on the earth. Our Dominion, our Confederation, is
not formed on the democratic principle ; the representative element is
a part of it, but it is founded on a monarchical basis Our neighbours
have their Confederation based entirely on the democratic principle;
they have tried the experiment, and it is a great success; but we have
tried our system to some extent, and we expect that its trial will
result in this?that so long as England shall be England, and so long
as England shall enjoy the freedom and the advantage of a Parliament,
our political gravitation and our political affection will always be
towards the Mother-country. (Dear, hear.) In order that we may not
lose sight of this fact, that we have founded a great Empire which will
extend from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean, we intend that all that
immense territory shall be well governed, and governed not merely on
a selfish principle as applied to us, but in order to add to the power
and to the prosperity of the Mother-country. (Hear, hear.) lam sure
that there will never be any cause of difficulty between England and
our friendly neighbours on account of ourselves, or on account of
England or of themselves. But it matters not; if that unfortunate day
shall ever come, we in Canada are ready to accept our position. (Hear,
hear.) We will accept the situation of the moment. But everyone of
us who understands the natural inclination of our neighbours, as well
as of ourselves or of Englishmen, to enjoy peace, is convinced that that
unfortunate day will not come. If, however, it ever should come, we
will be there. (Loud and continued cheers.)
My Lord, I have heard a great deal this evening with regard to the
Anglo-Saxon race. I had the honour to be presented to Her Majesty
when she graciously gave me an invitation, ten or twelve years ago, to
go to Windsor, and Her Majesty was kind enough to interrogate me
about the French Canadians. The shortest definition which I could
give (because you must always be brief to Royalty, and perhaps to this
meeting) was, that the French Canadians, as well as myself, were
Englishmen speaking French. (Cheers). They appreciate the worth
and the value of Saxon blood ; and I cannot lose sight of the fact that
there is an admixture of Norman blood, with the best blood of
England. I merely mention this to show that lam not in any way
wounded by the admission, because I know a little of past history.
With regard to ourselves on the other side, the two races there are
Frenchmen and Englishmen; we are Frenchmen, and the Frenchmen
in Lower Canada have proved (or rather Englishmen speaking French,)
that we can carry out Representative Institutions. It is said, by our
neighbours opposite here, that representative and free government can-


not be carried out. If they looked to that French Colony, which a few
years ago numbered only 45,000, and which now numbers 1,000,000,
they would see that the carrying out of the representative system has
been a success. I thank you, my Lords and Gentlemen. (Cheers.)
Marquis of Normanby. ?My Lords and Gentlemen, I can assure you
that it is with great satisfaction that I rise in such an assembly as this
to propose the toast which has been committed to my charge, and I am
sure that in this assembly it will need little from me to recommend
the toast to your notice. lam aware that there are some persons who
maintain that this country derives little benefit from our Colonies, and
profess anxiety that the connection should cease. lam sure that
no sentiment such as that will find favour in this meeting?(hear, hear)
??and it is a doctrine which I, for one, must entirely repudiate. That in
the lapse of time, with the increase of the Colonies both in wealth and
population, a period may arrive when it may be found advantageous,
both to the Colonies and to this country, that they should establish their
own independence, I do not deny ; but that the time has now arrived I
do not believe. I believe that the union is advantageous both to this
country and to the Colonies, and I also believe that the wise legislation
and the wise policy which have been adopted towards the Colonies have
so cemented the union which exists between us, and so bound together
the Colonies with this country, that there is little fear of such a time
arriving. The Colonies now have institutions as free as any in the
world ; they have the entire management of their own affairs, and they
can derive little advantage from any separation from this country.
This country, on the other hand, has the Colonies as a field for her
commercial enterprise, and the natural field to which her surplus popu-
lation should emigrate. I trust that the Society which we are met
together this evening to inaugurate, will tend greatly to dispel that
ignorance (for I can call it by no other term), which unfortunately
exists in this country as regards her Colonies. This ignorance, however,
is not difficult to account for. In young societies it is not the custom
to spend much time in writing histories, and I know nothing more
difficult, if one is anxious to obtain information with regard to any par-
ticular colony with which one is not personally acquainted, than to find
the means of obtaining that information. For the purpose of emigra-
tion, there is nothing more important than that a person who intends to
emigrate should be able to obtain authentic and reliable information, in
order that he may decide in which direction to turn his steps. In this
country, hemmed in as we are on all sides, and unable in any way to
extend our natural boundaries, we must look to the Colonies for the
relief of our surplus population, and whether it be a skilled artisan, an
agricultural labourer, or a small capitalist, or a man with larger pos-
sessions, they can each and all find ample employment in the various
Colonies. I trust, therefore, that the Society which has now been


inaugurated will tend to promote and to unite and to cement the love
and affection and loyalty of our Colonies. I give the toast of ? The
Colonial Empire,? coupling with it my Lord Granville?s name.
The toast was drunk amidst great applause.
Earl Granville. ?My Lord Bury, my Lords and Gentlemen, I beg to
thank you for the kindness with which you have received this toast.
Lord Bury, Mr. Gladstone, Mr. Chichester Fortescue, and Lord Nor-
manby have all alluded to the objects which this Society proposes to
itself. I cannot help feeling that if those objects were carried out in
the manner in which I expect that they will be, although they may not
at once lead to that Council of Government which was so gracefully
alluded to by the noble Duke on my right, yet they will take away the
sting of that witty saying that the Colonies were planets which looked
towards the sun and did not think much of one another. I cannot
help feeling that in my present position any kindness from an assembly
like this, while it makes one feel still more the responsibility of what
has been undertaken, is yet a very great encouragement to do one?s
best. (Hear, hear.) I happened to mention the other night to some
friends that I had received another encouragement from a very distin-
guished friend of mine, who, upon congratulating me upon the office,
said that it was one which he always thought required merely a
modicum of sense. Now that phrase is somewhat vague, for I fear
?that sense is a quality of which we are always apt to attribute to our-
selves more than our friends are inclined to give to us. But of this
one fact I am certain, that no sense on my part or on the part of Mr.
Monsell, whose compulsory absence this evening he regrets so much,
will enable us to do without the assistance of the talent and the ability
to be found in so remarkable a degree in the permanent staff of the
Colonial Department. I am, indeed, rather afraid that the Minister
ef the Great Republic, who has spoken with such singular eloquence
to-night, will feel that it is a little want of sense on my part, or
possibly' novelty in my office, which makes me unprepared at this
moment to open negotiations with him for ceding the British Colonies
to the Great Republic. (Hear, hear.) But I can assure him that I
have sufficient sense to appreciate at their just value those powerful
expressions of his, going to prove that it would be absolute insanity
for that great country and ourselves to be ever on any other than the
most friendly terms. (Hear, hear.) We have had a great many
hints, to use the words of a somewhat learned judge to a somewhat
prolix counsel, that time is passing ; and I am certainly not inclined to
answer, as that counsel did, ? Let it pass, my lord.? But there are two
points, I think, of some interest to an assembly like this, so deeply in-
terested in colonial matters, which it is possible that you will bear with
me if I very shortly allude to. (Hear, hear.) One of the subjects
which has necessarily occupied my attention since the change of


Government has been the transfer of the whole of British North Ame-
rica, excepting British Columbia, to the Dominion of Canada. My
noble predecessor had taken very great pains on the subject, and had
invited the presence of those eminent men the two delegates from
Canada, one of whom we have heard to-night describing himself as an
Englishman talking French, but who talked English with a power
which made him a worthy representative of one of the great offshoots
of this country ?(hear, hear) ?and I have not the slightest doubt that in
a few minutes we shall hear words equally powerful from the Hon.
Mr. Macdougall, his colleague. I own that for a very long time I was
perfectly hopeless of any amicable arrangement being come to on
this important subject. My right hon. friend Sir Stafford Northcote,
though a strong political opponent, and Sir Curtis Lampson, both
enjoying the confidence of the Hudson?s Bay Company, have treated
me with the utmost kindness and courtesy, and I must add patience,
but their opinion appeared to be as widely divergent as it is possible
to imagine. My right hon. friend Sir Stafford Northcote, availing
himself of our long intimacy, expressed himself to me in rather strong
language. I think he said that I was ? a terrible screw.? It is per-
fectly clear that the representatives of the Dominion considered mo
as a quasi representative of the Hudson?s Bay Company itself. My
Lords and Gentlemen, I had but one weapon in my defence, but that
weapon I admit is a powerful one, both in public and in private trans-
actions ;it may be termed the power of bore. I bombarded all these
four gentlemen with despatches, with private letters, and with con-
fidential notes, I plied them with interminable talk, and at last, when
I judged them to be exhausted and prostrate under the effects of sheer
fatigue, after a due consideration of what I believed to be Imperial in-
terests, I fired into them a new and final proposal equally unpalatable
to both; but which, I think, may possibly be accepted by them as
something like a reasonable compromise. (Hear, hear.) 1 do not know
whether there are many sporting gentlemen here present, but they
may be aware that the handicapper who handicaps two races, gains his
credit if both parties refuse, or if both parties accept, his verdict. I
shall think myself fortunate indeed if the result of my boring be that,
although both parties object, they both accept what I have laid before
them.
There is one other subject of a very different character, but which
I think is not without interest to those who share the feelings of dif-
ferent colonists in the Queen?s dependencies. Ido not know whether
you are aware that my noble predecessor obtained Her Majesty?s sanc-
tion to reorganise the Order of St. Michael and St. George, and to
extend it to all the Colonies, and entirely to remodel its statutes. This
work was finished so shortly before the change of Government that the
noble Duke had only time to name to the second and third classes some


gentlemen whom his judgment and experience enabled him to select;
and he told me that he had made an application to obtain from the
Queen permission to give the Grand Cross to Lord Monck, as a just
tribute to his able administration of the Government of Canada. There
is obviously one objection to an exclusively Colonial Order. I believe
that the noble Duke was stimulated by the example of the Star of
India, and that it was also confirmed by the difficulty of obtaining the
Order of the Bath for persons connected with the Colonies, who had
justly earned the honour. But I think that, from the affection which
is entertained towards the Mother-country by the colonists, they would
feel it to be an annoyance if they were dissevered from equally eminent
men connected with the Imperial Government at home. For this
reason I have very great satisfaction in stating that not only His Royal
Highness the Duke of Cambridge has consented to be the Grand
Master of the renovated Order, but that Lord Derby, Lord Grey, and
Lord Russell have accepted the offer of the Grand Cross which I was
empowered by Her Majesty to make to them. It may be readily ima-
gined that these three statesmen, so well known in this country ?two
of whom have been the dispensers of titles and decorations to many
others, and the career of one of whom has been so singularly inde-
pendent?should not now wish for any additional honour which their
Sovereign could confer upon them; but I believe they felt that it
was for the public interest that, in this almost new Order, statesmen
prominently connected with colonial affairs, should be included in the
first batch. Now, it happens that it is impossible to find three men
who have more fulfilled that condition. Lord Derby?s name was asso-
ciated with that Act for the abolition of slavery which is one of the
most glorious and disinterested measures which adorn the history of
this country ; Lord Russell gave self-government to our North Ameri-
can Colonies; while Lord Grey did the same in a great measure to our
Australian Colonies, and has left his strong mark upon all the principal
questions of Colonial Policy. It will be my humble duty to try to
maintain the honourable character which has thus been placed upon
this Order, and to confine my recommendations, as long as I have the
honour of being connected with the Colonial Office, to those who have
done real and great service to that Empire ? upon which,? if I may be
allowed tc repeat that well-worn but grand old Castilian phrase, ? the
sun never sets.? (Cheers.)
Sir Stafford Northcote. ?My Lord Bury, my Lords and Gentlemen, I
rise, in obedience to the Chairman?s summons, to propose the toast
which has been committed to me. But before I address myself to
that toast, I think you will hardly be surprised if I make a passing
allusion to the speech to which I have just had the pleasure of listen-
ing from my noble friend the Secretary for the Colonies. Lord Granville
has told you that he was congratulated upon his accession to that high


office, on possessing what his friend truly told him was an essential
requisite for a Minister, namely, a modicum of sense; and, with that
modesty which distinguishes him, he has added that he does not quite
know what is meant by that expression. I have had the pleasure of the
noble lord?s friendship for considerably more than twenty years, and
I have seen him tried in various public positions, and I think that I
can throw some little light upon the meaning of the gentleman who
thus complimented him upon his accession to power. I have heard a
definition of common sense, which I think most admirably applies to
the character of my noble friend. It was defined by a very great
authority as, 1 a good intellect acting upon a good hearty; and I may
say that in all the business which I have seen the noble lord transact,
he has fulfilled that condition. I never knew him wound the feelings
of any one with whom he had to do. I never knew him wanting in
capacity, and I certainly never knew him wanting in intelligence ; and
under those circumstances, possessing those qualifications, a man in
this country is able, as a public man, to do a great deal. Now cer-
tainly in this last negotiation he has contrived to bore us a great deal,
to put before us proposals which seemed the most unreasonable, and to
call upon us to sacrifice valuable property for, as it appeared to us,
very insufficient reasons. And yet the manner in which this was done
?the manner in which he would call upon one after breakfast, or send
one a note to come to him after dinner?was most pleasing. He was
equally good in the middle of the day and in the dark hours of the
night. He contrived to put his proposals in such a form that lam
prepared to say that, if there is any chance of this matter being
brought to a settlement, it will be under his auspices. But, Gentlemen,
I must at the present moment say that the matter has not yet been
submitted to those with wdiom the ultimate decision will rest; and
though I respond to the hope of my noble friend, that it will come to
a settlement, it is impossible to say how it will be.
But, Gentlemen, I do not rise for the purpose of speaking as to the
Hudson?s Bay Company,?it is the last of those mercantile bodies
which have done so much for the extension of the power and the name
of England ; but I rise rather to speak of an Empire which was founded
by another and a yet more distinguished representative of that great
class of English enterprise, and to propose to you the toast of ? The
Empire of India.? (Cheers.) My Lord Bury, the Empire of India is
fitly and appropriately associated with the objects which this Society
has in view, although the Empire of India is not, properly speaking, in
the ordinary sense of the term, a Colony. We are brought into com-
munication with men who not only are not of the Anglo-Saxon race,
but who have not even a drop of Norman blood in their veins, and
who cannot be properly described as being as much as Englishmen
speaking Hindostanee. We are brought into relations with ancient


and most illustrious and civilised peoples, of all stocks, I believe, of
the human race, comprehending all religions, and comprising men of
the most various political, and social, and ethnological tendencies; and
being placed in relations with those men we are bound to fulfil our
duties towards them. Now I wish to observe, in passing, that the
relations and duties which England undertakes towards the native
races with whom she is brought into contact in India, are very different
from the relations and duties which she undertakes with regard to her
own Colonies. As respects her own Colonies she is dealing with Anglo-
Saxons like Englishmen; and what she is doing is to people the un-
inhabited portions of the globe, to place her sons among them, and to
maintain them as long as they require her assistance, and when they
are able to go alone, to place them in a position of independence and
close relationship to herself, such as exists between grown-up children
and their parent. But with regard to nations so different to herself as
those with whom she is brought into relation in India, her task is a
very different and a very delicate one, because we have at once to
respect their idiosyncrasies and to respect the Oriental character. I
apprehend that we should neither Anglicise India, nor at the same
time allow our civilisation and our enterprise to be overloaded by the
peculiarities of the Oriental character. What we have to do is to try
to harmonise what is good in the English character with what is good
in the Oriental character; it is no easy task, but it is a task from
which we should not shrink, and I believe that we are in the right
way to accomplish it. I believe that any persons who have seen any-
thing of the Indian races, have seen how desirable it is to give a true
value to the native character, and at the same time to communicate to
the native races of India some portion of our own energy, and some of the
advantages which we have derived from our experience in systems of
government; and I most confidently look forward to the time when
India will be the great support and the great jewel in the Crown of
England ?not as a means of benefit to us for purposes of our own, but
as affording a brilliant example of the power of England to do good to
the nations with whom she is brought into contact. (Hear, hear.) It
will be in developing Indian enterprise and Indian resources, and in
attaining honour to ourselves by making India conscious of the advan-
tages of that connection, that we shall derive the greatest assistance
and benefit from India.
My Lord, I will not detain this company, because I know that our
time is short. I could have wished that in proposing this toast, I could
have had the privilege of calling upon the noble Duke who now admi-
nisters the affairs of India in this country to respond to it, because I well
know that he is not only one who has paid great attention in past times
to Indian affairs, but that he is now administering that department in a
spirit which promises well for the interest of India. Or I could have


wished, in his absence, that I could have had the privilege of calling
upon one who will shortly be in this country returning from his long
service in India, whose name will be associated with the proudest and
most brilliant times of Indian history ?I allude to Sir John Lawrence.
But as neither of those distinguished men can respond to this toast, I
will call upon one whose name is as well known as either of the others,
and as much respected, at all events in Indian circles, as any name can
be. I will call upon one who is now a member of the Indian Council,
and a friend of my own, and one who has borne a distinguished part in
India?l mean Sir Bartle Frere.
The toast was drunk with acclamation.
Sir Bartle Frere. ?My Lord Bury, my Lords and Gentlemen, I feel it
no little responsibility to be called upon to return thanks for the great
Indian Empire; but if anything could lessen the weight of responsibility
which I feel, it would be to know that the toast has been proposed by
one who on every occasion, not only in his official life, but through the
whole of his public life, has given clear, consistent, and useful expression
to those noble sentiments, and those noble principles, upon which I be-
lieve the people of England desire that their great Indian Empire should
be uniformly governed. (Hear, hear.) My Lord, it is impossible to look
around on those who are present this day, and to hear the sentiments
which have been uttered this evening, without feeling that in the
principles upon which you govern your Colonial Empire there should
be nothing inconsistent with those upon which you govern your Indian
Empire, if you wish to retain that Empire, as I hope that it will
be long retained, as the most glorious appendage to the British
Crown.
My Lord, there were two things which have struck me very forcibly
in all that we have heard this evening. One is that under whatever
form you send forth your children to colonise and create nations, it
is impressed strongly upon their minds, and upon your minds, that
the best guarantee for the government of those dependencies is that you
take it for granted that they know something of what they owe to them-
selves. And there is a second great principle, and that is, that when
any difference of opinion arises, and that when any difficulties present
themselves for adjustment, they are best adjusted, not by imposing
your commands upon your dependencies, but by inviting discussion
and threshing out the wheat of the truth. I believe, my Lord, that
these principles may be usefully acted upon, and that they are the
only principles upon which you can act with regard to your Indian
Empire. I feel, my Lord, that it is a good augury for these principles
being carried out that you have this evening not forgotten what a large
share of the universality of England belongs to India, and I trust that
this Society will never forget to include India among its objects.
(Hear, hear.) It is true, my Lord, that with regard to the Colonies


you have furnished the whole material of which those Colonies are
composed, or, at any rate, the greater portion of it; but we must not forget
that in India you furnish the cement which binds together all those
components parts to which Sir Stafford Northcote has made allusion, and
that if that cement did not exist, there could be no peace, there could
be no prosperity, and there could be no civilisation for India. I trust,
my Lord, that England will long continue to bear in mind those great
principles on which the Colonies have been founded, in administering
the Indian Empire. I will not further detain you, but will return you
the hearty thanks, which I feel assured will be participated in by all
classes in India, when they know that you have borne them in mind on
this occasion upon which you are inaugurating this Society, which I
trust will have a very important influence on the future interests both
of India and of the Colonies.
Mr. Arthur Kinnaird. ?My Lord, it has fallen to my lot to replace
one who would have given the toast which I am about to propose with
far greater ability than I can, from his long connection with the Colony,
and who is more entitled than myself to propose the toast which has
been allotted to me ?I mean Viscount Monck, whose absence I regret.
I was called upon to visit the Canadian Colony in an official capacity,
and I look upon it as one of the happiest days of my life when I set foot in
that new Dominion of Canada. I will only say, that from the time when I
set foot in that Colony, till the day when I left it, nothing was more re-
freshing or more gratifying to an Englishman than to see the cordial and
hearty welcome from every corner of that Dominion, which hailed every
man who came from the Mother-country. lam sorry that my excellent
friend the American Minister has left us, because I was going to apolo-
gise to him for giving this toast; but, in fact, no man in this room has a
greater admiration for the United States or for the ? Stars and Stripes?
than I have. I rejoice that my excellent friend gave expression in his
own words, with so much goodwill, to what is the feeling of that
country. The Minister for the Colonies has made two very remarkable
revelations to us. I congratulate my honourable friend near me, who
has to return thanks for this toast, that Canada is going to spread its
arms. We shall have one stretch from the Atlantic to the Pacific, and
I think that we shall see the day when British Columbia will be in-
cluded, and our whole China trade will come in that legitimate course,
and not by California.
Gentlemen, with respect to the restoration of the Order of St. Michael
and St. George, I am glad that as Vicount Monck has failed to be
present on this occasion, it has fallen to my lot to propose this toast on
his behalf, he being the first to receive that Order, I beg you to drink
the toast of ? The New Dominion and the Colonies in the West.?
The toast was drunk amidst cheers.
The Hon. W. Macdovgall. ?My Lord Bury, my Lords and Gentlemen,


I feel unable to express to you the gratification which this meeting has
afforded to me as a colonist and as a native of Canada. I think that I see,
and that you will see, in this gathering, and in the speeches which have
been delivered to-night, great encouragement from those who are
around this board. I think that I can see an evidence of the cessation
of that feeling of dissatisfaction which was beginning to show itself in
some of our Colonies ?a feeling which lam sorry to say is of the worst
consequences to this country, and which for the last three or four years
I have discovered to exist to some extent here also?namely, that the
connection between the Mother-country and some of the Colonies, at all
events, is one which is not of very great value to this country, whatever
it may be to them.
My Lord, a few years ago, the leading public men of all political
shades in Canada made up their minds, that if they wished to have the
benefit of the Constitutional Government which they derived from this
country, and wished to participate in the Government of the country,
it was necessary to re-construct that Government. They laid their heads
together. Some of them gave up those special projects which political
parties sometimes entertain, and they endeavoured to form a union of
all the American Colonies as a portion of this Empire. They found
on coming to this country, for the purpose of getting an Imperial Act
to give them a re-constitution of new Government, that both political
parties strongly sympathised in that Act, and the result has been that
it has been passed. And, my Lord, lam happy to state that that Con-
stitution has proved a perfect success. Dissatisfaction, of course, pre-
vailed in some quarters. It is difficult to prevent it in a country like
ours, where every man reads a newspaper, and almost every man thinks
that he can write one; but almost every one has accepted the new Con-
stitution, with great satisfaction. It has worked successfully ; the Local
Governments organised under it have passed a great many Bills, and up
to the present time we have been sustained by a very handsome majority.
My Lord, there is a circumstance which has attracted some notice in
this country. One of the Provinces has made some little objection;
but I am happy to announce, that the leading man in that movement
has become a Member of the Government, and I have no doubt will
work equally zealously to carry out the new system of government.
My Lord, I feel that after the various suggestions which have been
made with regard to brevity, and the lateness of the hour, my task is
nearly finished; but Lord Granville?s remarks with regard to a very
important question, and Sir Stafford Northcote?s remarks, will go out
to the public. That great territory of British America, which hitherto
has been under the control of a commercial company, is about to be
transferred to the New Dominion, and upon that, British Columbia will
reasonably ask to be annexed. Already NeAvfoundland has passed
resolutions by its Legislature, and by other means, I believe, unani-


mously asking to be admitted to the Confederacy, so that in a short
time we shall have one united Central Power over the whole of British
North America; and I would ask you, Gentlemen, to cast your eye
over the map of British North America, and you will see that this new
Government constitutes one half of the North American continent.
With reference to the terms which my Lord Granville has proposed,
I shall not discuss them here ; but lam afraid that he will have sqme
difficulty in defending them in another place, I must say that in the
whole of this difficult and important negotiation, we have experienced
every disposition on the part of the Imperial Government to listen to
our arguments, although it has not always been convinced by them.
And at last a proposition is made which I think is not quite fair to the
taxpayers, or the subjects of this country, some of whom I hope will
shortly go to that country, where thousands upon thousands of acres
are waiting to be cultivated by the poor of England, I think that the
terms which have been proposed are unfair to the people of Canada,
but yet they are not such as to prevent the union of this new country
with ours, and they are not so onerous that they cannot be carried out.
I shall be satisfied, as having had some share in this negotiation, if the
result in a very short time shall be to create in British North America
a great power enjoying free institutions as its crowning influence. I
shall rejoice if that experiment shall prove a success, and if we, running
a race alongside our neighbours, willing to live in peace and good
feeling with them, and borrowing everything from them which previous
experience has proved to be beneficial, shall enjoy at the same time all
those great principles of government, and all those grand ideas which
we have derived from you, and shall work out in the New World the
principles of the British system of government.
I shall only say that the other Colonies of the West are included in
this toast. I, of course, as may be readily supposed, have a very slight
knowledge of those Colonies, It was my good fortune two or three
years ago to endeavour to establish a better systejn of trade between
North America and our West India Colonies, and the conclusion which
I came to was that in those Colonies you have an active, enterprising
body of all classes. We found that the universal feeling was in favour
of connection with this country, and their desire to perpetuate that
connection was as strong as it was in our minds; and the institutions
which they enjoyed under the protection of the Mother-country were
those which they wished to enjoy so long as they could. (Hear, hear.)
My Lord, we return to you, and to those gentlemen who have been
active in the formation of this Society, our sincere thanks for the
inauguration of an Institution such as this is likely to be. On all
questions of knowledge we have found great difficulty in obtaining
information. There is no common centre ?no place where you can
find maps and information, and can consult with reference to matters


of colonial interest; and I trust that when this Society has established
itself, and given itself a local habitation, people will be able in this
country to obtain the means of information. (Cheers.)
Chairman. ?My Lords and Gentlemen, before the next toast is given,
I have to make an announcement to you in two words. I would
preface it, if you would allow me, by saying, ? Happy is the nation
which has no history.? It is curious how, if a hare is started everyone
runs after it, and on this occasion I almost regret to say that the con-
versation has mainly turned upon the subject of our North American
Colonies. Now, Gentlemen, I am quite conscious that more than half
of those who sit at our table to-day belong to the Colonies which we
have designated as the Colonies in the East?l mean Australia, New
Zealand, and the Colonies in that direction. The noble Duke who
returned thanks for the House of Lords to-night reminds me that he
is a New Zealander. He is owner of property in New Zealand, and
he, I believe, has held it for many years with great advantage to
himself, as well as with great advantage to the country. I admit that
at the present moment negotiations are in progress with respect to
Canada, and no negotiations are in progress with respect to the Austra-
lian Colonies. It is for that reason that the Canadian Colonies have
been mentioned with a prominence to-night which has somewhat ex-
cluded our Australian Colonies. The toast which lam now about to
call upon my noble friend Lord Alfred Churchill to propose, was to
have been proposed by the late Secretary for the Colonies, his Grace
the Duke of Buckingham. I had a telegram from him, stating that
his Grace was prevented by circumstances over which he had no con-
trol from attending the dinner to-day. I regret it extremely, because,
from the very beginning of our Society?when it was first thought of
?the Duke of Buckingham was one of our most strenuous supporters.
He was the first person to whom we applied for assistance?he was the
first who recommended the Society to the various Colonies, and he
watched over us with the most fostering care; and I could have
wished that the toast of the Australian Colonies should have come
with the ability and authority which he would have carried with it,
and that he should have been present to propose it. I therefore wish
to announce that it is only the circumstance of the Assize Judges visit-
ing the part of the world in which his Grace is now detained, that
prevents him from being here to-day. But lam quite sure that in
calling upon my noble friend Lord Alfred Churchill to propose this
toast, I place it in the hands of one who can do it justice, and
who will discharge the trust committed to him with that kindness and
affability and eloquence for which he is so distinguished.
Lord Alfred Churchill. ?My -Lord Bury, my Lords and Gentlemen,
I have been called upon very unexpectedly, and at a very short notice,
to propose one of the most important toasts of this evening. I thank


your Lordship for having mentioned the cause which has occasioned
the absence of the Duke of Buckingham, because it only bears out
what I say, namely, that I was totally unprepared to propose this toast.
We have heard, from the right hon. gentleman the Prime Minister, the
evil consequences which resulted from the Colonial Policy which existed
in former years, and how it was supposed that the interest of the
Mother-country could only be maintained in the Colonies by what was
called the ? English party ?; but not only has this English party sub-
sided, but the Colonies themselves have started into life, with a vigour
unprecedented in the history of the globe. We have now in the
Australian dependencies seven Colonies, six of these enjoying separate
and distinct Legislative Parliaments. They are engaged with ques-
tions deeply affecting the interests of the Colonies, and which we in
this country may do well to consider with regard to future legislative
action. I trust that we are shortly about to carry out one system in
this country which has received its initiation in that country, namely,
that affecting the purity of elections. Another question which we
may do well to consider, is one affecting the more easy transfer of
land. This system has been introduced into nearly the whole of the
Colonies, and with great success. The introducer of that question
is now in the House of Commons, and no doubt it will be brought
before the Imperial Parliament for discussion. There are also other
questions which these Parliaments are discussing among themselves,
and if they succeed there, they will also be discussed in this country,
with respect to the Legislature of the country. Gentlemen, these are
questions of very great importance. There are also other questions,
such as Emigration. We are weighted down here by pauperism, which
cramps our energies in every direction. It appears to me to be a most
important duty of this Society to discuss these questions, and then we
can discuss with the greatest advantage how we can promote emigra-
tion from this country to those Colonies. Gentlemen, I heartily and
sincerely congratulate the noble Lord for the energy which he has
displayed in promoting this Society. It is one which for many years
(and I am certain that every colonist in this room will bear me out)
there has been a very great desire to possess. We are now inaugurat-
ing this Society under the most favourable auspices, and I trust that
it may last up to a time when its influence shall be felt throughout
the whole country. With these few observations I beg to propose the
toast of ? Australia and the Colonies in the East,? and with that toast
I will connect the name of Sir Charles Nicholson.
The toast was enthusiastically drunk.
Sir Charles Nicholson. ?My Lords and Gentlemen, at this late hour
of the evening, when I see so many of our friends anxious to depart,
and when I fear that your attention must have been wearied by the
number of speeches to which you have already listened, I feel that it


will be impossible for me to trespass at any length upon your time in
conveying to you my thanks for the toast which you have drunk.
The Australian Colonies have been placed the last in the programme
of the evening. This, I believe, has been in some measure accidental,
and in some measure attributable to the fact that those Colonies are the
youngest of all the great group of Colonies belonging to the British
Empire. But though the last brought before your notice, lam sure
that it will be admitted by all British subjects that they are not the
least in the estimation of the British public. (Hear, hear.) I must
state that I believe that one important object will be achieved by the
inauguration of this Society. There is on the part of all colonists,
both in the Colonies and when they arrive in England, a feeling of
disappointment and jealousy at the indifference and ignorance which
prevail on the part of English people generally with regard to those
Colonies. Those who have lived in the Colonies and have witnessed
their growth, and have contributed in any way towards that growth,
feel a natural pride at the result of their labour, and they are disap-
pointed when they find that the great facts which they have contri-
buted to create, are unknown in a large measure at home. They come
home to England, and find the very existence of those countries, where
they have so long dwelt, almost ignored. They find the Press and the
public attention occupied with the miserable diplomacy of fifth-rate
States and paltry affairs in England, whilst those great Dependencies
with which they have been connected are utterly lost sight of, or are
only alluded to in the most casual way; [therefore I rejoice that a
Society has been instituted by which that state of things will to some
extent be remedied ?because I think that this Society will form a sort
of common arena?and I say that it is very desirable that we should
have a common ground upon which we can meet and sympathise with
each other. But it is also a very important object, and one which I
think is likely to be achieved, that in its gatherings we can evoke the
sentiments and the sympathy of those noble and distinguished gentle-
men who have honoured us with their company upon this occasion.
(Hear, hear.) It is the sort of feeling which even animates the citizens
of the United States of America ?they are jealous of the reputation
of their country. They are too prone, perhaps, to ask you to consider
all that has been done, and the great results Avhich have followed
from the colonising efforts of themselves and their countrymen. I ask
you to look at the vast regions which have been conquered by our
peaceful efforts, and at the impetus which has been given to commerce.
I say that these are feelings which press upon every colonist when he
arrives in England, and feelings which animate him in the most dis-
tant part of the world. Happily we have no disputes between the
colonists and the Parent State. We in the Australian Colonies are
not obliged to pester the Minister with such questions as purchasing


the rights of the Hudson?s Bay Company, questions which are a perfect
mystery to me ; and I rejoice that such happy relations should exist as
now prevail, between Her Majesty and her highest recognised officer in
the Colony, through the nobleman Avho now fills the position of Colo-
nial Minister. We have not the George Granville of 1767, and if any
Canadian now came with a grievance to England, he would not be re-
ceived as an American colonist was a hundred years ago. I quite
agree with many of the remarks which, fell from the last speaker. I
most sincerely and earnestly deprecate those mischievous speculators
who would have a severance of the Colonies from the Parent State,
The noble Lord in the chair said he believed that upwards of one-
half of the company present were Australians. I think that I may
claim two-thirds of those present as men who have been connected
with the Australian Colonies; and I call upon them, one and all, to
disavow such an idea as to suppose that the colonists are desirous of
severing in any way that happy and glorious connection which exists.
(Hear, hear.) And I rejoice to find, from the announcement of the
noble Lord, that it is the intention of Her Gracious Majesty to give
titles of honour to distinguished colonists. I rejoice that the Order
is not confined to colonists, because we colonists would not value that
which was merely local and not imperial. My Lord, we do not wish
to be trained to republicanism: we are subjects of Her Majesty, and
wish to remain so. The conditions of society in the Colonies may be
assimilated to those in England, and I think that this is one of the
happy expedients by which that result may be achieved. I apologise
for having trespassed so long upon you. I only regret that my clients,
the Australian Colonies, should have appeared so late in the pro-
gramme ; and if there is any grievance upon their part, it is, I think,
that they have not had an earlier place in the proceedings of this
evening, and I hope that they will obtain a more prominent position
upon the next occasion.
Sir Charles Clifford. ?My Lords and Gentlemen, I will ask you to
drink the health of our Chairman, not only for the admirable manner
in which he has conducted the business of the evening, but as being
one of the most energetic of those who have founded this Society, which
we are now met to inaugurate?a Society which I look upon as forming
an epoch in the Colonial history of England. Since the Colonies were
granted that wise measure which the Parliament of England thought
proper to give them?namely, that of Representative Institutions?they
have little to ask from England. They are perfectly content, as far as
I know, in every case to rest upon themselves. But they have heard,
and we have been told to-night, that there is a feeling existing in
England (and there is no doubt of it), that our Colonies are not essential
to the welfare of the Mother-country. That feeling does not exist in
this room. (Hear, hear.) We are quite certain that England is better


for them. They also are quite certain that they are much better as a
dependency of England than they would be, however strong within
themselves, as an independent nation. (Hear, hear.) The only Avay
to keep them in that humour is that their feelings should be under-
stood, and that their feelings should not be maligned. The Avay to do
that is, that the British public should have some Institution in England
which should be known to themselves, and also known to the Colonies,
and should be a medium of communication between the two. I sin-
cerely trust that this Society may be that mode of communication, and
may be that Institution; and lam quite certain that to carry it to its
legitimate end, we could not have a more admirable President than our
Chairman. I propose the health of Lord Bury, and may he long be
the President of the Colonial Society !
The toast was drunk with acclamation.
Chairman. ?Gentlemen, I shall return thanks to you in one word for
the honour which has been conferred upon me. In drinking my
health as the President of this Society, honour has been done to the
Society. For that I thank you. With regard to the personal honour
conferred upon myself, I feel that it is to those around me who formed
the Society, and who have nursed it from its earliest youth (it being
still in early youth), that thanks are due for the formation of this
Society, which I trust will have a great and a brilliant future. I think
that we could not have held our Inaugural Meeting under happier
auspices. We have been addressed by the Cabinet Ministers who have
come from the Colonies, and we have been addressed by the Prime
Minister of this country, Avho has declared Avith unparalleled eloquence
the light in Avhich he regards the Colonial part of the dominions of our
Queen. We have also been addressed by Lord Granville, the Secretary
of State for our Colonies; and lam sure that the terms in which he has
spoken of the view in which he evidently regards the trust which has
been conveyed to him by the Queen, must convince the colonists, if
they needed to be convinced, that in the Avhole of that Empire upon
which, quoting Daniel Webster, ?the sun never sets,? there is but one
wish ?namely, that universal brotherhood should unite us all together,
and that that tie should be strengthened day by day. Gentlemen, I
thank you very much.
This terminated the proceedings of the evening, Avhich had been
throughout sustained with the Avarmest enthusiasm and the liveliest
expressions of hope for the future prosperity and success of ? The
Colonial Society.?


?
.rs ' - - ?
?
?


THE INAUGURAL MEETING
THE COLONIAL SOCIETY
WAS HELD IN THE THEATRE OF THE
INSTITUTION OF CIVIL ENGINEERS, 25 GREAT GEORGE STREET, WESTMINSTER,
ON MONDAY EVENING, MARCH 15, 1869.
Present : ? The Marquis of Normanby, the Earl of Albemarle, Earl
Mulgrave, the Right Hon. Chichester Fortescue, M.P., Colonel Loyd
Lindsay, M.P., Y.C., Mr. Macfie, M.P., Sir Charles Nicholson, Bart.,
Sir J. C. Lees, Colonel Maude, R.A., C.8., V.C., Mr. Charles M'Garel,
Mr. George Yerdon, C.8., Mr. Edward Wilson, Mr C. Hutton Gregory
(President of the Institution of Civil Engineers), Mr. Leonard Wray,
Mr. Arthur N. Birch, Mr. Henry Blaine, Mr. H. E. Montgomerie, Mr.
William Walker, Mr. James A. You], and-about 170 others.
The Right Hon. Viscount Burg, President of the Society, in the
Chair.
The Secretary , Mr. A. R, Roche, read the Minutes of the General
Meeting of the 16th December, 1868, which were put to the Meeting
and confirmed. He afterwards read a list of names of forty-four gentle-
men who had been elected Fellows of the Society since the Meeting of
the 16th December.
The Chairman then delivered his Inaugural Address, as follows :
Ladies and Gentlemen, a new Society takes its place to-night among
the institutions which already exist in considerable numbers in this
country. Organisations somewhat similar to it in character, and hold-
ing a prominent place in the estimation of scientific and literary men,
are already in full operation. It therefore seems due to the practical
character which we wish to impress upon our proceedings to show
clearly that the objects we have in view cannot adequately be attained
by any existing organisation, and that we are not, in a spirit of idle
rivalry, setting up an opposition to any which already occupy public
attention. I certainly am of opinion that the great increase in the
number of scientific and literary institutions which is observable at
the present day is not by any means an unmixed advantage. The


cause of science would in many cases be more advanced if its votaries
were more concentrated. Holding this view, I need hardly say that I
should not have taken part in the formation of this Society if I had
not been fully convinced that we occcupy an exceptional position.
An unnecessary number of institutions, differing only slightly from
each other in the objects which they profess to aim at, frittei away in
the expenses of management, funds which, under a system of cordial
co-operation, would be available for more extended and practical use-
fulness.
It seems to me, therefore, that a new Society, instituted with a
definite object, and desirous of taking a creditable place in public
estimation, is bound to show clearly that the functions it proposes to
perform cannot equally well be discharged by others. I shall therefore
most fitly thank you, Ladies and Gentlemen, for the honour you have
conferred upon me by appointing me the first President of your Society,
by anticipating?and, if possible, answering?the questions which would
naturally be proposed by those who contemplated joining our ranks.
I therefore propose to offer some remarks which may be called, in old
English phrase, the ? Apology? of the Society. I will, in as few words
as possible, give an account of its objects, its limits, and the duties it
will feel itself called on to perform.
Now I may say at the outset, that the one great object of the Society
?the idea to which every other will be subordinate is to diffuse, as
much as lies in its power, accurate information upon Colonial subjects
among our countrymen.
This is the more necessary at the present time, because there is
among us a school of politicians whose leading idea appears to be that
Colonies are an excrescence of our Empire, rather than an important
element of its prosperity; an incumbrance, rather than a material ele-
ment of its strength; a source of commercial and political loss, rather
than of national wealth. .
Now this school of politicians are respectable for their learning, their
eloquence, their ability, and formidable on account of the persistent
vigour of their attacks. Their doctrines attack not only the root of our
Colonial System?which would of itself be serious and well worthy of
attention ?but the very existence of our Colonial Empire, which is of
infinitely more importance. A faulty system maybe reconstructed ; an
Empire thrown away can never be recovered.
This Society contains already among its Fellows many who are pecu-
liarly able, by lifelong knowledge as well as by practised ability, to
encounter the aggressive theories to which I have adverted. I express
the feelings of the Society generally, when I say that we hope to do that
duty well I venture to add on my own behalf, modestly as becomes
the President of a Society whose laurels are yet to be won, that if it
does perform that duty well, it will amply justify the wisdom of those


who formed it; and that such service alone would be sufficient answer
to those who ask us what good objects we propose to ourselves.
1 need not point out that there is no society, no body of men in
existence in England, upon whom such duties could devolve. The Co-
lonial Office is occupied with departmental and in some cases adminis-
trative details; it is clearly no part of the duty of that office to enter
into controversy on fundamental questions, such as the advisability of
retaining Colonies at all. Parliament will once in a while discuss a
Colonial question; but its Order Book is already overcrowded with
questions of immediate concern, which must be settled out of hand, lest
they impede the work of practical day-to-day legislation. Parliament
clearly has no time to argue on fundamental questions, or to refute
doctrines which, however insidiously they may be possessing them-
selves of the public mind and influencing the course of future legisla-
tion, are not yet within the matter-of-fact limits which the Legislature
rarely oversteps. No existing society, it is obvious, will undertake the
duty. The Geographical Society may, and indeed often will, touch
upon a colonial subject incidentally; so may the Ethnological, the
Statistical, the Antiquarian, and many other learned bodies. But the
particular cause which I am at this moment alluding to has hitherto
found no champion?no champion, I mean, in any corporate society
like our own. Many a gallant knight has put lance in rest and run a
tilt against the half-knowledge and perverted reasoning upon which the
opponents of colonisation rely. But without undervaluing in the
least the abilities and the courage which those champions have dis-
played, it may be confessed that they have needed the support which
an organised body like our own, widely acquainted with the subject,
will, I hope, henceforth be able to accord.
From what I have mentioned above, our visitors (for on such a
point I need not insist to the Fellows of our Society) will perceive that
while it has been nobody?s business to defend, the writers who attack
and would dismember our Empire have grown into a regular school of
politicians?keen, ready, and able. It is not one of the least important
facts that the doctrines of that school have been enunciated from a pro-
fessorial chair in our oldest university?l need hardly say that I speak
of Mr. Goldwin Smith. It is impossible to speak with too great admi-
ration of the brilliant eloquence, the consummate mastery of his mother
tongue, and the reasoning powers of Professor Smith. As specimens
of nervous English, in my opinion, some passages of Professor Smith?s
writings are unsurpassed within the range of modern literature ; but in
proportion as he is brilliant, he is dangerous. The principal charac-
teristic of Professor Smith?s writings is the use of sarcasm, and a con-
stant and, to superficial readers', apparently complete reduction of the
principles and arguments of his opponents ad ahsurdvm. No one who
knows the immense effect exercised upon youthful and clever minds


by ridicule skilfully applied, can doubt that Professor Smith?s influence-
upon his young disciples must have been immense. It is therefore,
somewhat startling to reflect ?and it is a thought which must nerve our
Society to exertion ?that the intellect of the rising generation of
av liters, thinkers, politicians, lawyers, headworkers in all branches of
science, has been attacked at the fountain-head, and, so fai as the in-
fluence of at least one great master goes, turned against us. For one
man, therefore, Avho holds doctrines favourable to the dismemberment
of our Empire at the present day, Ave may expect to find ten at a future
time; and the class of objectors we shall then have to meet will be one
especially difficult to encounter. The beneficial results of a great
Confederation can never fully be reduced to paper, catalogued, ticketed,
for the refutation of those who contest them; and the disadvantages
lie upon the surface, and lend themselves easily to the sarcastic and
quasi-utilitarian style of the neAV school. Do we speak of the advan-
tages of unity, the cohesive poAver of a common loyalty and a common
nationality ? What more easy than to urge that money doA\n is moie
than union, that loyalty is but a name, and to demonstrate with lofty
scorn that prestige is but a foreign name for cheating, that the boasted
influence of our consolidated Empire is itself but a sham and a delu-
sion ? The existence of such a school as this would of itself be a suffi-
cient reason for the existence of our Society. But we have many
others. It will form a centre to which those Avho come home from the
colonies will at once gravitate. The mere advantages of an address to
?which letters may be sent, and at Avhich appointments can be made, is
an incidental advantage Avhich would equally be afforded by an hotel
or club, if such an establishment existed. But the little ?if? in this
case is fatal to the supposition. While, therefore, we cannot flatter our-
selves that our position as a learned body will be improved by this
feature of our Society, it is a matter of satisfaction to us that we shall,
from the necessity of the case, become of importance socially to those
who, for business or pleasure, leave the shores of outer Britain to find
themselves in the great desert of London. Registers of the names and
addresses, not only of members, but of other inhabitants of our Colonies,
?will be a matter, slight in appearance perhaps, but of great convenience.
As an illustration of this point I may be permitted to say, that Avhen it
Avas first proposed last year to constitute this Society, one of the main
difficulties which had to be encountered was the insuperable difficulty of
discovering the abodes of those who were at that time temporarily so-
journing in England. It is obvious that under such circumstances
organisation for any purpose whatever Avas impossible. A subject
Avhich required the co-operation of all the residents in a particular Colony
and such occasions were of constant occurrence-fell always, and
from the necessity of the case, into the hands of a small knot of friends
who happened to be acquainted with each other?s address. How many


promising negotiations may have failed from the narrowness of the
basis upon which they were thus unavoidably built we shall never
know. We may at least hope that no mischance will arise from such
causes in future.
The Society will, I trust, permit me now for a short time to address
myself more particularly to those who have honoured us with their
presence here this evening as visitors, and to those outside our own
circle who may perchance be reached by the printed report of our
proceedings this evening. I venture to address myself to them be-
cause I cannot hope, in speaking of the nature and grandeur of our
Empire as a whole, to convey any ideas which are not familhir to the
minds of Fellows of our Society. But to others, whose thoughts have
not been directed to the lands which lie outside English limits but
beneath the British sceptre, it may be that a glance at their nature and
extent may convey a new, and perhaps more definite, conception of
the Empire which the disciples of dismemberment would abandon.
Every one will remember the pretty conceit of the American orator,
Daniel Webster, who illustrated the extent of the military power of
England by declaring that as the day broke upon each successive meri-
dian, the morning drum-beat, following the sun in his rising, girdled
the earth with an uninterrupted strain of the martial music of Eng-
land. You will observe that the statement is literally true. Another
great orator, Mr. Gladstone, at the Inaugural Dinner of our Society,
reminded us that there was scarcely a degree of longitude or a parallel
of latitude that was not represented at our Board. Scarcely has the
sun passed our meridian, when it is high noon in Western Africa,
where the British flag waves over the Gold Coast, St. Helena, and the
Gambia River. Then follow to the west the solitary waters of the
Atlantic. But the land which on the American continent lies furthest
to the east is British ground. Newfoundland is the first to salute the
rising sun?then Prince Edward?s Island, Nova Scotia, and the West
Indies. Then follow in succession the broad and fertile fields and
forests of the Canadas, and the large tracts of country watered by the
Saskatchewan, a stream which runs, through fifteen degrees of longitude,
from the Rocky Mountains to the Great Lakes, and whose boundless
plains will at no distant day be the granary of the world. Then follow
the Rocky Mountains and British Columbia. Next in order are New
Zealand, the vast continent of Australia, Ceylon, and British India, with
its dependent States. From thence isolated posts, such as Aden, Malta,
and Gibraltar, and the important Colonies of Natal and the Cape of
Good Hope, bring us back to the point from which we started.
It has not been my duty to-night to say one word upon the history,
the social character, or the political condition of these countries. I
will only remark that these are the lands which it is the object of our
Society to bring into closer association; that they all obey laws based


upon the ?same code, and framed immediately or ultimately by the same
authority; that the English flag waves over every fort; that troops
owing allegiance to our Queen, whether they be Imperial or Colonial,
garrison every citadel; that the social conditions of English life are
repeated with more or less modification in all; that the character of
our race, stern, self-reliant, obedient to authority, jealous of personal
honour and of personal liberty, has been indelibly stamped upon them;
that, in fact, they are all offshoots from the same parent stem ; that in
each and all of them, though seas roll between them, and month-long
journeys separate them from these shores, every English speakm 0 ip
in every one of these places, so various, so remote, speak of our dear
country as ? Home ! ? , ,
Three nations?the Spaniards, the French, and the English?a -
most contemporaneously commenced the woik of colonisation as soon
as the new continent was discovered. Each of these has branded its
own impress on the nations it founded. Neither Spam, France, nor
England holds a foot of the territory it originally possessed. le ,
although there is in each instance a radical difference between one sign-
manual and another, in each the mark is indelible It is easy to see
that the national character of the inhabitants of the American continent
is owing to the character of the parent land rather than to other causes.
In old nations the foundation of national character must be found m
far-off causes. The geographical position, the mildness or seventy of
climate, the degree of fertility of the soil, the growth of manners, the
development of laws, the accidents of conquest or of defeat, the oc-
currences of plagues or famine, physical causes repeated through
centuries, have moulded history. But these causes take ages to work.
In America and in Australia race is almost the only cause of the
national peculiarities. The Mexican or Peruvian
Spanish; the English Canadian, the citizen of the Hmted States or
the inhabitant of South Australia, are pure Anglo-Saxon. The French
Canadian habitant is still in manner and feeling French, as his ancestor
was in the days of Montcalm and De Sevi.
To understand the emigrant we must study the mother- .a ,
watch it as it emerges from barbarism, note its conduct among e
rude shocks of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. We must observe
the growth of the haughty and intolerant spirit of Spam, the persever-
ing independence of the fishermen and burghers of Holland, the island
pride and pluck of the English, and the obstinate adherence of the
French to the antiquated customs of the feudal system.
The English Colonies were in no case formed m the same way as
those of Spain and Prance. The Spaniards founded, on the countries
around the Mexican Gulf, a military colony. They rapidly spread over
the mainland. One adventurer conquered Mexico, a second seized
Florida, a third overran Peru. The vast territory which they possessed


was governed with a rigour which no other nation ever attempted to
exercise. The Spaniards admitted no foreigner into their Colonies, on
pain of death. Their commercial policy has been aptly described as a
monument of systematic tyranny. The Creoles fared as badly as the
native races. All, however, was in the hands of an oligarchy composed
exclusively of Castilians, who wielded it with such cruelty that the
whole race of American Spaniards, in a few generations, had arrived at
the last stage of degeneracy. The haughty courage of their race died
out. The descendants of the Conquistadores forgot the use of arms.
The French established on the St. Lawrence a State on the model
of their own. Seigneurs, armed with all the authority of feudal law,
levied droits d?aubaine and droits de moulinage upon the inhabitants
of Canadian hamlets, with the same unsparing rigour as at home. The
settler emigrated at the desire of his feudal lord; the locality of his
home was determined, not by his own choice, but by the exigencies of
military service. The nucleus of every village was a stockade. Every
aeigneury was conceded with a view to its strategic position. The
settler?s minutest action was superintended by his superiors; he was
drawn for military service by an unsparing conscription. His temper,
gay and volatile, submitted easily to this galling yoke. The peasant
was content to remain a serf; his seigneur was born a member of a
governing caste into which he had no chance of admission.
The English adopted a course entirely different from this. The
rulers of England saw their subjects depart for the New World without
interference or guidance. Sometimes they were abitrarily interfered
with; but in the main, they received from the Government that which
has been happily called the inestimable boon of its neglect.
A few poor emigrants left England for the temperate latitudes of
America. They suffered much from neglect and hunger; many died ;
some took to piracy; but the remnant established a foothold in the
wilderness. Vacancies in their ranks were filled by fugitives from
religious persecution, from political persecution, from justice. Gra-
dually they drove back the Indians; they made farms and homesteads.
As their numbers increased, they convoked assemblies and made laws
for their own guidance. Occasionally, some great English gentleman or
court favourite would obtain from his royal master the grant of an im-
mense district, to which he transported a few families, who became the
founders of a new Colony. Anyone was thought good enough for the
Plantations ; when honest husbandmen were not to be had, persons of
loose life, discarded serving-men, and the sweepings of the hulks, were
accepted. But the patentee usually got tired of his bargain, and sold
his interest, or withdrew, leaving his people to grow up unassisted *
The settlers sprang from a race "which had struggled too fiercely for
liberty at home to relax their hold of it in America; they grew more
self-reliant, more independent every year. Their fierce temper


brought them often into collision with the Mother-country. When a
sect was persecuted, its members took refuge in the Plantations; thus
there was a constant relay of combative men fresh from successive
scenes of strife. When Protestants had the ascendant, Catholics were
persecuted and fled; when Catholics were in power, Protestant victims
crowded to the sanctuary. As time went on, their ranks were re-
cruited from many nations and many creeds. They absorbed Dutch,
Swedes, and Germans; Roman Catholic fugitives, Puritan fugitives,
Calvinist fugitives; loyal men ; traitors; men flying for conscience
sake; the scum of the gaols and bagnios; men emigrating to avoid the
pressure of want; men kidnapped in the streets of Bristol and Glasgow,
and sold for slaves. But the two main branches of the emigrants still
preserved their distinguishing characteristics. The men of Maine re-
tained the republican temper of the Puritans, the Colonies of Virginia
and Carolina preserved to the last their loyalty to the Crown. Though
they by no means forgot their mutual animosity, these fierce exiles
were ready, at any attempt at interference, to make common cause.
They became the freest people on earth ; they were brave, self-reliant,
turbulent, impatient of authority.
The policy of England towards them was to let their internal affairs
alone, and to make as much money as possible out of their trade. They
were absolutely unused to control; trifles at which the French or
Spanish emigrant would have smiled, grievances which would have
seemed to the colonists of another nation no grievances at all, roused
the Anglo-Saxon to madness, and were eagerly seized on as a pretext
for revolt..
While the American Colonies were growing up into importance under
the sway of various European Powers, the Australian continent, though
it had been discovered by a French commander in the sixteenth cen-
tury, still showed no signs of life. It was first colonised in 1788, in
consequence of the report of Captain Cook.
I call upon our Australian friends to remember that this year we
celebrate their great centenary. It was in 1769 that Captain Cook,
having sailed to the Antipodes for the purpose of observing the transit
of Venus, sailed round New Zealand, made the coast of New South
Wales, and explored the coast about Port Jackson. A few years more,
and the loss of the thirteen North American Provinces made it neces-
sary to seek a new field for our surplus population. Considerations of
humanity, arising out of the well-known cannibal proclivities of the
Maoris, forbade at that time the settlement of New Zealand.
In 1821 free emigration commenced, and the Australian settlements
quickened into new life. One by one institutions which we recognise
as the foundations of our own national stability, took vigorous root at
the Antipodes. Trial by jury, a Legislative Council, embodying some
of the elements of the elective principle, were followed, a few years


later, by a more distinctly elective Legislative Assembly. In 1855,
the year of constitutions, New South Wales, South Australia, Victoria,
Tasmania, entered upon their career of self-taxation and self-govern-
ment.
But the great year of Australia?the year in which its latent powers
burst forth in full energy ?was 1851. That was the year of the gold
discovery. The one thing needed to develope the resources of the vast
untrodden field of enterprise, to draw population to its shores, to
provide at once the stimulus and the material for any degree of
progress, was found where it was needed. From thenceforth the growth
and the advancement of the Australian Colonies have been the marvel of
our times. The solitudes of half-a-century?of a quarter of a century
ago ?now throb with the busy life of crowded cities; the lately silent
waters are ploughed by steamers; the wilderness is traversed by
railroads.
A still later growth is the settlement of New Zealand. It was first
settled by the Church Missionary Society, who established a post in the
Bay of Islands in 1814. The New Zealand Company, in 1837, carried
on the work of colonisation, and in 1852 representative government ?
consisting of a Governor, a Legislative Council, and a House of Repre-
sentatives?was finally established.
It is not my duty to-night to describe those great and varied posses-
sions of our race. It will be enough if I mention the great extent of
territory which will be open to the operations of our Society. The
glance which I have cast at them as we made our circle of the globe,
will have recalled to the minds of those present their great extent, their
power, their social as well as political importance. You will not
think me unduly pertinacious if I again and again recur to the main
object of this address?the importance of our Society. Each of the de-
pendencies I have noted is more or less isolated. They have no com-
mon centre, no point of social reunion in this country ?no mart, if I may
use the expression, to which their members can bring the treasures of
their information?no body of associates to whom they can turn for the
advantages of counsel or discussion?no Forum to whose consideration a
suggestion could be submitted or a crotchet ventilated with the cer-
tainty of an appreciative audience; no place in which a colonial hobby
may be made to exhibit his graceful paces with the certainty of ready
and at the same time discriminating spectators.
Our Society proposes to offer such a centre. The cordial response
with which its proposals have been met, sufficiently prove the value, I
had almost said the grandeur, of the idea. Already, almost before our
Society is duly constituted, we number upwards of two hundred
Fellows. We have in our Treasurer?s hands a sum of 700 1. We
have a Council, and a body of Vice Presidents, of whom it does not be-
come me to speak in terms of fitting eulogy, but of whom I may ven-


ture at least to say this much?that the social and acquired position of
that body, some of them famous in politics, some in arts, and some in
arms, affords at least a guarantee that the great aims with which the
Society starts upon its career, will not be lost sight of, nor will the ma-
chinery of the Society be permitted in their hands to subserve merely
trifling or insignificant uses.
One of the objects which the Society proposes to itself, is to afford an
opportunity of reading and discussing at our periodical meetings papers
by its Fellows on subjects of interest connected with the Colonies. It
is probable, if I may judge from the nature and variety of the subjects
which are already selected as topics by some of our members, that these
papers will embrace subjects the most diverse, and perhaps at first
sight the most disconnected. Many of our Colonies are separated from
each other by the semi-circumference of the globe, and that man from
each of the places so widely separated, will discourse of what he knows
best, and of circumstances which surround him at home. It will be
well, therefore, to keep steadily in view on one hand the connecting
links which couple together our scattered Colonies, and on the other the
kind and extent of their divergence. The link will, I think, speaking
generally, be found in the unity of race, the cause of divergence in the
difference of fortune and position which that race has experienced. It
will be difficult, nay impossible, to maintain any'degree of unity in our
proceedings, unless we keep steadily in view the fact that there is a bond
which unites the members of our scattered family, and makes that
which is interesting and useful to one part in some degree interesting
to all.
One principal point which distinguishes our Society from others, is
that its functions may be said to commence where those of Societies
already in operation end. For instance, a geographical discovery is in-
teresting to the Society which is especially devoted to the study of that
science. An account of the discovery is read at a meeting of the So-
ciety, and the subject is dismissed. Now the interest of this Society in
such a discovery, supposing it to be made in one of our dependencies, is
of a more abiding character. Let us suppose that some explorer
discovers a new and practicable pass from the district of the Saskat-
chewan over the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific. A description of
the geographical particulars thus made known, would produce an in-
teresting and animated discussion at the Geographical Society. But as
soon as the new stone had been added to the cairn of geographical
science, immediate interest in the matter would cease. Not so with
us. A new highway for trade would have been discovered, which would
materially affect the advancement and prosperity of two of our Colo-
nies. We should watch with interest its gradual development. The
increase of traffic, the new facilities offered to emigration, the engineer-
ing difficulties offered by the road itself, would be to our Society a con-


tinual source of interest. We should welcome, if not for reading at our
meetings, at any rate to be filed and preserved for future information,
short notices on all these points from Fellows of our Society residing on
the spot.
In like manner matters touching upon the history or antiquities of
our Colonies?their trade, their mines, their finance, the progress towards
civilisation or decay of their aboriginal tribes?all will be to us a source
of interest. We shall store up information against the day of need
upon the progress made among our scattered peoples in the arts and
sciences. We shall chronicle discoveries of new material adapted for
the purposes of manufacture, or the application of those already in ex-
istence to new purposes. We shall watch,^with interest the experiments
now making in pisciculture and in acclimatisation, and we shall keep a
special pigeon-hole for the descriptions of those ingenious inventions
which, owing to the stimulus of the stern mother of invention, are so
characteristic of young nations and of pioneer settlers in the wilderness.
In ship-building, bridge-making, road-building?a thousand matters
which are now consigned to the tomb in the form of paragraphs in
back numbers of newspapers ?will, we hope, be kept like good weapons,
bright and fit for service, instead of being, like old and rusty armour,
cast aside as useless.
We shall not reject an occasional paper on archaeology; and notices
of the fauna and flora of our Colonies will find a ready welcome. Dis-
coveries and additions to the knowledge already acquired of zoology
and botany are daily being made in the ever-virgin fields of Australia
and New Zealand. In short, no subject, if it only serves to render
more complete our knowledge of the history and development of our
Colonies, will be unwelcome.
If the idea of the original founders of this Society be adequately
carried out, the historian, the politician, the antiquary, the writer or
speaker on Colonial subjects, will find ready to his hand and in good
order the special information he requires. I need hardly remind the
Fellows of the Society that an organisation so complete will demand
time to accomplish, cordial and zealous co-operation among all the
members of the Society, and lastly, patience, and a moderate supply of
the sinews of war.
I remember that Turner, the great painter, once said that one of
the great secrets of success was to be patient of incompleteness. He
illustrated his remark by his own art, observing that the man of genius
who already saw in his mind?s eye the completed picture, even when
the first tints were hardly dry upon his canvas, was apt, by impatience
at the want of harmony observable during its progress, and by undue
haste to realise his ideal, to delay, and even altogether to prevent, its
ultimate realisation. I venture to apply the aphorism to our own case.
Let no Fellows of our Society expect too much. The realisation of a


great scheme must be slow. Let none abandon us because we have
not come up to his ideal, unless he has first satisfied himself that the
incompleteness to which he objects is not removable by time and
labour; and let us remember that if the man of genius seems to com-
mand success, it is in nine cases out of ten because by patience and
labour he deserves it. (Great cheering.)
Mr. Chichester Fortescue. ?Ladies and Gentlemen, in performing in
a very few words a most pleasing task, that of moving a vote of thanks
to our distinguished President for his Inaugural Address to-night, you
will allow me first of all to congratulate the Colonial Society on the very
important event in its history which has taken place this evening.
It so happened that, upon the invitation and suggestion of my noble
friend near me (Lord Bury), I saw something of the very earliest
days ?I may say hours?of the Colonial Society. Daring the en-
forced absence of my noble friend, it was my fortune and pleasure
to give a few rocks as it were to the cradle of this Society, which
has to-night arrived, we may safely say, at man?s estate, because to-
night this Society, having been making its way for months past by
the assiduous labours of many?some of whom are here, and some are
not here?in comparative privacy and obscurity, has at last, I am
happy to see, in this spacious hall, under promising and dignified cir-
cumstances, emerged, I was going to say into the sunlight, but I ought
to say into the full gaslight of other learned Societies; because we all
know that this is the time of the twenty-four hours, and this is the
light under which all learned Societies conduct their proceedings.
Well, Gentlemen, all the circumstances are propitious. We meet, as
we have been told by our President, under the favour and hospitality of
one of the most distinguished Societies in this country, which certainly
would not have extended its hospitality to us if it had not considered us
worthy of that kindness even in the earliest days of our existence. We
have had the advantage of an Inaugural Address which, I venture to say,
has sketched with a rapid and comprehensive hand the whole field of our
Colonial Empire, and of the duties of a Society like the present. You
will agree with me, I think, that this sketch which we have had from
my noble friend, is a sufficient proof in itself of the ample work which
this Society will have to do, and the large and interesting field over
which it will have to travel. My noble friend said a good deal very
eloquently and very truly of that school of thinkers and writers in this
country who are in the habit of attacking the very foundation of the
Colonial System. For myself I shall venture to assume that our Co-
lonial Empire will continue to exist. (Cheers.) It is certainly not the
business of the Colonial Department of the Government, and I doubt
whether it is the business of this Society, to question those fundamental
actions which lie at the very root of our Colonial Empire. It is the
business of a Society like this, as it is of the Colonial Office, to retain


the Colonies, and believing as I do that our Colonial Empire will live,
and that this Society will live, I am firmly convinced that this Society
will make good use of its existence, and have an ample field for all its
benefits. Gentlemen, it will require but few words of mine to
induce yon to give your hearty thanks to my noble friend near me,
not only for his Address to-night?which is the least part, however
eloquent it may be?of what he has done for us. This Society is
indebted to him for his energy, and the interest he has taken in it from
first to last. It seems to me that my noble friend, among the public
men of this country, is of all others I could mention marked out for
an enterprise like the present. (Cheers.) For many reasons, public
and private, which I need not enlarge upon here, my noble friend has
taken a deep interest in the Colonies, and has long formed in the ranks
of English politics and English society a link between the Mother-
country and a very important Colony. It is under those circumstances
his natural influence, his abilities, and his remarkable energy, have
marked him out as exactly the man best fitted to start a Society like
the present; and I venture to say he has done what we have not
always been in the habit of doing, made the best possible use of those
opportunities he has had, in the cause of the Colonial Society. I ask
you, therefore, with the greatest confidence, auguring as I do a happy
and useful future for this Society, to retqrn your hearty thanks, not
only for to-night?s proceedings, but for the origination and conduct of
this Society to this moment, to my noble friend, Lord Bury. (Cheers.)
The Marquis of Normanhy. ?Ladies and-Gentlemen, I can assure
you that upon entering this room this evening 1 had not the slightest
idea that I should be called upon to address you. At the same time
a vote of thanks having been moved to our noble President, and seeing
no one else ready to rise and second that motion, I felt bound to take
that duty upon myself, I think we must all congratulate ourselves
most sincerely upon the promising prospects of this Society. I for one
entertain a very high opinion of the duties which will attach to the
Society, and of the advantages which are to be derived from its institu-
tion. There is nothing more difficult in this country than to form
a proper estimate of the Colonies. I myself have had some experi-
ence of Colonial life, and I know that among Colonists astonishment is
often expressed at the little interest which is manifested and the little
knowledge obtainable in England as regards the Colonies. But at the
same time, if you consider the question candidly, this want of know-
ledge is not to be wondered at. In young societies people are not
much given to writing histories; and we also find, on reading accounts
of Colonies of which we have any local knowledge, that those histories
are frequently written to carry out the particular views and opinions of
the writers?(hear, hear); and that, to a great extent, will account for


the ignorance about the Colonies. The want of interest in them which
is supposed to exist, is, I am sure, more apparent than real. The
Colonies are all distant from England. We are all occupied by
things which more immediately come under our notice; and though
colonists naturally look on this country, as I know they do, as home,
and turn their attention with great interest to the things which
take place here from day to day, still they can hardly be surprised
that, with the variety of Colonies possessed by this country, they are
not so particularly individualised by those living in England. I may
also be allowed, I think, to say, that the organs which convey by each
mail the intelligence of this country to the Colonies, express and give
their information in a manner more attractive than is very often found
in some of the Colonial journals. At the same time lam sure that
there is a deep interest felt in England as regards the Colonies, and I
am sure there ought to be. There is nothing more important to this
country than to find a new field for our surplus population as it largely
increases, and who, whilst languishing here for want of employment,
would be received with open arms by, and confer an inestimable
benefit upon, those Colonies to which they might go. Now for emi-
grants there is nothing so important as that they should be able to
obtain accurate information regarding the Colonies to which they are
about to proceed. The Colony which may suit one class of emigrant
may be totally unfit for another, and a man who would do well in
Australia might find himself at a loss in Canada. There is no descrip-
tion of skilled artisan, of labourer, of capitalist, who cannot find employ-
ment for his skill, his labour, or his capital, in one or other of our
Colonies, and that is the very thing which is required to complete the
prosperity and the importance of those Colonies. I think, therefore,
that one of the great objects to which this Society ought to turn
its attention, is by every means in its power to obtain and to classify,
in some simple form, this most desirable information. (Hear, hear.)
As my noble friend by me has stated, all this will take time and the
sinews of war; but having begun thus successfully, I hope that the
members of the Society will proceed energetically, and at the same
time give their aid liberally, to the successful carrying out of the objects
of this institution. I have much pleasure, Ladies and Gentlemen,
in seconding the vote of thanks to our President. (Cheers.)
Sir Charles Nicholson. ?Ladies and Gentlemen, I have listened with
much pleasure to the able and eloquent Address of our noble President,
and I should have been much gratified to avail myself of the opportu-
nity of seconding the vote of thanks, had I not been desirous that that
task should be entrusted to more able hands than mine. I find that I
was not wrong, because it has been so exceedingly well performed by
the noble Marquis. You have heard, in the Address of our noble Pre-
sident, ably and clearly defined, the reasons justifying the formation


of this Society; it would be quite superfluous for me to attempt to
recapitulate them, or to endeavour to add to them by way of stating
further grounds upon which our union is formed. I certainly do feel,
when I look back, some degree of surprise that it has never occurred?
or if it has occurred, at all events, that the idea has never been acted
upon?to form an association of this kind. We see people aggregated to-
gether?people with kindred sympathies and kindred interests?for every
possible object. They form combinations, unions, and societies for car-
rying out their designs. We have antiquarian societies, we have musical
unions, we have political societies and scientific combinations of every
kind; and yet a class of men, who ought to be united by the strongest
sympathies and the strongest possible interest, have never yet found
any common bond of union such as that formed by this Society ; and
it is, therefore, a matter of surprise that some such organisation as this
has not been hitherto provided. You have already, my Lord, expressed in
your Address the many advantages which an institution of this kind
holds out in various ways to the colonist arriving in England for the
first time, as well as to the emigrant proceeding to the Colonies, and
desiring information with regard to the country to which he is going.
You have already told us of the necessity of an institution which will
supply the means of disabusing the minds of the people of errors which
many persons are insidiously trying to instil into them. And I think we
may regard ourselves in some cases, without assuming a political cha-
racter, as in all probability likely to become a link between the Colonies
and the Imperial Government. (Hear, hear.) I say this without inferring
that we are to assume any distinct political character. I was very glad
to find that our noble Chairman, who has just favoured us with such
an eloquent Address, combated those mischievous and dangerous doctrines
which have been put forth by able and clever, and I am afraid somewhat
unscrupulous and, notwithstanding all the talent they possess, unthinking
writers. I, in common with other colonists here present, repudiate and
reject with indignation the doctrine and the influences of which that
school of writers and thinkers are the chief exponents. I believe that,
happily, they do not meet with much sympathy on the part of the public
at large. There are, however, men occupying high political positions
who seem carried away by .the arguments of Mr. Goldwin Smith and
others of his way of thinking. Their arguments appear to me so em-
phatically mischievous, so destitute of all political sound reason, that I
can hardly conceive how any sane person can put them forth, or how
any one can listen to and accept them. If the colonists were factious and
discontented, if they sought separation from the Mother-country, and
that in order to maintain them in their allegiance the Parent State were
subjected to positive loss, that might be a reason why she should endea-
vour to disburden herself of them. Is this the fact ? Why, I venture to
say that there is more loyalty in the Colonies than in the Parent State.


1 have lived for a quarter of a century in one of the most flourish-
ing and not the least important of the British Colonies, and I venture to
say that there is less disloyalty towards the Parent State there than is to
be found in England or any part of the United Kingdom. I can
affirm, after many years? experience of the habits and conduct of the
colonists, that a feeling of loyal enthusiasm has been developed amongst
them in every instance where there has been any occasion to call for
its exercise. I may appeal for evidence of this to several old ft lends
and colonists. At the conclusion of the Russian war, when the Patriotic
Fund was started, when subscriptions to a large amount were being
collected everywhere, there was no part of the United Kingdom where
the call was responded to so liberally as it was in Australia. I myself
know that in the first instance, in Sydney, they collected as much as
60,000k for that fund?a larger sum than was received in all Ireland.
In Tasmania the average collected was 1 1, a-head for every individual in
the island. See what that would have amounted to had the same been
done in England. You would then have had some 20,000,000k I
can speak, I think, practically as to the generosity and loyalty of every
section of the community. I was associated with one of the Judges
in making the collection, and in one of those divisions which was can-
vassed by myself and Mr. Justice Therry, we got 4,000k in three days,
going from house to house. I do not boast of this. I mention it to
show the unshaken loyalty and devotion of these distant Colonies, and
the pride they have in the British name, and in the possession of a
common British citizenship. It seems to me, in point of fact, that it is
but the mere shadow of an argument that is adduced by the writers who
advocate the casting-off of the Colonies, when they say that the expense
which they entail upon the Mother-country in maintaining troops and
fleets is thrown away, as it does nothing but keep up an unprofitable
prestige of a great Empire. Well now, with regard to that, I think it
is right we should understand that there is a palpable error on that
subject. With regard to the military forces which are maintained by
England in the Australian Colonies, the Imperial Government has only
to gay ?(there are merely some three or four companies of soldiers in
Sydney who receive Imperial pay) ?it could no longer pay for them,
but the Colony must bear the expense itself. It has only to be pro-
posed, and it would be done. The whole of these Colonies have
a large Volunteer Force as a means of self-protection, and in the
event of England being involved in any war, and obliged to with-
draw her troops, they could be spared. I believe in Melbourne
alone we have had as many as 10,000 Volunteers in the field col-
lected on one given occasion; and the only argument I can see in
support of the view of the Colonies being a burden to the Home
Government is, that she would have to protect them in the case
of war, in the event of ships going from one port to another. Even


if she had no Colonies, and if a war were to break out, would she
not be obliged to protect her ships on every sea ? It is England that
is interested in maintaining her supremacy on the sea. It is she
who would benefit, rather than the Colonies, by her connection with
them. However, I believe, and I rejoice to believe, that those opi-
nions in favour of casting-off the Colonies do not receive much
countenance or support either from any former Government or from
the present. And this I think is clearly the view of our distin-
guished Vice-President, Mr. Chichester Fortescue. I believe the value
of the Colonies is only just beginning to be felt. The noble Marquis
spoke I was delighted to hear it?on a question of infinitely more
importance to this nation than those questions which are now occupy-
ing the time and attention of every one?the question of emigration.
Emigration of the surplus population from our shores, sooner or later,
must force itself on this country in a way perfectly irresistible. Look-
ing to the enormous population of this country, seeing that it has more
than doubled itself during the present century?in the year 1800 it was
only eight millions, and it is now twenty millions?l would ask, if the
present rate of increase go on, what is to be done with it at the close of
this century ? Look at London alone; its people are increasing at
the rate of 60,000 every year. What is to be done with them if they
go on augmenting in numbers in the same proportion as they have
hithei to ? Well, I say, if that is the case, the question of emigration is a
question which must force itself upon the attention of the Imperial
Government. There are, especially in New South Wales and Victoria,
and also here, agencies aiding and supporting emigration?agencies
which, if they cannot do much in the way of pecuniary contributions,
yet do their best in stimulating public attention, I am very glad to
see certain establishments ready to unite?though their influence is
a mere drop in the ocean?with Government in furtherance of the
object. I know and feel that some great and carefully-organised means
must be provided by which the surplus population of these islands?
increasing some two or three hundred thousand every year in spite of all
the emigration that goes on?may go to those countries where they
may find happy homes, and, with their own happiness and contentment,
increase the power and the real happiness and the glory of this the
parent country. I feel very great pleasure in having listened to the
Address of the noble Lord. The motto of the newly enlarged Order of St.
Michael and St. George is ? auspicium melioris cevi ,? as affecting alike the
Colonies and the Parent State; and applying such a motto to ourselves, I
look forward to the inauguration of this Society as a happy omen, be-
cause I believe it to be a Society by which great and important results
may be achieved.
Sir J . C. Ices. ?Ladies and Gentlemen, I feel it my duty to express
to our noble President my thanks for giving his time and abilities, not
only to the preparation and reading of his Inaugural Address, but to the


formation of this Society. Some short time ago our noble Chairman
asked us to trot out our colonial hobbies. Some years ago, the Colonies
having been the great hobby of my life, I became convinced that I ought
to go and see them for myself. At that time ol day I could not help
feeling struck with many very remarkable features in the Colonial Em-
pire. One was the Colonies themselves. Nothing more remarkable, I
think, than the formation of these communities can be thought of or
found in history. That was one of the features that most struck me.
The second was that the apparent indifference which has been alluded
to, on the part of the British public towards the colonies, is an in-
difference which is more apparent than real; and the third is, that the
school of thinkers that seem to be studying the question at all, are a
number of very brilliant thinkers?for they are many and even most
brilliant?whose whole exertions seem to be employed to show that we
are burdened by our Colonies. Those three things struck me as so re-
markable, that i felt I could not do justice without going and studying
for myself. I should say that our noble Chairman need not scruple
in using the word grandeur in connection with the objects which this
Society has to carry out. Now, this is not the place, I quite agree, to
go into any discussion of the question of the relative position of the
Colonies and the Crown, or whether they should be kept or thrown
away; but I will just say one thing, that I know nothing more re-
markable than the indifference, the singular coldness, with which that
speculation has been maintained. What would be the foi tune of those
Colonies without us, if we were, as Mr. Goldwin Smith thinks we
ought to be, separated from them? It is a very important thing that
we should not fall into the error of undervaluing such a step. lam
glad our Chairman does not undervalue it. The argument of Mr.
Goldwin Smith points to this, that we have cut away every vestige of
political connection with the Colonies, and therefore we had better get
rid of all that is left of the connection. A more extraordinary political
fallacy was never put forward. What have we done with the Colonies,
and what shall we do as long as they are united to us . In every
Colony which has separated itself from us there has always been the
difficulty connected with the election of the Executive. Of that
difficulty it deserves to be pointed out at the outset, that no Colony that
has cut itself adrift from the parent stock has ever yet been able to solve
that gigantic difficulty. Let me point out the causeof that terrible conflict
which lasted so long in America. The whole question turned in rea ity
on the point of a President?s election. If there had not been that last
ounce to break the camel?s back, the election of President Lincoln?if that
difficulty had not been pressed, many of the other difficult questions mignt
have been solved without a civil war. And it is even, so in connection
with this, that I cannot help mentioning a most singular story winch
was told to me at the outset of that war. It is a fact that many of the
most cultivated Americans, in the first anguish of that year, did recur.


with a regret that could hardly have been expected ever to have arisen
in their breasts, to the old connection with the British Crown. One of
these Americans, Nathaniel Hawthorne, said to a friend of mine, ? Do
you think that the British Crown would have us back, if we come to
them? Of course it was said in jest, but it certainly does suggest to
us, in the very strongest way, that it is highly important that we should
remember that as long as the Colonies are connected with us, we should
desire to do good to them, and confer on them a great boon by saving
them from political confusion, which must be the case if they separate
from us. I speak as one who has seen for himself, and hopes hereafter
to say more about the very great work which the English race is doing
all over the world, ?a work which this Society may greatly aid by
fostering the sentiments of love among those communities. I desire to
express my personal gratitude to his Lordship for the admirable paper
which he has been kind enough to read to us this evening
Mr. Macfie , M.P. ?Ladies and Gentlemen, as a Scotchman and a
Lancashire man, I have to tender my hearty thanks to his Lordship
for dealing so practically Avith the question of our Colonies. I feel
there is a great deal of truth in what has been said, that the indiffer-
ence which we are accused of feeling towards our Colonies is only
apparent, and arises from a want of a proper understanding between us.
In fact, our language wants some words to explain what is the difference
between local taxation and imperial taxation. Local taxation is merely
the taxation of the United Kingdom, but imperial has a far wider
range. Therefore I say we want better understanding of our relation-
ship, and that better understanding may be brought about by the
influence of this Society. When that better understanding is estab-
lished, I have no doubt we shall be as willing to share our fortunes as to
share our burdens.
Lord Alfred Churchill. ?l shall trouble you but a very short time
in the remarks I have to make. As a new member, I beg to thank our
President sincerely for his admirable Inaugural Address. My Lord, you
have travelled with singular ability over the Avhole range of the Colonies
belonging to this country, and, in tracing their history from the com-
mencement to the present time, performed a most important service
to both. With regard to Canada, it has occurred to me?l think it
is in one of Mr. Warburton?s books, where he gives the origin of the
word ?Canada.? It appears that a party of Spaniards passed up the
Liver St. Lawrence, and they said, ? Acqui nada,? Avhich means, ?There
is nothing here.? They left the country. Now, if those Spaniards
could have seen the Canada of this day, and the progress it has
made up to the present time, and the distinguished part it is playing in
America, and its connection with the CroAvn in this country, they would
have thought very different to what they did then. The noble Marquis
also touched upon the advantages of emigration to our colonies. Now
there is one important point in connection with that subject which


demands our attention, and that is that we should organise a system
of emigration through the whole country. We have had many spas-
modic efforts made to .encourage emigration. There are certain
societies which do most important services, and they are very readily
performed, besides which there are the Emigration Commissioners.
They regulate the fitting-out of ships intended for emigrants, and they
take care they are properly organised to prevent abuse to the emigrants
on their voyage. But although the Colonies have agents who induce
people to pass over to them, emigration is not adopted upon a uniform
system, such as could be advocated by a Society of this character.
Therefore this is an essential element in this Society, and I think we
ought all to feel highly indebted to you, my Lord, for having inaugu-
rated a Society so much calculated to benefit the country.
Captain Bedford Pim, B.N. ?My Lord, my object in rising is this, to
request that you will vacate the chair, and allow Mr. Chichester For-
tescue to take it while the vote of thanks which has been proposed
and seconded is put to the meeting. You cannot, as Chairman, put it
yourself. It is the custom of the Institution which meets in this hall,
and to which I belong, when a vote of thanks is proposed to the Chair-
man, that he should vacate the chair, and another gentleman should
take it. [The Chairman then left the chair, which was taken by Mr.
Chichester Fortescue.] Mr. Chairman, for the paper which his Lord-
ship has read, I feel we must all be deeply thankful to him. In it he
has explained to us what this Society is going to do. I believe that, if
properly worked out, it will do an immense amount of good. It will
direct an enormous flood of surplus population to lands where there is
plenty of work and plenty of room for them. I feel most heartily that
this Society can do immense good, and I am very, very delighted, that
our President has thought it right to hold out the hand of fellowship
to the Colonial Society. lam a member of the Institution of Civil
Engineers, and most cordially endorse his action in this matter. Sir,
I shall ask you now to put the motion to the meeting.
Mr. Thomas Briggs. ?Mr. Chairman, I beg as a Lancashire man to
be allowed to say a few words on the subject we have been discuss-
ing this evening. I recognise an old friend in the face of Sir Charles
Nicholson. Ido not think he knows me, but he once called me a
stump orator ?[laughter) ?or said I would make a very good one in
the Colonies. I wish to point out, my Lord, that there are about
5,000 emigrants who go every week from Liverpool alone. Where do
they go to ? They go to America. Why do they not go to our Colo-
nies ? We want them in the Colonies. I told you, Sir Charles, that if
you got them there you would get labour, which is what you want. I
was pooh-poohed when I pointed this out. That labour would have
been so useful in Queensland that we might have had by this time two
millions of bales of cotton from Queensland, which would have been tan-
tamount to twenty millions more of money than Queensland is worth


now, even at sixpence per pound, which is one hundred per cent, less
than it is selling for now in Liverpool. There were several hundreds of
emigrants sent out, I sent fifty families, and I have had letters from a
few of them, who speak very highly of their enterprise, and of their
having realised their expectations in the way of producing cotton.
Mr. Chichester Fortescue. ?ln my position as Chairman I beg to
submit the following motion, which has been duly proposed and se-
conded : ?? That the best thanks of this meeting are due to Lord Bury
for the Inaugural Address which he has read to-night.? (Cheers.)
The motion having been carried unanimously,
Lord Bury said.?l have only to thank you, which Ido most sin-
cerely, for the honour you have done me ?for the kind way in which
this motion has been proposed, and the manner in which you have taken
it. I have been very gratified at hearing the little discussion which
my paper has provoked, and I think that the more our sentiments are
interchanged upon colonial subjects the more the objects of our Society
will be fulfilled; and therefore the discussion which has taken place
to-night is the firstfruits, I hope, of many similar discussions which
will take place at our future meetings. Our next meeting will be held
on April 5. Every speaker who has addressed you?my right hon.
friend the noble Marquis, the hon. Member Mr. Macfie, and Sir Charles
Nicholson?has given me the credit of the origination of this Society.
I simply wish, if you will allow me to do so, to repudiate that. I have
taken a very great interest in it, I am sure, but I am not the originator.
The originator was sitting here three minutes ago. Though many
have taken an active part in the formation of this Society?and it is, per-
haps, invidious to single out one more than another?yet the originator,
I am bound to say, of the Society is the gentleman who is now our
Honorary Secretary, Mr. Roche. I have to admit that he has had the
principal hand in it now; and when the Society has its ramifications in
our Colonies, and perhaps, if Mr. Gregory will allow me to say so, a
building, not so splendid, not so convenient a one to meet in, as this,
but our own, we shall think of our friend Mr. Roche. When one takes
up an idea, others work it out, and I hope we shall all respectively
labour and put strength into this undertaking in a way which will prove
that we must and will succeed in our object, (Cheers.)
Mr. Montgomerie. ?Will you allow me one word ? I think it would
ill become us to separate without expressing, by a formal vote, our
thanks to the Council of the Institution of Civil Engineers, the Presi-
dent and members, for allowing us the use of this elegant and commo-
dious hall. We are much indebted to them, and I think this Society
should express its obligation by a vote of thanks, which I beg to
move.
Mr. James A. Youl. ?I beg to second the motion that has been pro-
posed. I feel that we are deeply indebted to the Institution of Civil
Engineers for allowing us the use of this beautiful hall.


Mr. Chichester Fortescue. ?lt would have been very wrong if we had
separated without formally putting such thanks on record. I beg, then,
to put the motion.
Gamed unanimously.
Mr. Gregory. ?At this late hour I will not trouble you with many
remarks. I am extremely gratified by the Colonial Society in so
warm a manner acknowledging the use of this hall, which the Insti-
tution of Civil Engineers have been so happy to offer. More than
fifty years ago, my Lord, we were a very much more humble
Society than you are, and I will not tell you in how poor a place
we had our first meeting. We have now struggled into a po-
sition which we are proud of, and I assure you that we feel it to
be one of our first duties, when we see a Society, which promises so
much usefulness, in want of assistance, to do all in our power to help it.
You have seen, and have given us evidence, that we can ourselves
derive much advantage by joining your ranks. Captain Pirn has
shown, in his cordial observations to-night, I think, a very proper appre-
ciation of your services. The accommodation which we have given
has been most willingly offered by my colleagues and myself, and we
acknowledge the great courtesy with which it has been received. I
wish you, on behalf of my colleagues, every prosperity, and I am sure
.we shall be pleased whenever you make use of this room, and we hope
you will be useful to the world in general?a hope which will be largely
.shared in by the profession to which I have the pleasure to belong.
(Cheers.)
LONDON! PRINTED BY
BPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREBT SQUARE
AND PARLIAMENT STREET


'
.


,
.
?


'


