



PEOCEEDINGS
OF THE
First Australasian
CONFERENCE ON CHARITY,
HELD IN MELBOURNE,
From 11th to 17th November, 1890.
CONVENED BY THE CHARITY ORGANIZATION SOCIETY OF
MELBOURNE.
BY Au thority
ROBT. S. BRAIN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE
596.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.
PAGE
Inaugural Address— 1 ‘ Organized Charity,” by Professor Morris ... 1
Discussion and Resolutions ... ... ••• ••• H
Paper—“ Charity in South Australia,” by Miss Spence ... ... 15
Discussion ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 2o
Paper—“ Principles of Charity,” by Rev. J. W. Simmons 28
Paper—“ Science and Charity,” by Hon. Dr. Garran ... ... 34
Paper—“ Pauperism: Its Nature, Causes, and Remedies,” by Rev.
H. L. Jackson ... ... ... ••• ••• 86
Discussion ... ... ••• ••• ••• 44
Paper—“Ballarat Female Home,” by Mrs. Swifte ... ... 47
• 4.Q
Discussion ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• °
Paper—“ The Anchorage Refuge Home, Hobart, Tasmania, by
Lady Hamilton ... ... ••• ••• ••• 49
Discussion ... ... ••• ••• ••• ®1
Paper—“ The Sweating System,” by Mr. J. A. Levey ... ... 52
Discussion ... ... ••• ••• ••• •••
Paper—“ United and Systematic Charity,” by Mrs. Goldstein ... 60
• no
Discussion ... ••• ••• ••• ••• u
Paper—“ Able-bodied Pauperism,” by Rev. J. D. Langley ... ... 64
p a p er Hospitals and their Administration,” by Mr. R. C. Norman 68
Discussion ... ... ••• ••• ••• •••
Paper—“ The Destitute Poor Department of South Australia,” by
Mr. T. H. Atkinson ... ... ••• 9
Discussion ... ... ••• ••• ••• 9 2
Paper—“ Workmen’s Colonies for the Unemployed,” by Pastor
Herlitz ... ... ... ••• ••• 98
Discussion ... ... ••• ••• ••• 99
Paper—(l) “Neglected Children;” (2) “Wards of the State,” by
Mr. G. Guillaume ... ... ... ••• ••• 102
Discussion ... ... ••• ••• ••• 499
Paper—“ The Unemployed,” by Rev. Alexr. Macully, M.A. ... 114
Discussion ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• H 9
Paper—“ Charitable Organization and Indiscriminate Relief,” by
Alderman Crouch ... ... ... ••• H 9
Discussion ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 121
Paper—“ Rescue Work,” by Mrs. Rowe... ... ... ... 123
Paper—“ Maryborough Ladies’ Benevolent Society,” by Mrs. Warton 124
Discussion ... ... ... ••• 125
Paper—“ Charity Organization: Its Principles and Methods,” by
Colonel Goldstein ... ... ... ••• 126
Discussion ... ... ... f




PREFACE.
The publication of the Proceedings of the First Australasian Con-
ference on Charity marks, it is hoped, the beginning of an important
era in the history of philanthropic effort in the lands of the
Southern Cross. There has, from the earliest period, been no lack
either of charitable workers or of charitable deeds in these colonies ;
on the contrary, the ardour of the former and the generous kindli-
ness displayed in the latter have always been proudly held to be
characteristic of colonists. But there has been hitherto a lack of
intercommunication, there has been wanting that interchange of
experience and of mutual encouragement which Conferences such as
this can alone supply. We have in our hemisphere the same
problems to solve and difficulties to encounter which form the
inevitable task of the almoner everywhere. Certainly our difficulties
are not of the same intensity, and we have the greater vigour and
hopefulness drawn from our easier social conditions. Such
difference as does exist, however, is one of degree rather than of
kind; and equally with older communities we had begun to feel
the necessity of widespread organization, and of an agreement in
recognition of what are the best principles and methods of work.
The progress of the years has brought with it the desire for
extension of the narrow bounds of local effort in charitable as in
political circles. Local jealousies (even where these feelings
partake, as they everywhere do with us, more of the spirit of
generous emulation than of any smaller must be made
to efface themselves for the general good, and Australasian Con-
ferences are the best earnest of Australasian unity.


The extra-Australasian reader will view the information here
collected rather as an instalment, containing a promise of future
completeness, than as making any pretensions to present a full view
of charity in Australasia, The latter was felt to be very desirable,
as a glance at the circular convening the Conference will show.
But the conveners were rather too sanguine, as the event proved.
The distances to be traversed in themselves were a great difficulty.
To this must be added the exceptional obstacles presented by the
great “ strike ”of last year. Then there was the natural doubt of
a novel undertaking, and the consequent hesitancy to associate with
what might prove a failure. All these causes tended to prevent a
complete organization of the first Conference.
At the last moment the organizing committee, which desired to
set a reasonable limit to the time occupied at the Conference, had
to face the unexpected difficulty of being offered more papers than
it could provide for. A number of gentlemen, therefore, withdrew
their papers, and others were taken as read. The Eevs. Professor
Grosman, Dr. Strong, and A. T. Boas, and Messrs. T. Karlin, M.A.,
and Jacob Goldstein very kindly waived their claims to a hearing on
this account; and an interesting paper on “A Home for Uncon-
trollables,” forwarded by Mr. F. R. Burton, of Port Adelaide, was
reluctantly excluded for the same reason.
As no minutes have been published, it is necessary to state here
that on the evening of the 11th November, at a special meeting of
the delegates, Professor Morris was unanimously elected President,
and Mr. Jacob Goldstein Honorary Secretary to the Conference. At
the afternoon sitting on the next day a “Suggestions Committee,”
consisting of the following gentlemen, was appointedßev. J. W.
Simmons, Chairman and Convener; and Mr. A. A. Birchall, J.P.
(Tasmania), Mr. A, Solomon (New Zealand), Mr. G. E. Ardill
(New South Wales), Rev. A. T. Boas, Messrs. H. Kelly,
J.P., and T. H. Atkinson (South Australia), and Col. Goldstein
(Victoria).
The “suggestions” adopted on the report of this Committee at the
final meeting of the Conference may be viewed as the practical
outcome of the deliberations of the Conference, and the attention of all


readers in these colonies is earnestly directed to these “suggestions.’
All are entreated to give them the utmost consideration, and to
exert their influence to induce the general recognition of their value,
and their adoption by legislative bodies and charitable associations
in all the colonies.
One last word of apology and of thanks remains to be said.
Apology that the desire to keep as closely as possible to the prescribed
limits has necessitated extreme condensation in publishing the reports
of papers read and the ensuing debates, and has in two or three
instances prevented the printing of papers submitted and accepted;
thanks to the Government of Victoria for its great kindness in
bearing the cost of this publication.
EDWARD E. MORRIS,
President.
JACOB GOLDSTEIN,
Honorary Secretary.
Melbourne, March, 1891.




(Copy of Circular.)
AUSTRALASIAN CONFERENCE ON CHARITY.
The Charity Organization Society op Melbourne,
29 Collins-place, Exhibition-street,
80th June, 1890.
Dear Sir,
I have the honour to draw your attention to the following extract
from the last report to the council of this society, adopted on
Wednesday, 18th June: —
“ On the 20th May last your committee was informed by Profes-
sor Morris that he had received a letter from Rev. J. W. Simmons,
of the Hobart Benevolent Society, stating that the Hon. Dr. Agnew,
of that city, had directed attention to the description by Professor
Morris in his paper on ‘ Charity Organization Societies in England
and the United States * of the meeting in America of a congress on
charity, and suggested that a similar congress might be held in
these colonies. Your committee for the moment contented itself
by affirming, on the motion of Sir Arthur Nicolson, 1 that it
is desirable to hold an Australasian Conference on Charity.* Pro-
fessor Morris then communicated with Mr. Simmons, suggesting
that his society should have the honour of taking the initiative in
calling the Conference, and, on the 3rd inst., your committee received
a reply from that gentleman on behalf of his committee thanking
Professor Morris for his warm interest in the proposal, and promising
to do their part in making the gathering a thorough success. At
the.same time the writer suggested that, from its central position,
Melbourne would be the preferable meeting place, and mentioned
November as the best time. His committee also wished this society
to ‘ take the place of honour in the matter of the work to be done.’
Your committee then unanimously adopted the following resolution:—
“ That, as recommended by the executive committee of the Hobart
Benevolent Society, it is desirable that the proposed Australasian


Conference on Charity be held in Melbourne in November next; that
steps should be taken immediately to open communications with the
charities in other Australasian cities, in order to insure the proba-
bility of a successful issue to the proposed Conference; and that this
executive recommends the council to take steps accordingly.
“ Your committee proposes :
“1. That a Conference on Charity be held in Melbourne, com-
mencing Tuesday, 11th November, 1890.
“2. That the Conference, if possible, conclude its work within one
week.
“3. That for the place of meeting application be made to the Right
Worshipful the Mayor of Melbourne for rooms at the Town Hall, or,
failing those, that efforts be made to secure rooms at the University
(which would then be in vacation), as was done in the case of the
Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science.
“4. That circulars be at once issued by this society, inviting the
attendance of representatives of all societies of which information
can be obtained, and that in each colony some one society be
appointed to see that, so far as possible, no organized charity be
left unrepresented.
“5. That the executive committee of this society, with full power
to add to its number, form the committee of the Conference.
“ 6. That His Excellency the Earl of Hopetoun, Governor of
Victoria, be invited to become patron of the Conference.
“7. That during the first week in August the local representa-
tives in each colony be requested to elect two vice-presidents and a
corresponding honorary secretary.
“ 8. That after these appointments shall have been made, a presi-
dent and honorary secretaries be appointed in Melbourne.
“9. That the business of the Conference be the discussion of
questions connected with the field of charity, and that the subjects
enumerated in the appendix hereto be adopted tentatively, but be
considered to be subject to alteration in accordance with suggestions
by delegates.
“ 10* That it be suggested to all who read papers before the Con-
ference that they present their manuscripts to its committee, with a
view to their collection and publication.


“11. That the question of the establishment of an annual Con-
ference, and of its future organization, be left to the decision of the
Conference in November.
“ 12. That the Governments in the various colonies be requested
to make concessions in the cost of railway fares to the delegates.
"APPENDIX.
“ Class A.—Principles of Charity Organization.
1. Co-operation in charitable work.
2. Discouragement of indiscriminate giving.
3. Inquiry before relief.
4. Compilation of records.
5. Exchange of information—local.
6. Do. do. intercolonial.
“ Class B.—Hospitals and Treatment of the Side.
1. Management.
2. Election of medical officers.
3. Subsidies to hospitals—central government or local.
4. Special hospitals.
5. Convalescents’ homes.
6. Provident and municipal hospitals.
7. Treatment of the insane.
“ Class C.—lndoor Belief.
1. Benevolent asylums.
2. Refuges.
3. Night shelters.
4. Free meals.
5. Gaol relief.
“ Class D. —Outdoor Belief.
1. Ladies’ benevolent societies.
2. District visiting and friendly visiting.
3. Loan funds.
4. Assistance to widows.
5. Special charities.


“ Class E,—Treatment of the Dependent.
1. Wards of the State.
2. Neglected children.
3. Deserted wives.
4. The blind, deaf, and dumb.
“ Class F.—Reformation of the Criminal.
1. Discharged prisoners.
2. Reformatories.
3. Technical training.
“ Class G. — General.
1. Responsibilities of relations.
2. Work for unemployed.
3. Workmen's colonies.
4. Liability of masters.
5. Public health.”
May I, on behalf of the Executive Committee of the Conference on
Charity, ask you to bring the matter before your committee, so that
your organization may avail itself of the opportunity for representa-
tion at the Conference ? You are cordially invited to send delegates
to the Conference, which, covering so large an area, cannot fail to
prove a profitable medium for the interchange of views and experi-
nces on charitable matters.
Lou will greatly oblige by notifying me, as early as possible, of
the appointments you make, furnishing me with the names and
addresses of your representatives.
I have the honour to be, dear sir,
Your obedient servant,
EDWARD E. MORRIS,
President, C. 0.5.,
Melbourne.


REPORT OF SUGGESTION’S COMMITTEE TO FINAL
MEETING OF DELEGATES TO FIRST AUSTRALA-
SIAN CONFERENCE ON CHARITY.
Monday, 17th November, 1890.
Professor Morris presiding.
The Suggestions Committee of the First Australasian Conference
on Charity has the honour to present the following series of
suggestions to the Conference for its adoption :
1. This Conference suggests that all charitable societies should
keep records of every case of poverty brought under their notice—
giving details as to causes of poverty, whether those relieved have
been married or single, condition of the houses in which the poor
live, number and ages of members of family, kind of work engaged
in, wages (daily and weekly) earned, amount and kind of relief
given—and should forward such statistics at stated periods to a
central body, such as the Charity Organization Society.
2. This Conference suggests that in each colony there should be
adequate provision for the maintenance of distressed aged people
(not being of the criminal class) who are at present sent to gaol on
charges of vagrancy or having no lawful or visible means of support.
8. This Conference suggests that, with the view of checking the
abuse of hospital accommodation by patients who, well able to pay,
occupy the beds to the exclusion of the destitute sick, systematized
inquiry be made into the circumstances of all applicants.
4. This Conference suggests that the expediency of establishing
labour colonies, somewhat on the German plan, to which able-
bodied mendicants and unemployed could be referred, should be
brought under the notice of the charitable in the different colonies.
5. This Conference suggests to the legislative bodies in each
colony that maintenance orders, made in any one colony against
deserting husbands or fathers of families or putative fathers of
illegitimate children, be enforceable in any other colony on the
original order ; and that power should be given to issue main


tenance orders where intention to desert is shown, or in defendant’s
absence if he have left the colony; and that power should be given
for the issue and enforcement of maintenance orders against
deserting mothers.
6. This Conference suggests to the Royal Commission on
Charitable Institutions in Victoria that it is inadvisable to estab-
lish foundling hospitals, but recommends an extension of the
“ Homesystem, where mothers and infants are both received.
The Suggestions Committee desires to express its fullest
sympathy with several resolutions submitted to it, dealing with
rescue and reformatory work, and the raising of the standard of
public morality, &c., but thinks it wise to confine itself for the
present to the foregoing suggestions arising out of the proceedings
of the Conference.
It has now the honour to make the following suggestions for the
Second Australasian Conference on Charity :
1. That a Standing Intercolonial Committee be established to
correspond and confer on charitable questions of Australasian
interest, to consist, until the next Conference, of—Professor Morris
and Col. Goldstein (Victoria); G. E, Ardill, Esq., and Rev. H. L.
Jackson (Hew South Wales); Miss Spence and Rev. A. T. Boas
(South Australia); Rev. J. W. Simmons and J. Stevenson, Esq.,
J.P. (Tasmania) ; H. Fairfax, Esq., and Rev. A. C. Smith
(Queensland); and A. Solomon, Esq., and Dr. McGregor (Hew
Zealand).
2. That the delegates present at or appointed to the First
Australasian Conference on Charity form themselves into local
standing committees (with power to add) for 1891.
3. That at each Conference the locality and President for the
succeeding Conference should be selected.
4. That a circular be issued by the Melbourne Standing Com-
mittee containing suggestions as to the class of information
desirable to be sought and tabulated during 1891.
The Suggestions Committee thinks that the following two
suggestions are of particular importance :
1. That the proceedings at each Conference should be printed
and published.


2. That there should be issued an Australasian Guide to
Charities, on the plan of the C.O.S. Guide to the Melbourne
Charities.
The Suggestions Committee recommends that the cordial thanks
of this Conference be accorded to—
1. Professor Morris, President, for the interest he has displayed
in, and the ability with which he has directed the proceedings of
this First Conference.
2. To the newspaper Press of this city, for the uniform kind-
ness and courtesy it has extended to this Conference.
3. To Mr. Commissioner Chomley, head of the Victorian police
force, for the valuable assistance he gave to this Committee in
drafting a suggestion.
4. To the Right Worshipful the Mayor of Melbourne, for his
great kindness in granting the Conference a room at the Town
Hall for its meetings.
5. To Mr. Jacob Goldstein, Honorary Secretary to this Con-
ference.
(Signed) J. W. SIMMONS,
Chairman Suggestions Committee.
Jacob Goldstein, Hon. Sec.
(The foregoing is the form in which the Report of the
Suggestions Committee was adopted by the final meeting of the
First Australasian Conference on Charity. It was also resolved,
after considerable discussion, that the next Conference should be
held in Melbourne, in November, 1891, and that Professor Morris
should be President.
JACOB GOLDSTEIN,
Hon. Sec. First Australasian Conference on Charity.)




PROCEEDINGS
OF
FIRST AUSTRALASIAN
CONFERENCE ON CHARITY.
FIRST DAY:
(Tuesday, 11th November, 1890),
WILSON HALL, THE UNIVERSITY, MELBOURNE,
His Excellency the Earl oe Hopetoun presiding.
INAUGURAL ADDRESS—“ ORGANIZED CHARITY,”
BY
Professor Morris, President of the Charity Organization Society of
Melbourne.
The meeting of the first Australasian Conference on Charity is an
event of considerable importance in the progress of the scientific
organization of charity in this part of the world, and I esteem it
an honour that on this occasion it has fallen to me to deliver an
inaugural address. _
First, let me say a few words on the history of this Conference;
and if here I be treading on ground that is familiar to many of you,
perhaps they will forgive me whilst making the origin clear t® others
who are present. This Conference is a child (just born) of the annual
Conference that meets in the United States. This time last year I
was travelling across the States. A glance at a diary has reminded
me ( W U 1 this personal element interest you ?) —that on this very
day (11th November) we left Niagara at half-past six in the morning,
changed trains at Buffalo, and by cross lines made for Ithaca, the
home of the flourishing Cornell University. In the evening we
started for New York, changing again at the great city of Syracuse.
Buffalo, it was afterwards pointed out to me, was the first city in the
States in which a Charity Organization Society was established and
596. B


amongst the first places, if not the very first, where an Inter-state
Conference was held. Last year the Conference met at San Fran-
cisco, but unfortunately our steamer arrived a fortnight too late.
Some little time after my return to Melbourne I wrote for the
council of our Charity Organization Society a short account of the
work of Charity Organization Societies in America and Great
Britain. In this paper there was some little comment on the annual
Conference, and especially on the zeal which took men and women
long distances to attend it. Six days and six nights in the train
many from the Eastern States must have travelled in order to be
present. How, the States are like the Australasian Colonies in the
variety of their laws and customs on such matters as poor relief and
the administration of charity. It is as easy to pass from state to
state as from colony to colony, or perhaps, in the absence of Custom-
houses, still more easy. For some ten years the American con-
ferences have continued, and it is reported that they have done a
great deal of good. The Americans are a practical people, and would
not go on with them otherwise. There is now a permanent machinery
in existence—inter-state committees—that meet and work in the
intervals between conference and conference.
Excellent, however, as this conference work in America has proved,
it did not occur to me that we, in Australia, should imitate it. If
the idea crossed my brain, it was instantly dismissed as impracticable.
But when the same idea came to another, and that other not a resi-
dent of Melbourne, it was bound to receive more hospitable treatment.
The Rev. J. W. Simmons, of Hobart, president of the Benevolent
Society in that city, had his attention called to my little paper by the
Hon. Dr. Agnew, late Premier of Tasmania, and wrote to suggest
that a similar conference should be held in Australia. Those who
were consulted here agreed, but we suggested that Mr. Simmons
should call the Conference at Hobart. Hobart is a delightful city,
especially when Australia is growing warm; and Hobart has ere now,
with general approval, been the seat of intercolonial conferences and
councils.
Mr. Simmons, however, made reply that, at any rate for the first
meeting, he thought Melbourne would be better, because more
central ; and he urged on the Melbourne Charity Organization
Society that it should undertake the work of summoning. The
executive of that society was quite willing, and this meeting is the
result. May it be allowed to me here to say that I think Mr.
Simmons, as the real originator, should now be in my place, and
delivering this address. Let him have the credit that is his due.
But I must add that I have “ caught on ” (a good Americanism) to
his idea, and I yield to no one in the belief that the idea of the
Conference is good, and that our meeting may prove very fruitful.
You will hardly guess our first difficulty. It was to find the names
and addresses of the charitable institutions scattered throughout the


colonies. No doubt there were many omissions, but a circular was
prepared and sent far and wide to all known. But we all know the
fate of printed circulars. The waste-paper basket stands “par-
ticularly large and wide ; ” it is most inviting. No answer is needed,
for circulars answer themselves. Then, close on the heels of those
poor circulars came an event which, through all the colonies,
aroused and claimed the closest attention of all—the Strike. Com-
munication between the colonies was checked, and uncertainty
prevailed as to when it would be fully resumed. At the beginning
of last month it was doubtful whether the Conference could meet.
But its friends worked hard, and here we are.
A formal resolution will be laid before you of welcome to charitable
workers from other parts of this colony and from the neighbouring
colonies. Allow me here and now, in my own person, to bid them
welcome. We are grateful to them for coming, often at trouble and
inconvenience.
If we compare the list of delegates with the list which at first we
were wild enough to hope for, dissatisfied we cannot but be with the
muster from other colonies; and yet, if one considers the trouble, the
time, and the expense, against which an uncertain good has to be
balanced, there is no sufficient reason for dissatisfaction.
Of the two sister cities, Adelaide is much better represented than
Sydney, The Chief Justice of South Australia wanted to be present,
and expressed strong sympathy with our meeting, but he could not
be spared. Personally, I can only say I am very sorry about
Sydney. Not only did we send the printed circulars, the probable
fate of which has been already indicated, but we wrote many private
letters. Two of my correspondents in Sydney predicted apathy,
curiously enough using strangely similar expressions. One said it
would require “an earthquake;” another “a young earthquake,” to
stir their neighbours on this subject. Unfortunately I had no earth-
quake on hand, irrespective of age, to “ send along,” as our friends
in America would say. Now I, as a stranger, would never dare to
make such a remark about the mother city resting in its calm beauty
on Port Jackson, but when Sydney men themselves write it to me I
cannot but feel the force of their badinage. The reason why people
hesitate to come, or societies to send representatives, from a distance
is the doubt whether any good, and the uncertainty what good, will
come out of the Conference. We, too, are a practical people. To
this question, therefore, I address myself.
The advantages which may fairly be expected to accrue are of two
kinds—partly educative, partly practical. The first kind may be
explained by a few words on what is known as charity organization,
though it may be as well to say that this meeting has not been
summoned for the glorification of the Charity Organization Society
and its methods, nor in any way to exalt the Melbourne charities at
the expense of their neighbours,
B 2


The old idea with respect to charity was that each should do what
he or she could in his or her own neighbourhood; and in a certain
primitive state of society that may be a very admirable principle.
But that method will not apply to a city of 400,000 inhabitants.
In a large city or town, if you do not organize your charity it will
be both wasteful and ineffective. The benevolent will be imposed
upon; some, and especially those who are sturdy and idle, will be
helped many times over; whilst the deserving poor will often slip
through unassisted. This is so elementary a truth that I hesitate
even to state it, but I know that it is often ignored. The new idea
then is the organization of charity, which implies both full inquiry
and complete co-operation. Not very long ago a gentleman told me
that, when the Melbourne Charity Organization Society was estab-
lished, he thought but little of it, but now he recognised its educative
influence. “It has educated me.” The conversation was private,
and therefore my interlocutor's name cannot be given; but I cannot
deny myself the pleasure of adding this force to his remark. He is
an ex-Cabinet Minister.
What a Charity Organization Society undertakes to do, and tries
to do, for a single city or neighbourhood, however imperfectly, the
Conference aims at doing on a larger scale. That is the reason
why the Melbourne Society, true to its principles, received this pro-
posal gladly, and why it believes that, even if this meeting prove
premature, at some not very distant date Conferences like this will
be recognised as useful, if not indispensable.
The Conference is intended for an interchange of experience and
of ideas amongst workers and thinkers on all questions connected
with the field of charity. If it be true, as I have heard it suggested,
that in some places the charitable institutions are perfect, and inca-
pable of improvement, may we not venture on the statement that it
is the duty of those who manage these institutions to attend the
Conference as missionaries and to explain their methods ? At any
rate, all the charities in Australia are not perfect, so that good may
fairly be expected to result from free discussion. The circumstances
of the different colonies are very similar, but it will be found that
there is great variety in the laws. Look at the recurrent trouble
of “ the unemployed,” and the different ways in which it is met.
Every winter, Sydney and Melbourne expect the unemployed diffi-
culty. You would think, therefore, that there would be thoughtful
preparation beforehand, so that when the winter comes we might be
ready. But, I ask, are we ever ready to meet it ?
A charge is often made that one colony shunts its paupers on to
another. A few years ago many of those who applied for help in
Melbourne said that they had been sent hither from Sydney, with
passages paid by the Government. About June in this year there
were many applicants for relief in Sydney, and the general story
amongst them was that 'they had been forwarded to Sydney by the


Victorian Government. If you believe one story you must believe
the other, but my advice is to disbelieve both. Ought there not to
be some agreement between the colonies on the subject ? We don’t
want a law of settlement, but systematic “ passing on ” should be
regarded as contrary to intercolonial amity.
Gradually we have been passing from the educative to the
practical advantages of the Conference, which cannot be kept
distinct. Here is another and most practical matter on which inter-
colonial agreement might be of use. Ask of any Ladies’ Benevolent
Society, and you will hear of many cases of deserted wives and
children. Where are the husbands and fathers ? Frequently they
have gone to another colony to search for work. Some send money
from their earnings, whereas others drift away and form new ties,
leaving their old belongings to charity. Of course the law can get
at them. The difficulty is to obtain the knowledge in order to set
the law in motion. Now, if we knew more of each other’s methods,
we should at least know with whom to communicate when the
bread-winner is in one place and the family an unfair burden on the
charities of another.
One of the earliest bits of co-operation effected by the Melbourne
Charity Organization Society was the publication of a guide to the
Melbourne charities. A mere knowledge of what exists is of great
value in directing. If this could be extended, and a complete guide
published to the charities of Australasia, would not intercolonial
co-operation be helped forward ?
Here is another matter. No one will deny that in all large cities,
the chances of detection being small, many of the applicants for
charity are impostors, that is to say, are not in distress, but prefer
making a trade of begging to honest working for a living. Some
beg from door to door, and, gathering here a little and there a
little, make a very good thing of it. The trade of others is the
writing of begging letters, often works of elaborate art. Even the
softest-hearted man must allow that impostors should be exposed,
and, if persistent, punished. But in this matter—detection, exposure,
punishment—the individual is practically powerless. An individual
citizen has not time to investigate, he has not the method, he does
not know how; and an individual’s investigation cannot, in the
nature of things, be so thorough as that made by a society, which
serves as a centre for many subscribers and many societies, and keeps
records. If all would use the central society, the detection of im-
posture would become a certainty; and the impostors known, perhaps
prosecuted, in one city would flee to another. It is, however, not
beyond the range of imagination to conceive a net-work of societies
and an interchange of records and information such as would check-
mate even the cleverest of those who prey upon society, and—
this tribute is at least their due—some of them are remarkably
clever.


As we plead for the perfecting of the machinery, we must turn to
face an objection which many times has been raised. Charity is, or
should be, an individual thing betwixt man and man. You are trying,
the objector urges, to substitute machinery—your own word—an
office, a board, a committee, a society, in place of a human-hearted,
sympathetic, living person, with a heart to be touched and a voice
to express emotion. Often as the objection has been raised, it has
as frequently been answered. The new charity does not want to
eliminate, but to increase and foster the human element. Its desire
is to bring reason and method to the guidance of sympathy and
emotion, not to stifle or abolish them. Evil is wrought by want of
thought. Every one who has worked in the field of charity knows
the sore need of advice in difficult cases. It should be always avail-
ble. More light, more light—yes, more and better, clearer, purer.
The ordinary citizen whose time is fully occupied “ from morn till
noon, from noon till dewy eve,’* with his private business or the
duties of his public office, who returns home at night wearied and
worn out—what is he to do ? How can he inquire into the truth or
falsehood of the story that is told him whilst he is fretting and
fuming under the interruption in his vocation or of his hard-earned
leisure ? It is cruel to leave him with such a venerable truism as
that charity must not be stripped of the personal element.
Doubtless you have all heard the not very elegant slang verb
“to slum.” Slumming was, not long ago, fashionable. No doubt
it was carried to ridiculous excesses, and wandered into wasteful
channels, but in itself it was good, for it meant human sympathy.
“ Look how wide the East is from the West ”in London. Slum-
ming is one of the modern attempts to bridge the gap, and in
other great cities too. Does charity organization seek to stop
“ slumming ?” No ; the societies created it, and only seek to guide
their own creation.
To prove that modern and scientific charity asks more, not less, of
human effort, I might point to the distinction invented in America
between district visitors and friendly visitors; and, as the distinction
is not recognised or known here, I may perhaps be allowed to ex-
plain it. The usual system for a Ladies’ Benevolent Society, or any
similar society that visits the poor in their own homes, is to divide
the town into districts, and to assign to each district a lady, or per-
haps two visitors, to look after it. In the different districts there
will be a varying number of homes. It may be 12 or it may be 150.
But a limited number of ladies is employed. If others be ready to
take part in the work they must wait until there is a vacancy in the
district, and one who accepts the charge of a district may find the
work very heavy. The American idea is to interest and provide
work for a much larger number of workers, but not to place a heavy
burden upon any. In more than one city I was told that the ideal
was that four should be the largest number of families to be assigned


to any friendly visitor. It is hoped that, with this limit, the
number of workers would indefinitely be increased, for many a one
who would shrink from a district would gladly undertake to visit
four families. It was further hoped that the new name would not be
a misnomer.
District visitors are most kind-hearted and benevolent, but a lady,
however kind, who has a hundred families to visit, must find her
sympathies frittered, and that she has but little time to attend to
the story of each ; whereas the lady who visits four may enter more
fully into their difficulties, may advise, remonstrate, check, make
educational or sanitary suggestions, in fact deserve the name of
friend. Meanwhile these almoners are gathering facts on which a
scientific induction as to causes may be based. I venture to think
that this system, which the Americans call “ friendly visiting,” is
far superior to and more scientific than the old district visiting.
But it requires organization, and is, indeed, the outcome of a
Charity Organization Society in the States, and was widely spread
by means of just such a Conference as this.
With this little explanation in mind, will any one still say that the
new charity proposes to eliminate the human element ? It longs to
increase it, but according to system and reason, not at haphazard.
The latest newspaper from England that I have opened contains
this epigrammatic sentence, which I commend to your attention :
“ Ignorant people and swindlers dislike the Charity Organization
Society—the former because they understand it ill, the latter
because it understands them well.” The complaint against machinery
has been heard in other matters, and to pit the old charity against
the new is to travel by coach or waggon in the days of trains.
It is impossible for any one who speaks upon the question of
charity at this time to avoid mention of General Booth and the great
scheme of the Salvation Army. For my own part I atn longing for
the arrival of his book, “In Darkest England,” which will explain
to us the details of a scheme, the outlines of which are bold and
magnificent. The telegraph has already informed us that the scheme
has received the warmest approval of Cardinal Manning, some
English bishops not named, and Archdeacon Farrar. Their approval
is quite sufficient to attest that the scheme is generous and noble.
May I be pardoned for saying that it does not prove the scheme to
be practicable ? On this I should more highly value the judgment
of more cold-blooded critics. This is a matter in which the details
are far more important than the generalities. I have been assured
that the authorities of the Salvation Army hold quite strongly to the
apostolic precept, “If a man will not work neither shall he eat.”
It gives me passing satisfaction to point out that this was the
utterance of a warm-hearted enthusiast like St. Paul; not of a
modern reformer like Count Rumford, who, by a steady application of
it, cleared Bavaria of beggars ; nor of Mr. John Stuart Mill; nor of


any founder of a Charity Organization Society. But, with respect to
the Salvation Army, my difficulty is to know how the precept is to be
enforced. If a man will not work —how then ? Will he be allowed
to starve ? Have we grit enough to stand to that ?
The proposals are of immediate importance to Australia, and,
indeed, to the British Colonies in general, for a part of the scheme is
colonization on a large scale across the seas ; and we have been told,
again by telegraph, that the colonies are expected to give the land.
On one condition there is no doubt the colonies will. In Victoria
there is not perhaps much good land left for the Government to give,
but a new Mildura may yet be found for General Booth and his
soldiers on the banks of the Murray, and we may all feel confident
that the representatives of this latest of the churches will be received
as cordially at the Lands-office, say as Mrs. Gordon Baillie (now, I
believe, of Pentonville) when she was engaged in her benevolent
scheme for the good of the Highland crofters. That one condition
absolutely indispensable is this—the managers of this new labour
colony, whether it be in Victoria or in any Australian colony, must
give satisfactory assurance that they have solved the problem how to
keep, as well as how to bring, 50,000 men and women together.
Don't think that I am condemning a scheme of which I am
ignorant, for I confess how little I know, and am dealing with
what has been disclosed to all. It is not easy to transfer 50,000
people across the seas, but the feat is not impossible. But, given
the land, and given the transport, how are the authorities going to
keep them on the land assigned ? How prevent them leaving the
new Arcadia, and—town-birds, as they will be—hastening to Mel-
bourne, to Sydney, and to Adelaide ? Loafers some of them will
have been in the past, and in the winter they wilt join the ranks of
the unemployed—ranks that need no recruits. Or, if we for a
moment grant that the newcomers be industrious, how will their
desertion of Arcadia affect the labour market ? That is a question
to which many Members of Parliament will have their attention
soon drawn by constituents. The only answer that General Booth
has yet forthshadowed will hardly, I fear, satisfy the Minister of
Lands : “ How will we manage them ? Oh, we will manage them !
If you want to know how it is done, come and be a soldier in the
army,” But there is a graver danger than that to the labour
market. The morals of the people are more important than the
rate of wages. General Booth has himself told that the majority of
his settlers will be reclaimed thieves and prostitutes ; and a com-
paratively small percentage of backsliders leaking away from the
new colony would be as undesirable immigrants as it is possible to
imagine—worse than the generous contribution which France dribbles
on to us from New Caledonia,
With this subject I finish as I began, by saying that, whatever
the practicability of the scheme as a whole, it deals magnificently


with a pressing difficulty, and that it proceeds from motives that
are quite unimpeachable. How great the pity we, who belong to
older churches, say that our leaders never tried to lead in this
direction. ~ ,
Not long ago a Melbourne newspaper quoted from an English
specialist journal a jibe at ray enthusiasm on charity organization.
The world is becoming smaller, and ever grows more and more
round. You bowl here; back comes your ball from the other side.
It is now my innings. That a man is misquoted is, perhaps, no
peculiar ground for complaint. In my paper it is written that, to
my question about books on charitable methods, a friend in Brooklyn
had answered me, “ Oh, the best authorities are St. Paul and
Octavia Hill/’ My misquoter takes the remark to Boston, and
reverses the order with some such comments as this, “ Poor St.
Paul I He has to take second place.” Wittily enough the critic
adds, “The Professor probably thinks a word has been omitted
from’ the famous 13th of Corinthians,” which, according to me,
should run, “ Though I speak with the tongues of men and_ of
angels, and have not charity organization , I am become as sounding
brass or as a tinkling cymbal.” [Once a preacher was railing at a
classical education, and in his heated rhetoric he put this question
to his audience, “Did Paul know Greek?”] I unhesitatingly
claim St. Paul and the early Christians on the side of the charity
reformer. I utterly deny that charity organization is un-Christian,
any more than common sense is. St. Paul stated the naked truth
about the man who will not work ; he clearly saw that a man
“ might bestow all his goods to feed the poor,” and not have charity.
The very name of deacon stands out to show that the early Christians
were introducing order and method into their poor relief. Widows
were neglected in the daily ministration. Reform was A
committee of seven deacons was appointed “ over the business,” who
had to “serve tables,” i.e., to make inquiries, keep accounts and
records.
I have heard an excellent man in this city say that, with respect
to giving, he could recognise no rule but the biblical rule “ Give
to him that asketh thee.” Out of kindness to him I withhold his
name and address, lest the number of askers should exceed even
what such generosity could possibly meet, A rule is of no use if
it will not bear publication, and, let the richest man in Melbourne
announce to-morrow in the papers that he will act upon this rule,
his time will be fully occupied, and in a month he will be the poorest.
If we are hunting for texts, let me suggest one more appropriate,
and in my interpretation of it I am following an archbishop:—
“ Blessed “is he that considereth the poor and needy.” Whately
draws attention to the word “considereth.” It does not mean that
we are to put hands in pocket, to produce the first coin, and pass on
our way rejoicing, whilst the receiver of the coin makes for the


nearest public. It means rather that we are to inquire, to look into
all the circumstances of a case, to see the sort of relief needed, and
so to fit the help to the particular individual as not to injure his
self-reliance. Inquiry is not, and should never be made, a device
for refusing help, except to impostors.
In a violent attack on the Melbourne Charity Organization
Society, published in a Sydney paper, an imaginary case was put-
how we inquired and inquired until we found that a poor fellow had
been drunk in 1853, and then refused him help. But this case is
imaginary, and simply untrue. It was an unfair attack, and pro-
ceeded partly from malice and partly from ignorance. If the writer
of it be an honest man, only desiring the truth, I challenge him to
look into our cases, which shall be open to his inspection. He will
find that unblemished moral character is not demanded as a prelimi-
nary to help. In an earlier attack in the same paper we were asked,
“ Did any one, through the effort of this society, ever see the shining
orb of a golden sovereign ?” I can answer that. I know of one
man who, through its efforts, sees his golden pound every week;
and could tell him of many another case of help procured, friends
reconciled to friends, and relatives taken from being burdens on the
State. Charity Organization Societies all the world over stand for
the principle of investigation. They invite inspection into their
work, as they demand that all charities should in like way be open
to it. During the last few months Mr. Loch (a cousin of our late
Governor), of the London Society, has published an interesting
little volume on its principles. An even better book is that by Mr.
Gurteen, of Buffalo—better, at any rate, for us, as American experi-
ence is perhaps more adapted to our circumstances than English.
Great has been the growth of our principles during the last ten
years, but it is quite certain that their future will be greater
still.
A resolution will be proposed to you, thanking the Chancellor of
the University for allowing us the use of this hall. Should any of
you think it an unusual use to which to put an University building,
I should like to tell you that on the first and second of last month a
similar Conference was held at Oxford, when the college halls were
used for the meetings. My old schoolmaster (the Bishop of London)
addressed a conversazione in the hall of Balliol College; and a
meeting in the hall of University College was presided over by an
Oxford don, of whom we have since heard that he has been shot by a
mad woman. On the general committee of that Conference I find the
name of the Earl of Jersey (High Steward of Oxford and Governor-
Designate of hTew South Wales), as well as those of seven heads of
colleges in the University. The latter names are perhaps enough
to show that, so far from discord between the higher learning and
the new charity, it is to the former that the latter looks. The more
truly men are educated the more clearly they will see that charity is


not a thing of the moment, to be guided by impulse. We must
“ look before and after ” into causes of pauperism and consequences
of heedless giving, and “ dream of what is not,” of the better society
with “ nobler manners, purer laws ” for which we have to strive. As
a good son of Oxford, I rejoice she leads the way.
DISCUSSION.
Mr. R. Murray Smith proposed— “ That the charitable
workers of Melbourne cordially welcome the representatives of
charity from other parts of Victoria and from the neighbouring
colonies.” He said : There is the less necessity for me to enlarge
upon this proposition after you have heard the exhaustive address of
Professor Morris. This Conference was not devised with the
intention of glorifying our institutions, but for the purpose of
inaugurating a series of meetings for the benefit of systematic
charity, which will, I trust, be held throughout Australia. We
cannot complain of any deficiency in the extent, variety, or activity
of philanthropy throughout the civilized world; and here, in our own
country of Australia, we claim that it flows with “no stinted
stream, no scanty tide.” Its course is deep and broad, nor will
there ever come a time wheTn human sympathy and human affection
will not be the principal factors in guiding that stream to fertilise
the whole world. But, to follow out my simile, the very breadth
and depth of that stream make it liable occasionally to overflow its
banks ; much good effort runs to waste, if it does not do absolute
mischief in perpetuating and stimulating the very evils it sets itself
to cure. It requires such institutions as the Charity Organization
Society to guide and control it, and indeed in some direction to
restrain it ; this is the justification for the establishment of these
institutions. The workers of the society are aware of the difficulties
that lie in their way. They are not likely to find it sensational
work —God forbid that they should—nor are they likely to find it
very popular work. It cannot be expected that, in the course of
systematic inquiry and careful management, they should not occa-
sionally come in conflict with vague philanthropic sentiment. Still
it is a work of the greatest advantage to the social well-being of the
nation in which it is done, and I trust that their efforts will meet
with full recognition. I have much pleasure, therefore, in asking
you to welcome these charitable workers who have come here to
assist the Charity Organization Society in enlarging its work and
increasing its usefulness.
The Hon. James Campbell seconded the resolution. He said:
I have been called on at a moment’s notice to take the place of Mr.
Deakin, who is unable to be present, and I do so with great pleasure.
There are two reasons why I feel that pleasure. The first is that I
am glad to see our friends here from the other colonies upon any


mission that wears an intercolonial aspect, and the second is that I
am sure we are all glad to make common cause with them in such a
work as this. There is no greater or higher work that the colonies
can do together, for if there is anything in which the colonies should
be of one heart and one mind it is in connexion with the cause
of charity. We do not want that mawkish and foolish charity
which so often does more harm than good. We want not only to
“ devise liberal things/’ but to have our charity so organized and
directed that it may be a real relief, and at the same time free from
any tendency to pauperize. We have a splendid opening for
carrying out charity in its best and widest aspects, and I only hope
that from this Conference we shall derive some practical suggestions
and a knowledge of the best measures to do the work we all have at
heart in the best way. We are pleased to see our friends here, and
we are exceedingly pleased to see this large and representative
gathering to give them welcome.
The motion was carried by acclamation , amidst cheers.
Miss C. H. Spence (South Australia) said: Presumably it is
because I am a woman that I have been asked to speak first.
Well, it is not inappropriate that South Australia should be
represented here by a woman, for it was founded on the grand
principle of the equality of the sexes- and women, as well as
men, were sent out in the grand Wakefield emigration scheme. I
have been reminded by the recent jubilee of municipal institutions
that my father was the first town clerk of the first municipal body
in the southern hemisphere. I have been identified with the
province of South Australia all my life. In the matter of charity
women have a right to a say. Women do a great deal of charitable
work, and I wish them to do it more wisely, yet not less tenderly.
The holding of a conference between the colonies is a wise imitation
of our friends in the United States, with their inter-state meetings.
They quite grasp the idea that there should be a clearing house for
charity somewhere. I represent South Australia all the better
because lam not rich, Ido not belong to the merchant princes,
the shepherd lords, nor the silver kings. lam still glad to belong
to that important class which works, and which believes that a love
of the old land is the best foundation of prosperity in the new,
which reverences what our fathers have done in the past, and which
is hopeful of what we shall accomplish in the future. We have all
much to learn from each othePs experience and insight, but I trust
the time is coming, and that we may hasten it on, when there shall
be less and less need of charity,
Mr. Abraham Solomon (Hew Zealand) said; There can be no
stronger proof that great interest is taken in our proceedings here
by the colony which I represent than the fact that I have been
sent over 1,500 miles of not very smooth water to be here to-day.
Those persons who have been for many years interested in charitable


work will watch the proceedings of this Conference very carefully.
In Hew Zealand they expect great things from it of a practical
nature. They will watch with especial care all intercolonial questions,
and foremost amongst these in importance stands the question of
deserted wives. That will be a very difficult problem, which this
Conference will be expected in some way to solve. In every
important town in Hew Zealand we have scores of women to support
whose husbands are in Melbourne, and it is highly probable that
you have scores of women to support here whose husbands are in
Hew Zealand, These may be divided into two classes. The first
is where the bread-winner goes away from his family to find work,
and after a time forms new ties and divests himself of his obligations.
The other class of cases is where the so-called desertion is the result
of a mutual understanding between the husband and wife ; this
case is very frequent indeed. Men go elsewhere, knowing perfectly
well that their wife and family will be looked after in the colony they
are leaving them in. I hope this Conference will suggest to the
several Governments to introduce legislation to enable the men to
be punished who thus forsake their obligations and disgrace their
sex.
The Rev. J. W. Simmons (Hobart) said: So far as the repre-
sentatives of Tasmania are concerned, we do not come professing to
teach you anything. We are not so imprudent. We shall be very
glad to learn, but we do not presume to teach. We are like the
Queen of Sheba, for we have heard so much of your wisdom and
your thoroughness and your large-heartedness that we are come to
catch your inspiration. I thank you very heartily indeed for the
welcome you have given us, and I hope that this Conference will
more than fulfil all anticipations.
Mr. G. Ardill (Hew South Wales) said: I represent several
societies in Sydney. Our attention was only recently called to the
Conference, and the societies have acted promptly. We are very
glad to be here in this beautiful colony. As I have just come from
the train journey, I will content myself with thanking you very
heartily for the welcome extended to us, and to say that I trust that
our mutual talks in conference will aid us in Hew South Wales, and
that we may be enabled to give you some little light in return.
Dr. Boyd (Sandhurst) proposed :—“ That the thanks of this
meeting he tendered to the Chancellor of the University for his kind-
ness in granting the use of the Wilson Hall.”
The Rev. T. R. Cairns (Ballarat) said: I have great pleasure
in seconding the motion. In all large centres of population we feel
that we need protection from that large class of casual visitors who
drop in upon us. They drop in upon us unawares, and ask for a
subscription for a bed or to purchase some food, and we are often
imposed upon. If we give them a shilling simply to get rid of
them we cannot feel satisfied that we have done our duty. That is


one of the small ways in which some sort of organization would be
of great service to us.
The vote of thanks was carried by acclamation.
Mr. G. M. Hitchcock (Geelong) proposed a vote of thanks to
his Excellency the Governor for presiding at the meeting. His
readiness to assist in all charitable movements was well known.
Colonel Pollard (Salvation Army) seconded the .motion. He
said: I must put in a little claim upon your sympathy, because I
did not know that I should be called upon to take part in the
meeting. The Salvation Army has for years past taken a prominent
part in connexion with the kind of work which is to be dealt with
during this Conference. During the last year or two General Booth
has been occupied with the great social scheme which has been
referred to here to-day. His book “In Darkest England ”is being
looked for very eagerly by all who take an interest in the great work
of social reform. There may, I think, be some little mistake in
regard to the influx of criminals to the colonies. It is not the
object of the scheme to deal with people of the criminal class. The
primary object is to deal with the poor and needy. Those who
come from the gaols will, you may be sure, be thoroughly tested
and trained and tried in England before being shipped to the
colonies. So far as the Salvation Army is concerned no stone will
be left unturned to carry the scheme to a successful issue.
The-motion was carried by acclamation.
Mr. Julian Thomas proposed a vote of thanks to Professor
Morris for his inaugural address. He said: I have listened with
great interest to the address, and especially to that part of it dealing
with the work General Booth proposes to do. In the scheme pro-
posed there is a great chance of evil to the colonies. Australia has
been in a happy condition because she is far from the Old World.
The men who came here in the early days were men of pluck and
energy who did good work. Canada and the United States, being
within seven days’ sail and £3 cost of the Old World, receive a great
deal of its poverty and scum. We do not want people out here
who cannot get a living at home. Canada has suffered largely from
the importation of the loafers and the ne’er-do-weels of the old land,
and if the Charity Organization Society raises its voice to prevent
such an infliction here it will do a good work.
The Rev. A. T. Boas seconded the motion. Professor Morris
had conferred a great benefit on the meeting by reading a paper
upon a number of topics to which sufficient thought had not been
given.
The motion was carried by acclamation.
Professor Morris briefly acknowledged the compliment, and the
meeting terminated.


SECOND DAY:
(Wednesday, 12th November, 1890),
MORNING.
TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE.
PROFESSOR MORRIS PRESIDING.
Miss Spence read a paper on—
Charity in South Australia.
More than 50 years ago, during the first year of that long part
of my life which I have spent in the province of South Australia,
I lived with my family on West-terrace, close to the place where
the Eoman Catholic Church now stands. Just fronting our house,
on the park lands, which, as you all probably know, surround the fair
city of Adelaide to a depth of half-a-mile or more, there lay a square
of small wooden houses known as Immigration-square. These
houses were erected for the accommodation of newly-arrived immi-
grants, who, in those days, came in every ship that left Great
Britain, their passages being paid for by the price of land in the
young colony. South Australia was founded on the Wakefield
system, which fixed a comparatively high price for land, and spent
the money in importing labour to make that land productive. The
immigrants were provided with houseroom in Immigration-square,
and a fortnight’s rations for themselves and their families. During
that fortnight they were expected to find employment and lodgings,
and they were then turned out to make room for fresh arrivals.
This acknowledgment that it was the business of the State to
give temporary aid to immigrants, who might be supposed to be
without means, has never been retracted. South Australia, so far
as I know, is the only one of the Australian colonies where the most
socialistic principle of English legislation, the right of the destitute
to claim shelter and food from public funds, still holds good,
A year or two after the time I speak of, the socialistic principle
greatly extended its operations. South Australia fell into those
difficulties which every new country must encounter before settled
industry produces actual wealth from the virgin soil. The distress
in our case was intensified by land speculation, and by a drought in
the neighbouring colonies from which we derived our food supplies.
Col. Gawler, the Governor at the time, was so distressed at the
number of unemployed who had been brought out from their old
homes by such fair promises, that he set them to work on unproduc-
tive things—a gaol and a Government House. He not only did this.


but be paid wages in food at almost famine prices, giving the largest
supplies to the men with the largest families, not to the most
industrious and skilful. This was the principle of the old English
Poor-law, abolished in 1834, and was not approved at head-quarters.
The well-meaning Governor was recalled, and Captain, now Sir
George Grey, sent in his place. No man was allowed to refuse any
offer of private employment, and the colonists set to work to subjugate
the soil in good earnest, so that, from the dearest place in the civilized
world to live in, it became in two or three years one of the
cheapest.
But in spite of this episode, the colony never lost sight of the
claims of destitution being a first charge on the land, i.e., the
country. Even in our direst straits there was always an organization
for the relief of the poor, supported by the general revenue.
In the other Australian colonies Government aids substantially
various charitable institutions and organizations which have been
formed by voluntary combination. Possibly, nay, probably, as great
a proportion of charitable funds is drawn from the great milch cow,
the general revenue in other colonies, but in South Australia alone
is Government directly responsible for the administration of charity,
not in the city of Adelaide alone, but throughout the length and
breadth of the province.
The main stream of relief, therefore, flows through the Govern-
ment Destitute Board, the Government hospitals and the Government
lunatic asylums. All benevolent associations outside of these are
comparatively small, and in some case, are merely auxiliary to that
main stream, and their volunteer funds are generally supplemented
by Government grants.
The Destitute Board is composed of five honorary members, with
a paid chairman, who is now also superintendent of the destitute
asylum in Adelaide. The work of this board has been so wide in
its reach, and so centralized in its administration, that it furnishes
an inquiry office, almost a clearing house for charity, and is generally
referred to when private benevolence is doubtful as to the genuineness
of any case presented to it for relief,
Mr. Atkinson and Mr. Kelly, who here represent the board, will
give a full history of its constitution, and more details and statistics
than I can do, but it may be of value to this Conference to hear the
impressions and opinions of an outsider deeply interested in its
operations. During my long connexion with the children of the
State, when they were managed by the Destitute Board, and during
my shorter work on a Charity Organization Society on the same
lines as that recently established in Melbourne, and in my work as
a member of a board of advice for the district of East Torrens, I
have had opportunities of watching the course and effects of
Government centralized charity in a young and fairly prosperous
community.


In the preparation of this paper I have been largely assisted by
Mr. J. B. Whiting, secretary to the State Children’s Council, who
was for many years a valued officer under the Destitute Board, and
who has thoroughly grasped its spirit and scope. The direct
representatives of that board must excuse me for giving its operations
so large a share of my attention, because it is so important and so
distinctive that any view of general charity in South Australia
would be worthless if other things were put in the foreground. It
is because I think their methods in general so good that I should
like to see them imitated, and this is more likely to arise from an
independent than from an official presentment. It is all the more
important to take note of this special feature in South Australian
administration, because the trend of modern thought, in spite of
protests from individualists, is unmistakably socialistic.
The so-called new Poor-law of 1834 having done its work
in England, and extinguished or greatly lessened the evils which
the old Poor-law created and fostered, is now condemned by the
thoughtful and humane as inadequate, cruel, and demoralizing.
It directly tends to discourage thrift by insisting on absolute
destitution as the sole condition of affording relief to the aged
and infirm respectable poor. This Dr, Jessop and Mr, Sydney
Webb have forcibly pointed out, as well as that it discourages
partial aid from relatives, for that would only save the rates. It
makes the life in the work-house so distasteful, so restricted, and
so humilating that those who deserve best of the State shrink
from it, and the lazy, the wasteful, and the vicious receive from
national charity the maximum of the benefits with the minimum of
the anguish.
The desire to save the rates felt by the guardians—ratepayers
themselves, and representing the whole body of ratepayers in the
Union—has, I think, intensified the strong objections felt, and
brought forward against outdoor relief. Many people who
abhor living in the work-house have little objection to receiving
help at home, and no doubt vigilant inspection is needed to check
imposition. The work-house has, therefore, been the easiest for
the officials and the cheapest for the ratepayers, and those who
would not enter those gloomy walls might be left to beg, to starve,
or to steal. It is not socialists and sentimentalists only who speak
of the treatment of the aged poor in England as a scandal to
civilization and to Christianity.
In South Australia, the funds being derived from the general
revenue and not from local rating, and the gentlemen on the
Destitute Board being no more pecuniarily interested in the raising
of these funds than the ordinary citizens and taxpayers throughout
the colony, there has been no strong temptation to keep down
expenses by making outdoor relief too hard to obtain, and the
supervision necessary in the matter has been organized. As the
596. C


colony is dealt with as a whole, and as the community as a whole
pays for the relief, there has been no waste of money and time in
discovering what locality an applicant was chargeable to, and in
moving him thither with his family. I was astonished to see how
much of this is done in the United States when I read the reports
of the Board of Charity and Correction, though in many cases the
applicant is not moved but relieved on the spot, and the county or
the state to which he is chargeable debited with the cost. The
only movements favoured by the South Australian Board
are where there seems more prospect of work or of family aid
elsewhere.
The easy transference of the bread-winner of the family to another
colony, truly or ostensibly in seach of work, leaving wife and
children dependent on public and private charity, has been a
mischievous loosener of family ties in many cases, as well as a
serious burden to all the colonies. Sometimes one colony suffers
more than the others in this way, sometimes another, but it is a
chronic ailment with all. Intercolonial federation is necessary to
organize cheap and effective machinery to compel men earning
wages in one colony to contribute to the support of their natural
dependents in another colony.
Contrary to what we hear of the working of the English system,
the Destitute Board in all cases prefers helping to keep poor
families together to driving any of them to be wholly supported
by the State in the Destitute Asylum. I must first take note
of the
Indoor Relief.— The Destitute Asylum, built on that portion of
the park lands between North and South Adelaide, which was
retained as a Government reserve, and closer to Government House
than any other public building, is open as a permanent residence
only to the aged, the infirm, the blind, the maimed, the
paralyzed who are destitute. Absolute incapacity for self-sustaining
work is the qualification for admission, and the absence of sons and
relatives able to keep them. If there were more ground attached to
the institution there might be more work found for the old men, but
we must bear in mind that these are on the average incapable
than the inmates of benevolent asylums in the other colonies.
It is not a very cheerful place, though the food is good and
sufficient, the clothing decent, and the management not unkindly.
As a central bureau, an inquiry office, an accessible shelter, the
site is admirable ; as a home for 820 old men and women, it would
be much brighter if it was located on a larger block of land miles
from town. Its accessibility for relatives of the inmates and for
friendly visits from kind strangers is a set-off of some value. On
the other hand, being in the centre of the city, the fortnightly
half-holiday often carries the old body no farther than the nearest
public-house, where some one or other of the customers at


the bar compassionates penniless thirst, and stands treat with sad
results.
The men’s yard always seems to me more cheerful than the
women’s ; the old men, too, take infinitely more interest in books
and newspapers than the women. One doubts whether sewing
and knitting are as much to the old women as reading is to the
men. There are always twice as many men as women in the
asylum, for there are more friendless old men and more men
disabled by accident in all the colonies, and probably relatives are
more disposed to keep a grandmother than a grandfather.
Another class of inmates are not permanent but temporary.
Those women who go into the lying-in department. Of these
very few are married women, those who have homes at all are
generally helped there with medical attendance and rations. The
great proportion are single women, who, being penniless and
friendless, seek from public charity a refuge in their time of trouble.
The regulations in South Australia are, so far as I know, unique,
and reflect the greatest credit on the wisdom and philanthropy of
a past Destitute Board, Mr. Reed, the chairman, and Mr, James
Smith being especially responsible for it. On the girl applying
for admission she is made to engage to remain in the institution till
her infant is six months’ old, unless a situation offers sooner in
which she could keep it with her. The baby thus gets its natural
food and its mother’s care, and affection generally grows strong
during these six months.
Mr. Atkinson will tell you more of the checks on baby-farming
carried out by the Destitute Board, which are also unique—the
results of the same thoughtful and benevolent care for infant life and
for the restoration of the mother to respectability.
These young mothers being the only able-bodied people on the
establishment do the washing for the whole, as well as attend to the
babies and the ordinary household work of their own department.
A third class, still more temporary, are casuals who get a bed and
a breakfast.
I should like to see the habitual casuals, the tramps, loafers, and
beggars, drilled into productive industry, something more useful
than a mere labour test.
Outdoor Relief. —This branch of public charity interests me much
more than the asylum itself, and I differ from those who say it is
as pauperizing to apply for temporary help as to ask for complete
maintenance. I have known widows and deserted wives, and wives
with invalid husbands, who have had assistance for years from the
board, who themselves did their utmost all the time, and who, as
soon as their families grew up to be self-supporting, gladly re-
linquished it. I have known a single fortnight’s rations applied for
at a time of dire distress, and no application from that family after-
wards.
C 2


The outdoor relief is also the most comprehensive form. In
some centres of population the Destitute Board appoint paid agents
to inquire and give relief through orders on local storekeepers, but
in most country districts application is made to the chairman of
district councils or the nearest J.P., but the relief is charged to the
Destitute Board, and paid for by the yearly grant from the general
revenue to charitable institutions.
I read lately, in a striking book of Hesba Stretton’s, I think,
called “ In Prison and Out,” of a poor widow slowly dying of cancer
who had some relief from the Union, who one day when she
felt a little better than usual, had taken some washing to do for
payment. When engaged in this work, she set her little daughter
to watch lest the overseer or inspector should be near, that the work
might be concealed, for if it was seen that she could earn anything
at all, the relief would be stopped or docked. In South Australia
the more a mother can do the more favorably she is looked on; at
least it is known that she cannot entirely maintain a young family.
But my chief objection is that the relief given to such widows and
deserted wives is inadequate. It is pitched on too low a scale. A
woman with one child is supposed to be quite able to do without
relief if she is in health. With two she gets one ration, and half a
ration for each child under thirteen. An adult ration consists of
8 lbs. bread or flour, lbs. beef without bone, or 5 lbs. mutton
with bone; 14 oz. sugar, 14 oz. rice, 7 oz. soap, 2 oz. salt, oz. tea.
All this costs Government about 2s. 6d. a week. The mother has
to provide house rent, fuel, light, milk, potatoes and other vegetables,
all the clothes and shoes of all the family, tear and wear of furniture,
and et ceteras , from her own earnings. As each child reaches the age
of thirteen, half a ration is struck off from the family allowance. If
the mother loses heart and management, and her four or five chil-
dren, for whom she gets perhaps two rations costing Government
ss. a week, are committed by the magistrate as neglected, and
handed over to the State Children’s Department, the State has to
maintain them all at a cost of ss. 6d. or 6s. each, when probably
ss. more help at home might have kept the family together in love
and respectability. And often the taking away of her children
deprives the mother of her strongest motive for good. Where the
mother is of decent character every effort should be made to leave
her with her own natural responsibilities. The poorest home, if it
is respectable, is better than any institution; and although I have
great faith in the boarding-out system for the children of the vicious
and the cruel, I never see children taken from a mother who loves
them, even though she is shiftless, indolent, and dirty, without the
deepest sorrow.
And there is one important point which the Destitute Board, in
their zeal for economy, seem to have overlooked. A scale of relief
which was fixed before the educational requirements were so stringent,


is insufficient now, if it ever was sufficient. Children of ten and
eleven used to be able to earn something in the old days, and
mothers are more ashamed of ragged clothes and shoeless feet when
the youngsters are compelled to associate at school with the children
of the well-to-do. The truants, with whom we have to deal on boards
of advice, are largely composed of the children of widows and deserted
wives who get free education, and receive relief from the Destitute
Board, but who have in most instances to leave their homes all day
to earn the rest of the family livelihood.
Even the oldest girl who might, at twelve years old, keep the baby
or look to things at home, is obliged to attend 35 days in the
quarter till she is thirteen, or till she can pass the compulsory ex-
amination, which that class of pupils never pass at all. If the case
is very urgent, the board of advice asks for exemption, which is
generally granted. But educational authorities are apt to make
education paramount. As a member of the State Children s Council,
and as a member of the School Board of Advice, I have long felt
that more liberal aid from the Destitute Board, and less rigidity as
to school requirements, would save the State from the entire
maintenance of many children, and the struggling mothers from un-
necessary hardship.
In the case of old couples who can in any way, either through
partial employment, savings, or the help of relatives, manage t©
keep a roof over their heads, the Destitute Board does wisely to give
them a ration and a half, costing 3s. 9d. a week, rather than take
them into the asylum, where they would cost over 11s., besides the
expenditure on buildings and repairs. It is sad when the small
savings are spent, and the children or grandchildren cease to pay
the rent, and the home is broken up, the few poor sticks of furniture
sold, and the money appropriated by the board, and the old couple
are placed for the remainder of their lives in separate wards.
Mr. Lindsay, the superintendent, once told me that all attempts to
keep married couples together failed, because, there being no separate
cottages, they had to live together, and the women quarrelled about
everything and nothing. It is a thousand pities that the want of
social qualities, forbearance, tact, and politeness, should stand in the
way of needed reform. To separate two old people who have lived
together all their lives, simply because they are poor, is a cruel
thing. That is why Dr. Jessop makes such a strong appeal for
alms-houses sufficiently endowed for the old age of the worn-out
English agricultural labourers.
Sickness. —The Destitute Board has a medical man attached to
itself and to the State Children’s Council entirely. He attends to
the sick poor in the asylum and the State Children’s institutions,
and to the destitute poor in Adelaide and the near suburbs. Medi-
cal aid is also provided by the Board from qualified practitioners all
over the settled districts of South Australia. This was a great help


in the placing out of children in country homes, because there was a
doctor under whose care each child naturally fell. Bodily diseases
and accidents befalling the poor are treated free at Government
hospitals, and mental diseases at Government lunatic asylums.
There is no private lunatic asylum in the colony, and although it
has been talked of, and recommended by the Colonial Surgeon, Dr.
Paterson, there is no system of boarding out harmless patients in
cottage homes, or planting them in cities of the simple like Gheel.
The system of centralization pursued in South Australia has
several great advantages, which I shall point out seriatim :
Firstly, Economy. —The same amount of relief undertaken by
various benevolent agencies would cost from 30 to 50 per cent, more.
Government buys (at least in South Australia) cheaply, and it dis-
tributes very cheaply. There is an honest desire on the part of the
Destitute Board and the departmental officers to save public money,
and, though in some matters it carries this too far, it is an excellent
safeguard against imposition Whereas in most charities appealing
to the benevolent, there is a temptation to spend much in order to
show the usefulness of the institution, and to strengthen the appeal
for continuous and enlarged contributions. The society which spends
most money is erroneously supposed to do most good.
Secondly (and to me even more important is) Justice in the col-
lection of funds from all classes of the community, whether benevo-
lent or selfish, for the relief of destitution, in the same proportion as
they do for the other necessary expenses of the State.
Thirdly, more equality and justice in distribution, through an
organized board and department responsible to Parliament, than
through benevolent committees, responsible only to subscribers.
Where Government gives in many cases half the funds I have
always thought it should be represented effectively on the boards of
management. Probably Governments, i.e., Ministries, would rather
pay the money without sharing the responsibility, but it is of little
use having an Inspector of Charities if ho has not some power. I
have heard of such an inspector recommending reforms year after year
without anything coming of it, for he had no power to enforce them.
Fourthly, Centralization organizes a system of inquiry and super-
vision which is more correct and far-reaching than any separate
society can make for itself, which often stimulates to industry and
thrift, and even to cleanliness. “ I hear your house is very dirty,”
I once heard the superintendent say to a chronic case of shiftless
poverty, and though she indignantly retorted—“ Where do you see
the price of a broom in what I have to live on ? ” I dare say the
house was cleaner for a while. The more respectable of the poor tell
me that the supervision is not unkindly, though it must be strict.
I feel sure that in the various benevolent asylums in Victoria and
New South Wales there will be found a much larger proportion for
the population of old, infirm, and incapable people than are in our


one destitute asylum. Many of your wholly supported inmates
would be relieved by rations, and pressure put on relatives to pay
rent or to take them home. Government can put more of such
pressure than any voluntary association can do on sons and grand-
sons, who are legally liable, and on daughters and sisters, who are
not. Even when inmates of the asylum, the Board can compel sons
and grandsons who have means to contribute a reimbursement.
£348 last year was derived thus.
“ Keep your father or your mother in your own house and we will
give you one ration.” If it were not for the quarrelling, the rations
would make the maintenance of an old parent a mere featherweight.
I think that there is nothing so needful to be taught in all schools,
and in all homes, as courtesy and forbearance. Ambition and thrift
are no doubt excellent for the individual; but for society, good
temper, patience, and pleasantness oil the wheels of life at all times,
and are especially valuable in the relations between the old and the
young.
Fifthly, Swiftness. —I dare say you are surprised that I put this
as one of the advantages of centralized charity, but I think our
system gives relief with less delay than any organization I know of
I do not say than any individual. Every one knows that the
D.B. is the agency to apply to, and urgent cases are first relieved
and afterwards inquired into.
I recollect, somewhere in 1855, travelling in an omnibus with two
middle-aged women, one of whom had been in Melbourne, or rather
Victoria, with her family, and had evidently had hard times—
husband sick and out of work in a strange land.
“ And the worst of it was there was no Destitute there.”
“Dear me, that’s bad, Mrs. Brown.”
« Ko, there was no Destitute, and there is no Destitute, and I did
not know where to turn to.”
The women understood by the word destitute not the generic
name for helpless poverty, but the common name of the beneficent
and far-reaching agency from which help could be obtained when
distress was real and urgent. Mrs. Brown was glad to return to
the city of the Destitute, and yet she looked like a woman who
would be hard pushed before she would ask charity.
So far, I have spoken of the advantages of centralization, and
when I consider how much time and thought has been given to this
department by successive boards of unpaid citizens, I feel that South
Australia owes a deep debt of gratitude to them.
The drawbacks are such as are incidental to all large organiza-
tions, especially when they have been long established a want of
elasticity, a want of tenderness, and too great economy in certain direc-
tions. Ido not say that this is necessarily peculiar to State chanty
Indeed, I see in the future the possibility that State or communal
charity may be the tenderest, as well as the justest of all. Up to


the present time administrators of public relief cannot but inherit
the traditions of their calling, and they are constantly ruffled by the
solicitations of the lazy, the vicious, and the incompetent. In
relieving the destitute family of the drunkard, the loafer, and the
deserter, it is only human nature that some acerbity should mingle
with the dole. Though it is true that the drunkard contributes very
largely to the general revenue, that has never been held as a reason
why the State should provide for his dependents, and they think it
a premium on vice to give relief too easily to these. I would fain see
the State take and use the power to set such defaulters to compul-
sory work till they learned to work without compulsion.
The very best kind of charity is that which never comes before the
public at all ; where a brother or sister takes a brother or sister by
the hand, and, knowing the case thoroughly, gives the help just when,
and where, and how it is needed, and when the need is over leaves
the recipient neither pauperized (which would make him too willing
to ask help again), nor crushed and humiliated, which would make
him ashamed of having been helped at all.
“ I’ve heard of hearts unkind, kind deeds
With evil deeds returning;
Alas, the gratitude of man
Has oftener left me mourning. ”
The gratitude that has not pained has been the personal gratitude
for personal help and sympathy, for cheering words, and for the
thoughtfulness that devised some way by which the poor family could
help itself. It is not as a patron or as a subscriber, but as a sister and
a friend that the really divine, because really human, charity has to
me been twice blessed.
And all institutions, all associations are apt to fail in the personal
element, unless they can enlist as their visitors and dispensers people
who are not official machines. It is hard to combine the eye and
ear of the detective officer with the spirit of the ministering angel,
not to speak of the genius and inspiration of the captain of industry,
to lead out of the slough of despond to active hopeful industry. For
this cause I think that a Charity Organization Society should only
inquire and indicate the best and most thorough methods of relief,
and should have as little as possible to do with giving that relief.
Our Charity Organization Society in Adelaide failed because it was
too ambitious and too costly. A perfect system was devised for the
small community which needed it least on account of the centraliz-
ation of State charity, and at a time when the best objects of such an
organization were all but impossible. In a time of such financial
depression, as we had five years ago, it was easier to give doles than
to find work for the unemployed—loans were not repaid, people were
moved from one place to another where things were no better—and
the amount of extra charity distributed only seemed to increase the
number of applicants. It is in good times that such organizations


should be established, to be in readiness with effective machinery
during bad times. . .
I have dwelt so fully on the centralized system because it is
our distinguishing characteristic, and because all our voluntary
associations radiate from it, communicate with it, and in various
ways supplement it.
DISCUSSION.
The Chairman said: That with a view of directing the discus-
sion, he thought that there were two questions that he might draw
their attention to in which the people of the three colonies of
South Australia, Victoria, and New South Wales were much
interested. This was especially so in the case of deserting husbands.
That was a question which he wished to see pressed on the various
legislatures by this Conference. Could not the Conference make
a suggestion which would result in relief being obtained. The
other point is the question of centralized Government action—
whether the Conference considered the system adopted in South
Australia, of centralized Government action; or the system in New
Zealand, of localized Government action; or that of Victoria, which is
half the one and half the other, was superior.
Mr. R. W. Birchall said: The Government of Tasmania had
endeavoured to centralize, and those interested in the question at
Launceston, who knew the poor and were acquainted with their
wants, had always opposed this step. In reference to what Miss
Spence had said regarding the separating of man and wife, the
Benevolent Society in Launceston had always opposed that. (Hear,
hear.) They had done this on two grounds. Firstly, they did not
think it right to separate the old folks in their old age, and secondly,
they thought it far cheaper for the Government to _ give a little
assistance in the way of rent than place the old people in the asylum.
What was given by the Benevolent Society (five shillings per week),
added to 2s. 6d. from the Government, which would be in rent,
would keep the old people amongst friends; but if the Government
took them in hand entirely, it would cost 11s. 6d. per week. He
was very pleased to have heard the paper, and thought the hearing
of it had been an hour well spent.
Mrs. Rowe inquired if there were any one present representing
the Ballarat Benevolent Asylum. She had gone there on a visit
some months ago, and saw that they had cottage homes for old
couples, but had been told that the people would not occupy them.
Mr. C. Shoppee, J.P., said: He represented the institution in
question. They had several cottages on the ground, but of these
only two were occupied. They made it a rule that only persons of
thoroughly respectable character and behaviour were allowed to live
in these cottages. They had experienced cases where the husband
had sometimes come home intoxicated, and this had completely
disorganized the place and the other persons there. •


Mr. Thomas Rhodes said : He was pleased to listen to Miss
Spence's paper, but it was no surprise to those who came from
South Australia to have such a paper from her, as her abilities were
well known. As to the question of deserting husbands, he was
surprised to hear that they had any deserting husbands to complain
of here, for he heard in such cases in South Australia, generally, that
the husband had left his wife and gone to Victoria. In regard to
the various systems of charity, whether the centralizing system or
the localizing system, or partly one and partly the other, as in
Victoria, was the best; he must say he thought they required to
know more before deciding. Coming from South Australia, they
would probably take the former as the best.
Mr. H. G. Turner said : He ventured to say that there was
nothing to be said in favour of the Victorian system. The work
here, as it was done by the Government, was distinctly wasteful. He
thought the system in South Australia had been brought before
them in an admirable manner on that occasion, and would be laid
before the people of Victoria with the most excellent results. The
administration of the Destitute Board of South Australia had been
characterized by great ability on the part of the persons having
control of the system. It was not always possible—indeed, it
might be impossible—to get the organization necessary to carry
it out so successfully as in that colony. He did not agree with
Miss Spence’s opinion of the founders of South Australia. They
were doctrinaires , who had carefully laid the foundations of the
colony—in their studies. But from the earliest stage everything
done by the people in South Australia had been marked by
strong common sense. So far as their charities were concerned,
they were an admirable example for the other colonies. He would
be glad to see the idea of centralization, so far as possible, adopted
in this colony. He granted that a very small portion of this wealthy
community contributed as they should do. It was better for charity
that its maintenance should be spread over a large area, and this
would be the result of more centralization. He was sure, with this
example before them, that they would all do their best to lend a
helping hand to make—he said it advisedly—to make those who
could, but at present did not, contribute their fair share towards the
maintenance of the destitute.
Mr, Solomon said: As they wished to discuss principles, and
as there was some desire to know the principle adopted in the other
colonies, he would explain that in New Zealand every one, rich and
poor, was compelled by the Government to contribute.
Professor Morris inquired if they had a Poor-law in New
Zealand, because the people of Victoria had an extraordinary fear of
a Poor-law. He had been up the country lately, and a delegate
had stated to him that they wished the utmost done which could be
done to prevent the Poor-law being adopted here.


Mr. Solomon : At Christchurch, Auckland, Wellington, and
Dunedin there were boards. The office of each board was to
collect contributions from what they called the “ contributing
bodies ” to the charitable institutions. The local bodies all
contributed. The institutions sent in to the Charitable Aid
Board a memorandum of what money would be required for the
coming year. The Charitable Aid Board ordered contributions to
be paid by each local body according to the value of the property
within its area. That was subsidized by the Government to the
extent of pound for pound. Suppose, for instance, there was a
Charitable Aid Board in Melbourne —Melbourne would have to con-
tribute a certain amount of money according to its property. The
Government would add a portion to that, and out of this total all
the charitable institutions would be maintained. The Government,
in addition, gave twenty-four shillings in the pound as subsidy on
moneys collected by private benevolence. The advantage was that
every ratepayer had to contribute towards the charitable institutions
whether he liked it or not. (Hear, hear.) These boards were ap-
pointed by those who held the purse-string, two members being
elected by outside subscribers. The principle was recognized there
that it was the foremost duty of the citizen to contribute to the
support of the poor and the sick. The Government had an inspector,
but he had no power except to recommend.
Professor Morris : Are there any voluntary contributions in
New Zealand ?
Mr. Solomon : Yes.
Professor Morris: Are they paid into the same funds?
Mr. Solomon : We get private bequests.
Professor Morris : Is there a Law o! Settlement in New
Zealand ?
Mr. Solomon : Yes. If a person applied in one district for
charitable aid, and he had not resided six months in that district,
they could charge the district where he had last _
Professor Morris ; How much has been spent in litigation ?
Mr. Solomon : Nothing. There was no public opposition to the
passing of the law, although it was a difficult question when intro-
duced at first.
Pastor Herlitz said: This scheme appeared at first sight to be
a most admirable one ; but was there no difficulty to be met with ?
The people would say, “ Why should we contribute to the charities ?
The Government aids them with money, and that money comes out
of our own pockets,” This objection would arise twice over here.
The people would say, “We give twice—once as ratepayers, and then
as citizens.” Was there any answer to this in New Zealand ?
Mr. Solomon said: There was, of course, no compulsion of
voluntary contributions. But he had heard of many wealthy men
in Victoria who had not given anything in proportion to their


means. In New Zealand they must do so. The cost of the
benevolent institutions of Melbourne fell upon the citizens. In his
colony this would be borne by the whole of the colony. The people
who required assistance naturally gravitated to the towns. There-
fore they compelled every settler, farmer, or squatter to contribute
according to his means.
Colonel Goldstein asked if the money was obtained by a special
rate, called a “ poor rate ?”
Mr, Solomon said that the local bodies* contribution towards the
hospital and the charitable boards was one of their expenses, and it
was taken out of the ordinary funds,
Mr. Harlin said; The remarks of Miss Spence, as to the
removal of old people from homes close to the city, were exceedingly
valuable just now, because the question of the removal of the
Benevolent Asylum was now before the public. Miss Spence had
put before them clearly the advantage of municipal contributions to
charitable institutions. In this colony they occupied a very different
position. He thought that the municipalities were strongly opposed
to a municipal contribution towards charitable purposes. He
believed, at the same time, that those who were engaged in the
administration of charity were equally strongly in favour of a rate
on the whole of the community towards the support of the poor.
Rev. J. W. Simmons read a paper on
The Principles of Charity.
A quotation from the Rev. S. A. Barnett's essay on “Relief
Funds and the Poor *’ may not be out of place at the meeting of
the first Australasian Conference on Charity. “ If,” remarks the
well-known rector of St. Jude’s, Whitechapel, “ all who are serving
the poor could meet and divide—meet to learn one another’s object,
and divide each to do his own work—there would be a force applied
which might remove mountains of difficulty. Abuse would be
known, wise remedies would be suggested, and foolish remedies
prevented. Indirect means would be brought to the support of
direct; and those concerned to reform the land laws, to teach the
ignorant, and beautify the ugly would be recognised as fellow-workers
with those whose object is the abolition of poverty. Money would
be amply given, and the high motives of faith and love applied to
the reform of character. The ideal is in its fullness impossible
until there be a really national church, in which the denominations
will each preach their truth, and in which the entire religious life of
the nation will be expressed. Such a church, extending into every
corner of the land, and drawing to itself all who love their neigh-
bours, would realize the ideal of co-operative charity, and so order
things that no one would be in sorrow when comfort will relieve,


and no one in pain when help can succour.” It may be that there
are those true workers who would not quite indorse the terms used,
but does not the spirit of the language aptly describe the object and
aim of this gathering ? .
The people of Australia are famed for their large-heartedness and
generosity to all sorts and conditions of men, and more particularly
to the poor and needy. It is not too much to say that Tasmania is
not one whit behind the continent of Australia in this matter. The
hospitals of Tasmania will not suffer when compared with similar
institutions in other lands. Her benevolent asylums—bearing in
mind that Tasmania has a somewhat ancient history—if ugly in
outward appearance and somewhat repulsive so far as mere buildings
are concerned, are marked by internal comfort, careful attention to
the aged and infirm, and ample provision for their necessities.
Tasmania can speak of her orphanages, industrial schools, reforma-
tories,the boarding-out system for destitute children, the system of
out-door relief, societies for teaching the blind, aiding the ship-
wrecked mariner and family ; and, lest any should be neglected, her
ragged schools tell the tale of a most kindly care, needing but the
introduction of the industrial element in daily teaching to obviate
objection, and to make the schools a power for good amongst the
rising race. In cases of emergency, arising from accident, _ mis-
fortune, or bereavement, the generosity of the people is simply
boundless. In a word, should the pressure of poverty be so great,
provision is made for a man’s entrance into the world, and upon his
departure out of it the State is not unmindful of the reverent and
decent burial of the vacated tabernacle. The danger is, lest with
liberality so princely, the difficulty sought to be avoided should be
intensified and increased. The wise, prudent, and thrifty,
with their co-operative agencies, seldom or rarely need sue
aid, and would not look for it except from the feeling that they
have a greater right than those of the thriftless and imprudent class.
Charity, beyond doubt, contemplates, and covers with her ample
wing, the thriftless, the thoughtless, and the evil. Of the abundance
of charity there cannot be much controversy. Of the wisdom ot its
administration, more particularly regarded as a factor in the demorali-
zation or elevation of the people, there may be the most serious
question ; and it is on this point that charity-workers realize a practi-
cal difficulty. Of a colony with a population not exceeding 150,000,
with a State grant amounting in round numbers to £57,000 annually,
to which must be added large private benefactions, it may asked
whether, with the best of intentions, the people are being trained to
industry and self reliance, or to indolence and serfdom ? Mr. Barnett,
concerning Mansion House funds, may be strong ; can we, however,
despise the implied admonition “Never^ were needs so delicate left
to mercies so clumsy ; needs intertwined with the sorrows and sutter-
ings with which no stranger could intermeddle have been met with


the brutal generosity of gifts, given often with little thought or cost.
The result has been an increase of the causes which make poverty,
and a decrease of good-will among men.” Our trouble, then, is not
a solitary trouble; the United Kingdom and the United States join
United Australia in one common concern, viz., it is not enough to
give money ; there must be individual effort to raise the lowly,
making the dependent independent; and there must be co-operation,
lest too much aid should make poverty far more lucrative than honest
toil.
Tasmanian charities may be grouped as follows :
Government institutions, some with and some without committees
of management.
Institutions supported by voluntary contributions, aided by State
subsidy, and managed by committees elected by subscribers.
Societies purely voluntary in their methods and work.
The society which I have the honour to represent belongs to the
second class, and the record of service contained in its annual
reports may, with every confidence, be left to the public judgment;
our wish being to reach the ideal so ably sketched by Cardinal
Gibbons, in his address to the National Conference on Charities’
meeting, in Baltimore, last May :—“ The great question which con-
fronts you, ladies and gentlemen, is this : How are you to subserve
the interests of the poor and suffering ? Three methods are pro-
posed. First, by promiscuous almsgiving. But this method is open
to the objection that it can relieve only a limited number, and that
the benefactors are liable to be imposed upon. The second method
is by relegating the poor and distressed to State and national insti-
tutions. But this would be converting the State and nation into
paternal Governments, and experience has shown that paternal
Governments are not the most desirable ; they hamper individual
efforts. The third method is attained when a number of men and
women, animated by a spirit of zeal and charity for their fellow
beings, voluntarily band themselves together for the purpose of
relieving the distressed. This is the best of all methods, and it is
yours. It combines all that is good in the other methods Your
heart is in your work.”
Brief notes on some phases of a many-sided problem may follow
this general statement, and if they should appear contradictory it
may be remembered that the contradictions of life are frequently
more apparent than real.
1. The distinction between charitable effort and charitable relief
should be steadily kept in view. The supply of the necessaries of
life may, in many cases, be the first cares; but should not this be
regarded as a temporary expedient, pending employment or more
adequate provisions, should continued aid, owing to illness or
accident, be found necessary. Has not Arnold White put the case
with great clearness ? We give too little or too much. Too little,


surely, if the daily dole is to represent the journey of life and the
whole supply for that journey. According to one visitor amongst
the poor “ The foundation of such independence of character as they
possessed has been shaken, and some of them have taken the first step
in mendicancy, which is too often never retraced.*’ Too much, there-
fore, if the dole takes the place of personal interest in circumstances,
individual effort to lift up the depressed, and prudent counsel con-
cerning the battle of life. It is an easy matter to give the dole; it is
a most difficult task to lift up those who are cast down. The dole
could be very greatly and usefully diminished, if the effort to brighten
and improve the whole circle of life could be intensified and
6ni£irQ! , ocl
2. A sharp line should be drawn between outdoor and indoor
relief.
Not a person in this assembly would wish to see the days of the
old English poor-house in sunny Australia. Even in old England
the aged poor are not always separated; and such separation, it may
be hoped, will never be allowed on these shores. “In poor-law
unions, where it is known that,‘indoors,* all that is necessary for life
will be’provided, but that to ‘outdoors’ nothing will be given, the
poor feel they are under a rule which they can understand. The
question is surrounded with difficulty, but so long as recipients can
exercise a choice, and, remaining without, both can both live on
public charity and follow the craft of mendicants, we must look tor
an increase rather than a decrease of poverty. Out-door aid should
touch casual, not permanent, cases. Permanent cases should be met
by a rule of deserts strictly applied.
8. The children of the needy and outcast—what is our duty to
them ? How can we save them from becoming blighted lives ? Can
we interpose between them and the obligations their parents owe to
them ? In many instances children are already under public control.
In these instances does industrial training keep pace with the
three R’s ? Are the boys taught trades and fitted for some of the
manifold forms of useful toil? Are the girls taught cooking
cleaning, and domestic service generally ? Do we treat the girl and
young woman in the house with the same respect and attention as
we do the girl and young woman in the workshop and house of
business ? If not, why not ? Is the care of the home of less conse-
quence, or less dignified, than the ready-made slop industry ?
In which establishment would the young man be likely to find the
best wife ? And, after all said and done, if we wish to obliterate
this curse of poverty, we must find the root of our endeavour in the
comfort and well-being of the homes of the people. Assuming, then,
the larger care in the industrial training of children within reach,
what shall be done with the children of spendthrift and reckless
parents—parents mentally and morally unfitted for the training of
children—insisting on the rights of oversight? Perhaps during


this session some member of Conference may offer a solution of an
urgent problem.
4. Another question on which information would be valuable is
the relation of charitable institutions to the families of prisoners.
It is by no means an uncommon thing within twenty-four hours of a
poor fellow’s arrest for an application for aid to be presented, and
for the question to be asked: What is an allowance during his
imprisonment? The very question suggests that charity may
become a premium to crime, or, at least, that a person may become
so degraded and reckless that the certainty of kindness, so far from
restraining, has the effect of encouraging him to further crime. If
a workman, and able to earn good wages out of gaol, why not be
compelled to work in gaol, and the penal, rather than the charity,
account charged with the support of the family ? If those valued
members in our communities who object to prisoners earning money
would consider that they are paying through the State to support
families who should, and might, be supported by their natural
bread-winners, would the opposition be so great ? Without detailing
illustrations, apparent severity in such matters is frequently the
highest form of kindness. The Chinese method of sending
prisoners into the bush to clear the land, sending their families with
them for mutual succour and support, indicates a wisdom which,
perhaps, the English races are not prepared to follow.
5. Care for those who, through no fault of their own, are brought
low, indicates a theme not frequently dealt with. If we could
decipher the pains and distress of those who never whisper life’s
crushing need perhaps with many fields of service overworked, with
persons constantly overlapping each other in work, we might find a field
scarcely touched waiting to yield a rich harvest of choicest fruits.
It is the old lesson in a somewhat new form. The work of charity
calls for discrimination, adaptation, personal interest, and supervision,
with just as little red-tape as may be consistent with the rule of
absolute duty.
6. Matters of detail may be merely glanced at, A ration—what
is it, how should it be varied ? Money—should it be given under
any circumstances, and, if so, how guarded ? What is the defect in
institutions and systems where the third and fourth generations are
receiving aid, and looking upon the business not only as the right
thing, but as involving a legal obligation ? What is the duty of
the colonies to newly-arrived immigrants, who declare themselves on
public funds almost as soon as they land; and what is our position
with reference to public bodies sending out such immigrants ? Can
anything be done in the cases of deserted wives and children ? In
charity work can we seek to prevent overlapping ?
7. Looking forward, is compulsory thrift entirely out of the
question ? In the event of large bodies of persons seeking to
settle on the land, should not the matter be so arranged that no


advantage would be given but what would be equally available to any
colonist ? Should not social workers consider and develop more
thoroughly the method of co-operative agency as the most available
plan for restricting the service of mere charity ? All reform
must be the result of slow and steady work, and the worker
be prepared to admit and correct errors. Thus, with life more care-
fully guarded, homes lovingly watched, the dwelling improved, and
the general outlook bright and cheerful, some provision made for a
rainy day, with, perhaps, a nation’s reward to the son of toil, who in
the strength of his manhood has never touched the bread of charity,
the better days for men might not be so far distant. “ Scientific
method has won the great victories of the day, and scientific method
is supreme everywhere except in those human affairs which most
concern humanity,” The statement of the Earl of Meath may not
be out of place in closing this testimony :—“ The object of all good
citizens should be to work towards the abolition of a pauper class,
and, whilst it exists amongst us, so to alleviate its lot that it should
not be driven to despair. It is quite possible to show sympathy
with those who have been brought to misfortune, and yet so to relieve
distress as to give no encouragement to idleness or vice.”
(The Conference adjourned till the afternoon.)


AFTERNOON SITTING.
PROFESSOR MORRIS PRESIDIGN.
Mr. G. E. Ardill read a paper by the Honorable Dr. Garran
on
Science and Charity.
The great characteristic of our modern age, so far as the work of
the human mind is concerned, is the steady advance in all those
departments of study in which the scientific method can be made to
play a part. The advance is rapid, and the advance is secured
precisely in proportion as that method can be made to prevail.
Science is very tentative, and its hypotheses often have to be revised
—sometimes even to be abandoned. Yet, in the main, its conquests
once made are made for ever, and its movement is steadily forward.
There is no need to waste time in giving illustrations of this ; the
fact is familiar to every educated man.
At a Conference like this, the object of which is to enable us to
feel our way towards an improved art of charity, the question is
natural and pertinent whether we cannot apply to our inquiry the
method that has been so fruitful elsewhere. The method of science
is simply the method of observation and experiment —the elimina-
tion of laws from bundles of correlated facts, or, in other words, the
learning of the lessons of experience. It may be said that if
experience is all that we want we have enough, and more than
enough, out of which to build a perfect system of charity. Charity
has been practised time out of mind, and, if experience is all that
science requires, we have no need of any more.
But it is not only experience that is required, it is the proper
utilisation of experience; the study of it to extract from it what it
proves and what it disproves. The unfortunate thing is that so
much of our experience has been wasted, at least so far as extracting
wisdom from it is concerned. That some charity has done good
we may not only hope, but believe; that some has done harm has
been shown so plainly that only those who will not see fail to
recognise it. But as to the exact balance of benefit or harm, and as
to the forces which determine the result to be good or evil, we can
say very little that is so definite and demonstrated as to furnish a
basis on which we can go on building. We have done very little
towards framing a trustworthy science of charity. During the
present quarter of a century a beginning has been made, but it is
still only a beginning.
Why is it that such an immense volume of experience in respect
of benevolence should have left so little behind it in the way of
guidance for future generations ? Obviously because the experience


has not been gathered up in the scientific way, and with the view of
perfecting the art of charity. Benevolence has begun and ended in
itself. When the emotion was satisfied, and the beneficiary was for
the time relieved, it was considered that the work was completed,
and that no further obligation existed. But there is the further
obligation of finding out what are the ultimate effects of charity on
the beneficiary and on the community at large. This obligation,
when it is once recognised, cannot be disowned. Philanthropy
begins in emotion, and the undisciplined man who cares for nothing
more than merely to satisfy his humane instincts will be content
with the emotion and with the action it inspired. But the more
truly moral the philanthropist is, the more social that he is in his
temperament, and the higher the type of his own humanity, the
more anxious he becomes, not only that he shall feel kindly, but that
his intended kindness shall be real kindness. For what is
philanthropy ? It is the disinterested love of mankind. If per-
sonal religion consists in loving the Lord our God with all our
heart, and with all our mind, with all our soul, and with all our
strength, then social religion consists in loving our neighbour as
ourselves. But it is no love of ourselves to injure ourselves, not
even though we may be following an instinct. It is quite possible
to follow our instincts to our own injury. Similarly, it is no love for
our neighbour to injure him by following an instinct, if the instinct
is followed injudiciously or to an extreme. Experience has proved
to us that all our instincts need to be regulated—that in this matter
the will must be under the guidance of the reason, and that the
reason must be enlightened by experience.
Let us grant, then, that philanthropy begins in emotion ; but it
ought not to end there. If it does it is unintelligent, it is reckless,
and very often defeats its own purpose. And yet for generations
that is practically what philanthropy has been. It has been a play
of the emotions without being followed up by a corresponding play
of the intellect. In other words, charity has consisted in granting
more or less temporary relief without any adequate attempt to follow
up the consequences of that relief. What has been the effect, in the
long run, of all our charitable institutions ? What has been the effect
on the beneficiary ? What has been the effect on the community ?
These are questions we cannot answer. And yet they are questions
we ought to be able to answer if we are to exercise charity wisely for
the future. There has been an immense opportunity for utilizing
experience if only it had been thought to be a part of charity to
trace it in its ultimate effects. We are now beginning to see that
it is an essential part if we can extract from our experience the
lessons it can be made to teach. Now that the spirit of science is
beginning to penetrate all departments of human activity, it is time
that we began, in a most methodic and accurate manner, to record the
results of charitable actions ; to tabulate and compare them ; to
p 2


treat these facts as we treat all other facts that are intended to yield
up a scientific result.
Professor Morris read a paper by the Rev. H. L. Jackson on
Pauperism—lts Nature , Causes , and Remedies.
My position, be it understood, is simply that of a private indi-
vidual—of one who is, at the same time, deeply interested in the
subject which is to occupy the attention of this important Con-
ference. It is necessary to make this clear at the first outset, and
for the following reason: I am on the committee of the Sydney
C O.S. It might, therefore, naturally be assumed that I speak as its
delegate. This is, however, not the case. I speak as the represen-
tative of no society at all, and, perhaps, with all the more freedom.
It is not my intention to take up the time of the Conference with
lengthy statements as to what is being done—or left undone—in
Sydney. They would not, I fear, be very encouraging statements.
Our would-be philanthropists are, it is true, many ; money is being
raised, and spent, freely. Charitable work is going on everywhere.
But so far as I can make out, the results are by no means commen-
surate with the amount of time, and labour, and money expended.
The cause of such failure is, in my opinion, not hard to find. It lies
in the fact that old and obsolete methods of administering relief are
still in general application. Scientific principles are utterly unknown.
As Professor J. R. Seeley would say, there is plenty of limb-activity;
brain-activity is, on the other hand, exceedingly rare. Our charity
workers won’t think. Hence the work done by our multitudinous
charitable agencies tends, in many cases, to increase the evils which
they are meant to cure. I have, in fact, long ago ceased to wonder
at the extent to which “pauperism” exists in Sydney. It is, as I
think, increasing upon us. It is likely to go on increasing, unless
wiser counsels prevail and issue in wiser action.
You will not, of course, misunderstand me. The term “ pau-
perism ”is used in its purely technical sense. The “ pauper ”is
that individual who, deservedly or undeservedly, is actually in receipt
of relief. This being clearly understood, I have no hesitation in
saying that there is a great deal of “pauperism ”in Sydney. There
is a great deal more than there ought to be, or need be. My conten-
tion is that the introduction of reforms in present methods of
administering relief would mean an immediate shrinkage in the
extent of pauperism. If those only were relieved who really need,
and deserve, relief—if they were always relieved on scientific prin-
ciples the’number of “paupers” in the metropolitan area would
speedily diminish. You will allow me to add here that, were there
but one solitary “ pauper ” left, he would be one too many.


The fact is that we, in Sydney, are still without anything which
deserved the name of “ charity organization.” How long we are
to remain in such lamentable case remains to be seen. W'e are, X
fear, sadly conservative in many things ; in this matter, most
certainly, we lag behind. There is, however, some ground for
encouragement, A few here and there are beginning to realize
the amount of harm which is being done, and the need of organiza-
tion. A few have already begun to stir themselves. It may
interest this Conference to hear that some ten or a dozen gentlemen
are engaged at the present moment in a voluntary inquiry into the
whole business; that four of them (among whom is the present
writer) have been appointed a sub-committee to report as to the
causes of pauperism, and to make suggestions as to the best methods
of grappling with destitution. Our report is now under discussion
by the committee of the whole. It will, I trust, be published shortly.
Our deliberations will not have been altogether useless if one result
be the immediate organization of charity on the lines of the London
Charity Organization Society—lines which, I would observe, seem
to have been very closely followed by the admirable society of which
Professor Morris is president. It does not in the least surprise me
to hear that much useful work is being done by it in Melbourne.
That work is being done on right lines. Hence success.^
I must apologize for the length of these purely introductory
remarks. I proceed at once to the subject of my paper. I would
ask you to consider the aim which we who are interested in charitable
work may, very properly, always keep before us.
To judge from the remarks which one frequently hears made,
there are those who regard “pauperism” as a divinely-appointed
institution —as part and parcel of the divine order. They glibly
quote texts in support of their position. “ The poor shall never
cease out of the land;” “Ye have the poor always with you.”
They seem to think that God has mercifully so ordained it that there
shall never be wanting a supply of poor people to serve the special
purpose of providing objects for the benevolence of the rich. They
give one the impression that they are prepared coolly to acquiesce
in the continuance of pauperism as a necessary institution, and
that their sole aim, therefore, is to lighten the lot of individual
paupers. Their exceeding “ religiousness >} leads some of them, at
any rate, not only occasionally to talk wondrous nonsense, but to
act not seldom with exceeding folly.
I don't regard pauperism as a divinely-appointed institution.
Quite the contrary. To me it appears in the light of a terrible
social disease—a disease which it behoves us to get rid of as soon
as possible. We may therefore say here that the speedy abolition
of pauperism ought to be our aim. It has been truly said that
“ Pauperism is the social enemy of the modern State. The State
wants citizens. It cannot afford to have any outcast or excluded


classes—citizens that are not citizens. All are citizens in name ; it
must see that they are so in reality.”
Shall we agree to regard pauperism as a social disease ? If so, let
us go on to consider the action which is usually taken in the case of
a physical disease or epidemic. It is, I fancy, two-fold. People
endeavour to ascertain, and then to remove, the causes from which
the disease springs. At the same time they do their best to secure
proper treatment for the sufferers from the disease. In both cases
they prefer the services of skilled practitioners. There is still, on
the whole, an instinctive distrust and dislike of the quack doctor.
And the result of this two-fold action is generally this : the disease
or epidemic gradually dies out.
It has always seemed to me that precisely the same thing should
happen in the case of the social disease of pauperism. Our aim, as
has been said already, is to get rid of it, root and branch. Our
action must, therefore, be two-fold in its nature. We must seek for,
and, if possible, remove the causes from which pauperism springs.
We must provide and apply adequate remedies in the case of indivi-
dual paupers. The difficulties are, no doubt, great. All the more
need, then, for wisely-directed energy.
Our aim has, in fact, now resolved itself into two divisions. There
are doubtless many at this Conference who will speak of the best and
the wisest methods of dealing with individual paupers. It has
occurred to me that I may do useful service by directing attention to
some of the causes of pauperism which, as it seems to me, are bound
up in the existing social order.
I am at least quite sure that there are other and deeper causes
of pauperism than those which are usually enumerated. Mention,
by all means, such causes as idleness, ignorance, improvidence,
betting and gambling, intemperance ; they are, no doubt, fertile
causes. So, too, is much of that which is known by the name of
“ charity.” Indiscriminate giving breeds the professional loafer,
and the formation of every fresh fund serves but to increase the
number of those who prefer to depend upon anyone rather than them-
selves. I would, myself, deal with all these causes were there only
the time at my disposal ; I certainly don’t wish to overlook them.
Only do not let us run away with the idea that these, and these only,
are the causes of pauperism. Seek to eradicate them by all means,
but remember at the same time that there are other and deeper
causes. Seek to eradicate them also.
To quote the words of an author is not necessarily to identify one-
self with all and every his views and opinions. I find myself, how-
ever, on more than one point in full agreement with Mr. Henry
George. With him, I believe that there are “ deep wrongs in the
present constitution of society.” With him, lam persuaded also that
they are “wrongs resulting from bad adjustments, which it is within
our power to amend.” Pauperism is an evidence of their existence.


In a gathering such as this there is no need to describe the nature
of these ‘‘wrongs” in detail. Enough to point to the marked con-
trast, even in these colonies, between “ the House of Have and the
House of Want.” Luxury and penury are found side by side.
The life of many is but a struggle for a bare subsistence. Some are
utterly crushed under in the race for riches. A pitiless, wasteful,
and “ entirely damned ” competition is seen everywhere. It is a case
of every man for himself, and the devil take the hindmost. An
individualistic selfishness is playing the very mischief with society.^
How ? Well, I, for one, have no hesitation in saying that this
same individualistic selfishness will be found at the root of most of
the evils which confront us at the present day. It may be seen in
those false ideas of duty and honour which are so painfully current
among us. It means “ over-production ” —and thousands starving.
It means, among other things, the recent disastrous strike. It
means the gigantic fortune—and the benevolent asylum. It means
the “sweating system,” with its attendant horrors. It means
pauperism.
It is, to my mind, clear enough that one of the deeper causes of
pauperism will be found in that individualistic selfishness from which
we are at present suffering. Assuming this to be true, and I believe
that it is true, the question to be considered is, naturally, this —How
is this cause of pauperism to be got rid of ?
“ Strong personal attachments and disinterested self-devotion ”
to borrow the words of John Stuart Mill—must replace individual-
istic selfishness. If society has become disorganized on the basis
of competition, it must be reorganized upon a nobler and a sounder
basis. Perhaps I may quote here the striking words of the present
Bishop of Durham, Dr. Westcott: —
“ Every member (of the new fellowship) must hold himself pledged
to regard* his endowments of character, of power, of place, of wealth,
as a trust to be administered for the good of men ; pledged to deepen
and to spread the sense of one life, one hope, one end for all, in the
household, in the factory, in the warehouse, in the council-room ;
pledged to strive, as he has the opportunity, to bring all things that
are great and pure and beautiful within the reach of every fellow-
worker ; pledged to labour so that to the full extent of his example
and his influence toil may be universally honoured as service to the
State.”
Realize the ideas set forth in that noble passage, and there will
soon be an end of individualistic selfishness, and with it of that
pauperism which is one of the foul blots on our present social system.
We descend, however, from the abstract to the concrete. Theory
must be reduced to practice. If society needs re-organization, how
are we to set about it ? What is it precisely that needs doing ?
People are apt to be horribly frightened at the bare mention of the
word Socialism. Some go so far as, apparently, to regard Socialism


and dynamite as interchangeable terms. There is, at any rate, a
tendency to compare Socialism with the views and opinions of in-
dividual socialists. I shall not, I trust, be held to identify myself
with all and every such views and opinions if I profess my acceptance
of what may be called the “ platform ” of the English Christian
Socialists. It is by them stated as follows :
1. “ Every man should work. There should, be no idle class—no
class of those who consume but do not produce; no privileged body
allowed to live upon the produce of others’ labour without rendering
a due equivalent/’
Upon which I, personally, would make the following remarks:—The
word “ work ” is to be understood in its widest sense; brain work as
well as manual labour. Those who, from whatever cause, are unable
to work are to be provided for; not, however, by any mere system of
“ doling out alms.” Life-long toil is not to be inevitable.
2. “ The produce of labour must be distributed on a much more
equitable system than at present. The landlord and the capitalist—
say the socialists—secure by far too great a share of the wealth
created by labour. They take the first, and often the largest, share,
with an acknowledged tendency to increase their takings until no
more than a bare subsistence is left to the labourer. The socialist
claim may not be orthodox economy from the stand-point of laissez
faire, but it sounds strangely like an echo of St. Paul’s dictum, ‘ the
husbandman that laboureth must be the first to partake of the fruits.’”
Upon which, again, I would merely remark as follows:—That
distribution of the produce of labour under which the enormous wealth
of some is co-existent with the poverty of others can be no equitable
distribution. It is not to the interest of the State that such a system
of distribution should continne. It needs altering.
My impression is that the realization of the ideas propounded by
the Christian Socialists would mean a rapid decrease in the extent of
pauperism. It may, however, be very fairly asked, how are they to
be realized? What practical remedy can be suggested ?
It has been said that “the suggestion of practical remedies
belongs rather to the province of the politician.” I am, on the
whole, disposed to agree with the remark. There is, however, no
reason why I should refrain from setting forth a few leading prin-
ciples, or from actually making suggestions where I feel tolerably
certain of my ground.
First, then, as to principles. Among these I would lay stress
upon the following:—
1. A due regard for the spiritual. It were well to show our-
selves mindful of Mazzini’s warning—“ Religion—l mean the real
thing and not the sham —is not to be ‘ banished from our work,’ v
2, A due regard for the Golden Rule—“ Do unto others as ye
would that they should do to you.” At present this rule is almost
entirely disregarded.


3. A due regard for the dignity of all labour, whether of hand or
brain. “ The ethical sentiment connected with labour is funda-
mentally erroneous.” It needs replacing by other, and higher,
sentiments. At present, it is the place which confers honour upon
the man ; I want to see it clearly understood that it is the man who
should confer honour upon the place.
4. A due regard to the value of honest rivalry. The present
system of competition is “ one that exposes to risk the life, character,
and happiness of millions. ... It tends to economic and
social disorder and insecurity.” It is a thing to be absolutety con-
demned and got rid of. There must, however, be full scope for
individual gifts and faculties to arrive at their highest possible
development. If the workers of to-day are, practically, engaged in
cutting one another’s throats, there must be plenty of elbow-room
for the workers of the future to excel among themselves. We would
not wish to reduce mankind to a dead-level of monotonous uni-
formity.
From suggesting a few principles, I proceed to suggest one or
two remedies. One such remedy relates to a matter of general
interest and importance. The other will bring me to that part of
our subject which, hitherto, has been but very briefly referred to. I
mean the duty of relieving individual paupers. Present con-
ditions being what they are, we cannot, as yet, dispense with
“ charity.”
1. Improved educational systems. —I am by no means opposed to
education by the State, At the same time, I feel perfectly convinced
that there is room for improvement in our State schools. There
must, in my opinion, be the clear and definite recognition by the
State that “ the religious idea,” to quote again from Mazzini, “is
the very breath of humanity.” And, for the rest, let me follow on
the lines laid down by Buskin. I want to see greater stress laid on
the necessity for teaching each individual pupil—
(a) The laws of health, and the exercises enjoined by them.
( b ) Habits of gentleness and justice.
(c) The calling by which to live.
2, Sweeping reforms in present methods of administering relief.—
It has been said already that much of the so-called “ charity ” of the
present day is but a prolific cause of pauperism. Notice this,
further. Not only are the poor and the sick and the helpless left,
for the most part, dependent upon the casual (and often ill-applied)
bounty of the well-to-do ; their feelings of independence and self-
respect are also weakened and destroyed.
Here, as I think, is a work for the State to take in hand ; a work
which may not be safely left to private or individual enterprise ;
which may, least of all, be left to the different religious bodies in
their present woeful condition of disastrous rivalry, a rivalry mani-
fested not so much in good works as in cutting each other out.


Two things have to be accomplished. A stop to be put to habitual
and persistent idleness. Provision, adequate provision, to be made
for those who, having toiled, can—from whatever cause—toil no
longer. And mark this carefully—provision which may be accepted
with perfect dignity.
May I go on to suggest certain steps which should be taken in
hand at once. I have been urging them for a long time in Sydney,
but, so far, my words have fallen upon deaf ears. There has not
been even that bitter execration which is one of the surest signs of
ultimate success. But I am still urging them. They are as
follow:
That a searching inquiry be made as to the number, nature, work,
scope, method, results, &c., of all and every the “ charitable ”
agencies (government, private, religious and general) which are in
operation, in order to ascertain—
(a) The extent to which distress, in its various phases, actually
exists, and the causes of such distress.
( h ) What is actually being done in the way of administering
relief, and what is left undone.
(c) What is being done wisely, and, therefore, well; what is
being done unscientifically and without wisdom, and,
therefore, badly.
( d ) What is being done that does not need doing, and, there-
fore, is probably followed by exceedingly mischievous
results.
A full and complete and tndhful report is, in other words, the
first thing which is wanted. It seems to me that the State might
very reasonably make it its business to obtain such a report. A
commission should be appointed to go into the whole business. The
governments of these colonies—certainly the government of New
South Wales—are usually found ready enough to accede to appli-
cations for relief. Their action may be right or it may be wrong.
That is a question which I won’t discuss now. We are, however,
justified in demanding that, if they do give relief, they should give it
on the right lines. Under present circumstances the chances are
that it is given on wrong lines. They might, at least, show their
willingness to rise to more scientific methods than those which
obtain to-day ; they would show it by setting on foot that careful
investigation which I have just suggested.
But I proceed. Such report having been obtained, it will be
necessary to take further action. The next steps will be as
follow :
(a) Compulsory closing of all such “ charitable ” agencies as
may be shown to be unnecessary, or to be doing more
harm than good.
( b ) Adoption of such measures and methods of administering
relief as may be proved to be really effectual (because


based on scientific principles), to the rigid exclusion of
all others.
(c) All such “ charitable ” agencies the usefulness of which
shall be fully established to be placed under the strict
control of a central board of management.
Such steps as these having been taken, the results will soon be
apparent. There will be an appreciable decrease in the numbers of
the genus pauper. There will be a corresponding increase in the
number of good and useful citizens. True service will have been
rendered to the State.
A few words more and I bring this hastily-written and some-
what disconnected paper to a conclusion.
It has been affirmed that our aim is two-fold, and that action of
two kinds is needed to accomplish it. Pauperism is a social
disease, and we are not coolly to acquiesce in the necessity for its
continuance. If we bend our energies to the task of devising the
best methods of relieving individual sufferers from the disease, we
ought at the same time to spare no efforts to discover and to remove
the causes from which the disease arises. I would urge the im-
portance of this view of the matter upon the members of this Con-
ference. An impression is abroad —one hears it, in fact, stated
that would-be philanthropists can suggest no other cures for
pauperism than those which consist, after all, “ in doling out alms.
The sooner such an impression is cleared away the better. Speaking
from my own experience, I do not feel myself able to say that it is
entirely a false impression. There are, at any rate, some grounds
for it. Ido most sincerely trust that the only impression formed
by those who follow the deliberations of this Conference will be that
there are in these colonies men (and women) who clearly understand
the two-fold nature of the work which lies before them, and who are
striving to do it.
Again, it has been more than hinted that the writer is one of
those who believe that changes must be brought about in tbe present
constitution of society before there can be any hope of getting rid
of pauperism—that many of the causes of pauperism are to be found
in present industrial and social systems—that, as a necessary con-
sequence, there is much in those systems which needs to be amended.
Let me, therefore, say here that I do not expect such changes, such
amendment, to come about in a moment. If progress is to be sure,
it must, and it will, be effected gradually and slowly. “ The
necessity of the constant growth and development of the social
organism has become,” we are told, “ axiomatic. No philosopher
now looks for anything but the gradual passing of the old order
into the new, without breach of continuity or abrupt general change
of social tissue. The new becomes itself old, often before it is
consciously recognised as new, and history shows us nothing but
constant gradual evolution.”


DISCUSSION.
Mr. Swinborn said : It struck him with regard to the last
paper that the scientific element seemed to preponderate over the
religious, and he was not sure that that was altogether a proper
basis to be on. So far as the Charity Organization Society was
concerned, its aims were rather to render people independent in the
future. Aid should be so extended that the person receiving it
should be benefited by it and rendered no longer needing it. In the
world there was a great deal of charity of a frothy sort done. It
did not seek to elevate the person as it might. Without genuine
religion these charitable institutions were never likely to domuch good.
Miss Spence said: In reference to what Mr. Jackson said
regarding some central or controlling organization, that, in her
opinion, was a most important point. She thought New South
Wales and Victoria suffered from the enormous multiplicity of
benevolent agencies, and there was no doubt that the Charity
Organization Society grappled with this multiplication to the utmost
of its power, and its records would be most valuable to those who
applied to them. But she had not yet been informed that the
Charity Organization Society was used as much as it ought to be
by benevolent agencies. There was an idea about that the Charity
Organization Society was a cold-blooded thing, and that it rather
commended itself to those who wished to shirk their giving any-
thing than to those who wished to give to the best purpose. But
she was quite sure that the Charity Organization Societies in
London and America were of a contrary character, and tended rather
to help those who wished to give that they might give wisely. A
central controlling body such as was mentioned by Mr. Jackson
would be a very valuable thing both to New South Wales and
Victoria. It would be an authoritative body, and would necessarily
be, as it were, a sifting and weighing body, and therefore she
thought it might reduce the inoperative character of their charity
without lessening the good they did. But the hopeful point with
her was not in what would be done for the old, but what would be
done for the young. She thought they would begin at the right
end in dealing with the young, and the step they had taken in the
colonies in removing the children from barracks into cottage homes
must have a great effect in the next twenty years in reducing the
number of those helpless lazy people who would rather live on alms
than work. They had the poor with them always, and no doubt
would have them always, but she would like to see them in fewer
numbers and suffering less. (Hear, hear.) There was nothing
like scientific methods for making these sufferings lighter, but she
would by no means eliminate religion from this work. With
regard to women who have erred, reformatory boys, and shiftless
people, nothing but religion, and that religion of an emotional
character, could have much effect. (Applause.)


Mr. Thomas Khodes said: There could be no doubt what-
ever that charity conducted on scientific principles was what was
desired at the present time. How that was to be obtained was the
question which they had to elucidate if possible. He feared that
the views expressed in the latter paper (Mr. Jackson’s) were rather
Utopian, and that they would not see the excellent machinery there
indicated soon. He agreed with Miss Spence that the young
children’s being allowed to grow up as they were was a very
important factor in producing the pauperism of the present. Next
to unworthy parentage, he thought a chance of vice in almost every
institution was helped by truancy. If the school boards could
grapple with this as it deserved, a very great advance would be made
in the matter of education of our young paupers.
Mrs. J. Harcourt said: She might state that the principal
cases which came under the notice of the society of which she had
been secretary for the last ten years were cases of the wives and
families of husbands who had ostensibly gone out of the colony and
had not returned. They had to assist, and, instead of always giving
money, assisted them to get work. In many cases there were mothers
with five or six children who were not able to make clothes. In
other cases the women were clever with the needle, and in such cases
they gave the materials for the clothing and had them made. Thus
they did not consider that it was charity they were receiving. There
were five different societies in Sandhurst, and she was sorry to say
that there seemed to be a good deal of duplication. At the Jubilee
distribution to the poor, when blankets were collected for, they found
that certain persons had had blankets from four different societies, and
had sold them, in most instances, for beer. The society gave orders on
grocers, too, and the people receiving them had been known to dispose
of five-shilling orders for beer. She thought much good would result
from a central organization, which would have a controlling or
advising effect on the various societies.
Mrs. Swifxe said: When Mr. Goldstein, the secretary, visited
Ballarat, they told him that their institution was conducted upon
the best lines, and did not see any special advantage in their sending
representatives to this Conference. Mr. Goldstein, however, had
pressed them upon the point, and urged that they should send dele-
gates to inform them how they had arrived at the perfection which
they spoke of. She had been engaged as a young woman at home
working in connexion with charity, and if asked her experience of
the work here would say, from her conscience, that the work was as
well managed as could be, yet they were in great danger of pauperising
the young people. (Hear, hear.) They could not do anything
with the aged ; they could not do much with those of middle life ;
but they could do a great deal with young people, and it was for
them that she felt sorry. In their mining community they had sad
accidents and sudden deaths taking away the father or the husband.


The widow was left, perhaps, with a family of six or eight children,
and there was nothing for the society with which she was connected
to do but to help her. They were thoroughly practical, and if she
were young and had no baby, they saw that she helped herself, as
they did not wish to take the backbone out of people, but wished
them, if they were helped, to help themselves. In cases where there
was a family the society every winter gave so much clothing to the
children, assisting the woman until they were able to do something.
They did not help them and leave them, but saw to getting the boys
and girls into something. She feared from her experience that there
was a great want of backbone amongst the young people, and that
they did not fully appreciate the duty, which they should consider
binding upon them, to assist their mother as soon as they became
able to do so, and no longer allow her to be dependent upon public
charity. She thought that the law should be amended in some way
to deal with this phase of the question. She very much feared that
they would have in the next generation young people who would
not be able to assist themselves, and this was a very great contrast
to the grand families which she remembered to have been brought up
in Scotland, where two members of it were probably sent to the
university, earning in one season what paid their fees in the other.
This, however, was not specially the case of Ballarat, but she feared
was noticeable all over the colony,
Mrs. Rowe said : They wanted a better system of truant
inspection. She had a great deal to do with girls belonging to
the reformatory, and the origin of their misfortune in ten out of
fifteen cases had arisen out of truancy. The want of a spirit of
independence was a dreadful want with these girls, and the older
ones were worse than the smaller, and preferred staying at Brookside
to going out to work. They were, however, seeking to educate the
girls into working, and of eighteen placed in the Wimmera district
they had sixteen well reported upon. If ladies in the country knew
the work which was to be done they might do much good for these
people. Ladies, for instance, on a station might take a four-
roomed house, and getting some Christian woman to look after it,
very greatly benefit these young girls. (Hear, hear.)
Dr. Curtis, in reference to truant schools, mentioned that
Mr. Burton, of Port Adelaide, had started a truant school entirely
of his own effort. The boys and girls he took in were the greatest
larrikins about Port Adelaide. Most of them had left the school,
the boys to be clerks, and the girls going to service or to work in
ome other capacity. Mr, Burton taught them himself after his
return from duties, and gave instruction in reading and writing,
his wife teaching the girls cooking,
Mr. G-. E. Ardill said: It was not always neglected children
who came to them for relief. They had many applications of
persons who came for assistance from other causes than being


neglected in early life. In connexion with the wife-desertion
question, it seemed to be felt in all the colonies. If some reciprocal
action should be taken it would be well. There should be some
correspondence between the various societies, but nothing more could
be done. As to single women being taken into the institutions,
in New South Wales, at least, they found that the law of affiliation
required great change. Young men had gone out of the colony to
other colonies, and hundreds of girls had been thrown on the State
owing to inability to trace offenders in this class of cases. They
had in Sydney several refuges for men, and they were in the habit
of going from one to another and returning in a few weeks
because no work was provided for them. If the work test was
applied it would do away with much of this. In connexion with
the unemployed, this labour test was applied to many of them, and
the consequence was that they shuffled off to some other part.
Truancy work was not well done in New South Wales, as large
numbers of children were allowed to go about the streets without
going to school. Nothing was done except in the case of children
who sometimes attended, but missed a few days now and then. If
these missed a few days in their attendance they were dragged
before the courts, and much distress was the consequence.
Mbs. Swifte read a paper —
Ballarat Female Home.
About 24 years ago rescue work was first commenced in Ballarat.
It had a small beginning, the Female Refuge, as it was then called,
being a small cottage, with accommodation for only a very few
inmates. After some years’ experience of the work, the committee
were deeply impressed with the fact that better and more lasting
results would be attained if they could get hold of these unfortunate
women in the earlier stage of their degradation. With this object
in view, application was made to the committee of the Benevolent
Asylum to form a ladies’ sub-committee to visit the Lying-in
Hospital in connexion with that institution. That request was
granted. This opened to us another phase of the work, namely,
the caring for the poor children. We found the usual custom was
for the mother, on leaving the hospital, to arrange for the boarding-
out or, in other words, farming of the child. It is needless to say
this led to undue mortality amongst the infants, besides too easily
relieving the mother of her responsibility. To prevent this, the
necessity was laid upon us of providing a place where both the
mother and child could be taken in, as we were persuaded that, if the
mother and child could be kept together, a humanizing influence
would be brought to bear upon the mother, and naturally assist in


her reclamation. This led to the building of what is now known as
the Ballarat Female Home, a brick building, providing a separate
sleeping-room for each inmate; also day and night nurseries for the
children, and as laundry work is one of the principal sources of
income, ample provision was made for carrying on the same. The
mother, when entering the institution with her child, has to stay for
twelve months ; during that time she is taught house-work and
plain cooking. Our income from laundry work averages from
£25 to £BO per month. The results of the above have so far been
to the satisfaction of the committee, and by keeping the mother and
child together we have proved there is no necessity for a foundling
hospital. As the work has gone on we have been painfully impressed
by the defect of the law in reference to these unfortunate women.
We all know that this is a delicate and difficult subject to deal with,
but so many cases have come under our notice in which* we have
found that, by simply removing to another colony, the sharer of the
woman’s sin has relieved himself of all responsibility, that we cannot
help feeling great injustice is often permitted by the present defective
state of the law. Surely this ought not to be. However great the
difficulties may be in legislating to meet such cases, we think par-
liament should be able to so legislate as to thoroughly protect the
rights of both parties.
DISCUSSION.
She would like to supplement this paper with a few words. She
would like to say that they had found their home very useful in
connexion with the Prisoners’ Aid Society, of which she was a
member. In visiting the gaol they met with a class of young
women—not criminals, not drunkards, and she could hardly call them
abandoned women. Many of them had come from situations, and
just from having no person to take an interest in them had gradually
drifted until they had got into the hands of the police. They com-
municated with these women, and offered them an asylum in their
“homes,” where they would have a chance of doing better for
themselves. They had very little hope of the older women, but the
class to which she referred specially was more unfortunate than
criminal. When they were taken in they had to promise to stay
six months in the home. Having their children with them, the
effect upon the women was astonishing. Many of these women
were in good situations now, but when taken in they knew nothing
of how to do work in a house. Under the management of a good
matron they were soon able to enter a house and do work to a
moderate extent. After six months they get a plain outfit,
but they are given to understand that they are to be taught to earn
their own living. The home had therefore saved the lives of many
little children, and had also done good for young women who were
there, and who really had no home training.


Mr. Henry Kelly, J.P., had to thank Mr. Goldstein, the
secretary, for trouble which he had taken in endeavouring to find
runaway husbands who had come over here from South Australia.
His society had sent twenty deserted wives, during the last twelve
months, to their husbands—some here, some to Sydney, and some
to Broken Hill; and they had, in some cases, got the money back
which they had subscribed to send the family.
Alderman G, P. Crouch, J.P., Hobart, read a paper written by
Lady Hamilton, on
The Anchorage Refuge Home, Hobart, Tasmania.
Of all the classes of society with which we are brought in contact,
and which appeals to womanly charity, none is so difficult to deal
fairly by as the “ fallen woman.” We use the word “fairly ” because
there are two duties that create the difficulty.
One is the duty we owe to the “ fallen,” the other is the duty we
owe to society, and also to the future generation. For to ease our
own present difficulties by burdening posterity is not the highest
form of charity by any means; and, in fact, the question is raised as
to its being true charity at all when it is absolutely irresponsible as
to future results.
These ideas naturally crossed our minds in considering the
question of refuges, and the following is an account of how we
arrived at our Anchorage Refuge Home, which has now been
established for more than twelve months, and about which we should
be happy to receive further suggestions of improvement. The
committee, composed entirely of ladies of all denominations, has
worked con amore, and without any member having before been
engaged on such work, so that each step has been gained by
experience, not bought very dearly, fortunately for us.
The scheme is as follows :
Only those who have once fallen are admitted into the Anchorage,
and, again, only after the expiration of the ten days after confine-
ment. When the government institution for that purpose ceases
to keep them they are taken in, so that things should not be
made too easy for them.
Prior to this, the committee visit and instruct the girls, and ask
them to come into the Anchorage Horae with their child.
Here they are encouraged to nurse their infant, and look after him
or her thoroughly ; and the love of the mother for her child is made
the motive power by which she shall keep good and straight when
she leaves the Home. She signs a paper consenting to remain
twelve months in the Anchorage.
596. E


After this period has elapsed, a situation is found for her, if pos-
sible, with the child ; or, if that is quite out of the question, the
child is boarded at the Home, at the rate of five shillings a week, or
boarded close to the mother’s place of work.
Those who have led these girls astray are, if possible, found—
obliged to pay something for the child as compensation ; and that
sum or sums are placed in the hands of trustees, to be used for the
child’s benefit when he shall require to be educated or apprenticed,
but not for his maintenance as long as his mother can work for
him.
A record is kept of each one passing through the Home, and it is
hoped that no mother nor child will ever be lost sight of by the
Anchorage committee, and that it will thus not only help the present
but the future generation.
Whenever one of these cases is met with, the clergyman, minister,
or priest of the parish is communicated with, and it then rests with
him to decide for or against his parishioner being taken into the
Anchorage.
The committee and the matron give the Anchorage girls all the
instruction they can, and once a week a service is given at the Home
by some clergyman or minister, and they attend some place of
worship on Sundays.
Every effort is being made to humanize these children of sorrow,
and as they become more and more loving to their babies, to each
other, and to their matron, it is felt that God's love will come to them.
To teach them to be Christian members of society is the main
object of our work.
It may be interesting to some of our listeners to have the annual
report of our work, and to inspect the balance-sheet.
As we do not approve of going into debt, we have necessarily to
limit our number of boarders. In the first twelve months the whole
work has not cost two hundred pounds, furnishing and everything
else ; but the Hobart citizens have been most liberal with their
donations in kind.
Washing is taken in, but with six mothers’, six babies’, and the
matron’s washing, cooking, and house-work to be attended to, it does
not leave a large margin of time for much money to be earned in
that line.
The rules are few , the bolts and bars none. If loving care can
teach them to be a law unto themselves always, and also teach them
that in their right up-bringing of their little child their womanly
dignity is restored, surely a place of not only repentance but of
regeneration has been found for them in this life and in the great
hereafter.
Our committee would like to know how other places deal with
those who have gone astray three or four times, and with their
children ?


Also, those who are found half silly, or wanting in wit or intelli-
gence, who have fallen ? Is there any provision made, or restraint
for them, to prevent such a class being replenished by such-like
children in the next generation ?
DISCUSSION.
Mr. J, Swinborn said something had been stated as to the
inmates of this institution being kept without bolts or bars. In
such places, however, you had to protect the inmates from their own
temptations, and, so far as he knew, it was better that they should go
out by the front door while they allowed them to go if they pleased.
He had known many cases where young women had jumped fences,
and been extremely sorry and ashamed in consequence, and had not
liked to come back again.
Mr. Birchall believed the Federal Council had introduced
legislation upon the question of deserting husbands, but it appeared
as if no benefit had arisen from it. The husband was arrested on
warrant and brought back to the colony where his wife resided, but
generally she refused to prosecute. Nothing more was therefore
done, and he went away the next time and was not found.
E 2


THIRD DAY:
(Thursday, 13th November),
MORNING.
Rev. J. W. SIMMONS PRESIDING.
Mrs. Wbickhardt’s paper on The Clunes Ladies' Benevolent
Society was taken as read.
Mr. J. A. Levey read a paper on
The Sweating System.
About the middle of the present year I was instructed by the
Government to make an inquiry as to what extent the “ Sweating
System” existed in this colony, more especially in connexion with
the clothing trade. Just at that time several articles had appeared
in one of the Melbourne newspapers on this subject. I remember
very well the first one. It was headed —“ Sweaters in Melbourne.
Horrors of the Clothing Trade,” and sweating was referred to as
mean, frowsy, depraved, and pitiful, and it was stated that it was
carried on in Melbourne to a degree hardly less horrible than the
incidents of its prevalence in London. The articles created a great
amount of sensation at the time, and we all felt that the clothes we
were wearing were very possibly made in some dirty loathsome
den, reeking with filth and disease, and that we were spreading con-
tagion wherever we went. I could not understand it. My official
duties had taken me into all kinds of work-rooms, and although not
wishing to say that all these rooms were, or are, everything that they
should be, still I had not seen any rooms to which such terms could
with truth be applied. Then, again, the articles referred to spoke of
the long hours that sweaters employed their work-people. The
Factories Act in this colony does not allow females to be employed
more than 48 hours a week, but here we read of 78 and 80 hours as
being an ordinary week’s work. This, again, was astonishing.
Employers of labour continually said that they could not obtain
the female workers they required, and that when any extra pressure
of work came they were compelled to make use of the privileges of
the Act and obtain permission to work over-time. It therefore
seemed unreasonable to say that women would work inordinately
long hours in wretched rooms when they could get work in decent
factories and work only 48 hours a week. As regards men, they
have their unions, and it was felt that they were not likely to be
imposed upon to any extent. With these feelings, I naturally


commenced my labours in a very sceptical spirit, and what was
found ? That the whole question had been so muddled up and com-
plicated by mixing together the various classes of work into which
the clothing trade is divided that the articles were—to say the least
—very misleading. The result of my inquiries was embodied in an
official report, and laid before Parliament, and a copy can be obtained
by any one who feels inclined to go into the subject more closely.
Before going further it will be well to state what is meant by
sweaters and sweating. It is really necessary to do this, for the
definitions are as numerous as they are contradictory. For instance,
the members of the Tailors’ Union look upon all men who do not
work under their rules as sweaters. Some people urge that sweating
is an abuse of the sub-contract system, and consequently there can
be no sweating where there is no sub-contracting; others, on the
contrary, maintain that sub-contracting is by no means a necessary
element of sweating. Some people contend that a man who works
a few hands, and does not work under what the trade looks upon as
log prices, is a sweater; whilst, on the other hand, I have been told
that the worst kind of sweating is carried on in some of the largest
factories.
The committee of the House of Lords which inquired into
“ sweating )} came to the conclusion that they could not assign an
exact meaning to the term, but for all that they thought the evils
known by that name to be a rate of wages inadequate to the
necessities of the workers, or disproportionate to the work done,
excessive hours of labour, and the insanitary state of the houses in
which the work was carried on. I was compelled to give some
meaning to the word, and after careful consideration defined it as
taking advantage of the necessities of a worker to enforce a rate of
wages which is below the current price, disproportionate to the
work done, and which compels inordinate hours of labour. It was
necessary in that report to mention every class of work in the
clothing trade, but that need not be done here. It was soon found
that the better class of tailors paid good wages, and whether they
employed their work-people in their own factories, or allowed the
work to be done away, it was done in clean and decent rooms.
Many cases which came under my definition of sweating were
found, and they, without doubt, showed that the condition of this
class of workers entitles them to assistance in some way. There
are a great number of women who, through not having been brought
up to any trade, and yet having from various circumstances to
support themselves —and very often aged parents or young families
—are compelled to work in their own homes and to accept as pay-
ment for the work they do almost any remuneration their employers
will give them.
Perhaps a few facts connected with some of the cases inquired
into will enable this to be better understood.


A woman with a sick husband and six children, the youngest
about three years old, was found making, or rather finishing, boys'
coats. For this work she was paid ss. a dozen, and she said that
by working 70 hours a week she could manage to do dozen.
That is earn about 275. 6d. a week by working twelve hours a day.
The husband was not in any lodge, and none of the children old
enough to earn anything.
Another case visited was that of a vestmaker. The payment for
this work was 12s. a dozen for men’s waistcoats, 10s. for youths,
and Bs. for boys. She told me that she often worked 84 hours in
the week, and to earn 30s. was compelled to do so. She was a
widow with three children to support, one a baby eight months old,
and had to pay 7s. 6d, a week rent.
Another woman visited was a trouser finisher. This means
sewing on buttons and making button-holes, turning up the bottoms
of the trousers, putting in a band, and one or two other little
things, and for this twopence halfpenny to threepence per pair was
paid. She was a widow without children. Her house, a little
wooden place in a right-of-way off a street in Carlton, was almost
destitute of furniture. She paid Bs. a week rent, and told me that
she could not earn more than 10s. a week, being too old to sit very
long at a time. Two or three people lodged with her and paid her
what they could. Judging from the appearance of the rooms and
beds (indeed there was not a blanket in the whole house) the amount
she would receive must have been very small.
Another case was a woman who is a slipper binder. There is a
good deal of work about slipper binding. All the machine work
has to be done and the slippers lined and got ready for putting on
the soles, or for the putters-up, as they are called in the trade. For
this work she got Is. 3d. a dozen, a penny farthing each, and out
of this had to pay for her own cotton and buy needles for the
machine, the latter item being very heavy with certain classes of
work. She was a widow with one daughter, a cripple, who was
able to do very little to help her. Still, if work was plentiful, she
could, by working long hours, earn £1 a week.
In another place a woman was found making canvas bags. The
canvas was not new stuff that could be easily cut and fixed for
working, but old canvas which is pulled off packing cases, and is
often covered with tar or sewn up in such a way as to mean a lot of
work getting it in order before the bag-making commenced. She
did not buy the canvas, oh no, there was some one else, her employer
who did this. The canvas was sent to her, and she made it into
bags at the magnificent remuneration of a dozen. She said it
was a very hard day’s work when she managed to make four dozen,
that is earn Is. 2d. Her husband was out of work, there were four
children to be provided for, and 7s. 6d. a week rent to be paid. The
bags were sold to the bone-dust mills. The poverty here was


dreadful. As already stated, the husband was out of work. He
was a hatter by trade, but there was no work to be done, so had got
a bottle-boy's licence, and having hired a pony and cart, was going
about collecting bottles to sell to the marine stores. These bottles
had to be bought, but he could not afford to pay for them in the
ordinary way, so invested 6d. or a Is. in some toffee, which he broke
up into very small pieces, and gave a piece to a child for a bottle.
When it is remembered that or Bd. per dozen is a good price
for bottles, and that the toffee and pony and cart had to be paid for
before any profit was made, it will not be hard to see that the
turnover would have to be considerable before very much could be
brought home at the end of the day to increase the Is. 2d. the wife
had perhaps been able to earn.
A shirt finisher was visited. To finish a shirt you have to sew
on eight buttons and make six button-holes, to fasten off four parts
that have been left by the machinist, to cut off the ends of cotton,
and put on a ticket. For this work she told me she was paid 9d.
per dozen. This class of work is so wretchedly paid, that no one
who is entirely dependent on it can attempt to do it, as it is
impossible to make a living at it. It must be remembered, that the
work this woman did, was of the roughest, and for the commonest
kind of shirt made. Shirt makers as a rule receive from 3s. to
4s. 6d. per dozen for their work, and in my report, an average of
sixteen shirt and underclothing makers was taken, and it was found
that by working hours, they were able to earn 11s. 3d. per week.
It must, however, be remembered, that they have to pay for their
cotton and needles, and very often the rent of a sewing machine as
well out of this amount.
I could go on giving numberless cases, but they are all practically
alike. The details are of course different, but the same hard work,
long hours, and wretched pay exists. Even if all could go to work
in factories, and there are many who cannot, whose domestic duties
of one kind or another keep them at home, still the factories are not
big enough to hold them, and it is feared that many employers are
not anxious to have them, seeing that without doubt the work is
done more cheaply in this way.
It may be wondered what has this to do with a conference on
charity. It has this to do with it. All the cases mentioned, and,
indeed, a very large percentage of outside workers, are to be found
on the books of one or the other of the various charitable institu-
tions about Melbourne. The pay these women receive is so wretched
that they find it impossible to live entirely on what they earn. The
work is intermittent, and in the instances given the amount of the
earnings is always to be qualified by the remark “if the work is
constant.” It would, therefore, appear as if this subject could be
discussed in connexion with Class D. in the appendix to our Presi-
dent’s letter of 30th June last, viz.:—


Outdoor Relief. —In the official report already referred to various
suggestions were made in the direction of legislation, but it was felt,
and indeed said, that unless prices could in some way be increased
they would assuredly fail to achieve the desired object, and that they
after all were simply tentative. If the condition of these workers
could be so improved as to enable them to support themselves, it
would be a great point gained. And now, is there any way of doing
this, and if there is, what is it ? It is undoubtedly much more easy
to find fault than to suggest remedies. It would appear as if the only
way in which these people could help themselves would be by form-
ing an union amongst themselves. If this were done, they could,
backed up as they would be by public opinion, secure better pay and
not have to work such long hours. It is feared, however, that this
is impossible. There are so many dependant on this kind of work
the necessities of whom are so great that they will work for anything
rather than not work at all. There is also another class, who are
not compelled to work—those who have husbands earning good
wages, or in some way have a certain income coming in every week—
who will also work at any price, simply because, as they say, it does
not matter. They only work in their spare time, and at the end of
the week have a few shillings which belong to themselves, and
which they can do as they like with. These two classes (and the
number of people who would come under them is very great) would,
it is feared, effectually prevent any such a thing as an union of outside
workers being formed. Then, if they cannot help themselves, who
is it that should help them ? Surely the employers and the public
—the employers by paying a little more for the work done, and the
public by paying a little more for the article purchased. It is only
a little. Sixpence more paid for a pair of trousers, or threepence
for a shirt, would, if this additional money were allowed to go to the
workers, make all the difference to them. People in this colony
earn good wages, and surely, if they realized what this cheap clothing
means, they would not always try and buy it. It is the keen com-
petition of the age, the desire to make business no matter who may
suffer thereby, that is very much the cause of this sweating. If
the owner of some large clothing factory would start and put up
the prices paid to these outside workers, pay them the same as the
inside workers get (for at present there is a difference in favour of
the inside worker of at least 40 per cent.), and then in some way let
it be known that the maker of the article in question has been fairly
paid for her labour, surely the public could be induced to buy it, at a
little higher price truly, but not at a higher price than is absolutely
necessary to enable the maker of it to live.
The sweating system is, without doubt, gradually obtaining a
footing in this colony, and, if it could be grappled with at once, it
might possibly be eradicated before it has got too strong a hold
amongst us. In what way this can be done is the problem to be solved.


DISCUSSION.
The Chairman said the Conference would observe that Mr. Levey
took as the foundation of his remarks the fact that in this wealthy
city of Melbourne they had a class of persons really in the position
of the English under the poor law. They got a trifle for their work,
and that trifle was subsidized by some public or private charity.
Mr. Hitchcock considered that they were grateful to Mr. Levey
for a paper on such an important subject, put into such a concise
form. He had, however, a feeling in regard to this matter that the
number of those affected by the sweating system was small in
comparison with the number of the workpeople. The great majority
received fair and good wages, but there was a minority of shiftless
and unfortunate people who were forced into the position of taking
work at any price they could get; but the accusation levelled at the
whole trades was positively unjust. The only practical suggestion
Mr. Levey gave, and he did not say that altogether, was that a
union should be formed by the workpeople amongst themselves. If
they took the consumers as a whole it would be found that they
would not take the trouble to inquire who made an article or what
was paid for making it. They did not look at that, but simply
bought in the cheapest market, though there might be a small
section of the population prepared on principle to give a higher price.
Miss Spence had been very much interested in Mr. Levey’s paper,
but she did not think that the evil complained of was so much the fault
of the middleman as of the great buying public, which wanted a
cheap article. She thought the wholesale houses, as a rule, were the
agents of this sweating. They did not care how the article was
made. They were a very soulless and conscienceless body. (No,
no.) The fact was patent. It was not possible for the unskilled
widow to maintain a young family by herself, yet if the wages were
put up to the rate at which she could make things as comfortable as
when her husband was alive it would mean putting up the price of
the goods, and raise both wages and rent. She did not think that
that could be expected. The worker must have some assistance,
but it should not be pauperizing. The woman should have a claim,
and not be pauperised by the help given. It was often the unskil-
fulness of the woman who was “ sweated y which prevented her
getting good wages. If she could be taught to do something better
a very important result would be obtained. When she read in the
“ Bitter cry of outcast London ” that the boys were singing hymns
over the match-box making she thought it would be better for them
to be making something else, and getting more money for it.
Mr. Alderman Crouch agreed with Miss Spence that if they
could only get people to do their duty everything would be right.
But there are some adages in business that could not be got over.
One was that there was no friendship in business, and another was
that competition was the soul of trade.


The Rev. C. Strong, D.D., said: He Lad listened with very great
interest to the very temperate paper which Mr. Levey had read, and
he was sure that the Conference was indebted to him for it. He did
not think the large question of sweating was one that could be
discussed before that Conference, but the details very legitimately
came under the consideration of such a body as that. He could
corroborate every word that Mr. Levey had said with regard to the
poor woman who had been referred to. He thought the first speaker
in the debate had said that it was only a minority of the people who
were suffering in that way. Fortunately it was so, but so long as
there was one person suffering the thing was not right. There was
a large number of people in the poorer parts of the city who were
working, as Mr. Levey had said, for long hours for a miserable
pittance. Every humane and charitable person must wish to remedy
such a state of matters, and the wonder was that in a city which
called itself great, and which abounded in so many handsome
churches, kept up at large expense, that the question of the poor
had not become a burning one long ago. He did not understand
how people could go to their comfortable churches feeling that there
were people in the neighbourhood barely able to make a living, and
that there were little children suffering. He thought the proposal
of Mr. Levey was at present the most practical one, viz., that the
women should form a union. He thought the formation of a strong
union of these outside workers would do good, but it would require
some persons of a different grade of society to help those who formed
the organization. Once the public interest was aroused they would
find a way out of the difficulty. The last speaker had mentioned
some adages which would remain true as long as human nature
lasted. He did not, however, agree with him. He did not think
that they depended upon human nature, but rather that they
indicated animal The further they got towards human
nature the more these ideas would disappear. The only way in
which such evils, which were a part of larger evils, could be
remedied was by co-operation. If these people were working under
the co-operative system they would receive a just reward for their
arduous toil. They owed a debt of gratitude to Mr. Levey for
bringing the subject of this paper before the public, and whether
they were able to get a remedy or not when public sympathy was
awakened the remedy would be found out, but it would be, he
thought, in the direction of co-operation.
Mr. Henry Kelly, J.P., as one of the visitors from the Charity
Organization Society in Adelaide to places such as were described
by Mr. Levey, might say that they got the name of the house and
went there as quietly as possible, and having inspected it reported
the wretched condition of the surroundings to the employer. These
persons, in many cases, were quite unaware of the condition which
the people were in, and in many cases they had got substantial


increases in the rate. (Hear, hear.) Every member of the
Strangers’ Friend Society in Adelaide when he joined pledged
himself to be a visitor. He might have three or four or half-a-
dozen to call upon, and if he was acquainted with these facts he
would see certain persons, and these persons were appointed to go
and put the case fairly before the employers. And there were very
few cases where they had not succeeded in obtaining an im-
provement.
Colonel Goldstein said : They should in this matter discuss
as closely as possible to the subject in hand. He was glad to hear the
paper, for while it did not come within the scope of their work, yet,
in so far as it related to charitable funds it was a question that
might well be discussed. Unfortunately, our experience in Mel-
bourne was that some of the societies whose duties it was to relieve
absolutely gave less relief to those sweatees than they gave to
others, on the ground that they were doing work, while to those
not doing work, but having sons and daughters who could keep
them, these societies gave more relief. He was utterly opposed to
the idea that a union would effect the slightest alteration in this
matter. (Hear, hear.) If they abolished sweating, they abolished
the means of working for those who obtained that small amount of
labour. If they formed a union amongst the present class of
sweaters the employers would not employ them, because there would
be no necessity to give them lowest rate for finishing. Miss Spence
had touched the real question, which was unskilled labour. The
sweating might be considered to arise from two causes. The large
quantity of labour lying idle because it was unskilled was one cause,
but it was also caused in another way, and he thought a more
secret way. This cause was the excessive amount of labour in the
families of the skilled labourer. The skilled labourer could do so
much work per week. He had a family of grown up daughters.
These would say, “We have a great deal of idle time, we will take
up some of this work and do it at any rate which offers.” I hen the
poor starving outcast came in and would say, “ Give us this work,
and we will also do it at any rate that offers rather than not have it at
all.” They therefore got eight or ten shillings when they should
have fifteen shillings per week. It seemed to him that the union
would not help the sweaters in the country. To form unions
amongst the workers would simply drive the work out of the
market altogether, so far as those at present complaining were
concerned.
Mr, Guillaume said : Several speakers had pointed to the
existence of unskilled labour as being the radical cause of this
unfortunate and cruel rate of payment. He thought they must go
to the root of the matter by changing the system of education and
introducing technological education, as he did not think there would
be so much want of work if they had skilled labour.


The Honorable Mr. Abbott said : They were greatly in-
debted to the reader of the paper, because what he laid before them
was official work. He did not think he had exaggerated it in any
way, but at the same time had brought knowledge forward which
must be serviceable to the whole community. This was a very
old trouble. It was a trouble in the time of Tom Hood when he
wrote the “ Song of the Shirt.” It was the first article a man put
on, and with it was the beginning of his trouble. He believed that
the sweating system had increased instead of decreased. There was
no sentiment in business, every one went in to do the best he could.
The more this matter was talked about, and the more they could
show the wretched places in which clothes were made, the sooner
they would get rid of this difficulty. If they could get up a feeling
against the use of “ sweated” clothes it would be a good thing.
Mr. J. A. Levey, in reply, said that Mr. Hitchcock had alleged
that the persons suffering from the sweating system were a minority.
He, however, agreed with Dr. Strong that there was a small
minority, and any minority was too great. As he had said in his
official report, it was only the rough kind of clothing that was made
by “ sweated” labour at all. He did not think the clothing they
were wearing was at all likely to have been made in that way. He
agreed with Mr. Hitchcock that purchasers would not be at all
likely to inquire the price paid for the making, but people should be
educated to understand the advantage of more being paid for the
article. With regard to the organization in South Australia and
elsewhere, he thought from what he had heard at the conference that
the organization was better there than here. The idea of visiting
the employer to induce him to deal more liberally with the workers
would be well, but such a work as this of course he could not do,
his official duty simply being to report. He feared with Colonel
Goldstein that a union of the outside workers would be a difficulty.
If some society could assist to form a union some good might be the
consequence.
Miss Spence asked if there was much of the pocket money
earning which Mr. Levey had alluded to.
Mr. Levey said there was a great deal.
Colonel Goldstein read a paper by Mrs. Goldstein—
United and Systematic Charity.
Visitors amongst the poor who are interested in the reform of
charitable relief find that the difficulties that beset them are almost
insuperable. It is much to be regretted that relief societies know
so little of each other’s methods of helping the poor, consequently
it is found over and over again that a case supposed to be receiving


help from only one society is getting it from several. This over-
lapping is in many instances most hurtful in its effects and a great
drain upon charity relief funds, besides frustrating the object that
all true philanthropists consider primarily important, viz., social and
general reform. The fact must not be ignored, however, that there
are many poor people, especially amongst sweated finishers who, even
with the help received from several societies, eke out only a bare
living. It is absolutely essential that a full record of every case
assisted by relief bodies should be kept, stating particulars under
such heads as—married or single, widow, deserted wife, number and
ages of children, number of rooms in house, rent, sanitary
conditions, kind of work engaged in, weekly earnings, the amount
received weekly or otherwise from any society. These records might
be forwarded monthly to the Charity Organization Society, or to
some local branch in connexion with it. Such a system of
organization could not fail for one thing to get at the root of much
of the imposture that escapes detection under existing methods
The necessity for taking note of all matters referred to above will
be patent to any observant visitor. How frequently it is found that
a family of six or eight are crowded into two or three miserably
small badly ventilated, dilapidated, and in every respect insanitary
rooms with small yards attached, and shockingly drained. The
outside appearance, however, of this class of house does not always
indicate how bad the internal conditions are ; external repairs are
frequently effected, patching up and fresh paint make the poor
worker’s home (?) look more decent, and so long as the poor can
secure what they consider a cheap house the healthfulness of it must
be a secondary consideration. Rent is a continual nightmare to the
poor, especially to widows and deserted wives who are charwomen or
sweated finishers. Amongst this class it takes two or three days’
earnings of each week to make sufficient to pay the rent. A little
thought will show that not much is thus left to provide food and
clothing for even a small family. This is a section of the poor
who would certainly reap the benefit of better organized charity.
The giving of a weekly dole will not and cannot effect reform,
and this, as stated above, must be a district visitor’s aim. Every
insanitary and over-crowded house should be reported, and non-
attendance of children at school should be brought under the
truant officer’s notice. In these matters the law can help us if
it will only appoint a sufficient number of officials. Pity, alas
that the law cannot help us more in dealing with the loafer and
confirmed drunkard. The sooner some steps are taken that will
make it possible to include this unfortunate class amongst those
who can be helped to help themselves the better will it be for
society at large. If a man or a woman of the drinking or loafing
order will not support their offspring the powers that be should
surely compel them to do so. It is criminal to allow children to be


brought up in the confirmed drunkard’s hovel, where many a
precious little life is sacrificed owing to ill-treatment and neglect. Is
it to be expected that good citizens can be reared and trained in
such a poisonous and unwholesome atmosphere ? Until some
united effort is made by all charitable societies to work on co-opera-
tive lines little can be effected in the way of reform. As things are
hundreds receive help who do not deserve it, and others whose lives
of wretched slavery might be made more bearable consequently
continue to suffer. Why should the different societies hold aloof
from each other ? Are not their aims similar ? Surely in these
days of a broader Christian charity every one should be able to
work on common ground for the benefit of suffering and oppressed
humanity. Others papers will probably deal with the question as
to how co-operation is to be brought about. I merely wish, as one
who has had much experience among the poor of Melbourne,
specially in Collingwood, to emphasize the necessity for more
united and systematic effort if imposture is to be prevented and if
the poor are to be more adequately relieved. I wish also to insist
upon the necessity for charitable societies and district visitors
being more than mere distributors of alms, and upon the necessity
for interesting themselves in discovering the causes of poverty and
in devising practical remedies for the social evils which come
under their notice.
DISCUSSION.
Mrs. Rowe said, with reference to one point in the paper which
had just been read, she might say that there was no occasion now for
children to be brought up in drunkards’ homes, as the present law
gave the power to take children away from such homes. The Act,
however, was not used sufficiently.
Mrs. Swifte said, in reference to the houses of the poor, it had
occurred to her often (not so much in Ballarat, but in larger cities at
home where she had some experience) that it was a great pity that
there should not be some law to prevent landlords from crowding
large families into such miserable hovels as were sometimes seen.
The morality was interfered with by such a practice. She did not
see how girls could be kept pure and boys honorable under such
circumstances. She would be very glad if the Government brought
in some law for pulling down these miserable dwellings, and not
allowing the erection of houses in which proper decency could not be
observed.
Mr. G. E. Ardill did not wish Melbourne to have the credit of
being the only place where there was overlapping of charity. The
need of a union among the charities in Sydney was very evident, but
unfortunately jealousy amongst the charitable workers had to be
contended against.
Mr. Guillaume considered it would be very beneficial if the
various charitable societies worked more in unison with the Charity


Organisation Society. He had often been struck with the question
spoken of by Mrs. Swifte as to rent and the miserable houses which
some people had to live in. In London the matter was being grappled
with. It would be a great assistance to those who were struggling
to rescue girls and discharged prisoners from a state of degradation
if squatters and others living far away from the temptations of city
life would co-operate in finding employment.
Mr. Hitchcock thought they wanted a landlord’s and tenant s
law which would prevent overcrowding in houses in the same way
as was provided in the Factories and Shops Act. The landlords
should not be allowed to let houses which were unfit for habitation.
Mrs. Rowe said such a law was wanted not only in the town but
in the country. ,
Dr. Curtis said i The Health A.ct gave the health officer great
power! He was health officer for Port Adelaide, and made it his
business to make a house visitation to all the lodging houses. He
spoke to them and reasoned with them, not as health officer, but in
order to save them from wanting a doctor, and he thought a great
deal of good might be done in this way.
Dr. Strong —said : The paper referred to Collingwood, where he
knew himself that the health officer was very efficient. But the
district was too large for one man to attend to. Some one had also
referred to our building Acts. We had building Acts, but it was
very difficult to put these into force. It was all very well to talk
about the landlord, but he was like the rest of them, trying to do his
best, and very often he required his rents to support himself. But
would it not be possible in a place like Melbourne to have a large
building society which would put up proper houses for working
people to be let at a moderate rental. He knew it would be said
that if they put a certain class of people into a good house to-day it
would be like a piggery the next day. But that should be dealt
with as it had been dealt with in London. He thought it would be
a good thing if every house, not only those of the poor, but those of
the rich, were thoroughly inspected, and no one was allowed to live
in it unless it was properly finished and drained. There was, he
thought, something in the remark of Mr. Guillaume that there
should be local boards in the country to which charitable institutions
might refer. Many of our societies tried to send workpeople or
children to the country, but they were at their wits end to know
where they could find work. If they had in every country place
some charitable board to which they might refer all such cases, he
believed that an enormous advantage would result.
The Honorable Mr. Abbott hoped they would not go on
seeking for more Government aid. They were now asked to have a
policeman going to the houses to see how many people each man
had living under his roof. They should rather begin to teach people
to improve themselves, and if they could induce them to help


themselves to better houses, a proper work would be done. He did
not think we could stand any more officials and remain a civilised
people.
Colonel Goldstein said in reply : That the paper which he had
read for his wife, had led up to a paper which he had himself
written. She was anxious to have dealt with the insanitary condition
of the dwellings, and all she wished to advance on that subject was,
that while we had inspectors, we had a city with 450,000 people
here, and an increase in the number of officials was necessary.
Savings might be effected in other ways, and he believed that one
of the best means of saving was not to give so much in charitable
aid. They should leave it more on the shoulders of the people, and
a few officials might be added in the meantime. The laws were not
quite good enough, and when matters were reported to the police,
they were slow to act. His wife had wished to emphasize the fact
that a little closer inspection was necessary, and that the laws of
sanitation were not made sufficiently known by the district visitors.
The landlords of the small ill-drained houses received a rent of 65.,
75,, and Bs. per week for two rooms. That might appear a small
rent, but it was a large one to be paid by a charwoman getting
perhaps about 4s. a day, and not in constant work. The district
visitor should report such a dwelling. The landlord of that class of
house received a large return for his outlay. Such a property would
be valued at about £l2O, and at six or seven shillings a week it would
be about 13 per cent. If a person wished to go into a better house
they had to pay eleven or twelve shillings a week, and the owners
of the better class of houses did not receive anything like the same
percentage on the money invested in their construction. The
principle point which was advanced was, the necessity for the
uniting of all the societies for proper organization.
A paper by Rev. J. D. Langley, of Sydney, was read by Mr.
Harlin on
Able-bodied Pauperism.
Able-bodied pauperism in a young country like ours ! To those
unacquainted with our social condition, such a thing would seem
impossible. A vast territory capable of supporting millions—a mere
handful of inhabitants—on every hand sources of wealth well nigh
inexhaustable, undeveloped for want of labour. Yet thousands of
able-bodied men unable to find employment! Unable to support
themselves and their families ! Can this be possible ? It is a sad
fact. We have to-day not only to face the problem of dealing with


pauperism, the result of sickness, of old age, of crime, but with a
mass of able-bodied pauperism, which is unnatural to a young
country.
This fact has, in a remarkable way, been emphasized by the late
unhappy strike. To what is the failure of the labour organizations
mainly to be attributed ? To the fact, that there were thousands of
casual labourers out of employment, ready, even at the risk of personal
violence, to take the place of the strikers. For months the crowds
of men who hitherto had been living on alms have had plenty of
work, and there has scarcely been an appeal to our charity. Thus
what many of us have known from painful experience has now been
made apparent, that there are large numbers of able-bodied men
seeking employment in vain, and who have only been kept from
starvation by the charity of the public.
I do not propose to enter in this short paper upon the causes by
which this state of things has been brought about; they will
probably be dealt with by others. I desire rather to call attention to
facts as they exist, and to make one or two suggestions towards a
remedy.
Ist. I would suggest the discontinuance of indiscriminate alms-
giving. Let me not be misunderstood. So long as there is no pro-
vision for obtaining work for the unemployed, such alms-giving
must and will prevail. We cannot allow our brothers and our sisters
to starve ; we must provide for them by doling out alms, until some
better system has come into existence. But what is the result of this
system —a system into which we have been forced for want of a
better ?
Every time you supply a man with money or food for which he
has not laboured, when he is able to labour, you do so much towards
destroying his self respect, and making him a pauper. Soon such a
man learns how easy in this country it is to live well without labour
—to get on comfortably as a professional beggar. The result of this
we see in the crowds of such persons that exist in all our cities ;
persons who will not work, and are not likely to, so long as they are
supported by alms-giving. Their self respect is gone, they have
become mere paupers.
Such people need help from the charitable, but help to enable them
to help themselves, help to find them employment, and, if necessary,
to fit them for employment.
2nd. I would therefore urge that in all charity organizations
provision should be made systematically for finding steady employ-
ment for persons who need it.
Whenever men or women need an opening for earning a livelihood,
such an opening ought to be provided. This would at once do away
with the system of indiscriminate alms-giving. Persons applied to
for alms could send the applicant to a place where suitable help
would be rendered.
596. F


An honest effort should be made to bring together would-be
employers and would-be employed.
In the Dominion of Canada there is, I believe, a Government
organization through which every newly-arrived immigrant is met,
his capacity for labour found out, and he is sent to such place as
his services are known to be needed. This seems to me to be a direc-
tion in which charity organizations should aim. A central depot in
the metropolis of each colony, with ramifications in the shape of
branches or agencies all through the country, would he a means
whereby a very large amount of this casual labour might be absorbed.
3rd. But in addition to this there should be some provision for
testing the ability of the workers—their fitness for various kind of
labour. This can only be done by having a central place where any
able-bodied person might come, and where employment would be
found for him, with shelter and food. There are many descriptions
of work that could be found for such people. It need not neces-
sarily be remunerative, the main object in providing it being to test
the sincerity and capacity of the persons employed.
4th. I think that in connexion with this industrial centre there
should be some means for giving, to those who have the capacity for
it, technical instruction. A good many of the unemployed might
thus be trained to skilled labour. In our gaols men are so taught,
and the knowledge thus acquired has been the making of many a
man. Why should not our men and women, whose only crime is
that they have sunk into pauperism, be trained to some skill in
labour, and thus become a source of wealth to the community to
which they belong ?
sth. Then there appear to be endless openings in the direction of
gardening, agriculture, and settlement on the lands of the country.
Men need training for this, but such training might be supplied.
We have recently had from England proposals by General Booth,
of the Salvation Army, which have somewhat startled us. It is his
intention to establish in the colonies industrial settlements for
paupers and reformed criminals. Such a proposal would be met
with very strong opposition if it were actually submitted to any of
the Australian Governments. It would be felt (and, I think,
naturally) that such industrial settlements ought to be established
in England, Scotland, and Ireland. There is still ample room in
the old country, and the English people have a right to care for
their own poor and their own criminals. In the colonies the addi-
tion of such a class would, I fear, only prove an aggravation of our
great social problem.
But why should not such industrial homes be established for our
own poor ? On the banks of our great rivers, by means of irrigation,
and in other places where irrigation is not needed, ample provision
could be made for the settlement of millions of people. All that is
needed is proper organization, and the employment of capital that


would be returned fourfold. Surely there is amongst us in these
colonies sufficient philanthropy, sufficient public spirit to provide the
means for such organization. The money which is now wasted in
indiscriminate alms-giving, and which is often worse than thrown
away, would, if employed in the direction I have indicated, be
returned fourfold, and, instead of producing pauperism, would en-
courage industry and thrift, and help us to raise our country to the
greatness to which we all hope it may eventually attain.
(The sitting was then adjourned.)
F 2


AFTERNOON SITTING.
MR. A. SOLOMON PRESIDING.
Mr. Birchall read a paper on the
History of the Launceston Benevolent Society .
Mr. R. C. Norman read a paper upon
Hospitals and their Administration.
Like the poor, the sick and suffering we shall always have with
us. Even should that blessed time ever arrive, when the laws of
health are intelligently understood and universally obeyed, there will
still remain to be dealt with the victims of accident, as well as of
certain forms of disease that—so far as our knowledge at present
extends—would seem to be non-preventable. Hence, it is incum-
bent on all civilized communities to make adequate provision for its
unfortunate members who may suffer from poverty and sickness. _
At the outset of my remarks on “ Hospitals and their Adminis-
tration ” I wish it to be distinctly understood that I am not addressing
you in* my official capacity as a hospital secretary, but that the
opinions hereafter expressed are entirely my own, and therefore that
I alone am responsible for them, #
Though I cannot claim to speak with the authority of a veteran,
nor with the technical knowledge of an expert, still I trust I have
not spent ten of the years of my life, intimately associated with
hospital management here and elsewhere, without gaining more than
a superficial knowledge of my subject.
First of all to consider hospital buildings. Now, tne question or
locality and site is one of paramount importance, for upon a judicious
selection—where a choice is offered—depends not only the comfort
and well-being of the inmates, but to a great extent the usefulness
of the institution. Accessibility is the first desideratum in a general
hospital where you have to treat casualties and out-patients; while
special hospitals—such of those for fever patients, “ incurables
or “convalescents’ s—are 5 —are best well removed from populous neighbour-
hoods. As regards site, it does not require a savant to know that
your ground should be neither too low nor too level, otherwise you
will probably by troubled with damp, and have difficulties in the dis-
posal of your drainage. ....
Then again, you want ample space, not only for the buildings
themselves, but—if possible—around your buildings, so that if your
hospital reserve is situated in or contiguous to other reserves so much
the better, as long as it is easy of access.


But, after all, seeing we must needs “ cut our coat according to
our cloth,” it is useless attempting to lay down hard and fast rules
as to where a hospital should or should not be erected. The field of
selection being limited, all one can do is to choose the most convenient
and eligible site that offers.
As regards the size and structure of hospitals, not only do
“ doctor’s differ,” for that goes without saying, but architects,
boards of health, and hospital committees disagree. We need not
go a hundred miles to find expert opinion hopelessly at variance as
to the sanitary fitness of a building for the treatment of the sick.
My wisest course, therefore, will be to observe a discreet silence on
such a vexed subject as hospital architecture.
On the question of size, I am inclined to think that a hospital of
300 beds is quite large enough to administer efficiently and with
good medical results. Some may say that such a hospital is too
large ; others again, that it is more economical and advantageous
to have one hospital of 500 or 600 beds than two with half
the number ; and on the score of economy probably the latter are
right.
There are, however, certain very serious objections to colossal
institutions of this description. In the first place, it is almost
invariably found that the larger the hospital the higher the death-
rate. In proof of this fact let me quote a few statistics compiled by
that eminent medical authority, the late Sir Jas. Simpson. Taking
his figures from “ amputations recorded in the Operation Books
of various hospitals, he found in the large Parisian hospitals con-
taining over 1,000 beds that 600 patients per 1,000 of those operated
on did not recover. In the English hospitals of 301 to 600 beds,
410 per 1,000 died ; from 201 to 300 beds, 300 per 1,000 ; from 101
to 200 beds, 230 per 1,000 ; 25 to 100 beds, 180 per 1,000 ; whilst
in cottage hospitals, containing less than 25 beds, the deaths result-
ing from amputations were only 140 per 1,000. The tabulated
results in lying-in cases, though scarcely so much to the point, are
still more striking, for out of some 888,000 women delivered in
hospitals 35 per 1,000 died, while out of 934,000 confined at their
own homes only 4‘75 per 1,000 died.
Then there can be no doubt but that large hospitals, like other big
institutions, are more difficult to control than small ones, for the
more numerous and complex the staff the greater the liability to
friction and labour troubles.
We all know “ there are black sheep in every flock,” and the
larger the flock the greater number of such undesirable animals will
probably be found in it.
On the other hand, small hospitals have their disadvantages, and
are of little account as “ medical ” or “ nurse-training schools.”
The best men in the profession are not likely to seek honorary
appointments on the staff of a “ one-horse concern ” if they can get


elected to the staff of a large institution. They all go for the biggest
thing, and I don’t blame them, for the chances are I should do the
same myself. Of course, we know that primarily hospitals exist for
the treatment of the sick, but it must not be forgotten that they are
invaluable schools for the medical student and the nurse, neither of
whom would be likely to become “ shining lights ” in their respec-
tive professions without hospital experience. Expense of adminis-
tration is another disadvantage that the small hospital generally
labours under. For confirmation of this you need only look at the
total cost per head as given in Table VI. of the Inspector of
Charities’ Report in this colony, where you find that the hospital
having the lowest daily average of patients shows the highest
average cost per patient.
The question of the ventilation and drainage of hospitals is one of
great importance, for the want of fresh air aggravates disease,
increases the dangers of infection, and seriously retards the recovery
of patients.
On the matter of ventilation, some people have an idea that so
long as ample cubic space per bed is allowed nothing more is
requisite. Of course, this is a fallacy, for not only is adequate
superficial area equally important, but to insure good ventilation the
air must be kept constantly changed by means of through currents.
Now, if you take an apartment 10 feet square and 20 feet high,
you get a cubic area of 2000 feet, but no one will pretend that such
an apartment is hygienically equal to one 10 feet by 15 feet by 13
feet, although the latter is actually a trifle less in cubic measurement.
The sanitary expert declares that the height of the room beyond some
13 feet is so much waste as far as regards utility, and should not be
taken into account in reckoning the cubic area of breathing space.
The concensus of opinion is that in hospital wards a minimum of
100 superficial and 1,500 cubic feet per bed is desirable; while, for
some special surgical cases, and all fever patients, the figures should
be 150 square and 2,000 cubic feet.
As to the best means of securing a complete and continuous
change of air in our hospital wards, I dare not venture an opinion
in face of the fact that old-time theories anent ventilation are
being modified or altogether abandoned. Hitherto we have been in
the habit of introducing fresh air to an apartment from below, and
providing for its escape through or near the ceiling. Now, we learn
from America that this is a mistake, and a plan is being tried there
to convey fresh air from above downwards, and allow the impure air
to escape near the floor by means of open skirtings, through which
it is drawn by an artificially-produced draught. The idea is based
on the scientific fact that expired air contains a large proportion of
carbonic acid gas, which is heavier than pure air. Whether this
last “ Yankee notion ” will ever get beyond the experimental stage
remains to be seen.


On the subject of drainage I will say little, because it is generally
a matter of “ Hobson’s choice ” as between surface and underground.
Undoubtedly the latter, if efficiently carried out, is infinitely prefer-
able, more particularly in a climate like this. But underground
drains, if not properly trapped, flushed, and ventilated, are a fruitful
source of danger, all the more because unseen. Surface drains, to
be innocuous, must be kept frequently flushed, swept, and disinfected.
They should be constructed with glazed tiles, and not of any rough
or absorbent material, like common asphalt, cement, or bricks.
Tents in a climate like Australia are a most useful adjunct to
hospitals, both fever and surgical cases seeming to do remarkably
well in them ; for although subject to greater extremes of tempera-
ture than a building, the result to patients does not appear to be
prejudicial. In a place like Melbourne, subject as it unfortunately
is to recurring epidemics of typhoid, I consider the provision of fever
camps the best and simplest means for relieving the periodic pressure
on our hospital accommodation. And this leads me to say a few
words on the subject of special hospitals, which at the present time
is one of more than ordinary interest. I certainly think that in
every community of any size a special building, or block of buildings,
should be set apart exclusively for the treatment of infectious and
contagious diseases. lam also of opinion that cancer cases, and in-
curables generally, should have separate hospitals provided for them.
Neither are the wards of a general hospital suitable for the treatment
of young children. Of course, in large centres of population, like
some of the European capitals, you will find special hospitals for
nearly every class of disease under the sun, and certainly this system
has distinct advantages. But here, in Melbourne, lam inclined to
think that we have gone far enough at present in this direction, save
in regard to provision for infectious diseases. I have always
regarded with disfavour an undue multiplication of charitable insti-
tutions, medical or otherwise. Instead of increasing the number of
our hospitals, I would rather see special wards in connexion with
existing general hospitals set apart for the treatment of the diseases
of women and children, and for the diseases of the eye, ear, throat,
skin, &c. By this means the larger hospitals would gain much in
importance as clinical schools, and I venture to think that the
arrangement would be found more economical than the present one.
As to what proportion free hospital beds should bear to the
population of a community, the question 'is about as difficult to
determine as it would be to fix the number of hotels that should be
allowed to exist in a given district. No doubt the sanitary and
social condition of a populous centre is a powerful factor in deter-
mining what amount of hospital accommodation is needed therein.
This being so, it follows that, so far from a large proportionate number
of “ hospital beds ” being creditable to any civilized community, the
reverse is rather the case.


If Melbourne —by which 1 mean the metropolitan area—was in a
perfect sanitary condition, and if its inhabitants were as moral, self-
reliant, and thrifty as they ought to be, I do not hesitate to affirm
that our present hospital accommodation, instead of being as it now
is, admittedly, insufficient, would be found more than ample to
meet all requirements.
Many of you may remember that some eighteen months ago, when this
question of increased hospital accommodation was under discussion,
certain comparisons were instituted between this city and cities in Great
Britain and Ireland with respect to their proportionate number of
hospital beds. Now, comparisons, though sometimes odious, are
nevertheless often very useful, providing they are fair ; but I maintain
that to disparage Melbourne by a comparison with London or
Dublin is not fair to the former place, for here we have nothing like
the same proportion of utterly destitute and incapacitated persons to
provide for, neither have we large hospitals such as you will find in
both London and Dublin so richly endowed as to be quite indepen-
dent of voluntary support.
And now let us turn to the second part of my subject, viz., the
question of hospital administration. Here I feel myself treading
on somewhat delicate ground, and therefore it behoves me to “bank
my fires and go slow.”
Of course, boards of management come first, both as regards
importance and constitution. Where an institution is supported by
voluntary contributions I certainly think the subscribers are entitled
to elect a committee from amongst themselves ; and, on the other
hand, when the Government pays the piper, the Government may
claim the right to choose the time and nominate the hospital board.
But these are points that we need not stay to discuss.
I don't think that, as a rule, ex officio managers are a success;
for I have gleaned from the reports of one Victorian hospital,
boasting ten ex officio committeemen, that during the past five years
the aggregate attendances of the whole lot were only 76 out of a
possible 2,500, and I believe that a further analysis would have
shown that the majority of these 76 attendances were scored on the
occasion of elections, and in response to a powerful “whip.”
Passing to the term of office and mode of electing the honorary
medical staff of our general hospitals we find again diversity of
opinion and practice. If I mistake not, one medical gentleman
recently suggested that appointments to the honorary staff of our
metropolitan hospital should be for life. I wonder some other
gentleman in the profession didn’t “go one better” by proposing to
make such appointments hereditary ! Perhaps it is not yet too
late !
The folly and mischievousness of electing men to Parliament for
the term of their natural lives would not be greater than that of
making hospital professional appointments permanent. For my


own part, I believe in the periodical infusion of “ fresh blood ” into
all committees and staffs, whether professional or lay, honorary or
paid.
All the same, good men being scarce, it is well to keep them when
you can, and not make changes for the mere sake of change ; but
when any man or woman’s interest in their work begins to flag,
and they become careless and indifferent, or restless and discontented,
then the sooner such make way for their successors the better it
will be for all parties.
The election of the honorary medical officers of a hospital by the
subscribers is to my mind objectionable; for, in the first place, what
can the ordinary run of contributors to such institutions understand
about the professional qualifications or general fitness, of this, that,
or the other doctor for the post he seeks ?
In connexion with the last election of the Melbourne Hospital
staff I heard of one lady subscriber who declined to vote for Dr.
a A.” because he was only an “ P.R.C.5.,” but announced her in-
tention to vote for Dr. “ B.” who was an “ L.K.Q.C.P.1.”
Possibly the latter medico, being an Irish graduate, had kissed the
Blarney-stone; but, if it was the extra number of letters that turned
the scale, then I leave you to guess what sort of a show a simple
“ M.D.” would have with electors of this type.
Again, it really does seem infra dig. for eminent physicians and
surgeons to have to canvass for the votes of their butcher, baker,
and grocer, or in default have the mortification of seeing inex-
perienced juniors, or men of inferior status, elected over their
heads. I say such things are not comme il faut, and therefore I
favour the appointment of the medical staff by the hospital board
of management, with elections at intervals of one, two, or—at most
three years.
By this mode of election eligible men have some chance of being
appointed on their merits, while the necessary control of your staff
is secured; for depend upon it, if a medical staff can “ snap its
fingers ” at a hospital committee, you will have incessant friction
and more or less disorganization. Dual control is seldom a brilliant
success, and certainly never so in the management of hospitals.
My innate modesty forbids more than a passing allusion to
the office of hospital secretary. Judging by the eagerness with
which such billets are sought after, they would seem to be mere
sinecures; whilst, if the average quantity and quality of applicants
affords any criterion, it would seem as though the only requisite
qualification for the office was an elementary knowledge of the three
R’s. It is not for me to say whether the popular idea is a correct
one, but, if it is, why it simply amounts to this —“ they’ll none of ’em
be missed.”
Whatever opinions may be held as regards the relative importance
of hospital officials, I think you will all agree that the position of


matron, or lady superintendent, is nulli secundus. Indeed, it would
be difficult to exaggerate the influence for good or ill that a person
in this responsible position can exert, particularly in large institu-
tions. She, as it were, gives the tone to the establishment. So
many superlative qualities are desirable in the female head of a hos-
pital that there is never likely to be a glut of the “genuine article ”
in this particular branch of the labour market. Your matron should
be amiable, and yet firm ; even-tempered; just, but not harsh ;
sympathetic, but not too emotional ; possessing tact, energy, and
administrative ability, backed up by a fund of sterling common
sense. A combination of such qualities and virtues is undoubtedly
rare, and this fact inclines me to think that the ideal hospital
matron must—like the poet—be born, not made.
I remember reading of an English county hospital, situated in a
well-known cathedral city, which became such a hot-bed of erysipelas
and septicaemia that no surgical case could with safety be admitted.
A consultation was held, and finally it was agreed that the con-
struction of the hospital was at fault, with the result that it was re-
solved to pull the old building down, and erect new surgical wards.
In the meantime the staff was re-organized, and a change of matron
took place. By this latter step the whole aspect of affairs was
altered, the normal sanitary condition of the hospital was restored,
and the condemned wards had not to be demolished. I mention
this to show how much the cleanliness, and therefore the effective-
ness, of a hospital depends on the vigilance and capability of its
matron, and, believe me, without cleanliness all the many excel-
lencies that a hospital may boast are “as sounding brass and a
tinkling cymbal ” and profiteth it nothing.
Nursing the sick is woman’s legitimate sphere—l might almost
say her prerogative ; and it is gratifying to note the increasing
number of young ladies who are seeking to adopt this truly Christian
calling, for no one will devote her life to such work con amove whose
heart is not in the right place. I hold that one function of every
general hospital should be the systematic training of nurses, and the
granting of certificates of competency to those who, during their
term of training, succeed in passing the necessary examinations in
the theory and practice of their art.
I quite agree with the opinion expressed by more than one witness
before the Royal Commission on Charities that it would be well to
appoint a board of examiners, and to adopt a uniform curriculum and
method of examination for nurses, thus insuring something like a
uniform standard of efficiency.
Hospital nurses have not, so far, affiliated themselves with the
Trades Hall, nor yet joined the Eight Hours Movement. Heaven
help us when they do ! Their hours on duty are necessarily some-
what longer than one could wish, and their duties are onerous and
frequently far from pleasant. They should, therefore, be amply


paid, hare the best of plain food nicely served, and such means of
healthful recreation as it is possible to afford them.
As to the length of time that a nurse ought to serve as a pupil
before receiving her certificate, much would depend on the individual,
for where a woman has a special aptitude for the work she might
be found more competent in one year than another would be in
two. . .
Personally, I consider that two years should be the minimum term
of training, and would rather see that time extended than reduced.
During her hospital residence the pupil should be all over the house,
i.e., on both medical and surgical sides, and in male and female
wards. She should also have a spell of night duty, and, in addition
to receiving clinical instruction, be taught invalid cookery.
I do not favour the employment of male nurses in hospitals for
the sick, save in exceptional cases, such as for refractory or dan-
gerous patients. I know that the ears of a sensitive nurse are some-
times shocked by the horrible language of a delirious or depraved
patient, and this knowledge pains me ; but it is one of those un-
pleasant features of hospital life that cannot be helped, and, there-
fore, must be endured. After all, the blasphemous or obscene
ravings of a mind and body alike diseased cannot sully the purity
of the pure, nor pollute the soul of one who, in our hours of pain and
anguish, becomes transformed into a “ ministering angel”
And now, before concluding this paper, I feel it incumbent to say
a few words on hospital finance. Perhaps I should have dealt with
this part of my subject first, on the principle of the cookery book,
where you read, under directions for making—l think it is hare—
soup, “ first catch your hare.” Certainly, before you can build a
hospital, you must have the “ one thing needful ” in the shape of
funds. How, then, are they to be raised, and subsequently sufficient
money secured for the purposes of maintenance ?
These are questions that not infrequently perplex our hospital
treasurers and secretaries, and at times cause their committees grave
anxiety. If hospitals are to be successfully managed nowadays
they must be run to a certain extent on commercial principles.
Why, even churches are being conducted now after this fashion, and
those ancient worthies, the elder and the deacon, are giving place to
the manager and the committee-man. That struggle for existence
which extends from plants and the lower animals to man, and from
individuals to nations, and which we all hope may end in “ the
survival of the fittest,” has reached even philanthropic institutions,
and taxes all our ingenuity and resources to pass through success-
fully. A medical friend of mine, who strongly advocates hospital
extension and free-handed expenditure, is always preaching that in
the conduct of hospitals we should never trouble about money, but
run into debt with a light heart; and then, when credit is exhausted,
threaten to close our doors if funds are not provided. “ Depend


upon it,” said he, “ the Government or the public will ante up.”
“ Look at the Melbourne Hospital! £IO,OOO debt ! ! Money
raised in ten days !! ! Go thou and do likewise.” Now, in justice
to my friend I may say that he conducts his own private affairs on
an altogether different and much more rational system, otherwise he
would deserve the designation of “fool” or “rogue.”
And I maintain that a hospital directorate is no more justified in
lavishly administering the funds at its disposal than a board of
directors would be in recklessly expending the capital of a trading
company, or a private individual in systematically living beyond his
means. But do not misunderstand me, please, and run away with
the idea that I favour parsimony or niggardliness in hospital
administration, because Ido not. Any fool can save money at the
expense of efficiency ! Under-pay your staff, give them and your
patients “ cheap and nasty ” food, require one person to do the work
of two, and I have no doubt but that you will be able to show a
remarkably low average cost per bed, but depend upon it a cheese-
paring policy is a grand mistake, and the apparent economy resulting
therefrom utterly false.
In considering ways and means, it may be asked what are
legitimate sources of revenue for hospital maintenance ? First and
foremost comes the Government, of course. Here we have an ever-
lasting milch cow, and a very patient and generous animal she has
hitherto proved. Inasmuch as the Government is frequently called
upon to make up deficiencies, it would appear to answer much the
same purpose as the pump does to the unscrupulous dairyman, and,
like a good pump, it never runs dry. Seriously, though, Ido think
that the maintenance of hospitals is one of those things that
governments may be fairly asked to aid, if not to undertake entirely.
Rather the latter than that they should be supported and controlled
by municipal authorities. And here let me state that, although
neither a town councillor nor a property owner, I do not favour the
proposal to levy a municipal rate for charitable purposes. I would
much prefer to see a Government charity tax that would reach
everybody, and yet be a hardship to none. The suggestion made
through the press some time ago to add a penny per pound to the
duty on tea is, in my humble opinion, worth more consideration
than it has yet received. That, with a penny or twopence a gallon
excise duty on beer, would go far towards maintaining all the medical
charities in the colony in comparative affluence. Perhaps the latter
tax would be the more equitable of the two, seeing to what an extent
colonial beer helps, directly and indirectly, to fill our hospitals.
When examined before the Royal Commission, I stated that I
would rather the municipalities paid the actual cost of the main-
tenance of those patients they recommended to the hospitals than
donate their £lO, £2O, or even £SO a year, because more care and
discrimination would probably be exercised by mayors and town


clerks in the issue of orders, and at least one hospital I could name
would profit by this arrangement. .
The institution of a Hospital Saturday and Sunday is an excellent
one and I doubt not but that the movement will become increas-
ingly popular and successful as time rolls on, particularly if some
better understanding can be arrived at between its worthy secretary
and the clerk of the weather. As some of you may be aware, there
is a movement on foot to legalize the use of the totalizator in this
colony. Now, lam not going to offer an _ opinion as to the desir-
ableness or otherwise of the State sanctioning this particular form
of race-course gambling, but this much I will say, that if Parlia-
ment legalizes the machine—(mark the little word “if I)— then i
trust the Act will contain a clause stipulating that 5 per cent, of
all the money that passes through it shall be divided amongst the
medical charities of Victoria ; and I fancy the income thus derived
would be startling in its magnitude, assuming that the machine was
used at all the race meetings and patronized as freely here as it is
in other places where it has been tried.
Football clubs might do more than they do in the way of
charitable votes. Even 5 per cent, of their gross takings during a
season would amount to a tidy sum, and I should imagine might be
well spared for charity’s sake. Man, you know, is an omnivorous
animal, and hospital secretaries are but men. Bequests are
undoubtedly acceptable and by no means to be despised, for they
frequently cheer the heart of a desponding treasurer, but they can
hardly be reckoned as a reliable form of income, and after all
“ waiting for dead men’s shoes ” is an unsatisfactory business.
Generally such windfalls as legacies are placed to the credit
of endowment funds, and rightly so, I think, for though the
selfish may exclaim—“ What has posterity done for me that I should
take thought for posterity? ” still, right-thinking persons must
recognise that it would not be fair to our children to require
them to bear burdens that very often our own sins and follies
have either created or perpetuated. #
Lastly, “payments by or on account of patients” constitutes
one of the most legitimate sources of hospital revenue, and one
that I hope to see become increasingly productive, for not only
is such revenue a relief to the general contributors, but its moral
effect in preventing the pauperization of patients is good. I
feel strongly on this point, and could say much. Every patient in
our hospitals who is able to contribute something, however small,
towards his or her maintenance should be required to do so
“ Of that there is no manner of doubt,
No possible doubt whatever !”
To me it seems anomalous that an independent working man, who
would scorn to accept a dole in the shape of money, clothing, or


provisions through a charitable agency, will, when he is sick,
accept from our medical charities in or out-door relief without
giving anything in return, beyond, perhaps, a paltry shilling fee for
registration as an out-patient. The thing is as preposterous as it
would be for the same man to expect the community to pay the
expenses of his trip to the seaside should he happen to require a
holiday.
Time forbids my going into detail on the subject of hospital
expenditure. You will have already gathered from what has gone
before that I advocate a liberal, but not an extravagant , adminis-
tration, and I think that by adopting a proper system of book-
keeping the finance committee of a public institution ought easily
to check any tendency in the latter direction.
And now my allotted task is finished. Though I feel that I
have done but scant justice to my subject, nevertheless, if anything
I have said, by stimulating thought and action, results in the
improved construction and administration of our hospitals, I shall
not have spoken in vain.
DISCUSSION.
The Revd. C. T. Peeks had to express his thanks for the paper,
which he considered covered all the ground; and in the main he
agreed with most of the propositions. He was entirely with Mr.
Herman as to the mode of electing medical officers, considering that
there was room for an important change.
Mk ; Hitchcock urged the desirability of ladies being on the
committee of management of charitable institutions. In such
institutions as hospitals, three-quarters of the board should be
ladies, as the work which had to be supervised was much more in
their department than in that of gentlemen. Ladies trained as
nurses should be exempted from menial work. Women could be easily
obtained to do minor duties, and if this were done young ladies
would be attracted to this work. He was in favour of the practice
followed in Hew Zealand of raising rates in support of these institu-
tions, the municipalities raising a certain amount and the Govern-
ment subsidizing it.
Dk. Curtis said, with regard to the suggestion of ladies and
gentlemen being associated on boards of management, he considered
the whole success of the Adelaide Children’s Hospital was the result
of the board of management consisting equally of ladies and gentle-
men.
Mr. Solomon said : One thing in this paper was somewhat mis-
leading, viz., the question of the death-rate. It was hardly fair to
compare the death-rate in hospitals and those in private houses, as
the women in their own houses were a better class of patients than
those treated in the hospitals. Death rates generally were not
very reliable, as they were very largely governed by the extent to


which chronics and incurables were removed from the hospital. It
was very desirable that a matron should be found possessed of the
very highest qualifications. They left it to their chairman on one
occasion to find such a matron. He succeeded, after much laborious
search, in finding a lady who was virtuous, sensible, good-tempered,
and accomplished, and —he married her. (Laughter.)
Mr. T. H. Atkinson read a paper—
The Destitute Poor Department of South Australia.
(. Preliminary Explanation. —Before beginning my paper, I desire
to say that when the communication from the president of the
Charity Organization Society of Melbourne was received by the
Destitute Board of Adelaide, inviting the attendance of a delegate
at this Conference, the chairman of the board (A. Lindsay, Lsq.,
J.P.), who is by virtue of his office the responsible head of the
department, was absent in England, enjoying a well-earned holiday.
This being the case, the board appointed myself, who was tempo-
rarily in charge of the department, to be its representative at this
Conference.)
The Government of South Australia, some forty years since,
recognised the necessity for creating a department which should
have for its object the care of the destitute poor of the colony.
Its working is at present controlled by an honorary board, consist-
ing of five members, with a paid and executive chairman. The
Destitute Persons Act of 1881, under which the board is consti-
tuted, provides that, subject to the rules and regulations of the
public service, the board shall have the care, custody, and adminis-
tration of all funds voted by Parliament for the relief of the poor of
the colony, and, further, that it shall have the care and control of all
illegitimate children born in any of its establishments. Power is
also given the board to grant licences to fit and proper persons to
act as foster mothers, or wet-nurses, to children, either legitimate or
illegitimate, who for various reasons are not nursed in the home of
their parents.
The Destitute Asylum. —As a home for those who are destitute,
and no longer able, through age or other infirmities, to attend to
their requirements, this institution is provided. It is situated in the
city, and near the railway station, and is the only institution of its
kind in the colony. Most of the buildings constituting the asylum
were never built with a view of their being utilized for present pur-
poses, but until circumstances will allow of a building being erected
more in accordance with modern ideas they are made to answer very
well indeed. When the necessity for additional accommodation has
arisen, through increasing numbers, the value of ground space so


near the city has been taken into consideration, and has led to the
erection of buildings two stories high. This, in an institution con-
taining aged and infirm people, is an objection, as stair-climbing is
always fatiguing, and at times attended with danger. This matter
will receive attention when a new building is provided. It was the
intention of our Government, some seven or eight years ago, to
erect a new building, of proper design, at a, distance from the city,
with several acres of land attached, which would be available for
gardening purposes, and so provide additional employment for our
male inmates.
Plans were prepared, and the first instalment of the money was
voted. Classification was also provided for on a liberal scale, but it
was ultimately decided that the present buildings would answer all
requirements for some time to come.
In an institution containing so many sorts and conditions of
people classification is certainly required, and while we do all that
we possibly can in this direction with the accommodation at our dis-
posal, we would like to be able to do more.
In the asylum at present we have 217 males and 113 females,
and out of the whole number I do not think it possible to find one
really able-bodied person. Great care is always observed in granting
applications for admission. Verification of the applicant’s state-
ment is always required, and where any doubt exists as to the
ability of the man or woman to earn a livelihood a medical certifi-
cate of incapacity is insisted upon before admission is granted. Our
own medical officer is available for the purpose of making a medical
examination, and so a check is provided if imposition is attempted.
Charity at the expense of the State demands the exercise of the
greatest care in its administration, and poor relief should not be of
such an attractive nature as will cause the fostering of a spirit of
dependence among any members of a community. The Poor Law
Commissioners of England, in 1834, strongly laid down the prin-
ciple that the condition of the pauper ought to be below the lowest
condition of the independent labourer, because every penny bestowed
in rendering the condition of the former more eligible than that of
the latter was a bounty on indolence and vice. The problem has
always been a difficult one, and the evils arising from careless
administration of poor relief in the past appear to have been very
great. It is affirmed that the lavish system of poor relief which
existed in England about the year 1832 almost threatened the
country with bankruptcy and ruin. Probably much of our poverty
of to-day could, by careful investigation, be traced to this system,
for it is well known that when the spirit of self reliance is once
broken through, by accepting public charity, pauperizing germs are
sown, which in some instances greatly grow and fructify. Even in
our few years of experience, in South Australia, we are able to point
to records proving that four generations have been supported by


public relief. It is, therefore, a dangerous thing for a community to
provide too lavishly for its poor, as such a course can only result
disastrously.
The Destitute Asylum answers all the requirements of a home for
the poor supported by the State, while at the same time care is taken
that it is not made too attractive. Notwithstanding this, however,
it seems to have a reputation for comfort which has reached beyond
our colony. Within the last few months an old man came to us
direct from Melbourne with the express intention of gaining admis-
sion to the asylum. Asked why he had done so, he replied that he
had heard it was “a good place for old men/’ He stated that he
had never been in South Australia before, but had spent many years
of his life in Victoria. As his example might speedily have been
followed by others, it was deemed expedient to promptly offer him
his passage back to Melbourne, and this he at once accepted.
I think some understanding should be arrived at between colonial
institutions for the reception of the poor that only those who have
spent the majority of their lives in a colony should be maintained in
the asylums belonging to it.
When a, man, therefore, who is proved to properly belong to, say,
New South Wales, presents himself for admission into the Destitute
Asylum of South Australia, he should be sent direct to one of the
institutions in New South Wales, and be there received.
The same system of relief, both in-door and out-door, should, I
think, be also adopted in all the colonies. With our means of easy
intercolonial communication no inducement should be offered to the
indigent to seek any particular city or institution because of better
and special poor relief.
We have at present two inmates of the Adelaide asylum who
admit having resided in similar institutions in our neighbouring
colonies, and they are able to furnish much information concerning
their management.
Again, a similar system throughout our colonies would be of
undoubted advantage for statistical purposes, and would enable
accurate, interesting, and important information to be compiled
yearly, and so prove an excellent guide to our individual and collective
prosperity.
The annual report of the Destitute Poor Department of South
Australia is always looked forward to with interest, and is rightly
accepted as one of the best evidences of the condition of our
colony. .
To return to our institution. The improved condition of many of
our inmates, after a short residence with us, speaks well for the
benefits which it confers, and people who have been content to live
in abject misery and wretchedness have, upon admission to the
asylum, expressed themselves as never having been so well provided
for before.
596. G


Many of our inmates are suffering from complaints of an incurable
nature, and have been discharged from the different hospitals in the
colony, as they were no longer subjects for that class of treatment.
Our institution is really the only one in the colony to which our
hospitals can look for the reception of their patients who cannot be
further benefited by hospital treatment. A female nurse is in charge
of the infirmaries, so that the requirements of the sick receive every
attention.
The medical officer visits the institution every morning when cases
requiring his treatment are brought under his notice. ■ The paid
staff (beyond the superintendent and regular clerical staff of the
department) consists of four wardsmen, a matron, three nurses, a
cook, and scullery maid.
The inmates, under supervision of these officers, perform all the
domestic and other work of the institution. They also make all boots
required for use in the institution ; and one man, a carpenter, is pro-
vided with a workshop and set of tools, and proves of much use about
the place.
The ordinary dietary for each, adult is as follows : —l6 ozs. of
bread or flour, 8 ozs. beef and 12 ozs. mutton on alternate days,
12 ozs. potatoes, 2 ozs. sugar, 2 ozs. rice, oz. tea, oz. salt, pint
of milk daily ; and for children under seven years of age —16 ozs.
bread or flour, 6 ozs. meat, 1 oz. sugar, 1 oz. rice, oz. tea, \ oz.
salt, 1 pint milk. In the absence of butter from the above scale, a
sufficiency of good wholesome dripping is provided.
Medical comforts are issued when necessary, and whenever the
medical officer orders a special diet it is provided.
The expenditure of our department under the head of Destitute
Asylum for the year ending 30th June last was £4,617 6s. lid.
The average number of inmates for the year was 321, and the average
cost per head per week of each inmate was ss. 6|d.
The Public Tender Board, under the managemen t of our railway com-
missioners, calls for tenders for general Government supplies annually.
With the exception of bread, meat, and milk, all articles and pro-
visions required by the department are obtainable from the general
contractors. Thus regular supplies and uniform prices are guaranteed,
and when the securing of a large and general contract is concerned
keen competition necessarily follows.
It can, therefore, easily be seen how our department benefits by
participating in the arrangements made for general Government
supplies. The board deemed it advisable to make its own arrange-
ments for the supply of meat, bread, and milk. If, therefore, any
trouble arises as to the supply or quality of these articles, the board
can apply the remedy, and similar supplies to other Government
institutions or departments are unaffected thereby.
Casual wards for the reception of males and females are attached
to the institution, and are used whenever occasion requires it.


Lying-in Department. —In connexion with the Destitute Asylum,
but in a separate building adjoining it, a lying-in home has been
established for the accommodation of women who are in destitute
circumstances.
A qualified and competent midwife is in charge, and two students
from the medical school in connexion with the Adelaide Hospital
are allowed to be present at each accouchment.
During the year ending 30th June last, we had forty-seven
admissions to this institution. They were nearly all of single women.
Apart from being destitute, it is also a condition of their admission
that they must sign an agreement, undertaking to remain in the
establishment for a period of six months after the child is born.
The condition of a six months* residence in the home is made with
a view of securing the efficient nursing of the child by its mother,
and, at the same time, to allow for the development of that natural
affection which every mother has for her child. Of the unwanted
children annually born, numbers die through sheer neglect, and it so
often happens that mother and child are separated within a short
period of the latter’s coming into existence. There is a guarantee,
therefore, that children who are born in our establishment will have
every chance of existence afforded them, and when the critical period
of the first six months of life is passed it so often happens in our
experience that the affection between mother and child is so great
that nothing will separate them, No difficulty is experienced in
obtaining situations for mothers with their children. Under such
conditions, however, high wages are never looked for, the main
considerations being a comfortable home, and mother and child being
together.
The board, however, under certain conditions, allows a woman to
leave the home with her child before it attains the age of six months.
If the woman, with the consent of the board, accepts a situation, a
written guarantee is obtained from the mistress that the girl will
retain the sole care of her child, and be allowed every facility for
nursing it, and in the event of dissatisfaction arising the girl is to be
returned to the home in order to complete the terms of agreement
made upon admission. A respectable parent or friend is also allowed
to take mother and child out, provided a satisfactory undertaking is
given that the nursing conditions will be fulfilled. In order to satisfy
the board that the agreement entered into is faithfully performed,
a lady in the employ of the department pays periodical visits to the
home to inquire and report as to the welfare of mother and child.
At the close of each year a general inquiry is made concerning
the women and children who have left the institution during the
year, and the knowledge that the department manifests an interest
in their after career is certainly productive of good.
As some illustration of the benefit gained to the children by the
detention regulation, I would state that, on the 30th June last, out
G 2


of thirty-two cases where mothers left the home with their children
during the year, twenty-three of the children were residing with
their mothers and doing well. In four cases the children had been
permanently adopted, in one case the child was kept by its mother’s
relatives, the mother being at service, and in four instances the
children were with licensed foster-mothers, under supervision, the
mothers being in domestic service.
When a separation between mother and child does take place
through force of circumstances, care is always taken that the latter is
placed with a licensed foster-mother, a system concerning which I will
have something to say later on. As the children in every instance
are over the age of six months before separation does take place, a
fairly good start on their career has been secured to them.
Much difficulty is experienced in establishing the paternity of the
children, as it so rarely happens that the necessary corroborative
evidence is obtainable. If the law on this matter were more generally
known, there is but little doubt that maintenance could more often
be secured.
The women in this institution are divided into three classes —
Those who have fallen for the first time, those who have had children
previously, and, lastly, prostitutes. Each class is kept entirely to
itself. The time of the inmates is taken up in nursing their children,
in doing the domestic work of the institution, and a large amount of
washing for the inmates of the Destitute Asylum. During the year
which ended on 30th June, 1890, the expenditure under the head of
Lying-in Department was £525 Bs. 3d. An average number of
eighteen inmates were supported, and the weekly cost per head was
lls. 2|d.
Out-Door Belief. —Out-door relief extending over the whole
of the colony is granted by the Destitute Poor Department.
The relief is termed rations, and consists of bread, meat, and
groceries. The following are the articles and quantities making up
one ration, which is the weekly allowance for one adult, or two chil-
dren under the age of thirteen years :—8 lbs. bread, lbs. meat,
ozs. tea, 14 ozs. sugar, 14 ozs. rice, 7 ozs. soap, ozs. salt.
No other out-door allowances, such as fuel, bedding, clothing,
or money, are granted. When these are necessary they are provided
by private charity.
In Adelaide there is the Strangers’ Friend and Charity Organiza-
tion Society, and in the principal country districts societies are
formed which supplement the relief afforded by our own department
according to requirements. These societies are supported entirely by
private subscriptions, consequently a local interest in the poor is
maintained, and the State is not called upon to provide everything.
The following are cases in which out-door relief is issued :
Widows with families, families whose natural protectors cannot
support them through sickness, families deserted by the father, or


where he is absent in the adjacent colonies, when parents are in gaol,
single women with more than one child, families of labouring men
who are away from home seeking employment, and the aged and
infirm or otherwise incapacitated.
Eations are not granted to able-bodied men or women, or to a
woman with only one child, but when there are two or more children
under the age of thirteen years half a ration is granted for each
child.
The board meets every Thursday morning at ten o’clock to hear
personal applications either for admission to the asylum or for out-
door relief. If nothing be known of the applicant, a statement of
circumstances is required, and, if the case is apparently a proper one
for relief, the address is taken, and nothing further is done until the
truth of the statements has been investigated. If inquiry proves
the case to be one of need, relief is then issued. Supposing the case
to be that of a woman recently left a widow, with six children, whose
ages range from sixteen to three years, four being under the age of
thirteen years, two rations would be granted. This is presuming
that the mother is in good health, and consequently capable of pro-
ducing some income. The two children over the age of thirteen
years would not be included in the allowance, as they are of an age
to earn their own living. A case of the foregoing description would
be regarded as of a permanent nature until but one child remained
under the age of thirteen years, or until the united earnings of the
mother and the elder children were considered by the board to be
sufficient to support the family. The relatives who are by our Act
liable for the support of each other are parents, children, grand-
parents, and grandchildren, so that, in the case of the widow
quoted as an example, inquiry would be made as to the circum-
stances of both maternal and paternal grandparents if any.
As a check against imposition, two visiting officers are regularly
engaged in making inquiries concerning the recipients of out-door
relief in the city and suburbs, and every case is under constant and
regular supervision. Particulars of each visit and inquiry made are
recorded in a journal kept for the purpose, and each case is indexed.
Another and much larger set of books is kept in which one folio
is reserved as a permanent record of all particulars in connexion
with the case.
An account of every case relieved since the system was established
is to be found in these books, and as there is a perfect index of
names with the number of the folio attached, there is a ready means
of reference, and a most valuable record is maintained.
An inquiry was recently made concerning a recipient of relief, and
by our own system of bookkeeping it was proved that the subject of
the inquiry had been under the intermittent observation of the
department for a period of 33 years. If lost to memory, the applicant
has only to admit having received relief from our department before,


and, whether it has been in the city or country, we are able to refer to
the record immediately.
Cases of a chronic or semi-permanent nature receive tickets for
one month’s relief in advance at one time on a stated day. These
tickets are at once presented to the storekeeper at the Destitute
Asylum, and the supply of groceries which they represent is imme-
diately issued to the bearer. The tickets for bread and meat are
presented to the contractors for those articles as may be required.
The chronic cases —those of old and feeble people whose circum-
stances are unchangeable—are spared the trouble of appearing
quarterly before the board. Nevertheless, the visiting officers keep
them under close observation. All other cases appear before the
board quarterly on an appointed day, and the relief allowed is either
lessened or increased as alteration of circumstances require it. The
visiting officer’s report of a recent visit to the case is before the
board, consequently a decision is quickly arrived at.
It has long been a recognised rule never to relieve the families of
labouring men who are out of employment while the man remains at
home. The knowledge, to some men, that their families were being
provided for would cause them to be indifferent about obtaining
work. No encouragement should be given to a feeling of this kind,
and it is difficult to discriminate between those who really want
work and those who are not anxious about obtaining it. If
the Government were to provide for people in idleness pernicious
influences could only result. The rule referred to has therefore
been introduced with best motives.
When inquiry proves that the man is really absent from home,
seeking work, the family is relieved immediately.
It is frequently noticed that those seeking relief are far from
doing their best with the resources at their disposal.
Elder children are encouraged to remain at home, instead of being
at employment, and so, by their presence, they add to the troubles
of the family instead of lessening them by the assistance of their
earnings. Frivolous excuses are occasionally made for keeping
these children home, and in cases of this kind relief is always declined
until the children are known to be at service.
Where distress is caused by sickness relief is readily given, but
a certificate from the doctor who is in attendance is always required.
This is needed to prevent malingering, but it is not always suc-
cessful in doing so ; for, where a man feigns illness for the purpose
of deception, it is sometimes difficult to expose him. Applicants
who have appeared before the board with an arm in a sling, or in a
crippled condition, have been seen at other times, unknown to them-
selves, with no signs of ailment whatever.
In large country centres of population the board has paid repre-
sentatives appointed, and these officers deal with the requirements
of the poor on the spot.


Particulars of the cases relieved through these agencies are
regularly forwarded to the board in Adelaide, and if the questions
asked on the printed form of application be fully answered there is
no difficulty in determining whether the relief has been properly
issued. In numerous other districts of a thinly-populated nature
there are usually few cases of destitution, and in these instances
the board is represented gratuitously by the mayor of the
town or the chairman of the district council, as the case may be.
The few cases that occur in outlying districts are usually attended
to, by communicating with the nearest resident magistrate or police
officer. As in the city, relief in the majority of country cases is
issued quarterly, but it is expressly provided by the regulations that
only a month's supply, i.e., one-third of the quarter’s allowance, is
to be issued at equal intervals.
Towards the end of each quarter a fresh application for the case
requiring relief for the coming quarter is made by the local authority,
and in response thereto a ration-order paper is posted, and this,
when presented to the contractor, secures the supply of the articles
enumerated therein to the person whose name appears upon its face.
To secure reasonable prices for the supply of rations, tenders are
invited from all storekeepers residing within the different districts,
and where the samples submitted are satisfactory the lowest tender
is, of course, accepted.
Books containing information for those who may have business
with the department are published and widely circulated, and the
necessary procedure for granting relief in any case of destitution that
may occur is fully explained.
Cases relieved in country districts are subject to an occasional
visit and inquiry by an experienced official from the central
office.
This is necessary, as opinions sometimes differ as to what is a
proper case for relief, and an occasional interview between the local
authority and the officer of the board is often of much mutual
advantage. Again, the honorary representative of the board is by
this means brought in touch with the department in the admini-
stration of which he takes a part.
In Adelaide the poor obtain medical attendance at the out-
patients’ dispensary at the Adelaide Hospital, and, as this is all but
a Government institution, recommendations for treatment issued
from our office are always accepted. In some 95 districts throughout
the colony a resident medical gentleman is paid an annual stipend
by the board to secure medical attendance to the poor that may
require it. An order from the chairman of the district council is
all that is necessary to enable them to do so. Cases of sickness
among the city and suburban poor, of such a nature as to prohibit
attendance at the hospital dispensary, are attended at the homes
by our medical officer. . t


During the year ending 30th June last the expenditure in con-
nexion with all cases of out-door relief in town and suburbs was
£4,086 9s. 2d., and that for a similar purpose in country districts
was £9,472 14s. lOd.
Before leaving this part of my paper, I would like to call attention
to the fact that our total expenditure on destitution in South
Australia has decreased in the last three years from £24,183 to
£18,702; the total number of cases relieved three years ago was
9,037, as against 4,979 for last year. The ratio of number relieved
to the 1,000 of the population for the year 1886-7 was 29*34, while
that for last year was 15*60, and in the interval our population is
estimated to have increased by 11,000. The cost of poor relief per
head of the population was but Is. 2d.
For the information of the Destitute Act Commission in South
Australia, whose inquiries extended from the years 1883 to 1885,
an approximate comparative statement was made of pauper relief
in South Australia, Victoria, Tasmania, England, and the State of
Massachusetts in America, for the year 1883. In this statement
it was shown that the cost of poor relief per head of the population
was in South Australia Is. 9|d., Victoria 2s. B|d., Tasmania
3s. England 6s. 4d., and Massachusetts 3s. 4d. The com-
parisons between Victoria, Tasmania, and our own colony were the
most useful of those made, for in all three colonies the social con-
ditions are similar, and, to quote the words of the report of the
Commission, the cost of poor relief in the colonies of Victoria and
Tasmania, “as compared with South Australia, certainly points,
on the ground of expense, to the advantage of the official and
centralised administration of the funds provided by Parliament
which prevails in this colony.”
Licensed foster-mother system. —As far as I am aware, South
Australia is the home of this system. It has been introduced for
the purpose of protecting infant life, which too often comes into
this world unwanted.
Occasionally it happens that our daily newspapers contain ac-
counts of infants being found in the homes of so-called baby-
farmers, either dead or dying, where it is conclusively shown that
cruelties have been practised in the shape of starvation and
neglect.
In an article recently contributed to the Contemporary Review by
the Rev. Benjamin Waugh, of the London Society for Preventing
Cruelty to Children, a most harrowing account of the cruelties per-
petrated on little children is given. Humanity demands that child-
life in either legitimate or illegitimate form should be nurtured and
cared for, and not destroyed.
The law provides a severe penalty when human life is proved to
have been taken in a direct manner, and the knowledge of this pro-
duces deterring influences. When children, however, are born into


this world to bring nothing but a burthen, shame, and regret to
those responsible for their existence, the frailty of early life, coupled
with neglect, often proves the means of their destruction.
It would be claiming too much for our system to say that it com-
pletely prevents the possibility of cruelties to children being prac-
tised, but it is not too much to say that its adoption is the means
of lessening and mitigating the evils so often attending baby-
farming.
By our Act a penalty not exceeding £2O is provided in the case of
any woman who takes a child to nurse without first obtaining a
licence to do so from our Board, or for the father or mother of any
such child who shall knowingly leave or place it with any person not
being a licensed foster-mother or wetnurse.
Where a child has to be placed out at wetnurse, a certificate from
a duly-qualified medical man exempts the case from the provisions
of the law.
In order to obtain information concerning cases where the law is
wilfully being broken, it is provided that half the stipulated fine shall
be paid to the informer. Public attention is occasionally called
to the existence of the law by advertising its requirements in the
daily newspapers.
Persons who might be disposed to disregard its provisions hesitate
to do so when they know that some near neighbour is likely to be
pecuniary benefited by supplying evidence which will secure their
conviction.
Those who desire to be licensed to enable them to take children to
nurse are asked to fill in a printed form of application, and a certifi-
cate of good character at the foot thereof is required from a clergy-
man or magistrate. As an additional safeguard, the home of the
applicant is always visited by a lady in the employ of the depart-
ment, and the granting of the licence depends upon the nature of
her report. The licence when issued always specifies the number of
children which the licensee is considered to be capable of properly
nursing, and the home and children are regularly inspected by our
lady visitor at about fortnightly intervals. Neglect when noticed is
pointed out, and should no improvement follow the licence would be
cancelled. A register of licences issued is kept in the office, and we
are frequently applied to by persons wishing to place children with
licensed foster-mothers. Our system guarantees the respectability
of the women to those who wish to take advantage of their services.
As an additional means of protecting early child-life, a suggestion
has been made that all private lying-in homes should be under a
licensed system, and subject to inspection.
Measures could be adopted to secure all confinements of single
women to these homes, and in cases where the mother could not
retain the care of her child it should only be placed with a licensed
foster-mother.


In conclusion, I would say that in South Australia we have had
no baby-farming cases of notoriety for many years past, and it rarely
happens that instances occur when a prosecution is considered to be
necessary. The police are always ready to render every assistance
to the Board in connexion with this branch of its work, and our
immunity from cases of a sensational nature can fairly claim to be
due to the legislative measures provided and the method adopted to
make their existence known. A recent advertisement of the require-
ments of the law resulted in the number of licensed foster-mothers
being increased by 22.
The question of wife desertion has attracted considerable notice
at this Conference, and a committee, as you are aware, has been
asked to consider the matter, with a view of suggesting some
practical means whereby the evils resulting from this offence may
be lessened. In South Australia, in the Destitute Persons Amend-
ment Act of 1886, clauses exist which read as follows:
“In addition to the remedies provided by section 9 of the
Destitute Persons Act 1881, whenever any husband unlawfully
deserts his wife, or leaves her without or fails to provide her with
adequate means of support, or when any father or mother deserts
his or her child under the age of fourteen years, or leaves them
without or fails to provide them with adequate means of support,
and goes to reside beyond the province of South Australia, either
temporarily or permanently, such husband, father, or mother shall
be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanour, punishable with hard
labour for any term not exceeding twelve months.
“In any of the cases specified in the last preceding section if
complaint be made on oath to any justice of the peace by any
respectable person, such justice, upon the production of a certificate
under the hand of the Chairman of the Destitute Board that such
complaint is well founded, may, if satisfied that an offence has been
committed within the meaning of the said section, but not other-
wise, issue his warrant for the apprehension of the person against
whom such complaint has been made,”
Misdemeanours are provided for in the Fugitive Offenders Act,
which now applies to all our colonies. We have, therefore, the
power to bring any wife-deserter back to South Australia.
In my experience, however, no case has occurred in which the
law has been put in operation by our department.
The difficulties in the way of doing so are great.
Firstly, it is necessary that the husband’s exact whereabouts
should be known.
Secondly, a constable who can identify the offender must be sent
after him in charge of the warrant. When the man is brought
back his defence might be such that a conviction would not follow.
If the offence be proved, and the twelve months’ sentence follows,
the family has still to be supported by the Government during his


incarceration. Many men leave their wives and families in the
first instance with an honest intention to procure employment, with
the idea of returning to or sending for their families as soon as such
is possible. Absence, however, instead of strengthening the ties
of affection has the contrary effect, and with some men of vicious
natures new associations are formed, and those who should rightly
claim their support are neglected. In the crowded cities of our
colonies a man’s identity can soon be lost, and if he leaves home
for the purpose of avoiding his responsibilities he can very easily
baffle inquiries by changing his name. By the desertion of some
men their wives and families have been distinctly benefited.
A drunkard who deserts his family is an instance. The evil
influence of his presence is removed, and his absence secures relief
for his family, which would not otherwise be eligible for
assistance.
When a man deserts his wife, and is known to be in our colony,
the issue of a warrant for his arrest is insisted upon before relief
is granted.
The wife is always made the complainant, as, without her
evidence, a prosecution would be useless. Many cases have
occurred where the wife has refused to appear against her husband
when arrested. Thus the provisions of the law have often no
other effect than the bringing of husband and wife together again.
If the man is known to have money when he returns, the depart-
ment has power to recover from him the value of the relief
issued to his family. If the charge of desertion be substantiated, an
order for a weekly payment is made, and in the event of non-
compliance therewith the man is committed to gaol for a period
which is left to the discretion of the magistrate.
A gentleman from Tasmania —I do not remember his name
yesterday stated that he disapproved of a system which caused the
removal of an aged couple from their familiar surroundings in
order to become inmates of an institution some hundred miles away.
I think from what he said he has the impression that this is
regularly the system in South Australia. If this be so, it is quite
an incorrect one. We have many aged couples residing in far-
away country districts who regularly receive outdoor relief, and only
when they are no longer able to attend to their requirements are
they required to come to reside in the asylum.
I have refrained from criticising any of the proceedings of this
Conference up to the present, as I have been desirous of learning all
I could in connexion with charity matters in your colony. From
the scanty information I have at various times obtained I could not
help thinking that much good money has been misapplied in charity
matters here. The evidence of the lady from Sandhurst and of
other speakers fully establishes that I was correct in my opinion.
I wrote a month or two ago to Mr. Brett, your Inspector of


Charities, and he courteously supplied me with some information as
to your system. It was stated that the Government had no
accurate data whatever of the cases relieved through the Ladies’
Benevolent Societies, This, I must confess, caused me great
surprise, as I understand that much Government money is spent
through these channels.
DISCUSSION - ,
Me. Solomon thought this question of bringing husbands back
was a difficult one, and it was hard to suggest what was the easiest
way out of it. There was, first, the question of expense. If a man
left bis children and went from here to New Zealand, it cost £SO
to bring them back ; and it was a question whether he was worth it
when they got him back. A woman often said to them, “Do not
send for my husband; we starve in peace when he is away, but
we starve in misery when he is at home.” He thought that the
suggestion which had been made by the Chief Justice in South
Australia was the right plan. The law should be so dealt with by
the various colonies jointly that an order made in one colony for
maintenance should be enforceable direct in any other colony.
Me. Atkinson said it was necessary to bring the wife and
husband together, because she had to prosecute, and sometimes it
was found that they were in collusion.
Me. Solomon meant that the order should be made in the man’s
absence, and should be enforced in the colony to which he has gone.
Me. Aedill thought that might be open to objection, for a man
might not be able to come back from New Zealand as it was expen-
sive, and he might have had good reasons for leaving, or be in
employment which he might not care to throw up.


FOURTH DAY:
(Friday, 14-th November).
MORNING SITTING.
Mr. G. E. ARDILL PRESIDING.
Pastor Berlitz read a paper on
Workmen’s Colonies for the Unemployed.
The question how to deal with the unemployed, i.e., with able-
bodied persons who either wish to work, but cannot, from various
reasons, find employment; or who could work, but prefer a life of
laziness, vagrancy, and begging is not an easy one to answer. Yet
it has to be answered, and here in Australia—the working man’s
paradise—too. For it makes itself felt even here more acutely every
year, and especially during winter time in our large cities. It will
grow more acute still as time goes on if nothing is done. It
would be well if this Conference, therefore, could find some practical
answer to that difficult question. A remark was made the other
evening when the programme was being discussed that this subject
does not properly come under the consideration of a Charities
Conference. I think it does. It certainly belongs to the province
of charity to help people wishing to work to get employment, and
so to prevent them from becoming burdens on the community.
Again, a great number of the so-called unemployed live almost
exclusively on the abuse of public and private charity. And, as far
as I understand it, it is one of the principal aims of this Conference
to prevent such abuse as far as possible. In the opinion that this
is a proper subject for the consideration of such a Conference as
ours I do not stand alone. In last Wednesday’s Argus the able
writer of the “ Notes and Comments,” referring to this Conference,
sa y S: —“ The main roots of city poverty, perhaps, are unthrift,
indolence, and drunkenness, and a Charity Conference will hardly
extirpate them. But there are other roots and influences peculiarly
Australian which an Australian Conference might very well assail.
One of these is the easy possibility of loaferdom in the cities and in
the bush. Climate favours the lazy man first. In Sydney and over
all the inner lands of the continent no sting of cold impels him to
exertion. But, next, there is a system of toleration and of uncon-
sidering supply which nurtures laziness. It is not charity.”
And, further on, he continues in this way—“ It will behove the
Charity Conference to get a good grip of the whole matter and to
have something to say as to the means • • • * of the breaking


up of the vagabond system, which has done much to people the
bush, and the city too, with loafers.”
Now, the object of this paper is to show the means by which it has
been tried, and partly already successfully tried, to break up a
similar vagabond system in Germany, and a much larger one than
we have here—one which, on account of its magnitude, had become a
veritable land plague. In view of the undeniable fact that many of
those who were wandering about from place to place could not
always, even if they wished to, find suitable employment,
“Working men's colonies" were established, and their number
is being continually enlarged all over the country. Into these any
man that wishes to work can enter freely at any time and find
employment, so that by this means it is easily possible to distinguish
the simply unemployed from the habitually idle vagrants and
mendicants. Let me now, in passing, shortly refer to the manner
in which the latter class are dealt with in my fatherland. Houses of
correction are established “to compel the idle to labour, to train
them to habits of industry, to set a limit to groundless application
for relief, and to put an end to begging.” These houses are under
the control of the police, and under the police regulations any person
may be consigned to and retained in them up to two years “ when
he so far abandons himself to gambling, drink, or idleness as to
require relief for himself or for those depending on him for their
support." 1 think if our law dealing with persons having no lawful
visible means of support was amended in a similar way, the number
of those who participate in the usual winter demonstrations of the
unemployed would be very perceptibly diminished.
In dealing with the really unemployed, i.e, with such who wish to
but cannot find work, some excellent principles have been laid down.
“ Injudicious help may easily be the cause of absolute ruin to the
recipient; the true way of relieving an able-bodied applicant is to
help him to find work." “ Public or private relief must not be
made a soft cushion, on which the love of independence and the
desire for work and self-support can go to sleep.” “ The indigent
but able-bodied poor,” says the Chairman of the Elberfeld Relief
Board, “ require a careful and thoughtful treatment. The granting
of relief is certainly in many cases justifiable and unavoidable, but if
nothing else is done it may lead the applicant to moral and social
ruin. The only real, reliable, and practicable relief is the provision
of work. Not that we should leave the man ‘ out of work ’
inactive, and take upon ourselves all his troubles, and the efforts to
look up work and wages. It is only after he has clearly proved that
he has himself made honestly every effort to obtain work that we
endeavour to find or direct him to it.'’ On these principles a method
of dealing with the unemployed has been established in Germany
during the last seven years, which has met with considerable success.
The scheme, which was originated by Pastor von Bodelschwingh,


who is widely known for his administrative abilities and his philan-
thropic efforts, consists, as I have said before, in the establishment
of colonies for workmen (Arbeiter-Kolonien), at which work is
freely offered to all who choose to apply for it. The scheme of the
founder is that these colonies should be maintained principally by
charity, for if the offer of work was a form of relief provided by the
State, and not the free gift of charity, the claim of a “ right to
work ” which is advanced by the Socialists would in effect be
conceded, and it would be impossible to rid the colony of idlers of
every description. .
The first colony of Wilhelmsdorf, in Westphalia, was founded in
August, 1882; and in October, 1886, there were already sixteen
others in Prussia alone. The “Central Society for German
Workmen’s Colonies ” promotes their establishment, and publishes
information respecting them periodically; but the general management
of each colony is intrusted to a committee, and varies with the
circumstances of the locality. The first intention was that the
colonies should be farms in country places, but lately one has been
started in the suburbs of Berlin, and it appears that the society are
coming round to the opinion that the institution may, with certain
modifications, be worked successfully even in the largest towns.
The colony at Wilhelmsdorf may be taken, as far as essentials are
concerned, as typical of the rest. It is about ten English miles from
the manufacturing town of Bielefeld, and is situated in a tract of
desolate and almost uninhabited sandy waste. The estate consists
of about 700 acres of poor land, of which only a small proportion has
as yet been reclaimed so as to be in a state of more or less profitable
cultivation. The land is exceptionally suitable for the purpose, as it
is possible to carry on the work of reclaiming the sandy soil even
during a hard frost. The establishment consists of a residence for
the manager, whose wife and family live with him ; a house for the
superintendent of the men; sleeping and day rooms for the
and large farm buildings. At first provision was made for 150
inmates, but the accommodation has been gradually extended, and
now there is room for 360. In summer there are often scarcely 100
taken up, but in winter time there are no spare beds. Since the colony
was opened nearly 5,000 inmates have been received.
It is an essential part of the system that the accommodation should
be good and sufficient, and there is no attempt to discourage applicants
by making them uncomfortable. Experience shows that tramps are
not deterred by mere discomfort or by bad accommodation, and the
managers of the colonies contend that decency, cleanliness, and com-
fort have their effect in reclaiming vagrants to better habits. The
inmates have separate beds, arranged like bunks on board a ship, with
ample and clean bed clothing. The dietary is good and abundant.
Admissions and discharges are perfectly voluntary. ISTo recommen-
dation or order is needed to secure admission. But no inmate may


stay without a break for more than two years, for a two years’ resi-
dence would give him a “ right of settlementsubject to this
limitation, however, he may remain as long as he likes, and may
discharge himself when he pleases by giving three days’ notice.
For the first fortnight of his stay a colonist gets his board and
lodging free, but no wages. He then receives a little pay for
another fortnight, and afterwards, if he is industrious, he gets about
half the usual wages, No money is paid to any colonist until he
takes his discharge, and if he is dismissed for misconduct the arrears
of pay due to him are forfeited. If he requires new clothes they are
supplied to him, the cost being deducted from his wages. This rule
is strictly enforced, and, as most of them come to the colonies in a
ragged state, the offer of getting new clothes by work is a strong
motive to steadiness and good conduct. Pipes and tobacco are also
supplied, but nothing in the shape of strong drink.
The management of the farm, and the superintendence of the
inmates, is intrusted to two paid officers alone—a fact which is very
significant. No doubt the head of the establishment is an excep-
tional administrator, who has naturally the gift of managing men,
and both his colleague and himself are trained brothers of the
Nazareth House at Bielefeld ; but something must be allowed to the
credit of the system. Although there have been some difficulties in
the past, the men, as a rule, behave well, assisting sometimes them-
selves to keep the unruly in check ; and only 24 had to be dismissed
during one year out of a total of 554 who came to the colony. Skilled
professional cadgers do not often come to Wilhelrasdorf. Most of
the colonists are able-bodied, and not past middle age ; some were
drunkards, but many are, or become, good workmen.
The superintendent sends a weekly report of the admissions to
the police, who occasionally visit the colony. Otherwise the police
do not interfere with the management. The average stay of the
inmates is 98 days.
The central association publish tables purporting to show the
occupation of those admitted to the colonies, but, as these state-
ments must, in the great majority of cases, be based on the words of
the inmates, they are not of much value. It is, however, certain
that not more than 15 per cent, of the admissions to the Wil-
helmsdorf have ever been agricultural labourers. It is not possible
to give any complete statement of the cost, for the value of the land
reclamation work done by the colonists cannot be estimated with
accuracy. Pastor von Bodelschwingh states that the average daily
cost of each colonist, including his clothes, is about one shilling a
day. But, as the clothes are paid for out of earnings, the cost of
them should be excluded, and the daily expenditure per head would
then be reduced to about ninepence. At that rate the annual loss
on an average of 100 daily inmates would be about £9OO, nothing
being allowed for the improvement of the land.


The number employed in the colonies shows a steady increase,
which, remembering the purpose for which they are established, is a
hopeful sign of ultimate success in greatly diminishing, if not totally
abolishing, vagrancy. As far as the information at my disposal in
this respect reaches, in December of the years 1884, 1885, and 1886
the average numbers were respectively 1,400,1,673, and 2,070. No
doubt they will be much larger by this time, the number of these
colonies having been constantly increased. The reports show,
besides, that a large proportion of the inmates make use of the
colonies more than once. At the colony Karlshof, for instance, out
of 260 inmates, 77 were there for the second winter and 29 for the
third.
There is also evidence that some colonies are more popular with
the unemployed than others, and that there is a considerable migra-
tion from one colony to the other. This is just what might have
been expected, and the remedy can only be found in a more uniform
administration. The founder of the system is of opinion that when
it is thoroughly organized, and a colony is established for each
province, a comparatively small number of beds will be sufficient, and
it will no longer be necessary in ordinary times to turn away appli-
cants for admission on account of want of room. Of course, times
of extraordinarily great depression will require additional means of
relief.
Whether the experiment ultimately succeeds or not (for it is still
on its trial), there can be no doubt that it will be tried thoroughly in
Germany. By some it is opposed, mainly on the ground that it will
increase'the evil it seeks to eradicate by making the life of a vagrant
too easy. But some, whose opinion must carry great weight, express
themselves strongly in favour of giving the scheme a full and fair
trial, and it has certainly, as yet, the prestige of a first success.
Probably its ultimate success depends very much on this—whether
the people can be persuaded into ceasing to give money to vagrants,
and into referring them to these colonies instead.
The scheme has been tried in other countries besides Germany,
though in a modified form. In the Argus of the 4th inst. I found
the following notice :—“ The special committee sent on circuit by the
Paris municipal council, to see how other countries deal with their
beggars, selected Holland as the scene of their first campaign.
Steenwyck was visited, and also all Yeenhuizen. This is a State
establishment for harbouring, occupying, and supporting mendicants.
If the French accounts be just, the difficulty of modern times is here
confronted and conquered. Yeenhuizen is an agricultural colony for
male beggars varying in age from 17 to 70. There is room
and occupation for 4,000 inmates, but the number has never
exceeded 2,800. These are not volunteers, but under sentence for
terms of reclusion. The French delegates returned to Paris most
favorably impressed.”
596. H


Now, the question I should like this Conference to consider is
whether we could not make some similar provision by founding one or
more such labour establishments in each colony for our unemployed
.—at least, for such of them as would be willing to make use of it.
Last winter, in Melbourne alone, some 500 persons, if not more,
who asserted that they could find nothing to do, had to be kept and
sheltered for many weeks by charitable relief. Large sums of money
were spent in this way, which would have gone far to cover the deficit
of a workmen’s colony, where these same people might have honestly
earned their board and lodging and some small wages besides, Ido
not in the least underrate the difficulties of such an undertaking.
The scheme might have to be modified to suit our own circumstances.
But the difficulties cannot be so very much greater than in other
countries. In some respects, we will, indeed, be better off here.
The winter —the very time when the greatest numbers use those
colonies—stops most agricultural and out-door work at home, but it is
no hindrance here. The buildings, owing to our more favor-
able climate, could be much less substantial, and, therefore, much
cheaper. They could be much smaller, too, for in times of emergency
tents even could be used. And, whilst the associations in Germany
have to buy the land, we could easily get it as a grant from the Govern-
ments. Plenty of land is to be found in the Australian Colonies,
even in Victoria, that could be reclaimed, cleared, irrigated, and
otherwise usefully worked and greatly improved in value by the
labour of able-bodied men who are out of employment. Saw-mills
might be very profitably connected with some of the establishments,
and blacksmith, wheelwright, and carpenter shops with all of them.
Tailoring, and perhaps bootmaking too, at least as far as mending
is concerned, could be done for the inmates. Those not strong
enough for the harder work could be made useful in preparing meals,
washing clothes, cleaning, baking bread, and raising vegetables for
the establishment. In this way, at times, great numbers might be
employed when work is scarce, and could honestly earn their
bread, and wait quietly until an opportunity offers to them to get
other employment and better wages than such a colony could afford
and ought to pay. And such opportunities would not be rare, as
pastoralists and farmers, when in need of labourers, would very
likely apply to these colonies, which in this way would serve, at the
same time, as labour bureaux. The general public, I am sure,
would willingly and liberally support such a scheme, seeing that it
would be the means of dealing effectually with the unemployed
question, which, at times, is not only a nuisance but becomes a veri-
table menace to the inhabitants of the larger cities. As regards this
latter aspect of the question, the scheme would be almost certain to
work beneficially in the following manner:—The unemployed who
throng our cities in the winter are, for the most part, composed of
three distinct classes. There are such who, without any fault of


their own, find it very hard to get work in their usual occupations in
winter. These, instead of flocking into town in the very uncertain
hope of “ something turning up,” would probably be glad to avail
themselves of the colonies until the busier season commences.
Others, again, who usually throw up their employment in the country
as soon as the wet season commences, because they dislike country
life in winter, and then come to town in the hope that by agitating
they will succeed in having more genial work at good wages pro-
vided for them in or near the city, will think twice before leaving
their fully-paid work in the country, when they know that all they
have to expect in town is the offer of similar work for much smaller
pay. And the remainder—dhe habitually lazy—who only take part
in the unemployed cry in the hope of being kept by charitable relief,
if they become a nuisance, could then be properly and effectually
dealt with by the police as vagrants.
Though the poor we shall always have with us, yet in a well-
ordered community no one who is able and willing to work should
have to become a beggar. And I hope this Conference will join me
in the opinion that workmen’s colonies would be an effectual means
to prevent this.
DISCUSSION.
The Rev. A. T. Boas thought this which they had just had
was one of the most interesting papers which had been read at the
Conference, inasmuch as it set forth practical ideas. If the Conference
could recommend such a labouring colony to the Government, they
would have effected a great benefit by having held it. There was
no doubt, as had been pointed out, that there might be some difficulty
in the way, but he thought Australia was well adapted for the
establishment of such an institution. It would be one of the
greatest blessings, he believed, that could be attained to try to
get work for the unemployed ; not those, as pointed out in the
paper, who were not willing to work, but those who from force of
circumstances were thrown out of work. He hoped the paper would
not be lost sight of, and that resolutions regarding it would be
embodied in any which were arrived at by the Conference. It was
one of the most practical papers they had had, and he hoped that
the Government would meet them in the carrying out of the worthy
objects suggested.
Miss Spence agreed with Mr. Boas that the paper had been one
of the most practical and suggestive which they had had. Even if
the Government did not grant assistance, in these colonies a great
deal of voluntary effort at present expended in benevolence might
suffice, if directed in another way, to accomplish such an object.
She had noticed the pastor’s statement that the establishment should
be in the hands of one or two good men. A great point was to get
at the men for such a work, and whether it should be in the hands
H 2


of the Government or of others she could not say. She thought
it was the right idea for the improvement of that shifting class
which gravitated between the charities and the gaol.
Colonel Goldstein thought that this question of working
colonies for the unemployed, though after nine years’ experimental
treatment in Germany, was still in the form of an experiment, and
it behoved them to consider that fact before they introduced them
here. For the last few weeks he had been studying the American
System of Labour Bureaux and the reports of the American Charity
Organization Societies, and if this experiment had been a success he
thought that it would have been adopted there. He did not, of
course, advance the fact that it had not been adopted as conclusive,
but it was an experiment, and he made the remark in the nature of
a warning. What succeeded in Germany might not succeed here.
The person here who annoyed people most was the man who worked a
little, but did not wish to work at all if he could help it. In the
fine weather he went around the country doing a day’s work here,
and then having about three weeks’ idleness there. In the winter
these persons flocked to the cities, and they should not be assisted
at that time to get shelter when it was most needed by more
deserving people. There was also a class of skilled labour in the
open air which had to be thought of; the labour of the man would
keep him employed during the summer, but, through climatic and
other causes, he might not get sufficient in the year to pay his small
balance to the building society, and perhaps on his farm in the
country; and he would go to one of these labour colonies, and swamp
out the colony, and keep the unfortunate class which it was estab-
lished for out of it. He thought this would be a dangerous
experiment. He would like to provide for the man who wished
for work and really could not get it; but this class would be
shut out, in the same way as the deserving poor were now shut
out about our cities.
Mrs. Swifte said those who were best acquainted with the vice
and poverty which existed must be pleased with this very excellent
paper. From what she could understand, those who clamoured for
work were not artisans, but just labouring men—that class which
they found it most difficult to get work for. It struck her that if
there were a colony of this sort established, they would find it very
beneficial to give work there to the heads of families which they had
to support or assist. It seemed that by these institutions there
would be some opportunity given to men to contribute towards the
support of their families. As to the ordinary artisans swamping
the institution, there was a class of people who would rather starve
than go into it. Anything tending to individual independence
would, she was sure, do much good.
Mrs. Hitchcock thoroughly approved of the paper, and suggested
the establishment of one of the colonies in Australia, not necessarily


by the Government. If they had a place where they could send a
man, they would find out whether he was a loafer or a man really
seeking work. She had recently travelled all through America, and
had found that there were a great many good things which did not
exist in America, and she thought Germany had more of these.
She would be glad, as a worker in connexion with charity, to see
such an institution tried.
Mr. J. A. Levey said the paper was most interesting and, to
him, very instructive. They could understand that the work was
an experiment, and would be the same here ; but the Conference
had met for the purpose of considering these matters, and in what
they did they would, no doubt, go slowly. He did not understand
in what way the genuine unemployed were separated from the pro-
fessional vagrants. The great difficulty here would arise from the
working classes themselves ; they were very strong, and very great
objection was always raised to relief work. He hoped that the result
of the paper would be that something would be done.
Rev. W. J, Eddy said General Booties scheme was, he believed,
taken from this Elberfeld idea. When the scheme was nine years
in existence it was surely more than an experiment. He thought
Pastor Herlitz* reference to it as an experiment was very good of
him, but was a rather modest way of speaking of an experiment
which had been tried in his own fatherland. Having seen a good
deal of German life, he appreciated very much the life of the farming
people there. He looked upon this as the most satisfactory solution
of the unemployed difficulty, but whether it was to be taken in hand
by the Government or by private effort was a question that should
be considered. The Conference should consider whether an experi-
ment should not be made here, and, if successful, the Government
might be asked to enlarge the scheme.
Alderman Crouch said this was the most practical scheme
which had been put before them, and was just the right thing. In
Hobart, if able-bodied men applied for relief they were put in a
wood-yard to earn something for themselves and families, and thus
relief was not given to those not deserving of it. They had much
land in the colonies which might be improved by the work of these
men, and the institutions being situated far from the city would be
a great test as to a man being desirous of obtaining work, as many
men preferred being near the city. He hoped that the subject
would not be lost sight of by the Conference.
Mr. Whiting said in South Australia their experience was that
the State made a great mistake in providing work for the un-
employed. When they had the unemployed difficulty the Govern-
ment provided work, of course at a lower rate than the ruling wage,
but the tendency of the men who obtained this work was not to get
away from the labour test and seek work outside. He was not in
favour of the plan at all. He thought it was a mistake to interfere


with social conditions, but private individuals might act. He did
not know whether the assistance given by these institutions was
supposed to be temporary or permanent. He believed, with Colonel
Goldstein, that the matter was still an experiment, and it must be
remembered that the conditions of life in Germany were different
from what they were here.
Mrs. Harcourt thoroughly approved of the paper, and thought
the ladies were nearly all agreed upon this matter, but that some
of the gentlemen were labouring under a misapprehension. It was
intended that this should be merely an experiment, and it would
be a good plan to ask the Government to grant a piece of land for
the purpose of carrying it out. The work supplied would be a
valuable test, and those who would not work should be dealt with
in another way.
Pastor Hbrlitz, replying to a remark that the people first work
at a reduced rate and then sought to compel the Government to
continue it at full wages, did not wonder that under such circum-
stances there should be men remaining persistently in the institution.
In Germany, as the price of labour was kept down, people did not
stay longer than was necessary. As there had been a great deal
of vagabondage in Germany it was no doubt an experiment to draw
them into these labour colonies, but this would not be the case in
the colonies which had been successful. If they put off doing any-
thing until all these things had been proved to be a success many
of the people for whom they were concerned would starve. They
should not be unprepared when the time came for the appearance
among them of the unemployed. If there were modifications to be
made they should be made, and if there were difficulties they should
be overcome. There were many persons brought here who were
completely lost if not taken in hand.
Mr. Guillaume read two papers—“ Neglected Children ” and
“ Wards of the State.”
(1.) —Neglected Children.
In submitting, by request, for the consideration of the Conference,
papers on the two first sections of class E, viz., No. 1, Wards of
the State, and, No. 2, Neglected Children, I have ventured to reverse
their order, and deal first with the topic of “ Neglected Children,” in
view of the fact that the “ neglected child ” has in practice to be
first provided for, and that his existence, as such, terminates on his
admission into the latter and improved position of a “ ward of
the State.” Hence, by the way, the inappropriateness of the title
“ Neglected Children’s Department ” retained in Victoria as com-
pared with that of “ State Children’s Department,” or “ State


Children’s Eelief Department,” obtaining respectively in South
Australia and New South Wales.
In the first place, the rescue and wise training of its neglected
children should, I submit, be. recognised as constituting one of the
most sacred and pressing duties of any State.
The social reformer (like the enlightened modern missionary, of
whom Bishop Patteson is a type) feels that his best hopes of success
lie in rescuing and regenerating the young. If the ranks of the
criminal and the vicious, whose unchecked growth would imperil the
very existence of the commonwealth, are to be reduced, the one
effective way of accomplishing this is by getting hold of and bring-
ing under good influences the unhappy children who, if left unaided,
must infallibly recruit those classes. The supply should be cut off
at the source.
Secondly, It is of the first importance that this indispensable
rescue work should be undertaken early, in the interest alike of the
child, of its parents, and of the community.
1. Of the child. —Every day during which the neglect is continued
is an injustice to the child, its physical and moral tone being alike
lowered, and whatever bad habits it may have acquired being allowed
to gain strength.
2. In the interest of the parent. —While the child is young, and
the number of the family small, the dissolute or drinking habits of
the neglectful parent or parents are less masterful, and the natural
parental susceptibilities not yet altogether deadened, so that a possi-
bility remains that the pang and the disgrace inflicted by the
interposition of the State to withdraw the child may be felt and
resented, and some real effort after self-reformation be put forth with
the view of recovering charge of the child or children.
The withdrawal of the latter before the parent has sunk too low
also greatly increases the prospect of enforcing the departmental
claim against him for the cost of maintenance, which again is itself
a further stimulus to his endeavours for the recovery of the guardian-
ship.
B. In the interest of the community, —The younger the age at
which the child is brought under good influences, the less costly will
be its reformation or training, and the more certain and enduring
the good result ; the gain to the community, whether from an
economical or a social stand-point, being simply incalculable.
The following resolution, passed unanimously at a Conference of
reformatory workers, held at Melbourne, in the year 1888, puts very
forcibly and convincingly the argument for the early interposition of
the State :
“ That if the class of children (girls especially) now being placed
in the reformatories were brought before the courts and dealt with at
an earlier age, and on the first occasion that the opportunity offered,
a very large proportion of them might, at that stage of their


downward career, be safely dealt with under the Neglected Children’s
Act, while those whom it might be necessary to send to reformatories
would be more readily reclaimed, and capable of earlier transfer
therefrom, and it is our confident belief that were this important
point to receive due attention, the numbers requiring treatment in
reformatories would be largely reduced, and also the number of
failures ; so that children and State would be alike benefited.”
The rescue of such children should be facilitated in the fullest
degree by simple and comprehensive legislative provision.
1. It should be competent for any person (as in the Bill which
passed in June, 1889, through the House of Lords, and in English
enactments which have been long years in force) to bring a supposed
neglected child before the court.
2. It should be sufficient, also, as provided in the Bill last men-
tioned, to produce evidence that the child whom it is sought to
rescue is not under proper guardianship, a condition which would
be fulfilled where, though it had actually a home, yet the court
might be satisfied that the parents could not, or did not, exercise
any control, and that its moral welfare was consequently being
endangered.
3. It should be sufficient that (as in that Bill) the person or
dwelling from whom or which a child may, by order of the court, be
withdrawn should be of reputed bad character, without the onus being
imposed upon the rescuers of proving this, which sometimes, when
most certain, is most difficult of proof.
4. The law should give the court ample powers for dealing with
children charged as neglected, either by in the first instance fining the
parent, and placing his child or children (without removal) under
the supervision of a truant or probation officer, which would often
produce in a costless manner the desired effect; or by sending them
to a receiving depot, to be thence placed promptly in an approved
foster home ; or by sending them for a few months to a truant or
other school of short detention ; or, if shown to be have been leading
a depraved life, to a reformatory school.
5. It should be made possible also, as in the Victorian Act
(Part VIII.), for philanthropic persons (specially approved) who are
at the pains to discover such children and bring them before the
court, to be intrusted by the court with their care and legal
guardianship, subject to regulations sanctioned by the Government
and the Legislature.
6. It should, further, be made possible (as in that Act) for such
persons to acquire guardianship by writing under the hand of the
child’s parent in the presence of a justice, subject to the aforesaid
regulations.
These provisions (5 and 6) would be hailed by English philan-
thropists, such as Dr. Barnardo, as an invaluable addition to their
present powers and means of effectual child reclamation.


7. Lastly, and very specially, it is important that all neglected,
and, indeed, all offending, children should (as in Massachusetts and
now in South Australia) be dealt with by a special court, presided
over, as a rule, by an experienced stipendiary magistrate, and be
brought under his consideration (with the exception of those referred
to in paragraphs 5 and 6) by a Department of the State specially
charged with the management of such children, and only after full
inquiry and investigation by such Department.
The magistrate would have the great advantage of a full and
intelligent statement of the case, and of the advice of those com-
netent to tender it; also with reliable information as to the power
of the parent to comply with any order of the court that might be
at the same time made against him for maintenance, while the
children would be spared the undesirable and injurious associations
of the police court, and also of the lock-up or of the gaol, as during
remand, which would only seldom be necessary, they could be kept
at one of the receiving depdts of the department.
Country cases could be heard by arrangement locally, apart
from other business, and remanded, where practicable, to the special
central court referred to. Where not practicable an officer from the
special Department could, when considered expedient, attend the
local court.
(2.) —Wards of the State.
We come now to the question of the best methods to be adopted
by the State in dealing with those of its Neglected and Offending
children who have been sent by the court to its guardianship,
whether that guardianship be vested in the secretary, in the head
(paid or honorary) of a particular school, or in a State Children's
Council; and, in doing this, it will be well to lay down a few
broad principles of general applicability.
1. The congregation of large numbers of children in any institu-
tion is to be deprecated and avoided.
2. As far as possible, and as speedily as possible, family home life
should be provided for all.
3. The co-operation of the public, as far as possible, and of the child
itself, should be enlisted in the work of its training or reformation.
4. While detention in any institution should be short, the State's
guardianship should be during minority, or until the age of eighteen,
with the power of extension by the executive government until the
age of 21, subject, of course, to prior discharge at any time.
5. While children are in a receiving depot, or in foster homes,
guardianship should vest in the secretary or council of the Department.
6. When in a probationary reformatory or other school, or placed
at service therefrom, guardianship should vest in the superintendent
or matron (whether paid or honorary) of such school,
7. Lastly, and very particularly, effective inspection of homes,
schools, and receiving depots should be provided by officers of a


high class, unconnected with the administrative Department, and
reporting direct to the Minister.
To touch briefly upon each of the foregoing principles of adminis-
tration, I remark—
(i.) The objections to large institutions are many. Some of the
chief of them are, the risk of contagion and infection, physical and
moral, and the impossibility of individual treatment or of a healthy
personal influence over the inmates on the part of the superin-
tendent or matron in charge of them. Classification, moreover, to
be effectual should be provided in separate buildings or premises.
(ii.) The home life, which is the birthright of the neglected child
when the State takes him in hand, is perfectly secured to him by the
adoption in the Australian colonies and Scotland of the boarding-out
method, properly safeguarded by effectual supervision and inspec-
tion. That system is thus vindicated by one of the oldest and most
vigorous of the boarding-out committees yet at work in England,
where vested interests and the national conservatism sadly block its
establishment :—“ We, in following the natural order of training,
by the wholesome influences of family life, are employing God’s own
ordinance for the benefit of His children.”
In New South Wales the whole of the orphan children have been
very properly taken from all the State-subsidized orphanages, and
placed out in carefully selected and supervised foster homes, to their
great satisfaction and benefit.
But the “ juvenile offender ” has no less a right than the neglected
child to be given the benefit of family home life at the earliest
moment that he is prepared to appreciate the boon. The old system
of detaining a child for a long term of years, either in an industrial
school or a reformatory, must be declared unnatural and pernicious.
In the Victorian boys’ reformatory, the newly-arrived ward is
informed that it is in his power to secure transfer to home life within
nine months by steady good conduct. If then of an age for service,
the condition is fulfilled by placing him at wages, with a sympathetic
employer; if younger, by placing him on probation during good
behaviour with his parents, or if these are disreputable, by then
placing him (after transfer) in a country foster home.
In regard to reformatory girls a somewhat different treatment
will probably, as a rule, be found necessary. From long experience
I consider that such wards are best dealt with by locating them in
small country cottage farm reformatories, of about a dozen inmates
each, such as those described in Mrs. Rowe’s pamphlet, and which
have been in successful operation at Brookside during the past three
years, where as near an approach as possible to the free conditions
of home life is accorded them, and where it is found that, after a
comparatively short detention, they can be safely placed as servants
in the neighbouring farm-houses.
(iii.) The desirable conjunction of private effort with public bounty
is secured, as regards the boarded-out children, by the appointment


with large powers and responsibilities of local ladies’ visiting
committees, each with its correspondent; and, as regards the wards
who are inmates of schools, by the appointment of visiting commitees
of whom the larger proportion are local residents.
(iv.) The extension of guardianship till the advanced age of
eighteen or twenty-one is designed, and has proved specially necessary
and valuable, for the protection of State wards from unworthy
relatives, and in very exceptional cases only, for the control of wards
who are unsteady and ill-disposed. It is important that visitors
and inspectors alike should keep this in mind, more especially in
regard to children received as “neglected.” The supervision over
service children from the age of fifteen or sixteen, should be rather
friendly than inquisitional, and should be gradually relaxed, the
ward understanding that no hindrance will be offered to any chamge
of situation with the concurrence of the Department that might
benefit its prospects without moral risk.
(v.) Though the legal guardianship over boarded-out children
must remain in the hands of the Department (whether secretary or
council), a large discretion should be allowed to the local committee
and correspondent, whose authority should be strengthened by being
constituted the paymasters for the Department, and the medium also
of all communications from the foster parents. The committee
should even have power to transfer children in extreme cases to
another duly approved foster home, obtaining subsequently, but
without loss of time, the concurrence of the department.
(vi.) It is only by giving those who have the charge and training
for a considerable period of its wards a freedom of action and large
responsibility that the State can hope to secure for this work
Christian men and women of a high class, such as are indispensable
to real success in a a work so important. Such a superintendent or
matron (paid or honorary) will have a parental feeling of responsibility
towards each child under his or her care, and must have scope for its
exercise. If in charge (e.g.) of a reformatory, they will be quick to
recommend the earliest possible transfer of any child to the benefits
of home life.
It should rest with the Department to provide against the mixture
of two classes of children in a given school ; say, for instance, of
children who have only been guilty of pilfering with those who have
been leading an immoral life. To permit of such admixture would
be to incur a very grave, and even criminal responsibility. If a
second State institution is wanting, it should be supplied, no matter
how roughly, without loss of time, or private philanthropists should
be encouraged to supply it—being given a weekly allowance towards
the cost of each child’s maintenance.
Two points of some importance in regard to reformatory school
matters may be touched upon. First, it is indispensable to
anything like general and lasting success, in dealing with reformatory


girls, that they be employed in country work, amid country sur-
roundings, and within reach of desirable country service homes, at
such a great distance, moreover, from the metropolis as to separate
them effectually from the excitement of the city, from their old
associates, and from disreputable relatives. Secondly, in view of
the importance of bringing religious influences to bear on such girls
—not as a matter of formality as much as in the daily intercourse
with them—experience has shown it to be highly desirable, in the
interests alike of the Roman Catholics and the Protestants, to hand
over those of the Roman Catholic Church, where possible, to the
guardianship of the ladies of that faith who are devoted to such
kindly Christian work.
(vii.) My last position, viz., as to the essential importance of the
separation of inspection from management, follows naturally on the
other and important principle just affirmed as to the large powers
that should be given to those actually intrusted with the charge of
schools and the training of their inmates. While comparatively free
from departmental interference, their dealing, whether judicious and
faithful or otherwise with their wards, should be the subject of frequent
and independent review, and of report to the Minister who is respon-
sible to Parliament. Obviously the most honest and high-minded
administrator, whether immediately or ultimately responsible, can
hardly hope to report without bias on the working of institutions
which more or less represent the results of his own acts, appoint-
ments, nominations, or arrangements. The Government and
the public will depend with confidence on the reports of inspectors
holding a thoroughly independent position, as a guarantee that
any undue detention, for example, of children, or their location
in a wrong school is avoided, and that their moral, physical,
educational, and industrial training, and their happiness, are
secured.
It would also be for the inspector to see that the administrative
Department was not behind-hand in the introduction of valuable
reforms, such, for example, as the boarding-out system, the very
existence of which system (for want of that separation of manage-
ment and inspection here advocated) is undiscoverable in the annual
reports of the English Departments.
I had proposed closing this paper with a brief summary of the
advantages of the boarding-out system just referred to, and of the
leading principles to be observed to secure its highest results. As
my space, however, will not now allow of this, and it will probably
be dealt with by other contributors or speakers, I will simply add a
few words in reference to one very great incidental advantage result-
ing from the adoption of that system which has not, I feel, been
brought at all adequately into prominence, viz., its remarkable
tendency to discourage the too ready abandonment by careless
parents of their parental responsibilities. While such parents would,


without much hesitation, shirk their responsibilities when aware that
their children would be lodged and trained in a palatial industrial
school, where they could monthly visit them and regain custody on
their becoming of a wage-earning age; they would think twice
about abandoning custody when under the new (boarding-out)
system they would lose sight and touch of their children, never,
perhaps, to regain it except by bringing up their home to the depart-
mental standard, and then being required in all probably to submit
to departmental supervision as a condition of having the children
replaced in it. Consequent upon the adoption of the boarding-out
system by the colony of Victoria in the year 1872, and notwith-
standing the exceptionally large increase in the meantime of its
population, there has been no increase, but a decrease of nearly 20 per
cent, in the number of the children chargeable on the public revenues,
while during the same period the number of children in the indus-
trial schools of Great Britain has increased from 10,185 in 1872 to
21,426 on Ist January, 1889, and their total cost has grown from
£222,067 to £372,454.
DISCUSSION.
Mrs. Wharton said she had been interested in this Department
since 1872, both for the Department and the Brighton Orphan
Asylum, and she had very much pleasure in saying that the
boarding-out system had been the cause of much good, both to the*
children and the parents. She could assure the Conference that
many of these children who had been placed young in these districts
when parents had claimed them, had afterwards returned to the
district, and preferred their foster parents to their own parents.
The children reared in “ foster homes ” were invariably preferred as
servants to children trained in their own homes. They were trained
to obedience, and the boys in many cases were trained to domestic
purposes. She knew squatters who preferred to take boys and
teach them to wait at table, and do domestic work, rather than get
a servant from town, and very few had been returned disobedient in
any way.
Mr. Whiting agreed with the suggestion raised in the paper.
The writer, however, first of all spoke of legislative provisions, but
did not go into detail. He thought that they had now in South
Australia what appeared to be more liberal conditions than obtained
here. Mr. Guillaume said that there should be power to receive
children from parents on surrender. They had that power in South
Australia. In their new Bill, which, unfortunately, was not yet
law, while they had many provisions not adopted in the other
colonies—they were a part of the English law. They had in South
Australia now the trial of all juvenile offenders at the office of the
Department. The regulation had only been in force for a few
months, but he was sure that the proceedings under it would be


interesting to the Conference. All the children, whether arrested
for theft or any other offence, or as neglected children, were kept at
the office and tried there by the visiting magistrate, and were not
taken to the police court at all. They felt that this was a very great
advantage, in comparison with the practice of taking children to the
court. As to the boarding-out system, he could hardly agree with
the writer that the Department should have absolute control of the
children, and as regards the reformatory, that control should be
vested in the matron or superintendent of the institution. In South
Australia they were going in for centralization. There the control
was vested in the council, and the child was as much under control
as if it were vested in the superintendent. It appeared to him that
any splitting up of control amongst half-a-dozen different people
would be a mistake, and would weaken the control of the Department.
The inspection of schools by an independent officer seemed to him
unnecessary. Where there was a council in New South Wales and
here, he thought it was quite unnecessary, and, he would also say,
uncomplimentary to the officers. As to the girls’ reformatory,
they were ahead in South Australia in that matter too, as there
they had a new reformatory for girls. It had three cottages, to
accommodate about ten girls each, and had its own appliances for
cooking, and each was managed as one household. That was for
criminal girls only. As to classification, those acting immorally and
those guilty of theft were kept apart. The boarding-out system
was so well known that it was not necessary to discuss it. They
had initiated it in South Australia two or three years before they
introduced it here, and in 1872 they had gone into it on a larger
scale. Their inspections were different from what they were here;
they had local committees who did a great deal of work, and they
had two paid inspectors, who visited every child regularly every
year. As the committees were rather slip-shod sometimes in their
work the inspection was necessary.
Mr. Wrbford said the system of boarding out had not been
adopted in Ballarat. The committee which he represented—that of
the Ballarat Orphan Asylum—was totally opposed to it. They
had seen cases in which the children were paid drudges, and they
were therefore quite against the system. He could assert that in
their asylum they had a perfect system. They had about 45 acres
of land. They had recently put a part of it under cultivation.
They had not been able to do that by the labour of the boys alone;
but first had had to employ outside labour, and afterwards the
labour of the boys, under the supervision of the superintendent,
entirely worked the farm. In reference to the girls, they had a
system of a certain number every three months taking the laundry
work, and a certain number taking the cooking, while others managed
the house-work. Thus they took the work in rotation, and were
kept in special rooms. They had no difficulty in sending girls out


to service, and boys also. They had now 30 applicants for children
whom they could not supply. For the most part the children sent
out had turned out well, and not only that, but they did not forget
the institution in which they were brought up. Only recently a
former inmate of the asylum had come there, and had left a donation
of £5 to show his feelings towards the institution, and what he
thought of the manner in which he had been brought up and cared
for during his residence there. The superintendent and matron
were at all times in communication with the children who were at
service, as well as those in business, and some of these were doing
remarkably well.
Mr. Rhodes felt it a pity they had so little time to discuss a
matter of such importance as that contained in the paper just read.
While they had sympathy with all the vagrants and the unemployed,
he thought the claims of the children were infinitely superior to
those of any others ; and he considered it was no hardship upon him
to come 500 miles if he could in any way improve his education in
reference t© what he regarded as the most important matter which
could engage the attention of the philanthropist. While they
could deal with the trouble in older persons, if they went to the
children there was a possibility of there stopping the trouble at the
fountain head. While there was much that he could approve of in
the paper, he would have liked to have heard some suggestions as
to the prevention of child immorality, which they had heard so much
about. There should be much more power placed in the hands of
truant inspectors connected with the boards of advice to arrest
children who were commencing their criminal career by truancy.
They did not wish to offer facilities to unworthy parents to neglect
their children, but, by giving attention to these matters, he thought
the incipient causes of the trouble, they would be staving off the
after delinquency and giving a great deal of happiness to the objects of
their attentions. He would have liked to have had something said
about the results of efforts being put forward, as, for instance, by
Mrs. Rowe, for the reformation of girls. They should give the
children a great deal more attention than they had given them up
to the present time.
Mrs. Swifte said, coming, as she did, from Ballarat, and as a sub-
scriber to the orphan asylum, felt that she must take a little exception
to the remarks of Mr. Wreford as to the boarding-out system. As
to that system, there was no work which she had touched which
filled her with more admiration than that. She had not a word to
say against the orphan asylum, which was very well managed, but
she did not see why the children should not be sent out to loving
homes where they could be made soft and gentle, and given bright
ideas. That could not be done in the institution. Home life was
the making of the children, for they were not turned out on a
mechanical pattern.
( The Conference adjourned.')


AFTERNOON SITTING.
Rev, A. T. BO AS PRESIDING.
Mrs. Harcourt said she was very much interested in the
boarding-out system, and also the licensing-out of children. Mr.
Whiting had made some remarks, not so much as to the boarding-
out as to the licensing-out of children, and had said that they had
had official inspection once a year in South Australia, She agreed
with Mr. Guillaume that as to persons having charge of wards being
able to dispose of them themselves. The committee of which she
was a correspondent for eight years had a district with 150 or 200
children, and they found it very advantageous to have an inspector
come round once a year. There were very few complaints. On the
value of the boarding-out system there could be no two opinions.
(Hear, hear.) They had seen the advantage of children being taken
from vicious homes and placed with thrifty foster parents. In large
institutions the children were brought up like machines. Regarding
the supervision, particularly of the boys who were licensed out, they
had had families of four or five boys and girls. They were in one
foster home for many years. They had obtained situations for the
boys as they became eligible. They had one placed in the country
at 10s. per week and his board. He strongly objected to official
inspection. The boy had come to her twice, and asked her to use
her influence with the Department to have the inspection omitted.
He said that the inspector came round, and that the boys he was
working with got to know that he belonged to the industrial school,
and imposed upon him. He said at any time he would be prepared
to report himself to the committee, but he did not like the official
inspection, and that he would have better wages and better treatment
if it were not known that he was an industrial school boy. She
thought it ought to be left to the committee, in whom the secretary
would have confidence, and that there should not be so much official
supervision. The committee gave careful attention to the children,
even if they were at a great distance. If there was less red-tapism
and less official inspection it would be much better, as it would give
the children the idea that they were not altogether paupers. While
they were very thankful, she was sure, for the interest taken in
them, it was not well to have too much officialism.
The Hon. Secretary (Mr. Jacob Goldstein) said, with
respect to this question of official inspection of boarded-out Wards of
the State, there had lately come under the consideration of the
Charity Organization Society a case or two which he thought had con-
vinced the society that the independent inspection in connexion with
the boarding-out system was a most wise and necessary thing.


Mr. G. E. Ardill said he was connected with an institution in
Sydney which had for its object the rescue of child-life, and he had
been connected with a society for the prevention of cruelty to
children. He thought there should be such inspection as had been
referred to.
Mrs. Harcourt explained that she did not object to official
inspection, but it should only be once a year.
Colonel Goldstein said official inspection might be made a
most hateful thing, but he had known cases of official inspection
which had been the mildest thing possible. He knew of one case of
a child who was boarded out (in reality was adopted). He had no
doubt that it would grow up a lady and be well received in society.
The children started under the boarding-out system, but the board-
ing-out in time was dropped. It was necessary that every society
should know what became of its children, but the agent of the
society might call casually at the place where the child was boarded
and simply make an excuse to see that it was being well looked
after. There was no necessity for taking out a note-book or making
a parade of the inspection,
Mr, Guillaume said, with reference to the remarks of Mr.
Whiting as to guardianship, it was not sufficient to place the
guardianship in the Council, as they were not capable of exercising
guardianship, not knowing the child. It was, therefore, a great dis-
advantage to a boy to be dealt with from a central source. Mr.
Whiting has also taken exception to his views as to independent
inspection, but he thought it was a great advantage to all concerned.
He says that where there was a State council they would have full
confidence in the superintendent. He might say that he also had
the same confidence in the secretary, but as secretary he would rather
they did not place full confidence in him and do without inspection.
He would rather the report should come from a source opposed to
himself. Mr. Whiting had not objected to his proposal as to the
absolute importance and necessity of putting the reformatory girls
far away from the city and their bad associates. But he knew that
the Adelaide council did stand out for that principal with their
Government. He thought they would follow the example of other
countries in this matter. In regard to Mr. Wreford’s remarks, he
was glad the boarding-out system had been to some extent impugned,
because that had called forth much that had been said in its favour.
Could there be anything like home-life in large institutions? With
regard to inspection, he thought the Conference agreed with him
that when girls and boys went out to service inspection should not
be inquisitorial.
596.
I


The Rev. Alexander Mactjlly, M.A., read a paper on
The Unemployed.
I hare ever felt, since able to think seriously of charitable work,
that no community should feel satisfied with a social system in
which willing and able hands were seeking vainly for employment.
The object which I have set before myself in this paper is not so
much to offer a solution of the problem as to throw out a few ideas,
which may, I trust, suggest discussion upon a subject which is at
least one of the sources from which springs the distress we all so
much deplore. There are, indeed, many who will tell you, if you
speak to them of the unemployed, that it is their own fault that they
are go—that there is plenty of work for those who desire it.
I am afraid that those who treat the subject in this off-hand sort
of way have really given it but little attention. During the recent
land boom, for instance, the building trade was very brisk, but when
depression came,‘l was told that there were thousands of workmen
out of employment, who could, in fact, get nothing to do.
Under our present social system, such depressions are bound to
recur periodically.
In the winter season there is an appeal that has, unfortunately,
become familiar, that the Government should start relief works;
but the Government of this colony, at least, has steadily refused to
do more than put as many contracts in hand as possible.
Professor Morris, in his inaugural address, mentioned the
periodical recurrence of this distress, coincident with the sun’s
departure to northern latitudes, and that there was no special pro-
vision made for such seasons. Surely this is a leakage in the system
of our charities which requires mending, and affords food for earnest
and thoughtful consideration.
The sick we provide for in our hospitals, as far as their accom-
modation and means will permit.
The old and infirm are likewise provided for in our asylums.
The ladies’ benevolent societies do what they can to provide for
emergencies, such as families suddenly plunged into poverty through
the desertion, sickness, or death of the bread-winner.
In many cases, however, the aid which is thus afforded is
inadequate to meet fully the requirements, owing not to any unwilling-
ness to assist further, but to a desire to extend the hand of help to
as many as deserved it, whilst the supply is somewhat limited.
On many occasions cases have come before our own societies
requiring immediate attention, and we were at a loss to know how
to direct for their provision.
It was, indeed, such cases that gave birth to the desire of a
member of the committee to add to our Charity Organization Society
an auxiliary, by means of which the committee might be enabled to
extend the hand of help to such cases; otherwise her functions are,


I think, rightly restricted to investigation and direction. We
should not, however, rest satisfied until our charities are so regulated
that every case can be met and provided for.
Even the impostor when discovered should be subject to an
enforced residence in a reformatory, where he would have time to
reconsider his mode of life, and the advisability of amending his
ways, and not merely, as is at present the modus operandi, to refuse
his request and give him a caution.
Again, there are many cases dealt with by our society, but can
hardly be considered as satisfactorily completed—such as the man
who is reduced to poverty through intemperance, and when this is
discovered he is looked upon as an unfit recipient of any charity,
and we compliment ourselves upon the efficacy of our investigation
which saved us from imposition.
The case is then dropped, and we pass on to the next ; but I
would ask : Is it completed ? Nay, more, I have known of instances
where help has been withheld from a family because the parents were
addicted to drink. It was felt that it was unsafe to do anything, as
the probability was whatever was given would be speedily converted,
by means of the pawn-office or unprincipled dealers, into drink. The
woman whose life is not free from suspicion of immorality is like-
wise refused assistance.
Yet I cannot help feeling that such cases, without any undue
straining, might well be looked upon as analogous to the case
represented in that admirable parable of “ The Good Samaritan,”
we being not altogether unlike the priest and Levite, who, seeing
their brother lying wounded upon the road, passed by on the other side.
It may, indeed, be objected that the simile is not complete, inas-
much as there is, it is thought, an essential difference. The man
who fell among thieves was brought to his pitiable condition through
no fault of his own, whereas in the cases I have mentioned the man
or woman is looked upon as responsible for the condition they are in.
But, even granted that they are responsible. And yet how many
pitiable cases there are, when one is familiar with their history, of
which you feel doubtful if you would yourself be any better had you
been subject to similar influences. However, let us accept that they
are responsible. Does that relieve us, I would ask, from binding up
their wounds, and leaving them in an inn, where they will be cared
for and, as far as possible, protected from the attacks of impulses
which laid hold upon them when they were, figuratively speaking,
travelling upon a lonely and unprotected way ?
It may be said that there are inebriate asylums and houses of
refuge for such as I have depicted. These are, however, altogether
inadequate for many such cases as I have presented to you. We
require homes, where both drunkard and sensualist would be insulated
from old associations ; where labour and industry would be rewarded
in such a way as to instil feelings of self-dependence and respect ;
I 2


where work would be remunerated according to a carefully-adjusted
scale, the working expenses and rent of building being, if possible,
deducted.
Their earnings I would place to their Credit, to be given to them
when their conduct was such as to warrant their beingagain allowed
their freedom, but forfeited in cases of wilful breach of discipline or
bad conduct. _
The idle and larrikin classes should, I think, be dealt with
rigorously, and provided with only the bare necessities of life, any-
thing beyond this being dependent upon their own industry and
perseverance.
When discovered, they should be handed to the police, and sent
by a magistrate to a reformatory, where work is compulsory. Such
a disposal of the loafing element would, I believe, have a salutary
effect in lessening their numbers, and would do much towards
diminishing crime. At present our measures are not sufficiently
drastic. The loafer and the drunkard are able to evade becoming
amenable to the law, whilst they continue to sponge upon those
whom they ought to assist. Who is there, for instance, who does
not know of drunken husbands supported by their wives ; of sons
and daughters idle and worthless, loafing upon their parents, who,
rather than suffer an exposure, endure the burden ?
I should be glad to see truant schools established here such as
one gentleman mentioned yesterday afternoon existed in London.
Amongst the young of these colonies there appears to me to be a
very strong dislike to all restraint, and on the part of the parents a
want of firmness in the control of their children; and this laxity
does not at all intensify the affection of the child for the parent, but
appears really to lessen it.
We were told yesterday afternoon how loth the children were to
take upon themselves the providing for their parents even after their
being themselves brought up and educated in charitable institutions.
In such cases one would imagine that, with such a practical illus-
tration ever before them, that they should be actuated not alone by
a natural parental affection, but that they would be influenced by a
sense of gratitude to relieve the institution to which they themselves
were so deeply indebted.
If such a trait becomes widespread it will prove a very serious
menace to the manhood of our rising generation.
It was suggested by another lady what a useful work might be
done in taking young girls into your home and training them to
household work. There is no work that I know of that would confer
a greater boon upon a large portion of our community.
How often in our trains and trams do we see a young, delicate
woman, with two or three children —one in her arms and the others
dragging after her —wearied and careworn through her anxiety and
endeavours to look after the safety of her little ones.


Such a mother would gladly take in a little girl, and teach her to
look after children, to cook and to clean the house; but they cannot
get such girls without paying a wage from 7s. to 10s. a week, which
would be much beyond what they could afford. The great mass of
servants are not only lamentably deficient in knowledge of their
duties, but positively resent any attempt on the part of their mistress
to give them instruction. Such, at any rate, is the experience of my
own wife, and she took her diploma in the first class at the School
of Cookery, South Kensington.
For the rising generation a much stricter discipline than that
which they are at present receiving will be required, to make men
and women of sterling principles and true human sympathies.
Professor Morris, in his inaugural address, mentioned a book recently
written by General Booth, entitled “ Darkest England,” in which
the difficulties I have touched upon in this paper are dealt with. I
shall look forward with interest to its perusal, for I think that one
who has originated a movement that has so wonderfully attracted
the masses, and gained such a hold upon men that they willingly
relinquish profitable employment to labour in it for a bare sub-
sistence in order that they may be instrumental in succouring their
brethren, will, I am hopeful, have practical as well as generous
suggestions.
My religious opinions, I may state, are far removed from the
Salvation Army. Their mode of worship lam unable to appreciate,
nevertheless that does not prevent my admiration for their earnest-
ness and self-denial, and feeling that they do a great deal of good
work in relieving distress, and inducing many to relinquish their
vicious habits and live a nobler life. I purposed speaking of the
German workmen’s colonies, but as Pastor Herlitz has, I believe,
given you a paper dealing with those colonies, I left the matter in
his hands.
A movement is at present being made in England to dispose of
unemployed labour, by the establishment of agricultural colonies or
co-operative estates.
A recent writer tells us that for the establishment of such a
colony some 500 acres would be required ; that tools be purchased,
and about a dozen matrons and foremen of departments, under the
control of a director, be engaged ; after which 500 of the unem-
ployed are selected and sent in detachments to the estate as work
can be given them.
At the outset he tells us it will, of course, be necessary to erect
houses, a central building (containing kitchen, diningroom, reading-
room, recreation-room, and lecture-hall) ; also storehouses, granaries,
cowsheds, workshops, school-house, &c., will require to be erected.
Two hundred allotments, consisting of a third of an acre each,
should be enclosed, and also a large orchard planted. The estate
would require to be stocked with about 75 oxen, 350 sheep, and


25 pigs. He goes into further particulars as to the most economic
way of conducting farming operations, which I need not here
capitulate. With regard to the class of people that should be first
introduced, he mentions builders, carpenters, agricultural labourers,
gardeners, bakers, cooks, laundresses.
In the next batch he would recommend tailors, dressmakers,
needlewomen, spinners, and weavers.
His idea is that all their requirements should be as speedily as
possible provided on the estate itself.
He reckons that four-fifths of all the work done by the society
would be absorbed by the community itself, and that one-fifth might
be sold in the open market.
He gives what, to me, is a satisfactory answer to the free labourer,
who contends that the products of such communities should not be
brought into competition with his, as he recommends that only such
things should be sent into the open market as ham, bacon, eggs,
poultry, &c., which are now imported from abroad. One half of the
money thus received would be spent in the wages of director, matron,
&c. None should be taken on the estate who cannot work, except
100 children at the outset —the offspring of unemployed parents.
In a colony thus established there would be some 400 able and
willing to give a regular period of daily work to the society, whether
men or women.
The wages of the ordinary workers should not consist of money,
but of a rent-free house, three good meals daily (supplied in the
dining hall of the society), a suit of clothes annually, education for
the children, an allotment of land to each family of about a third of
an acre, and lessons in the art of bee-keeping, mushroom culture,
basket-making, mat-making, and various handicrafts.
The time given to the work of the society should be at least five
hours daily. The workers, it is expected, would spend a portion of
the remainder of the day that was left to them in attending to little
matters of their own —in raising pigs, poultry, flowers, &c.; and that
a carpenter would probably find time to build a light cart, and take
the produce of 20 or 30 of his neighbours to the nearest market.
The sale of intoxicating liquors he would rigorously exclude.
Many other details are given, but it will only be necessary to add
that the rules are not unduly oppressive or inquisitorial.
There are many who may see numberless objections to such a
colony. However, I must say that, when we are able to remove the
drunkard, loafer, and impostor from our midst, and treat them as at
present we do criminals, and make their comfort depend upon
their own exertion, we will not, I think, have much difficulty in
providing for those who are unfortunate but, at the same time,
willing and anxious to work. Charity, as was suggested in an able
paper read at one of our sittings, has, in the gradual evolution of
things, reached a higher level than merely yielding to an impulse to


relief distress because it is painful to the eye or that the applicant
is importunate. It demands that the portion of our means we
devote to this purpose shall be distributed to the very best advantage.
The object of our meeting together is for the advocacy, not of less
tenderness of heart, but for all the wisdom we can possibly gather
for its direction.
DISCUSSION'.
Me. Commissioner Coombes said he would probably be expected
to refer to the colonization scheme of General Booth, but he pre-
ferred not touching upon the matter, as they would shortly have the
scheme before them. He, however, felt sure that the Salvation
Army would not send people out to these colonies until they were
found to be persons who could be well trusted to make good citizens.
Colonel.- Goldstein thought that a paper on the unemployed
should have given them something about the unemployed movement
in Melbourne, and that subject had only been barely touched upon.
He would have preferred that Mr. Macully had touched upon
the Elberfeld system. He had spoken of this agricultural farm as
the best means of solution of the difficulty, but in his description
he alluded to the fact that each workman should receive a suit of
clothes annually. How could each person receive a suit of clothes
annually in an institution where the unemployed were merely to be
relieved ? To him the unemployed was that body of men always
going through our city and asking fora little work, and this solution
would not touch the question of these. It was utterly impossible
for any community to invent labour. All that could be done was to
provide some sort of light work in the shape of odd jobs.
The Rev. Alex. Macully, in reply, said that, with regard to the
remarks made about his paper, he might say that he had listened
anxiously to hear what he considered the principal points spoken
upon, and found that they were almost altogether ignored. He did
not confine his definition of the unemployed to merely those tem-
porarily out of employment. He looked upon the drunkard of the
river side and the idler as the unemployed. The plan he had
referred to seemed to him admirable.
Mr. Alderman Crouch read a paper on
Charitable Organization and Indiscriminate Relief.
The good old book says, “ The poor you have always with you
and it is quite true ; but among them are the professional beggars.
These are sometimes poor, sometimes not—mo objection to be poor or
thought so—who make begging a trade because they find it pays better
than working. Both these should receive no quarter, and certainly
no quarters except the penitentiary or the treadmill. While we have


this class in the community, there is another, soft-hearted and foolish,
who think by promptly giving money—the easiest, quickest, and only
way of satisfying these people—that they have done their duty, and
deserve the commendation of their fellows, and merit God’s approval.
In most cases they get neither, because both know that generally
the evil has been increased, not mended, and certainly not cured.
In visiting our Invalid Asylum, at Newtown, a few months ago,
in company with several of the committee of the Benevolent Society,
and seeing more than 800 very aged and decrepid men and women,
I asked the superintendent, “ What is the cause of all this
pauperism?” Without a moment’s consideration, he replied,
“ Drink ; unhesitatingly, drink.” Notwithstanding this, a present of
a cask of wine on feast days is gratefully accepted by the Govern-
ment, and as gratefully drank by those poor unfortunates whose
health and wealth have been sacrificed in building up the princely
fortunes of the brewer and wine and spirit merchant. The drink
trade under its present conditions is the monster curse of the
English-speaking race. This is admitted by everybody except the
brewer and the publican, who make money, sometimes a fortune, by
it. It makes men lazy, wretched, quarrelsome, crazy, and criminal.
It so dehumanizes them that parents drive their innocent children
into the street to beg, to lie, or to steal, so that they may have
money to buy beer or rum. Drink fills our gaols and hospitals, and
crowds our benevolent and lunatic asylums. It places upon the
industrious, the saving, the sober, and the charitable the heavy
expense of maintaining these institutions, the product of the ill-
spent money over the public-house bar, augmented by the major part
of the indiscriminate alms-giving in the public streets. Dr.
Guthrie says :—“ I charge intemperance as the cause of almost all
the ignorance, and almost all the irreligion, that disgrace and afflict
the land.” That it enfeebles the intellect, induces idleness, and
corrupts the morals is abundantly proved by police-office reports, and
by the evidence of all who are connected in any way with pauper
administration. Can any one deny that drink is not the principal
cause of pauperism and the helpless condition of the poor ?
The late Earl Shaftesbury said he was satisfied that, were it not
for the temperance associations, England would be so immersed in
immorality, violence, and sin that it would be scarcely habitable.
The duty of law to interfere with the evil or perilous propensities
of the individual is assumed as an axiom in every criminal code. In
fact, law is to make it easy to do right and hard to do wrong. If
this is admitted, then the amount of time and money devoted to the
almost numberless charity institutions, without giving to the cause,
seems not in accord with common sense. I have heard of a lunatic
asylum where a test is applied to every new arrival. It is this : The
patient is ordered to bale the water out of a cistern, into which a
stream of water is running. Should he be obedient and industrious,


and work hard to carry out the task, he is soon taken off, and
passed in as a permanent lunatic. But should he soon cease baling,
turn the tap, and then resume work, he is pronounced as a hopeful
case. May not succeeding generations look back to our day with
astonishment that we spent so many thousand pounds a year, “ and
never turned the tap and stopped the stream.
Where charitable organizations exist, the safest, in fact the only
wise, plan, is to subscribe to their funds, and on every appeal for
money to give the applicant a letter to the official of the institution;
and, rest perfectly assured, that no person will be allowed to want
for food. Inquiry will promptly follow, and, should it prove a
deserving case, judicious assistance will be given, and, if possible,
put in the way of helping themselves. It may be assumed that the
public beggar is a “professional.” The real deserving poor suffer
long, and try to hide their poverty from the public eye as long as
possible. If all indiscriminate givers would do justly to themselves,
to the public, and to the beggar, they should make a personal visit
to the abode of the applicant prior to giving relief ; much money
would be saved and mendicity suppressed. The “ professional ” does
not want any trouble taken about him, he does not want food, he
only wants a trifle of money. Hot a tithe of the letters written to
the registrar or secretary of any society ever reach his hands. They
are too well known.
Every case is (or should be) recorded alphabetically, to be easily
referred to. In the Hobart Benevolent Society’s books we have the
names of several generations, proving that eleemosynary aid tends
to produce hereditary paupers. Our registrar has been in office
since the formation of the society, 35 years ago; and frequently
surprises the committee by his remembering the name and ciicum-
stances, and sometimes even the voice, of an applicant who has
many years before been on the books of the society.
My committee have ever been only too happy to supply a like
society with all the information in its power. In Tasmania there
are but two cities, so that we can easily communicate with one
another; but in Australia, where the work is tenfold and the
population so migratory, it is of the greatest importance that cases
should be fully tabulated, to be easy of Every case
emigrating to another colony or locality, the particulars should
follow, so that the kindred society would be put on its guard. Let
this be done persistently, locally, and intercolonially, and a heavy
blow will be dealt to professional begging and impostors; while the
unfortunate, but deserving, poor will be easier and more permanently
helped.
DISCUSSION.
The Rev. Father O’Connell said : His experience led
him to agree with the principle set forth in the very sensible paper
which had ust been read. One of the principal causes of


poverty, to his mind, was intemperance; and in a Conference of
this nature, unless they attempted to grapple with the causes of
poverty, the Conference would end with very little good. They,
no doubt, intended to do all the good in their power, and he
thought if any good was to be done they must reform the drink
traffic. There should be some restriction on the breweries and
public-houses. Unless they struck at the root of the evil, by
placing a heavy tax to support those who were the victims of
those breweries and public-houses, very little good would be done.
He was pleased to hear the Rev. Dr. Strong speak ©f the
insanitary state of the homes of the poor. In Melbourne he
thought the state of the houses of the poor was a disgrace to
any community. Whether poverty was the cause of drunkenness,
or drunkenness the cause of poverty, it was hard to say; for,
while drunkenness led to poverty, he believed that poverty very
frequently led to drunkenness. (Hear, hear.) It would, no
doubt, be against the interests of the owners of the houses to
say that certain hotels should be shut up. It would require a
strong nerve to tackle the question, but if they did not take
action, and abolish these dangerous surroundings, he feared there
would be a very small result attained.


FIFTH DAY:
(Saturday, 15th November, 1890).
MORNING SITTING.
PROFESSOR MORRIS PRESIDING.
Me. G. E. Ardill read a paper by Mrs. Rowe on
Rescue Work.
I will not touch on work amongst refractory girls to-day. I
am very much concerned for their welfare, as most of those present
know, but I had rather make a few suggestions as to other
work of the same sort which would naturally follow out mine,
had I time and ability to take it up.
1. I have done no prison visiting, but am greatly drawn to the
consideration of the needs of first-sentence female prisoners.
I know that they might be treated, with few exceptions, much as
we treat my Brookside girls, and that their future course would be
more likely to be permanently affected for good by efforts made to
that end amidst country surroundings. Our Government is willing
to release such prisoners to responsible persons, and they would, I
think, give better results than the same number of reformatory girls
who do not come into our hands till, perhaps, fifteen or sixteen,
having had a taste of an immoral life, without getting far enough
involved to know anything of its extreme bitterness, feuch girls
often give me and my helpers the greatest anxiety, as we feel they
may only be arrested for a time in their course of sin. Still, even
in these cases we have good hope, as, by our Act, they are under
our immediate influence till the age of 20, or, if necessary, 21.
Most of the prisoners would have suffered more than the girls
I speak of, would welcome release from gaol surroundings, and
would be amenable to necessary discipline. Nothing would be
required for the trial of this scheme but a small cottage, situated on
a few acres of land, capable of holding, say, from four to six inmates,
with a lady in command possessed of the necessary tact and ex-
perience, lam supposing that these women have been selected by
the authorities as fit to be under such favorable conditions, and
ikely to repay the extra trouble bestowed upon them. Ido not
think our Government should be expected to take up such work,
but I believe they would make a certain weekly allowance, say, from
7s. 6d. to 10s., towards their expenses for the of their
unexpired terra. The sum should be a little less than their cost in
the gaol itself. They would do their own work in house and garden.
There would probably be neighbours within driving distance, who


would furnish some washing and, perhaps, other work, so that they
could be kept busy. lam confident that, were the experiment made
for, say, two years by practical and earnest women, not easily dis-
couraged, with first offenders and more trivial cases, the system
would be extended, and the older and more hardened offenders given
a chance of a new beginning amidst happier and freer surroundings.
Cannot somebody be persuaded to try ?
2. Then there is our Infant Asylum—a charity in which lam also
deeply interested. There is, I think, no doubt it should be more
largely used, and it would be if it were better known. If the advan-
tages of distance from town are ever more fully appreciated, the
present building will become simply a receiving depot, from which
the poor mother and her baby will be transferred to the purer air of
the country.
I will not extend my remarks any further, and so waste the
valuable time of this Conference, I only ask that those interested
in the subject should come and see for themselves our little country
homes for reformatory girls, and then they would be able to estimate
the value of such a departure in the case of institutions in which
they are personally interested.
I may mention, without any betrayal of trust, that a lady has
already arranged for the purchase of a property of 40 acres in the
neighbourhood of Brookside, which she intends to devote to some
such purpose as I have mentioned.
Colonel Goldstein read a paper by Mrs. Warton on the
Maryborough Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
I beg to bring before this Conference a few particulars in reference
to the working of our Maryborough Ladies’ Benevolent Society, and
also the requirements of our district where this particular branch of
charity is concerned. I may state that the rules of our society are
the same as those of kindred societies, namely, to relieve the poor
and needy of the district. The society has existed for 21 years,
during which time, through the assistance of the Government
subsidy of £SO; Borough Council, £lO ; Tullaroop Shire, £10;
and local subscriptions to the amount of about £3OO (making a
total of nearly £4OO a year), we have been enabled to relieve about
100 persons yearly, 35 of whom are very old and infirm. These
are regular recipients from the society, some having received con-
stant assistance for more than fifteen years. It is this class of
recipient which I wish to bring under the special notice of this
Conference. We are able to relieve these old people by providing
cottages for those of them who are houseless, and by supplying
them with the usual order for groceries to the amount of 16s. a
month as long as they are able to assist themselves. In extreme


old age, however, these people become incapacitated, and are there-
fore unable to help themselves in any way. It is for this class of
people we need a benevolent asylum. I may state here that the
only other charity in our district is the Maryborough Hospital, and
it is not the place for these old people, who do not require medical
aid, their infirmities being entirely from old age. We have been
greatly distressed through not having a suitable place for them. I
wish, therefore, to bring under your special notice the need wehave
of a’district asylum. I do not mean that we require one built at
Maryborough, as the number of inmates would not be great enough
for its support. Wffiat I would like to suggest is that one of the
country hospitals, which I think are too numerous, should be con-
verted “into a benevolent asylum, to which deserving cases from the
whole surrounding districts could be sent. There is a benevolent
asylum at Castlemaine, but we experience great difficulty in getting
our cases admitted there, and when this difficulty is overcome we
have to pay £8 per annum for each inmate we send. In support of
my argument, I would call the attention of the Conference to the
following fact, that between Ballarat and St. Arnaud inclusive we
only have one benevolent asylum, while the hospitals in the same
radius are seven in number. Surely one of these might be con-
verted into a benevolent asylum without incurring any neglect to the
sick and adding much to the comfort and care of the poor and
needy.
DISCUSSION.
Me. Harlin said that it struck him that the paper contained
a very practical suggestion, but its only fault was that it did not go
far enough. It seemed to him that there was a larger of
hospitals in Victoria than we really required. If the suggestion
could take the form that not only should some be converted into
benevolent asylums, but that some should be used to assist the City
Hospital with convalescent patients, it would be a good thing.^
Colonel Goldstein, from a residence of twenty years in the
Western District of Victoria, knew that hospitals and benevolent
asylums were combined in most of the towns such as Portland and
Warrnambool. It seemed to him, from conversation with Mrs.
Warton, that the hospital had no room for any but the sick.
It was a very good suggestion, therefore, that one should be con-
verted into a benevolent asylum.
Mrs. Warton, in reply, said that at the present time there were
six or eight in the Maryborough Hospital whom they might have
cast upon their hands at any time. Their society was not able to
support these. In some instances they had had to send them to
the gaol, and the gaol was not a place for these poor old people.
When these people were quite homeless they provided cottages, but
in order to be allowed to live in them they must attend to them-
selves.


Colonel Goldstein read a paper on
Charity Organization: its Principles and Methods.
Socialism is theoretical, but impracticable—therefore, is mis-
leading, if not wholly untrue. Sociology is scientific, and must be
practicable, because, dealing with facts, it arranges and classifies
them so as to discover the laws that govern society. One of these
facts is that society is composed of individuals, who are what they
are owing to their environment—some very rich, some very poor,
with many intervening grades. Society is the result of natural
causes, and, scientifically considered, each particle or individual of
that society is intimately connected with and acted upon by every
other individual. “We are members one of another.” When this
is fully recognised and adopted as a guide to our conduct we cannot
go far wrong. If we fail to act upon this principle of society we
are likely to be wrong and to do wrong. This is equally true of
associations as of the individuals of which such associations are
composed. If, recognising this duty towards society as a whole, yet
acting upon that recognition only in part, they become exclusive,
and, while conscientiously trying to do their duty, they commit
serious errors.
In large cities there are many associations for dispensing charit-
able relief. These recognise, in part, their duty to the poor, but
ignore their equal duty to the rich. They therefore fail in this
respect, that they do not endeavour to bring the rich into closer
relations with the poor, laying no stress on the reciprocal duty of
all parts of society towards each other part—a duty that obtains its
highest incentive from a belief in the universal brotherhood of man.
This is what charity organization should aim to do ; to induce
the rich to endeavour to elevate the poor by their personal influence
and by practical suggestion rather than by indiscriminate alms-
giving. Alms-giving is not charity; charity is a sentiment rather
than an act. The highest conception of charity is that it is a law
of love. Eelief alone is utterly insufficient. To elevate the poor
requires more—much more—tender sympathy; a wider and more
general belief in the value of friendly intercourse between rich and
poor; a belief that the best help that can be given is help that will
enable the poor to help themselves.
Mr, C. S. Loch, in his recent book on charity organization,
says—“ Pauperism is the social enemy of the modern State. . .
The distribution of relief in order to meet the ordinary contingencies
of life tends to increase pauperism.” Mr. Kellogg, of the Kew York
Charity Organization Society, says—“ Pauperism is unsocial. The
remedy is to replace the fallen and incapable in sound social
relations, and to maintain them there as honorable active factors in
common life.” How, then, can we so replace them ? Do our
various charitable associations succeed in doing this ? If not,


wherein do they fail ? They fail in that they are exclusive, in
that they give because they are asked, often without inquiry, or if
inquiry is made it is almost certain to be so imperfect as to be
useless. The remedy is in co-operation and organization, and the
modern outcome of this idea is the charity organization society,
whose work is conducted on strictly scientific principles, by regis-
tration, arrangement, and classification of facts.
The charity organization society seeks also to establish better
relations between rich and poor, and to foster individual sympathy
and charity. Alluding to the London society, Mr. 0. S. Loch
says “The want to which this society gives expression is the want
of a better social and charitable relation between members of the
same community.” _
The leading principles of charity organization are—l. The
scientific treatment of benevolence. 2. The amelioration of social
irregularities. And, 3. Organization treated as a business scheme.
And its methods are —Co-operation, investigation, registration,
repression of fraud, direction of charity to the deserving, and estab-
lishment of schemes for the encouragement of thrift and self-help.
Acknowledging these modern ideas, it is the first duty of all
charities in every city to co-operate, in order that organization on
sound business principles may make them mutually as well as
individually successful. Where city charities avoid co-operation
there must be a great deal of over-lapping, and thus pauperism is
directly and surely encouraged. A deserving case, getting aid from
one society, probably through well-meaning people, eventually
obtains aid from several societies, each of whom asked the question
« Are you being helped by any other society V’ and each received
the convenient reply—'“No.” That case is at once pauperized, and
may in time develop into the begging-letter writer, or adopt any
other method of imposing on the credulity of the charitable. Again,
say four agents have examined the above case, as a rule only a
small part of the truth, if any, has been ascertained by each. If
these four charities had been associated, the organization, by means
of one central agent, would have obtained the whole truth. The case,
being deserving, would have been referred to one of the four
societies, by that one society would have been adequately relieved,
and without fear of being pauperized; and, as the central agent
registers all information about the case, each associated society can
at any time refer to this register and obtain full information as to
its history. Unassociated none of the four societies register, or, if
they do, their information is not available for the others. The
charity organization society prevents waste of power and wasteful
distribution of relief, and succeeds mainly because it carefully avoids
dispensing relief itself. Its work is the prevention of imposition by
means of investigation, and the consequent direction of the stream
of charity to the deserving, while the charitable societies associated


together have their one aim—relief—more economically, more care-
fully, and more adequately attended to. “ The difference between
relieving agencies and the associated charities ('or charity organiza-
tion societies) is this—they aim at relief, we aim at prevention
The question of the relation of relief to charity organization is
one on which very diverse views are held, but a careful study of the
published reports of the charity organization societies in England
and America goes to show that relief may only be given by the
central agency as a last resort, when there is no other agency,
from which the required relief could be obtained. Many of these
societies, and these the most modern, give no relief whatever from
their funds, but send worthy applicants to other charitable insti-
tutions or to benevolent individuals, and in their reports give many
and weighty reasons for adopting this course, mainly agreeing that
for the organization society to give relief is to interfere with
co-operation. Some of the older societies in America who started
by combining relief and organization, now recognise this error, and
seek to change their system, which, however, they find very difficult,
from many obvious reasons. The Cincinnati Central Board says, in
one of its reports —“ Necessity compels us to relieve, but we regret
it, and hope it is only temporary.” That was in 1881. In 1889
their last report says—“ The relief part of our work is not in the best
or most satisfactory condition, owing in part to lack of more
thorough organization.” This society is therefore so far unsuccessful
and is so probably because in this matter of relief it interferes with
other relieving agencies. Boston “ Associated Charities ” (another
name for charity organization society) says—“ Our society has re-
frained from the outset to give relief. . . . Our relieving
societies therefore found it necessary to co-operate/’
The London Charity Organization Society, established twenty-one
years ago, commenced as a relieving society and finds it hard to
shake off the incubus. In 1881 the secretary says—“At present this
society must do a large amount of relief work, but its endeavour is
to be the organizing agency for others. A relief society is not likely
to be an effective organizer of charity,” While, in Mr. Loch’s
book lately published, speaking of 68 societies in England and
Scotland and 78 in America, the author says—“ Some societies
seem rather investigating and relief societies than charity organiza-
tion societies, the distinctive feature of which is co-operation
with individuals and institutions for the relief of cases of
distress. .... Some societies have, indeed, in the
matter of relief, departed widely from sound principle. .
The tendency of organization is towards obtaining and not giving the
relief required. This method rouses interest and draws as many
institutions and private persons as possible into co-operation.”
*Boston Conference, 1881.


Much more might be adduced on this subject, but enough has been
quoted to show that to meddle with relief in any form is dangerous
if not fatal to the success of charity organization societies ; while
to avoid it altogether tends to make them in every wav prosperous
and useful.
The “ Charity Organization Society,” “ Associated Charities,”
or “ Central Board,” names meaning the same thing, seeks to become
a clearing-house for the various relieving societies in co-operation
with it. Its method of investigation is most thorough. Individual
societies not associated make as close inquiries into cases as it is
possible for them to do, but their means of ascertaining facts are
far from being efficient, consisting for the most part of personal
cross-questioning, which usually fails to enlist the truth ; or perhaps
they make a further inquiry amongst the neighbours, which is,
often as not, misleading. The charity organization society, on the
other hand, by means of its association with other charities, with
agents in every district, in every town, and by its co-operation with
corresponding agencies in other colonies and in nearly all parts of
world, has ready means of making most minute inquiries. These
are carefully formulated, and registered on a simple plan for easy
reference, and are open at all times for the information of other
societies or individuals interested. The system of organization is so
complete and scientific that, if all societies were associated with it,
fraud and imposture would be much diminished, and would be
rendered quite impossible, if, in addition, all benevolent individuals
were to decline to dispense relief without reference to the charity
organization societies.
Many charity organization societies adopt means of testing the
bona fides of applicants for relief by offering them work in a wood-
yard, if men ; in a laundry, if women ; but in most cases these have
only been partially successful. In America several have been closed,
while the labour-yard of the London society was closed in 1870, and
has not been re-opened. Mr. Loch, secretary to that society, who
must have given the matter very close attention, and who may justly
be taken to be an authority upon the subject, says—“ Relief by
work may be suitable in cases of vagrants, but, though as a test it
may answer, especially at first, many are likely to look upon it as a
source of income winter after winter, and it will not lead them to
meet their difficulties by the only sufficient method —thrift.”
Experience seems to indicate the necessity of avoiding publicity
with regard to labour tests. Probably the best way to manage
them would be for the charity organization societies to make
temporary arrangements with a well-managed business wood-yard,
to be succeeded by another at intervals, and so tend to prevent the
recurrence of visits from vagrants winter after winter, because
they would be uncertain if this provision of labour were continuous
or only temporary.
596. k


The owners of these wood-yards might be induced to set apart a
corner of the yard, and provide materials, to which the charity
organization societies could send applicants for relief, that they may
do a certain quantity of work, for which they would receive payment
in the form of a ticket that would obtain for them a meal or a bed,
or both, as may be required, but beyond this simple labour test it
would seem to be unwise to go. To provide work for the un-
employed, or those who are really willing to work but cannot find
any to do, is a problem that does not seem to have been solved
anywhere. In Minneapolis, U.S., there is a system that seems to
meet with a fair amount of success, but the system does not provide
regular work, though leading to it in many cases. It provides,
probably by means of voluntary registration of benevolent employers,
“ odd jobs ”of all sorts. In 1889 the Employment Bureau in that
town registered 1,028 applicants of both sexes, who were thus pro-
vided with 1,958 odd jobs to 400 women and 200 men, the re-
maining 423 being, presumably, loafers. The 1,953 jobs averaged
3 dols. per job, so the help was substantial, though apparently
intended only as a labour test. The worker had to return to the
charity organization society a card for each job, indorsed by the
employer, and any worker who returned ten cards properly indorsed
is entitled to a regular place and testimonials for constant em-
ployment.
The obtaining of relief for the deserving poor, direct or by means
of work provided, is, after all, only a minor of the work oi
charity organization. Its principal aim is “ the amelioration of social
irregularities,” and the principal method by which this is sought to
be attained is “ the establishment of schemes for the encouragement of
thrift and self-help.” A simple, and, seemingly, a most efficient,
plan was originated in Baltimore for inducing the young to form
thrifty habits. This is called the “ Penny Provident Fund,” and is
thus described in a late report of the Hew York Charity Organization
Society : “ Special lithographed stamps of different denominations
are used to represent the amount of the deposit. A stamp-card is
given to the new depositor, and the stamps are attached to little
squares marked on the inside of the card. Ho account is kept with
the depositor for these fractions of a dollar, but he leaves his
signature, and the card bears his name and number. The stamps
are redeemed at the office where they were obtained. When his card
is filled with stamps he is credited with the amount, and given a
new card if he wishes to continue. In the first five months there
were 2,431 depositors, with an average of 36 cents each. . . .
The expense of this experiment has been borne by individuals, not
by the society. ... "We believe there is no more valuable
philanthropy, and none likely to make better citizens than these
girls and boys.” Another valuable scheme is the Savings Society
recently adopted in several parts of the United States of America.


A committee of ladies is formed, who visit every week from house
to house to collect the small sums that these people can afford to
lay by. In one year at Omaha, by means of this house to house
visiting, 690 dols. were collected in small sums, and since the
beginning —about seven years—over 10,000 dols. has been saved by
those very people who before were begging for relief.” These people
would not make use of savings banks, and can only be reached in
the way alluded to.
Closely related to this house to house collection of savings, but by
far the more valuable scheme for the amelioration of social irregu-
larities, is the bringing into intimate friendly intercourse the extremes
of society—the rich and the poor. Wonderful success has been
attained in this direction in the American societies through the for-
mation of associations of “ Friendly Visitors.” “By friendly visiting
we mean seeing and knowing people in their homes, and trying by
means of personal influence and practical suggestion to improve
their condition. . . . We believe in this power for good,
because we have become convinced that only as the people we try to
reach can be roused to wish for better things is there any hope of
improving their condition. . . . The great power of a wise
personal influence and example to find and bring out the good in
seemingly vicious people is clear to any one who has been able to
watch the result of faithful visiting. . . . Visiting is not
primarily relief work, though relief may be necessary. It has its
own large field. ... It is a visitor’s part to go into a wretched
household as a friend, to make acquaintance with the members of
it, win their confidence, and become familiar with their circumstances,
temptations, and difficulties, in order to find out what can be
done to improve their condition.”*
“ Another point in keeping visitors is to prevent their getting into
difficulties. One of the most dangerous, because it is so subtle, is
the giving of relief. Do not let the visitor give from his own pocket,
but get relief if really necessary, or show how to get it.”f
These quotations will serve to indicate the nature of the “ friendly
visitor” system, which has been so productive of good wherever tried
that it is spreading rapidly. To fully describe the system would
require a separate and lengthy paper, which must be reserved for a
future occasion. It may, however, be explained here that the system
is quite distinct from “ district visiting,” or any other form of asso-
ciated visiting used in these colonies. Ho friendly .visitor is per-
mitted to take more than four families ; in many places two is
considered ample. It is soon found that to be really friendly to one
or two poor families is quite as much as one visitor can attend to
properly. Let us hope that the plan will soon be tried here, and
* Mrs. James J. Putnam, Omaha, U. 8., 1887.
f Miss Z. D. Smith, Omaha, U.S., 1887.


surely in this system, more than by any other means, lies the way to
bring rich and poor together, leading to mutual respect and esteem,
to the elevation of the lower grades of society, and eventually to
the larger hope, the active faith of all in the divine idea of universal
brotherhood, the only true “ liberty, equality, and fraternity.”
DISCUSSION.
Mr. Solomon thought that the main object of the Conference
was to compare systems, and to ascertain which of their systems
was the best and most deserving of a trial. He had heard a great
deal of laudation of the charity organization society since he had
been there, and he feared it would be looked upon as heresy to take
an opposite view. Where he came from there was no such thing
as a charity organization society, and they did not want it.
Mr. Harlin said it seemed to him that in Dunedin they had
charity organization in fact though not in name. But the paper
read on this occasion covered a great deal more than that. The
organization pointed out was not only intended to find out imposi-
tion, but to bring together the rich and the poor.
Mr. Alderman Crouch was glad that the paper had been'
written so late, as the writer had been able to cover all the ground
taken by the Conference. There was no necessity in Hobart for a
charity organization society, but they were differently situated in
Melbourne. They had so many organizations that it was necessary
to prevent them over-lapping. The paper had the right ring.
What was wanted was to help the poor to help themselves. When
a charitable grant had been voted some years ago in Tasmania, the
late Judge Giblin, then Premier, said he hoped it would soon cease
to be required, as the class requiring charitable aid was dying out.
Unfortunately, this was not the case, and funds had still to be found.
Mr, G. E. Ardill said they felt the absolute necessity of charity
organization in New South Wales. What they had was simply a
relieving society. It seemed to him that though in New Zealand
they were satisfied with Government action to a large extent, there
was a fear of that action drying up the fountain of individual
sympathy. Though police reports might be adverse to a case, that
was not always a reason why persons should not be assisted.
Colonel Goldstein, in regard to what Mr. Solomon had
said, was not sure that a charity organization was not wanted in
New Zealand, but if that were the case there were many places in
the world where a charity organization society was wanted. There
were now seventy in America and eighty in England, and they
had increased recently, because people were beginning to find out
the value of them.


LIST OF DELEGATES APPOINTED TO OR PRESENT
AT THE FIRST AUSTRALASIAN CONFERENCE
ON CHARITY, HELD IN MELBOURNE.
New South Wales.
Names of Delegates. Societies Represented.
Allen, Lady - Children’s Hospital, Sydney.
Ardill, G. E. - - - Rescue Work Society, Sydney.
Society for Providing Homes for
Neglected Children, N.S.W.
Society for Prevention of Cruelty to
Children, Sydney.
Garran, Hr. - - - Of Sydney.
Jackson, Rev. H. L. - - „
Langley, Rev, J. D. - - „
Roberts, Sir Alfred - - Alfred Hospital, Sydney.
Yarley, G. H. - - - Grafton.
South Australia.
Atkinson, T. H. - - Destitute Board, Adelaide.
Boas, Rev. A. T. - - Home for Incurables, Incorporated,
Eullarton,
Campbell, Hon. Dr., M.L.C. Children’s Hospital, Adelaide.
Curtis, Dr. H. C. - - „ „ „
Cunningham, James H, - Home for Incurables, Incorporated,
Eullarton.
Downes, Major-General - ~ „ ~
Graves, Thomas - - Adelaide Hospital.
Haggard, H. D. - „ „
Hardy, C. B. - - Home for Incurables, Incorporated,
Eullarton.
Kelly, Henry, J.P. - - Destitute Board, Adelaide ; Adelaide
Benevolent and Strangers’ Friend
Society.
Leader, C. S. - - Children’s Hospital, Adelaide.
Perks, Dr. R. H. - - Adelaide Hospital.
Rhodes, Thomas - - State Children’s Dept., Adelaide.
Spence, Miss C. H. - „ „ „
Stirling, Dr. E. C. - - Adelaide Hospital,
Way, Chief Justice - - Children’s Hospital, Adelaide,
Whiting, J. B, - - State Children’s Dept,, Adelaide.
Tasmania.
Birchall, A.W., J.P. - - Benevolent Society, Launceston.
Crouch, G. P., J.P. - - Benevolent Society, Hobart.
Seabrook, G. S., J.P. „ „ „
Simmons, Rev. J. W. „ „ „
Stephenson, John, J.P. - Benevolent Society, Launceston.


New Zealand.
Names of Delegates. Societies Represented.
Solomon, Abraham - - Benevolent Institution, Otago.
District (Hospital) Board, Otago.
Charitable Aid Board, Otago.
Benevolent Institution, Wellington.
Victoria.
Abbott, Hon. J, H., M.L.C. Sandhurst Hospital,
Boyd, Dr. James, M.D, -\ t> -n ” i . * ,
J ’ ’ ( Bendigo Benevolent Asylum.
Boyd, Dr. W. R. - „ „ „
Burr, Mrs. ... Ladies’ Benevolent Soc., Daylesford.
Carr, W. P. - - - Infirmary and Benevolent Asylum,
Geelong.
Cairns, Eev. T. R. - - Benevolent Asylum, Ballarat.
Dowing, Mrs. - Ladies’Benevolent Society, Kyneton.
Eddy, Rev. - - - of Geelong.
Gibbings, ... Ballarat Hospital.
Goodman, Mrs. - Ladies’ Benevolent Society, Geelong.
Gray, Mrs. ... Ladies’ Benevolent Soc., Horsham.
Grey, J. H. - - - Geelong Infirmary and Benevolent
Asylum.
Gurr, Mrs. ... Ladies’ Benevolent Society, Geelong.
Hannay, Mrs. ... Ladies’ Benevolent Assoc., Maldon.
Harcourt, Mrs. J. - - Dorcas Society, Sandhurst.
Higgins, Mrs. - Ladies’ Benevolent Society, Geelong.
Hitchcock, Mrs. G. M. - Ladies’ Benevolent Society, Geelong.
Hitchcock, G. M. - - Homoeopathic Dispensary, Geelong,
Jamieson, Mrs. - - Ladies’ Benevolent Soc., Daylesford.
Jermyn, Mrs. J. - Ladies’ Clothing Society, Belfast.
Johns, Edward - - Wesleyan Children’s Home, Ballarat,
Martin, Mrs. Irvin - - Ladies’ Benevolent Society, Dunolly.
Menzies, Miss ... Ladies’ Benevolent Soc., Daylesford.
Meyers, Mrs. J, E. - - Ladies’ Benevolent Society, Chines.
Morphett, Mrs. - Ladies’ Benevolent Society, Echuca.
McKee, W. D. - - - District Orphan Asylum, Ballarat.
Nicol, J. - - - - Infirmary and Benevolent Asylum,
Geelong.
Parker, Mrs. H. G. - Ladies’ Benevolent Soc., Kyneton.
Pitcher, Mrs. W. - - Ladies’ Benevolent Society, Clunes.
Robinson, Mrs. H. E. - - Ladies’ Benevolent Soc., Bairnsdale,
Rowe, Mrs. ... Private Girls’Reformatory, Brookside.
Sandford, Mrs. George - Ladies’ Soc., Bairnsdale.
Scott, William, J.P. - - District Orphan Asylum, Ballarat.
Shoppee, C., J.P. - - Benevolent Asylum, Ballarat.
Skelton, Mrs. - Ladies’ Dunolly.


Names of Delegates. Societies Represented.
(Ladies’ Benevolent Clothing
Society, Ballarat.
Female Home, Ballarat,
Tattam, Miss F. - - Female Home, Echuca.
Toms Rev. J. H. - - Infirmary and Benevolent Asylum,
Geelong.
Turner, Mrs. Tom H. - - Ladies’ Benevolent Soc., Horsham,
Warton, Mrs. H. R. * - Ladies’ Benevolent Society, Mary-
borough.
Warton, H. R. - - - District Hospital, Maryborough.
Weickhardt, Mrs. J. F. - Ladies’ Benevolent Society, Clunes.
Wells Mrs. ... Ladies’ Benevolent Assoc., Maldon.
Wreford, Robert - - District Orphan Asylum, Ballarat.
Yule, Mrs. A, - - - Ladies’ Benevolent Society, Kyneton.
Melbourne.
A’Beckett Mrs. T. - - Ladies’ Benevolent Society, St.
Hilda.
A’Beckett, Mrs. - - - Ladies’Benevolent Society, Brighton.
Butchart, Mrs. - Ladies’ Benevolent Society, Prahran.
Baker, George - - - Immigrants’ Aid Society’s Home.
Bon Mrs. . Austin Hospital for Incurables.
Brett W, G. Charity Organization Society.
Cock C. - - - - Benevolent Asylum.
Coates, John - - - Immigrants’ Aid Society’s Home.
Coombs, “ Commissioner ” - Salvation Army.
Dickson Mrs. - Australian] Church Social Improve-
ment Society.
Ellery, R. L. J. - - - Alfred HospitaU
Gibbs E. M. - - - Victorian Eye and Ear Hospital.
Godfrey, F. R. - - - Charity Organization Society.
Goldstein Mrs. - Australian Church Social Improve-
ment Society.
Goldstein, Colonel - - Convalescents’ Aid Society for Men.
Goldstein, Jacob - - Charity Organization Society.
Gosman, Rev. Prof. ~ »
Grice, John - - - Melbourne Hospital.
Grondona, C. H. - - Society of St. Vincent de Paul.
Guillaume, George - - Department of Neglected Children.
Haddon, F. W. - - Charity Organization Society.
Harlin, Thomas, M.A. - •» >»
Hartnell, William, J.P. - Immigrants’ Aid Society’s Home.
Herlitz, Rev. H. - Victoria Stiftung.
Hicks, J. - - - - Benevolent Asylum.


Names of Delegates. Societies Represented.
Hudson, C. - - - Homoeopathic Hospital.
Jacobs, Mrs. C. - - - Charity Organization Society.
Kennedy, Rev. James - - Friendly Brothers’ Soc., Richmond,
Leeper, Dr. - Charity Organization Society.
Levey, J. A. - - - „ „ „
Macully, Rev. A. „ „ „
Marshall, Rev. A. „ ~ ~
Morris, Mrs. E. E. - - „ „ „
Morris, Professor „ „ „
Moubray, Mrs. „ ~ „
Moule, F. G. - - - Melbourne Orphan Asylum.
Munce, Mrs. - Women’s Hospital.
Nankivell, Mrs. - Victorian Infant Asylum.
Nicholson, Sir Arthur, Bart. Caledonian Society.
Norman, R. C. - - - Charity Organization Society.
O'Connell, Rev. J. H. - ~ „ „
Pennington, Mrs. - - Convalescent Home for Women.
Perks, Rev. C. T. - - Richmond Dispensary.
Pollard, “ Colonel ” - - Salvation Army.
Rhind, Mrs. - Melbourne Ladies’ Benevolent Soc.
Roberts, W. H. Loyd - Charity Organization Society,
Roberts, John L. - - Austin Hospital.
Skinner, Mrs. - Young Women’s Christian Assoc.
Smith, R. Murray, C.M.G. - Charity Organization Society.
Southwell, W. A. Young Men’s Christian Association.
Strong, Rev. Dr, - - Charity Organization Society.
Swinborn, J. Elizabeth Fry Retreat.
Syme, David ... Charity Organization Society.
Tayler, Lloyd - Society for Assistance of Persons of
Education.
Turnbull, Mrs. W. M, - Charity Organization Society.
Turner, Mrs. H. G. - - Melbourne District Nursing Society.
Veal, J. W. - South Yarra Home.
Watkin, Rev. Dr. - - Victorian Deaf & Dumb Institution,
Weigall, Theyre - - - Melbourne Hospital for Sick Children.
Wilson, Mrs. Henty - - Richmond and East Melbourne
Ladies’ Benevolent Society.
Workman, Dr. - Charity Organization Society.
Zox, E. L., M.L.A. - - Discharged Prisoners’ Aid Society.
By Authority: Robt. S. Brain, Government Printer, Melbourne.








