

Proceedings
of the
University of Sydney
Society for Combating Jenereal
Diseases
11.
Egresses to /Ifcen
price Sixpence


neveal
L, LL.D.,
).Sc.,
5.,
Professor D. A. Welsh, M.a., B.Sc., M.D., f.r.c.p
Hon. Secretary— MEßEDlTH ATKINSON, M.A.
Hon. Asst. Secretary— Ralph A. NOBLE, M. 8., Ch.M.
Hon. Treasurer—R. A. DART, M.Sc.
Hon. Asst. Treasurer— MlSS L. AsHER SMITH.
Miss I. M. Fidlbr, B.A, Mrs. K. Street, B.A
OTHER MEMBERS OF COUNCIL:
( a ) Representatives of Staff—
Professor J. B. Peden, 8.A., LL.B., Dean of the Faculty of Law
Professor A. Mackie, M.a. Professor R. F. Irvine, M.a.
H. E. Barff, M.A., Warden and Registrar.
H. T. Lovell, m.a., Ph.d.
Representatives of Graduates, etc.
Peter Board, M.A,, C.M.G., Under-Secretary for Education.
E. H. MOLESWORTH, M 8., Ch.M., Lecturer in Diseases of the .Skin
Miss L. Macdonald, M.A., Principal of the Women’s College.
Dr. C. E. D’Arcy, M. 8., Ch.M. Dr. E. M. Little, M. 8., Ch.M.
W. A. Porves, M.A. Mrs. Francis Anderson.
i c ) Representatives of Undergraduates—
Miss Mona M. Ross. The Messrs. T. E. Cooney
E. A. Woodward, P, B, Cox, and W. L. Nickson.
S
T i
l®
m
George Howe <;
GazetteJ’resst
I®^
03
03
J'erguson
Rational Library"
Canberra


The Universit y of Sydney
Society for Combatting Jenereal
Diseases
OFFICE BEARERS 1916-17
PATRON:
The Hon. Sir William P. Cullen, K.C.M.G., M.A., LL.D.,
Chancellor.
PRESIDENT:
Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart, M.D., LL. D., D.Sc.,
Dean of the Faculty of Medicine.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE:
Chairman of Council—
Professor J. T. Wilson, M. 8., Ch.M., F.R.S.,
Chairman of the Professorial Board.
Vice-Chairman of Council—
Professor d. a. Welsh, m.a., B.Sc., M.D., f.r.C.p
Hon. Secretary—Meredith ATKINSON, M.A.
Hon. Asst. Secretary— RALPH A. NOBLE, M. 8., Ch.M.
Hon. Treasurer— R. A. Dart, M.Sc.
Hon. Asst. Treasurer—MlSS L. AsHER SMITH.
Miss I. M. Fidler, B.A. Mrs. K. Street. B.A
OTHER MEMBERS OF COUNCIL:
( a ) Representatives of Staff—
Professor J. B. Peden, 8.A., LL.B., Dean of the Faculty of Daw
Professor A. Mackie, M.A. Professor R. F. Irvine, M.a.
H. E. Barfe, M.A., Warden and Registrar.
H. T. Lovell, M.A., Ph.D.
Representatives of Graduates, etc.
Peter Board, M.A., C.M.G., Under-Secretary for Education.
E. H. MoIESWORTh, M 8., Ch.M., Lecturer in Diseases of the Skin
Miss L. Macdonald, M.A., Principal of the Women’s College.
Dr. C. E. D’Arcy, M. 8., Ch.M. Dr. E. M. Little, M. 8., Ch.M.
W. A. Purves, M.A. Mrs. Francis Anderson.
i c ) Representatives of Undergraduates—
Miss Mona M. Ross. The Messrs. T. E. Cooney
E. A. Woodward, P. B, Cox, and W. L. Nickson.


Proceedings
of the
Uninversity of Sydney
Society for Combating Jenereal Diseases
II.
Addresses to Men
i.—Untrobuctorp Bbbress—
SIR THOMAS ANDERSON STUART,
M.D., LL.D., D.Sc., Dean of the Faculty of Medicine.
n.—aabrcss to mnberarafcuates—
PROFESSOR J. T. WILSON,
M. 8., Ch.M., F.R.S., Chairman of the Professorial Board,
hi.— Bfcfcress to XllnfcerGratmates
PROFESSOR D. A. WELSH,
M.A., B.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P., Professor of Pathology,
University of Sydney,
iv. Bfcfcress to SolMers—
PROFESSOR D. A. WELSH.
v.—XTbe Derbict of tbe IRopal Commission.
June, 1917


INTRODUCTORY ADDRESS
BY
SIR THOMAS ANDERSON STUART,
M.D., LL,.D., D.Sc.,
Dean of the Faculty of Medicine.
Professor Welsh and I discussed some time ago the de-
sirability of an Annual Address being given at the beginning
of the academic year to freshmen by some member of the
teaching staff, who might be regarded as especially qualified
by age, experience and profession for the task of bringing home
to young men some of the matters to which their attention
should be specially directed at the opening of their new life.
So long as they were boys at school they were more or less
under authority, perhaps more than less, but when they come
to the University there is a large measure of freedom, which,
unless it be wisely guided, is apt to become liberty, and some-
times license. Suddenly the boy is translated into the man,
or at all events he is suddenly endowed with a great deal
more freedom of action than he has hitherto had, and it is
well that the lad should be wisely guided, and by whom better
than one of the staff of his University?
There are various grounds upon which one might appeal
for—lacking a better term at the moment —what we might call
the better life. Not unfrequeritly the young man is appealed
to on the ground of the risk of contracting diseases if he
strays from the straight path in certain directions, but I make
the appeal on no such grounds. I call no man honest who
keeps out of prison solely because of the police. If that be
the ground on which he keeps from stealing, he remains a
thief at heart. The honest man is he who does not want to


steal, who does not steal because it is wrong. If it were
upon such grounds as these that I appealed to the young mind,
I might as well advocate measures of prevention, which I cer-
tainly do not do. And so I advise, counsel and appeal to
you to be men, and straight men, on each and all of these
grounds, namely: —“Respect for the Race,” “Respect for
Self,” “Respect for Womanhood.”
Respect for Race.
Those of you who have been through the classes of
Biology, Botany, Physiology or Anatomy, or even one of them,
must know that each individual as he comes into the world,
and even before that interesting event, is the bearer of a ma-
terial substance which carries from all the ages the inheritance
of the ages; I mean germplasm. Each of us is the heir of
his predecessors back to the primordial protoplasm. To each
is entrusted a share of this precious substance, which it is his
duty to hand on to future generations clean and pure, and so
it is our duty to do nothing to jeopardise the quality of this
germ substance. And yet there is nothing surer than this, that
the diseases which are commonly referred to under the name
of Venereal Diseases will contaminate and debase this germ
substance, and, indeed, very often destroy it altogether. From
this it follows that there is no more frequent cause of sterility
than the diseases referred to, and, short of absolute sterility,
there is no more frequent cause of the coming into the world
of poor, weakly, stunted creatures, who either die early or
grow up useless members of the community. If each would
remember that the germplasm is not really his at all, but
that he has it in trust for the race, a higher sense of duty
might suggest that he should at least hand it on to the future
as good as he received it from the past. From the racial
standpoint it is not honest to do otherwise.
Respect for Self.
We are all endowed with certain appetites. There is
the appetite for food, called hunger, and the appetite for
drink, which we call thirst, and the appetite for fresh air.
All of these have for their end the preservation of the indi-
vidual, but there is a fourth appetite, which is as insistent as
any of the others, and, indeed, sometimes even more insistent,
namely, the sexual appetite. This is, so to speak, the overflow
of the individual into the race. It is to this appetite that


the perpetuity of the race is due. It is, therefore, a perfect!)
natural desire, and its gratification is entirely blameless, pro-
vided it be in a lawful manner. It is the unlawful indulgence
which is to be condemned. It therefore follows that every
young man should remain chaste in desire and act, and it
should be the desire of every healthy-bodied and wholesome-'
minded young man to find a young woman who is to be his
mate, and wedded, they should be content to climb the ladder
of life together. No other condition of life is a complete life,
and no other is entirely happy. Further, no woman’s life is
complete unless she has borne children. The mere fact of
having had a single child completely transforms the woman’s
body, and in no less degree transforms her outlook upon life.
Honourable marriage is, therefore, the only condition upon
which the gratification of the sexual appetite is permissible,
and to this end the young man should work hard to keep him-
self healthy, and in due time he will reap the reward of his
labour.
Respect for Womanhood.
No man such as we are likely to find in this hall cares
to associate with a woman whom he cannot also respect, and
even the roue will take every care that he does not introduce
the womenkind of his own family to the woman who is his
mistress. The words of Lord Kitchener in this regard should
be remembered. In addressing the troops as they were going
away to France, he advised them to treat every woman with
respect, but nothing more. It is not possible to treat a woman
with respect if there is anything more. Anything like familiar-
ity with a woman is to be strenuously avoided, for this simple
reason, that if any young woman permits anything of the
nature of familiarity she is not what she ought to be, and
ce n’est que le premier pas qul coute. If she allows any in-
fringement of what we would call modesty, she is on the sure
way to going further, and going wrong. Here, if anywhere,
facilis est descensus Averni. On these grounds, then, I appeal
to you as young men to be chaste in thought and deed, and I
leave the matter to be dealt with in detail by my colleagues
who will now address you.


ADDRESS
TO UNDERGRADUATES
By PROFESSOR WIESON
This large gathering is a striking indication of the natural
and vivid interest which surrounds the facts and problems of
sex.
Sex is one of the big things of life. The sex impulse is
a paramount factor, both physiological and' psychological, in
human experience. Without it that experience is incomplete.
In a very real sense, the whole organism, with its functions
and activities, is subservient to the facts of sex. Reproduc-
tion —the continuance of the race—is conditioned by these
facts. The individual must wither; the race must endure.
And to secure this endurance is perhaps, biologically speaking,
Nature’s supreme and ultimate end and aim. It has been
said epigrammatically that the female body is merely the
vehicle of an ovum. And with equal truth it might be said
that the male is but the bearer of the fertilising sperm. It
may be objected that purely biological dicta of this sort are
grotesque misdescriptions of the significance of the living ac-
tivities of the human organism. This may freely be admitted
even while we claim that from the merely biological standpoint
they are largely justifiable.
For not only are the other bodily functions directed in
great measure towards the ends of reproduction and rearing
of offspring, but the distinctive psychological characters of
men and women are rooted and grounded in the sex function.
And for organisms lower in the scale reproduction and its asso-
ciated 'sexual phenomena are in many cases quite obviously
the supreme facts of existence. The blossoming of the flower
is simply the efflorescence of the sexual organs of the plant.
In not a few animals sexual union is the unique culmination
of the life cycle, and is immediately followed by death, Nature's


aim has been fulfilled. There the sex instinct or impulse is
imperious and uncontrollable, overriding all others, even that
of self-preservation.
In man, on the other hand, we encounter a more com-
plex situation. Here the sex impulse is merely one —albeit
one of the strongest —of several impelling motives and propen-
sities, more or less within his control.
The capacity for self-control or conscious inhibition is
one of the most distinctively human attributes.
Civilisation, on one side of it, means just such inhibitions
—the restraint of blind natural appetites and propensities in
obedience to some ideal of behaviour consciously grasped.
Such inhibitions are fundamental conditions of civilised human
society. They are manifold —restraint of acquisitiveness; of
violent self-assertion over others; of cowardice in face of dan-
ger; and of many other tendencies besides those towards sexual
intemperance and promiscuity.
Further, it must be regarded as an immense step in
human evolution when the sexual union came to be conditioned
by psychological affinity, the genuine human love of man and
woman. Imperfect as it may often enough be, it is undeni-
ably the highest sanction of sexual intercourse in a civilised
community. One may question whether a genuine union of
hearts is fully attainable except under conditions of mono-
gamy, and its possibility is perhaps the real basis of value for
this social status.
But we must never forget that the physiological
aspect of the sex relationship is a persistent and fun-
damental one. It is perfectly evident that fruitful physical
union is the sine qua non of human society and its institutions.
But its value and importance for the individual, qua individual,
must not be left out of account. The physical union of the
sexes in marriage is no base thing. You are trustees of the
life of the next and of succeeding generations. In your loins
—as the archaic phrase runs —is the seed of posterity. You
are responsible for the harvest. What it will be will depend
on all that you are, and on your faithfulness to your trust. I
say that the next generation depends on you. Its physical and
intellectual characters depend largely on yours; much of its
social and moral quality and worth will be in your keeping.
Was there ever a period when the call of duty to your country
was more insistent to produce and to train for its service and


for the highest ends a healthy, wise and noble progeny? It
is a sacred trust. Dare you risk the transmission of an
enfeebled or damaged constitution? Will you accept the chance
of a sterility which it is only less criminal to incur? And
even if it be perhaps possible to obviate such accidental risks,
are you willing that the father of your children should be a
man of unclean mind and impure heart? Are you content
to permit yourself to become an accomplice in the debasement
of some woman with a human heart and soul —or if she be
one of that sad sisterhood commonly regarded as already de-
praved and lost—are you entirely ready to aid in the per-
petuation of this dark blot on our civilisation?
I appeal to you to regard your virility as a capacity or
gift, neither to be ashamed of nor to be furtively indulged or
trifled with. In fulness of time, if you are essentially faithful
and loyal to your higher self, you will find that, through it,
not only will your own individual life be sweetened and en-
riched, but that in the sane and normal development of a
socially sanctioned union you will realise the true significance
of the human sex relationship as no mere animal copulation,
but a far truer union, at once physical and psychical, a verit-
able human sacrament.
I remember that somewhere or other (in a passage I am
presently unable to verify), George Eliot remarks that there
is really only one thing ultimately and absolutely to be dreaded
in man’s life, and that is failure to be true to that which he
knows to be the best.


THE PREDISPOSING CAUSES OF
DISEASE AND DISASTER
AN ADDRESS TO UNDERGRADUATES
BY
PROFESSOR D. A. WELSH
[COPYRIGHT]
An older University than that of Sydney has a great dome
over the entrance to its historic quadrangle, and above the
dome a goldqn figure of Youth bearing in his hand a lighted
torch. It is a symbol of the old University ideal, and of the
new, which aims at sending out not only minds trained to
enlighten the world, but also men worthy to replenish the
world. A University must not only light the torch of know-
ledge, but it must also teach men to keep burning bright and
clear the very light of life. The first step in this larger
teaching is to put before you some elementary facts about
your sex. The larger purpose, which this University holds to
be its duty, is to put the truth before all men.
In discussing with you the problems of sex where they
become pathological, I have in mind the possibility not only
of disease, but of disaster. I recognise that prevention depends
upon avoidance of the antecedent causes, and that avoidance
depends upon knowledge. I find that the ultimate causes
operate indirectly, and include (1) a wrong mental attitude
towards the facts of sex, and (2) the influence of “the man
of the world” upon inexperience. Before the microbes of
venereal disease begin to take dirett action, or the foundations
of vigorous manhood are sapped, these other factors have been
at work preparing the victim by warping and poisoning his
mind.


Mental Attitudes, Right and Wrong
To some men sex is a comedy; to others it is a tragedy;
to all it is a mystery. Most often a man’s worst enemy is
himself. His whole mental attitude to the facts of sex is
wrong. He has never seen them in their true perspective.
He has never realised them in their true relations to himself
and to others —to the present and to the future. In his
boyhood he acquires the perverted idea that there is something
inherently indecent about sex. When that idea sticks to him
throughout life, it is the cause of endless trouble.
The idea of indecency breeds the further idea of secrecy.
It keeps a man from seeking help from those who are best
qualified to advise him, when the natural developments of
his sexual life begin to baffle and distress him. It will keep
him from speaking frankly to his children, as it kept his
parents from speaking frankly to him. So the evil is perpe-
tuated. The tradition of indecency and secrecy is maintained.
Disaster threatens if such a man should become diseased,
when he may try to hide his condition, or may consult
incompetent men, with the result that he may lapse into an
incurable state, and remain a persistent carrier of infection.
The foundation of a true ideal of sex is the acceptance of
the naturalness of sex. There is nothing to be ashamed about
in being a man with all his apparatus -of sex and with all his
sex impulses. It is just as natural for a man to want to
gratify his sex appetite as it is for him to want to eat when
he is hungry or to drink when he is thirsty. But this may
give rise to another error. No natural impulses are shameful,
vet that does not mean that they are to be unreservedly obeyed.
It is not always right to gratify an appetite however natural
that appetite may be.
Natural appetites are implanted for specific pur-
poses. To secure the propagation of the race there is
deep-seated in our flesh the most imperious, the most insistent,
craving that the healthy human body knows. And the reason
is obvious. It is because the continuance of the race is the
ultimate biological fact on which all human progress depends.
The sex impulse is made imperious to make the individual
duly sensible of his obligations to the race.
Here again misunderstanding may pave the way for
tragedy. The true meaning of sex does not come naturally
to a man. The very imperiousness of the sex impulse may


over-reach itself. It makes a man think that it exists for
him alone, when, in reality, the needs of the race are para-
mount. It makes him think too much of the present of which
he is a legatee, and too little of the future of which he is a
trustee. The problems of sex can never be solved in terms
of the individual. They transcend his petty needs. When
a man allows the sex interest to dominate his conscious
life, he becomes that poor thing—a slave. The man who is
most in danger is he who cherishes a vacant mind. The
antidotes to this poisonous form of slavery are the exercise of
a reasonable self-control and the furnishing of the empty
mind with healthy interests.
The great danger, therefore, for the man in himself is
that he may be so obsessed by the personal appeal of his
sex that he loses sight of its true meaning and relations.
When he comes to look upon women as fair game, he
degrades both sexes, and “youth’s sweet-scented manuscript”
closes with an ugly blot. Let me put in a plea for women. I
am not speaking of prostitute women, professional or amateur.
lam speaking of all other women. It is simply the statement
of a natural fact to say that in woman the sex impulse is not
aggressive as it is in man. It is normally responsive but
otherwise quiescent. Your relations with women will there-
fore be just what you choose to make them, clean and whole-
some and helpful, or —the reverse. That fact must appeal to
the chivalry of all men in whom chivalry is not dead.
The Man of the World.
Next to its own inexperience and ignorance, the greatest
enemy of youth is the “man of the world.” He may not be
old in years, though he may be seasoned in profligacy. The
stuff that he serves out as worldly wisdom is compounded of
an intimate experience of human frailty and an abysmal
ignorance of the great facts of life. He it is that darkeneth
counsel by words without knowledge.
There is a cult which holds that a man is entitled to
have a fling in his youth, that youth is a period of glorious
irresponsibility, that it is a crime to deny it the immemorial
privilege of sowing its wild oats. In a moment of gush one
member wrote that youth could rise superior to a thousand
nights of sin. He was neatly countered by a medical man
who invited him to attend one of the London hospitals and
see for himself the pitiable condition of a thousand youths


after one night of sin. Apart from that, I put it to you- is
not the responsibility of youth more glorious than its irre-
sponsibility? Can this great University and this great
country offer you no higher culture and no greeter privilege
than the cultivation of weeds in your life? If you will allow
me to say so, it is the wild asses who sow the wild oats.
The man of the world may try you in another way. He
may invite you to act the beast by daring you to be a man,
by taunting you with being afraid. Well, I always understood
that the bravest men were the most afraid—of doing wrong,
and there are reasons, as I shall explain, why this would be
a great wrong for any young man. But Mr. Wordly Wiseman
has a stronger argument. He will tell you straight that it
will hurt you to restrain yourself. He will say that your
manhood will deteriorate if you do not exercise it properly.
He will clinch his argument by telling you things about
yourself that you know to be true. But there is one thing he
will not tell you —because he cannot —and that is the whole
truth. That is why he is so dangerous. You can detect the
substratum of truth in what he says, but you cannot estimate
the huge overburden of error and vicious reasoning.
The Natural Safety-Valve.
Let us examine some of the pernicious nonsense which
the man of the world is never tired of preaching. Take the
statement that there is an organic necessity for a man to
exercise his sexual function lest it should degenerate. The
grain of truth, which germinates into this crop of lies, is that
nature is so afraid of failure in fertilisation by the seed that
she prepares not double nor treble the quantity needed but
millions of times too much. Throughout the whole animal
and vegetable kingdom you will find that Dame Nature is
quite fussy about her preparations for fertilisation, and about
her fears lest it should fail. Men suffer in consequence from
accumulation of the seed. I do not mean that men suffer
actual harm, but they do suffer some discomfort and often
great mental perturbation, because this natural accumulation
is relieved by a natural safety-valve—a periodic overflow —
which takes the form of nocturnal emissions, or wet dreams,
which are very much misunderstood.
These emissions are natural. Far from indicating a loss
of virility, they are a proof of its presence, so long as they
are not too frequent, and so long as you do not tamper with


the safetv-valve. What makes them distressing are the dreams
which accompany them, and which are often as ridiculous as
they are indecent. I say emphatically that a man is not
responsible for the form of these dreams. They are neither a
reflection on, .nor a reflection of, his moral character. The
dream occurs in the moment of waking, before the man has
recovered control of his faculties. It is given a sexual direc-
tion because sleep is broken by a disturbance of the sexual
apparatus. There is no moral stigma, because the events do
not enter the moral sphere. A man must not think of himself
as a sink of iniquity merely because he has these dreams.
The recurrent overflow causes a passing disturbance, and it
need cause nothing more.
It becomes pathological only when you brood over it, as
you are apt to do when you do not understand what it
means. I hope that what has been said will relieve your
minds of embarrassment. If anything should still worry
you, see that you consult a reputable medical man to whom
you can talk with confidence. An occasion may arise, because
some men suffer from a constant dribbling away of the seed —
a condition of spermatorrhoea. Doubtless you can realise
something of the abject state of mind into which a man may
allow hifnself to drift through ignorance and alarm, and of
the drivelling idiocy into which he may be carefully piloted
by those sharks who represent the I.WAV’s, of medicine and
advertise freely in the press.
Unnatural Practices.
Deliberate abuse of the organs of sex comes into another
category altogether. It is one of those vicious practices which
may grow upon a man like secret drinking. No one who has
practised it can look back on that period of his life without
shame and loathing., The loathing is as natural as the prac-
tice itself is unnatural. I shall be absolutely frank with
you. An isolated act of this kind is not particularly hurtful
in any physical sense. But every man, worthy of the name,
is fully conscious that it is unworthy of his manhood.
If the practice should become habitual, then it is both
physically damaging and morally degrading. It interferes
with the vigorous development of body and of mind. It is a
violation of manhood —an outrage on the race. Again I shall
be frank with you. If any man has exposed himself to the
risk of physical and moral wreckage which self abuse


entails, I say to him that it is never too late to stop. He
cannot recover the lost years. He cannot lose an abiding
shame. But he can rally his lost manhood, and he can see to
it that the years to come are not lost. The truth still holds
“that men may rise on stepping stones of their dead selves to
higher things.”
It is a delusion to suppose that a man will never be able
to beget healthy children because of natural emissions or
because of unnatural practices. That way madness lies. It
is a delusion which unprincipled men do everything in their
power to foster. It has no foundation in scientific fact.
The Other Function.
Now you may ask, since nature is so prodigal of the
seed that the superfluity requires a natural outlet in the form
of nocturnal emissions, is there any harm in occasional
sexual intercourse, or are the objections to it purely moral?
Once more I shall be frank with you. The answer is that
premature sexual intercourse is most hurtful on physical
grounds alone. Over-indulgence at any time of life is bad;
but any indulgence during adolescence is worse. The reason
is that, although the material is not wanted for seed, it is
urgently needed for another purpose. The organs of sex
have two functions. One is to prepare the seed by which
the race is propagated; the other is to manufacture a chemical
food which is a source of nervous energy and has a profound
influence on growth and development.
You can understand that this must be so' when you
consider that, quite apart from the apparatus of sex, it is
possible to tell a man from a woman. The man has larger
bones, stronger muscles, a bigger head, and, although the
larger brain may represent a difference in quantity rather
than in quality, it is a difference nevertheless. When a mur-
derer has burned his victim’s body, it is often possible to
reconstruct the sex from a charred fragment of bone. The
characters of sex are not limited to the special organs of sex.
There must, therefore, be some contribution from the sex
glands which determines the other differences between the
sexes —the different heads, bones, muscles, voices, and hair.
In other words, the secondary sex characters, on which man-
hood and womanhood depend for their full realisation, are
developed by the nutritional and nervous influences of the sex
glands.


You can appreciate this in another way by recalling
the effects of castration. You know that loss of the testes
makes any male animal flabby in body and flabby in mind.
Contrast the massive strength, the energy and initiative of
the bull with the soft muscles and placid brain of the ox.
These effects are at a maximum if the animal is castrated
when young, and they are at a minimum if it is castrated
when mature. Such facts serve to illustrate what you already
knew, but what you perhaps did not consciously express, that,
when the chemical food supplied by the sex glands is cut off,
then the most profound nutritional and mental effects are
produced. In a very literal sense the testes are the source of
virile strength.
It is obvious that the same far-reaching effects will be re-
produced, though on a lesser scale, by interference with the
proper functions of the sex glands. Brain, bone and muscle
all require their tonic food. During the years of adolescence,
when the sex characters come into prominence, there is a
special demand on all the vital resources of the body. At
that stage it is the proper function of the sex glands to meet
that demand by their contribution to the development and
vigour of body and of mind. Hence it is in youth that any
interference with that function is most hurtful. I have
explained that natural emissions do not constitute interference,
but abuse, or premature exercise of the sexual organs, does
interfere both with bodily and with mental vigour. Further,
it must be borne in mind that the human body is not sexually
mature until some years after legal maturity is reached, until
about the 24th year of age, and that this statement applies
to both sexes.
For any young man, who hopes to do any good work,
these considerations are of the first importance. It is suicidal
for him to waste his store of chemical food, or to wreck his
source of nervous energy, at the time when he needs them
most. For one who hopes to excel in sport, in work, or in
any effort of body or of brain, this form of the dissipation of
energy is disastrous. An engine-driver would not get much
work out of his engine if he were to amuse himself by blowing
off steam. An engineer would not have much head of water if
he were continually opening the sluices of his dam. Both
metaphors apply to" our natural source of energy, of which we
may say that the proper pressure is regulated by a natural
safety-valve, or that the proper level in the reservoir is main-
tained by a natural overflow.


The Realisation of Manhood.
You are men in the making, and the few years of your
undergraduate life will decide what manner of men you will
be. Leaving boyhood behind, and entering the world of men,
you are fired by the ambition to prove your manhood. But
it is only reasonable to expect that the manner of realising
true manhood will be different at different stages of your de-
velopment. The obligations of the man immature are not
identical with the obligations of the same man mature. To
put it bluntly, the ideal for the adolescent is continence, that
for the adult is marriage.
For the growing man the path of honour and duty is al-
ways clear, though it is not always easy. The obligation is
laid upon him to develop and conserve his young manhood,
not to squander that priceless possession. It simply is not true
that the mere exercise of the sexual function is the cachet of
manhood. That plea, advocated by evil and ignorant counsel,
is a gross mockery of manhood. Never more truly than in
the years of adolescence do self-respect and self-control repre-
sent higher ideals of conduct than self-abuse and self-indul-
gence. Never more urgently than in these critical years does
this resolve make its high appeal—
“l am the master of my fate:
I am the captain of my soul.”
For the full realisation of young manhood is attained only
through continence in thought and word and deed.
When a man has reached sexual maturity, the con-
ditions have entirely changed. Other considerations must
guide his conduct. The physical consequences of the sexual
act in itself need not deter him from its exercise.
Nevertheless, indulgence is unnecessary to vigorous and healthy
manhood, and immoderate indulgence is hurtful. With that
knowledge, his sexual activities must be regulated by his
patriotism and by his chivalry, and not many men are des-
titute of both. It is his duty to marry and rear healthy chil-
dren. He is under no form of compulsion to raid the woman-
hood of the nation. He will find the full expression of his
manhood, not in acts of illicit intercourse, but in the discharge
of those high responsibilities—individual and racial —which
centre in the married life. He is the good citizen, he is the
true patriot, he is the real man, who worthily contracts an
early, happy, fruitful marriage.


A Regrettable Incident.
It is not until the outer defences have proved inadequate,
not until the first-line trenches have been rushed, that the
enemy of disease can break through into the citadel of life.
But these “regrettable incidents” will happen, so long as we
are resigned not to wage war against venereal disease with all
our mind and with all our might.
When a man calls on his doctor with a disarming smile,
and the remark, “I’m one of the unlucky ones, doctor, there
is no need of Sherlock Holmes to tell what is wrong with him.
That is the common way of looking at it —“perfectly rotter
luck.” But many a man, who begins by looking on venereal
disease as a comedy, ends by finding it a tragedy. He may
use the same word some years later in another sense. In his
early married life he may protest in vain, “For God’s sake,
doctor, don’t say that I’ve given my wife that rotten disease.’
The doctor will not mince matters with the husband, and,
when the interview is over, hell will have no further terrors
for that man. Perhaps also a haggard woman will say,
“Don’t tell me, doctor, that my husband is rotten.” And the
doctor, seeing her young health slipping from her, seeing he.
hope of motherhood gone, will try to save from the wreck of
the marriage the only thing left —her faith in her husband
and will tell her a merciful lie. That is not an uncommon
episode. It is only a youthful indiscretion —an attack of
gonorrhoea —a home made desolate —a nation defrauded.
Conclusion.
It was not an easy thing for us to know just what to say,
nor how to say it. But we took one way out of every difficulty,
and that was to tell you the truth, so far as we know it. We
believe that truth is great enough to prevail in matters of sex
as in all other concerns of life. We did not come to preach
at you. We came because we have stood, where you now
stand, on the threshold of perplexing mysteries. We had to
worry out their meaning for ourselves. We hope to save you
some of that worry.
We appeal to your sense of decency and of honour, to
your chivalry and your patriotism. But we recognise that,
within a University, the intellect is the final court of appeal.
We shall have failed in our purpose, if we have not satisfied
vour intelligence that the attitude of mind which we have
defined, and the course of conduct which we have outlined,


is the only attitude and the only course open to you as reason-
able men. We shall have failed, if you are not satisfied to
dismiss from your minds everything sexual that is degrading or
distracting, and to retain only that ideal of sex which is
ennobling and inspiring.
We members of a great University have a great privilege
and a great responsibility. We are the heirs of
the ages of freedom. Our heritage is that of our
Anglo-Saxon race. Whatever else we have received
from our fathers, we have inherited a life that will
be clean so long as we keep it clean. There’s not one of you
would be here to-day if your fathers had handed on to you
tainted lives. “Damaged goods” of that kind never reach a
University, though goods may be damaged there. Within the
University, we have the privilege of adding to our inheritance
by giving our life a deeper interest, a higher purpose. But
all that heritage and all that privilege will count as nothing,
if we should prove so false to our manhood, so traitorous to
our race, as to condemn our children to blighted lives or to
extinction —if we should fail to hand on the torch of life as
brightly burning as we have received it, or if that torch should
be extinguished at our hands.
When we trace the progress of mankind through the
darkest pages of his history to the brightest, we see the brutal
pit whence he is digged and the spiritual rock whence he is
hewn. We see that the spirit can conquer the brute. Though
he may slip back into the slime, he is ever impelled to
answer the call —“Arise . . . move upward, working out the
beast, and let the ape and tiger die.” The mark of the beast
is still deeply branded on some men. The ape has paraded
his lust, and the tiger his cruelty, throughout the stricken
homes of Belgium and Serbia and Armenia. The great war is
but an episode in the greater warfare between spiritual free-
dom and brutal enslavement. Each must decide for himself
under which flag he will serve.


DISEASES AND DISASTERS.*
AN ADDRESS TO SOLDIERS
BY
PROFESSOR D. A. WELSH
The contagious diseases, syphilis and gonorrhoea, do not
differ in their essential nature from other infectious diseases.
They, too, are caused by microbes, or germs, which enter the
human body and poison it, just as do the microbes of smallpox
and of typhoid fever. Once upon a time, indeed, syphilis was
known as the great-pox, to distinguish it from the smallpox,
and in many ways the two diseases are as closely allied as they
are notorious.
The contagious diseases are transmitted from one person
to another only by direct contact. The man who contracts
them, therefore, has only himself to blame. It is a popular
delusion, and a gross mistake, to suppose that there is any
organic need for a man to expose himself to this risk. That
is nothing but pernicious nonsense. It is the question of alcohol
over again, and the answer is the same. Indulgence is un-
necessary, and excess is hurtful, to any man, and particularly
to him who is training for the hard life of the soldier.
Alcohol inhibits self-control, abolishes self-respect, and
arrests those influences on which good conduct largely depends.
Hence, men under its influence become exposed to contagious
diseases which they would otherwise have avoided. A single
act of over-indulgence in alcohol, not far beyond the limits of
moderation, may thus dispose a man to foul diseases which
render him unfit for the work of a soldier, and may wreck
his life.
*“ Diseases and Disasters ” is taken from “The Health of the
Forces and the Forces of Health.” which was given as an address to
the Australian Imperial Forces in February, and to students of the
University in April, 1916, It was then published in the Sydney
Morning Herald, and reprinted by the Y.M.C.A. for free distribution
to the naval and military forces of the Commonwealth,


Of the two diseases, syphilis begins with a local sore,
gonorrhoea with a local discharge. When a man has exposed
himself to the contagion, he should report to a medical officer
within twenty-four hours, as important preventive measures
may be taken within that time. Here, as in other diseases,
prevention is better than cure. But there are limits to what
can be done even at this early stage. The only certain means
of prevention is to avoid the risk altogether. When the sore
or the discharge has made its appearance, the infection is
already established, and prevention is no longer possible.
Nevertheless, prompt and vigorous treatment by a competent
doctor may do much to rob both diseases of their worst terrors.
Both forms of contagious disease are hard to cure, and in
both the infection may remain active for years. Where alco-
hol is the indirect, they are the direct cause of most of the in-
capacity and inefficiency that are inseparable from military
camps as they are at present conducted. They are the bane of
modern armies. It is no exaggeration to say that every soldier
who becomes infected has allied himself with the enemy for
the period of his incapacity.
{<?) Syphilis.
Most men have heard of the ravages wrought by syphilis.
They know that there is no part of the body that can escape
its corrupting influence. They know that a man may be in-
fected in his youth, and that in his prime the latent microbe
may spring an ambush upon him, and condemn him to a ner-
vous wreck, from which death is a merciful deliverance. They
know something of the domestic disaster that follows when
the innocent wife becomes infected too. They know that the
earlier children may be killed before they are born, and that
the later children may be born diseased. They recognise the
tragedy of visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children to the third or fourth generations—when the fathers
themselves were little more than children when they fell vic-
tims to the disease.
Medical men are always learning, and the work of recent
years has added much to our knowledge of both forms of
contagious disease. For one thing, modern science has done
much to mitigate the severity of the old Mosaic curse. But
medicine is not yet able to rid a patient wholly of the syphilitic
microbe, nor to relieve him completely from its devastating
effects,


(i) Gonorrhoea.
Some few years ago it was thought to be a greater calamity
to be infected by syphilis than to be infected by gonorrhoea.
Outside the profession of medicine, the belief still holds that
gonorrhoea is a trifling ailment, incidental to a youthful in-
discretion. There never was a greater delusion, nor a more
terrible mistake.
The advance of bacteriology has revealed the fact that
gonorrhoea is a much more serious condition than is commonly
realised; but it has not yet revealed any satisfactory method
of overcoming the infection. That is a serious problem. The
disease carries with it grave and unsuspected dangers which
we are not yet in a position to avert.
Gonorrhoea is not always cured when the discharge is
cured. The dregs of the infection may hang about the passages
for years. The microbe lurks in the remoter crevices and
openings, retaining enough vitality to reinfect a fresh subject
long afterward. In a man, the infection may spread to all
adjacent parts, and cause many forms of painful and disabling
inflammation and abscess. It may travel to invade his joints,
causing one of the most intractable forms of rheumatism. It
may infect the eyes, causing serious damage, and sometimes
blindness. It may lead, directly or indirectly, to a fatal issue.
This condition is bad enough for the man, but it is
worse for the woman he marries. Any persistent infection
is transmitted to her, and she is then forced to exchange
health and happiness for a life of sickness and misery. Her
internal troubles are often of so alarming a nature that a
major operation is required to give her relief. Many women
who become infected are rendered unable to bear a child,
whether an operation is done or not. Unlike syphilis, the taint
is rarely handed on to the offspring; but there may be no
offspring.
Hence, the man who contracts this disease may condemn
his wife to a childless marriage, as well as to chronic ill-
health. That is what a wife may gain from the “youthful
indiscretions” of her husband. Such an act is criminal at
any time. At a time like the present, when our best immi-
grants —our own healthy children—are most precious to the
Empire, it is worse than criminal; it is the act of a traitor.


THE VERDICT.
Being Extracts from the Final Report of the Royal Commission
on Venereal Diseases, London , February , 1916.
Gonorrhea in Men.
Gonorrhoea is generally regarded by the public, as a trifling
ailment, though it has in reality serious and far-reaching con-
sequences. Since the gravity of the disease is insufficiently
realised, it follows that early treatment is often neglected, and
the opportunity of attacking the disease in the incipient stages,
when it is much more amenable to treatment than later, is
lost. . . . The consequences of gonorrhoea in males are
grave and far-reaching. The disease is a frequent cause of
sterility f and a source of the greatest danger to the com-
munity at large.
Gonorrhea in Women.
It is impossible to exaggerate the importance of gonorrhoea
in women. In the earlier stage it inflicts on her a serious
ailment; subsequently it may cause sterility, and in later years
it frequently leads to conditions which may necessitate grave
and difficult operations, to chronic invalidism, and sometimes
to death. . . . The infection is peculiarly tenacious, and
when once the organism has lodged in the deeper structures,
its dislodgment is extremely difficult, if not impossible.
Alcohol and Venereal Diseases.
Abundant evidence was given as to the intimate relation
between alcohol and venereal diseases. Alcohol renders a
man liable to yield to temptations which he might otherwise
resist, and aggravates the disease by diminishing the resistance
of the individual. . . . The facts point to the conclusion
that decrease in the use of alcohol will be an important factor
in diminishing the prevalence of venereal diseases.


Treatment by Unqualified Persons.
We have no hesitation in stating that the effects of un-
qualified practice in regard to venereal diseases are disas-
trous, and that, in our opinion, the continued existence of un-
qualified practice constitutes one of the principal hindrances
to the eradication of these diseases. ... It cannot be too
strongly emphasised that the essential point in the control of
venereal diseases is to secure for the patient the best treat-
ment at the earliest possible moment. By the intervention
of the unqualified person, the stage at which the permanent
eradication of the disease is possible is lost, and the many and
terrible after effects which we have described may supervejie,
for, although the disease is difficult to cure, symptoms are
readily made to disappear. In any case, the treatment is ren-
dered more difficult, protracted and expensive, and the risk
of the disease being communicated to others is very largely
increased.
Disqualification for Marriage.
In view of the comparatively small importance with which
until recently the consequences of gonorrhoea have commonly
been regarded, it is our duty to emphasise that the evidence
given before us seems. to establish that gonorrhoea, until it
has been effectively treated, should be considered as a hind-
rance to marriage. Speaking of the communication of gonor-
rhoea by the husband to the wife, Sir Thomas Barlow tells us
that gonorrhoea was the cause of a large percentage of sterility
in women, and of “suffering incalculable.” In answer to the
question put by Dr. Mott, “Should we not endeavour to get
a more serious view taken of it?” he replied, “Yes, I think
we should. I think there has been a considerable improve-
ment in the way in which it is regarded, of course of late
years, but I am entirely with you. I think it is terrible. . .”


burrows a co.,
PRINTERS ,
51 ENMORE ROAD. NEWTOWN
