

PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
Australian Library
Conference
HELD AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
AUGUST, 1928
Printed by the kind consent of the Government of Victoria
November, 1928
By Authority ; H. J. Grech, Government Printer, Melbourne
14870.




PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
Australian Library
Conference
HELD AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
AUGUST. 1928
Printed by the kind consent of the Government of Victoria
November, 1928
By Authority : H. J. Green, Government Printer, Melbourne
14870.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
Foreword, by Professor D. B. Copland, President of the Library Association
of Victoria ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3
Address to Library Conference, by Hon. G. M. Prendergast, Chief
Secretary, Victoria ... ... .. ... ... ... 5
Australia Requires a Better Library Service, by W. H. Ifould,
Principal Librarian and Secretary, Public Library, Sydney, N.S.W. .. 8
The Organization of a Lending Library, by Charles H. Bertie, F.R. Aust.
Hist. Soc., City Librarian, Sydney ... .. ... ... 16
Report on Public Libraries in England and Wales, by H. Rutherford
Purnell, Chief Librarian, Public Library, Adelaide, S.A. ... 22
The Relation of State and Municipal Libraries : A Question of
Policy, by Professor E. Morris Miller, M.A., Litt.D., Tasmania ... 32
School Libraries the True Foundation of a National Public Library,
by Gilbert M. Wallace, Editor of the Publications of the Education
Department of Victoria ... ... ... ... ... ... 36
The Public Lending Library of Victoria, by T. Fleming Cooke, 8.A.,
Librarian Lending Branch, Public Library, Museums and National
Gallery of Victoria ... ... ... ... ... ... 40
Co-operation in Library Work, by E. R. Pitt, 8.A., Assistant Librarian,
Public Library of Victoria ... ... ... ... ... 48
Libraries Seen Abroad, by S. Talbot Smith, M.A., LL.B., President of
the Public Library of South Australia ... ... ... ... 57


FOREWORD.
The papers published in this booklet were read before an important Con-
ference of Librarians held at the University of Melbourne on 21st, 22nd,
and 23rd August. We are indebted to the Government of Victoria for
making these papers available to all interested in the development of
libraries throughout the Commonwealth. For the first time for many
years eminent librarians from all parts of Australia met in conference
to resuscitate the Australian Library Association, and to consider co-
operative plans for the extension of library service in Australia. The
delegates who attended were as follows; ,
Miss Ellinor Archer and Mr. E. R. Pitt (Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research, Victoria), Messrs. R.'D. Boys, T. F. Cooke, A. B.
Foxcroft, W. C. Baud, and C. A. McCallum (Public Library of Victoria),
Mr. C. H. Bertie (Sydney Municipal Library), Mr. K. Binns (Common-
wealth Parliamentary Library), M. F. W. Bampfield (Adelaide Circulat-
ing Library), Mr. J. Blakiston (Geelong Free. Library), Mr. W. W. Brad-
ford (Newcastle School of Arts), Mrs. E. Lee Steere and Rev. C. Irving
Benson (National Home Reading Union, Victoria), Cr. Angela Booth
(Women’s Citizen Movement, Victoria), Mr. H. C. Batten (Ballarat
Mechanics’ Institute), Professor D. B. Copland, Rev. W. P. Hackett,
S.J., Cr. Burnett Gray, M.L.A., and Mr. A. E. McMicken (Library
Association of Victoria), Mr. J. D. A. Collier (Public Library of Tas-
mania), Mr. J. H. Cochrane (Willi am.st own Mechanics Institute (Vic-
toria), Mr. David Gumming (Railway and Tramway Institute, Sydney),
Mr. J. R. Forward (Launceston Mechanics’ Institute), Mr. E. L. Frazer
(Victorian Parliamentary Library), Mr. J. H. Furneaux (Prahran
Mechanics’ Institute), Mr. H. M. Green (University of Sydney), Mr. R.
F. Grant (Shire of Braybrook Municipal Library), Mr. B. H. Gillman
(Railways Institute, Adelaide), Mr. W. H. Ifould, 0.8. E. (Public
Library of New South Wales), Miss Adelaide L. Kent (Allied Societies
Library), Professor E. Morris Miller (Library Association of Tasmania),
Sir William Sowden and Mr. F. E. Meleng (Institutes Association of
South Australia, Incorporated), Messrs. S. Talbot Smith and H. R.
Purnell (Public Library of South Australia), Mr. Leigh Scott (Mel-
bourne University Library), Mr. G. M. Wallace (Education Department
of Victoria and Brisbane School of Arts), Miss M. E. Wood (University
Library of Western Australia), Councillor H. A. Woodfull (Chairman
Prahran Municipal Libraries), Miss Mary Daly (Private Library, Mel-
bourne), and Mr. G. H. Firman (Robertson and Mullens, Ltd.).
The most important business transacted at the conference was the
drafting of a Constitution for the Australian Library Association. The
following constitution was agreed to:
1. Name. —“ The Australian Library Association.”
2. Objects. —The objects of the Association shall be to promote library
service and librarianship.
(3) Organization. —(i) The Council shall recognize only one Library
Association in each State or Territory, and the Constitution of each such
Association shall be decided by the members thereof. Until such time as
an Association is formed in the Federal Capital Territory that territory
shall form part of New South Wales.
(ii) The affairs of the Association shall be managed by a Central
Council, consisting, in addition to the President, the Secretary, and the
Treasurer, of three delegates appointed by each State Association, with
power of the Council to co-opt five other members.
(iii) The Central Council shall meet at a time and place to be fixed
by the executive after consultation with the State Associations, pro-
vided that not more than two years shall elapse between two consecutive


meetings of the Council, and provided further that the Executive shall
summon a meeting on the request of three State Associations. A quorum
shall consist of ten members of Council, in which at least three Associa-
tions shall be represented.
(iv) The functions of the Central Council shall include:
(a) The co-ordination of the work of the State Associations.
(b) The preparation and issue of publications, including a Federal
Journal, as soon as practicable.
(c) The consideration of such other matters as may be referred
to it by the State Associations.
4. Subscriptions and Membership. —Members of the Association shall
consist of all State Association members on whose account 2s. 6d. has
been contributed by the State Association to the Australian Association.
Other persons may, with the approval of the Executive, be admitted to
membership on payment of an annual subscription of 10s. 6d. Mem-
bers shall be entitled to receive all publications of the Association.
5. Executive. —The Executive shall consist of a President, a Secre-
tary, and a Treasurer, elected by the Council at an ordinary meeting held
annually, if possible, and shall continue in office till the election of suc-
cessors, provided that the first President, Secretary and Treasurer shall
be Sir William Sowden, and Messrs. F. E. Meleng and H. R. Purnell
respectively.
6. Amendment of Constitution. —The Constitution may be amended
at any meeting of the Council, provided that notice of such amendment
is given to the State Association at least two months before the date of
meeting, and provided that a majority of State Associations approve
such an amendment.
7. Ratification of Constitution. —This Constitution shall come into
operation when it has been ratified by three State Associations.
8. Voting by Correspondence. —lt shall be competent for the As-
sociation to conduct a vote of the Council on any question by correspon-
dence, provided that at least three-fourths of the members of the Council
signify their approval in writing of the question being decided by such
a vote.
9. Vacancies. —Vacancies in the Council shall be filled by the Coun-
cil, provided that delegates from the State Association shall be nominated
by the Association concerned.
Library Associations have now been formed in Victoria, South Aus-
tralia, and Tasmania, and it is hoped that similar associations will be
established m the other States. As soon as three State Associations
ratify the constitution, the Australian Library Association will come
into being, and will, it is hoped, prove an effective instrument for foster-
ing library service.
D. B. COPLAND
President of the Library Association of Victoria.
University of Melbourne,
7th December, 1928.
The first officers of the Australian Library Association were elected
as follows:
President, Sir William Sowden.
Secretary, Mr. F. E. Meleng.
Treasurer, Mr. H. R. Purnell.
The secretarial arrangements for the Conference were carried out by
the Secretary of the Library Association of Victoria, Mr. A. E.’
McMicken.


ADDRESS TO LIBRARY CONFERENCE.
T UESDAY, 21ST AUGUST, 1928.
By Hon. G. M. Prendergast, Chief Secretary, Victoria.
As the Ministerial Head of the Public Library of Victoria and a
trustee of that institution, of which we Victorians are, I think, justly
proud, it affords me much pleasure to welcome in the name of the
Government the members of this conference and to officially open the
conference.
To those members who come from other States, I extend, on behalf
of the people of this State, a special welcome, and hope their stay in
Melbourne will prove both enjoyable and profitable.
It is a very important function of our great Public Library and
Museum to assist the members of this Association to build up greatness
for both and to cultivate the public taste for books and art treasures,
not only in the one place in Melbourne, but throughout the State, by
going to the people with bpoks and pictures and art treasure offerings
literally in their hands.
In dealing with the objectives which the conference has in view, I
may say that the school teacher is generally recognized as the individual
responsible for inculcating the principles of knowledge in the mind of
the child; and well this work is done. It is, however, in the years that
follow thet school period that the library plays such an important part.
Through these institutions provision is made for the development of the
rudiments of knowledge acquired by the scholar as a child, the pursuit
of specialized knowledge in every avenue of art, science, and industry.
Within the walls of the library we find in a concise form the fruits of
the greatest minds of all times available for the benefit of the student.
Thus the services rendered by our libraries play an important part in
educating not only the mind of the individual but that of the nation.
Broadly speaking, the aim of the conference seems to me to be
to co-ordinate and extend the activities of the libraries of to-day.
This meeting, I understand, cannot claim the credit of initiating the
movement, although undoubtedly some praise is due to its promoters for
restoring an organization that has been for some years in a comatose
condition, if not actually defunct. So long ago as 1877, an International
Library Association was formed in London, and has functioned ever
since.
In Australia, the first steps towards the formation of an Australian
association were taken by the trustees of the Public Library in 1894,
when Dr. Leeper, one of the trustees, moved —
That, in view of the great advantages likely to accrue to the
public libraries of Australasia, it is desirable that the trustees take
steps towards the foundation of a library association of Australasia,
on lines generally similar to those of the Library Association of the
United Kingdom and the American Library Association.
As a result, an Intercolonial Library Conference met in Melbourne
in April, 1896, under the presidency of the late Hon. Sir John Madden.
There were 600 guests, including 80 librarians and delegates from every
colony. Then followed a conference in Sydney, in 1898, and another


in Adelaide in 1900. One other meeting was held by the association
in 1902, in Melbourne!- Since that time, for reasons of which I am
unaware, no further meetings were held.
, I understand that last year a small conference was held in Adelaide
with a view to re-forming this Association, and this conference to-day
is the outcome of its efforts.
That the State is wholly sympathetic with this movement is evidenced
by what has been done in the past in the assistance public
libraries.
We must promote and foster a desire toi “ read, mark, learn and
inwardly digest ” and send our experts to point the well-trodden,
although ever new, path of knowledge.
Any thinking man must realize the value of a library as a factor in
the educational development of the community and the blessings of
books to residents of small country towns and scattered centres of settle-
ment.
Since the year 1862 the Government has provided an annual grant
for the assistance of country libraries, and for the past three years an
annual grant of £2,750 has been made. Since 1924-25, some 375
country libraries, all of which are free to the public, have participated
in the distribution of the grant. Particularly in the more remote
districts, where the facilities for obtaining current literature are few,
these institutions fulfil a very useful function, as their educational,
recreational, and social value is considerable.
Last year, the Government suggested that portion of the expenditure
on literature should be devoted to the purchase of works of Australian
authors; and it is pleasing to relate that the suggestion was very cordially
received and acted upon, with good results.
Even prior to this grant, the Public Library trustees arranged for
the circulation of literature to country towns. In 1859, Sir Redmond
Barry said—
It has been deemed highly important to spread abroad as widely
as •possible the beneficial influence happily brought into being, of
which those who live at a distance are unable to partake, and thus,
without impairing the resources of the institution as a library of
deposit and research, to increase the facilities of general literary
improvement, and for the expansion of the public mind. To
accomplish this object, it is proposed to lend to the mechanics and
other similar institutions in the provincial towns a certain number
of duplicate copies upon a variety of interesting subjects.
Since that time the system has been gradually extended, cases of
books on all subjects being forwarded to free libraries, mechanics’ insti-
tutes, and municipal libraries on loan from the Public Library. Con-
cessions have been made by the Railway Department on the freight
of these cases of books, and every encouragement offered to the libraries
to avail themselves of these advantages. Then the system of postal
libraries has also been instituted, whereby every person over fifteen
years of age residing more than 10 miles from the Public Library is
entitled to have books sent from that institution by post. Any desired
book is sent at the expense of the library, and under these systems the
trustees have gone far to cater for the intellectual needs of the country
districts book-lover.


The Public Library and Museum received a magnificent endowment
from a great, public-spirited citizen, the late Mr. Alfred Felton, which
up to the present amounts to £339,750. The allocations have varied
from £B,OOO in 1905 (when the endowment commenced) to £27,000 in
1927. Why do not other wealthy citizens provide for our own great
institutions in a similar way ?
Apart from the country district, I may refer to the activities of the
Reference Library at the Public Library. On the 18th April last, '.here
were, between the hours of 10 a.m. and 10 p.m., 2,532 books referred to;
whilst in the newspaper room on the 16th May there were 991 visitors
with a definite purpose. The growth of research work by students has
increased enormously during recent years. The number of visitors to
the Reference Library on the 24th of May last was 1,331, and at the
Inquiry Room 386.
The number of borrowers from the Public Library has increased
from 6,551 in 1923 to 9,658 in 1928, and the total annual circulation
of books from 117,000 to 148,000. The “ postal library” borrowers in
country districts have grown from 81 in 1923 to 443 in 1927.
The Government of Victoria distributed £4,000 to libraries during
the preceding year, and has spent the sum of £2,840 to promote the
interests of art galleries in several places in the State. A sum of £1,214
is also held in trust for payment to art galleries upon the fulfilment of
certain conditions by the galleries concerned.
In our great Central Public Library and Museum there were at the
end of 1927
383,943 volumes of books,
18,761 pictures,
5,528 statuary and works of art
of a value, at a modest computation, of £706,912, because who can gauge
the real value of such a glorious possession in the formation of the
character of a nation ?
The number of volumes in the Lending Library at the end of
1927 was 46,696, the loans from the Lending Library during the year
amounting to 148,108 books, 4,875 of these being sent to 443 borrowers
in the country.
I congratulate Air. McMicken upon having been made a trustee of
the Public Library, as it is a very important link between the present
associations and our great Library and Museum.
The agenda paper contains much business that will absorb the time
of the conference) and it is pleasing to note the active interest displayed
by those prominent citizens of Australia who are outstanding in their
knowledge of this subject. On behalf of the Government, I wish the
conference every success in its deliberations, and feel sure that benefits
will accrue that will be appreciated, not only by those who are at present
taking advantage of the existence of these excellent institutions, but
also by the future generations who seek to increase the wisdom and
consequent greatness of the nation.
14870.—2


AUSTRALIA REQUIRES A BETTER LIBRARY SERVICE
By W. H. Ifould, Principal Librarian and Secretary, Public Library,
Sydney, N.S.W.
I chose this subject for my address because I have felt for some time
that our libraries are not keeping pace with the growth in population,
and with industrial and agricultural development. I feel also that we
do not sufficiently recognize our duty to educate the coming generations
in the use of books and journals in order that our people, so far removed
from the centres of experience of the old world and America, shall be
able to absorb the knowledge obtainable from the written records.
I propose, then, to place before you material for a discussion on two
aspects of the question, viz:
1. The supply of information and its availability.
2. The training of the public to use it.
During the past twenty years the population of Australia has
increased by about 2,000,000, and in the same period the value of our
primary products has doubled, whilst the value of our secondary indus-
tries has increased threefold. It does not need the quotation of figures
to inform us that, whilst our primary industries are certainly increasing
in value, there has been a larger increase in manufactures.
For some time before the war period our most thoughtful men
realized that if Australia were to increase in population and influence
in the world it must develop secondary industries. The importance of
this—nay, its absolute necessity—was emphasized during the war period,
and this catastrophe also assisted in the establishment of factories, since
developed and increased by the protective policy of the country. The
need for technical information during this period of factory building
discovered our weakness in the supply of technical experts and of infor-
mation for their use.
The officers of my own Library were overwhelmed with inquiries of
all kinds, which could only be inadequately answered. Fortunately, we
had partly foreseen the need for making better provision for supplying
technical information. Right through the war period a very large
proportion of our purchasing funds were expended on building up the
technical sections. Those trustees who were especially interested in the
humanities side frequently complained that our book lists and orders
for new journals were overwhelmingly on the subjects of technology.
We were making our library capable of meeting an increasing number
of the demands for information on the developing needs of the State.
Apart from procuring the most necessary books and journals, it was
found important to make the information contained in them more avail-
able, especially to people who were not trained to search for themselves.
We established a special research staff of three officers to assist in
procuring information, largely of a technical character, which was diffi-
cult to obtain. Apart from the direct value of such a staff in assisting
special students and inquirers, it also assisted in discovering the weak-
nesses of the general collection, in deciding on the value of the numerous
journals needed for technical research and in encouraging the use of the
library by busy men who previously had been discouraged by the diffi-
culty in getting on the track of information.


Notwithstanding its unsuitable building, the State Library soon
increased its prestige as an institution for the supply of information.
During the past three years an average of 539 special researches per year
were carried out, mainly on behalf of people connected with factories.
It is impossible to estimate the value of this work in pounds, shillings,
and pence. We know that in many cases the information so obtained
has saved industry very large amounts, and some idea of the apprecia-
tion of those benefiting can be gauged by the very frequent letters of
thanks. Some bodies have even taken the trouble to express their
appreciation in a more public way.
The New South Wales Chamber of Manufactures wrote to the Min-
ister for Public Instruction, through its secretary, as follows:
I have been instructed by the council of this Chamber to express
to you their very warm appreciation of the work done by the
Research Department of the Public Library, particularly for the
smaller Australian manufacturers. The manufacturing concern
which is a transplantation of a large overseas firm is generally less
in need of the services of the Research Department of the Public
Library than is the smaller concern of humble beginnings, which
starts without foreign experience to guide it.
One of our members who recently had recourse to the services of
the Research Department of the Public Library reports on the
experience in the following words:
“ Recently we had occasion to investigate a certain mechanism,
and wrote to the Librarian with the request for research work on
our particular subject. Over 60 articles in various magazines and
books were set aside for our reference, and the information gained
was of great value to us.”
Whilst the Chamber does not wish to distinguish between its
various members, it is felt, however, that the smaller man, the man
who we think stands so much in need of the Research Department,
is often a native-born Australian struggling for a footing, employing
entirely Australian capital, and constituting in himself an example
to Australian children of what can be done in the manufacturing
world by an Australian compelled to start in a very humble
fashion.
With this I think you will agree. It is disappointing, however,
to note that the demand on the Research stall has now become so
great that inquirers must wait their turn. This is an unfortunate
handicap upon the smaller and less equipped establishment. It is
one that can be easily removed were we to be favoured with addi-
tional staff, sufficient at all events to meet the present demand,
which has obviously grown beyond the capacity of the very excellent,
efficient, and courteous staff whose abilities and assistance have been
the subject of quite a flood of laudatory comment from those who
have been helped.
The bulk of the work of the Research Department is to meet the
demands of people within the metropolitan area of Sydney. Some
requests are, however, received from people in other manufacturing
centres in the State, notably from Newcastle. When the material on
the subject of inquiry is brought together, the inquirer is informed and
makes a special journey to Sydney in order to go through it.


I have referred at some length to this development in the State
Library of New South Wales mainly to emphasize the changing character
of these large central libraries. I shall now refer to a development in
connexion with the library’s assistance in supplying information to
country people. Over 50 years ago the State libraries of Victoria and
South Australia commenced to assist readers in country districts by
lending to local libraries boxes of books. New South Wales adopted
the system at a later date. Whilst doubtless such circulating boxes have
been of value to country libraries in providing for their subscribers
general reading of a character not always obtainable through the insuffi-
cient financial resources of local libraries, these circulating collections
are not intended to cover the demands for direct information. They
cannot in the nature of things supply information urgently wanted by
all classes of people far removed from the central reference library.
About 25 years ago, the trustees of the Public Library of Sout'h
Australia established a special section of books of an educational char-
acter in popular science, agriculture, &c., for loan to students in the
country. Unfortunately, I think, the trustees limited borrowing to
members of country institutes, the idea being to supplement the
resources of such local libraries. For several years—that is up to the
transfer of the country circulation department of the Public Library
of South Australia to the South Australian Institutes Association—very
little use was made of this country students’ reference collection, even
by school teachers.
The Public Library of New South Wales at the time of my appoint-
ment as principal Librarian had also a small collection of books for loan
to country students, but it was too limited to encourage much use. The
trustees were persuaded of the need for helping country people by
supplying through the post the best possible books on all subjects of
country interest, and, with many doubts as to the possibility of the
scheme, allowed us to build up a useful collection and to send to any one
beyond the metropolitan area of Sydney, which we roughly regard as
within a 20-mile radius.
The first year, viz., 1912, only 128 volumes were lent to 70 appli-
cants, and the collection comprised a few hundred volumes. From then
on there has been a regular increase in the number of volumes available,
the number of students, and the number of volumes borrowed. During
the financial year just closed on the 30th of June, 1928, the special
collection available to country students totalled 13,657 volumes and
5,177 pamphlets; 32,628 books were sent to 20,414 borrowers. The
collection comprises books and pamphlets on all branches of agriculture
and other useful arts practised in the country districts of New South
Wales and in the towns other than Sydney—science, education, books
on literature (but not literature itself), history, geography, and in fact
all imaginable subjects for which it is expected reasonable demands for
books will be made by country students. The borrowers comprise school
teachers, agriculturists, mechanics, business people, professional people,
covering a very large number of callings.
No general catalogue of this collection is issued, but sectional
catalogues are available, and in the most important subjects are brought
up to date every two years. I have with me for inspection by any of
you interested a number of these sectional lists. I have also a few
copies of our lists of such catalogues. To become a borrower from the
section it is only necessary, in the first place, to reside beyond the
metropolitan area; secondly, to fill in a form, giving name and address,
and a witness to signature. We take all applicants on trust. This is


one feature of the system about which my trustees were very anxious in
the beginning. The statistics for the year just ended show that in this
circulation of 32,628 books, 26 volumes were lost by borrowers and paid
for, 22 were lost in the post, and 17 were lost or stolen and for which
we received no payment. The value of the seventeen lost in this way
was probably less than £6, and of those lost in the post, a little over
£7—a total of about £l3.
For the first two or three years after the establishment of this
country reference section, we advertised the scheme, taking advantage
of every opportunity, and especially through the medium of articles sent
to various country newspapers. We found that newspaper proprietors,
metropolitan as well as country, were only too glad to give us free space
for informing people of this free system of borrowing reference books.
During the past few years, the increase in circulation has grown by
borrowers informing their friends. We have not advertised, because
without increased expenditure we could not cope with a large increase
in the demand.
My trustees are satisfied that the country reference section is of
the greatest possible value to people in connexion with rural industries.
It must be understood that the books available in the section are books
for the supply of information, not for entertaining reading. All are
sent in response to a specific request. The correspondence is therefore
very large. We have minimized it as much as possible at the library
end by the utilization of printed postcards and forms of all description.
The library pays the outward postage and the borrower the return
postage. All books are sent through the post.
Most of you are doubtless aware of the activities in Victoria, South
Australia, and New South Wales in the lending of boxes of books to
country institutions. In South Australia these boxes are under the
control of the Institutes Association, and in Victoria and New South
Wales under the State libraries. In New South Wales, we circulate
boxes of books not only to country schools of arts or country institutes,
but to branches of the Public School Teachers Association, branches of
the Agricultural Bureau, and notably to small country schools. During
the year ended the 30th of June, 1928, there were forwarded from the
Public Library to country institutions in New South Wales 3,831 boxes
of books, containing 85,880 volumes; and of these, 3,312 boxes con-
tained children’s books lent to fifth and sixth class country schools.
It is the policy of the Education Department to encourage school
teachers to build up a library in every school, and statistics compiled
about two years ago showed that 98 per cent, of the schools in New
South Wales have a children’s library of some kind or other. The fifth
and sixth class schools are far removed from centres of population.
They are mainly in agricultural districts, and the school libraries are,
of course, very small. It is difficult to procure from the parents suffi-
cient funds to purchase books. Moreover, it is difficult for the teachers
of these small schools to know the best kind of books to buy. It is
therefore of very great value to receive from the Public Library every
four months a new box of books on loan. It is recognized by the
teachers and the inspectors that these books have a very great and
direct educational value. Most of the children come from homes where
there are no books. Their parents know nothing about books. The
teachers themselves use the books, not only for lending to the children,
but often for oral reading. Children are introduced to a new world by
the medium of these stories and informative books supplied in the boxes
from the Public Library.


I believe that if wo arc to build up in Australia a public capable
of utilizing the stored-up knowledge contained in books, the experience
of other parts of the world, we must train the children to be able to
use books and to need them. The majority of them can only be trained
during their school life. It is hard for us who belong to the city, who
have private libraries of our own, and whose children have access to all
kinds of means for education, to realize how important it is that the
best possible books should be placed in the hands of these country
children as soon as they are capable of using them. I could read to
you for some hours the letters from school teachers and inspectors
praising this system of lending children’s books to the schools, and
pointing out how very valuable it is to them in their work of training
the children and how important they consider it in educating the
children to need books during their post-school life.
We find there is considerable wear and tear on these books. We
circulate them in their publishers’ bindings and never get them re-
bound. They are repaired after every circulation. In the first year
or two they need only simple repairs, usually by means of scissors and
paste, and later on are re-sewn into their original covers. Children’s books
last from five to six years, and in this time go through fifteen to eighteen
circulations from the Public Library, but it is impossible to say how
many children have the use of them during that period. The teachers
are so glad to get the books that they make every effort to train their
pupils to use them carefully. There are comparatively few losses.
During last year one box was lost in transit—it may still be found—and
one was burnt in a fire which destroyed the school building. In this
total of 85,880 volumes circulated during the year, 174 volumes were
lost and paid for by the losers, 138 volumes were lost and not paid for;
93 of these 138 were lost in a wreck, a fire, and a flood. The others
were lost in small schools which had no Parents and Citizens Associa-
tion funds to pay.for them. I think that the small percentage of losses
in the country circulating system, not only from the boxes of books but
from the country reference section, also is surprising.
It is difficult to give an exact statement of the total cost of this
country circulation system, because some of the officers are employed
partly on other work, but I think the total can be approximately put
down at about £B,OOO for the year just ended, without allowing for
rental value of the space occupied. For this amount, let me repeat,
32,328 volumes were lent through the post to 20,414 individual bor-
rowers, and 3,831 boxes containing 85,880 volumes were forwarded to
institutions. To those of you who are connected with circulating
libraries these figures may not seem very striking, but I must ask you
to remember that each of the 30,000 odd reference books was sent in
response to a specific appeal for information. They were not wanted
as entertaining reading, as are a very large percentage of books borrowed
from circulating libraries.
After all, the total amount of book reading in Australia
is ridiculously small as compared with the reading of newspapers. I
wonder how many people realize that about 13,000,000 copies of such a
weekly paper as Beckett’s Budget are circulated in one year. I think
we may safely estimate that there are not nearly as many books read as
copies of that one newspaper. Add to this the circulation of all other
papers, daily as well as weekly, and I think the total will exceed in each
year 600,000,000 copies, For Ihc majority of our people newspapers


provide far more reading than books; in fact, we may safely say that
not one in four adult Australians reads books. One might be forgiven
in supposing that to this fact is due the indifference to library extension
exhibited by most of our political leaders.
Amongst the people in both the cities and the country in Australia
there is a surprising ignorance of the real value of books. A very large
proportion of our people do not read books; and even amongst the well-
to-do one seldom finds anything of a private library.
“ And what,” said the character in the pantomime, “ arc you
going to give Mama for her birthday ?”
“ Oh, I don’t know. I think I’ll give her a book.”
“ Oh, but, Darling, she’s got a book!”
Notwithstanding the exaggeration, there is a kernel of truth in this
joke. It represents the attitude of many people towards books, even
in these days of general and compulsory education.
I have referred at some length to these activities of my own Library,
viz., the development of the Research Department in the central Library,
and the country circulation, because I believe that these are directions
in which libraries are to be made of more value to the people in all
States of the Commonwealth. The provision of books for school chil-
dren will do much to assist in the building up of a book-using popula-
tion which will demand greater facilities to obtain information than in
the past. I believe they will demand, not only adequate central
libraries, such as the State libraries, but also good reference libraries
for local requirements.
I frequently have letters from people beyond the borders of New
South Wales, asking if we cannot extend our system of lending refer-
ence books to residents in other States, Mr. Meleng will tell you of
the development in the country circulation department controlled by tbe
Institutes Association of the State of South Australia. Mr. Boys will,
I hope, inform us whether extensions are proposed by the trustees of
the Public Library of Victoria to the existing system of lending boxes
of books to mechanics’ institutes in that State. I cannot help thinking
that if the New South Wales system were adopted in every State there
would be a tremendous increase in a very few years in the number of
book-requiring people in the Commonwealth.
But,.after all, we as librarians can only regard such extensions of
library facilities as a beginning. We should do everything possible to
provide every centre of population in the Commonwealth with an
adequate library—not only a library containing books of entertaining
reading, valuable as I believe they are, but also a good reference library
specially suited to the requirements of each particular district. Towns
centred in agricultural districts should have first-rate collections of books
on all branches of agriculture suitable for their districts; mining centres
should have journals and books dealing with the branch of mining in
which their particular people are interested ; industrial centres, such as
Newcastle, should be provided with a comprehensive technical library
dealing with coal-mining, chemistry, technology covering steel manu-
facture and all the subsidiary industries.
The local committees should not look entirely to the State to provide
the funds for these reference libraries. There is in some directions an
awakening to the need of special libraries of this character. The late
Mr. Charles Hoskins, the founder of the steel works at Lithgow,


bequeathed a considerable sum of money for the establishment of a
suitable mechanics’ institute at Lithgow and the procuring of a collec-
tion of technical reference books, as well as works of a general educa-
tional character. I recently had very great pleasure in assisting in
the selection of some portion of this library.
Large corporations find it necessary to purchase books and journals
for the use of their technical staff; for instance, the Broken Hill Pro-
prietary Company at Newcastle. I think, however, that such companies
should give an annual amount for the procuring of reference books,
especially technical books and periodicals, to be housed in a central
library in their district. For example, if the Broken Hill Proprietary
Company, and a considerable number of other large companies at New-
castle, would provide only a few hundred pounds a year, the technical
section of the Newcastle School of Arts could be made an exceedingly
valuable one—a saving to all these industries from the. information
supplied to their employees of far more than the cost of their annual
donation.
Let us go a little further and consider those centres which aro
devoted to entirely rural industries, such, for instance, as dairying.
Let us imagine the various big dairying centres in Victoria, in New
South Wales, and in Queensland, especially, deciding that they will at
least provide in their local libraries all books and bulletins and journals
of any value in the English language dealing with dairying, veterinary
science, stock breeding, dairy bacteriology, fodders, milk, cheese,
co-operation, and so on, and with such associated industries as poultry-
keeping thrown in! How many centres in Australia are provided with
such libraries? The cost to the local people would not be very great,
and I am satisfied the means would be found if the people themselves
could be thoroughly persuaded concerning the need and the economic
value of such collections.
I believe that the country circulation from the State libraries, such
as I have described in connexion with the Public Library of New South
Wales, will gradually inform the people in the country of the importance
of books, and will eventually create the demand for local libraries such
as) I have indicated. I cannot help thinking that this can also be
assisted by the various State Education Departments. I think all
teachers, before they are sent into the country, should be brought into
touch with the library system, and should be given a little training
during their college period in the building up of small libraries and in
methods of teaching their children and, as opportunity offers, the
parents, to need and to use books of reference.
I do not think there has been in the past in Australia a close enough
bond between the library and the teacher. Fortunately, in my own
State, the public library is a branch of the Education Department. I
and my officers are all public servants under the Minister of Education.
The Director of Education and every Minister of the Education Depart-
ment for the past sixteen years have recognized the value of connecting
up the library work with the direct work of the teachers.
' I think, too, that the very great value of the country reference
section to the teachers themselves in reading for examinations and in
their study of other subjects in which they are interested, as well as
the system of lending children’s books to the small schools, is having a
great influence in showing the teachers the value of an education in the
use of books and the need for training their pupils to be able to go on
with their education after leaving school by reading for themselves.


THE ORGANIZATION OF A LENDING LIBRARY.
By Charles H. Bertie, F.R. Aust. Hist. Soc., City Librarian, Sydney.
I take it that one of the functions of a library conference is to
present an opportunity of discussing those problems which each librarian
has to tackle. While it is right and proper that we should speak of
those successes which we have won, I think we would be wise to speak
also of the disasters. By such frankness we would erect beacons on the
quicksands which beset a librarian’s voyage, and warn other voyagers
of the dangers of his course.
Tennyson has said—
That men may rise on stepping stones
Of their dead selves to higher things.
I think you will agree with me that these are wise words, and if you
can find another man generous enough to provide you with a stepping
stone it is much less painful than using yourself as one. When I say
that I propose to speak of some of my mistakes, as well as my minor
successes, in organizing a lending library, it is in the hope that other
librarians will follow and provide me with one or two stepping stones.
In October, 1909, I took over, on behalf of the Municipal Council
of Sydney, from the Government of New South Wales, what had been
the lending branch of the Public Library of New South Wales. There-
after the institution was known as the Sydney Municipal Library.
It has not fallen to the lot of many librarians to enjoy the experi-
ence which lay before me. I was handed over a library over which
hung a pall of dirt and decay. Lassitude was at home there. No
refreshing stream of new books had flowed into the library for years
and the place would have looked like a paradise to a bookbinder in
search of a job. Had I not been backed by an enthusiastic library
committee, which was prepared to alter this state of things, my
condition would have been parlous. My first job was to embark on a
weeding out. The library was established in 1877, and as far as I could
see the books had never been weeded since it was established. I have
no time at my disposal to dwell on the pleasures of weeding out. I
must content myself by saying that I have a remembrance of many
happy hours, perched on a stool, enjoying the delights of browsing in
long-forgotten volumes. While this work was in progress, new books
to the value of .£1,300 were purchased, and a vigorous bookbinding
campaign inaugurated.
When some 6,000 new or re-bound books were available two problems
arose as to the future policy of the library. The system in operation
was the old closed system with a driver's indicator. I recommended
the introduction of the open-access system, and with a little hesitation
the library committee agreed.
The next problem was the system of classification to be introduced,
and here we come upon my first mistake—a mistake that has left its
mark even to this day. I weighed the advantages of the Duff Brown
and the Dewey systems and decided on the former. In extenuation,
I may say, that the area available for the open-access portion of the
library was so small that it appeared ridiculous to start a minute
classification. I am afraid I did not vision the time when our output
14870.-3


would grow to nearly half a million books per annum. Some nine
years ago we changed over to the Dewey classification for all new and
re-bound books, leaving the Duff Brown system to expire gradually,
To-day we have the remnants of the sections in use entailing two sots
of catalogues and shelves. My word of advice to those librarians who
may be faced with a similar problem is not to hesitate, but choose the
Dewey system even though your beginnings are small. The Duff Brown
system has some advantages, but they are overshadowed by the superior
attractions of a scientific classification and above all by bringing to-
gether all books on the same subject.
During the process of weeding out, I was confronted by another
problem which demanded solution. I came across numbers of bocks
which had rarely moved off the shelves. From a reference point of
view 7 some of these books w 7 ere useful—one I remember contained pic-
tures of early forms of bicycles—but from a lending library point of
view were of little use. Now 7, a lending library is to an extent also a
reference library, but it must be kept clearly in mind that the refer
ence side is incidental and not the raison d’etre of its existence. This
being so it follows that no librarian of a lending library is justified
in keeping on his shelves hooks which have had their day and passed
into the realm of the reference librarian. I am, of course, not referring
to the standard reference books with which all libraries should be
equipped, but to those dead books which cumber our shelves. One
of our leading booksellers once said to me that he expected each foot
of bookshelf in his establishment to earn him a definite sum per annum,
and if w 7 e regard our shelves in the same light, substituting service for
profit, we w 7 ould be encouraged to dig our forks a little deeper durine
weeding out.
The lesson I learned in those early days has been of great value
to me both in buying new hooks and in replacing those withdrawn. In
the latter case it has been particularly useful as a test to apply before
writing “yes” or “ no” on the replacement cards.
Having settled on the scheme of classification the next matter to
decide was a system of charging the books. The system adopted, which
was based on American practice, was as follows;—The borrowers were
provided with tickets, measuring about 3 in. x 2| in., bearing a number
and the borrower’s name and address. Each book had pasted in it,
at the back, a pocket, and in this pocket rested the book card on which
was written the accession number, the shelf number, the author’s name
and short title. A label on which to stamp dates was pasted in the
front of the book. When a borrower took out a book the date was
stamped on the label, and his ticket was slipped into a pocket on the
book card. Afterwards, the borrower’s number was written on the
book card and the cards filed on the accession numbers, behind a guide
bearing the day of the month. When the borrower returned his book
the book card was taken out and the borrower’s ticket returned to him.
For a number of years this system worked well and gave satisfaction,
but as the numbers of borrowers and the output crept up the queue of
those waiting to enter the library began to grow in proportion. This
was particularly noticeable during the lunch hour rush, and while I
was in America in 1922 I made a study of methods in use in the United
States. In the New York Public Library I found a system which I
introduced into our library on my return. In this system the borrower
is provided with a ticket about 5 in. x 3f in., which is ruled and
printed to allow of the date of taking out and return being stamped


for each book, and this ticket is not kept by the library, but returned
to the borrower. The ticket fits into the pocket in the back and is
usually kept there by the borrower. The advantage of this system is
that on the return of the book there is no necessity to hunt up the
book card. The only duty of the assistant is to check the dates on
the book label and the borrower’s ticket and stamp the ticket under
the return column. This is a matter of three seconds and the borrower
then is finished with. The books are released at leisure. The system
has eliminated the waiting queue. It has one disadvantage compared
with the first system. Then we held the borrower’s ticket while he
had the book and the book must be released immediately it is handed
in. Under the present system it is possible for the book to be re-
turned to the shelves without being released, leaving the book card
in the tray with the result that an innocent, and sometimes irate,
borrower receives an overdue notice. By checking up, however, all
overdue notices before issue and instituting a “mystery shelf” this
inconvenience has been reduced to a minimum. The pockets used in
this system are made of tough cartridge paper and are pasted inside
the front cover. To facilitate counting for record purposes the book
cards have a narrow coloured strip printed along the top, each main
section of Dewey having a distinctive colour.
In the Children’s Library, where time is not so important, we have
retained the first system, and I have recommended its adoption, where
I have been consulted, in several libraries where a more leisurely pace
is observed.
I shall now describe our method of handling new books. On its
arrival in the library each new book receives an accession number.
The next stage consists of the writing of an accession card which is
filed in a cabinet under the author’s name. The entries on it comprise—■
Author, title, date ordered, from whom received, cost, edition, im-
print, 3/ear, size, vols., binding (if not in cloth), date when catalogued
and placed in circulation, accession and shelf number, and date of with-
drawal.
This card is one of the most useful adjuncts to the library. It
has been gradually evolved from earlier types and experiments and
in its present form meets all our wants. It constitutes a history of
each book. As a card is written immediately the book is received it
is invaluable in checking duplication and makes available an# new
book before it is catalogued.
When the book is classed a shelf card is made out and this is ruled
to permit of stock-taking results being entered on it for eighteen years.
At one time we took stock annually, and for the purpose the library
was closed for two weeks. It was found that after re-opening, it took
from two to three months to recover our average output. This is due
to man’s inherent weakness when he gets out of his stride. We in-
terfered with his stride to the library and he took weeks to find it
again. This being so, and no decided advantage following on a yearly
stock-taking, we changed over to a biennial one. Careful preparation
is made beforehand for stock-taking and the opportunity is taken to
see that all book cards are in their proper books. A stock-taking is
the equivalent of a woman’s spring cleaning—unpleasant in operation,
but beneficial in result. When we re-open the library we have the
feeling that our house is in order. I nearly wrote that we know where
every book is—but the Fagins of the book "world have more knowledge,
in this respect, than we have, concerning certain books.


I shall be glad to hear the experiences of other librarians with
regard to the book thief. We have had a curious experience. Up to
the year 1916, a sum of £lO would cover our annual losses by theft,
but in the year named our losses increased tenfold. One can only
ascribe it to the loosening of morality engendered by the war, but,
whatever the reason, the book thief has worried us ever since.
The thieving, I find, is prompted in the majority of cases by
bibliomania. No bookseller will buy our books and they are rarely
offered them. In nearly all cases where we have caught a thief (a
very infrequent occurrence) he (in one case she) has been prompted
by the desire to possess the books. One sad case, 1 remember, was a
young fellow, smitten with consumption, who had been offered a home
in the country. With no money and an intense love of books he
“ acquired ” a small, but choice, collection from the Public Library
and the Sydney Municipal Library to take away and relieve the soli-
tude of the bush..
When a book is classed and catalogued, it is passed to the bindery,
where the pockets and date slips are pasted in, and the book numbered
and stamped with the name of the library.
The book is ready then for circulation, but before it is placed on the
shelves the book is exhibited in the library in what is known as “ the
new book case.” This is a locked case, with a glass front, and borrowers
are invited to note the names and numbers of any they require, or to
place a reserve on any book or books they desire. A borrower desiring
to reserve a book is provided free with a specially printed post-card, upon
which he pays a penny for postage. The question of the advisability of
permitting the reservation of books is one to which, I must confess, I
cannot give a “ yea’” or a nay.” We are doubtless all of the opinion
that the student should have an opportunity of obtaining a book of
which he has need, and therefore must permit reservations; but, on the
other hand, when one finds that each Monday morning a band of
leisured gentlemen descend on the library, and skim the cream of the
week’s supply with reservations, one feels that there is something to be
said for the “ nay ” side.
Sometimes we have 70 or 80 reservations handed in on one book
during the week it is on exhibition. This means the purchase of further
copiej to meet the demand, but even with this it is months before a copy
reaches the open shelves. A borrower once asked me, “ Where do the
new books go? I seldom see them on the shelves.” And I had to explain
to him how they disappeared, and suggest that he use his right to
reserve.
We invite borrowers to offer suggestions for new books, and have a
special card for the purpose. Where the suggestion is adopted, the
person suggesting is given the first reserve on the book. In our callow
youth we provided a suggestion book in the library, and a number of
borrowers took it to mean that we invited their opinions on the existing
books, with the result that one borrower, differing from the views
inserted by another, entered his views, and a hot duel ensued, with
facetious remarks interspersed by interlopers in the duel. The book
certainly added to the gaiety of the library, but when Miss Amelia
Smith started to tell the world that Mmnrise on the Hill was “ a lovely
book,” we felt it was time to take to cover.
Having brought our book into circulation, we now turn to the library
itself. One of the most important parts of our work here is an inquiry
desk. One often notices in a library borrowers wandering round with


a helpless, almost a hopeless, look in their eyes. One feels they are in
search of something definite, but catalogues and Dewey numbers are too
bewildering for them. Here is where your inquiry desk officer takes on
the appearance of a ministering angel. But it is not merely as a guide
to bewildered borrowers that the desk performs its most useful service.
Let me illustrate with an example; During the war a working jeweller
called at the library, and asked for books on artistic enamelling. The
inquiry desk officer supplied him with books dealing with the preparation
of enamels. Later he called and asked for books on the application of
these enamels. These, too, were supplied. About a year later I met
this jeweller in the library, and he told me that, finding he had not
sufficient capital to embark on the business, he had enlisted the aid of
one of the large jewellery establishments, and at that moment he was
foreman of an enamelling department, which he had created, with ten
workmen under him. This, of course, is one of the outstanding achieve-
ments of the inquiry desk, but it illustrates what has been achieved in a
lesser degree with other inquiries. For some time we kept a record of
the inquiries made at this desk, and in my little booklet, A Short
History of the Sydney Municipal Library , I give a typical day’s in-
quiries at this desk. Perhaps it will not be out of place to repeat it
here—
“ Wanted, a list of next of kin.”
“ The works of Michael Faraday.”
“ A poultry book.”
■ ‘‘ The author and name of the poem ‘ The Hermit, the Angel,
and the Man.’ ”
“ The Philo system of poultry rearing.”
“ Wheat-growing in Australia.”
" Books on leather manufacture.”
“ Books on organ playing.”
“ Something about the pneumatic system of handling grain:”
‘‘Books on upholstery.”
“ Economic value of the eucalyptus.”
‘‘ Financial condition of France and Germany before the War.”
“ Books on cabinet making.”
“ Children’s history of the war.”
“ Books on education and democracy.”
“ Criticism of the ‘ Canterbury Tales.’ ”
While such inquiries as those given above can be answered, in some
instances we have had to confess defeat, as, when a gentleman asked the
population of the world, in decades, from the year T a.d., or the request
of a lady for “ a book that will give a cure for industrial unrest.”
The officer in charge of the inquiry desk is the classifier also—a useful
arrangement, as this officer is closely in touch with all new books. The
inquiries made at this desk serve another purpose. We find out the
weak points in our collection, and, knowing these, it is an easy matter
to strengthen them.
Now let us turn to the organization of the counter work.
In the first place, the application card which is supplied to intending
borrowers has room at the top on which is written the name and number
of the borrower. These are filed, and become an alphabetical index of
borrowers. A numerical index is required also, and we have experi-
mented with a card system and with numbered books, but have finally
adopted loose-leaf ledgers for the purpose. The sheets are numbered
by the printer, and they are kept in volumes containing 10,000 numbers.


The advantage of the loose-leaf ledger system is that when new tickets
are issued at the end of the biennial period, three or four assistants at
the one time can be put on to write up the index in place of the one
with bound books, and it has been found easier to operate these books
than to handle a card catalogue.
Regarding overdue books, we have a complete follow-up system,
which starts with a post-card to the errant borrower, and finishes, after
sundry warnings, in the Police Court. Unfortunately, a summons costs
Bs., and it is, therefore, only possible to proceed to the last stage when
the value of the book justifies it. We find, however, that a letter from
the city solicitor usually produces a change of heart in the offender.
After trials of various systems, we have found that it pays to print
cards for such things as—books reported lost, changes of address, appli-
cation for duplicate tickets, and applications to renew books.
It has been my experience that any system which depends on a man’s
memory, that is, where a number of men are concerned, its certain to
create trouble. If there is a rush at the counter, it is not advisable that
assistants should be withdrawn to make entries of changes of address,
lost books, &c. The provision of cards, which can be handed to borrowers
to fill in, removes the danger of the matter being forgotten, and makes
it possible to leave the entry until there is leisure to attend to it.
Opening on Saturdays. —We have experimented in almost every way
possible in the matter of opening on Saturdays. At first the library
opened at 10 a.m., and closed at 9 p.m. Then for a year, in 1921, it
was closed entirely on Saturdays. After that it was closed at 2 p.m.,
and nowadays we are open from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.
As the result of these various experiments, and from the records
which I have made at various times of the users of the library, hour by
hour,' during day and night, I am firmly of opinion that the present
hours meet all the legitimate wants of the city.
Our output to-day on Saturdays is larger than in the days of day
and night opening. I found, as the result of a check, that on Saturday
afternoons the output was confined to an odd person, and at night to
a handful of borrowers. We certainly deprived a few inveterate news-
paper readers of their Saturday night dissipation, but we trust they
found an added zest in their Sunday paper;
These observations, of course, apply only to a library situated in
the heart of a city, where there are but few residents, and where the
shops are closed on Saturday nights. For a library placed in a residential
area, or where the shopping night is Saturday night, other conditions
would obtain, but it would be worth any librarian’s time to make a
survey of his users, hour by hour, on Saturdays, and thereby ascertain
if the expenditure of staff time and lighting is justified on Saturday
afternoon and evening.
The Bindery.—ln the years prior to 1926 we depended for our book-
binding on contract work. About the year 1911 I introduced a specifica-
tion for bookbinding, which was based on a study of the practice in
English libraries, and, as it contained matters which were new to them,
with one exception the bookbinders shied at it. The exception, as a
result, had a monopoly of this contract until we started our own bindery.
As bookbinding is a matter which concerns us vitally as librarians, I
may be permitted to dwell on this matter for a moment. In the speci-
fication we provided that no two sections should be sewn on the one
length of thread, but that each section should be sewn “ all along.”


One innovation consisted of providing for the end papers being made
with cloth joints, and sewn into the book as a section. This increases
wonderfully the strength of the book at the joint—its weakest point.
With leather-bound books we provided for French joints. Split boards
are used with a piece of calico bound round the end sections. Flexible
glue is used throughout, and all leathers are to be sumach or oak bark
tanned, and free from acid. We are now obtaining good moroccos,
locally tanned, under these conditions.
A later development consists of strengthening the first four and last
three sections with linen, and for very heavy books, like the Boy’s and
Girl’s Annual , after sewing we glue a strip of buckram down the back,
and sew round the tapes. Naturally, these improvements increase the
cost of binding, but with the heavy wear of a lending library it is
essential to improve on the ordinary binding. If we can double the life
of a book with an increase of one-third in cost, it is true economy.
In 1926 the Council decided, on my recommendation, to install a
bindery in the library, and we have now a staff of three men, four
women, and two apprentices, with a foreman, at work. Our output in
1927 was 6,864 rebound books in addition to the books repaired, and
6,862 new books numbered, blocked, and pocketed. This is a satisfac-
tory output, and when one considers that it is possible to send up a
batch of books, requiring minor repairs, in the morning, and have them
returned to the shelves in the afternoon, the value of a bindery on the
premises is apparent.
We have tried various methods of publicity, from direct advertising
in the public press to the display of posters in the various business houses.
The latest form we have adopted is to print a monthly list of new books
added to the library. A circular was sent to all the large business firms
asking if they would care to have free copies to display in their rest or
lunch rooms for their employees. The response did not come up to our
anticipations, but was sufficient to justify the continuance of the system.
The surplus is sold in the library to borrowers at 2d. a copy.
I do not know if the experience of other lending librarians is similar
to mine, but we have found that borrowers will not purchase catalogues
in sufficient numbers to justify their being printed. Some years ago
we issued a subject index to the library at Is. each, and sold very few.
Then we tried class catalogues—one for each class—and sold them under
cost at Id. each. Even at this price the sale was small. The sale of the
monthly lists does not exceed 200 per month.
One can only surmise that, with the exception of a small percentage,
borrowers come to the library for a book, not a definite book, and are
content to trust to the card catalogue and the shelves to supply their
wants.
Mention of the catalogue reminds me that I have not referred to it.
This is a card catalogue, with authors and subjects separate. The sub-
jects are arranged alphabetically. The shelf lists cards constitute a
classified catalogue, but these are not open to the public.
In the Children’s Library, where a staff of two assistants is employed,
we have adopted a simple system of classification consisting of—
M I—Biography.
M 2—History.
M 3—Travel.
M 4—Natural Science.
M s—Useful Arts.


M 6—Poetry and Drama, and stories from.
M 7—Fiction.
M B—Fairy8—Fairy Tales.
M 9 —Games and Pastimes.
M 10—Miscellaneous.
The cataloguing for this library is done by the principal assistant,
and is not so detailed as that for the main library.
In conclusion, I may be permitted to quote—as I am sure it will
interest all those engaged in library work—portion of the most thought-
ful appreciation I have received of the value of lending libraries to
children. The letter was written by the head master of one of our
principal high schools. He writes:
“ Now as to the other aspects of the value of the library. I could
write for a week on this subject, but would probably travel along the
avenues you have already investigated—the joy the children get from
the books; the ethical value of having placed before them in a delightful
way high ideals and right standards of life; the cultural influence of a
high-minded author on a child whose life is passed in sordid surround-
ings, &c. But it may be some help to you to know that the influence of
the Municipal Library is really felt in the teaching work in the primary
school.
“ The primary object of all reading is to get from the printed page
the thought content of the words. In a school one way by which a child
illustrates the extent to which he has developed this power is by oral
reading. In my reading tests I have found that in classes where the
library membership is strong, and particularly where the teacher is
interested in his children’s outside reading, the fluency and intelligence
of the oral reading are of a high order.
“ Heading also influences three other important sections of primary
school teaching, namely, correct speech, the right use of words, and the
expansion of vocabulary.
“ Correct speech, that is, what most people call grammatical speech,
is not taught through the grammar, but by hearing, reading, and prac-
tising correct forms.
‘ ‘ Similarly, the meaning of words and how to use them correctly
are not learned from dictionaries, but by hearing and reading them as
used properly by others.
“ In these important activities a multiplicity, of experiences of what
is right gradually sets up a right habit in the individual, and the more
a child reads of good literature, the more is he strengthened in his
knowledge of how to speak grammatically, to use words in their proper
connexion, and to learn the use of new words.”


REPORT ON PUBLIC LIBRARIES IN ENGLAND AND WALES.
By H. Rutherford Purnell, Chief Librarian, Public Library,
Adelaide, S.A.
In October, 1924, Lord Eustace Percy, President of the Board of
Education, confirmed the appointment of a committee formed by his pre-
decessor, Mr. C. P. Trevelyan, the object of which was “ to inquire into
the adequacy of the library provision already made under the Public
Libraries Acts, and the means of extending and completing such pro-
vision throughout England and Wales, regard being had to the relation
of the libraries conducted under those Acts and to other public libraries
and to the general system of national education.” The committee met
39 times. A questionnaire was issued to all public library authorities,
both urban and country, in reply to which an immense amount of
information was received and tabulated. The committee further took
evidence from 52 witnesses representing library and municipal associa-
tions, educational bodies, librarians, and individuals. In the result,
they were able to present a unanimous report, excepting In regard to
a single reservation on a particular point made by the honorary secre-
tary of the Library Association.
Such a report, in order to be complete, must refer to the history of
the movement with which it deals. In doing so, a very high tribute is
paid to the efforts of the similar Select Committee that was appointed
by the two Houses of Parliament in 1849, whose report is still a docu-
ment of the first importance, and led to the passing of the first Public
Libraries Act in 1850. Its excellence lies both in its comprehensive
character and in the liberal spirit which inspired its recommendations.
Notwithstanding the multitude of experience obtained in urban libraries
during 75 years, says the new committee, ” we find that the general
lines of our report correspond with those of the report of 1849, and that
in many instances we have only to reaffirm the recommendations which
were made in that report,” and were not put into effect. To the 1849
report must be attributed the legislation which authorized the provision
of libraries and all subsequent library developments. There is one
notable difference, however, in that whereas the earlier report of 1849
laid stress on the absence of library provision in England as compared
with other European countries, not excepting Portugal and Russia, the
present report deals only with the achievement in England and Wales
and does not even refer to the predominant position now held by Great
Britain in this respect over most European countries.
Reviewing briefly the position depicted in the 1849 report, it may
be said that in these early days of library history the need for libraries
had become apparent, and, before the passage of any legislation, efforts
had been made to supply the want. Apart from the copyright
libraries and a few private foundations, however, the only libraries
were those added to mechanics’ institutes, from which by the payment
of a small subscription members were able to borrow books, and a small
number of parochial libraries scattered throughout the country, which
were due in the first instance to private benevolence and intended gene-
rally for the use of the clergy. But the position of “ our gigantic
manufacturing and commercial towns ” and of London was deplorable,
and the statement is made that a kind of literary darkness seems to


prevail over the vast extent of the newly-formed portion of the metro-
polis. The general conclusion was that the present inferior position
is “ unworthy of the power, the liberality, and the literature of the
country,” and that it would be a source of sincere satisfaction if the
results of their labours shall Ife still further to call out, to foster and
encourage among their countrymen that love for literature and reverence
for knowledge, of which, during their inquiries, they have had the
gratification to trace the spontaneous development.
The recommendations of the 1849 Committee were soon followed by
the passing in 1850 of the first Act, the object of which was to give
a permissive power to town councils to levy a small rate for the estab-
lishment of public libraries and museums in all municipal towns. Its
main provisions were the conferment of powers on town councils of a
population of 10,000 to provide buildings, a librarian, light, fuel, &c.;
a rate to be levied limited to a halfpenny, and admission to be free of
charge. Curiously enough, no provision is made for the purchase of
books. This was repealed by the Act of 1855, which reduced the
population limit to 5,000, increased the rate limit to one penny, and
enabled the purchase of books, newspapers, maps, and specimens of
art and science. Various amending Acts were passed between this
and the consolidating Act of 1892, but although Sir John Lubbock
pointed out in 1887 the insufficiency of the penny rate, especially in
small places, it remained, except In a small number of towns which
obtained special parliamentary sanction, as one of the greatest hind-
rances to the full development of the benefits of the provisions until
1919, when the rate limitation was altogether removed.
In the meantime, a great impetus was given to the movement by
the munificence of Mr. Andrew Carnegie, who between 1897 and 1913
gave grants for building and furnishing public libraries to the amount
of one and three quarter millions, distributed among 295 libraries, in
sums varying from £4OO to £120,000. All his grants were made sub-
ject to the local authority levying a rate for the upkeep of the building,
and in no case would he provide books, which he held were the main
concern of the local council. At his death, provision was made for
the formation of the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust, one of whose
earliest actions was to invite Professor W. G. S. Adams to make a
report on library provision and policy. In this account of a report
that is very greatly concerned with figures, I am endeavouring to avoid
figures as far as possible, but thev will intrude, and a few are especially
important. Professor Adams found that the percentage of the total
population in England that were resident in library districts in 1911
was 62, and in Wales was 46. Only three towns with a population of
over 50,000 inhabitants and 19 out of a total of 222 with 30,000
inhabitants or over had not adopted the Acts. A serious consideration
became apparent that in contrast to the great progress in urban dis-
tricts by which 79 per cent, of the town dwellers lived in library areas,
only 2.5 per cent, of the rural population enjoyed this privilege. His
two main conclusions were that the grants made by Mr. Carnegie had
led to over-building, in that a number of centres which had benefited
by his gifts were unwilling or unable to support a library on the scale
which he had provided; and that county councils should be given a power
which at that time they did not possess, to become library authorities.
Professor Adams had in mind a system of distribution from a central
county library. The Carnegie Trustees acted on his recommendations
by setting a time limit to urban building grants and inviting certain


county councils to establish county library schemes on the basis of
full capital expenditure and maintenance costs for a period of five years
being met by the Trustees. In this provision there was a considerable
risk in that no legislation was even contemplated at that time which
would give the county council the power to carry on the scheme so
instituted after the end of the five years’ period.
In 1919, further important consideration of library affairs was made
by the Adult Education Committee of the Ministry of Reconstruction,
who issued an interim report on libraries and museums. This was
followed by the Act of 1919, which removed the rate limitation and
gave power to county councils to adopt the Public Libraries Acts. It
is noteworthy that whereas in 1850 the Public Libraries Bill was carried
by a majority of 17 only, in 1919 it was carried without a division,
only two members being in opposition. The passage of the Act was
immediately followed by an extension of library facilities to a large
part of the population. The Carnegie Trustees withdrew their offer
towards both capital and maintenance expenditure, but continued to
offer to county councils willing to adopt the Acts the whole of the
capital expenditure. In the result, 57 out of 62 counties adopted
the Acts, and at the date of the report 96.3 per cent, of the population
of England and Wales reside in library areas.
From these admirable returns it does not, however, follow that
libraries are provided in all the library areas included in the figures.
As no replies were received from 49 urban library districts with a
population of 580,000, the committee concluded that no libraries exist
in those districts, and the figures are accordingly not quite so favor-
able as they seem. Nor does the existence of a library service necessarily
imply that the service is in any way adequate. There appear to be
serious deficiencies, and one of the chief services rendered by the com-
mittee is the tabulation. of figures with the special object of trying to
ascertain what can be regarded as an adequate service. The problem
is not at all a simple one. Whereas a town of 500,000 inhabitants
will require, roughly, ten times as much gas or electricity or water
as a town of 50,000 and 100 times as much as a town of 5,000, the rule
does not at all apply to a library service. A community of 5,000 may
include readers with as great a variety of tastes as a community of
500,000, and w T ill therefore require to have access to as wide a range
of books. Naturally the larger the town the greater will be the
library; and how this problem is to be solved of enabling small areas
to have access to greater collections is treated by very practical sugges-
tions later on in the report, the outstanding feature of which is a large
measure of co-operation
In paying a tribute to the outside sources that have influenced the
growth of the library service, such as the benefactions of Andrew Car-
negie, great stress is laid by the committee on the work of the Library
Association. Founded in 1877 as the outcome of an international
library conference held in London, the association was granted a royal
charter in 1898 as the responsible representative body for libraries and
librarians. The objects of the association as set forth in the charter
are:
1. To unite all persons engaged or interested in library work
by holding conferences and meetings for the discussion of
bibliographical questions and mafters affecting libraries or
their regulation or management or otherwise.
2. To promote the better administration of libraries.


3. To promote whatever may tend to the improvement of the
position and the qualifications of librarians.
4. To promote the adoption of the Public Libraries Acts.
5. To promote the establishment of reference and lending
libraries for use by the public.
6. To watch legislation affecting public libraries and to assist in
the promotion of such further legislation as may be con-
sidered necessary for the regulation and management or
extension of public libraries.
7. To promote and encourage bibliographical study and research.
8. To form, collect, and collate, and publish (in the form of
transactions, journals, or otherwise) information of service
or of interest to the fellows and members of the associa-
tion, or for the promotion of the objects of the corpora-
tion
9. To collect and maintain a library and museum.
10. To hold examinations in hbrarianship and to issue certificates
of efficiency
11. To do all such lawful things as are incidental or conducive to
the attainment of the above objects.
These objects have been and are being carried out as fully as the
inadequate resources of the association permit, says the committee, and
it is in our opinion highly desirable that it should receive the full sup-
port of the public libraries of the kingdom.
After the general survey of the library position which I have so
inadequately summarized, the report goes on to deal specifically with the
main sections of library service, the first and most important of which
is their provision in urban districts. A survey of the statistics reveals
three things very clearly. First, a remarkable progress much accelerated
of recent years in the library movement as a whole; secondly, the
existence of serious deficiencies which need to be made good; and,
thirdly, the consequent need of linking up the efforts which are being
made by many zealous persons in many quarters. The public libraries
in the great cities, and in many urban areas of medium size, says the
committee, have developed notably during the last generation, and have
established themselves as an indispensable element in the life of the
community. They provide information essential for the progress of
commerce and industry; they make research possible in every depart-
ment of intellectual life; they aid solitary students in their investiga-
tions ; they provide relaxation and refreshments for every class of the
population. They are administered by men who, working often with
little public encouragement, with very limited means, and with scanty
personal remuneration, have by their enthusiasm built up a great
organization, and have created a demand by furnishing a supply. There
is now a far healthier belief in the value of knowledge, and in the
importance of intellectual life. The public library ... is recog-
nized as an engine pf great potentialities for national welfare, and as
the essential foundation for the progress in education and culture with-
out which no people can hold its own in the struggle for existence.
Further, in commenting on the connexion between the education
authorities and the library it is laid down that it is now becoming more
and more recognized that education is not a process confined to the
years of school or (for those who are so fortunate as to enjoy this ad-
vantage) university attendance, but is prolonged throughout adult life,


and that the State does well to encourage as best it can the continuance
of this process through adult years, in order to promote the production
of a well-educated community.
[Comment on the controversy over the transfer of the library system
from the control of municipal bodies to that of the Education Depart-
ment, which the report emphatically decides is not necessary both because
of the unwillingness of the education authorities to undertake the
responsibilities with their hands already full, and the efficient state to
which the present independence has brought the libraries.]
It would take too long even to make a brief summary of the recom-
mendations in regard to urban libraries. The principle observed
throughout has been to examine and correlate all the information
obtainable as to the best practice in use, not in one library system, but
by a piecemeal comparison between many differing methods in various
library systems. In this way the subject of the relationship between
public libraries and local education authorities, including the distinctive
functions of schools libraries and juvenile departments in libraries, the
work of Public Library Committees and revenue and expenditure are
dealt with before coming to detailed descriptions of the main depart-
ments of a public library. These latter differ in libraries serving towns
of different sizes, but generally include reference and lending libraries,
reading rooms for periodicals and newspapers —sometimes separate and
sometimes in conjunction —lecture rooms, and in the large buildings
separate rooms for special subjects; also branch libraries, delivery
stations, and travelling libraries.
From the departments in a library system the report goes on to
speak of details of organization and administration from the planning
of a library building to the training of the staff; and the two latter
subjects are by no means unconnected, though their connexion is often
overlooked with disastrous results. Too often is the planning left to
the discretion of the architect, whereas it is essential that the planning
should be carried out in consultation "dth the librarian, and, even more,
that the librarian shall have had sufficient experience to give guidance
throughout. A most useful summary of library planning principles
is given in an appendix.
As to the training and qualifications of a librarian, the report deals
at some length, and since it is a vital subject to librarianship and par-
ticularly interesting to this conference, I should like to quote rather
more freely from the pages than has been possible in other matters.
“ A mere collection of books, however large, cannot by itself perform
more than a small portion of the service which a well-administered
library can and should* render to the community.
For the large majority of the population the librarian and
his staff are the guides who introduce them into' the kingdom
of knowledge. For such a service no qualifications can be too
high, while it is a disaster to the community if they are too
low. It means that a potential mechanism of cultivation is running at
less than its full power, and that the country is obtaining much less
than full value for its library- expenditure.” The report then goes
on unhesitatingly to point out that without making any reflection on
the considerable number of good librarians in the country whose work
in gaining a high degree of training, in spite of lack of facilities, is
highly creditable, the country is obtaining much less than full value
for its expenditure. The public library service, which owed its early


development to the exertions of a few energetic individuals who under-
stood the benefits that might be expected from it, has grown up in the
midst of a public opinion that was slow to appreciate its possibilities.
The library was regarded as an institution providing blameless relaxa-
tion and useful instruction to that section of the community which had
a taste for reading, and the library staff generally were regarded as
lending library clerks, whose duties hardly extended beyond handing
out to borrowers the books for which they asked, and keeping a record
of the transaction. Such services did not demand high remuneration;
and the rate limitation made it impossible to pay adequate salaries,
even if a council were sufficiently enlightened to wish to do so. Public
opinion was not alive to the value of a trained staff, and therefore was
not prepared to pay for one; and although many individuals for love
of work laboured for very insufficient salaries, the effect on the profes-
sion as a whole was inevitable. It was unorganized, untrained, under-
paid, and only partly sufficient.
In parentheses may I exclaim : What a picture of librarianship in
Australia to-day, but with the big difference, at any rate in regard to
some of the States, that the great benefits of this aid to cultural deve-
lopment have not even been tried. Where they have been tried,
notably in the Sydney Municipal Library, which works at an enormous
disadvantage in its situation; at Broken Hill, and at Prahran, the
results show that Australians are not slow to take advantage of reading
facilities. I will never admit that Australians are not as keen readers
as are to be found anywhere; but I have often said, and in public, that
opportunities are wanting, and are just as much needed, as in countries
that are supplied with free and abundant supplies of books
To resume from the report: “ The last generation has seen the
beginnings of a great improvement. Through the labours of the pro-
fession individually, and through the Library Association, public
opinion has been awakened to the actual and potential value of public
libraries. More is hoped and expected of the staff than was formerly
the case. The removal of the restriction of the rate puts it within the
power of library authorities to pay better salaries. Organizations
have been created for the training of librarians. The possibility now
exists of securing better staffs ”; and the object of the recommendations
is to show how this can best be done. " The two main requirements
for a librarian are a liberal education and technical training. In a
certain limited sense the latter is the more indispensable, since no one
can conduct the business of a library without some acquaintance with
the technique of classification, cataloguing, the care of books, and other
library routine. But in a wider sense \t is the other qualification
that is the more essential. Any man or woman with a good education
can, if the necessary opportunity be given, acquire a knowledge of
technique; but the completest knowledge of technique will not qualify
a member of a library staff for the highest posts in the profession.
For the welfare of the library service it is essential to recognize that
librarianship is a learned profession. A librarian who aspires to the
control of a large public library must have a sufficient knowledge of,
and sympathy with, all branches of knowledge to be able to do justice
to them in his selection of books, and to give students the guidance of
which they stand in need. He also needs administrative ability; and
it is a matter of. common experience increasingly recognized in all
branches of life that, while such ability may be found in any grade and
with any antecedents, it is good general education which gives it the


best chance to develop. No training for librarianship will therefore
be adequate which does not provide for both these branches; and no
library authority is justified in appointing to the higher posts in its
service any one who is not qualified in both of these respects.”
The report then goes on to describe the training now available in
England in Library Association classes and examinations in literary
history, bibliography and book selection, classification, cataloguing,
library organization and library routine which, with a thesis, a certi-
ficate showing three years’ experience in actual library work, and a
certificate of knowledge of Latin or Greek and a modern foreign lan-
guage qualifies for the Library Association Diploma, and admits to
Fellowship of the Association. There is, too, the University of London
School of Librarianship at University College, founded in 1919, the
syllabus of which is similar, to that of the Library Association, with the
added subject of palaeography and archives. The normal length of this
course is two years’ full-time attendance at the school, supplemented by
a year’s salaried work in a library. The standard of education aimed
at on entrance to either course is that of University Matriculation. In
addition to these main courses, there are correspondence schools and
summer schools organized by the University of London School of
Librarianship, the National Library of Wales, at Aberystwyth, and
others. For these classes and schools facilities are given by commit-
tees and scholarships to enable members of staffs to attend, eo that even
the University of London School of Librarianship is open to assistants
who can combine technical with theoretical training.
From all that has been said, it is clear . . . that the library
service falls into two main branches. There are those who are engaged
in the mechanical and lower routine duties of the library, from the
cleaning staff up to the minor clerical work, and there are the controlling
or administrative staff who are concerned with cataloguing, classifica-
tion, the selection and care of books, preparation of bibliographies,
guidance of readers, and the general administration of library policy.
For the former, a moderate amount of technical training is sufficient;
for the latter, any degree of knowledge up to omniscience is not exces-
sive. In the matter of salaries for the various grades, some principles
are laid down for the guidance of library authorities, into which there
is not time to go; but the statement is made that just as in the univer-
sity libraries payment is recognized on an equality with the teaching
staff, so in municipal services the payment of library staffs should be
at least on an equality with the new standard of awards to teachers.
From the recommendations in regard to urban libraries the committee
report goes on to deal in detail with the problem of libraries in rural
districts which, as has already been pointed out, was almost entirely
neglected until the matter was taken in hand by the Carnegie United
Kingdom Trust in 1911, and that has led since 1919 to the rapid adop-
tion of an extensive, I should say almost universal, county library
system. “It will be difficult for many readers of this report,” says the
committee, ‘ ‘ to realize the state of intellectual destitution obtaining in
areas, but particularly rural areas, which did not possess a public
library service. For nearly a hundred years the taxpayer, and for
forty-five years the ratepayer, have been voting large sums of money in
order to ensure that every member of the population shall at least be
able to read and write. In the rural areas the child left school till
recently at eleven or twelve, and then at the age of fourteen, having


spent seven to nine years in acquiring these (among other) accomplish-
ments, he went out into a wider world only to discover that they were
almost entirely useless for lack of the books on which they might be
exercised. It is true that in areas where there was a resident gentry,
with the perception of their obligations which was usual in county
districts, there rarely failed to be some voluntary provision made in
the form of village libraries, which, with limited means, endeavoured
to provide some kind of mental recreation for the local population. Such
efforts, however, could not go far; and in 100 many cases the power to
read became atrophied through disuse. Plainly this power denoted a
failure in the purpose of the legislation. Whether the power to read
is or is not necessary either to happiness or to wisdom, it : s indisputable
that it is a waste both of money and of time to acquire that accomplish-
ment and then not to exercise it. The result was that in those areas
where a library service either did not exist, or existed only on a quite
inadequate scale, the population was placed at a serious disadvantage.
Not only were they ignorant of many of the things which it is a pleasure
and a happiness to know, but they were ignorant of things that they
ought to know for the utilitarian conduct of their own affairs. They
were ill-equipped for their duties as citizens. They had no means of
verifying the simplest fact, and were at the mercy of the almost
unblushing misstatement.”
Within ten years of their initiation, county library schemes have
become practically universal. The county library has so stimulated the
demands for books that many of those areas which for years were
content to remain without any library service at all are now demanding
not only the circulating collection of books provided by the county
library system for villages, but also permanent libraries of their own.
I wish that I could dwell on the methods by which a library service
has been carried into the rural districts, comprising village libraries,
circulating boxes of books changed from time to time at delivery
stations such as the schools (something like the interchange of boxes
of books among institutes in South Australia) and travelling libraries
in motor vans fitted with shelves. It is by these means that library
areas for 62 per cent, of the population in 1911 have been extended to
96.3 per cent, of the population in 1926—fifteen short years.
It is no wonder that the committee pause every now and then to make
such a remark as this: ‘‘ The most prominent characteristic of a civilized
country is a widely disseminated taste for books, knowledge and good
literature. ... A general love of reading cannot be instilled with-
out constant opportunities of access to a collection of books fairly exten-
sive in its dimensions, affording a considerable range in selection, and
enabling the reader not only to borrow books but to see them on the
spot and to handle them,” This is being realized very quickly in Eng-
land and Wales. It is being helped through the National Council of
Social Service by Village Social Councils or Village Community Councils,
bodies composed of every organized effort in the village—the parish
council, church, chapel, school and every other village organization.
A whole chapter of the report deals with special libraries—that is to
say, libraries of commerce, technical libraries, musical and dramatic
libraries, libraries for the blind, for seafarers, and others. Such
cities as Manchester and Liverpool have found it necessary to establish
in the heart of the business quarters special reference branches relating
to business and commerce, in which Cook’s directories, trade papers,
commercial codes, atlases, maps, &c., are provided free of charge for


business men. , It is not a new idea, since Hamburgh has had such a
library for over 100 years—no doubt an important contributing cause
to its greatness as a commercial city. Similarly manufacturing towns
are being provided with technical collections, particularly rich in books
on the industries principally represented. Where the sources are not
sufficient for separate libraries of this nature, the public libraries devote
attention to special collections, one very important feature being the
collection relating to local history. So numerous are the libraries
devoted to particular subjects that an Association of Special Libraries
and Information Bureaux has been founded in England to correlate
their interests.
Among the practical recommendations offered by the committee
report, perhaps the most important are those relating to the organiza-
tion of a national library service. After considering the possibility of
a Government grant, with central control, and a system of inspection,
they consider that the present position, attained by a spontaneous and
individual development, is sufficiently healthy to do away with the
necessity of such a scheme. They think that there are much greater
possibilities in a system of co-operation—that is, co-operation between
neighbouring libraries, and co-operation between neighbouring districts,
gradually leading to the linking up of these co-operating libraries into
larger groups each centred on some big central or regional library sup-
plementing and helping to co-ordinate the libraries in the particular
regions. The scheme aims at the division of the country into regions,
the largest library within the boundaries of each region being estab-
lished as the regional library. Books would be interchangeable and
the catalogues unified. The advantages of such a system are great,
in that needless duplication is avoided and a greatly improved book
service is afforded to each participating library in the group. There is
such a scheme existing in the State of California ; and the idea can be
observed in any large city which has a central library and branches.
Imagine the Sydney Municipal Library to be the central library of a
system extending throughout the city and suburbs, with a branch
library in each suburb, and an interchange of borrowing facilities. It
is a practicable scheme and one that has, I believe, been suggested in
connexion with the Greater Sydney movement, and would apply equally
to the other Australian States capitals. That is the sort of thing that
is recommended in regard to wider areas, and it is in regard to these
recommendations as to co-operation that the only dissentient reservation
is made by Mr. Frank Pacy, who was until lately the honorary secretary
of the Library Association, and Chief Librarian of the Westminster
Public Libraries. Whereas the' committee optimistically express their
belief that this co-operation would be generally welcomed, he points out
that in regard to the greatest area of possible co-operation, that is in
the County of London, there is a deplorable opposition to any form of
co-operation whatever. Each London borough seems to be so afraid
of losing its independence that it holds aloof from any schemes, even
of interchange of borrowing and co-operative cataloguing. There are
twenty-eight different authorities controlling twenty-eight separate
library systems in the metropolis, and their combination into such
a grouping seems to him to be remote. Such an example, he protests,
does not augur well for the acceptance of the committee’s suggestions.
On the other hand, such cities as Manchester and Liverpool have excel-
lently working systems of libraries of the kind indicated.


Linking up the whole of the libraries throughout the country it is
suggested that there shall be a Central Library from which all libraries
can draw supplies of books that they have not on their own shelves.
Such a library is already in existence in the Central Library for
Students, a library due to the foresight and activity of Dr. Albert
Mansbridge, the founder and former secretary of the Workers’ Educa-
tional Association, and President of the World Association for Adult
Education. The committee recommends the development of this library
for the purpose, and its being made a Department of the British
Museum, so as to have the advantage of the great practical experience
and help of the National Collection, though the British Museum itself
would be left intact. Its main objects would be:—
1. To aid directly, and also through the responsible bodies, groups
of organized students throughout the country.
2. To aid through public libraries, and to a slight extent directly,
the individual readers whose wants cannot be met from
local sources.
3. To serve as a link between the special libraries for the purpose
of making their loan books available under proper con-
ditions for students in all parts of the country.
A part ot these functions is being carried out in Australia by the
Public Library of New South Wales, in that any one in the State can
write for a book from the State Library. This work has for some time
been carried on by the Central Library for Students, at present a volun-
tary organization, and the committee hope for it a much wider
development.
With the chapter on “ Library Law ” it is impossible to deal, nor
with the one headed “Miscellaneous,” which examines the best systems
of classification for libraries, the preparation of select lists for readers,
the supply of Government publications, and the vexed question as to
special terms for the purchase of books. These are matters of detail that
show how very thoroughly the committee did its work.
The tables of figures occupy over 100 pages, and an example of their
practical value has just come to hand in one of the professional journals-
The small town of, I think, Mansfield, is advertising for a librarian.
The committee were about to make an appointment of the old-fashioned
kind—the sort of “ any one can run a library ” appointment—when
their attention was drawn to the report. They looked up the tables to
see what amount of salary was being paid to librarians in towns of
similar size, and what ought to be their standard in regard to number
of books, &c. The result was an advertisement for a librarian at a figure
that would ensure a trained man who could re-organize their library
system, and bring it up to date. I think that the whole report can be
used as an object lesson to us in Australia.


THE RELATION OF STATE AND MUNICIPAL LIBRARIES:
A Question of Policy.
By Professor E. Morris Miller, M.A., Litt.D., Tasmania.
The library system in Australia (omitting the special libraries), as 1
view it, is a series of large State (reference) libraries, with puny, under-
stocked, disconnecte'd municipal or provincial libraries. There are a
few exceptions, such as the Sydney Municipal Library, the Adelaide
Institutes Library, and the Prahran Public Library. But lam viewing
the general situation
In none of the States are the State and municipal libraries linked
up into an organized system An exception may be made of Hobart,
where the Public Library is the joint concern of the State and the
municipal corporation. Here the principle of co-operation is sound and
worthy of extension, but the financial provision is not commensurate
with the importance of the city, and does not come up to the standard
accepted by the British Public Libraries Committee. The position in
the large cities of Australia is not unlike that which prevails in London,
though the magnitude of London’s library resources provides compensat-
ing features. But, on the other hand, the position is unlike that which
prevails in similar cities of the United Kingdom and the United States.
It may be affirmed generally that the municipal councils of the capital
cities of Australia have not accepted responsibility for library services.
And most of the populous suburban and country municipalities in Aus-
tralia have followed their unfortunate example. The existence of impos-
ing State libraries has dulled or prevented the development of a civic
library consciousness.
There is a marked lack of proportionate development as between the
non-lending (reference) and the lending branches of the system, and
there is an utterly inadequate articulation both between these special
services and the libraries themselves. The growth has been lopsided.
Bigness and meanness appear to have been too companionate in our
Australian city library organization.
How has the situation come about 1 It is largely due to the want of
adjustment between centralization and decentralization of services. We
have over-centralized in. some directions, and penalized or neutralized
local initiative and control. In other directions there has been the
reverse. The former disability has been featured in our educational
system, and the latter in metropolitan municipal government. But in
each instance modifications have been superimposed to adjust the balance
in a more or less haphazard way.
In the fifties our great State Libraries were founded. The “ British
Museum cult ” dominated their policy. Of course, one does not desire
to deprecate the British Museum (library). Its greatness is almost
unparalleled. But its peculiar greatness is just the reason why it should
not have been copied in Australia. It is the “ cult” that arose out of
its practice that I have always objected to ever since I became associated
with a public library. The distances which separated these libraries
accentuated their apartness, as well as political differences and the want
of rapid methods of interchange. But during these same fifties the
modern library movement made a beginning in Great Britain, and the
mechanics’ institutes of that period commenced to change over into the
fine municipal libraries of to-day. This development has scarcely even
affected Australia up to the present time.


And so the States built up large libraries in the capital cities in
addition to the parliamentary and university libraries, and municipal or
city libraries were practically neglected. Thus it has come about that
as a general rule the metropolitan municipal corporations in the Com-
monwealth are practically uninterested in libraries.
Further, in the Australian capitals municipalities are manifold.
Comparatively small local authorities are grouped round a business centre
with little co-ordinated action. In several instances boards have been
formed to link up overlapping services. But municipal libraries, being
dwarfed and uninfluential, never obtruded themselves.
Accordingly, the big libraries became merely storehouses for books,
and the placement of books in the homes by the libraries has been very
restricted. Sydney is moving on the way towards being a splendid
exception. But generally Australian cities cannot compete with
American cities in library organization and the circulation of books.
They show up very poorly in comparison. I am fully aware of what is
being done in our large State libraries to assist readers in the country,
and so forth. On an Australian basis this service may be praised; but
if we go across the Pacific we shall find our achievements dwindling into
littleness.
This lopsided growth has had an unfortunate effect upon the pro-
fession itself. The municipal librarian, in his small library, has had to
make his way on his own, e.g., in Victoria. Until recently he has had
little help from his big State brethren. But it is most gratifying to note
that this conference has at last broken down the barriers. We are
imbibing more of the freedom of the B.L.A. and A.L.A. May this
spirit of mutual aid grow!
What may, then, be done to bring about an adequately articulated
library service in our great cities ? How can we co-ordinate the State
library and the municipal or suburban libraries ? Our problem is a
difficult one on the financial side, owing to the varying revenue-getting
authorities which exist in each metropolis. And the special expansive-
ness of our cities, while eminently desirable in most respects, in this
instance accentuates the difficulties.
But despite these many difficulties, it should be possible to build up
a central library organization with radiating branches, permitting an
easy inter-lending of books all round. Indeed, it is a problem that must
be tackled by the State library associations. It is utter folly to extend
the British Museum idea any farther in Australia. Leave that to the
National Library at Canberra, which, by the way, might better imitate
the Library of Congress.
[I would add a remark here. It was gratifying to hear that Mr.
Kenneth Binns, the Commonwealth Librarian, was working in this direc-
tion at Canberra. He will, lam sure, have the support df all who are
interested in the unfolding of a statesmanlike library policy for the whole
of Australia. It is also fitting to put on record the splendidly-visioned
view of Mr. W. H. Ifould, that we should do what we can to break down
the territorial limits of library service in. Australia. If Melbourne
would join hands with Sydney in this great effort, we should eventually
evolve an organization of library service in Australia in keeping with
the great democratic institutions which the Australian people have
established in the domains of government and education.]
If we consider what has been achieved in our tramway, water supply,
and health services, we may find a clue. We need first of all a
modernized library statute, enabling some form of co-ordinated action


between the State and the municipalities towards a common library
service for the whole metropolitan area on the one hand, and the country
and rural districts on the other hand.
I would suggest that, so far as the large capital cities are concerned,,
a board be set up—
1. To determine the distribution of reference and lending (includ-
ing branch) libraries throughout the urban areas;
2. To devise a financial scheme for their foundation, development,
and adequate maintenance by the State and municipal
authorities;
3. To link up the special libraries with the scheme so as to avoid
unnecessary overlapping, and to increase the efficiency of
the special libraries;
4. To develop definitely the technological, commercial, educational
and other divisions of public libraries, as is done abroad,
and to provide separate accommodation for research workers
and other investigators;
5. To arrange for co-operation between all the libraries by way of
interlending of books, co-operative cataloguing, aids to
readers, liberal lending facilities, &c.;
6. To provide for the training of librarians, and to increase the
status of their profession.
This scheme with appropriate adjustments could be modified to suit
the conditions of States with small populations such as Western Australia
and Tasmania, and the rural districts of the larger States.
The consummation of a Greater Sydney or a Greater Melbourne
municipal government will greatly aid in preparing the way for a co-
operative service such as I have outlined. It would be a wise course for
the State library associations to keep close watch on these civic efforts
towards unification of local (city) government, so that the library ser-
vices will have a prominent place in the scheme. No one will dispute
the fact that the present-day staffs of the State libraries require an
enlarged outlet for their energies. They could find no better way than
to link up with the municipalities, and provide the capital cities with
library services that would rival the best which exist elsewhere. It is
not wise to multiply institutions under separate control. We need
co-ordination under a higher direction, such as the State public library
staffs can give. By extending departments, the way is open to absorb
the experienced men, and retain .them in the public library movement.
Increased facilities for the training of librarians would then be a growing
demand, and opportunities for the absorption of trained men and women
would rapidly increase. So long as the existing policy of isolation stands,
this will not be possible. Finally, the example of the capital cities will
be taken up in the larger country towns and the rural areas, and the
special (departmental) libraries will also be more effectively influenced
than they are at present.
The scheme I have outlined is merely a suggestion for discussion. It
is but a statement of a practical policy to overcome the difficulties created
by a governmental situation. In a similar form it was put forward over
sixteen years ago. When the actual facts of the situation are deter-
mined, it may be that a better way may open out; but what is urgently
needed is some form of co-operative effort to extend the usefulness of the
large libraries, and provide their staffs with more opportunities for a
positive and expanding service in the interests both of the public and
the profession.


SCHOOL LIBRARIES THE TRUE FOUNDATION OF A
NATIONAL PUBLIC LIBRARY.
By Gilbert M. Wallace, Editor of the Publications of the Education
Department of Victoria.
“ 1 had a dream which was not all a dream.” It was a vision of
Australian library conditions a generation or so hence, when the work of
library associations should have flowered and come to fruition.
The white-bearded “ oldest inhabitant,” indispensable to these pro-
phetic imaginings, was there, of course, to explain how the changes had
come about. With the permission of the congress, we shall give him
charge of the narrative.
In 1928, he said, when the newly-formed library associations were
essaying their first steps, tentative and hesitating, but promising well
for adult strength and progress, there were already many fine public
libraries in the various Australian capitals, and there were others in
most of the rural centres. The National Library in the metropolis,
with its countless books and magazines, was free to rich and poor, and
in some cases had as an adjunct a free lending library, of no great scope
at that time when compared with the present, but steadily expanding
its activities. And there were many fine special libraries, such as those
connected with the universities.
One would have expected this much of a community such as that in
Australia, with its generally prosperous conditions of living, its favor-
able hours of labour, its homogeneity of race, language, and tradition,
its galaxy of Government and private schools and colleges, scattered
like glittering dust through the void, and its very low percentage of
illiteracy.
Generally speaking, continued the Old Man, these libraries had
arisen spontaneously and sporadically to satisfy, in part at least, the
people’s needs. But there was little co-ordination or systemization;
there were but few conferences held between library committees; there
was the scantiest provision for the training of librarians; there was a
lack of missionary effort in the direction of establishing new libraries ;
there was wasteful diversity of method in the matter of the purchase
of new books, in mutual exchanges, in library classification, in library
economy. The separate libraries were fine, healthy recruits; but, collec-
tively, they were a mob rather than an army. Perhaps this is an
unfortunate metaphor, for the methods of the drill-sergeant are not
always applicable to things spiritual; still all great social and religious
movements come to need order and direction.
Faced with these conditions, he went on, the library associations
began to consider the very obvious question: If a public library system
of a truly national and democratic character is a desideratum, what
should bo the foundational units? Where should organization start?
A rational answer seemed to be: Since the object of libraries is to
inform and enrich the minds of the people with the garnered wisdom
of the race stored up in books, the library system is indissolubly con-
nected with the system of public education, not in the narrower sense
of the complsory education of children from six to fourteen, but in the
ampler conception of a curriculum that begins at the kindergarten stage


and goes on to three-score and ten, or, by reason of strength, to four-
score. Yet this was so little regarded by the pioneers, that, to take
Victoria as an example, the supervision of public libraries in 1928, and
the allotment of Government grants to public libraries were not vested
in the Minister for Education, as they should have been, but vested in
the Chief Secretary, along with the supervision of gaols and lunatic
asylums.
The library associations determined to remedy this state of affairs.
They saw clearly that the primary schools, where the mechanics of read-
ing were first taught, were the fount and origin of the reading habit,
ami they determined to devote a due meed of attention to that earliest
and fundamental form of public library—the school library.
Their investigations showed that in most Australian schools there
was a so-called children’s library, but it was nearly always inadequate
fcr the children’s needs. The State educational authorities expected
that every child should be given a knowledge of reading, but apparently
they did not, expect, or at least they did not insist, that in every pupil
there should be induced a fondness for reading. Yet' all experience
shows that such a thing is possible if the teacher has had the right train-
ing, takes the right attitude, and is given the time and the pedagogic
material. What this means to the success of the public library move-
ment, even in one generation, is obvious. It lies at the root of the
whole matter.
The pedagogic material necessary for inducing in school children a
general love of reading is a school library, rich in picture books and
story books, especially those for the lower grades. The school libraries
of 1928 were top-heavy; there was an attempt to cater for the-senior
pupils, but the juniors were too often neglected. Yet a moment’s reflec-
tion will show that, if the end is to be achieved, as soon as the youngster
learns to spell through his primer he should have as many simple, inter-
esting, and well-illustrated books put in his way as he cares for, and
that means very many. Just as there is no child that doesn’t care to
listen to a story, so there is no child that will not be eager to read a
story if the teacher has the will and the time and the opportunity to
give the necessary guidance of growth in this direction.
There is no need to advocate an unchanging diet of fairy tales. It
has been said that in its growth in the womb the child recapitulates
the evolutionary history of the species from moneron to man. Ziller’s
theory, which may be taken as true with reservations, asserts that in
the first few years of his life the child further recapitulates the history
of the race from utter barbarism to so-called civilization. A well-
selected course of juvenile reading will appeal to him at every stage of
the route, and keep him keenly interested. Fortunately, some admirable
guide-books to children’s reading are available through the efforts of
patient investigators and child-study societies. But the best guide is
the child’s own interest if he has enough books around him to enable
him to exercise it.
The library associations, in considering school libraries, took
into account also the effect of books other than school text-
books in widening and enriching the subjects of the school
curriculum. They saw that the subject of history would be made vivid
and real if there were pictures and stories to make the dry bones live—
it would become what it should be, the story of social evolution;
geography would be humanized if views of the world and its people were
readily available. Science, natural history, and general knowledge


would be made more attractive. Side by side with the works of imagina-
tion in the school would be juvenile reference books of the type of
Arthur Mee’s Children’s Encyclopaedia, Cassell's Book of Knowledge,
the American World Book, that very fine Australian Encyclopaedia,
published by Angus and Robertson, as well as the growing group of
books on Australian birds, trees, flowers, and other things dear to the
child.
Of course, said the Old Man, we have these things now in the schools.
A school is considered unworthy of the name unless we supply material
enough to enable the child to understand his own environment and live
the fuller life that comes from knowledge.
He went on to say that the library associations offered their help to
the various State educational authorities in the matter of stocking,
maintaining, and extending school libraries, and library committees
collaborated to produce and publish graded lists of books recommended
for school use. School committees and communities were circularized,
and such enthusiasm was engendered that local effort was stimulated,
local contributions were raised, until in time every school had a worthy
library. Schemes for interchange of books were formulated, and the
school libraries, now rightly classed as public libraries, were affiliated
with the national lending libraries, and regularly received parcels of
books on loan.
The training of school teachers in library methods was another
matter that engaged the attention of library associations. It was suc-
cessfully urged on the various Ministers of Education that a short course
of training in library methods was an essential part of the pedagogic
training of students in teachers’ colleges. At present, said he, no
student receives a permit to teach unless he can produce evidence of
having undertaken a course in librarianship. The universities and the
staffs of the national libraries gave great help in this matter.
The library associations also successfully urged on the Ministers of
Education that teachers in small rural schools should act as librarians,
not only for the children under their charge, but for the rural com-
munity as well, thereby bringing into operation a plan that had worked
well for many years in France. The teachers’ duties were increased,
it is true, but he had the compensating advantage of a well-stocked
library to cheer him in lonely places, and he had the satisfaction of
knowing that he was increasing his worth to the community, and making
the school a more effective social centre.
In the country townships, said the Old Man, where work of this kind
would make too great a demand on the teacher’s time, he was not
expected to act as librarian; but he was always expected to collaborate
with the librarian in charge, and to advise in connexion with the chil-
dren’s section of the local public library. It was recognized that a
public library that did not embrace a special children’s section was not
worth calling a library, and was deemed unworthy of a Government
grant. Wherever it was possible to do so, a special room was set aside
for the children, with a specially trained librarian to minister to their
wants.
The training of librarians was a question that was entered into very
heartily by the library associations. They considered that if doctors
and teachers and dentists and plumbers had to produce certificates of
training before they were allowed to practise their trades or professions.


librarians ought to be similarly treated. The universities and the
national libraries collaborated, giving courses of instruction and issuing
diplomas, with the result, said the Old Man, that all our libraries are
now under the charge of skilled librarians. Librarianship is no longer
a haphazard occupation; it is a profession.
“ What, then, do you regard as the chief changes in the public
library system since 1928?” I asked him.
‘‘Many important changes have occurred,” he said. ‘‘The free
lending libraries have extended their operations enormously. Books
by post and books by van are rushed all over the States to supply the
urgent demands of borrowers. The reading habit; fostered by school
libraries and the juvenile sections of other public libraries, has become
general. Young farmers feel the need of books not only for recreative
purposes, but for their daily work, young artisans want to keep up to
date, and the lending libraries do their best to meet the demand.
People in some places put out a box for their daily book, as they used
to put out the jug for the milk. The old problem was to get people to
visit the libraries; now the libraries ,visit the people. We have out-
distanced even the United States in library matters. Certainly we had
the advantage of being a more unified people, with a higher standard
of literacy.
“ But the chief factor in betterment has been the attention paid
to juvenile reading. We saw it was useless to build the house from the
roof-tree down, according to the recipe of the Academy of Lagado in
the cloud-supported island of Laputa. We concentrated on the founda-
tions, and started building up. You would be surprised,” he went on,
“ how many wise old birds (using the term with respect and affection)
that used to perch on the topmost pinnacles of the Tree of Knowledge,
and caw to one another about ‘ priceless treasures,’ and ‘ first editions,’
and ‘ incunabula ’ (a blesseder word than Mesopotamia or ornitho-
rhynchus)—how many of these incunabulists, I say, hop down nowadays
to the lowermost or kindergarten branches, and try to teach the fledg-
lings to fly.”
“ How about censorship?” I asked. ‘‘There’s hardly need for it
nowadays,” replied the Old Man. “ I don’t like the word censorship;
it does not rhyme well with freedom. We find that if children start
right, and are familiarized with the best literature from the outset,
they have no taste for the vulgar and pernicious. Such stuff, in these
more" enlightened times, censors itself. It dies for lack of users. We
saw that from the first. We were not overcome of evil, but overcame
evil with good.”
“ Does your library system work as a Commonwealth organization,
or are you content to function as State-wide societies?” I asked.
“ We thought it well,” he said, “ to preserve a certain measure of
State autonomy, but we brought about a loose federation for the whole
Commonwealth. We exchanged ideas freely, and had some uniformity
with regard to methods, but each State practically controlled its own
finances. A healthy emulation was engendered, and the results have
been satisfactory.”
‘‘But how did you manage for finances?” I asked. ‘‘Did chill
penury repress your noble rage?” He lauehed. “ Australia is a rich
country,” he said, “ and we depended largely on the propaganda of a
good cause to loosen the purse-strings. We persuaded the Governments
to give more generous library grants. We persuaded the municipalities


to strike special rates for library purposes. We showed rich citizens
a worthy outlet for their superfluity. We sought grants from various
societies, we appealed to unions, we enlisted the advocacy of the pulpit
and the press. In this matter of finance, as in all other matters con-
nected with libraries, we found our strongest backing in the schools.
Those earnest little communities which had raised so much money for
war relief, raised also a noble amount for the libraries. We felt that
what other countries could do, Australia could do, and we did it.”
Ladies and gentlemen, I don’t wish to continue in this prophetic
and visionary manner. Here and now, let me put certain definite pro-
positions before you for consideration and discussion—
(l) Books are essential in a national education system.
(2) The school is’ the fount and origin of the reading habit, and
makes possible the existence of public libraries, which do but continue
and amplify the work of the school.
(3) In any State-wide organization of public libraries, the school
library should be the foundational unit.
(4) The supervision of public libraries and the administration of
Government grants for public libraries should be vested in the Minister
for Education, assisted and advised by a thoroughly representative
library council.
(5) School libraries should be classed as public libraries, and should
share in the Government grant allotted to public libraries.
(6) In small rural schools the school library should function, not
only as a library for the pupils, but as a library for the adult com-
munity also, the teacher acting as librarian.
(7) The school libraries should receive regularly on loan parcels of
books from the national free lending libraries.
(8) A system of renewal and exchange of books between schools
should be instituted, and special library officers should be appointed
by the Education Departments to supervise this matter.
(9) A short course in library methods and organization should be
made an essential part of every teacher’s training.
(10) The national library in each metropolis and approved pro-
vincial libraries, in collaboration with the university, should act as
training schools, not only for teachers, but for public librarians, and
should issue certificates of competency.
(11) It should be made a condition of the grant to the larger public
libraries that each should contain a children’s section, if possible in a
room separate from the main room of the library, and with a special
attendant qualified to deal with the special work.
(12) No uncertificated person should be given charge of a public
library after facilities for training are instituted.
(13) A permanent committee consisting of representatives of the
Education Departments and trained public librarians should draw up
and publish lists of books suitable for school libraries and the children’s
section of public libraries.
(14) A research committee should investigate what is being done in
other countries along similar lines, and collate the information with a
view to the improvement of conditions in Australia.
Following the illustrious example of President Wilson, I offer only
fourteen points for discussion. He had in mind the peace and prosperity
of all nations; I have confined myself to the advancement of our own.


THE PUBLIC LENDING LIBRARY OF VICTORIA.
By T. Fleming Cooke, B.A., Librarian Lending Branch, Public Library,
Museums amd National Gallery of Victoria.
Tills Conference, now drawing to a close, has certainly achieved the
highest aims sought by its organizers, and they merit our sincerest thanks.
It has been the means of bringing together colleagues from every State
(with the exception of Queensland), and its Federal import has been
emphasized by the presence of Mr. Binns from Canberra. The resultant
exchange of ideas can only react beneficially upon the future activities
of libraries throughout the Commonwealth, and the publicity given to
the discussions by a sympathetic press has already indicated the para-
mount importance of the librarian in the intellectual and commercial
life of the community. It has long been recognized by many that the
“ dry-as-dust ” librarian was a myth, but apart from the increasing
numbers who avail themselves of his willing professional skill the mani-
fold “ uses of libraries ” were not as well known as they would all
desire. This Conference would serve to indicate the infinite possibili-
ties of their great institutions in disseminating all types and degrees of
knowledge, and must result through public recognition of their value in
raising the status of a noble profession.
Speaking personally, it has been a great pleasure to attend this my
first Library Conference in a service of almost three decades. It has
further afforded a welcome opportunity to many of us to renew associa-
tions with our Alma Mater. And apropos of this, in the quadrangle
I met a Don who, mindful of many prior meetings at the Public
Library, greeted me thus, “ Hello, you’re off your beat, aren’t you?”
" Oh, no,” was my reply, “ I’m here in quest of knowledge.” His
reply was terse. ‘‘You’ve come to the wrong shop!” You will be
pleased to hear that the explanation that I was attending a Conference
of Librarians quite satisfied him that my mission was certain to meet
with satisfactory results.
The Public Library, Museums, and National Gallery of Victoria
occupies half of one of our great city blocks. The buildings of the
finest educational institution in the Southern Hemisphere front
Swanston, Latrobe, Russell, and Little Lonsdale streets. The great
ferro-concrete dome of the Reference Library is one of Melbourne’s most
prominent landmarks, and the various departments are havens for the
sightseer as well as the student. Much time would be required for a
bare recital of the wonderful exhibits and treasures stored in what has
been aptly described as the poor man’s university. But this morning
we must elude the marble halls of the Reference Library, the marvels
of the Technological, Ethnological, Art, and Natural History Museums,
the Aladdin’s cave of the Picture Galleries, and the great Art School
which has produced so many of Australia’s leading artists. I will
direct your attention to but one small department of this great institu-
tion, namely, the Public Lending Library of Victoria, at the comer of
Russell and Little Lonsdale streets. I will not attempt to mislead you
in regard to its external appearance and approaches; in that regard it
is the Cinderella of the pile; but, like the small boy after a very big
tea party it carries the goods.


The Reference Library was founded in 1856. Many years passed
before the necessary accommodation and funds permitted the establish-
ment of a lending library. The Trustees, after much serious considera-
tion and urged by a deputation from the Trades Hall, opened a lending
branch in 1892 with 6,000 volumes transferred from the main library.
For some time the borrowers selected books by means of rn indicator
which showed by red or white numbers whether books were available or
not. A great forward move was made in 1899 when the books having
been classified under the Dewey Decimal System by Mr. R. D. Boys,
borrowers were given access to the shelves, a boon dear to the booklover.
The open access system followed the lead of the Reference Library, but
the Dewey system was adopted from America, and the success of this
pioneering effort in scientific arrangement of the shelves is proved by
the fact that libraries throughout the Commonwealth followed this lead
of the Melbourne Lending Library. The gentleman responsible for
this great reform now occupies the position of Chief Librarian and
Secretary to the Trustees, and the lending library now contains 54,000
volumes and caters for the varied tastes of more than 10,000 borrowers,
to whom were issued last month 21,484 books.
The fact that my old friend, Professor E; Morris Miller, is chairman
of this session is peculiarly gratifying to me, for we joined the Lending
Library as juniors soon after its re-organization by Mr. Boys. The
professor, a brilliant product of Wesley College and of this University,
and myself, a less worthy alumnus of a greater school (Scotch), were
" passing rich on £4O a year.” But we were exceedingly fortunate in
having for a mentor Mr. Boys, whom I regard as the greatest librarian
Australia has produced. To him certainly I ascribe any success I may
have attained in the profession. It was Mr. Boys who drew my atten-
tion to Spofford’s “ Book for all Readers,” the first and probably the
best book I have read on librarianship. At that stage, however, I
must confess I was almost discouraged when I learned from that book
the qualifications of the ideal librarian. May Ibe permitted to men-
tion some of them:—Native talent of a high order with a wide education
superadded, a gift for organization and administration, courtesy,
splendid health, an even temper, sound common-sense and a keen sense
of humour, enthusiasm and energy of a high order, accuracy, tact,
patience, an absence of red tape, a retentive memory, <fec., &c. Stoic
philosophy to endure the lack of commensurate emolument was duly
noted by the author, and surely this is one of the greatest merits of
the librarian who is expected to possess all the virtues under Heaven
and many reserved only for Heaven.
The Lending Library is open on week days from noon until 8 p.m.
On Saturdays the hours are 10 a.m. until 1 p.m. Any ratepayer of a
Victorian municipality may borrow books. This in practice means that
any householder upon application may be enrolled. Further, any other
person having reached the age of fifteen years may borrow upon the
guaranty of a ratepayer. The period of loan is restricted to fourteen
days, but books may be renewed if necessary. This enables residents of
Melbourne to borrow personally or by messenger. Provision is also
made for those who live more than 10 miles from the Town Hall, Mel-
bourne, and this is being more and more availed of by borrowers in the
country, books being regularly despatched to such distant centres as
Murrayville, Irymple, Red Cliffs, Torrita, Mildura, Nhill, Brutheu,
Buchan, Hamilton, Shepparton, Wodonga, and places the names of
which and certainly the location would probably be quite unknown to


many of you. Such books are forwarded by post and are available for
a fortnight, but upon application may be renewed for further terms
without return to the library. In the case of far-distant borrowers,
several days elapse between the posting of the parcel and its receipt,
and to meet the convenience of such as these arrangements may be made
for the issue of a book or books for four weeks, thus ensuring that the
readers may not be unduly handicapped by postal delays. Of course,
parcels are regarded as second-class mail matter by the postal authori-
ties, and letters are given precedence at busy periods, but sympathetic
consideration is given at the library to endeavour to prevent country
borrowers from being penalized on account of any such delay in
delivery.
Now I trust I have made it clear that there is a splendid Lending
Library available to any resident of Victoria of the age of fifteen years.
The city borrower, of course, has the advantage of being able to browse
over the shelves and select his reading. The country borrower, denied
this privilege, must seek our aid by correspondence. A list of books
desired is the first requisite, and to ensure promptness of service it
should contain at least a dozen entries. A complete catalogue of the
64,000 books in printed form being impossible, a list of new books is issued
quarterly at a coat to borrowers of 3d. By means of these (each of
which contains about 24 pages with nearly 1,000 titles) splendid details
of requirements may be compiled. Should further assistance be needed
it will be gladly given. For instance, should a borrower wish to read
a number of good works on a definite subject, his request will be attended
to. Should he or she be interested in a certain author, the books
already read need only be indicated, and the remainder of those avail-
able in the Lending Library will be sent in turn. Should special infor-
mation be required an effort is made to supply the want, and research
students in the country are often saved the necessity of special visits to
the city by having posted to them the type of books containing the
desired knowledge.
Now, in regard to the cost of all this. Of course, as I have explained,
the Lending Library is portion of the Public Library, Museums, and
National Gallery of Victoria, which is a Government institution, and
these facilities are free of cost provided you are in the happy position
of being able to pay a visit to the Lending Library and select your own
book. There is the restriction of the loan to a period of fourteen days
unless by arrangement, and to ensure that books will be made available
for other borrowers a fine of 3d. per day is imposed for failure to comply
with these conditions. As stated, special arrangements are made for
the less fortunate borrowers in the country to prevent them coming
under this penalty clause, whilst to cover the postage the library pays
for the outward despatch of the parcel and the return cost is defrayed
by the borrower. Thus readers are only charged postage one way, and
the value of the stamps to be affixed to the return parcel is obvious by
reason of the fact that parcels are weighed and stamped at the Library
prior to being forwarded to the country. This provision is a boon to
those—and they are many in the cases of our borrowers—not readily
accessible to a post office. On an average, the cost of postage will be
about 4d. In the case of the more expensive volumes, which are neces-
sarily heavier—that is, of course, in bulk without reference to the
literary content—the cost will be greater, but the transit of a single
volume rarely exceeds 7d. In some cases, as many as four members of


e family receive a parcel of books, the cost of postage of which amounts
to a little over Is., and by the wise provision of extension of loan with-
out return of the volumes until finally read the cost of conveyance is
further reduced.
Practically all of the standard works of Philosophy, Religion,
Sociology, Philology, Science, Trades and Applied Arts, Fine Arts,
Literature, History, Voyages and Travels, Biogra'phy, and Fiction are
available at the Lending Library. Recent works are constantly being
added at the rate of 4,000 annually, and these additions are noted in
the quarterly lists of new books. As explained, the whole resources of
the Lending Library are available to city, urban, and country residents.
Long queues at the delivery counters during Busy periods of each day
attest the interest of the former, whilst more than 1,000 books monthly
are forwarded to country borrowers. Naturally the work entailed in
attending to a country borrower’s wants is much greater than in the
case of the town borrower, and for purposes of comparison I would
estimate the ratio at 40 to 1. Thus the 615 country borrowers at
present enrolled correspond to nearly 25,000 town borrowers. Fre-
quently well over 1,000 books have been issued at the counters in a
single day. This average of more than two books borrowed each
minute will give some, idea of the celerity during peak periods on these
days. In the case of the country borrower, his or her requirements
must be ascertained, the book found, wrapped, weighed, addressed,
stamped, recorded, and taken to the post. Further, a large amount of
correspondence is involved. However, I think it will be found in
practice that the courtesy and efficiency for which the staff of the
Public Library is deservedly noted extends in a marked degree to its
relations with the reader in the country, and certainly complimentary
letters are constantly received from the utmost limits of the State. The
remarkable growth of the Library and its increasing popularity through-
out Victoria are sufficiently indicated in the statistics for the past
month. The amount of work involved in connexion with much larger
accessions of books has also greatly increased. Comparative totals are
16.000 in 1900, 28,000 in 1910, 38,000 in 1920, compared with the
6.000 of 1892 and the 54,000 of to-day. Unfortunately, this great
expansion has not yet resulted in additional staff, a vital necessity to
which consideration is at present being given, and under this head I
was much interested to learn from Mr. Bertie that his staff at the
Sydney Municipal Librarv consists of 36 as compared with our total
of 9.
I have outlined the operations carried out by us to endeavour to
satisfy the wants of borrowers in the city and the country, and before
indicating our third method of distribution I would like to refer to the
important question of children’s libraries. Adjacent to the Lending
Library there is virtually no resident population, but we have set out
to afford parents the opportunity of borrowing suitable literary fare
for the younger generation, and this is being largely availed of, more
than half of the fiction now being issued coming under this head. Books
published especially for the delectation of childhood abound—poetry,
plays, games, science and art. The child has a divine right to the
companionship of books, and in our own suburbs special Children’s
Libraries to meet this want are surely gaining a footing. It is im-
portant that thickly-populated industrial suburbs regard them not as
luxuries and privileges for the child, but his or her undoubted necessity


and right. They are in addition important factors in evolving and
cultivating a civic sense. Prahran is a shining example of what can
and ought to be done in this direction, and recently Footscray has fol-
lowed in Prahran’s steps with gratifying results.
A love for reading must be awakened and cultivated. Guidance
and direction is essential. There is ever the danger that children's
eyesight may be permanently injured by injudicious reading under a
poor light. Sensitive and specially intelligent children may become
too immersed in books to the detriment of their physical development.
Unwise or too much reading could conceivably become almost as had as
no reading. And since the Mens Sana in corpore sano is our highest
ideal, the only safe and reasonable plan is to call in the aid of the
expert and accustom our children to seek the guidance and willing co-
operation of the librarian. Some knowledge of basic educational and
psychological principles are often urged for parents seeking fo regulate
their children’s reading, but the problem is considerably lightened
where a Children’s Library exists. Books for children should give
pleasure, awaken the imagination, and sow the germs of great ideas.
The books read at an early age by the child should afford such genuine
joy and mental zest that for ever the thought of books will be associated
with delight. Under the auspices of the Library this desirable aim is
almost certain.
Whilst in our case, as already stated, there is no necessity for a
special children’s room, typical books for children from nursery age to
the adolescent period have been assembled;—Picture books, nursery
rhymes, fables, fairy tales, animal stories, Kipling’s Just-so stories,
Hawthorne’s Wonder book and his Tanglewood tales, Stevenson’s Child’s
garden of verses, Defoe’s “ Robinson Crusoe,” Wyss’ “ Swiss Family
Robinson,” “ The Arabian Nights,” Carroll’s ‘‘ Alice’s Adventures in
Wonderland,” Swift’s “ Gulliver’s Travels,” Stevenson’s “ Treasure
Island,” Kipling’s Jungle books, Twain’s "Tom Sawyer” and his
“ Huckleberry Finn,” Irving’s “ Rip Van Winkle,” Ballantyne’s
“ Coral Island,” Louisa M. Alcott’s “ Little Women ” and her ‘‘Little
Men,” Doyle’s “ White Company,” Kipling’s ‘‘ Kim ” and his “ Puck of
Book’s Hill,” Scott’s “ Ivanhoe,” Bunyan’s “ Pilgrim’s Progress,”
Dickens’ “ Tale of Two Cities ” and his “ David Copper field,” Hag-
gard’s “ King Solomon’s Mines,” Dumas’ “ Three Musketeers,” Wal-
lace’s ‘‘Ben Hur,” London's “ Call of the Wild,” Melville’s “ Typee ”
and his ‘‘ Moby Dick,” and many others. Nor have our own Aus-
tralian writers been forgotten or neglected, and here it is worthy of
note that our women authors have furnished some of the finest books
obtainable for girls —works which have a wide appeal throughout Britain.
To mention but some of these, we have Mary Grant Bruce, Ethel
Turner, Lillian Pyke, Mrs. iEneas Gunn, The Macks, The Rentouls.
The field for boys has, perhaps, been not so well exploited by our men
writers, although Rolf Boldrewood, Conrad Sayce, Bernard Cronin,
Donald Macdonald, and others more than hold their own. Jennings’
" Human Pedagogue ” is a fine story of the Geelong Grammar School,
while it is certain that Norman Lindsay’s all too few stories of boy life
would have directed attention to him in that field had not his genius
drawn him into other realms of fantasy.
D’Esterre, in his latest historical work ‘‘Masters of War,” un-
ashamedly admits that he obtained his flair for history from reading
the works of G. A. Henty, and how many boys have been stirred and


ennobled by the works of Captain Marryat, Fenimore Cooper, G. Man-
ville Fenn, R. M. Ballantyne, Herbert Strang, Captain F. H. Shaw,
Jules Verne. Of contemporaries, apart from the Australians I have men-
tioned, L. M. Montgomery, the Canadian, has a great appeal for girls,
as also have Kate Douglas Wiggin and Gene Stratton Porter, whilst
probably the most sought after of all is Angela Brazil, with her fas-
cinating tales of school life. Wcsterman is the boy's ideal, whilst Zane
Grey appeals to men and boys alike.
Now for a further phase of the activities of the Lending Library.
This is known as the Travelling Libraries section. This system was
instituted by the Melbourne Public Library as far back as 1859, and was
later adopted by the United States and other countries. It consists of
forwarding cases of books to the Committees of Free Libraries and
Mechanics’ Institutes, or to the councils of municipalities for periods
of six and twelve months, with the privilege of renewal without return.
From one to six cases may be lent, the borrowing institute merely pay-
ing the expenses of transport from Melbourne, since the Railway De-
partment returns the cases free by rail on the expiration of the loan.
Each case contains about 50 volumes of standard and current works on
biography, history, travels, general literature, popular science, indus-
tries, agriculture, and mining. On an average, the value of each case
with contents is about £3O, and the local committee gives security for
the return of the books and case by means of a bond signed by at least
three members. Some slight misunderstanding appears to exist under
this head, so let me make it clear that no monetary deposit is necessary,
but merely the signed guaranty of the parties concerned. Collections
such as those forwarded form the solid nucleus in many centres through-
out Victoria. The books themselves to the number of 14,000 are
quite distinct from those lent to the town and country borrowers, but
many of the best works fo be found in the Lending Library are also
stocked in the Travelling section.


Classified List of Books Borrowed from Lending Library during
July, 1928.
—
Circulation.
Percentage.
0. General works of reference
38
•17
1. Philosophy
424
1-973
2. Religion
383
1-782
3. Sociology
1,046
4-868
4. Philology
31
•14
5. Natural Science ..
778
3-621
G. Useful arts
1,423
6-623
7. Fine arts
915
4-255
8. Literature
1,784
£■303
9. Biography and history
' 2,716
12-643
Fiction
11,946
55-604
—
1023.
1924.
1925.
1920.
1927.
1928.
Circulation during July ..
11,362
11,797
11,713
12,554
14,701
21,484
Average daily circulation..
Number of days Lending Library
437
437
434
465
505
820
was open
26
27
27
27
26
20
Number of borrowers on register ..
6,551
G,G50
6,580
6,948
7,500
9,658
—
Total Annual
Circulation.
Average Dally
Circulation.
Total Number of
Borrowers.
1923
117,151
401
8,008
1924
118,110
403 !
8,204
1925
119,780
407 j
8,321
1920
125,055
427 ;
8,428
1927
148,108
508
1
*9,700
Country Individual Borrowers.
—
Total Annual
Circulation.
Total Number of
Borrowers.
1921
250
41
1922
429
08
1923
587
81
1924
703
128
1925
1,201
158
1920
1,581
183
1927
4,875
443
To date, 615 borrowers are enrolled, and the monthly circulation
totals 1,000.
• The highest number yet recorded.


CO-OPERATION IN LIBRARY WORK.
By E. R. Pitt, B.A., Senior Assistant, Public Library of Victoria.
The extension of co-operative work in the fields of scientific and
economic research has been one of the outstanding features of our last
few decades. The Great War brought home to our rulers the dependence
of the security of our future existence on the development and en-
couragement not only of applied science, but of the pure sciences on
which discovery and invention must ultimately rest. Even before the
war international and national congresses dealing with a great variety
of topics were meeting at more or less frequent intervals. The war
temporarily suspended the operations of the international conferences,
and the cleavage of Europe into two sections led to the formation of a
Union Des Associations Internationales, which excluded from member-
ship the ex-enemy countries. Of late years, however, there is a marked
tendency to re-admit these countries to meetings, so that by the exchange
of views problems of international importance may be considered in
common.
Though co-operation in the intellectual sphere has not advanced as
rapidly as it has in the scientific and economic, still marked progress
has been made in recent years. International conferences on bibliography
and documentation have been held in 1895, 1897, 1900, 1910, and 1920.
The League of Nations, through its Committee of Intellectual Co-
operation, has evinced considerable interest in the international aspects
of library work, though it has been greatly hampered by financial and
other difficulties. One of the suggestions under its consideration has been
that of Dr. Hagberg Wright, who, a few years ago, proposed an inter-
national annual list of the more notable books published. The material
was to be furnished co-operatively by committees established in the various
countries of the world, and a scale was suggested, in order to keep the
list within reasonable limits, by which countries publishing over 10,000
Volumes annually would have a right to mention 40 volumes, and
those, such as Australia, which publish less than 2,500, would be en-
titled to have ten included in the annual list. The Australian Com-
mittee might at first have some difficulty in securing a yearly list of
ten really notable books, but inclusion in the list would gradually come
to be considered as a recognition of merit, and Australian authors who
now find it advantageous to publish the results of their labours in
England might be induced to issue their works in Australia through a
desire of an honoured place in such a world list. The Commonwealth
Government, indeed, in selecting the Australian Committee, might very
well consider the desirability of giving awards, after the principle of the
Nobel Foundation, though on a necessarily much smaller scale. Such
a scheme would undoubtedly give a fillip to Australian literary pro-
duction. Of course, great care would have to be exercised in appointing
a Committee which would be entirely uninfluenced in its work of selec-
tion by interested people or interesting plebiscites. Such a world list,
especially if it included information regarding prices, would be most
valuable to libraries seeking for their shelves the most notable books
published in various countries, guided as they would be in their selec-
tion by the opinion of competent committees. Two of these lists
have already been published for 1924 and 1925.


Other suggested activities of this Committee of Intellectual Co-
operation include a scheme of international borrowing and of abstracting.
The Committee has created an International Institute of Intellectual
Co-operation, subsidized at first entirely by the Government of France,
and later with the assistance of Italy, Austria, Hungary, Czechoslovakia,
Switzerland, and other nations. Bibliographical work has from the first
been recognized as one of the main functions of the Committee, and one
of its earliest activities has been the publication of the Index
Jiiblioyraphicus, an international catalogue showing the sources of
current bibliographical information. It is instinctive to note that
Germany heads the list with over 200 entries. France has 150, Great
Britain 88, United States 62, and Japan 54. The four publications
credited to Australia are the Commonwealth Copyright List, Aus-
tralian Science Abstracts , the Scientific Australian, and the. Common-
wealth Parliamentary Library Monthly List of Accessions.
The Committee was in its early stages at least in close touch with the
Institut International de Bibliographie. This Institute was founded at
Brussels in 1895, but received a serious blow during the world war,
from which it has not yet fully recovered. Its object is the study and
development of bibliography, of book technique, and of documentation,
including international organization in these fields. It specially aims
at perfecting and unifying bibliographical methods, particularly those
of classification. It proposes to function through national or regional
committees. Each national committee, according to M. Paul Otlet,
the Secretaire Generale, will be “ autonome, et determinera lui-meme
ses statuts, qui doivent avoir un caractere federatif quant a leurs propres
membres et confederatifs a I’egard de I’lnstitut International de
Bibliographie.” Should a country not be officially represented, it may
be represented by som; body or person designated by the Institut. The
Institut concluded a convention with the League of Nations in 1924,
by which the latter accorded, through its Committee on Intellectual Co-
operation, to the Institut its patronage with regard to a projected
universal author catalogue of books. The magnitude of this task may
be gauged by the fact that the Institut estimated in 1910 that
12,000,000 books had been printed since the inception of the art of print-
ing. Patronage has also been asked for a similar subject catalogue. The
assistance is purely moral and not financial, notwithstanding the regrets
of the members of the Committee and its acknowledgment that biblio-
graphy is the basis of scientific work. The library of the League of
Nations and that of the International Labour Office have adopted the
decimal classification of the Institut. This decimal classification is an
expansion of the system invented by Melvil Dewey, which is practised
so largely in America and Australia.
Time will not permit of an extended explanation of the accomplished
and projected work of the Institut. It includes the internationalization
of the Anglo-American cataloguing rules; co-operative catalogues of the
libraries of various countries; international loans; international ex-
changes ; a world encyclopaedia; a revised edition of its Classification
Decimate in English, French, Spanish, German, and Esperanto; and
an international book museum.
As distinguished from this international aspect of co-operation,
important work has been done in various countries to co-ordinate
library effort. The library associations of the United Kingdom and of
the United States have been in existence for many years. The former
was founded in 1877, and granted a Royal Charter in 1898 as the re-
sponsible representative body for libraries. One of its objects is the


holding of examinations in Hbrarianship and the issuing of certificates
of competency. One thousand one hundred and seventy candidates sat
for examination in 1924. It grants diplomas and certificates, and shares
the control of the School of Librarianship of the University of London.
In America these library schools are a distinct feature of the library
system, and degrees in librarianship are granted in some American uni-
versities. The report of the Public Libraries Committee presented to
Parliament in 1927 states, in regard to the English association, “ The
Association ranks generally with other similar bodies of professional
men, except that it possesses no disciplinary or directive power, but is
purely an advisory body. It has, however, upon occasion, made remon-
strance, sometimes effective, against proposed action likely to bo
derogatory to the efficiency of libraries or to the interests of librarianship.
“ The scope of the Library Association may be expected to be greatly
enlarged in the near future with the growth of the movement in the
counties, and with the development of special libraries and other organi-
zations. In those and other developments of the library service of the
country which we contemplate the Library Association offers the
machinery for dealing with many of the problems which will arise; and
it is in our opinion highly desirable that it should receive the full
support of the public libraries of the kingdom.”
It is perhaps in the domain of cataloguing that co-operative work
had made the greatest progress in recent years. Union catalogues, as
they are generally termed, are mainly confined to periodical literature.
The earliest known instance of such a union catalogue was published in
Milan in 1864, and was a 44-page list. At first these catalogues were
mainly “finding” lists of periodicals, but the need for accurate
bibliographical details has necessitated much more thorough editorial
and co-operative work. The two most important of these union
catalogues are the World List of'Scientific Periodicals issued by the
Conjoint Board of Scientific Societies, representing the leading scientific
societies of Great Britain and Ireland, and the Union List of Serials in
libraries of the United States and Canada. The World List, the first
volume of which was issued in 1925, and the second in 1927, is a list of
24,128 periodicals contained in about 150 libraries in nineteen principal
cities of Great Britain and Ireland. It is arranged in a fairly strict
order of title of publication. Thus, all entries commencing with the
words Bulletin, Journal, Proceedings, &c., are arranged under these
words. There are 2,072 entries under Bulletin, and 808 under Report.
The Union last in America was officially projected in 1913, but the war
stopped progress. At the meeting of the American Library Association
in December, 1921, the question was again discussed. A plan was pre-
sented by the well-known publisher, H. W. Wilson, and a committee of
six was appointed to co-operate with him. This committee appealed
to the American library world for financial help. The expense was
estimated at f? 36,000 and 40 libraries were asked to subscribe 8900 each.
Miss Winifred Gregory was appointed editor in January, 1924. A pro-
visional edition was issued for checking purposes, and the final edition
was issued in 1927. The expense exceeded the original estimate, and an
advance payment of $60,000 was ultimately made by the subscribing
libraries. The price of the catalogue to non-subscribing libraries is $75.
The number of libraries represented is approximately 225, and the num-
ber of periodicals about 75,000. It includes periodicals of all descrip-
tions, scientific or otherwise, but unfortunately excludes official publica-
tions and publications of international congresses.


11l Germany there has just been issued the Gesamtverzeichnis der
Auslandischen Zeitschrlften, 1914-1924, edited by the Auskunftsbureau
der Deutschen Bibliotheken. This contains lists of about 14,000
periodicals, and represents about 1,400 libraries.
The Swiss catalogue is entitled V erzeichnis A usldndischer Zeitschriften ,
and the third edition was issued in 1925 by the Vereenigung
Schweizerischer Bibliothekare (Swiss Library Association). It contains
8,686 periodicals from 387 libraries. Most periodicals are, of course,
duplicated in various libraries, and the total number of entries is
21,342.
A French Union list, Inventaire des Periodiques Scientifiques des
Bibliotheques de Paris , was issued by the Academic des Sciences in
1924-25. One hundred and fifteen libraries are represented, and the
periodicals listed number over 16,000.
The Universitetsbiblioteket in Oslo published its U tenlandske
Tidsskrifter in 1925. This contains 4,200 periodicals from 96
Norwegian public libraries. The number of entries is over 10,000.
A new edition of the List of Serial Publications .... in the
Union of South Africa was compiled in 1927 by Mr. A. C. G. Lloyd,
Librarian of the South African Public Library. Forty-four libraries
show a total of 3,117 periodicals.
So far as I am aware, the only attempt at a union list in New
Zealand is a Iteference List of the Scientific Periodicals in the Libraries
of New Zealand , compiled by Mr. Archey, Curator of the Auckland
Museum, issued in 1927. Thirty-one libraries have contributed to the
list of over 1,000 periodicals.
In Australia the pionder attempt at a union catalogue was a
Catalogue of Scientific Serial LAiteruture in nine libraries in Sydney,
compiled under the direction of Professor T. P. Anderson Stuart, by
W. T. Dayton in 1889. It is an excellent list, considering the com-
parative paucity of material to work on at that time. It contains about
900 periodicals. This was followed in 1893 by a Tabidar LAst of Medical
Periodicals in Melbourne LAbraries, prepared by the late Sir Harry
Brooks Allen. Onlv three libraries were represented, those of the
Public Library, the University Medical School, and the Medical Society.
It was published as pages 97-112 of the Australian Medical Journal , new
series, vol. 15, 1893. About 300 periodicals are mentioned.
The first attempt at a complete scientific list of periodicals in Vic-
torian libraries was made by the late Dr. T. S. Hall, the genial and
well-remembered assistant to Professor Sir Baldwin Spencer, and for
many years Honorary Secretary of the Royal Society of Victoria. From
the colour of its binding it was affectionately known in University circles
as the Purple Cat. It was a volume of 225 pages, issued in 1899. Forty-
eight libraries were represented, and the periodicals included numbered
about 2,200. The wide use made of this led to the publication of a second
edition in 1911, in the compilation of which I had the privilege of
assisting Dr. Hall. It includes about 4,000 periodicals, and 54 libraries
assisted by making their records open for inspection. The arrangement
is not ideal, from a bibliographical point of view; and Dr. Hall ex-
plained in the preface that many of the defects were due to the fact that
he had not always accepted the ideas of competent advisers, but had
followed his own views. This catalogue is now seventeen years old, and
various demands for its revision and the extension of its scope have been
made during that period.


Shortly after the establishment of the Institute of Science and
Industry in 1916, proposals were made for the compilation of an Aus-
tralian Catalogue of Scientific and Technical Periodicals on the lines
of the 1911 Victorian catalogue. A small committee was established to
draw up rules and formulate methods, and, owing to my connexion with
the 1911 catalogue, I was asked to undertake the editing. The catalogue
was compiled on cards, and, when it was nearing completion, the
various State Governments were asked to assist in the expense of printing.
Queensland, however, was the only State to promise its quota towards
the undertaking, and the idea of printing had to be abandoned owing
to lack of funds. On the reconstitution of the Institute as the Common-
wealth Council for Scientific and Industrial Research in 1926 a sum of
money was voted for the purpose of bringing it up to date. The various
States willingly co-operated in supplying lists. I was again appointed
General Editor. Unforeseen difficulties have arisen, and as some of the
lists have not even yet been received, some time must elapse before the
work can be printed. It is estimated that it will enumerate over 8,000
periodicals from 128 Australian libraries. Some of the minor libraries
in the 1911 catalogue will be eliminated. Altogether there will be about
36.000 entries, including 14,000 from New South Wales, 12,000 from
Victoria, 4,000 from South Australia, 3,000 from Western Australia,
2.000 from’ Queensland, and 1,400 from Tasmania. These figures are
subject to revision.
This catalogue includes Government documents and transactions of
international congresses, though the omission of these important works
in other union catalogues increases the difficulty of giving accurate
information regarding them. Official publications are too much neglected
as a field of research. There is a wealth of information stored in them
which is not generally appreciated. The United States Superintendent
of Documents issues a Monthly Catalogue of Documents, and a glance
at the most recent annual index shows that in addition to the ordinary
congressional proceedings, these documents include reports and bulletins,
circulars, tic., of the Department of Agriculture, Employees’ Compensa-
tion Commission, Education Bureau, Geological Survey, Interstate
Commerce Commission, Children's Bureau, Bureau of Standards, Bureau
of Labour Statistics, Bureau of Fisheries, Public Health Service, Forest
Service, and many others. The latest Consolidated Index to British
Government Publications includes work on aeronautical research, educa-
tion, physical training, industrial awards, medical research, building
research, fisheries, agricultural economics, vital statistics, and other
subjects.
I have thought it advisable to give this summary of international and
interstate co-operation in order that, those who have had no actual library
experience may understand what progress has been made on the other
side of the world, and how far Australia has to go before it can arrive
at the stage at which Europe and America arc at present. The ques-
tion, however, of co-operation, actual and potential, between the various
libraries of any one State is of more pressing moment. In South Aus-
tralia the various libraries are kept in touch with one another through
the Institutes Association, and that State is to be congratulated on its
development in this respect. So far as Victoria is concerned, however,
the only element of co-operation is that which exists through the
recently-formed Library Association of Victoria; and this, of course, is
still in the embyro stage. The question as to how far the smaller


libraries may be helped by the State Library is naturally a matter of
policy. In a paper of this kind, one can only express one’s individual
opinion. It is, however, desirable to indicate in what directions, should
policy so permit, the larger libraries may assist their less fortunate
brethren. The Government grant for country free libraries is limited to
those outside the 10-mile radius. It varies according to the financial
conditions of the State. During the last five years it has averaged
£2,550 per annum. The number of institutions which shared in this
grant in 1927-28 was 375, so that the average amount of the grant for
each library is under £7. As portion of the grant is devoted to assis-
tance in building operations and repairs, the average amount used for
the purchase of books is still less than the figure quoted. The grant
is allotted pro rata in respect to the books purchased by the local
institute. The maximum grant to any one library is £ls.
Country libraries are entitled to the loan of books from the Public
Lending Library, and the Lending System will be explained by Mr.
Cooke in his paper. From one to six cases will be lent, and as each
case contains about 50 books, it is possible for a country library to nave
300 volumes on loan. Only about 25 per cent, of these libraries take
advantage of the facilities granted. The question as to how country
readers may be helped is one full of difficulty. The average library in
the country is a depressing sight, and the same indeed may be said of
some surburban libraries. I paid a visit to one of these a short time ago.
The very entrance was uninviting A few worn wooden steps led to a
narrow forbidding passage. However, I persevered, and entered the
reading room, an ill-lit, uncomfortable, dingy room, separated by
partitions into a fiction department and an unoccupied reference section.
The fiction was badly worn and unattractive. The reference portion
included the Victoria Year-Book to about 1914, and some early issues
of the Commonwealth Year-Book. This section was entirely shut off
from supervision. The ledges were dusty, though the public were pro-
tected against access to some of the shelves by a large vacuum cleaner.
The books were mostly out of date. The most striking feature of the
shelves was a large yellow copy of a German work, the Weltwirtschaft-
liches Archiv, which had apparently strayed into the library as a gift
from some German non-scholar. It was sandwiched between Strutt’s
j Sports and Pastimes and Cassell’s Booh of Sports and Pastimes. Evi-
dently the donor had informed the librarian that it was a book on
politics, and had added the information that politics was a game. After
all, this classification is no worse than that of an old-time suburban
librarian who placed The Autocrat of the Breahfast Table among the
works on cookery. A more suitable donation to this particular library
would have been an inscription to be placed over the front door “ Aban-
don hope all ye who enter here.”
Though not typical of suburban libraries, this one may be taken
as typical of the average country library. How, then, can these libraries
be helped ? The first essential is an adequate staff. If a municipal
council is seeking an accountant, it rejects all applicants without at
least some elementary knowledge of accountancy. But when it comes
to a librarian (and this remark applies also, I regret to say, to many of
our departmental libraries) the last qualification sought for seems to be
library experience. One country institute, in reply to a question sent
by the Library Association of Victoria, replied that the custodian of the
books was “paid as librarian and billiard-marker.” Why in Heaven’s
name have books at all, if there is no one competent to look after them ?
Why buy a grand piano to play five-finger exercises 2


The outstanding institution in Victoria where adequate training is
given to the staff is the Public Library, and it is therefore the only real
training ground at present for our future librarians. It would, of
course, be impossible to give tuition to the librarians of the 357 libraries
which share in the annual grant. The solution of the difficulty seems
to lie in the establishment of regional libraries, similar to those recom-
mended in the report of the Public Libraries Committee of England
already mentioned. Each regional library would act as a centre for the
smaller libraries. The regional libraries would have as their centre, so
far as lending is concerned, the National Library. The regional libraries
would distribute from their stock to the smaller libraries works of fiction
and the lighter types of non-fiction such as books on sports, travels, &c.
The National Lending Library would distribute to the regional libraries
the more rarely-used, but more important and more expensive works
which it at present aims at supplying. The regional libraries would at
first be those of the large country towns. Their ambit would naturally be
large at first, but with the growth of library education, more regional
libraries would be established, just as in the case of ecclesiastical
dioceses.
The relations of the Public Library to the regional libraries is a
delicate matter, and I can, of course, speak only for myself on this
subject. If the librarians of these regional libraries are to be trained
(and this is essential) it would necessarily have to be done in the Public
Library. Either the trained staff could be supplied by a special itinerant
staff, who would organize the library methods in the regional libraries,
or the regional libraries would themselves supply the staff for training.
Gradually the regional staffs would grow more and more trained in
library methods, and be able to impart their own knowledge to the
staffs of the smaller libraries. By this means wc might hope to have a
fairly efficient library staff throughout the State in 50 years’ time, or
even less.
But there are still further ways by which the National Library
could perform important co-operative work. Recently the Engineering,
Surveying, Architectural, and Chemical Associations of Melbourne
decided to amalgamate their libraries into one; an important instance
of co-operation among scientific institutions. The question of
cataloguing and classification was naturally the most perplexing problem.
It was solved by the newly-appointed librarian writing her author cards
with the advice of the Library staff. These cards were then taken up
to the Library by sections, the classification and subject entries noted,
and the whole taken back to the Allied Societies’ Library for writing
up. The experience gained by an observant librarian was an education
in itself in these important branches of library work. The amount of
work entailed on the library staff was very small. The result was that
the new library was classified and catalogued in an astonishingly short
time, and has already in hand the preparation of a printed catalogue;
an achievement which would have been impossible under any other
arrangement. This system might well be adopted by other libraries
which have large stocks of books unclassified and uncatalogued. Only
a small amount of training is required in writing the author cards of
90 per cent, of the books. Cataloguing in bulk does not sound particu-
larly scientific, but it is a practical and a sensible method for libraries
to adopt who wish to take advantage of work already done. It would be
an obvious advantage to have as many libraries as possible classified
under the one system, and catalogued on the same lines.


This method is suggested for volumes already in stock, in order that
institutions which desire competent libraries should be able to reach
an efficient stage as rapidly as possible. The problem of cataloguing,
current books is a different matter. The suggestion that the National
Library should catalogue these works for the proposed regional and other
libraries is put forward with some diffidence, as it could not be under-
taken without an increased staff. Yet it seems sensible that when a
particular work is received in a dozen or more libraries, the time spent
in determining its classification and its subject-matter (often a long
process) should be concentrated in the most competent hands, instead
of multiplied, as it is by the present methods. This problem was
attacked by the English Public Libraries Committee, and its report
reads:—“Two of the principal defects of our publi<v library system
arise from lack of co-operation, in the first place affecting the local
supply of books, and in the second the production of catalogues. Until
the founding of the Central Library for Students there was no .institution
promoting a co-operative service for the systematic interloan of books
between libraries. The establishment of that Library has already im-
proved local book service, and its development on the lines which we
have just indicated will have, we are convinced, a very beneficial effect
on the service. Central cataloguing, however, has received less attention.
Though the problem has been much discussed by librarians, no practical
steps have been taken to promote joint action for the provision of
cataloguing. Every library continues to catalogue its own books, re-
gardless of the fact that the same books undergo similar treatment in
some hundreds of libraries throughout the country. In due course,
catalogues are therefore produced independently, and the whole cost of
preparation is met by each library. There is redundancy with conse-
quent waste under such practice, while the exercise of economy is
pushed to extremes in other departments of library provision and ad-
ministration. Standards of quality vary also, some catalogues being
excellently produced, whilst others are of little value. The obvious remedy
is Central Cataloguing. To the question put by the Committee, ‘ Are you
in favour of the supply of printed cards from a central source?’ 141
affirmative answers were returned, while 96 were insufficiently informed
regarding the nature of such a service as to favour its adoption,
or were clearly opposed to it. The representatives from the Library
Association, the Council of the Scottish Library and all our
witnesses, with two exceptions, who have given evidence on this matter,
strongly favour Central Cataloguing.” I trust that the discussion on
this important matter will be productive of practical results.
Another direction in which co-operation will result in time-saving
is in the preparation of bibliographies. Not only the larger libraries, but
such institutions as the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
are frequently asked for the available literature on a particular subject.
A bibliography is prepared and perhaps kept for future reference. A
precisely similar query may have been made at another library a short
time previously. The preparation of adequate bibliographies is a task
of considerable duration. If arrangements could be made by which
several copies of such bibliographies could be struck off and interchanged,
a great amount of effort and time might be saved.
A large proportion of the references in these bibliographies are in
foreign languages. The research worker may be ignorant of the
language used, and anxious to have a translation. In Australia there
must be competent translators, if only they could be found, and it


should be the task of some library committee, or a Committee of the
proposed Australian Library Association, to prepare a list of translators,
showing their qualifications and their scale of charges.
Occasionally it happens that extracts from volumes, copies of which
are only available in another State, are required. A short time ago the
Australian Museum desired a copy of a paper prepared by William von
Blandowski on the Natural History of the Lower Murray for the
Philosophical Institute of Victoria in 1857. It had been for some
reason withdrawn from the Transactions of that body. The Public
Library, however, happened to have a copy of the original printed
paper. A copy was made and sent to the Australian Museum. The
Library copy is perhaps the only one in existence. It was
regretted at the iime that it could not be reproduced by some mechanical
process, and distributed to other libraries who possess the Transactions.
The establishment of a photostat machine in each large library would
enable copjes of such works and of manuscripts and other documents to
be reproduced for the benefit of others. It could also be used for the
reproduction of the bibliographies and translations which I have men-
tioned. The Copyright Library in London supplies photostat negatives
of articles for a couple of shillings. According to Mr. E. Wyndham
Hulme, formerly librarian of _the H.M. Patent Office, “ the photostat
machine is a very profitable machine.”
I have been asked whether the lending of lantern slides for lectures
is not a legitimate function of the Public Library. I have not given
sufficient attention to the question to be' qualified to give an opinion
on the matter, but certainly some central institution where one could
borrow not only lantern slides but also large maps would be a boon to
public and private lecturers. One cannot keep in one’s house at the
same time large maps and domestic harmony.
The co-operative aspects of lending books have not been touched
upon, as they will come up for discussion in other papers to be read.
Nor have I touched upon the problem of abstracting, which seems in the
scientific field more suited for trained scientists with some bibliographical
knowledge than for librarians with inadequate scientific knowledge.
But I have, I hope, indicated some of the directions in which librarians
and library associations may join in advancing the cause of bibliography.
If I have antagonized any who consider criticism and suggestions for
improvement as an unwarrantable interference in their domain, I can
only plead a desire to see an amelioration of the lot of the smaller
libraries as my excuse.


LIBRARIES SEEN ABROAD
By S. Talbot Smith, M.A., LL.B., President of the Public
Library of South Australia.
Mr. Smith said that he spent, most of last year motoring
about Great Britain and looking in on various libraries, having
an honorary commission from the South Australian Govern-
ment to “inquire and report” on these, together with kindred
art galleries and musuems. The one inquiry he made always
was, “ Have you plenty of money! and of space?” In every
case but one there was a regretful answer in the negative. He
had been greatly struck by finding, starting with Durban, that nearly
all libraries were municipal affairs; and one librarian after another had
expressed envy of the Australian system which gives the care of such
institutions to a committee composed of men appointed because they were
supposed to know their job, or at any rate to be directly interested in
culture and the arts; whereas the municipal system means that the com-
mittee is made up from among men who have been elected for their
skill in roads, drainage, and other municipal matters—sometimes merely
for political reasons. It is only fair to add, however, that the muni-
cipal bodies are now recognizing this disability, and, by exercising a
right to co-opt extra members from local universities and such bodies, to
build up really strong library committees.
On this general question, it is interesting to see how people moving
towards the same end, and with the same general ideas, can hit on
entirely different methods. He had spoken as though the Municipal
Library was entirely a non-Australian thing. South Australia does,
indeed, know very little of it, but the present conference was making it
plain that there are various libraries municipally run, and well run, in
other States. On the question of free access to books, this was found
a very rare thing. Our idea of “ browsing ” is quite repugnant to
English ideas. One has to know what one wants, and ask for it; though
at the British Museum, and elsewhere, much kindly help is given in
supplying anything that may seem to bear on a given subject desired.
The speaker, who had begun by apologizing for obtruding personal
experiences into a gathering meant largely for the discussion of technical
and practical matters, gave some amusing reminiscences of the Library
Conference in Edinburgh. It was the jubilee meeting of the Library
Association of Great Britain; and America, which held its jubilee a year
or two back, sent a strong contingent. There were representatives,
also, from all over Europe, and some of the particularly American jokes
in the after-dinner speaking had to be translated carefully into anything
from Norwegian to Czecho-Slovak. The Chairman was the Earl of
Elgin, who made something of a sensation by concluding his banquet
speech with “ Scots Wha Hae,” entirely unaccompanied. But a very
fine week’s work was done in Edinburgh, in between the hospitable
festivities. The speaker had represented South Australia on the occasion,
and. followed Mr. E. la Touche Armstrong in speaking for this part of
the world.


The general feeling left in thp mind of a visitor to the libraries of
Britain was one of envy and almost bewilderment, a kind of Queen of
Sheba feeling. When one had seen all one could wish for in one place,
there would be found perhaps 50 miles away—or in London 1 mile
away—something that equalled or perhaps excelled what had gone
before. The glorious manuscripts of early days were a special feature;
in the great Library of Wales, on the mountain behind Aberystwith,
perhaps the most finely situated library in the world, were many manu-
scripts in Welsh, a quite unexpected " find." And so it went on. One
could but leave the land of glorious history for our own country of un-
limited possibilities, with a firm desire to do what one could to keep the
cause of culture going in our new land.
By Authority: fj. J. Green, Government Printer, Melbourne.
