

T' ord Carri
PROFITABLE US?
FOR SURPLUS
FRUITS AND VEGETABLES.
COMPILED PROM
LATEST EUROPEAN AND AMERICAN SOURCES,
WITH DETAILED INFORMATION AS TO VARIOUS
Modern Preserving Processes,
COUETENAY SMITH,
POPULAR SCIENCE LECTURER,
SEGOITD IE ID IT I OUST,
1890
Price One Shilling-.
The First Edition was printed specially for the Governments of New South
Whales and Western Australia.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED BY THE AUTHOR.
Stoimeg:
Printed by Geo. Loxton & Co., 12a Bridge Street, published by The
Author at 508 George Street, Sydney. *




Under the Patronage of His-Excellency Lord Carrington.
COLEMANE & SONS’
Manufacturers of the world-famed
Eucalypie Extract & Victory Ointment,
Awarded Medals and Diplomas Adelaide, Sydney and Melbourne Exhibi-
tions, beating all competitors.
The only known Cure for Asthma, Consumption, Bronchitis,
and all Affections of the Chest.
We hold more bona-fide testimonials for the cure of these complaints
than any medicine in the world.
EXTRACT, 1/6 and 2/6 per bottle ; OINTMENT, 2/.
Posted to any Address on receipt of Stamps.
Manufactory, Cootamundra.
Sydney Wholesale Depot, 251 Elizabeth st. Sold everywhere.
Trade Mark; “The Royal Observatory,” Greenwich, England.
PARSONS’ GRAPE SALINE
Eorms an agreeable Effervescing Drink, remarkable for its
refreshing properties in relieving thirst and cooling the body.
It does not impoverish the blood, but keeps it in a healthy state —
invigorating the system, and removing all Bile and Unhealthy Secretions.
It is invaluable for Gout, Rheumatism, or any Poisons in the Blood, and
may be taken with the greatest advantage by persons young or old.
It is strongly recommended as a preventative of Fever, Small Pox, Liver
Complaints, Headache, Heartburn, Indigestion, &c.
Laboratory : Greenwich, London.
In Boz. Bottles at Chemists, Grocers, and General Storekeepers.
W. H. ELETCHER & CO., Agents for New South Wales,
3 Queen’s Place, Sydney.
“CHING’S DUGONG OIL”
Is recommended by the Medical Faculty for its wonderful curative properties
in cases of Consumption, Diseases of the Chest, Stomach, and Bowete,
Chronic Cough, General Debility, Defective or Insufficient Nutrition,
Chronic Bronchitis, Indigestion, Biliousness, &c., and for its extraordinary
effects, either inwardly or outwardly applied, in Wasting in Children.
Prepared at the Dugong Fisheries, Hervey’s Bay, Queensland, by
JOHN LIONEL CHING & CO., from Launceston, Cornwall, England.
Twenty Prize Medals and Certificates.
To be obtained from the General Agent, COURTENAY SMITH, 508
George-street, and ELLIOTT BROS. Ltd., Sydney ; also from E. FLET-
CHER Junior, 386 Flinders-lane, Melbourne, and through all Chemists.
Highest Medical Testimony.
*3" Do not fail to ask for the Pamphlet entitled “ Dunheved Island.”


Rotary Knife
PEACH AND APPLE PARER.
$4
0
fH
d
ft
ft
ft
H- 3
in
CD
PQ
0
PEBPECTIOU I
We take great pleasure in offering this Machine as the best Parer
manufactured. It will do its work perfectly, rapidly, and satisfactorily.
Will pare soft, uneven or bruised fruit perfectly. The revolving knife
being the only one that will pare peaches successfully. It is now in use by
nearly all the large packers and many families in America, and has proved
itself indispensable, performing the work of five hands, removing merely
the skin of the Peach or Apple, making the fruit more desirable in appear-
ance and saving a large amount of waste.
A Machine on the same principle is made for factory use, but is much
larger, heavier, and works faster. Special forks adapted to holding Pears
and Quinces which this machine admirably pares.
Indents received by
M. S. HILL, 6 Bridge Street, Sydney.
Agent— Sami Crump Label Co.; I‘hillips' Fruit and Vegetable Evaporator;
Neio Scott Ufa. Co.


Lv>vxic) ttjL
To the Citizens
of A
Federated Australasia
OF THE FUTURE,
These pages are respectfully dedicated, for they
refer to Industries which can best be worked
FOR THE FULLEST ADVANTAGE OF THE COMMUNITY,
AND ENHANCE THE WELFARE OF THE AuSTRALIAS, BY
THE PERFECT APPLICATION OF THE PRINCIPLES OF
Intercolonial Freetrade.


—■it J i - ,
LITTLEFIELDS ESTATE,
AT THE HEAD OE
The Mulgoa Valley,
NEAR PENRITH.
ORCHARD FARMS,
Rich Basaltic Soils, well drained, and mostly
cleared by the Vendor for Orchard purposes.
ARRANGEMENTS MADE TO INSPECT.
&CsMNT QM TEE ESTATE.
A. W. STEPHEN,
28 Castlereagh Street,
Sydney
TORRENS’ TITLE.
EASY TERMS.


if put atpl
PRESERVING INDUSTRIES.
INTRODUCTORY.
MUCH has been said, and more written, during the past four or five
years, on the vastly important subjects of the preservation and sale of the
surplus fruit and vegetable products of these Colonies, that is to say, the
balance remaining after supplying the local and intercolonial markets ; yet,
though many suggestions have been made, popular science lectures deli-
vered by experts—chiefly in the large cities—and a few futile, because
mismanaged, attempts made at starting such industries, but little
practical result has been attained, and that principally in the Colonies of
Victoria and South Australia as an outcome of the “ Colinderies ” Exhibi-
tion of 1886, except as to jam-making, which it is beyond the province of
the anthor to touch upon. It is customary to inveigh against the supine-
ness and lack of rational self-interest shown in the matter by fruit-growers
.and other cultivators, but although these attributes are certainly possessed
by very many whose living depends upon what the soil yields, yet there are
other reasons why the lessons to be learned from older lands, and from
our American cousins in particular, have not been brought into practical
operation in this country of sparse population and magnificent distances.
For instance, growers in the immediate vicinity of the large colonial towns,
while finding usually a ready market for the better grades of their produce,
yet, having to pay such a high price for the land they buy, or exorbitant
rental for that they lease - in many instances more than is paid in England
they cannot compete as to comparative value, either of the raw or manu-
factured article, with the imported, well known brands of trans-oceanic
firms individually preserving more of one single product than would be
needed for the supply of a whole colony. Again,—those growers at a dis-
tance from large markets are handicapped with heavy rates of transport,
loss by damage in carriage and by decay, and the difficulty—almost impos-
sibility—of procuring,at reasonable cost, the whole of the various machinery
and materials required for the proper preservation and, what is quite as im-
portant, the proper packing, finish, and display of their product so as to
ensure successful competition with that imported. The higher cost of
skilled labour, as compared with Europe and the United States (the latter
statement is made advisedly, as will be shown later on), particularly of the
class required, is another drawback to the profitable prosecution of the
industries now under review, and others might be mentioned ; but these are
enough to show the uninitiated, which signifies the general body of the
public, that very serious difficulties present themselves to those who desire
to mark out a track in the wide field of fruit and vegetable preservation.
While, however, it is, at the start, admitted that grave hindrances exist,
it is the object of the writer of these pages to show not only that many of
them may be overcome, but that there are in each and all the colonies materials
and artificial causes for forcing the development of some at least of the
industries, or branches thereof, appertaining to the products of the Orchard
and the Field.
That there is an absolute necessity for the introduction of other modes
of preserving than that of mere jam making, is proved by the enormous
Waste of Vegetable Products that takes place in Australasia. To state that
cows and pigs are fed upon luscious peaches, apricots, nectarines and plums,


in fruit-growing districts, is simply publishing a fact well enough known
to agriculturists in some Colonies, and the writer has seen large quanti-
ties of fruit carted to the sea-beach, there to rot for want of buyers. Indeed
hundreds, if not thousands, of tons of good vegetable food are annually lost
to the people through lack of available means of preservation. Although
it is true that in some cases this waste and destruction may be traced to the
narrow-minded cupidity of growers, who, sooner than let their produce, in
a time of great-plenty, go for less than the price they consider it worth, will
allow it to decay in or on the ground, yet, as a rule, the causes are more insur-
mountable and, broadly, thus summarised (1) Distance from mar-
kets ; (2) Heavy cost of freight and haulage ; (8) Prolific crops ; (4) Glutted
markets ; (5) Damage by flood and rain, or, on the other hand, drought;
(6 ) The conservatism and want of enterprise in farmers and growers in not
availing themselves of modern and simple means of remedying, at all events
to some extent, the evil complained of, whereby a loss of hundreds of thou-
sands of pounds is annually caused to the people of Australasia, and the
importation is encouraged of green as well as dried fruits, &c., from Oceania,
the United States, and Europe ; for most readers will be surprised to learn
that lemons are imported in brine from the Mediterranean. These facts and
reflections lead one to note
Three Great Wants.
I. A steady market for Green Fruit that will stand a long sea voyage ;
11. A market for dried and otherwise preserved Fruits and Vegetables;
111. The knowledge and means for such Preservation so as to ensure success.
Only quite lately that admirable American Orator and Lecturer, Major
Dane, in one of his stirring orations, while expatiating upon the fruit trade
of the Mediterranean, calling attention to the fact that in Australia existed
an equally fine climate and more splendid soil, whereby the best fruits of
the earth might be cultivated and bear crops at a season of the year when
non-existent in their fresh state in Europe and North America, thus offering
an enormous field for rural enterprise, exclaimed, with dignified rebuke,
“ You Australians must toake up ; ”
Owing mainly to friendly pressure from without and increasing com-
petition within, the fruitgrowers and tillers of the soil are beginning to
wake up. The Indian and Colonial Exhibition of 1886 had the effect of
drawing public attention to the fruits of Australia as there exhibited and
sold, in flavour and appearance all that could be desired, but as to price,
prohibitive, except to the wealthy, or as novel samples of Colonial industry.
In 1887, an interesting paper on “ Fruits as a Factor in Colonial Commerce,”
was read before the Royal Colonial Institute, in London, by Mr. D. Morris,
M.A., F.L.S., Assistant Director of the Royal Gardens, Kew. He referred
to the great interest awakened in the possibilities of our Colonial Empire
as a source of a large supply of fruit. Taking a rapid review of the Aus-
tralian Colonies, he mentioned that New South Wales and South Australia
were destined to produce Oranges equal to any in the English markets,
and in that one fruit alone they possessed an opening of great value.
Australian Oranges were expected to arrive in Europe in June, July, and
August, a time when no Oranges were found in the Northern Hemisphere.
Shipments of that fruit at such a time must naturally cause a change in
the characteristics of the English fruit trade, but for fine fruit carefully
packed and well placed, there was little doubt it would soon establish itself
as a recognised article of trade, and prove adequately remunerative.
Victoria produces excellent Apples, Apricots, Cherries, Figs, Melons, Plums,
and Raspberries. Fig-drying was being taken up as a local industry, and
it was hoped that some portion at least of the two hundred thousand pounds
Great Britain paid at present (1887) for her supply of Figs would be
attracted by that Colony. The canned fruit of Victoria had been pronounced
in the city to be equal to the best Californian fruits now so largely used in
Europe ; and after carefully testing them, one firm had expressed the


opinion that “ there will doubtless be a large trade done between the
mother country and the dependency of Victoria.” Each Australian Colony
by virtue of its geographical position, its climate, and soil, and the tastes
and habits of its people, was enabled to take up its own special branch of
fruit industry. South Australia produces Grapes and Apples, which could
be sent home in large quantities ; but if all its Pears were equal to those
which appeared in the Colonial market (the one at the Exhibition), and
they could be supplied in large quantities, that Colony would have a
distinctive fruit of great value in northern markets. Queensland w T as
capable of producing rich stores of both temperate and tropical fruits.
While sub-tropical Queensland -with a fine, dry, stimulating climate, granted
only sufficiency of water (yearly increasing through artesian bores), possessed
excellent capabilities for producing fruit with good keeping qualities equal
to the best Californian fruit, it is evident that tropical Queensland must
eventually become the seat of a large fruit industry, provided a good
outlet was found for it. Western Australia, with an equally dry and
stimulating climate, had produced Raisins and Currants of excellent quality.
As regarded the latter, it had been believed that the Corinth vine had not
proved a success anywhere except in the Morea and lonian Islands, but
the Currants shown at the Colonial and Indian Exhibition from West
Australia, South Australia, and the Cape of Good Hope were seedless, and,
moreover, were of such good quality that they could hold their own with
any at present imported into this country (England) * It was evident
that choice and delicious fruits were to be numbered amongst the stores of
Western Australia’s prosperous future. Tasmania, unfortunately, was not
represented at that Exhibition, and, knowing her capabilities as a fruit
country, that was a distinct loss to herself and to those who felt an interest
in colonial industries. Fresh fruit from New Zealand had arrived in thirty
consignments. It was evident that Apples, Quinces, and fruits of that
character could be very successfully grown there. Moreover, they possess
such keeping qualities that fruit stood the long voyage without special
storage, and remained good for several weeks afterwards. As regards jams,
there was practically no market for those from the Colonies. The abundance
of English and Continental fruit suitable for jam-making, and the low price
of sugar, enabled English-made jams to be the cheapest and possibly
the best of any. There is on the other hand, a good opening for
attractive and tastefully prepared candied and crystallised fruits, which
come now chiefly from France. There is no reason why the Colonies should
not at once enter upon preserving their best fruits in syrup, and their chief
competitor in this branch would be California.
The packing and shipping of fresh fruit was important. Apples from
Australia and New Zealand of the more delicate sorts should be wrapped in
paper with the layers divided by thin strips of cardboard or wood. (Dr.
Storer’s process mav be recommended, as also for Oranges and Lemons.—
The Author.) The best New Zealand Apples arrived packed in chaff,
but it was a question whether this was really necessary. Pears might be
wrapped in paper and packed in two or three layers in light boxes. For
the English market “ stem cut ” Oranges were not specially sought ; but
the plan might be very well tried by Australian growers, to test whether
such Oranges arrived in better condition than those without stems. Grapes
were largely received in England during the winter months, and they came
chiefly from Spain, packed in cork-dust, in barrels or half barrels. They
fetched from 10 to 20 shillings per barrel. Growers in Australia and the
Cape would do well to ship only the best fruit known to keep well, and
possibly they would find paper the best substitute for cork-dust. Chaff
* From information to hand at the end of December, 1889, we learn that at the
Mildura Irrigation Settlement, South Australia, vines of the Muscat Gordo and the Zante
Currant had a surprising display’ of fruit and were looking splendid. Irrigated fruit
plantations will in time be the means of securing enormous surpluses of produce for the
preserving industries here referred to.— The Author.


packing or ordinary saw-dust would appear not to answer. It was absolutely
necessary that all perishable fruits intended to be shipped should be gathered
before they were ripe. The exact condition when export fruit should be
gathered required some experience ; but it was understood in the West Indian
expression of “ full fruit.” It was necessary the fruit should have attained
its maturity as regards size, but not in the elaboration of the juices, which
gave its ultimate sweet flavour. What was sought by a special chamber on
board ship was to retard the ripening process of the fruit as much as possible
without affecting its flavour ; in fact to keep the active principles of life in
the fruit in such a state of suspense that it would travel long distances
before the ripening process was completed. If cool chambers for fruit could
be provided at a reasonable cost there was no doubt that they would greatly
enlarge the prospects of a trade in fresh tropical and sub-tropical fruits
between the Colonies and the mother country.
These are the views, suggestions, and advice of an independent expert
of the highest standing, and they are summarised hers at such length for
the reason that they cannot be too widely known throughout the Australias ;
and, it is hoped, will receive the attention they deserve. Although more
than two years have passed since this valuable paper was read, experience
has shown that Mr. Morris’ statements and ideas w r ere in the main correct,
and may, with little reservation, be confidently acted upon.
The Profitable Uses for Surplus Fruits, &c.,
may be divided into two divisions:—
I. Exportation of green fruits.
11. Home consumption and preservation.
Under the heading “ Exportation,” Oranges, Lemons, Apples, Pears,
and Grapes, in the green state, are principally referred to ; though pre-
served fruit exports will follow when the time is ripe for the perfection
of the industries relating thereto, but that is not yet. As regards what
are known as English fruits those of New Zealand and Tasmania will
stand a long sea-voyage better than those grown on the mainland of
Australia. The fruits most suited to the climate are the ones to study
and cultivate so as to bring them to the highest state of perfection,
and if growers will keep this in mind they will be saved much labour
and loss. The exportation of Oranges and Lemons to England has been
very practically experimented upon during the last three years, with
results more or less encouraging, and which any fruitgrower can readily
make himself acquainted with by communicating with the Agricultural
Bureau (if such exists, as it should) of his Colony, or with the Secretary of
the Fruitgrowers’ Union of New South Wales, Parramatta. In a general
way it may be remarked that the tiade is in its infancy, that it is bound to
develop into very large proportions, and that prices and profits will
gradually reach an average level. During the months of June, July and
August, in London, Oranges of good quality and condition will sell in quan-
tities at prices that will nett the Australian grower somewhere about six
shillings per case, but as for the phenomenal figures occasionally quoted as
inducements for shippers it would be wise not to be led away by them. A
good, steady trade, with a fair average price for practically unlimited quan-
tities of well-picked, well-dried, well-packed fruit (let those three, conditions
be noted) is better than fluctuations from splendid profits to dead losses.
It should, however, be borne in mind—and this is most important—that the
condition of the fruit on arrival in London depends very largely on the
character of the season, whether wet, or dry, or moderate, during which it
was grown ; extremes in either case being highly prejudicial to good results.
The Colonial Fruitgrowing Industry is yearly attracting more attention
in London, and quite lately a deputation representing the Fruitgrowers’
League waited upon Sir Saul Samuel, Agent-General for New South Wales,
to explain that they proposed to send a fruitgrowing expert to that colony
to inspect and select suitable land for fruit production, and they asked if


the New South Wales Government would be nreDarpd tn mnto OTITt
wav' Xd Si8 th n S® matter ‘ Sir Saul S«“«l said that he could Sln any
the^nterprise^TWrmav 6 ? Wh « h he e P resented to render assistance to
the Sr'S, I
tmprore the fruit-eulfure and trade of eolon“ SSfate
s being taken m these matters in Australia itself, for during the S ™X
k,rge and well-attended conferences of fruitgrowers have g been P held in
Melbourne and Sydney with results that must prove of lasting benefit to
iect oTSXpZn M'S? VEfit
!£H!S
,nd American martetB ’““““
tus in 00,mection with whii *
Home Consumption and Preservation.
industries 1S C °an£ a 7 ide and important field for new and profitable colonia 1
fol'owin" hints t a V°’ 3 ’ th ” f h t
to h 6”’ ”B “ P °"»f Cafi?oS wilSound
g£«Msss£=t?jaHS3
““*? mrehable. As a consequence me/were loth to iSt thei?
money in the business ; and the industry languished The art of fruit
“Trap, and dicing in the sun, has elfanged ,11 this. The fcSt
growei no longer depends upon a local market. His markets are in London
Amsterdam, Africa, Asia, and Australia. Fruit preserving has steadied the
Suit only Ce as^ a a S iiHarv U t it er depends upon local demand for green
a^T^f
no wonder SaYthe TpowerTn^he
OOO andriilT f’ COmbined > yield an estimated value of
yoTncr niants not vit in fTn P ro P ortio ? f , the acrea^e P lanted consists of
Sn ever fThe 1 S r ; and P la ‘ ltin g is going on more briskly
buan ever. (_ine last U.S. census was in 1880. The Dresent nonnlati™. n f
SS*5“fS be br °“dly estimated at 1,400,000, or, sav!??hiSm„to than
New South Wales or V.ctoria. The increase of population in thesXtes £
reckoned at 2 5 per cent, per annum. California’s^fruitcron in 1888 wa<3
Author ) aggregate the enormous total of 276,410,0001*/ weight-THE
Cahforma first class fruit only i, placed on the local martets fa ho™


consumption. Thus, a farmer picks the very best samples of his fruits, and
sends to the local market, for which he will obtain, as a top price, about 2d.
per lb. for peaches, apricots, &c. The Cannery values for these fruits are
about M per lb., sometimes even less, and sometimes ,d. This is for
medium frSts; and as this is a stationary value from year to year the
farmer is sure of this sum. The very inferior fruits are disposed °f to the
best advantage possible—converted into jam (as in Australasia), 01 feed tor
Dies and poultry. The various classes of fruit offered for sale in the San
Francisco markets are, as already stated, usually first class and are got
up in a manner most creditable to the fruit growers. The stone fruits are
mostly marketed in open parcels-peaches, apricots, and nectarines in open
wicker baskets "of >1 bushel, \ bushel, 1 peck, or \ peck eachjpiumsinsha-
low boxes of about 4 inches deep ; strawberries and blackberries m small
baskets or very shallow boxes ; apples, pears, citrous fruits, and grapes in
boxes In every case the basket or box is sold with the fruit; and the more
perishable kinds of fruits are put up in parcels to suit purchasers of small
quantities. By 6 o’clock in the morning the fruit carts are scourm 0 the
citv supplying all kinds of customers with fresh fruit packed the evening
before. The housewife gets her fruit daily direct from the shipper s waggon,
and obtains for her money more than double the quantity
Italian or Chinese fruit-vendor for the same amount. The fruits thus offeied
are clean, bright, choice, sizable, and mostly of the same variety m each
parcel. It is this which leads Australian visitors m San Francisco to think
that the fruits of California are superior to those of Australia. Were they
to consider that in the one case, it is the pick of the fruit they see,andin
the other case, a general assortment of fruit, the surprise wou d_
The packing of the fruit is also ingeniously and intelligently conducted. Yet
there is nothing in it which any handy, intelligent man cannot pick up from
his 5 -own experience and observation ; and if a man will not exercise these
faculties it is idle to talk of teaching him “ how todo it. Shortly, the rules
to be observed may be laid down as follows 1. Have a standard-sized box.
Observe the number of large, second large, medium, small, and very small
fruits it will contain. Grade the fruits accordingly ; and never have fruits
of two sizes in the same box. 2. Do not mix the varieties. 3. Have the
fruits all of one color ; and let neither scabs, scales, bruises, nor imperfec-
tions of any kind mar the surface of the skin. 4. Consider to what market
the fruits are to be sent. If to a distance, they should not be quite as ripe
as those which are to be consumed locally. 5. Pack honestly. Let the top
of the case be a fair index of the samples below. 6. Have the package
which contains the fruit clean and tidy ; let the fruits be placed gently in
the box in regular rows ; and have the case so full that the contents cannot
shift about in it. Where paper is used let it be a fine paper containing but
little oil. 7. Small fruits, such as strawberries, blackberries, plums,
should be packed in neat shallow boxes or baskets. Remember that the
weight of dead-ripe fruit will crush that below.
As regards the marketing of fruits in Australia, a great fault is the
hap-hazard way in which much of it comes forward. A very great draw-
back is the neglect of grading according to size, colour, ripeness and
varieties ; but greatest of all, the large number of inferior fruits, decom-
posing scabs on pears, fungoids on apricots, and scales (red, white and
black) on oranges and lemons. Even these inferior fruits will sell at re-
munerative prices in times of scarcity. But if these fruits were refused
admission to the'markets, where would the owners dispose of them / The
remedy here, as in California, is the cannery. Create a demand for fruit
and supplies will soon be forthcoming.. Competition will soon kill in-
ferior fruit. Pass a measure compelling the reasonable cleansing of
orchards, just as it is compulsory to dip scabby sheep. This would also
help to meet matters. And matters >vould very much improve if we would
only have a little more faith in ourselves, and in our ability to produce and
excel.


considStanS tt SvSeaiTof *££ Z** 1 , deserve, grave
= cen M m ar k et,. The SorVafS fhafo^e
SaTi^T™"' d ba ’ n® 6 now* at « P hf°mS:
man , and the purchasers would know exactly their nosition Tf nthor
IS=P§ii^i=
in the trade. rn g “to operation a much-needed and beneficial reform
and s“r a ide et wm
wFJktZ&L"* candied fruits ’ “ d ld -p“
Th 18« S/ / d K "7« i 3,f ° f ? ied ’ bottled ’ aM CaDdi6d “ totalled:-
1888 ffS? 8 f hlp P in « value ’ *102,674 ; duty £56,605.
n , 1888 ’?’ O2b > 3601b s; shipping value, £103,006 ; duty £58,553.
oenl V suffic?enTI e<ithat i P a i d at the enormous rate of 56 -per
is^otTtakpri 8u ? pose ’ to the development of any
n, o 7! y®* lC 1S not taken advantage of except in a very small decree
i^mmsrk&s
Z a "ff b “ n *T“ *^P-“ 4 ‘p»K r
Sbe whoT’chSaTk Snot *° be e f pected that ° ld enstom, »r= going
w . The Dried Fig Industry.
nrniifi 616 !i u gra ? d ?PP ortu nity for a profitable trade. The fio- i s most
who foftL fralusedYblf w^ n carefull y ; there is no waste ; the
lsedl . ble the process of drying and packing perfectly
'ATaZT'T I % large ’ l and I the * scal Protection afforded
livelihood hereof 6 number P e °pl e could earn a pleasant and healthy
The Dried Plum or Prune Industry.
sompnSS V Ch( : ap ’ s j m P le > Process a profitable trade in a whole-
Candied Lemon and Orange Peel.
greater attention is not paid to Lemon growing ; for in a counTry Hke thS


it seems a disgrace that there should be room for importation of this
Fruit in brine from the Mediterranean.
The Olive Oil Trade.
The Olive will grow to perfection in many parts of the colonies.
Under good management there is a fortune in this trade. Sir Samuel
Davenport’s Olive Oil Works in South Australia may be given as an ex-
ample of what can be done.
Almonds, Chestnuts, and Ground Nuts.
will grow prolifically in Australia. In the cultivation of these there is
money, and employment for many, and for the children s children ot those
who plant now.
Oil of Lemons.
This is an article heavily taxed in most, if not all the colonies, and
which ought to be manufactured in districts where, sometimes, a glut
occurs. _
UV/VUJLOI
Dried, Canned, and Bottled Tomatoes.
This vegetable grows very prolifically in these colonies, and immense
quantities are wasted through glutted markets. It can be dried man
evaporator, and used months or years afterwards by being simply im-
mersed in water ; or it may be canned or bottled, This trade has a large
future before it.
Carrots, Parsnips, Turnips.
By the aid of American evaparators, these and other vegetables can be
so dried as to carry long distances in the smallest possible space, and yet
retain their aroma and flavour, so that a year or more after drying they
may be used, in places where vegetables are scarce and dear to great ad-
vantage, particularly in soups. This brings us to one of the most important
economic industries of the present day, an industry which is peculiarly-
adapted to Australasia, but which has not yet been taken up m the way it
deserves. This is—
The Preservation of Fruits and Vegetable Products by Artificial
Evaporation;
that is to say, a special process of pneumatic drying by expelling moisture.
For ages past this has been effected by sun-drying, which, however,
has its drawbacks, for there are many cases in which fruit has to remain a
lon o' time in the sun, during which fermentation sets in, the starch and
sugar are turned to vinegar, myriads of insects prey upon the fruit, and
dust and filth envelop it, rendering it disagreeable to the eye and un-
wholesome to the stomach. To advantageously dry fruit in the sun a hot
dry climate is necessary, but in an uneven climate, where rain is liable to
fall at any time, as in most fruit growing districts in Australia, artificial
evaporators or “ driers” are necessary. The desiccation or artificial drying
of vegetable products has been practised for many years, notably by the
French in the first instance; and the author believes he is correct in stat-
ing that preserved vegetables were used in their army and navy during
the Crimean war (1854), and, certainly, their dried cabbage, carrots,
potatoes, etc., were in common use in 1860. But to the Americans be-
longs the credit of the introduction of the improved scientific pneumatic
drying, evaporating, or desiccating (they all mean one and the same) ot
fruits and other vegetable products, a process entirely distinct from can-
nine- or bottling, yet largely made use of in the extensive canning estab-
lishments of the United States, where, especially at the end of the week
during the busy season, large quantities of fruit may have accumulated,
and, there not being time for the ordinary process of the factory, it is
hydrated or evaporated to save it from decay, and when wanted for the
cans or, bottles it is re-hydrated—that is, allowed to take up the same


amount of moisture it expelled, and is then put through in the usual way.
When this is properly done one cannot tell the difference between
evaporated and fresh canned fruits. Here is a lesson in true economy
that might be learned and practised in Australasia, where the waste of
fruit is at times of a startling character. The evaporators in use are
various and distinctive, and are very numerous in the U.S. The “Cali-
fornian Fruit Grower” states that within a radius of forty miles of Ro-
chester, New York, there are more than 1,600 evaporators. These give em-
ployment during autumn and winter to about 30,000 hands, whose wages
average from 12s. 6d. to 265. per week. Last season the production of these
evaporators was about 30,000,0001b5., worth at first cost about £416,666.
The principal consuming countries abroad are Germany, England, Belgium,
Holland, and France, in which the new product has entirelv displaced the
old-fashioned sun-dried fruits. West Africa and Australia are beginning to
call for evaporated fruit.” This refers to one district onlv. and to fruits
that can be just as well grown and evaporated in Australia."' We will now
proceed to refer briefly to several kinds of evaporators, merely stopping for
a moment to remark that, whereas many of these machines are costly and
fitted only for being worked on a large scale, either on the co-operative
system, or by small companies, there are numerous hand driers, suitable for
individual farmers and growers, or for young men possessing brains and a
few pounds, who can take them about from orchard to orchard, buying and
evaporating the fruit on the spot, a mode of operation strongly to be re-
commended in well-settled districts, for not only does fruit, whether in-
tended for the table, the kitchen, or the preserver, lose its quality and
value by constant handling (and especially by the rough usage it is subject
to here), but by this means a saving in time, labour, and material is effected.
It is a splendid, healthy, profitable occupation for young men of energy
and perseverance, and it affords a sure outlet for the grower. It is not the
business of the Author to act as an advertising agent by recommending one
particular drier more than another. Convenience in manipulation of the
fruit and saving in labour are among the desiderata sought to be obtained
in the construction of these machines; but some maybe mentioned for
stationary purposes as drying factories, others for domestic use, others
again, for transporting from place to place. In the latter case, of course’
weight and size have to be considered.
The principle involved is simple, the object being to drive the
moisture off the fruit or vegetable with as little labour as possible, and
to leave it in a condition for food. Any contrivance which will do this
is the article required.
There are three classes of evaporators in general use :—The “Vertical ”
the “ Horizontal,” the “ Inclined Flue,” all of which have their admirers
and detractors. A fourth kind has lately been brought out in Victoria by
an enterprising American. It may be termed as of the “ Rotary” class, and
will be referred to in its place. Personally, the author prefers those
machines in which the fruit or substance to be dried is entered at the
greatest point of heat and finished off at the lowest. By this means the
direct action of heat in the primary stages fixes the essential oils, to which
aroma and flavor are due. Otherwise the steam from the lower trays as-
cends, and in so doing passes through and around all trays above them
and thus steams, cooks, or soddens the contents. This is disastrous to
success, for the vapour expands and finally bursts the cells, and by ex-
posure of the contents causes acidification and oxidization, also dispelling
the essential oils. In order to prevent this, and to bring out the fruits
etc., fully and well dried, without any damage to the cellular formation’
various modes have been thought out and patented of diffusing currents
of dry, hot air under, over, and around the trays containing the fruit or
other substances. Upon the issue of this depends the success of the whole
operation. We will now proceed to the brief consideration of several
evaporating machines, or driers, in general use ;


The “ Alden” Process of Pneumatic Evaporation
for preserving and perfecting Fruits, Vegetables, Meats, Fish, etc.
This machine is of a large size suitable for a factory, with upper floor
on which to draw out the trays as they come to hand. It may be con-
structed in an ordinary frame building. For the construction of the heat-
ing chamber, which is composed of brick walls, about 9in. thick, an exca-
vation 4ft. or sft. deep is made in the soil. The chamber can be con-
structed in two divisions, with a wall in the centre : so that the one can be
worked independently of the other. This, however, is a matter depending
on the extent of the business to be done. The furnace has an immense
heating surface and the heat is distributed by a novel system of pipes or
flues. Cold air openings are provided on the sides of the heating chamber,
near the bottom of the enclosing walls. The cold air comes first in con-
tact with the lower and moderately heated pipes ; then rising successively
to the second and third tiers (the upper tier being the hottest), it is heated
by degrees, and as the pipes are placed close together, the air is filtered
through the narrow spaces between them, thus bringing every atom of the
air into close contact with the heated pipes, which is said to be a more
effective method of heating air than by radiation. The pipes can be easily
cleaned of soot. The principal part of the apparatus consists of a vertical
drying chamber, or shaft, 20 to 25 feet high, and 3 to 5 feet square, con-
taining a series of frames, or trays, one above another, four and a quarter
inches apart, covered with netting, and moved upward all together by
endless chains and a rachet wheel. The heating apparatus is placed under
this chamber, from which currents of air, heated to any required tempera-
ture, pass up, through, and around the frames. On each frame is spread
ten to twenty pounds of fruit. The lowest frame is first placed in the
chamber directly over the heat, at the bottom of the shaft, where it remains
from 2to 6 minutes. It is then moved up 4| inches, and another frame of
fruit is placed beneath it. At regular intervals the whole series of
frames are moved upwards 4J inches, a fresh frame is put on
beneath them, until the frames are all in, containing (if apples) from
15 to 30 bushels of fruit. At this time, the shaft being full, one frame is
taken off at the top, and one is put in at the bottom at regular intervals,
varying with the variety of the fruit treated, and the thickness of the
slices or pieces. Each bushel of apples contains about 40 lbs. of water,
which is seized by the ascending air, and passes with it up, through, and
around the fruit as the moisture is taken gradually from it, enveloping it
to the last in a cloud of vapour. The pores of the fruit are thus kept open,
free for the circulation and exit of vapour, until all the free water is re-
moved, the remainder (16 per cent.) being held as hydrate. It is well
known that fruit will not mature, ripen, or sweeten, in strictly dry weather,
nor in cold wet weather. It is claimed that by the “ Alden” process the
fruit does not become “dried” in the ordinary acceptation of the term, but
it is preserved in its own concentrated juices, and will keep for years in
any climate. These machines cost in America from £BO to £250. Messrs.
T. and W. Willis, agents for the Tasmanian Steam Navigation Company,
Bridge-street, Sydney, can be referred to for further information.
As many inquiries are made respecting the cost and profits in evaporat-
ing, the following “Alden” tables are given :
California Raisin Drying, with 2 enlarged evaporators, calculated in dollars
and cents.:—
IO.OOOIbs. grapes at 1 cent, per 1b... .. $lOO.OO
Labour, fuel, etc. .. .. .. 15.00
Boxes and packing 3,3331b5. raisins .. 33.33
Total cost of producing same .. .. $148.33


3,3331b5. raisins (lib. from 3) at 10 cents per lb. $333.30
Deduct cost of producing same .. 148.33
Profit for 24 hours .. .. .. $184,97
Profit for 30 days, of 24'hours .. .. $5,549.10
The manufacturers state they are prepared to guarantee these results
under proper management.
Below is given an estimate of a day’s work of twenty-four hours for a
factory of five evaporators :
PARED PEACHES.
APPLES.
10 tons Fruit, at §2O CO §2OO 00
50 Boys and Girls or Chinamen, at
75c 37 50
11 cords Wood, at §8 00 10 00
2 Foremen, at §1 50 3 00
1 Superintendent 2 50
30 Boxes, at 25c 7 50
1 packer, at §1 50c 1 50
10 tons Apples, at §lO per ton §lOO 00
Paring and Coring 320 Boxes, at Bc.
per box 25 60
11 cords of Wood, at §8 00 10 80
2 Foremen and Superintendent 5 50
40 cases, at 25c 10 00
Packing and Incidentals 7 50
§252 00
Evaporated Peaches, 2,0001b5., at
33c. per lb 660 00
§l5B 60
Evaporated Apples, 2,5001b5., at
14c. per lb 337 50
Deduct from this the value of cores and
skins, and it will reduce the cost below
6 cents per lb.
FRENCH PRUNES
7 tons Fruit, at §4O
8 Boys and Girls or Chinamen,
75c.
11 cords Wood, at §8 00
Foremen and Superintendent .
Packers and Incidentals
132 Boxes, at 15c
TOMATOES.
§2BO 00
8 tons Fruit, at §lO 00 §BO 00
i, at
6 00
100 Boys and Girls or Chinamen, at
75c 75 00
11 cords of Wood, at §8 00 10 00
Foremen and Superintendent 5 50
75 ten pound Boxes, at 11 cts 8 25
Packer, §2 50 ; Incidentals, §5 00 .. 7 50
§331 30
Yield, 4,6661b5., at 17c. per lb.
TABLE OF PRINCIPAL
793 22
§lB6 25
Y r ield, 1,0001b5., at 75c. per lb 634 50
ARTICLES
EVAPORATED, WHOLESALE PRICES
YIELD
nruimiLUy vviiULLunLL r iilULOj
ETC.
go I S-d
® c? § OJ ? g
c v © e?o
*».&
£•§ £§B
P- as §
1001I 001 I°*
2
13
£
o
g
8
S-i
Q
Pm
» e
£ p
A
JM
§ ©
Ao
2 o
■P
'S rH
§3
Art
o-Iq
£
B
•S-d®
« as
I l£
Apples
Apricots
Reef
lbs.
4000
4000
3000
4000
4000
2000
4000
2000
4000
4000
3000
3000
4000
4000
3400
3400
3400
4000
lbs.
500
560
500
440
900
300
400
200
400
640
660
880
360
560
340
275
240
280
12J
14|
20
16J
11
13J
10
10
10
16g
22
33g
9
12J
10
8i
10
6i
Cherries
Corn ..
55(8 75
9 1-6(812!
31
4
Currants.
Nectarines.
Onions ...
Peaches, pared.
Plums
Potatoes
Prunes, French
Peas
30@45
3J@sf
2
Pumpkin
Rhubarb.
Squash .
Tomatoes


It may be well to mention here that other evaporators, if constructed
on sound principles, may show equally good returns. The lower price of
fruits and labour in the States is more than made up by the heavy freights
from America and the protective duties in all the Australasian Colonies.
The principal needs here are an abundance of fruit, and energy sufficient
to make good use of the ever increasing surplus.
The “ Climax,” Fruit and Vegetable Evaporator.
This machine, the invention of an American, Mr. A. F. Spawn, is of a
peculiar character, and, so far as the author knows, is unique of its kind.
It may be described as of the rotary class, and its construction and use is
thus briefly set forth :—“ The Evaporator is 5 feet by 6 feet, 7 feet 8 inches
high ; 3 feet of the bottom part is made of galvanized iron, built to an
angle iron frame, in which is built a wrought iron hot-air furnace, running
the length of the Evaporator, for burning wood or coal. The top part, or
hot-air chamber, is 4 feet 8 inches, and built of two thicknesses of half-
inch tongue and groove lumber, with a ventilator at the top to let out the
moisture arising from the fruit. An iron-shaft runs through the hot-air
chamber, on which are two hubs, four spokes in each. The frames to carry
the trays are hung on the ends of the spokis with bolts. The greatest
weight of the frames is hung below the bolts, so that they keep level when
the machinery is in motion. Each frame carries seven trays, making
twenty-eight trays in all. The trays are made of galvanised wire-cloth, 48
inches by 22 inches. At the end of the shaft, outside of the air chamber,
is a gear, with a shaft running to the side of the air chamber, with a crank
opposite the door, for putting in and taking out the trays of fruit. When
the operator has one frame filled with trays of fruit, he turns the crank,
the nest of trays moves away, and brings another frame opposite the door,
until all four frames are full of trays of fruit, when the door is closed.
Any time the operator wishes he can change the position of the trays by
turning the crank, moving any one he wishes directly over the hot-air
furnace—the hottest place in the Evoporator—and can bring any tray of
fruit to the door to be examined. By the use of dampers in the furnace,
and the ventilator on the top, any degree of heat can be kept up. One of
the great advantages of the revolving motion is that all trays of fruit get
the same degree of hot air, thereby all danger of scorching some and not
drying others is avoided. This size will dry from thirty to forty bushels
of apples in twenty-four hours. Can make them double the size or larger.
We do not think it would pay anyone to have a smaller machine than
would dry thirty or forty bushels a day, as it would require as much
attention to operate a smaller one. Any fruitgrower not having enough
fruit at the present time to keep one going through the season can buy
from his neighbours, and make a profitable business of it. The cores and
skins of the apples are made into cider or vinegar, there being no waste.”
The cost of one of these machines is about and they are manu-
factured and used in Victoria for the preservation of several kinds of fruit
and, to a large extent, of vegetables. Small companies are formed to work
these evaporators in country districts where fruit, &c., is cheap and tran-
sport dear.
Mr. Spawn advertises his machine by delivering a lecture entitled,
“ The Coming Industry for Victoria ; or, What to do with our Boys,” and
each person entering the hall is presented with two packages of evaporated
fruit. This is the only evaporator at present manufactured in the Colonies,
and, as such, deserves special mention.
The “American” Inclined Flue Evaporator.
This machine is the invention also of an American, Dr. Ryder, who
claims to have spent over twenty years in experimenting upon his process,
and on the exact angle at which proper evaporation, without soddening the
fruit, &c., could be effected. The “American” is made entirely of wood


with the exception, of course, of the furnace, which will burn coal, coke,
wood, charcoal, bamboo, reeds, turf, peat, or any other vegetable refuse.
It is also claimed that by means of specially constructed machines, under
this patent, flood-damaged grain, hops, sugar-cane, &c., can be perfectly
hydrated and recover their soundness at a cost not exceeding 6d. per bushel.
Some experiments made in the county of Kent two or three years ago, with
grain soaked in water for twenty-four or forty-eight hours, and afterwards
put through this evaporator, were entirely successful. Thus an immense
saving might be effected in many Australian grain and sugar-growing
districts where great damage is done by floods.
A most important point connected with this machine, in the opinion
of the author, is that it can be folded up and very easily transported from
orchard to orchard, and thus offers a mode of livelihood to men who
are weary of unsuccessfully seeking employment in the large towns, and
who have the intelligence and the courage to embark in this industry as
is done by large numbers of their class in the United States.
Some “Alden” statistics having been given previously, it will only
be fair to quote a few published by the patentees of the “ American ” pro-
cess (in English money) :
Quantities. Varieties. Cost of Conversion, Profit in given
I.abour. and Fuel. Quantities.
1 bushel ... Apples ... sd. 1/5 to 2/6
1 „ ... Peaches, 2nd grade 7£d. ... 1/3 „ 2/9
1 » ••• » Ist grade... 1/1 ... 2/1 3/6
100 ears ... Sweet Cora ... 13 ... 1/3 '3 4
100 quarts ... Raspberries ... 1/3 ... n/. ” ie ( .
100 v Cherries ~. 2/1 ~. 4/- ” 8/-


The following bona fide record of operations of an American Evapora-
tor size No. 4, capacity about 100 bushels per day, started about Sept. 15
1886 in Eastern Ohio, and selected because it had only a short season and
exclusively on apples, may be of interest. There were several owners, all
practical, closely engaged business men, each contributing $200.00 (£40)
They appointed a Superintendent, and employed the following help to
run it :—
A Superintendent, or Foreman, per day ... $1.50.
Two men to attend machine, each J-day J-night, 1.25 2.50.
Two boys to run two Eureka parers 1.00.
Three girls to trim and spread fruit 1.50.
Five bushels coal -^0.
Operating expenses per day $6.80 (28/-).
They advertised for apples and paid 12, 15 to 20 cents per bushel according
to quality, &c. They were overrun with fruit, having generally 500 to 1000
bushels on hand, and obliged to turn many away. In 35 days' run the
factory had turned out enough Evaporated Fruit to pay for evaporator,
paring machine, apples, labour, fuel, Ac. In other words, they made 100 per
cent, and had the whole outfit clear in that time.
Taking into consideration the very heavy trans-Pacific freights and the
Colonial protective duties on dried fruits, the Australian Evaporatercan-
afford to pay nearly double these prices for his fruit.
The cost of an “ American ” machine is from £ll to £lOO, according to
size, landed in Sydney.
The “ Vermont Farm ” Pneumatic Fruit Drier.
This is a small and handy machine, somewhat of the same class as the “ Al-
den,” but very much smaller ; can be worked by one man, and is capable
of being easily transported from place to place, though not collapsable.
The “ Stutzmann” Evaporator.
Is a machine constructed in the simplest manner of galvanized iron, and is
suitable for domestic use. Further particulars concerning these last two
machines can be obtained from Mr. Hebblewhite, George-street, Sydney.
The “Excelsior” Family Fruit Drier.
Claims to be a simple, cheap, and efficient drying apparatus for family use.
The machine is not sold in the Colonies, but the right to build and erect,
with full instructions, may be obtained from Messrs. Fletcher & Co., Queen’s
Place, Sydney.
There are also
Small “ Cook Stove ” Driers.
To be had through any American importing firm, in which very small quan-
tities of home-grown fruit may be dried, without much care as to quality,
appearance, or keeping properties. They are useful in their way when there
is a surplus of fruit, as it can be afterwards preserved in other ways,
or used in the kitchen without further preparation, in the winter time.
They cost about £3 each, and might be made in the Colonies for 30/- to 40/.
The Author has been thus particular in specifying (as he trusts, impar-
tially,) various lands of Evaporators, because there is in these Colonies a
most singular ignorance as to their nature and use, and if the circulation
of these pages has the effect of turning the attention of fruit-growers and
farmers to this simple and inexpensive means of converting what would
otherwise be “ waste ” into good marketable food a great good will have
been effected. But attention is again directed to the very important points
of clean, sightly, packing and “ get-up.” A great fault with so many colo-
nial industries is the loose, untidy manner (combined with poor workman-
ship as to tins, boxes, labels, &c.) in which the product—good enough in
itself—is put up for the market.
The following points on Fruit Drying, from the “ Californian Fruit-


Grower,” will prove of value to those who intend embarking in this indus-
try “ Allow your fruit to mature thoroughly on the tree before gathering
it. Green or under-ripe fruit does not contain a sufficient quantity of
saccharine matter or grape sugar to make a good article of dried fruit
Over-ripe, mushy, bruised or partially decayed fruit makes a poor, dark-
coloured dried product. Grade your fruit as to size before you cut it. Fruit
that has fallen from the tree and is bruised is sure to turn black when dried
Evaporate your fruit thoroughly, but do not dry it too much. Put on the
finishing touch in your curing-house. Fine dried fruit cannot be produced
from poor, small green fruit. In bleaching do not burn the sulphur in the
evaporator on any account, and it is advisable not to burn it in the
bleaching-house with the fruit. Twenty or thirtv minutes is a sufficient
length of time to submit fresh-cut fruit to the‘sulphur fumes. (Some
claim forty or fifty minutes the proper time.) We consider the Muir peach
one of the best varieties for drying. It is thick of flesh and has a verv
small pit. Five and one-half to six pounds of fresh fruit will make one of
dried. Clingstone peaches are good driers; but cause considerable trouble
in pitting. There is less waste to the cling than to the freestone. The
finest dried fruit made in the State last year was placed in the evaporator
tor a short time only, and finished in a curing-room at a temperature of
130degs. to 135degs. If you want to make a record for your fruit use the
hnest, choicest fruit you can get for drying. You cannot produce choice dried
frmt if you use windfalls, culls, wormy, and over-ripe fruit. Do not dip
the fruit in water after it is dried, just before packing, for the purpose of
softening it up and making it heavy. Buyers can tell “ doped” fruit the
moment they see it; and if it is not sold and consumed immediately it is
S u re i t ?^ Urn blacli » & et soffc and s P oil - Your curing and packinghouse
should be well ventilated : but all openings should be well secured against
insects by wire screens.” °
The manufacture of a very simple home-made fruit drier, was described
m the columns of the Australian “ Town and Country Journal” in one of
the issues in October or November, 1889.
Profits in Evaporating as a Business.
While admitting that this is the most important part of the subject in
the eyes of all who propose going into fruit and vegetable drying the
author is compelled to acknowledge that it is one upon which verv little
reliable information can be obtained, so far as these colonies are concerned
simply because the trade here is as yet in its earliest infancy, and therefore
it is almost impossible to obtain data to found an assertion upon. It is not
however, pretended that any large fortunes are to be made in this industry'
but it may be fearlessly stated that a good living for many thousands of
men, women, and children, yearly increasing in numbers, will result from
the regular adoption thereof, which will force on, in its turn, the cultiva-
tion ot large fruit-growing areas, and bring about a very heavy consump-
tion, at a reasonable price, of the class of goods most adapted to the climate
and the natural wants of the people, and also lead to a considerable export
trade. Ketemng, then, to profits on evaporating as a business, so far as
Australasia is concerned, judging from what is done in other countries and
from the facilities for the industry that exist here, it is fair to assume that
a direct advantage of from 50 to 100 per cent, on the market value in
times of plenty of the fruit or vegetable evaporated, should accrue to the
evaporater, and a direct benefit to the State would be gained by the pro-
fitable and healthful employment of large numbers of persons who at
present find the labour market over-stocked. But, once more let it be en-
graved on the minds of wonld-be evaporaters that unless they are prepared
to devote to this industry the care and attention it deserves they had better
leave it alone. A thing if done at all should be done well. The man who
follows the advice here given will find that the fruit and vegetable evaporat-
ing industry is one well worthy of the highest intelligence, care and skill


Available Industries.
While it is impossible to attempt to specify seriatim the hundreds of
productions of the universe to which evaporating may be judiciously ap-
plied, the following list will at least serve as an indicator, requiring but
perception and appreciation to induce profitable application of the
evaporator, in one or other of its forms and sizes, in their curing or prepara-
tion, viz.:—
Barks for Tanning Grasses Vanillas Mace
uarKSior iainiing
Oil Seeds Roots Fish Pigs
Carraways Weeds Dye Woods Dates
Cochineals Prawns Peppers
Aloes Nuts Barks Apricots
Miif.mpou Cinchona Plums
Aloes . -
Nux Vomica Nutmegs Cinchona
JNux vomica 7,; ” .
Castor Beans Cocoanuts Cinnamon Cherries
Gallnuts Betelnuts Soojee Parsnips
Rhubarb Dye Stuffs Farinaceous Products Peas
Driws Waxes Tapioca Lemon Peel
Chemicals Gambier Fodders Oilcake
Myrabolanes Colors Fertilizers Arrowroot
Coura Confections Cacao Birdnests
BGche de Mer Salts Cloves Grains
Dholl Seeds Prunes Coffee
Madder Tobacco Pippins Spices
Yeast Powders Cardamons Pears
Ishwlass Rubbers Peaches Tomatoes
Salt-Petre Crystals Raisins Pimento
Paints Gums Blackberries Currants
YarbaMate Caoutchouc Carrots Nectarines
Pistacios Camphor Potatoes Raspberries
Locust Beans Cutch Orange Peel Sweetcorn
Essences Curry Stuffs Hay Turnips
Pulps Chilies Sago Beans
Paner Stock Ginger Sugars Citron Peel
Herbs Turmeric Breadstuffs Manures
yeasts Flowers Tea Bananas
Hops Safflower Chocolate Cocoauut^
Flood -damaged Wheat, Corn, Sugar Cane, &c., &c.
THE PROCESS OF
FRUIT AND VEGETABLE CANNING.
The reasons for favouring this class of fruit preservation are very
obvious. The fruit is thoroughly preserved against all changes of tempera-
ture and climate ; it is turned out in a cooked and finished state, fit either
for the kitchen or the table ; it presents a sightly appearance ; there is
no breakage as with bottled fruit; and the expense of manufacture is
comparatively small. On the other hand, considerable capital, cheap
sugar, cheap labour, cheap tin and wood for casing, and cheap fruit, with
abundance of it, are absolutely requisite for thelprofitable carrying out of
this fine industry in Australasia. One great advantage we possess here is
the magnificent appearance and size of much of our fruit, which, if canned
under favourable conditions, must top the market as to price.
The preserving of fruits by boiling with sugar has been long known,
but it is only within the last thirty years that it has been tried by cooking
and preserving by the exclusion of air. It is said that the modem process
was first hit upon by the finding among the ruins of Pompeii of figs in jars
in a perfect state of preservation, sealed air tight. _ The fruit-canning in-
dustry in California has attained immense proportions, and not only are
fruits preserved in this way, but all the finer and more perishable vegetables
such as green peas, string beans, green corn, and. so forth. Generally


speaking all canneries make their own cans, and, as a rule, such should be
the case to carry one on successfully. The tin is bought in the boxes as it
comes from the manufacturers, and the very best machinery is in use to
turn it into cans. One machine cuts out sides ; another cuts out and
creases bottoms; another cuts out tops with holes for filling fruits ;
while still another cuts out covers for the holes after being filled.
Machinery also rounds the sides, and fits them for the solderer. Then the
tinner begins Ms work. The sides are first soldered in the usual way ; the
bottoms are fitted ; and a string of solder is put inside around the out
edge of the can. In some establishments the cans are then put on edge on
a moving belt set over a hot iron plate ; and by the time they are passed
over the solder is melted and the bottom fastened on. Others stand them
on the bottom of a hot plate, while some canners think that in view of the
defective work from mechanical soldering the cheapest way is by hand.
However it may be done, the least defect in soldering will make the fruit
spoil. The tops are put on last, and the cans are then ready for fruit. The
can-making and soldering is largely done by Chinamen. It is the cheap
labour question that is such a stumbling block to the canning industry in
the Australias.
The canneries are usually erected where they are convenient for fruits
and railways ; cars being run right up to warehouses both to discharge
sugar, material for boxes, and other supplies, and also for the economical
handling of fruit after canning for shipment to market. There are also
canneries in San Francisco city, which depend greatly for their fruit on
buying up the surplus each day and canning it. Of course the outcome is
not first-class quality. Taking all things into consideration, the best fruit
is produced where the cannery is located near the orchard, as hauling and
handling deteriorates the fruit. The grower usually delivers his own fruit,
which is packed in boxes holding about 301b5., and having a narrow strip
of wood nailed across each end on the top, so that boxes can be set one
above another without the risk of bruising. These boxes have holes in the
ends for the fingers in handling.
The following summary of a report published in the “ Town and
Country Journal” of a cannery started by growers themselves on the co-
operative principle, because they had a surplus of fruit, will give a fair
idea of the subject. It is selected because such a plan is apparently the
best on which to make a start in this industry in some of the fruit growing
districts in these colonies :
The fruit is received at the door in boxes (similar to those described
above), and weighed. It is then passed to the graders, who sort and grade
the fruit according to size, ripeness, and quality. It is then taken to 'the
cutters, who are women and girls. These are seated at small tables, and
dexterionsly cut the fruit into halves, throwing out the stones. For can-
ning purposes the fruit is cut clean round with a clean cut ; but for drying
purposes the fruit may be torn a little without damage. The sum of 3Jd.
is paid for cutting Sslbs. of fruit. The cut fruit is then placed before other
women and girls by boys. In doing this every grade of fruit is kept by
itself ; and at one side of the table first-class fruit is handled by one set of
workers, and at the other side second-class fruit by another set of workers.
The empty fruit cans are set beside the operators nice and clean, with about
half the lid on each ; a hole of sufficient size being left in the centre for the
operator to insert her finger and thumb, grasping the piece of fruit while
filling the can. The dexterous and slim fingers of women are best suited
for this purpose. The pieces of fruit are neatly and quickly packed in
around the sides of the can. After the can is filled, a space can be seen in
the centre of the fruit almost to the bottom of the can, with the skin or rind
side of the pieces of fruit uppermost. Between every two operators is a
pair of scales, on which the filled cans are weighed. So expert are the
workers that the cans do not vary an ounce in weight; and yet every can
is filled to the top. The filled cans are now carried on trays to another


table. The tops of them are wiped clean, and the syrup poured into them
from a hose which leads down from the syrup tank overhead. The cans
are filled with syrup so as to quite cover the top pieces of fruit. Boys then
pass along and place the small circular, central part of the lid in position,
when the tray is carried to the solderers, who use the brace and bit solder-
mg iron. That is, a soldering iron, having a curved bit, revolves round an
upright iron on steel rod which is fixed in the centre of the lid, and forms
a small puncture for the escape of air from the can when being boiled. The
curved copper bit of the soldering iron just fits in the circular groove
where the two pieces forming the lid conjoin. By dexterously working
the bit round the spiral rod forming the brace, the central portion of the lid
is soldered on by the turn of the wrist.
The trays, which hola about three dozen cans, are now placed on the
top of each other, about four deep, in an iron cage, and hoisted by means
of a tackle on a swing crane, and lowered into the boiling vats. The trays
containing the cans are placed in the cage so that the top ones do not touch
those underneath. The trays are kept in the boiling water about five or
six minutes, just long enough to heat up and expel the air through the
small puncture or hole in the lid. They are then hoisted out. The small
holes in the lids are soldered up by Chinamen. They are returned to the
cage, hoisted into another boiling vat, and boiled for six or seven minutes
longer, according to the ripeness of the fruit. The fruit is then deemed
sufficiently cooked, and is hoisted out, and allowed to cool. The total time
allowed for boiling, from first to last, is about fifteen minutes, which, how-
ever, varies according to the ripeness of the fruit. When the cages are lifted
from the boilers the second time Chinamen come along with strips of canvas
about 3 feet long, and 4 inches wide, and, encircling a dozen or more of the
hot cans with the belt, lift them off the trays and set them on the floor to
cool. The simple contrivance greatly expedites the handling of the hot
cans. Next day they are cool enough to handle, when they are placed in
huge piles, according to their grades, and are ready for labelling and pack-
ing for market.
The full cans then are put away for a few days to develop what is
called “ swell heads,” in other words, to let those which have any imper-
fection in sealing, or in the cans, get a chance to ferment, and prove them-
selves previously to labelling and boxing. Labelling and boxing can be
done at leisure, and mostly when the canning season is over. The labels
are mostly printed in San Francisco, and the boxes are cut all ready for
making up in the Sierra Nevada mountains, 800 miles away.
The Vats
may be sheet iron, lined outside with wood, or they may be unlined. They
are heated by a steam coil in the bottom. Fresh water alone is used in the
boiling.
The Syrup.
The best grades of granulated sugar are used in syrup making. The
strength of the syrup varies according to the grade of the fruit. What is
termed standard grade, or first-class fruit, is put up in about 25 deg. syrup,
or about Bib of sugar to 1 gal. of water. The extra good fruit is put up in
syrup of 45 deg. This fruit leads the market, and is worth 12s. per dozen
cans of 2ilb. each. There is a third-class fruit which is put up in syrup of
from 10 deg. to 12 deg. sugar strength, and is sold for about 6s. per dozen
cans. The varieties of Apricots used are the Mooroark and Koyal. About
twenty tons are put up per day, or about 40,000 cases in the year. The
season lasts about four months.
Value of Appearances.
Every attention is paid to the following requirements :—Neat, artistic
and effective labelling, clean and wholesome premises, good packing, and,
generally, to the inviting character and good appearance of the fruits'


Buyers never purchase fruit by taste, but by the appearance of the fruit
when the cans are opened. If the fruit is of a healty colour, and of an in-
viting appearance, it will sell; but if it is not, it will not sell. It is, there-
fore, very necessary in a business of this kind that the label should be of
such a character as to attract the eye, and the quality of Ithe fruit so good
and of such a natural color as to tempt the appetite.
Other Classes of Fruit.
are also put up, such as peaches, strawberries, and blackberries. Apricots
are purchased at about id. per lb., blackberries at 2d. per lb., and straw-
berries at about 2 id. per lb.
Labor.
There are employed, in and about the cannery, from 170 to 200 men
women, boys, and girls. The organisation of the various grades of avail-
able labour is thorough and complete. Every grade has its own position
and rate of remuneration, according to its abilities. There is no clashing
between departments ; and there is no intermixing of the sexes. The men
are worked by themselves, the boys by themselves, and the women and girls
by themselves. The working boss of the men is a man, of the boys;a boy,
and of the women a woman. There is no idle, or unnecessary talk, chaffing,
or banter. Every one is intent on his or her duty ; and the work progresses
with celerity. The weighers and graders are men, who are paid at the rate
of 7s. per day. (Living is higher in California than in Australia.—l he
Author.) The cutters are women and girls, who are paid by the piece at
the rate of 3|d. for 35 lb. of fruit. The can-fillers are women who are paid
4s. ner day. The wipers are women, who are paid the same. Ihe first
grade of solderers are white men, who are paid Bs. per day. The second
orade of solderers are Chinamen, who are paid from 3s. to 4s. per day. Can-
makers are paid at the rate of 3s. BJd per 100 cans The cans owing to
the fluctuations in the price of tin, are this year (1889) made in San Fran-
cisco. Boys and girls are paid from 2s. to 3s. per day. A day s work is ten
hours.
Necessity for Canneries and Driers.
Wherever deciduous fruits are grown on a large scale, it will be found
necessary to have canneries and driers (evaporators). Before the cannery
referred to above was started fruit was almost unsaleable m its green
state ; but the cannery immediately created a good demand. But when
fruit got to be plentiful prices came down again, when drying was resorted
to by the growers, as a means of self-protection. Prices are now pretty
well regulated in this way ; and contracts are often made for the season,
and sometimes for two or three years ahead, at a fixed price for a certain
grade The best fruit is put up where the cannery is situated near the
orchard, with a railway right past the warehouse. What with refrigerator
cars for carrying fresh fruit long distances, and with canneries wherever
there is sufficient fruit, supplemented by natural and artificial heat in dry-
ing, the future of fruit-growing seems to be in California but in its infancy ;
and at the present rate of increase will soon eclipse all other agricultural
or pastoral industries.” , , , ,
It will be observed in the above report that Chinamen are referred to.
Chinese labor fortunately for the white colonists of Australasia, is “ taboo
in this industry here, and although “white” labour is dearer here than m
California, yet against this may be set the very heavy freight from America
and the protective colonial duties, tabulated below. As a proof of what
may be done by native enterprise may be mentioned Mr. Lamb s fruit-grow-
ing settlement and cannery at Rooty Hill, near Sydney, where a good
article is turned out at a fair profit. But a very much larger sample of


2ilb Table Fruits.
Apricots ..
per doz.
.. dol. 1.50
Peaches, Lemon, Cling
per doz.
.. dol. 2.05
Apples
1.65
,, White Heath
Assorted .
1.75
Pears, Bartlett
2.05
Blackberries
Cherries, Red
1.85
1.85
Plums, Golden Drop
„ Yellow Egg
1.35
1.35
,, White ..
Currants, Red
2.15
185
,, Green Gage
,, Damsons ..
1.35
1.35
Gooseberries
1.75
,, Prunes
1.35
Grapes, Muscat ..
1.40
Quinces
1.75
Nectarines
Peaches, Yellow, Green
1.95
Raspberries
Strawberries
2.50
2.25
Asparagus, square cans
VEGETABLES.
2.00
Peas, Marrowfat, 21b...
Beans, Lima, 21b.
1.25
,, Petit Pois
,, String „
1.10
Tomatoes, 2£lb.
0.85
Corn, Sugar ,,
Peas, Sugar „
1.20
,, Gallons
2.65
colonial industry is the Chaffey Irrigation settlement at Mildura, S.A., now
in its third year, with a population of about 1,500, and nearly 10,000 acres
already sold for and largely under cultivation. A canning company of
Melbourne are making preparations to erect works at Mildura to receive
fruit and can it for the market. It is stated that there will be room there
for half-a-dozen canning companies in four or five years. What has been—
andis bemg—done at Mildura may be accomplished in other parts of Aus-
tralia. In New Zealand the question of Irrigation has been settled by
Nature. The requirements in that lovely colony are more population and
more fruit.
Shipping Values.
Tn order that a fair idea may be obtained of the wholesale price of
canned fruits and vegetables, f.0.b., at San Francisco, the following price
list f m American money, for the last quarter of 1889. will afford needful
information
Reckon $4.86 to £l, English, and add exchange (via London), say, Hto 24
per cent, t reight from Frisco to Sydney, wharfage, cartage, and storage,
may be reckoned at from Is. 6d. to 3s. per doz.
It is estimated that standard grade peaches can be canned in these
colonies at an average price of 7s. 6d. per dozen 2§lb. cans.
The following table will be found useful
*Since the above was penned the following information has reached the author “ A
large irrigation trust has been formed in Bairnsdale (Victoria) district, and as soon as the
necessary plans and specifications of the head works, collecting and distribute channels
connected therewith, are prepared, their construction will be commenced The’Trust has
been granted a loan of £111,376, anc will be entrusted with rating powers up to 255. per
lame w^ir h fn I lhe IC \Tf 1 iy a u U u 1 - on ' v, T , he s ?* len ? e of works includes the construction of a
large weir in the Mitchell River below its junction wit h Stoney Creek : the excavation
eni /1 f f the J eft bank . of the river, nearly three miles long, capable of
carrj mg 850 cubic feet of water per minute, the erection of a flume across the Mitchell
River, capable of carrying 7,000 cubic feet per minute, construction of a south channel 42
7 >®°° cubic feet at its head, and a north channel along the leftside of
the Mitchell 47 miles long to carry 150 cubic feet per minute. All these works will be
carried out by the Trust. The water will be obtained from the Mitchell River whence
the trust has power to draw 8,500 cubic feet of water per minute, but the quantity to be
diverted must not exceed more than one-half the natural flow of the river at anytime”
To assist comparison, it may be mentioned with regard to Mildurathat there are at present
about 23 miles of ditches from 15ft. to 25ft. wide, with from 2ft. to 3ft. of water carrying a
full supply for the irrigation of 10,000 acres. There is a river frontage of over 6o’ miles fhe
A wn* a £i in\wi a K nd more sukstantial basis than most, if not all, in the United States
August fas 4 t° ,0W had been expended on this settlement by the Chaffey Brothers up to
the season Packing Cora P an y> San Francisco. Packing had then practically ceased for


£0
stoms Tariff for 1890, of the Australasian C
Fiji on Preserved Fruits and Vegetables.*
. .gsf i gi ! | „•
.2 -§2 -3 .gg § £ g
1 «s s $ >ll
.2 <5 s >55 N
> &_ _J
Id. lb. 6s. doz. 4s. doz. 3s. doz. 12£ p.c. 3s. doz. 20 p.c.
i Id. lb. 3s. doz. 2s. doz. ls6ddoz 12^p.c. |ls6ddoz 20 p!c!
: Id. lb. Is 6d doz Is 6d doz Is 6d doz p.c. :1s 6d doz 20 p c
2d. lb. 2d. lb. 3d lb. 2d. lb. 3d. lb. i 3d. lb. Free
Free 21b lb. 2d. lb. 2d. lb Id. lb. 2d. lb. 2d. lb.
2d. lb. 2d lb. 3d. lb. 2d. lb. 3d. lb. 2d. lb. 2d. lb.
J 3s doz
Id lb 2d. lb. 2d lb. (Is6d., 12J p.c. 3d. lb. 20 p.c.
Free 2d. lb. 2d. lb. 15 p.c. p.c. Id. lb. 20 p.c.
on with the Rooty Hill (N.S.YV.) settlement, prt
ollowing will prove of interest : —“ The steam p'
R/i i* if ii t « m Vi i"i 4 /~\ i i ti
Tabulated
Customs Tariff for 1890, of
Colonies
and Fiji on Preserved Fruits
Article.
Bottled fruits, qrts.
„ „ pints
„ ~ smaller
sizes
Candied fruits
Dried fruits (except
Dates) ..
Preserved fruits (i.e
canned)
Preserved Vegeta-
bles
2s. doz.
Is. doe
Is. doz.
2d. lb.
2d. lb.
2d. lb.
2d. lb.
10 p.c.
In connection with the Rooty Hill (N.S.W.) settlement, previously
mentioned, the following will prove of interest “ The steam plough is
still being kept busy at Mr. Lamb’s Woodstock Orchard, Rooty Hill.
About 250 acres will be broken up this year (1889), and sown to cereal crops,
which will be planted to trees next year. The young trees in the orchard
already planted are in a flourishing condition ; those of them which are old
enough giving every promise of an abundant crop this year. Aphis has
been troublesome in the orchards ; but by spraying with a decoction of
tobacco water, the pest has been kept well in hand. The orchards are
well cultivated by ploughing and cultivation. Mr. Lamb experienced
great difficulty last year in procuring sufficient fruit to keep his fruit
cannery going. This year the difficulty will not be so great, for his own
orchards will supply a large quantity of fruit. Each year will see the
difficulty lessening, until the full demand of the large canning works
will be supplied from the Woodstock orchards. The village of Plumpton
shows every sign of permanency and prosperity The cannery
is being put in order for the canning fruit season. The ever-increasing
demand for space leads to constant additions being made to the premises
It is wonderful how this one industry has changed the aspect of the
country.”
This letter was written some months ago. When the author passed
through at the end of last year (1889) Rooty Hill fruit growing and pre-
serving settlement presented a perfect picture of quiet prosperity. Again,
be it remarked—What can be done at Rooty Hill can be accomplished else-
where.
IFJRTTIT BOTTLIITG-
WITH WHICH IS INCLUDED
PRESERVING IN GLASS JARS-
Here is a neat little industry that might well be taken up by many in
these colonies. The capital required is small, and the results are good. As
regards the details of the process, Experience is, of course, the best teacher
for the exigencies k)f each fruit require a different treatment. But it is
necessary that the fruit should be perfectly fresh, sweet, in good condition,
* This table is taken from the “ Tabulated Tariff of the Australasian Colonies,” pub-
lished by Marcus and Andrew, Sydney.


and of first-class quality. Fruit kept over night is not recommended for
bottling, and it must not be over-ripe. It is usual, though not absolutely
necessary, to peel fruit, such as peaches. Soft fruits, such as strawberries,
should be gathered in shallow vessels in order that as little crushing as
possible occur ; and peaches, pears, apples, plums, etc., must be picked
from the tree by hand, and with care.
All jars and bottles must be freshly washed, wiped quite dry, and be
put near enough the stove, or other heating apparatus, to heat gradually,
the top and rubber having previously been fitted on to make sure of a
perfect fit. (This refers to patent jars.) The bottle, or jar, must be
quite warm, almost hot, when the first spoonful of fruit touches it.
Some put in a little syrup first, which is a good plan, thereby allowing
of the fruit being put in boiling hot, as it should be.
The rim of the jar should be wiped dry before the top is screwed down.
The jar, or bottle, should be filled as near the brim as possible, as it is highly
important that the air should be entirely excluded. For at least a week
the tops should be tried every day, for they will often be found loose.
The fruit is boiled whole in a little water. Any kind of boiling
utensil will do, if for domestic use, but, if for sale, a bright copper pan
should be used. Standard grade syrup —(see “ Canning”)—should be put
in the jars to fill up, or, for the information of housewives, as much sugar
in the water with the fruit as when baking pies. When the fruit is soft,
but not broken, take up with a large fork, or spoon, and fill the bottle
(having first put in a little juice or syrup) ; then fill to the brim with syrup
and fasten up. If an ordinary cork is used a piece of bladder should be
tied over it, or else let it be covered with bottling wax. The French use
extra white glass bottles with wide mouths and long necks, and corks or
glass stoppers. But for colonial use the American Preserving Jars are
recommended, especially the “ Lightning” patent, with adjustable wire
fastening, as much labor, time and breakage are saved thereby. Neat
labels and packages are essential to success. Oranges of the “ Mandarin”
and “ Poor Man” description can be well preserved in this way. When
preparing peaches, pears, apples, etc., always have a vessel of cold water
ready to drop the pieces into, if necessary to cut. The water not only
keeps the fruit firm, but prevents it turning dark.
A cool, dark cellar, where the temperature neither drops to freezing
point, nor rises to summer heat, is the best place for keeping fruit in glass
jars. If much light be admitted each jar should be enveloped in several
thicknesses of brown paper. It is believed that the action of sunlight
causes fruit and vegetables to ferment. Be careful to keep the jars in an
upright position and not to jostle them.
We now come to the important and profitable process of
FRUIT CANDYING.
An industry which is to some extent carried on in Queensland and New
South Wales, but which could and should be largely increased. Heavily
protected, it needs but a good supply of fruit at a reasonably low price
to enable an extensive and profitable trade to be developed in those
colonies, and in Victoria, South Australia, and Western Australia. At
present the supply of green fruit, at a price, is not equal to the demand, and
it is a lamentable fact that lemons in brine are imported in quantities from
the Mediterranean, and candied here. The process is simple but is a slow one.
Seeing that at the principal seat of this industry, Leghorn, in Italy, the con-
ditions are to a great extent the same as here, (that is, everything connected
therewith has to be imported there) with this exception in favour of Aus-
tralia that, whereas the green fruit is imported into Leghorn, it is grown
here almost at our very doors, we turn to the “ Scientific American ” (a
■journal that ought to be widely read in Australia) for a copy of the report of


Her Majesty s Consul at Leghorn.* He says that that city occupies the
rst place for the preparation of the candied citron and orange peel so
largely used in all branches of confectionery—citrons being brought for
this purpose from Corsica, from Sicily, from Calabria, and other southern
provinces of Italy from Tunis and Tripoli, and even from Morocco ; while
Hie candied peel of the fruit is exported to North America, to the United
Kingdom, and to Hamburg, for distribution throughout Germany. Su°ar
also is imported, for the purpose of the manufacture, from Egypt. The wood
of the boxes in which the candied peel is packed comes from Trieste, and
the immense earthenware vessels necessary for the saturation of the fruit
in sugar syrup are made m the neighbourhood of Florence. The oranges
imported into Leghorn, whether for consumption or candying, are nearly
all brought from the islands of Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica. In all the
countries contributing the raw fruit for this industry it is treated in the
same manner for the over-sea passage. The fruit is simply halved, and
placed in hogsheads or large casks, filled with a fairly strong solution
of brine ; the fruit being halved merely to insure the thorough preserva-
tion of the rind by an equal saturation of the interior, as well as the
exterior surface. In these casks it arrives at the door of the manufactory.
The first process to which it is then subjected is the separation of the
fruit from the rind This is done by women, who, seated round a large
vessel, take out the fruit, skilfully gouge out the inside with a few rapid
motions of the forefinger and thumb, and, throwing this aside, place the
rind unbroken m a vessel alongside them.
The rind is next carried to large casks, filled with fresh cold water,
m whmh it is immersed for between two and three days to rid it of the
SaU , l ' haS l ab f« rbed .- When taken out of these casks the rinds are boiled,
with the double object of making them tender and of completely driving
out any trace of salt which may still have been left in them. For this pur-
pose they are boiled in a large copper cauldron for a time varying from one
to two hours, according to the quality of the fruit, and the number of
days it has been immersed in brine. When removed from this cauldron,
the peel should be quite free from any flavour of salt, and at the same
time be sufficiently soft to absorb the sugar readily from the syrup, in
which it is now ready to be immersed. The next process to which the
rind is subjected is that of a slow absorption of sugar. This occupies no
less than eight days It is needless to say that the absorption of
sugar by fresh fruit in order to be thorough must be slow-and
not only slow but gradual—that is to say, the fruit should at first
i tre fj; ed .T I ** a weak solution of sugar, which may then be gradually
power of absorption is one which grows by feed,
th* holds g ood m °re especially with the rind)
would absorb with difficulty, and more slowly and unequally, if plunged
C Y n i a r IC than I . if gradually treated with weak solution,
easier of absorption and by which it has been thoroughly permeated first.
It is a knowledge of this fact which governs the process I now describe.
The fruit has now passed into what I may call the saturating-
room where on every side are to be seen long rows of immense
earthenware vessels about 4ft. high and 2*ft. in extreme diametei-
in outline roughly resembling the famed Etruscan jar, but with
a girth altogether out of proportion to their height, and with
very short necks and large open mouth. All the vessels are filled
to their brims with citron and orange peel in every stage of absorption, i e
steeped m sugar syrup of, roughly speaking, eight different decrees of
strength. I said before that this is a process which occupies almost always
*lt should be noted that the Government and fruit growers of the TTniteri
ss—a-sris-issssi


eight days ; and, as the syrup in each jar is changed every day, we may
divide the mass of vessels before us into groups of eight. Take one group of
this number, and we are able to follow the fruit completely through this
stage of its treatment. With vessels of such great size and weight, holding
at least half a ton of fruit and syrup, it is clearly easier to deal with the
syrup than the fruit. To take the fruit out of one solution, and to place it
in the next stronger, and so on, throughout the series, would be a toilsome
process, and one, moreover, injurious to the fruit. In each of these jars,
therefore, is fixed a wooden well, into which a simple hand suction-pump
being introduced the syiup is pumped-from each jar daily into the adjoin-
ing one.
“ How is the relative strength in each jar regulated ?” is the next question.
44 The fruit itself does that,” is the foreman’s reply ; and this becomes clear
from the following explanation —Number your jars from 1 to 8 respectively ;
and assume No. Ito be that which has just been filled with peel brought
straight from the boiler, in which it has been deprived of the last trace of
salt, and No. 8 to contain that which having passed through every stage of
absorption but the last, is now steeped in the freshly prepared and
therefore the strongest solution of syrup used in this stage. 44 YVe prepare
dady a syrup of the strength of 30 deg., measured by the 4 provino,’ a
graduated test for measuring the density of the syrup,” continued the
foreman ; “and that is poured upon the fruit in jar No. 8. Tomorrow the
syrup from this jar, weakened by the absorption from it, by the fruit, of a
certain proportion of sugar, will be pumped into jar No. 7, and so on daily
through the series. Thus, No. 1, containing the fruit itself, regulates the
strength of the syrup, as I said.” “ But if the syrup has lost all its strength
before the seventh day, or arrival at No 1?” we ask. “ Care must be
taken to prevent that, by constant testing by the 4 provino’,” is the reply,
44 and, if that is found to be the case, a little stronger syrup must be added
to the jar.”
A slight fermentation next takes place in most of the jars, But this,
so far from being harmful, is regarded as necessary. Of course it must not
be allowed to go too far. There is yet another stage, and that, perhaps,
the most important through which the peel has to pass before it can be pro-
nounced sufficiently saturated with sugar. It is now boiled in a still
stronger syrup, of a density of 40 deg., by the testing tube ; and this is done
in large copper vessels over a slow coke fire—care being taken to prevent
the peel from adhering to the side of the vessel by gentle stirring with a
long paddle-shaped ladel. The second boiling will occupy about an hour.
Taken off the fire, the vessels are carried to a large wooden trough, over
which is spread a coarse, open wire netting. The contents are poured over
this, and the peel distributed over the surface of the netting ; so that the
syrup, now thickened to the consistency of treacle, may drain off the sur-
face of the peel into the trough below. The peel has now taken up as
much sugar as is necessary.
Now comes the final process, the true candying of the covering of the
the surface of the peel with the layer of sugar crystals which is seen upon
candied fruits. To effect this a quantity of crystallized sugar —in Leghorn
the same quality is used as is employed in the preparation of the syrup—
is just dissolved in a little water ; and in this the now dried peel, taken ofE
the wire netting, is immersed. The same copper vessels are used ; and the
mixture is again boiled over a slow fire. A short boiling will suffice for
this, the last process, for the little water will be quickly driven off, and the
sugar upon cooling will form its natural crystal over the surface of the
fruit. Toured off from these vessels, it is again dried upon the surface of
the wire netting, as before described. The candying is now complete ;
and the candied peel is ready for the packing-room, to which it is carried
off in shallow baskets.
In the packing-room may be seen hundreds of boxes of oval shape, or,
if I may so speak, of rectanglar shape with rounded corners, and of


different sizes ; for each country prefers its boxes to be of a particular
weight, Hamburg taking the largest, of 15 and 30 kilos, the United States
of America preferring smaller, of 10 and 12 kilos, Britain taking the
smallest, of 5 kilos, and one containing about 7 English pounds. The wood
of which the tops and bottoms of these boxes are made comes to us in thin
planks from Trieste ; and a skilful packing is generally done bv women—
the boxes being lined with white paper. They are then packed “in cases of
100 kilos; 10 of the smaller American boxes filling a case. The candied
peel is now ready for export.
I think I have now spoken of all that need be noticed in the actual
manufacture of candied citron, and orange peel in Leghorn. There are
however, a few reflections upon the very existence of this industry here
which seem to me suggestive and instructive ones. In my inquiries into
the course of the industry, I find that the fruit itself and every ingredient
and article necessary to the preparation of the candied peel come to us
from abroad. The fruit of the best quality is from Corsica ; Egypt fur-
nishes the sugar, Britain provides the fuel, and distant provinces of Italy
contribute a portion of the raw product and wood for the boxes in which
the peel is exported. The province of Leghorn provides nothing but the
labour necessary for the manufacture. Nor is this industry one which has
fallen into Livornese hands from any specially acquired local handicraft or
skill. How, then, does this industry exist here in these days of keen inter-
national competition ? No doubt it is mainly supported by the large
drawback granted by the Italian Government upon the duty paid on the
chief and dearest ingredient in the manufacture : sugar. The Custom’s
tariff in force imposes a duty of 76.75 lire upon 100 kilos of the sugar used
(classed in the tariff as of second-class) ; but grants a drawback of 60.50
lire upon 100 kilos, of the exported article. Without this large measure’of
support there can be no doubt that this industry would immediately and
wholly collapse. With it, aven, it finds it difficult to hold its ground.
Exporters tell me that the United Kingdom* is beginning to call for the
fruit to be sent to it direct from the countries of production in the same
condition as it reaches Leghorn, viz., steeped in brine ; and the manager of
one of the factories I visited confirmed this with an air of verv natural
chagrin by telling me that he had himself seen 600 hogsheads of fruit
shipped in brine in one vessel last year (1888) from Bastia for Britain.”
Taking into consideration the simplicity of the process, the adaptability
of Australian soil for growing the fruit, the suitability of the industry for
large numb rs of our women and grown boys and girls, and the h«avy
protective duties, averaging 2£d. per lb. (See Tabulated Customs’ Tariff), it
is evident that every City in Australasia is in a better position to produce
candied peel than the one in Italy which for generations has revelled in
the most extensive trade in this wide-selling article.
DRY PRESERVING FRUIT.
This is a neat and simple process, yielding highly profitable returns, best
described by quoting from the Auburn (United States) “Republican.”
Reporting on a recent county fair, after referring to the scrupulous neat-
ness of all the operations of Mr. W. M. Foster, of Lincoln, the paper thus
describes his method of preserving: “ For choice dried peaches he selects
the largest and best cling-stones he can find. These are peeled, split,
pitted, and then put into a white sugar syrup, such as is used for canning.
Ihe syrup is allowed to come to a boil, when the fruit is immediately taken
out, and placed on wooden trays in the sun where it is dried about four
* The Consul might have added “ and Australia.”


days. Mr. Foster thinks tin trays, kept bright and clean, would be better
He aims to get the largest amount of dried fruit from the smallest amount
of green, and finds that by this process 3 lb. of green fruit will make one of
dried. The sugar costs from 3to 5 cents for each pound of product; but
the result is something very like crystallized fruit. It is stated that it is as
choice as the crystallized fruit for which 50 cents a pound is paid. Mr.
Foster says it is a good paying business at 25 cents a pound. Pears and
apricots are treated the same as peaches. But his choice prunes and Pacific
figs were simply brought to a boil in clear water without any sugar before
the drying process. They contain sufficient syrup ; and the dip into the
boiling water brings it to the surface, so that the prunes are clear and silky,
and the figs are made perfectly transparent. Mr. Foster has the hand-
somest dried fruit in the market ; and everything is done by the foregoing
methods. He uses no sulphur on his figs ; and he gets fancy prices for
everything.”
Conclusion.
In summing up the various industries, too briefly referred to, the
author desires to afford encouragement to people to go in for fruit and
vegetable growing. There is plenty of good land to be had within easy
distance of all the large cities, which are as it is over populated, and we
want settlement on the land. As to the question of transit the railway
authorities everywhere are coming to the wise conclusion that these in-
dustries must be fostered by cheap carriage rates ; and water freights are
reasonable enough where there is any competition. Then as to over-production,
a bete noir with many, this pamphlet is issued for the very purpose of show-
ing how the surplus can, in numerous ways, be made use of so as to sell
when or where fresh fruits and vegetables are unobtainable. The Back
Blocks, alone, will take thousands of pounds worth annually in each colony.
In California they were threatened with over-production until science
stepped in and offered an outlet for the whole of the available surplus, so
that now the demand is greater than the supply. Just the same, though
of course on a smaller scale, can be effected in Australasia, where these
very industries are heavily protected, and where climatic conditions are so
favourable to their development. Moreover, the population is very rapidly
increasing, and will absorb more and more of the present supply of fresh
fruit, whilst the export trade to Europe, the United States and Canada, is as
yet in its infancy, and will reach enormous proportions. Therefore an
opening is presented to thousands of men, women, and children, who, in
this country, or the old, find it difficult, in these days of fierce labour com-
petition, to. earn a decent livelihood. To such the fruit and vegetable
growing and preserving industiies, in all their many branches, offer the
right sort of assistance— self-help.
A DDBJSTDA.
Curing Figs.
The fig-drying industry has been referred to. A simple method of
curing this fruit in the sun is to pick it when it has just begun to wilt.
Place it on trays in a tight room, put a slow sulphur fire under it (say
half pound best sulphur to 200 lbs of figs) ; let the sulphur burn slowly
till consumed, the fumes ascending among the fruit until entirely exhausted.
This will require, say, ten or twelve hours. The fruit should be kept in the
sulphur bath. The object of the sulphuring of the green fruit is to prevent
fermentation and souring in the process of drying, to preserve the natural
flavour and the qualities of the fruit, to softeti the skin, and at the same
time to bleach or whiten the dried products. After the sulphuring it
should be .taken out, placed on trays on a scaffold, and treated much the


same as the raisin is. The figs should be turned over several times when
drying. Care should be taken not to let them get too dry and hard.
This, of all mistakes, is the most common with the amateur in fruit-
drying.
In most localities, especially in the valleys near the coast, it will pay
wall to cover the figs at night to keep off dampness. With favourable
weather and proper care it will usually take from four to seven days to
dry the sulphured figs, and from eight to twelve days to dry the unsul-
phured, for they dry much quicker after being sulphured. After they are
thus dried they should be dipped in a boiling hot solution composed of,
say, thirty gallons of water, one pound of concentrated lye, and
three pounds of best rock salt, thoroughly dissolved. The figs should
be held under this solution about two seconds, and then taken
out, dripped and dried until the water is gone, and then packed away in
large boxes about the same as used for raisins (covered up so as to keep out
the insects), and left to sweat from two to four weeks before packing for
market. For speed and security from damage drying in an evaporator is
best, as the process takes but as many hours thereby as days by sun-drying.
Grrapes to grow for Eaisins.
The “ Numurka Standard” (Vic.), referringto the raisin making industry
carried on by Mr. Hardy, an Australian king in this branch, makes the
following remarks : —“ The endless number of sorts of our commercial fruits
is a cause of great perplexity to novices in fruit-growing. Fortunately,
this objection does not apply to raisin sorts, though a great source of
trouble in the wine varieties of grapes. The raisin sorts that are worth
growing can be counted on your fingers. Here they are For raisins,
Muscatel, Gordo Blanco, M uscat of Alexandria, Raisin des Dames, Ma-
jaga, Muscatel, Common Hall Muscats, and the stoneless Sultana. There
are only two varieties in currants, viz.: the Zante and the Corinth currant.
The'individual qualities of varieties may be very quickly summed up. The
finest raisin grape in Australia to-day is the Gordo Blanco. This is Mr.
Hardy’s favourite. He has been growing it for the last twenty years
and it is still and easily at the head of the list, as the best all round
grape for extensive planting. It is a vigorous grower, comes into bear-
ing early, throwing a fair crop at two or three years from the cutting.
It is a heavy bearer, very often throwing a second crop in the same
season. The berries are large, ambsr-colour when ripe, firm, carry well,
and the fruit thus brings good prices as table grapes. Raisin des Dames
is a noble grape, somewhat larger than the Gordo. The bunches are
also of great size. Unless, however, it is pruned on the long cane system
it does not crop regularly. With proper pruning, however, it has made
a splendid record around Mooroopna, and should come into extensive
cultivation. It is also a very fine table grape, and makes good prices in
the Melbourne market for this purpose. Majaga, though a very fine
grape of large size, ripens rather too late in our district to become
popular as a raisin sort. Muscat of Alexandria, and Common Hall, would
be excellent varieties, but for the fact that they are uncertain bearers.
The Sultana, which gives the stoneless raisin of commerce, is one of the
prettiest grapes in cultivation. Its bunches are very neatly formed and
shouldered. The berries are small but handsome. The grape is not a
heavy cropper, but its quality in this respect may be much improved by
prunning on the long cane system. As a set-off, however, to its lack of
weight, it may be mentioned that the raisins are worth more money
than an ordinary pudding raisin, and they dry quicker. Of the currant
sorts, the Corinth is much the larger of the two, and on this account
will perhaps be preferred to the Zante. The Zante is a wonderful vigorous
grower, and for this reason can be recommended for covering a shed of
trellis rapidly. There is an impression abroad that the currant sorts are
nine or ten years before they begin to bear. Though they do take a con-


siderable time before their full bearing capacity is reached they give ex-
cellent returns from four years upwards. Mr. Young, of Mooroopna, one
of the enterprising pioneers of the raisin industry in our district, has had
quite a decent crop from three and four year old vines from the cuttings.
Mr. Hardy, to whom the samples were submitted, pronounced them to be
very fine.”
The Olive Industry.
Mention has been made of Sir Samuel Davenport’s Olive Oil Works in
South Australia. This is an industry well worthy the attention of cultivators.
The soil and climate of many parts of this continent are well adapted for
the production of olives. The tree is hardy and will thrive even in the
poorest soil and on almost any elevation. But, doubtless, the South Coast
districts and moderate elevations would suit it best. The oil requires no
great skill to prepare ; and there is a remunerative and sure market for all
that can be produced. Italy has nearly million acres of land planted
to olive trees. About one hundred trees are planted per acre ; and some
trees are said to be over 600 years of age, and still bearing. The olive tree
begins to bear about the fourth year from the cutting. At five years it
will pay expenses ; and at seven years it will pay handsomely. But it is
probable that in the generous climate of Australia one or two years may
be taken off these terms. The yield of oil varies according to circum-
stances. But 200 gal. per acre is considered a very small yield ; and in
France 1,000 gal. per acre is considered nothing extraordinary. The olive
should be one of the most profitable trees to cultivate in this country ; and
attention is specially directed to the olive oil industry.
To obtain big Yields of Tomatoes.
An unknown grower gives the following information respecting this
prolific and profitable vegetable The tomato plant is the prettiest
vegetable plant we hare when properly cared for. First make a ridge Bin.
high and 12in. wide. If the bed is not strong enough to grow thirty plants
go to the fence corner and get some that is ; place about one peck where
the plants will stand. Set plants 3ft. apart—not less—get stakes, say,
Sin. in diameter, and drive in the ground, leaving 3ft. out. Drive one
every Bft. the length of the row ; they will be 3ft. apart the cross way.
Use stakes or fence wire for trellises, making three rows on each side at
lft. from the bottom, at middle and at top, then cross near the plants to
keep it straight. Every five or six days pass along and fix the branches
in proper shape, as you would have them grow. Do not allow grass or
weeds to grow within 3ft. of plants. Water the plants in evening if it does
not rain enough to make them grow fast, and when the tomatoes begin to
ripen you will have a row of them sft. wide, 4ft. high, and 99ft. long, from
only thirty plants. This frame can be placed on one side of the garden
and remain for years. If this plan be tried, it is sure to give satisfac-
tion.


Boftlipg Bidjisb Fi^if
By W. S. Manning.
C£?RUIT can be “ bottled ” (or canned, as it is termed in America) in
< -V r l two or three ways; either by boiling or baking it before it is put
into the bottles, or by filling the bottles with the ripe, raw fruit, and
boiling in a stew-pan of water filled up to the necks of the bottles. All
these methods are described here; the last mentioned looks best when


done, but is the most trouble ; the baking plan gives the least trouble, and
is equally effective if the sealing process is carefully attended to. Dr. Trails’
method of making flannel air-tight seems to be the best for this purpose
where the fruit is wanted to keep a long time and in large quantities.
The jam-makers, who boil down fruit alone in summer into pure “ pulp,”
for after use, adopt a system of sulphuring the jars ; this is also the ordinary
method in German families. Flower of sulphur is melted in any old sauce-
pan, and then bits of rag are dipped into it, and allowed to cool. The
jars are placed bottom upwards on the table, one side slightly raised, and
the sulphur rag is lighted and allowed to burn until the bottles are filled
with fumes of sulphur. This most effectually destroys all the “ germs,”
and the boiling fruit should be at once filled in; but if the bottles can be
placed in an oven, or boiled in a copper, the same object is accomplished.
The “ sulphur process ” is the safest plan when very large earthenware jars
are used. The sealing process must not be omitted, unless covered with
half an inch of oil or of the melted wax composition as noted below.
The three points needful, to attain perfection in this art, are, therefore,
only to use perfectly germ-free bottles; secondly, to get all vitality and
germs in the fruit entirely destroyed by heat; and thirdly, to make the
bottles quite air-tight immediately they are filled. A few experiments will
soon make perfect, if these three points are carefully attended to.
The fruits best suited for bottling are plums and gages of all sorts;
cherries, like May-dukes, morellos, or other dark culinary sorts; ripe red
gooseberries, like Warringtons ; currants, red, white, or black, and rasp-
berries. The stone fruits probably do best of all; especially when got
perfectly ripe and with unbroken skins and unblemished by bad packing,
and if cooked a little longer at a higher temperature than other fruit.
The secret of success seems to be.in screwing down the stoppers directly
the bottles are filled to the brim with the “ preserve,” immediately after it
has been steadily boiled for a few minutes.
If there is no preserving-pan available, the fruit can be stood in rather
shallow dishes in an oven, and gently baked for ten or twelve minutes. It
must then be turned into the bottles quite hot, and screwed down at once.
The fruit must of course be first carefully picked over, and should be
gathered dry and in as perfect condition as possible. In this condition,
put away in a dry cupboard, it will keep well a year, and it will be found to
be as near as possible to the natural uncloyed flavour of the ripe fruit. It
can be used with porridge or plain cold cereal “moulds ” made like blanc-
mange, of either oatmeal, maize, pearl barley, or crushed wheat. Taken
with a little plain whole-meal biscuit or bread, such wholesome fare would
form enjoyable breakfast or tea meals the whole year round. Finger-rolls,
or any form of unfermented bread, with such “ preserves,” are perhaps the
best approach to the ideal diet that can be aimed at for family practice
during winter. Occasionally well boiled plain rice or macaroni will be
found to go admirably with such fruit.
Two ladies have forwarded the following recipes: “To can frujt without
sugar, put it in a stew-pan with sufficient water to keep it from burn'ng, and
bring it to a boil; have ready screw-topped bottles, which have been put
into and filled with warm water which has been brought to the boil in a
boiler ; empty out the water, and immediately pour in the boiling fruit, fill
to the brim, and screw down. The bottles must be looked at the next


day, and if a bubble is seen that bottle must be done over again, as of
course the object is to exclude the air. The boiler that the bottles are
heated in must be lined with flannel or something to prevent them from
breaking.” These screw-topped bottles can be got through any glass shop.
They are not needed in the following methods.
Another plan : “ (i) Get some good earthenware or glass jars, perfectly
sweet, and free from cracks. (2) Fill the jars with sound, ripe fruit. Place
them in a gentle oven, tops covered with plates or paper, to keep in steam
and prevent burning. No sugar to be added until needed for use. (3)
Have ready a supply of boiling water. When the fruit is heated through,
but not burst , it will have sunk from two to three inches, according to the
kind. Take out of the oven, and fill the jars with the boiling water, to
within an inch of the top ; then cover at once with paper, well fasted all
over. Over this, again, paste a second layer of paper, in a similar manner,
to ensure the perfect exclusion of cold air. (4) Store the jars or bottles in
a cool , dry room. Afterwards they should not be disturbed. (5) When
required for use, open the bottles and pour off the juice into a preserving-
pan and sweeten it with raw sugar according to taste. Boil the syrup about
ten minutes, and pour back on to the fruit. At the time of boiling up the
syrup and adding sugar, there is always a large quantity more than is
required for covering the fruit; this I bottle separately, and use for making
delicious fruit jellies, of which sago is the foundation.”
The following extracts are from Dr. Trail’s Hygeian Home Cook Book
(3d.,The Memorial Hall), the best advanced cookery book yet issued.
“ Bottling the Fruit. —The bottles or jars are thoroughly cleansed, and
each one fitted with a stopper. For these, soft corks are best; but they
may be made of soft, dry wood. For cement we heat together in an
old tin basin or iron kettle one pound of rosin, and one and a half to
two ounces of tallow. This may be mixed in quantity, and melted from
time to time as wanted. While the fruit is being heated, as above
described, the bottles are well warmed by setting them near the fire and
frequently turning them ; or better, by setting them in cold water in a wash-
boiler and heating to the boiling point. The fruit being barely scalded
through , it is dipped hot into the heated bottles, through a funnel, if the
bottle necks are small. This is done carefully, so as not to mash the fruit.
The bottles are filled up to where the bottom of the stoppers will come ;
they are then jarred a little to make the air bubbles rise, and more fruit or
syrup added if needed. The tops and necks are then wiped clean, inside
and out, and the stoppers put in, and sunk to a level with the top. The
cement being warmed in the meantime, a little is dipped on over the
stoppers to close them tightly. Margarine will do as well as tallow for
this cement.
“Another Method. —Take common, wide-mouthed glass bottles or jars;
those with a rim round fhe neck are preferable. Procure any thick
flannel; cut it into squares sufficiently large to cover the top and neck of
the jar. Dip these pieces into heated grafting wax made by melting
together one pound rosin, two ounces beeswax, and one and a half ounces
tallow. Several pieces may be put in at one time, and should be allowed
to remain in until they are perfectly saturated with the wax. Just before
filling a jar with fruit take out one of these pieces, thus allowing it to cool
a little. By doing so they can be handled with greater ease, and there is


no danger of the wax running through them into the fruit. After the wax
shouWtteX added” 8 ““ “ * aP ‘ harden S ' ightlj '' A little allow
, , Heat fe bottles to prevent breaking; this may be done by placing them
nnH em ? h n th t StOVe ’ 0r else by P uttin g them into a kettle^of cold water
and gradually heating it. Pour the now hot fruit into the hot bottle
mg it full; wipe the top and outside of the neck perfectly dry • have
mnn^ a K 80 that it will just fit the inside of the
mouth of the bottle, and lay it on the top of the fruit. Now you
are prepared for the sealing process. The pieces of thick flannel
f ha 7u S been P reviousl y saturated with the wax and
mom? of ° r . f ° Ur min UteS ’ P lace one of them over the
h T 1 *’ draWl^ § 11 as tlghtly as possible, and then wind a
piece of strong twine round and round, binding the edges of the cloth
firmly against the neck of the bottle. Then with a spoon dip on a little of
the hot wax, spreading it evenly over the top of the cloth, and over this
place a paper large enough to cover the top and neck of the bottle
smoothing it as closely as possible, and the jar is sealed. As soon as the
bottles cool a glance will determine whether they are not air-tight, as if
so there will be a slight depression of the cover. The least hole ‘will
prevent this concavity, and thus indicate at once the necessity of repeating
the sealing process ’ If care be taken, not one bottle in forty will fail of
being perfectly sealed at first. A small kettle of boiling water should be at
hand, as each bottle should be filled to the brim, especially with the
screw-topped bottles, just before it is finally closed down. The fruit must
be carefully watched for the first week, so that, if not air-tight, or if any
fermentation begins, it may be used at once. y
“In preparing the fruit for table one pound of sugar to six pounds of
raspberries., wild blackberries, whortleberries, etc., is sufficient; while for
strawberries and the more acid fruits, one pound to four is requisite.
Add a small quantity of water and cook the fruit less than if it were to be
used immediately upon the table.”
o , Tbe ! l ! ethod explained of baking the fruit in the bottles is not so well
adapted for stone fruit, which requires the more intense heat of the stew-
pan ; but it is a far pleasanter mode to manipulate than Dr. Trail’s air-tight
nfw ' i The , same kdyXwhose system has been strongly commended by
dh p a f so observes: This plan, successfully carried out, cannot fail to
wSn fi • 1 have / ound best to use large jars (six or eight quarts)
when first preserving the fruit; and, at the time of opening them, for add-
in?n S Si m - tead of ' P u ttmg them again into the large jars, pour the fruit out
r Ja l S r° r )0 n t f ; S ’ put them into the oven long enough to warm
the bottles and fruit all through; then pour the boiling syrup to cover the
fruit, and paste tightly down to exclude the air.” ■ P COver me
3d. per doz., po St free ; IS . P er Io °> ° r 7®- &L per i,ooo. Postage, 3 d. per 100, is. 3 d. per ™
m" Members of the London Vegetarian Society abstain from fish flesh nn,i


* K
Can supply all descriptions of
RANGE, LEMON, CITRON,
SUMMER FRUIT,
INCLUDING
Japanese Persimmons or Date Plums,
In splendid order, from their
(PARRAMATTA RIVER.)
SHOP, 379 GEORGE-STEEET,
SYDNEY, opposite the Sydney Arcade.
2-| per cent, discount if Cash is sent with the Order.
(hoffnung’s buildings.)
NEW SOUTH WALES
rtikrsery & Orchard Co.
y\
ORNAMENTAL TREES & PLANTS,
NURSERIES AT ERMINGTON
They are also prepared to supply Fruit and Flowers
in any Quantity from their CITY
Orchardists are requested to send their Orders early for next
Planting Season.
New South Wales Nursery and Orchard Co., Limited.
HEAD OFFICE. 161 PITT-ST, SYDNEY


MCLEAN
N XfM
IGG,
ironmongers,
512 GEORGE-ST., SYDNEY,
All Sizes in stock for Farm, Orchard, or G-arden Work..
Clark’s Patent Cut-away Harrow,
The best Pulverizer in the World.
Garden Rollers, Lawn Mowers, Shears, Sprinklers,
Tools of all kinds, at Lowest Prices.
512 GEORGE-ST., SYDNEY
