

ytnw Soull) XiPales -public School
Oeacfyers’ federation
l|ennj Hauismi
iannunttr
ISU) "June, 1924


A child will understand him better than a
busy city man, for the child understands the
eternal language of the heart written in the
eye; and Australia, strong-thewed pioneer
though she be, has enough of the child left
in her to understand her son.


By permission of the Trustees of the National Art Gallery




Amongst the small band of immortals who have
graced Australian literature, Henry Lawson seems
to have best struck the true Australian note. His
pictures of the men and women of the bush make
a special appeal to all those who have lived and
worked in the vast silent places of our land. The
sundowner, the drover, the settler, the new chum
rouseabout, as drawn by his master hand, stand
out in bold relief, true to life, the very men we
have known and seen in the days when the world
was wide.
It is good for us and for future generations
that so characteristic an Australian has made
permanent these pictures of bush life as it was
lived in the last decade of the nineteenth and the
first decade of the twentieth century in Australia.
He has vividly depicted in prose and verse
phases of Australian life which are now passing
away, or have already passed.
“The singer has sung our lives, our joys, our
tears;
He has broken the barren rock and revealed its
gold!
And now he has gone-alone-with his doubts and
fears,
And who shall speak the sorrows he left un-
told.
He sings no more, but his songs come wreathing
back
From that golden West where the good Aus-
tralians go.”
I am pleased to know that the Teachers’ Federa-
tion is taking an active part in the movement for
the erection of a memorial to the most Australian
of Australian writers, and I trust that their effort
will be successful beyond all expectations.
I trust also that teachers will ensure that, so
far as practicable, every school library contains
a complete edition of the writings of Lawson (for-
tunately, these volumes are now procurable at a


very moderate cost), and that all senior pupils
are encouraged to read with enjoyment his
sketches both in prose and verse. This will form
a memorial to Henry Lawson quite as valuable
as the more material one which is now being
arranged for.
S. H. SMITH,
Director of Education.
9/5/24
ON THE NIGHT TRAIN.
Have you seen the Bush by moonlight, from the
train, go running by,
Here a patch of glassy water, there a glimpse of
mystic sky?
Have you heard the still voice calling, yet so warm,
and yet so cold:
‘Tm the Mother-Bush that bore you! Come to
me when you are old?”
Did you see the Bush below you sweeping darkly
to the range,
All unchanged and all unchanging, yet so very old
and strange!
Did you hear the Bush a-calling, when your heart
was young and bold:
“Tm the Mother-Bush that nursed you! Come to
me when you are old?
Through the long, vociferous cutting as the night
train swiftly sped,
Did you hear the gray Bush calling from the pine-
ridge overhead:
“You have seen the seas and cities; all seems
done, and all seems told;
I’m the Mother-Bush that loves you! Come to
me, now you are old?”


The colours of the setting sun
Withdrew across the Western land—
He raised the sliprails, one by one,
And shot them home with trembling hand;
Her brown hands clung—her face grew pale—
Ah! quivering chin and eyes that brim!—
One quick, fierce kiss across the rail,
And. “Good-bye, Mary!” “Good-bye, Jim!”
Oh, he rides hard to race the pain
Who rides from love, who rides from home
But he rides slowly home again,
Whose heart has learnt to love and roam.
A hand upon the horse’s mane,
And one foot in the stirrup set,
And, stooping back to kiss again,
With “Good-bye, Mary! don’t you fret!
When I come back”—he laughed for her—
“We do not know how soon ’twill be;
I’ll whistle as I round the spur—•
You let the sliprails down for me.”
She gasped for sudden loss of hope,
As, with a backward wave to her,
He cantered down the grassy slope
And swiftly round the darkening spur.
Black-pencilled panels standing high,
And darkness fading into stars,
And, blurring fast against the sky,
A faint white form beside the bars.
And often at the set of sun,
In winter bleak and summer brown,
She’d steal across the little run,
And shyly let the sliprails down,
And listen there when darkness shut
The nearer spur in silence deep,
And when they called her from the hut
Steal home and cry herself to sleep.
And he rides hard to dull the pain
Who rides from one that loves him best
And he rides slowly back again,
Whose res Hess heart must rove for rest.


Uaratalj and Wattlf
Words-Henry Lawson
Music-H. F. Treharne
PIANO


Copyright by H F Trchornc MXfAXXIV. Irytcrnational Copyright secun


We boast no more of our bloodless flag that rose
from a nation’s slime;
Better a shred of a deep-dyed rag from the storms
of the olden time.
From grander clouds in our peaceful skies than
ever were there before
I tell you the Star of the South shall rise—in the
lurid clouds of war.
It ever must be while blood is warm and the sons
of men increase;
For ever the nations rose in storm, to rot in a
deadly peace.
There’ll come a point that we will not yield, no
matter if right or wrong;
And man will fight on the battle-field while pas-
sion and pride are strong—
So long as he will not kiss the rod, and his stub-
born spirit sours—
For the scorn of Nature and curse of God are
heavy on peace like ours.
There are boys out there by the western creeks,
who hurry away from school
To climb the sides of the breezy peaks or dive in
the shaded pool,
Who’ll stick to their guns when the mountains
quake to the tread of a mighty war,
And fight for Right or a Grand Mistake as men
never fought before;
When the peaks are scarred and the sea-walls
crack till the farthest hills vibrate,
And the world for a while goes rolling back in a
storm of love and hate.
There are boys to-day in the city slum and the
home of wealth and pride
Who’ll have one home when the storm is come, and
fight for it side by side,
Who’ll hold the cliffs against armoured hells that
batter a coastal town,
Or grimly die in a hail of shells when the walls
come crashing down.
And many a pink-white baby girl, the queen of
her home to-day,


Will see the wings of the tempest whirl the mist
of our dawn away—
Will live to shudder and stop her ears to the thud
of the distant gun,
And know the sorrow that has no tears when a
battle is lost and won—
As a mother or wife in the years to come will
kneel, wild-eyed and white,
And pray to God in her darkened home for the
“men in the fort to-night.”
But, oh! if the cavalry charge again as they did
when the world was wide,
’Twill be grand in the ranks of a thousand men in
that glorious race to ride,
And strike for all that is true and strong, for all
that is grand and brave,
And all that ever shall be, so long as man has a
soul to save.
He must lift the saddle, and close his “wings,” and
shut his angels out,
And steel his heart for the end of things, who’d
ride with a stockman scout,
When the race they ride on the battle-track, and
the waning distance hums,
When the shelled sky shrieks, and the rifles crack
like stockwhips amongst the gums—
And the straight is reached and the field is gapped
and the hoof-torn sward grows red
With the blood of those who are handicapped with
iron and steel and lead;
And the gaps are filled, though unseen by eyes,
with the spirit and with the shades
Of the world-wide rebel dead who’ll rise and rush
with the Bush Brigades.


She’s England yet! The nations never knew her;
Or, if they knew, were ready to forget.
She made new worlds that paid no homage to her,
Because she called for none as for a debt.
The bullying Power that deemed all nations cra-
ven,
And thought her star of destiny had set,
Was sure that she would seek a coward’s haven—
And tempted her, and found her England yet!
We learn our England, and we soon forget,
To learn again that she is England yet.
They watched Britannia ever looking forward,
But could not see the things her children saw.
They watched in Southern seas her boats pull
shoreward,
But only marked the eyeglass, heard the
“Haw!”
In tents, and bungalows, and outpost stations,
Thin white men ruled for her, unseen, unheard,
Ten millions of strange races and far nations
Were ready to obey her at a word.
We learn our England, and in peace forget,
To learn in storm that she is England yet.
She’s England yet; and men shall doubt no longer;
And mourn no longer for what she has been.
She’ll be a greater England and a stronger—
A better England than the world has seen.
Our own, who reck not of a king’s regalia,
Tinsel of crowns, and courts that fume and fret,
Are fighting for her—fighting for Australia—
And blasphemously hail her “England Yet!”
She’s England yet, with little to regret—
Ay, more than ever, she’ll be England yet!


18th June, 1924.
THE SCHOOLS’ CELEBRATION.
The Education Department and the Teachers’
Federation are cordially in agreement on the ad-
visability of holding a schools’ celebration in
honor of Henry Lawson. The object is twofold—
(1) by a State-wide movement to bring Henry
Lawson and his work vividly before the children
and their parents, and (2) to raise funds for a
memorial to perpetuate the work of the “Aus-
tralian Burns.”
The method of the celebration is left to the
discretion of each teacher, but it is requested that
collecting cards be not put into the hands of the
children. There are many other ways such as
concerts, picture entertainments and refresh-
ment drives by which funds can be raised, and in
which the children can display individuality,
initiative, and self-help, without relying solely
upon the generosity of adults.
The music of the Waratah and Wattle has been
composed specially for the occasion by Mr. Tre-
harne, State Superintendent of Music, and is in-
tended to be sung by the whole school, while the
extracts from Lawson’s poems are intended as
aids to school concerts on the day.
Steps are enclosed for the despatch of sub-
scriptions to the office of the Federation, and
reports of the functions held might be supplied
to the local press, and to the district Inspector
of Schools.
It is confidently expected that the response to
the appeal will be worthy of the children of Aus-
tralia.
The poems in this booklet have been reprinted
from Henry Lawson’s “Winnowed Verses,” by
special permission of Angus and Robertson, Ltd.,
owners of the copyright.
E. DASH,
President,
N.S. Wales Public School Teachers’ Federation.


At the time of the poet’s last illness, children
from the State Schools in all parts of Australia
wrote to lighten the burden of his pain, and to
confirm the hope that his songs would live in
their hearts. When he died our teachers and
children were the most genuine in their promise
of support for a worthy memorial. The Memorial
Committee looks confidently to those same men
and women, with the children of our schools, to
fulfil this promise.
The Executive Committee consists of nine men,
not the least able and earnest of whom are the
representatives of the State Schools, Messrs. Dash.
Alanson, and Latter. They are proudly confident
that the teachers and children will contribute at
least half the amount of £2500 required for the
noble statue of the dead poet it is proposed to erect
in the Sydney Domain.
Lawson’s works are his gift to Australia, and
there should be a set of his volumes in every
school of his native land. Through the generosity
of the publishers we are able to offer as a souvenir
to each school or individual for each £1 donated
or collected one of the eleven volumes of his poems
or stories. The schools forwarding £lO will re-
ceive the whole set. Beyond this copies of the
beautiful illustrated edition of the selected poems
will be awarded as prizes to New South Wales
schools on the following basis, viz.:—
Among Ist class schools, 3 volumes.
Among 2nd class schools, 2 volumes.
Among 3rd class schools, 3 volumes.
Among 4th class schools, 6 volumes.
Among sth class schools, 10 volumes.
Among 6th class schools, 20 volumes.
Among Provisional schools, 10 volumes.
All of these prizes and souvenir volumes will
contain a bookplate portrait of the Poet, specially
drawn for the occasion and presented to the fund
by Mr. Lionel Lindsay.


The schools which are most enthusiastic in
honoring our national poet will honor themselves
by winning these prize volumes containing the
stories and songs which we believe will be retold
and recited when the portrait bronze has long
since crusted to tears of malachite.
W. H. IFOULD,
Chairman of the Executive Committee, Henry
Lawson Memorial Fund.


