

31V
CP
ilhe WnCxisxm JHemartal axiii Society of Jlootscrag
" zUirf this be our watchword for evermore —
For Australia till we
" —Henry Lawson
The Society meets at the Footscray
Town Hal! at 8 p.m. on the third Wed-
nesday in each month.
Secretary’s Address:
63 Windsor Street, Footscray,
Victoria.
Fellow Countrywomen and Countrymen of Henry Lawson,—
From humble beginnings, the annual Henry Lawson
commemoration, held in Footscray, has grown to impressive
proportions. It has won wide recognition because of the
persistent and sustained efforts made by the Victorian
Movement to popularise the work of Australia’s writer and
poet, Henry Lawson.
The late Mr. David McKee Wright, a gifted Australian
poet and man of letters, paid this tribute to Lawson: “He
was the first of Australia’s sons to speak in her own tone
and language. That is his unique distinction. When the
little things of the moment are forgotten he will stand out
as the greatest man of his age and country. He belongs to
a nation in the building; and who can even guess how much
of the foundation his wandering thought has laid?”
To Footscray (Victoria), belongs the pre-eminent and
two fold distinction of being the first place in the Common-
wealth to commemorate Lawson by annual gatherings and
by the formation of a literary society in his honor.
tPhoto by May Moor a)
HENRY LAWSON
The Henry Lawson Movement came into existence in
hoot.seray on Sunday, September 9th, 1923. Movements
somewhat similar have since been formed elsewhere. The Henry Lawson Society of Footscray
welcomes the advent of such kindred bodies, and it is proud to be the pioneer.
The objects of the Henry Lawson Memorial and Literary Society of Footscray are:
To perpetuate the name of Australia’s writer, Henry Lawson, by annual commemorative
gatherings in the Footscray Hill Park on the Sunday in January nearest to Aus-
tralia’s day (Foundation Day).
To inculcate a definite Australian Sentiment and a greater appreciation of native
Literature.
To establish a Statue Fund for the purpose of placing a memorial to Henry Lawson
in the Footscray Hill Park.
For attaining those objects—and, particularly, that of a Lawson 'memorial in Victoria—funds
are urgently required. Membership of the Society is open to Australians everywhere, the annual
subscription being two shillings. Subscriptions expire on 31st December in each year irrespective
of the date when membership commences.
On receipt of two shillings and sixpence, a membership card, and a post-card photograph
(done in sepia) of Lawson will be despatched to any address. The post-card photograph can
also be obtained separately at Gd. or 5/G per dozen.
Donations aim specially appealed for and will be promptly acknowledged. Donors of three
guineas, and upward!, will be enrolled as Life Members.
The Society desires to secure a membership roll of 1,000 —the Lawson Thousand; but it be-
lieves there must be many times that number of good Australians to whom the honoring of a Big
Australian must strongly appeal.
Therefore, the Henry Lawson Memorial and Literary Society of Footscray confidently appeals
to you individually to become a member or to forward a donation.
Gr. JOHN MULLENS,
President.
S. FORD,
Honorary Secretary.
I <f 2-9
