

H3H3KBraraH3KOB3B3P3KafiHB3raraBOB3HJP3HHraH3MIH
Henry Lawson
1867-1967
CENTENARY
Commemorative
Souvenir
PRICE 25 CENTS
under the auspices of
THE HENRY LAWSON MEMORIAL
AND LITERARY SOCIETY
33 Smart Street, Hawthorn


LAWSON MEMORIAL, FOOTSCRAY GARDENS
erected by
Henry Lawson Memorial and Literary Society


mm
HENRY LAWSON
1867-1967
CENTENARY COMMEMORATION
PROGRAMME
Classic Coffee Lounge, 11 Swanston Street (upstairs)
(opposite St. Paul’s Cathedral)
MONDAY, JUNE 19, 1967
Sherry 7.30 p.m.
Programme sharp at 8.00 p.m.
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Harry Pearce
(President, Lawson Society)
Lawson Songs . . . . . . . . . . “Austral Singers”
“Lawson and his Publisher” . . . . Mr. E. C. Bray, b.a.
(of Angus & Robertson)
“Bill of the Ages” . . . . . . . . (Mrs.) Nancy Benton
(Lawson) (Vice-President, Lawson Society)
“Lawson as an Australian” . . . . Mr. Wally Smallman
(A.N.A. and Australia Day Council)
“A Bush Publican’s Lament” . . . . Miss Elsie Mullen
(Lawson)
“The Essential Lawson” . . . . Mr. Frederick Macartney
(Critic and Poet)
“For’ard” . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wally Smallman
(Lawson)
“Lawson and Democracy” . . . . . . Mr. “Mick” Jordan
(Secretary Trades Hall Council)
SUPPER
(“The Vanguard” and “It Was Awful” by permission
of Angus & Robertson Ltd.)
ADMISSION TO THIS PROGRAMME $1


THE VANGUARD
They say, in all kindness, I’m out of the hunt —
Too old and too deaf to be sent to the Front.
A scribbler of stories, a maker of songs,
To the fireside and armchair my valour belongs!
Yet in campaigns all hopeless, in bitterest strife,
I have been at the front all the days of my life.
Our army was small and ’twas scattered afar,
And our headquarters down where the Poor People are.
But I knew the great hearts of the Jims and the Bills,
And we signalled by wireless as old as the hills.
There were songs that could reach to our furthermost wing,
And sorrow and poverty taught me to sing.
Our War Hymn the war hymn that ever prevails —
Oh, we sang it of old when we marched from Marseilles!
And our Army traditions are cherished with pride
In streets and in woods where we triumphed, or died;
Where rebel or loyal, by farmhouse or town,
The chorus waxed faint as they volleyed us down.
No V.C. comes to us, no rest nor release,
Though hardest of all is this fighting in peace.
Small honour to wife or to daughter or son,
Though noblest of all are the deeds that are done.
But we never are conquered, we never can die,
For we live through the ages, my Army and I.
■ —HENRY LAWSON
(from “My Army, O, My Army! and other Songs”)
IT WAS AWFUL
He was a tourist, don’t you know. He was on his way to pay a visit
to his brother-in-law, a squatter on the Darling, and stayed over one
night in a hotel in Tallytown. It was during the great strike. He said, “It
was awful, don’t you know”. In the morning he arose, and while he was
fixing his collar he happened to glance out through the window and two
bodies hanging to the limb of a tree across the road.
About three seconds later he tumbled down the back stairs on top
of a Darling Whaler, who rose up, collared him, and made inquiries in
language totally unfit for publication.
“O, my God!” gasped the tourist, “there’s been murder done!’
“What?”
“Murder! Run for the police. Fetch the police. There are two men
hanging to a tree in front of the hotel. They’ve been lynched in the
night. Oh, my God! It’s awful.”
The tourist collapsed into a chair, and the Whaler went to look.
When he returned he seemed calmer and wore an interested expression.
“Well, have you informed the police?” gasped the newchum, still
trembling, and with a corpse-like face.
“No”, said the other sadly.
“Why? Why didn’t you tell them?”
“Because it’s no use. The unionists hold this town. Those poor fellows
are past all help now —”
“What —what do you mean?”
“Well, those men were non-unionists, the boys caught them last night
and choked ’em off. That’s about it”.


“Great Scot! Does the law of this country allow men to be murdered
in cold blood? My God! It’s awful!”
“Well, it seems so”, said the Whaler, in reply to the first part of the
question. Then an idea seemed to strike him. “By the way”, he asked, in
a hurried, anxious tone, “have you got a ticket? Do you belong to the
union?”
“N-no —I —l don’t know anything about it.”
“Well, you will soon, if you don’t pull your wits together. Are you
a Jackeroo?”
“A what? I suppose I’m a newchum, if that’s what you mean.”
“Well, it amounts to the same thing—a jackeroo is a newchum and
a newchum is a jackeroo. Now, those poor fellows hanging out there
were jackeroos.”
“My God! It’s awful.”
“It will be awful if you don’t pull yourself together. Now, listen
here. I’m a union man, and true to my mates, but I don’t like this
business. I don’t want any more choking off done. I like your looks, and
I’ll save you if I can —-”
“My God! It’s awful.”
“Don’t interrupt me. There’s no time to lose. Get your bag and get
down to the station before the boys in the union camp are up and on
your track. There’s a train in twenty minutes. Get your ticket and keep
out of sight till she starts; then jump in.”
“I will. My—”
“Never mind that. Off with you, and do exactly as I tell you.”
“I will.”
And he did, and nearly got hauled up for boarding a train while in
motion. He didn’t visit his Uncle; he came back to the city. Whenever
he referred to the adventure he said it was awful. . .
ihe effigies of two notorious non-unionists are hanging there yet.
■ —HENRY LAWSON
(The Stories of Henry Lawson, Vol. 3, pp. 81-2, Angus & Robertson, 1964)
THE REAL HENRY LAWSON
Much has been said about Lawson, but there is one aspect that has
received very little, if any, notice. This is his own attitude to his own
work. To understand this is to understand Lawson.
This is his complete identification of himself with his “Army of the
Rear”. The whole of his work illustrates a conscious effort to be its
mouth-piece.
In his "Autobiography” he describes his search for work in Sydney
and says, “the faces in the street were passing all the time. The worn
faces and gaunt figures in poor, pitiful clothing. Meeting me and passing,
and catching up and passing, and seeming to turn momentarily, hopelessly,
fearfully, resentfully, appealingly, as though looking to me for help or
sympathy, or guidance—for something—l didn’t know what. AND MY
FACE WAS ONE OF THEM . . . about then I wrote . . . ‘The Army
of the Rear’.” (My emphasis, H.P.)
In that same poem he says, “I’ve sworn to die a soldier of the Army
of the Rear.” In “Arvie Aspinall’s Alarm Clock” he describes the tragic
conditions of Grinder Bros, employees, and in his “Last Review” says,
“/ was Arvie Aspinall”. (His emphasis, H.P.)
In “The Last Review” it is plain that his identification with his
characters is complete. So, too, in “Bill of the Ages”.
Lawson’s creed of “Mateship” is not limited, but includes humanity—
it is universal. This is positively shown in his “Write It Down for Me”,
where one of his “Army” is depicted as saying to a Shanty-Singer, “That’s
the truth, bloke! Sling it at ’em! Oh! Gor Bli’ me, that was grand”, and
asks the singer (Lawson) “Will you write it down for me?” Then Lawson
continues:


“And the backblock bard goes through it, ever seeking as he goes
For the line of least resistance to the hearts of men he knows;
Yes, he tracks their hearts in mateship, and he tracks them out alone —
Seeking for the power to sway them, till he finds it in his own:
Feels what they feel, loves what they love, learns to hate what they condemn,
lakes his pen in tears and triumph, and he writes it down for them.”
(My emphasis, H.P.)
Is not THAT exactly what Lawson did?
His identification is clear in the lines;
“My Army, O, My Army! The time I dreamed of comes!
I want to see your colours; I want to hear your drums!”
His whole work is presenting various aspects in the life of his “Army”,
and he was impatient and angry with those who did not understand this,
but criticised his work from a coldly superior and academic “literary”
aspect. This impatience and anger, as well as his identification with his
“Army”, he expresses in “To My Cultured Critics”:
Must I turn aside from my destined way
For a task your Joss would find me?
I come with the strength of the Jiving day,
And with half the world behind me.
I leave you alone in your cultured halls
To drivel and croak and cavil;
’Till your voice goes further than college walls,
Keep out of the tracks we travel.”
(My emphasis, H.P.)
Henry Boote said, “To look into (Lawson’s) singularly deep and
questioning eyes was to peer into the very soul of humanity”.
Humanity WAS Lawson, and Lawson WAS Humanity. That unity
remained with him until he died. He could not desert his “Army”. He
could not rise above them on his own. To have done so would have been
to him, treachery, the denial of his creed of “Mateship”—to have become
a Scab!
In his poem “Otherside”, obviously written in the shadow of the
“New Australia” exodus to Paraguay, he says:
And when I am weary neath a load of worldly care.
There are times when I’ve a longing just to hump my bluey there;
But alone I could not reach it for the track is barred to one —
I must take the nations with me— all must go, or none.
(My emphasis, H.P.)
This identification explains—or goes a long way to do so —his later
life. We see his loyalty expressed in “To Victor Daley”, and in “And
What Have You to Say?” When disillusionment was too heavy he found
relief in drink, as he says in the last mentioned:
When others see the devils dance,
I hear the Angels sing,
And round the drunkard’s bed
Heaven’s Nurses whispering
And says, “And what have you to say?”, Yes, WHAT?
It is not for “Society” to feel superior, but to hang its head in shame,
because, really, it put Lawson in the condition where he finished his life.
With his identification he had a conviction of “destiny”:
I was born to write of the things that are,
And the power was given to me.
I was born to strike at the things that mar
The world as the world should be.
(My emphasis, H.P.)
A true psychological understanding of Lawson has yet to be done.
“The Army of the Rear” understands Lawson as no others can, or do.
And that is why Lawson will always hold his own in the hearts of “The
Faces in the Street”.
HARRY H. PEARCE
(President, Henry Lawson Memorial and Literary Society.)
