

L. M. S.
PROGRESS.
Being
The Decennial Report 1920-1930.
of the
Gilbert Islands & Nauru Mission,
Central Pacific.
London Missionary Society,
Roňoro ň o Press,
Beru, Gilbert Islands, Central Pacific,
1931.










First United Conference of the Protestant Churches of all the Gilbert I Lands, August 20-24, 1930.
Missionaries seated in centre of front row. (reading from left to right) are Mr. W. A. Levett, Rev. J. H. Spivey.
Rev. G. H. Eastman, Rev. P. Hannah. Pastor jupeli is behind Mr. Levett.


1920
1930
European Missionaries (clerical married).
3
3
„ „ (lay married).
—
1
„ „ (women).
1
2*
Samoan Missionaries.
8
7
Gilbertese Ordained Ministers.
16
42
„ Trained Teachers (not yet ordained).
62
45
„ Untrained Evangelists.
20
32
Mission Press (Printers who are Trained Teachers)
4
6
Churches established.
96
116
Church Members.
3737
5489
Seekers.
1604
1094
Total Adherents.
9900
15153
Central Boarding Schools.
2
2
Scholars in ditto.
202
275
Village Schools.
90
108
Nauru Church Members estimated.
350 \
no
„ Total Adherents including Ch. M.
650)
returns
Special Funds Raised. 1920 For Jubilee Fund.
£717.
1930 For new Ship John Williams V.
£1350.
LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
GILBERT ISLANDS & NAURU MISSION,
CENTRAL PACIFIC.
Decennial Report 1920 1930.
PROGRESS at a Glance.
*1 absent on furlough.


Map of the GILBERT GROUP or Kingsmill Archipelago.
Central Pacific.


LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
Gilbert Islands and Nauru Mission,
CENTRAL PACIFIC.
Southern Islands BEEU, NIKUNAU, ONOTOA,
AEOEAE, TAMANA.
(Evangelisation commenced 1870 by Samoan teachers under L.M.S.)
Central Islands TABITEUEA, (1868), NONOUTI (1871).
(Evangelisation commenced by American Board of Missions at
dates stated. Work taken over by L. M. S, 1917).
Mission Staff, Southern and Central Islands At Eono-
rono, BEEU (Headquarters of Mission; Central Station for Work
of Southern and Central Gilberts; Teachers’ Training College;
High Schools for Boys & Girls ; Mission Press ; Mission Store ;
Dispensary ; Industrial Training; Wireless Station ; &c.)
Eev. G. H. Eastman and Mrs. Eastman.
(Cook Islands 1913-1918, Gilbert Islands 1918-.)
Mr. W. A. Levett and Mrs. Levett, 1923 -
Miss Simmons 1910 - Miss E. M. Pateman* 1922 -
(*Absent on furlough 1929 -1931).
Samoan Pastors At Eonoroho, BEEU, Pastors lupeli and
Eusia. At AEOEAE, Pastors Tamatoa and Apisaloma. At
TAMANA, Pastor Toraasi.
Gilbertese Staff 16 Ordained Ministers, 30 Trained
Teachers, 8 Evangelists.
Mission Press 4 Printers, 2 Bookbinders, and assistants.
Northern Islands ABAIAN (1857), TAEAWA (1860),
MAI AN A (1871), MAEAKEI (1871), BUTAEITAEI & MAKIN.
EUEIA, AEANUKA, ABEMAMA (1873). (Evangelisation com-
menced by Hawaiian teachers under American Board of Missions
at dates stated. Work taken over by L. M, S. 1917).
Mission Staff, Northern Islands At Morikao, ABAIAN
(Central Station for Work of Northern Gilberts ; High School for
Boys ; Dispensary &c.)
Eev. J. H. Spivey and Mrs. Spivey, 1928 -
Samoan Pastor Pastor Kaua.
Gilbertese Staff 22 Ordained Ministers, 15 Trained
Teachers, 24 Evangelists.
Ocean Island and Nauru
European Missionaries, (resident at NiIUEU). Eev. P. Han-
nah & Mrs. Hannah, 1927 -
Samoan Missionary (OCEAN ISLAND). Pastor Mate.
Gilbertese Ministers ( OCEAN ISLAND). 4.
NAUEU. 1 Pastor, 1 Assistant Pastor.
Intermediate Boarding Schools are established on the islands
of AEOEAE, NONOUTI, and MAI AN A.
Village Schools are established in all villages where there are
Gilbertese Ministers or Trained Teachers, and in some cases
untrained Evangelists also conduct small schools.


Gilbert Islands & Nauru Mission,
Central Pacific.
Rev G. H. Eastman’s Report.
Roftoßofto Training Institution,
Berli, Gilbert Islands.
January, 1931.
It was our privilege in 1920, the Jubilee year of the introduction
of the Gospel to the Southern Gilberts, to issue a hopeful Report
entitled, “A Day of Good Tidings.” We rejoice that the promising
advance then begun has been continued throughout the decade
1920-1930. Not that there have been no lapses, and no retrogression
here & there. We have had our disappointments in some islands.
But taking the period as a whole, there has been definite advance on
every island, and we give glory to God that we can again present a
cheerful report recording PROGRESS in many directions. The
extent of that progress may be seen at a glance as tabulated on page
one of this Report. Statistics are by no means the only or even the
best criterion of true progress in spiritual matters, but at least they
do afford some outward indication of the growth of the Kingdom
of God in this Group of Islands; and we rejoice to feel that in
addition to extension there has been also a deepening of the spiritual
consciousness of the Church. It will bo seen that the advance in
Church membership and in the total number of adherents has been
almost 50 % during the decade under review. That this increase is
spread over the whole Group of Islands is one of its most satisfactory
features. The progress of the, work in the various Districts and depart-
ments is reviewedin the following pages.
The Ronorono Training Institution.
In our report for 1920 reference was made to the re-organisation
of the curriculum, and to the efforts being made to reduce the aver-
age age of the students. This policy has been carried out with
success. While the majority of the boys are between 14 and 20
years of age, we have some as young as 12 or under, and 'very few
over 25. Similarly, in the Girls’ School the average age of the girls
is lower than formerly. This makes for greater educational efficiency,
as a Gilbertese over twenty can make but little effective response to
new ideas unless he or she has been in continuous training from an
earlier age. Our missionary colleagues from Samoa who visited us
in November were struck by the fact that our scholars and students
are on the average considerably younger than those in the L. M. S.
Institutions at Malua, Leulumoega, and Papauta in Samoa.
After the great increase in the number of scholars reported in
the Jubilee year, there was a somewhat serious decline in 1922-1923
chiefly owing to drought conditions locally, and to the high price of


foreign clothing &c. This decline became very pronounced during
our long furlough in England in 1924-25, when the numbers in the
Boys’ School fell very low. But on our return in 1925 numbers
rapidly increased; and for the last few years our accommodation has
been fully occupied. Our numbers have broken records ;
and for the Girls’ School, whose number is limited to 70, there is a
waiting list. Our total of scholars and staff is now normally between
200 and 300.
Girls’ School. As Miss Simmons feels unable at the present
time to write a separate report about the Girls’ School, at her re-
quest I am including in this report a few references to the Girls as
suggested by her.
Although the education given in the Boys’ and Girls’ Schools
is in the main of a simple character, our educational standards have
been rising during the decade under review. Tins is especially so in
the upper section of the Institution, known as the Teachers’ Training
College. A plan has been adopted of recalling some of the younger
teachers for Refresher Courses in the Teachers’ College, after their
first term of seven or eight years service, and before they proceed to
their new appointments. Most of them find themselves a long way
behind the present students; and the experience has a salutary effect
in waking them out of slothful self-satisfaction as well as in giving
them new knowledge and new ideas.
The Monitorial Syste m has been revised so as to give to the
Boys themselves a larger measure of self discipline, with good effect.
All minor delinquencies are now dealt with by the Monitors’ Council,
which reports monthly to me as Principal. The Girl Monitresses have
a similar Council, and report monthly to Miss Simmons.
The Scholarship Fund inaugurated as a result of our Home
I urlough in 1925 has proved of the greatest service in enabling us
to tide over difficult times a considerable number of promising young
people who, hut for such help, would have been obliged to leave
school with their educational course incomplete, and characters
unformed. A number of those who have been the recipients of
Scholarships of £ 3 or £ 5 per annum provided by individual donors
or by Schools at Home, are now doing good work as teachers in the
islands of the Group. More help of this nature is needed, and would
be warmly welcomed. Our young people who have received help
are grateful and responsive. There is no fear of their becoming
sycophants or “rice-Christians.” Help is given only to deserving
scholars whose relatives for one reason or another, are temporarily
unable to provide sufficiently for their maintenance.
The Boys & Girls have given a number of Demonstrations or
Pageants in connection with our annual “Me” or Missionary meeting.
These Demonstrations have been excellent training in themselves;
have been greatly appreciated by the L. M. S. people of Beru Island;


and have assisted to raise funds for various aspects of L. M. S. work.
Last November our students gave dramatic representations of “Scenes
from the Pilgrim’s Progress,” under the direction of Mrs. Eastman.
The deep impression made is evident by the continually recurring
references in sermons & addresses during recent weeks.
Some few years ago the Boys started a voluntary Prayer
Meeting on the first Sunday evening in the month. This has been
maintained entirely by the boys themselves, and is attended by all the
unmarried boys & youths. Out of it have grown various activities
making for the higher tone of village life, and for the development
of self-control, and of a healthy public opinion.
Associated also with this Boys’ Own Prayer Meeting, some 40 or
50 of the older boys have lately been visiting the villages of Bern,
and holding evangelistic services for the boys and young men of the
island. It has given great encouragement to them, and help to the
teachers in the villages, and needless to say has given deep satis-
faction to us, that through these efforts, eighty-two conversions
have been made, the new converts being cared for by the teachers
in their respective villages.
Each year we have the joy of receiving into the Fellowship
of Christ’s Church a number of the young people on our Head Station.
In 1930, we received 47 now members of the Church at Ronorono,
21 on profession of Faith in the Lord Jesus, and 2G by transfer from
the Churches on their islands. Formerly it was the custom to receive
as pupils at Roilorono only those who had already become Christians
and were Church members or at least “Seekers.” But as we now
take many pupils at an earlier age, a large number of our boys and
girls are led to Christ after coming to Ronorono.
) Appointments.
In addition to some hundreds of boys and girls who have received
education for longer or shorter periods, during the decade 82 teacher-
couples who have been trained in the Teachers' College, have been
appointed to work as Teachers in the Group. Six new couples were
appointed last year. Many of the Students choose their wives from
amongst the girls in the Girls’ School.
Volunteers for Missionary Service in Papua.
From time to time Ronorono boys have been temporarily
employed on the S. S. “John Williams.” In the course of the ship’s
voyages some of these boys have been to Papua and have seen the
conditions of our L. M. S. work there, and the great need for more
teachers among the Papuans in the districts where the work is in its
early stages. The result has been a quickening of interest in the
evangelisation of Papua. Towards the end of last year a number of
our young teachers and senior students volunteered for missionary
service in Papua. No special .appeal had been made. The move-
ment was entirely spontaneous. Of the eight volunteers, three have


been to Papua on the S. S. “John Williams,” and have seen some-
thing of the conditions there. These volunteers are among our very
best young people. Three are junior teachers at Ronorono. We
shall miss them greatly if they go, but we shall gladly and proudly
send them if the Papua District Committee to whom we have for-
warded their offer of service, can utilise their services. We greatly
hope some at least will be accepted, and that their going as mission-
ary teachers to Papua will deepen the missionary interest and
enthusiasm of all our Churches. One young fellow is giving up a
good position and a good salary in order to complete his training for
this work, to which he has felt the call for some three or four years.
We rejoice and glorify God for this signal token of the working of
His Spirit in the lives of these Gilbertese Christians.
Scouts and Guides.
During the last few years Companies of Boy Scouts and of
Girl Guides, affiliated to the Parent Organisations, have been
organised at Ronorono. These are much appreciated, and are greatly
benefitting their members. The Boy Scouts are admirably led by
Scoutmaster Kireata, one of our junior teachers, with Mr. W. A.
Levett as Scout Commissioner. Miss Pateman when here was
Captain of the Guides, and while she has been away on long furlough,
the Guides have been led by Mrs. Eastman, who is Guide Commis-
sioner for the Group.
Sport and Recreation have been encouraged. A much needed
new and larger recreation ground has been obtained, a large piece of
waste land near the Station and covered with useless bush, having
been rented from the owners, and cleared and levelled by the boys.
In addition to their numerous native Games, the boys play Cricket
and Football; and from time to time general sports are arranged.
The Boys’ Sports Club is mainly run and financed by the boys them-
selves with the assistance of junior teachers, and when necessary, of
the missionaries.
Industrial and Technical Training.
During the last few years efforts have been made to develop
this side of the training given at Ronorono. Through the kindness
of a few generous friends it has been possible to install a number of
Spinning Wheels for spinning the fibre of the cocoanut husk into
native string, which is always in great demand for native building
purposes &c. A loom has also been erected for making coconut fibre
matting. It was hoped that this object lesson of the use of simple
machinery would encourage the development of the native industry
of coir and mat making, but results so far have been disappointing.
The spinning wheels and plant have been useful in the preparation
of native string for use on the station, and a number of boys and
girls have gained some proficiency in their use. Demonstrations


have been given to companies of villagers; but the Gilbertese are very
conservative, and until our staff is strengthened it is not possible to
give time and attention enough to the development of this industry
to convince the people of its practical commercial value.
A knitting machine, the gift of a friend, for knitting cotton
vests &c, is in regular use. The vests are knitted on the machine by
boys; and are trimmed and finished by women and girls. These
receive a small remuneration for their work, which is helpful to them
in their maintenance at School. The vests provided are durable and
comparatively cheap, so that the whole school and mission community
benefits from this innovation.
During the last few years Government has given us a contract
for making considerable quantities of Government uniforms for the
Native Police and other Native Government officials in the Southern
Gilberts. This has involved a great deal of heavy work for Mrs.
Eastman, but she has willingly undertaken it in order to enable the
women to earn a little money as seamstresses.
In addition to the regular work of the carpenter’s shop and
the constant erection and repair of buildings on the Station, many of
the boys receive practical training in the building and repair of boats
and canoes. Last year three new canoes were built on the station.
For the past eighteen months we have conducted Handwork
Classes for the boys, at which they are taught the use of the simpler
carpenter’.* tools, and are encouraged to practise native handicrafts.
A simple plant for making cement blocks having been donated
by a kindly builder friend in England, we have been able to teach
the boys how to make cement blocks. A large number of these have
been used in the erection of improved buildings on the Station.
Many hundreds are now being made for use in the New Jubilee
Memorial Church now in course of erection at Ponorono.
During the decade many improvements have been effected on
the station. A new Mission House, now in the occupation of Mr. &
Mrs. Levett, was erected in 1924-25. Plans were made as far back as
1920 to accumulate funds from profits on the Mission Press for the
erection of a new Printing House. A fine durable building of
hardwood with a fibrolite roof, and fibrolite sheets and cement blocks
for the walls, was erected in 1929. The printers now work in a roomy,
clean, and airy building. Many of the old houses built of native
materials have been demolished or have collapsed, as the native timber
is very perishable. All the students’ and teachers’ houses on the station
have now been provided with hardwood posts erected on a raised coral
& lime foundation wall. The upper structure is of native material,
the roof of pandanus thatch, and the walls are made of the midribs
of the coconut fronds. Material of this character calls for frequent
renewal. As many as 100, 000 six-foot sections of thatch have been
needed in a single year to re-roof the numerous large schoolrooms,


dwelling houses, and other buildings on the station. The girls make
most o£ the thatch used in the normal upkeep o£ the village, but
when the larger buildings require thatching we are often obliged to
contract with the Bern villagers for the extra thatch required. With
the development of the work certain new buildings have become
necessary, and have been added from time to time.
Electric Light & Wireless Installation.
One of the chief drawbacks of the Gilbert Islands is their extreme
isolation and lack of communications. Four, five, or six months
may pass without any ship bringing letters or news from the outside
world. Our own Mission ship would be delayed two or three months,
and we used to wait anxiously wondering from week to week what
had become of her. In cases of serious emergency neither medical
help nor advice was obtainable. Now r all that is changed by the advent
of wireless. Yet it has not been so simple a matter as it might seem.
Bern is 2500 miles from Sydney ; and although it is a simple thing
today to install a wireless listening-in set in England or any civilised
country within a few miles of several broadcasting stations, it was five
years ago a very much less simple matter to install on this lonely
island not only a radio receiver receiving over 3000 or 4000 miles, but
also a spark Morse transmitter to enable us to get in touch with the
Government wireless station at Ocean Island, 400 miles away. How-
ever, with the sympathy of the Directors, and the generous help of
two or three friends, the difficulties were overcome ; and in 1927 we
were able to install a small engine and dynamo to provide the necess-
ary power, and a small receiving and transmitting plant. There was
a great deal of red tape to get through, but now for the last three
years we have been in touch two or three times a week with Ocean
•/
Island, and more recently with Tarawa. Atmospheric conditions on
the Equator arc usually so bad that it is seldom possible to listen in
with pleasure to broadcasting, but from time to time when conditions
are favourable, we are able with our more recent apparatus to pick
up news, music, and occasionally a Sunday evening service from New
Zealand or Australia. Japanese and American stations can also be
heard. But the chief use of the radio installation has been to keep
us informed of the movements of ships, especially of our own Mission
Vessel; and to enable us speedily to get in touch with Sydney or
London in matters of urgent importance. The care and upkeep of the
apparatus and the necessity to keep regular wireless watches; the con-
siderable enforced free use of our radio service both ways for Govern-
ment messages; and the clerical work involved, make rather heavy
demands on my time and strength. But the radio has proved its
worth again and again; and has been of great benefit to us in our
work. Within the last few weeks in addition to valuable local
information, I have received a message from Suva telling of the arrival


there of the new Schooner “John Williams Yanother telling of her
sailing for the Gilberts; and a message from London conveying an
important and urgent decision which, apart from our wireless, might
not have reached us for six months or more. The wireless, too, has
enabled me to obtain medical advice for the treatment of serious
cases of illness or injury with great benefit to the patients.
As an engine and dynamo had to be provided to obtain electrical
energy to transmit messages over 400 miles of ocean, we decided to
try to make use of the power supply for lighting our Church for our
evening services. We have been able to do this with entire success;
and we are now able to gather our students and scholars for evening
study and preparation of school lessons in a well lighted building, with
considerable benefit to their school work. Not only so, but Gradu-
ally wo have managed to extend our lighting system until now we
have electric light installed to the full capacity of our little plant, in
three mission houses, and in the houses and rooms of most of our
teachers and scholars, as well as in two large schoolrooms. This
installation has been a very great improvement to our village ameni-
ties; and makes not only for comfort and convenience, but for safety,
as formerly our people used miserable little kerosene lamps, often
without glasses; and accidents such as setting fire to mosquito nets,
or upsetting the lamp on an easily inflammable mat, were not
infrequent. Now that we have overcome the initial difficulties of the
capital cost of the installation, our present problem is to pay for its
running and maintenance. By contributing as substantially as we
can ourselves, and by means of a levy on all the teachers and scholars
who benefit by the use of the electric light, we are endeavouring to
make the plant as nearly as possible self— supporting; and we hope to
be able to run it.without any cost to the Society other than the
small annual grant which the Directors have allowed towards its
maintenance.
Mission Dispensary.
This department of our work continues to care for the health of
our three hundred young people on the Mission Station; and much
assistance is also given to the people of the island of Bern. Miss
Simmons cares for the girls, my wife looks after the women and
babies, while I attend to the men and boys, and to the majority of
the outside patients. At times of epidemics, or when we have two or
more serious cases of illness in hand at one time, the work is arduous
as one has to be not only physician but nurse as well; and all has to be
fitted in with the ever pressing claims of other duties. Formerly
this work was shared by the two men missionaries; but for some six
years now we have been one married man short on our small staff,
and the whole burden has devolved upon us as our lay colleague has
not the knowledge for this work. During our absences on visitation
of the Group or on furlough, the Dispensary work is carried on by


the missionaries who remain on the station, usually by Miss Simmons
or Miss Pateman. Miss Pateman has done a large amount of useful
work in the Dispensary, caring for the girls during Miss Simmons’
furloughs, and doing most of the general dispensary work
while we were away on furlough. We very gratefully acknowledge
the most valuable help of friends who have supplied parcels of
lint, wool, bandages, dressings &c. These are always most welcome,
as the demand frequently outruns the supply. We are running
short of bandages at the present time, and we should be very grateful
for further supplies. All widths from 1 inch to 0 inches are useful.
The strong unbleached calico bandages are most serviceable as they
can be washed, and used again. Friends who are believers in
Homoeopathy may be interested to know that while I still make use
of the Allopathic Treatment which I learned at Livingstone College,
I have found the knowledge and experience of Homoeopathy which
I gained by taking a Course at the Homoeopathic Hospital Medical
School during my last furlough, most valuable. I use Homoeopathy
nowadays even more than Allopathy; and find it suits the natives
admirably. It has the advantages of being safer and much less
expensive than allopathic treatment, especially in cases which have
a tendency to become chronic. Such, indeed, often yield to
Homoeopathy when allopathic treatment has failed. I am glad to
report that after much negotiation we have succeeded in our appeal
to the High Commissioner at Fiji for remission of Customs Duties
on drugs used freely in our Mission Dispensary.
Visits of Resident Commissioner, Director of Education &c.
During the decade 1920-1930, Ronorono Institution has been
officially and unofficially visited and inspected several times by the
Resident Commissioner of the Colony, by District Officers, by the
Director of Government Education and members of his staff; and by
the Commanders and officers of His Majesty’s warships which have
visited the island. These gentlemen have spoken in generous terms of
their surprise at, and appreciation of, the scope and variety of the
work being done. In particular they have been much impressed by
the attention given to practical work, and to industrial and techni-
cal training; and by the equipment and appearance of the station.
Extracts from Government reports have been forwarded to the
Directors from time to time.
The Mission Store, which supplies the needs of our teachers
and scholars at Ronorono, and of our teachers throughout the Group,
and of which formerly I was in charge, has since the end of 1923
been under the care of Mr. W. A. Levett, and is referred to in his
report. It continues to prove of great benefit to the teachers and
scholars; and by providing the teachers at a low cost with necessary
goods, saves the Society from the demands for the much larger
stipends which the teachers would require if they had to purchase


through ordinary trading channels, as there is little or no trading
competition in the Group, and shipping and distributing costs are
heavy, rendering retail prices very high.
Mission Press.
This useful adjunct to our work has been under Mr. Levett’s
charge since his arrival towards the end of 1923; though I continue
to have a considerable share in the preparation of MSS, the correction
of proofs, &c; and have taken charge during Mr. Levett’s absences
on short furlough. The Press continues to further the work of the
Mission in numerous ways as outlined in Mr, Levett’s report.
Literature.
The claims of this Head Station with its large family; the long
half-yearly visitations of the Group; and the constant pressure of work
connected with Committees and the oversight of the work in the
islands, leave little possibility of literary work. During the decade
we have, however, managed to add a few books to the small library
in the vernacular now available. These include a new edition of our
Gilhertese Hymn hook with Tunes, including about ninety new hymns
(1926); Banyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress,” translated by Mrs. Eastman
(1926); God’s Work of Redemption through Jesus Christ; a Text
book for Students (1923); Elementary Hygiene and first Aid
(1929); Christian Theology for the Gilhertese, Yol. I. (1930); An
English Primer for the Gilhertese, prepared by Mrs. Eastman, (1923;
Revised and Enlarged edition 1929); besides other smaller books.
Mrs. Eastman has nearly ready for the Press a small book for
Gilhertese women on the Care of Mothers and Children. The Mis-
sion Magazine has been issued quarterly as usual; and provides a
useful way of keeping our Churches in touch with Head-Quarters
and with one another, as well as affording a useful channel for spirit-
ual and moral education, literary and biographical articles, news, and
much general information. Articles are included suitable for the
young folk; and each issue contains Notes on the Sunday School
Lessons for the ensuing quarter. Each year we have issued a list of
suggestions for the “Universal Week of Praver,” which is observed
“ c”! •/ 7
in our Churches; a Syllabus for Village Schools, &c.
European Staff.
In 1920 the European Staff of the Mission was below the strength
agreed upon by the Board and the District Committee as the mini-
mum staff essential for the carrying on of the existing work. Although
there have been welcome additions to the staff during the decade,
there have been equivalent losses, so that the close of 1930 finds the
Mission still under-staffed. Meanwhile the work, especially at the
Head Station, has grown in extent and in complexity, so that it is
a matter of urgency that the staff should be re-inforced and
brought up to strength with the least possible delay.


Head Station, Ronorono, Bern.
Throughout the decade apart from Home Furlough in 1924-5,
Ilev. G. H. Eastman and Mrs. Eastman have worked at the Head
Station and have taken part in the visitations of the whole Group,
usually for about three months in each year. The Directors appointed
Rev. G. H. Eastman as Principal of the Ronorono Training Institution
in 1924.
Rev. H. P. Bralsford and Mrs. Bralsford joined the Mission in
June 1920, and spent the first two years of their service at the Head
Station, assisting also in visitation work. After short furlough, in
1923 Rev. H. P. Bralsford and Mrs. Bralsford were transferred to Ocean
Island and Nauru, which district had been without a resident mission-
ary for some years. After a further period of service much broken
into by ill-health and consequent furloughs, Rev. H. P. Bralsford
left the Mission in June 1926, Mrs Bralsford having preceded him
in 1925.
Mr. W. A. Levett and Mrs. Levett arrived in August 1923,
Mr. Levett having been appointed more especially to undertake the
care of the Mission Press. Mission Store, and the clerical duties of
Treasurer and Secretary.
Miss B. E. Simmons has throughout the period been in charge
of the Girls’ School, with two absences of two years, 1919-21 and
1927-29, on long furlough. During the last half of the decade she
has not been able to help as much as formerly in the visitation of
the islands, partly owing to health reasons, and partly because the
re-organisation of the Girls’ School which took place in 1925 necessi-
tates more personal supervision of the girls by a white missionary.
Miss E. M. Pateman joined the staff in 1922 as educationalist,
and did valuable work both in the Girls’ School, of which she took
charge during Miss Simmons’ absence on furlough, and in training
the Students in teaching method. Miss Pateman left for home
furlough in Aug. 1929, and is now due back on the field. To our
concern a rumour has reached us that Miss Pateman has tendered her
resignation; but we hope that she may see her way to return, as the
work needs her help.
The vacancy for a second clerical and educational missionary
at the Hoad Station, and for the work of the Southern and Central
Districts, caused by the transfer of Rev PI. P. Bralsford to Ocean
Island in 1923, has remained unfilled since that date, imposing very
heavy extra burdens upon the few other members of the small staff.
Northern District.
Rev. 11. A. Arnold and Mrs. Arnold, after short furlough, in
Dec. 1920, reopened the old American Board station at Morikao,
Abaian, which was being carried on by a Samoan Pastor. WithAbaian
as a centre Mr. Arnold and Mrs. Arnold worked in the Northern
District- with a Homo Furlough in 1923-24- until they resigned


from the work in 1928, to provide a home and educational facilities
for their young family in Australia. Mr. Arnold is happily settled
as minister of Eagle Junction Congregational Church, Brisbane,
Queensland. The valuable help of these two experienced colleagues
is much missed.
On the retirement of Rev. H. A. & Mrs. Arnold, in Nov. 1928,
Rev. J. H. Spivey and Mrs. Spivey arrived from England, and have
succeeded Mr. & Mrs. Arnold in the charge of the Northern District.
Ocean Island and Nauru.
After a further period without a resident missionary subsequent
to the retirement of Rev. H. P. Bralsford in 1920, Rev. P. Hannah
and Mrs. Hannah were appointed for this District. They arrived
at the end of 1927, and took up their residence at Nauru, which island
has so far claimed almost all their time and attention.
Vacancies on the Staff.
There is urgent need for the appointment of a second clerical
missionary for the Head Station and the Southern District, vacant
since 1923; for another clerical and educational missionary for itinera-
tion by the now Schooner; and— if Miss Pateman should not
return- for a woman educationalist for the Girls’ School, and to assist
also in the Women’s and Boys’ Schools at Rohorono.
Samoan Staff.
Pastor lupeli and his wife Nei Sera have been our loyal helpers
throughout the decade, with two furloughs to Samoa. Pastor lupeli
is a member of the District Committee; Secretary of the Church
Administration Committee, which deals with settlements and removals
of Gilbertese teachers, &c; and Vice—Principal of the Roilorono
Institution. Nei iSera is also an active helper of the work in many
ways. f
During the decade four Samoan Pastors arrived in the Group,
Pastors Esau, Kaua, Tomasi (1922) and Mate (1930). Five
Samoan Pastors have retired:- Pastors Faraimo (1924), Tese (i 925),
Samuolu (1924), Esau (1928), Rinioni (1930), Pastor Rimoni, in
particular, did splendid work first on Arorae Island, and latterly on
Ocean Island. Samoan missionaries remaining at work in the Group
at the end of 1930 are:- Pastors lupeli and Rusia (Bern); Apisa-
loma and Tamatoa (Arorae); Tomasi (Tamana); Kaua (Abaian);
Mate (Ocean Island).
We are still at least one short of the number of Samoans whom
we could usefully place in the Group, but the quality of the men
sent in the last decade, has, with one notable exception, been
markedly below that of earlier Samoan workers here. We should
be sorry to see our connection with Samoa weakened, but unless men
capable of real leadership are forthcoming, it is useless for them to
come to the Gilberts nowadays, as the standard of our own teachers is
steadily rising; and the presence of Samoans of inadequate ability in


the more important positions and drawing larger stipends is not
conducive, either to efficiency or to good feeling.
Gilbertese Staff.
Attention is drawn to the Comparative Table on page 1, from
which it will be seen that the number of Gilbertese Ordained Ministers
has increased from 16 in 1920 to 42 in 1930, or of Ministers and
trained Teachers (not yet ordained) from 78 to 87. The number of
untrained evangelists at work in small villages, chiefly in the nor-
thern islands, has increased from 20 to 32. It is upon the Gilbertese
Teachers and Evangelists that the brunt falls of the hard work of face
to face contact with village life, and slowly dying pagan customs.
We gladly record our tribute of admiration of these Gilbertese col-
leagues. Many of them work faithfully and steadily year in and year
out, with little opportunity of appearing in the limelight or of receiv-
ing rewards for their labours other than the satisfaction of seeing
their flocks increase and their people growing in grace. Temptations
are strong; inherited tendencies are hard to overcome; natural quali-
fications are sometimes deficient ; and consequently disappointments do
occur, and the wastage at times appears high. On the other hand,
the results of the work during the decade are themselves evidence
of much loyal and devoted work. The very considerable increase in
the number of ordained men is also an evidence of steady persever-
ance, since no men are ordained as Ministers until they have done at
least eight years faithful service as Teachers.
The Arrangement of Districts planned on the reorganisation
of the work in 1920 after the survey of the islands taken over from
the American Board, has in the main worked satisfactorily, and is
being continued. Ocean Island is the most difficult problem at the
moment. It needs much more attention from a European missionary
than it has had for some years past; and the missionary needs to
know Gilbertese in order to do effective work. So far Mr. Hannah
has felt tied to Nauru, and has been able to do little for Ocean Island.
The ideal, of course, would be to have a white missionary stationed
on each of these islands, as the American Board had for a time.
The District Committee can meet only when the Mission
Vessel is in the Group and can bring the missionaries together.
Then Committee work has to be done amid all the pressure and
distractions of the visitation of the islands, meetings being held at all
hours ashore or on the ship between islands, as the time can be fitted
in. A great part of the work has to be dealt with between the half-
yearly meetings of D. C. by the Executive Committee, which is com-
posed of the members of the D. C. resident at Beru. During the
decade several matters of major importance have occupied the time
of the D.C, including the long drawn out problem of the Mission
Ship, now happily settled for a time by the building of the new


schooner; negotations with Government relative to the native Dances;
and relative to the Government Education Scheme, &c.
Geographical circumstances render it exceedingly difficult for
Rev. P. Hannah to attend meetings of D. C. He lias been present
only twice: once on his first arrival and before his settlement at
Nauru, and again after his short furlough, which had to be prolonged,
involving a delay of four months in his return to Nauru, a very
heavy price to pay for attendance at D. C. meetings.
With the new Schooner it looks as if full meetings of District
Committee will be more difficult than ever. Probably it will seldom
be more than once a year that either Mr. Spivey or Mr. Hannah
can attend a meeting with the members at Bern, or vice-versa.
The Church Adminstration Committee meets at Bern several
times a year, and deals with all appointments and removals of teachers,
and with matters affecting the general welfare of the work as a
whole. Here again geographical difficulties seriously limit the
possible representation on the Committee. This Committee acts as a
useful centre and “Clearing House” for the Islands Church Councils
which function in every island. While the Committee “recommends”
on financial matters to these Islands Councils, it has at present no
funds, and no practical control over finance, the responsibility for
which perforce remains with the District Committee. It is hoped to
bring under the control of the Church Administration Committee a
small fund for local purposes, the raising of which was suggested by
the delegates at the recent United Conference of the Churches.
Correspondence is a heavy burden on so small a staff, and
falls almost entirely upon two or three members. Mr. Levett as
Secretary, deal.) with the' Committee Minutes and matters arising
therefrom, with the assistance of Rev. J. H. Spivey as Minute
Secretary. Much of the official correspondence with Government on
Education, the Native Dances, and similar matters, as well as a very
heavy native correspondence with the over 100 native pastors, devolves
upon me. Pastor lupeli, with my co-operation as Chairman, acts as
an efficient secretary of the Church Administration Committee.
Hostility of Roman Catholics.
The progress of the Protestant Cause has naturally aroused the
resentment of the Romanists. In several of the islands our teachers
and people have been subjected to much petty persecution —instigated
we believe by the foreign priests—from Roman Catholic Govern-
ment officials. Several of our teachers have been fined, and some
put in gaol for several months on the most trumpery charges.
Protests have often been completely unavailing, but we did succeed
after much delay, in getting one fine of £ 5, most unjustly imposed
by the order of a Roman Catholic white officer, returned to the teacher
who had been unjustly fined after already suffering an unjust
imprisonment of two months. The only islands free from trouble of


OUR NEW SHIP.
The auxiliary Schooner “John Williams” V
built at Grangemouth, Scotland, in 1930, for the Work of
The London Missionary Society in the South Seas,
particularly in the Gilbert and Ellice Islands.


New-L.M.S. Church, named “The New Jerusalem,” at ARORAE ISLAND.
This splendid church costing over £2.500. —raised locallv. was August 21 st. 1930.


this kind from the priests are the two where the people are all Protest-*
ants. Efforts have been frequently made by the Romanists to get
a footing in those two islands, but the people are wise enough to
resist them. That type of arrogant interference with freedom of
conscience and with political administration which has recently been
so patent in Malta, is attempted on a smaller scale here. The Homan
Catholics here have, however, a newly appointed Bishop, with whom
we have had one or two interviews; and we have reason to hope that
his authority over the priests may, in some directions at least, lessen
the causes of friction which we deplore.
Church Building and Improvement.
In several of the islands improved Church buildings have been
erected during the last decade, notably in the Southern District. A
fine new Church of coral blocks and lime, thatched with the panda-
nus leaf, and capable of seating over 1000 people, has been built at
Buariki Village, Onotoa. Two similar but smaller buildings have
been erected in two of the smaller villages of Bern. In other villages
old buildings have been replaced by newer and better Churches of
native materials, notably on the islands of Tabiteuea and Nonouti.
The crowning achievement of the decade in this direction has been
the erection of a magnificent Church of coral and cement, with
fibrolite roof, ornamental ceiling, beautifully modelled Pulpit and
Communion rails, and externally, handsome porches and a tower,
at the village of Tamaroa, Arorae Island, * This Church, of which an
illustration is given in this booklet, was opened on Aug. 21st 11)30,
by me as Chairman of Committee, together with my colleagues and
representative teachers and delegates from all the islands of the
Giro up, on the occasion of the Great United Conference held at that
Island in August. The whole of the cost, approximately £2500, has
been borne by the people of Arorae, the greater part having already
been raised. v
At the time of writing the people of Tamana Island are engaged
in rebuilding their old Charch. They have been raising funds with
conspicuous self-denial for some ten years past until they have raised
nearly £3OOO. The materials for their new Church have been brought
from Sydney on successive trips on the SS. “John Williams”. The
people are now engaged on the erection of the building under the
direction of the half-caste carpenter who made so good a job of the
Church at Arorae, which the Tamana Church promises at least to
equal if not to surpass.
Here on our Head Station at Ronorono, Beru, we are also
engaged in building a New Church of a more permanent character
than the existing building of a wooden framework and native thatch,


which has become infested with white ants. The new Church is
to be a Memorial of the Jubilee of the Introduction of the
Gospel to the Southern Islands. It will be a less pretentious
structure than the Churches on Arorae and Tamana, as we have not
the means of raising money which the people of those islands have.
Beru itself is a poor island, and the people are not generous. To com-
plete the Church according to our plans we shall require at least
£l5OO. Towards this the Churches raised in their Jubilee Fund a
matter of £7OO, the interest on which has been used from time to time
in the purchase of cement for making cement blocks for the new
Church. For ten years we have waited, partly because prices were high
and our funds insufficient; and partly because the future of the Insti-
tution and of the Mission was uncertain until the replacement of the old
ship had been decided upon. Last year it became evident that as the old
ship was about to be disposed of, we must act at once, or we should bo
faced with the extremely heavy freight charges £t> per ton or
more which would be payable if the materials for the Church
could not be brought up from Sydney on our own vessel. That would
have made the Church an impossibility. So we have secured the
material for the erection of the major portion of the building, the
nave, which we hope it will be possible to complete and put into use,
even if the completion of the whole Church building should have to
be deferred. Our teachers and scholars have given most generously
in spite of having already made a very great effort to raise funds for
the new ship “John Williams V.” But we still need some £OOO or
£7OO to complete the Church to make it worthy of the Head Station
of the Mission, and a permanent object lesson to the teachers who
will be trained here in generations to come. Since our most generous
supporters at Arorae and Tamana Island are fully occupied with the
rebuilding of their own large (Lurches, we cannot expect any help
from them for some time to come, so we trust that other friends of
the Mission will be moved to come to our assistance. We are not
obsessed with the desire to erect a cathedral, nor do we exaggerate
the importance of a “building” as such. We do, however, appreciate
the fact that a religion which does not inspire its followers to raise
some temple better than mean huts is apt to be meanly esteemed. It
was no false sentiment which led our forefathers to erect noble and
stately Cathedrals for the Worship of the King of Kings. The
Roman Catholics in this Group have raised and are raising elaborate
Churches; and we feel it is a right and proper sentiment of our
Protestant people to wish themselves to honour God with Churches
dignified, clean, and not liable to ever-recurring decay. As our boys
and girls and students are, however, not themselves in a position to
earn money or to give substantially, we are obliged to look to those
who feel the value of the task we are seeking to carry out, to come
to our aid in such a matter.


Education: The new Government Co-operation Scheme.
Hitherto village education in the Gilberts has been entirely in
the hands of the Missions, who have laid the foundations of such
simple education and civilisation as exist in the Islands. Most of the
villages of considerable size have a village school of some sort, though
many smaller hamlets are still neglected. The L.M.S. now has over
100 village Schools in the Group, covering all the larger villages,
and in some cases grouping the children of neighbouring hamlets.
About ten years ago Government appointed an Education officer,
who first established a small School at Ocean Island. In 1922
Government built a Boarding School at Tarawa Island, and gathered
about fit) young and carefully selected boys for training as Government
cadets &c. For some time there was talk of a pretentious scheme
for establishing Government Schools in every island, to be conducted
by boys trained at the Government centre at Tarawa. This scheme
was abandoned as far too costly, and unnecessary, at any rate at the
present stage of development of the Colony. Then for some years the
Government strongly pressed the Missions, Protestant and Catholic,
to adopt in their village Schools a somewhat elaborate syllabus of
secular education prepared by Government officers not closely ac-
quainted with the conditions of village life. For a time the idea of
some officials was that all education to he of value must be in English.
Fortunately wiser counsels prevailed: and it has been recognised
that the proper vehicle for primary education is the vernacular. But
while Government pressed the Missions to pledge themselves to
carry out its secular syllabus, it was unwilling to give any financial
assistance, or to provide books or school equipment, toward the carry-
ing out of its proposals, beyond the continuance of the grant of £2OO
per annum (on two occasions £ 250) which has now been made for
some years in respect to the central Shcools at Ronorono and Morikao,
and a similar grant to the Catholic Mission. Protracted and
delicate negotiations involving many interviews and much heavy
correspondence have ultimately resulted in the issue of a new Govern-
ment Scheme for co-operation with the Missions for the further de-
velopment of village education. The scheme is by no means ideal, and
from the Mission point of view has many serious drawbacks. How-
ever, both Missions have now agreed to attempt to co-operate with
Government along the lines of the Government Scheme, the L.M.S.
Committee having first secured an undertaking that this co-operation
shall be of a tentative character for the first few years. Briefly the
scheme is that each year ten Mission teachers, five from each
Mission, Protestant and Roman, will be withdrawn from their
schools—and naturally, from their pastoral duties also—and will be given
at the Government centre “at condensed training course in theoretical
and practical teaching and in General Knowledge, sufficient to ensure


that, on their return to their schools, the teachers will give to the village
children, hy improved methods and hy the use of new didactic materials,
that kind of education which will react to the benefit of village life.
(The above is a quotation from the latest Government Report of the
Education Department.)
It is understood that the teachers will receive about one year’s
training; and will then be returned to the Missions, who undertake
to re-appoint them to village Schools. Subsequently the village
schools to which such teachers are appointed — and only such
schools—will be eligible to earn a small efficiency grant, not likely
to exceed some £ 12 to £ 16 per annum, on inspection by a Govern-
ment education officer. While it is hoped that the scheme may
prove of benefit to secular education in the limited number of villages
to which these teachers may be appointed, the scheme raises many
practical difficulties for the Mission, such as these:—
(1) There will be considerable unsettlement of the Society’s
religious as well as educational work in a number of villages every
year.
(2) The Mission is put to the inconvenience and expense of
finding other teachers to carry on the work in the villages from
which teachers are temporarily withdrawn; and to find other occupa-
tion for, or to return to their homes, the temporary teachers at the
expiration of their relief work. Very much travelling by teachers
and their families is involved, the brunt of which falls on the Mission.
Government is willing, if necessary, to defray the cost of the pass-
ages of the teachers sent for training,—but not if they travel on the
Mission vessel, —and of these only.
(3) There will be a very real danger of so much pressure
being brougnt to bear upon these teachers to give their whole strength
to the secular teaching, that their religious teaching and their
pastoral work will suffer.
(4) There is certain to be jealousy if some teachers and schools
are financially helped while others on the same island, and
quite possibly equally efficient, receive no help at all. Govern-
ment, however, absolutely refuses to make any grant, however small,
for other schools. The only concession we have been able to obtain
is the verbal assurance from the Resident Commissioner that wo
may expend the grants earned as we please. But the Education
Department stipulates that the aided schools shall be equipped with
books and apparatus up to the standard which the Department may
require, so there is not likely to be much margin for assisting other
schools. The Society may even lose support in other villages, out-
weighing the small grants earned in the few villages that will be
eligible for grants.
(5) In the cases which are bound to arise where the Roman
School is aided and the Protestant School is not aided, or vice-versa,


there is likely to be dissatisfaction and friction, possibly of a serious
character. There is certain to be attempted proselytising, as the
Government Scheme requires that each aided school in order to be
eligible for a grant, must have a certain minimum of scholars in
regular attendance, the minimum presenting difficulties to both
Missions in many villages, and entirely cutting off the possibility of
help for a large number of village schools. We know from experience
the way the Romanist priests and teachers seek to entice away
children to their schools, and the bitter hostility they show to our
Protestant teachers in cases where parents whose children have
occasionally attended a Romanist school, send their children to
attend a Protestant school where they find a better education is
being given.
However, the Government has decided to carry out this
scheme; and throws upon the Missions the responsibibly of overcom-
ing any such difficulties. Further, Government ingenuously insists
that the Missions must provide the necessary school books, readers, &c.
While the L.M.S. staff is so small, it will be next to impossible to
provide new school literature of a type to satisfy the Government
requirements unless Government will frankly realise the difficulty,
and accept the literature which the Mission is already providing for
its schools, and to which it adds from time to time as is possible.
The first batch of Mission teachers went to the Government
centre last August. While we gratefully recognise this movement on
the part of Government to assist to a limited extent village education
in the Group, and while the Mission will do its best to co-operate
with Government, it is probable that experience will show that some
modifications of the new scheme will be necessary. In particular
we wish the Board could get the Colonial Office authorities to see
the reasonableness of our request that all Mission Schools should be
eligible for a grant-in-aid provided they can carry out with reason-
able efficiency the Government syllabus of secular education laid
down for use in the Schools even though the teachers may not have
received the special Government teaching course.
In this connection reference may be made to the very serious
strain upon so small and already overburdened a Mission staff, which
is being experienced by the ever increasing demands of the constant-
ly multiplying Government Departments and officials for reports,
statistics and information of all sorts. There seems to us to be an
unnecessary increase of formalities and red-tape; and a danger of
the machinery of Government becoming quite unsuitably ponderous,
complicated, and expensive for the real well-being of so small and
so simple a community as the Gilbertese.
AVhile dealing with education in the villages, may we thank our
friends who have so kindly sent us parcels or boxes of gifts for the
Schools. We have twice a year to visit and examine our Schools


with about 3500 children; and we need a very large number of
small prizes for such occasions. At the present time our supplies
are practically exhausted, and we shall have difficulty in providing
prizes for the village Schools at the forthcoming examinations.
Gifts of School stationery, slates, exercise books, rubber, pencils, very
easy illustrated reading primers, toys of all sorts, rulers, &c. are most
acceptable. As parcel postage to the Gilberts is so expensive, it is
best for friends or Schools in a District to combine to fill a fair-sized
case, which should be well and closely packed; and to consult the
Mission House as to how and when to forward the same from London
or Manchester with a consignment of goods for the Gilberts Mission.
Lists and particulars as to sending will be gladly sent to friends who
are willing to help us in this manner.
First United Conference of L. M. S. Churches in all the
Gilbert Islands' (See Photograph facing page 1.)
In the year 1908 Rev. W. E. Goward arranged a Conference
of Pastors and Deacons of the L. M. S. Churches in the Five Islands
of the Southern Gilberts then forming the L. M. S. District in the
Group.
In 1920, the Jubilee of the introduction of the Gospel to the
Southern Gilberts, a second and larger Conference was held at the
Head Station, Ronorono, Bern, to which it was found possible
to gather, in addition to representative teachers and deacons from the
Churches in the Southern Gilberts, a number of representatives from
the two large Central Islands, Tabiteuea arid Nonouti, and two or
three only from the large District in the North which was taken
over by the L. M. S. in 1917 from the American Board.
The year 1930, and the final visitation of the Gilbert Group by
the old S. o. “John Williams”, was signalised by the holding of the
First United Conference of Teachers and representatives from
all the islands in the Group, Ocean Island alone not being repre-
sented, owing to arrangements for delegates to travel on the Govern-
ment schooner falling through as that vessel’s movements were altered.
This signal event may well be said to mark an epoch in the
Story of the Kingdom of God in the Gilbert Islands, as the
delegates brought together from all the islands felt in a very marked
way a new sense of unity and brotherhood in the Kingdom of God.
This is probably the first time in history when so representative a
gathering of responsible islanders from all the islands of the Group,
South, Central, and North, has been brought together with one unit-
ing spiritual bond and purpose.
The Ship Committee in Sydney kindly granted a slight extension
of the ship’s time in the Group, as we had in effect only one visita-
tion in 1930 instead of two; and by careful planning we were able
to collect representative delegates from the Island Church Councils
in every island, and to bring them together to the rendezvous at


Arorae, the most southerly island of the Group, and one of the two
islands where the L. M. S. cause is strongest, the whole popula-
tion being nominally and enthusiastically Christian and Protestant.
The Conference coincided with the completion of the splendid new
Church erected by the L. M. S. people of Tamaroa village, Arorae;
so that the occasion was one for double rejoicing.
The people of Arorae received the delegates with unbounded
hospitality. Houses had been set apart for the representatives from
each of the islands, and certain families were told off to care for their
comfort. Daily throughout the Conference, most generous gifts of
food were provided, all the local arrangements having been made
with commendable foresight and liberality. The delegates, especially
those from the Northern Islands, where Romanism is a divisive
influence, were greatly impressed by the happy unity of spirit, and
liberal friendliness of the Christian people of Arorae; and referred
again and again to the evident benefits of being “all of one heart
and of one mind” in the Gospel.
A happy spirit of friendship and mutual goodwill prevailed.
Although some Island Councils had presented involving
expenditure which could not be acceded to, in the main the dele-
gates seemed to understand better than those attending the Conference
ten years ago, that if they wished to make advances locally involving
additional expenditure, the Churches in the Group must try to raise
funds to meet such expenditure. Ultimately a suggestion put for-
ward by two or three Island Councils .was unanimously adopted
recommending that the Churches in all the Islands be invited to
make a Christmas collection each year for a Central Fund for the
development of local Church work. A number of requests for grants
were referred to the Church Administration Committee to be dealt
with if and when a Central Fund comes into existence, e. g. grants
in aid of Teachers’ children at the Mission Central Schools; pensions
for retired ministers and for teachers’ and ministers’ widows and
orphans; grants to smaller villages to make up the stipends of their
teachers; grants to increase the allowances of assistant teachers;
wholesale relief of churches in regard to the support of their teachers
in times of drought; free passages on the now Mission ship; &c.
There were petitions from several quarters amounting in fact to
a request that as the price of copra locally has fallen to such a
distressingly low figure, while the charges for imported goods remain
high, in part owing to the Government duties, and in part owing to
the high costs of freight and distribution to such isolated and scattered
communities, the Society would establish a trading company in the
interests of the Gilbertese. We had to point out that while we had
great sympathy with the people in their difficulties, the Society was
not and could not become a trading company. The delegates made
a very strong, unanimous, and, we think, a reasonable request, that as


has been clone with the old Mission Shi]), the contributions of the
L. M. S. supporters towards the support of their teachers and of the
work generally, should be accepted as copra, and conveyed by the
new Mission vessel to Suva or Sydney as may be found possible, for
sale at one or other of those ports, thus doubling or at least consid-
erably increasing the cash value of the people’s gifts for the sup-
port of the work. We hope the Directors will concede this request
as it is definitely in the Society’s interests that this should be done.
One day was given to the discussion of matters of Church
Discipline; the attitude the Church should take to certain heathen
or doubtful native practices ; the marriage of the children of Protest-
ants to pagans or Roman Catholics ; Sunday observance and its
neglect; and similar subjects. Much strong feeling was expressed
concerning the persecution and what was felt to be the unjust treat-
ment of Protestant teachers and people in certain islands; and
ultimately a letter was drawn up to be addressed from the Conference
to the Resident Commissioner setting out some of the Protestant
grievances and asking for relief in regard thereto. A request was
made that.the Resident Commissioner would not allow hostile Native
Magistrates to put Protestant teachers in gaol for trivial technical or
imaginary offences, thus doing great harm to their religious and
educational work, but would instruct Native Magistrates to hold over
such cases to be dealt with on the arrival of a European missionary or
of a District Officer of Government. No reply has yet been received.
There was prolonged and animated discussion on the question
of the Native Dances, it will be remembered that the Conference
I °f agreed to the very strong request of Government
- that the Protestant Churches would withdraw their ban on the
attendance of Church Members at the Native Dances provided that
Government would organise effective supervision of the Dances, and
would meet the Protestant Church by suppressing certain evil dances,
dance songs, and concurrent customs, and by making regulations for
the proper control of all dancing. There was great delay before any
further action was taken by the Government, partly owing to
changes in the office of Resident Commissioner. At last in 1926
Government prepared and issued printed regulations for the control
of the Native Dances, and although they did not meet all the requests
of the Protestant Church Conference, nevertheless the Protestant
Churches agreed to the renewed request of Government that the
Church members and adherents should be permitted to attend the
dances, and that the Mission and its adherents should endeavour to
assist the Government in the cleansing of this national pastime of the
Gilbertese. The Resident Commissioner proposed the formation of
Committees of Supervision on which representatives of both Missions
would sit. Subsequently, to the disappointment of the Mission and
its adherents, he decided not to form such Committees after all. The


Mission entered into the movement of co-operation with Government
towards cleansing the dances, with good will, but reserved the right
to review the situation after three years. We regret to report that
the results have been disappointing. Mission teachers and others
who have in a perfectly straightforward and legitimate way endea-
voured to assist by drawing the attention of Native Government
officials and others to abuses, and to breaches of the Government
regulations, have been subjected to obloquy and to persecution.
While we gratefully recognise that in some islands the 11)26 Regula-
tions have improved the character of the Dances, there is not the slight-
est doubt that in other islands these regulations are evaded, and there
is serious laxity in their application. Representations have been made
to the Resident Commissioner, and he has again assured us that it is
his desire that the regulations should be observed. The difficulty
seems to bo in ensuring their observance by the native officials of
Government.
As there w T as much dissatisfaction in some quarters and a desire
on the part of some of the Mission’s workers and adherents to revert
to the uncompromising ban of the Dances, with its corollary, the
dismissal from Church Membership of all Church members who
might take part in or even watch a dance, the whole matter was
referred to the Island Church Councils, and came up for decision at
the Conference. After animated discussion it was decided that in
spite of the grave disappointments which the Mission’s workers had
experienced in some islands, in view of the Resident Commissioner’s
assurance that he would make it his business to see that the Dance
Regulations were enforced, the Protestant Churches would continue
for a further period to permit members or adherents w T ho wished to
do so to attend the Dances, with a view to render further assistance
to Government in raising the tone of the Dances. It was felt that
a large number of the Mission’s adherents would not approve of the
drastic ban on their attendance being reinforced, as in some islands
the Dances had improved. It was further decided to permit to the
Island Church Council in each island a measure of local option in
the matter. If in any island, the Dances are found to be evil, and
representations to Government do not result in a cessation of abuses,
the Island Church Council may, with the approval of a majority of
the Church members, temporarily suspend permission for Church
members to attend the Dances.
The unqualified disapproval of certain evils associated with some
dances was again affirmed, and representations from the Conference
were again addressed to the Resident Commissioner asking that he
would more actively protect from persecution Mission teachers or
others who, in accordance with his request, might come forward to
give evidence of breaches of the Dance Regulations, or of evils aris-
gin in connection with the Dances. One fruitful source of dissatis


faction and friction lias been that the Native Dances have been
permitted on the premises of the Roman Catholic Mission in some
islands without supervision from Government officials to ensure the
observance of the Dance Regulations. But we are very glad to report
that the new Roman Catholic Bishop has now decided to prohibit
these Dances on the premises of the Roman Mission throughout the
Group; and is in course of instructing his priests to that effect. What
now requires to be done is to overcome the slackness of Native
Government officials in enforcing the regulations; and to discipline
those who are not faithful in enforcing them. We regret to learn, as
we prepare this Report, that there is another apparently unbridled
outbreak of questionable dances on the island of Maiana. We hope
that Government will take steps to bring it under control.
At one session the Conference devoted its time to the review of
the Work of the Mission in the various islands, and to an exchange
of ideas as to forms or methods of work which had proved
helpful, and which had strengthened the Church or developed its
usefulness. Various suggestions were considered, and recommenda-
tions were made to the Island Councils, which the Conference felt
would be helpful to the progress of the Kingdom of God in the
Gilberts.
Special sessions were held for the Ministers and Teachers,
when matters more directly affecting them were considered. A num-
ber of requests had been sent in by the teachers of one island which
seemed to show a rather grasping spirit. We are glad to report that
the Teachers saw the difficulty of making such further demands upon
the Directors and friends in England, and withdrew some of their
requests, agreeing that the others should be considered by the Church
Administration Committee.
The Conference lasted five days, Aug 20-24, 1930. The last
day being Sunday, united services were held in the magnificent new
Church, which had been opened and dedicated on the previous
Wednesday. An impressive Communion Service followed, con-
ducted jointly by the Chairman of G. I. D. C., a Samoan Pastor
and a Gilbertese minister. Deacons vrere chosen from among the
delegates from the various islands. In the afternoon the Conference
gatherings were fittingly brought to a close by a United Service
of Thanksgiving and Mutual Encouragement, when a number
of short addresses were given by representatives of several islands
who told of the great changes for the better which they had
witnessed on their islands since the coming of the Gospel. Many
told of the worship of the “anti” (fetish blocks of coral); and of
their destruction, in which some of the speakers had taken part;
others told of dark heathen customs and cruelty which were rapidly
dying out, one old man from the most northerly island of Makin
told of a licentious chief who required the surrender to him at his


will of the first girl in every family, until at last an exasperated
father killed him. Raids and murderous forays were common.
Families waged a vendetta against other families through successive
generations. In one night five or six people might be killed, being
speared through the abdomen with a spear edged with shark’s teeth,
while they lay asleep on their mats. If the marauder was caught he
was killed and quartered, and his body burned. When the first
missionaries came all was darkness and strife, but gradually the
Light broke, and murder and cruelty ceased. Another told how
the island of Maiana had for a long time been under the spell of a
fetish called Karibana, and of how a sorcerer claiming to be the
priest of this fetish practically ruled the island, levying tribute in
kind or person as he willed. Others described how the licentious
dances provoked quarrels and bloodshed. Several speakers from the
North spoke of the beginnings of the evangelisation in their islands
hy Hawaiian teachers under the Hawaiian and American Boards, and
told how the work went back when the Hawaiian teachers were
withdrawn, and the white missionaries ceased to visit the islands when
the American Board’s Mission Vessel “Morning Star” was given up.
It was just at this period of weakness that the Roman Catholic
priests came into the Group in ever increasing numbers, and made
many nominal converts in the northern two thirds of the Group.
The speakers were unanimous in bearing testimony to the new life
and progress witnessed on their islands since the L. M. S. took
over the work, and since teachers trained at Ronorono were placed
on the islands and regularly visited by the white missionaries per the
S. S. “John Williams”. This can be seen by the statistical table
showing a comparison of the years 1920 and 1930.
The 1930 United Conference was unanimously felt to be a
pronounced success. We give thanks to God that by His help all
the delegates were assembled and later returned to their islands with-
out accident or illness; and that in spite of conflicting views and very
free and frank discussion on many matters, decisions were reached
with remarkable unanimity and good feeling. The Gilbertese are
essentially clannish. From the remote past until comparatively
recent times there has been suspicion and often hostility between
the people of the different islands. They have been brought into
fellowship at last by the power of the Gospel of Christ. The older
men at the Conference could not cease to express their glad amaze-
ment at the possibility of men from all the different islands in the
Group being assembled together in friendly concourse. The Confer-
ence certainly did much to strengthen the sense of Unity of the
Protestant Cause throughout the Group, and to bind in closer friend-
ship to the L. M. S. the Churches of the Northern Islands, which for
many years bewailed their first love, the American Board, and eyed
with some suspicion their new friends of the L. M. S.


But perhaps most important o£ all was the evidence of the begin-
nings of readiness to consider the idea of co-operation. Not only
have most of the stronger islands been averse to rendering any finan-
cial help to the weaker islands, but the same has been true of villages
on any one island. One of the things which disappointed us at the
1920 Conference was the spirit of self-concern and unwillingness to
consider sharing the burdens of others. In the earlier years of the
decade, when we appealed to the people of a village to try to raise
their teacher’s salary, they would reply, “You brought him here;
you can pay him.” Not infrequently teachers suffered hardships
from lack of sufficient food. We are glad to report considerable
improvement. In most cases the teachers are well provided with
native food, though in times of scarcity they have to suffer with
their people. There is greater readiness to recognise the reasonable-
ness of the request that the people should support their own teachers.
In a large number of villages this is now done, except in years of
drought. The raising of the teachers’ salaries has been greatly
assisted by the acceptance of the people’s contributions in copra, and
by its conveyance by the Mission ship to Sydney, where the price
fetched is almost double that in the Group. Copra having fallen to
the unprecedentedly low figure of about £ G per ton in the Group, it
is more difficult than ever for the people to raise their teachers'
salaries. The only hope of their doing so is if the new mission ship
can convey their copra contributions to Fiji, and obtain a better price
there. The difficulty of raising the teachers’ salaries in view
of the low price/ of copra, was considered by the Conference. The
delegates were also asked to encourage cc-operation between the
villages on their islands to raise the teachers’ salaries for the island,
the larger villages to help the smaller. While we cannot say the
idea was enthusiastically received, yet there was not the hostility of
a few years ago. It was accepted as an ideal to be aimed at; and in
the cases of two or three islands efforts are being made to put it into
practice.
The occasional interchange of pulpits by teachers was arranged
for with the full approval of the Conference. A request was made
for a development of inter-island visitation; and for senior ministers
or other successful evangelists to be loaned for a time by one village
or by one island to another. Evidences of the readiness for pro-
gress in mutual helpfulness enabled us with the full approval and
to the delight of the delegates to decide that the 1930 Conference
should go down to history under the name, “The Conference of
Mutual Help.”


Visitation of the Islands per S S. “John Williams,”
The visitation of the islands of the Group has been systematic-
ally carried out by means of the S S. “John Williams” twice yearly,
save for the period during 1923-24 when the ship was laid up in
Sydney, and the experiment was made of trying to do the work by
chartering a small trading schooner. The experiment was not a
success. The work was done at great inconvenience to all concerned,
and could not be so efficiently and thoroughly carried out as by our
own larger vessel and this not through lack of courteous help from
the master and owners of the schooner, but because of the vessel’s
unsuitability for the work, lack of accommodation for the missionaries,
teachers and their families, school boys and girls &c; and above all
lack of boats which are essential for the great amount of boat work
entailed in connection with the native food stuff which has to be
collected from villages distant from the ship one to 20 or more miles
in the various islands. Further, it proved as expensive to charter a
small vessel as to maintain our own larger and efficient steamer. It
has been possible to give the islands good visitations only when we
have had the S. S. “John Williams” for the minimum period of six
weeks required for one voyage round the Group. On several occa-
sions the voyage has been curtailed owing to prolonged delays in
Sydney. Also during the last three or four years we have had a
good deal of rough weather, and on several occasions the captain has
cut the visitation short as he considered it unsafe for the ship to
remain in the Group. This has meant that the work has been unduly
rushed, and often several islands have been loft entirely without a
visit. We are hoping for better things with the new ship, which
should be able to spend longer periods in the Group. During the
years 1927 to 1930 landings have often been difficult, not to say
dangerous. Several times we have had our boats swamped in the
heavy breakers on the reef; often our boats have been capsized and
damaged, but fortunately without loss of life. Sometimes it has been
impossible to land anywhere on an island, although we have effected
landings across the reefs in places where we have never attempted to
land before. Often we have had to leave native food supplies behind
as it has been impossible to transport them to the ship owing to the
dangerous seas. The work of visitation has been correspondingly
exacting and exhausting. We are about due now, we hope, for
another cycle of fine weather years. Otherwise it will prove extremely
difficult to carry out the visitation work with a smaller ship and
fewer and smaller boats.


The New Ship.
It has been a great relief after all the uncertainty and suspense
of the last decade, to have this matter settled at any rate for the
time being, by the building of the new auxiliary schooner ‘John
Williams V.’ While we are disappointed that it was not considered
expedient to build a larger vessel which could not only serve the
work in the Gilbert and Ellice Groups better than a small ship,
but could also serve Papua and Samoa, and link all the Groups
together with one another and with Australia or New Zealand, yet
we are very grateful to the Directors and to the friends in England,
Scotland, Wales, and the Colonies, especially to the young people,
for providing the new schooner for our work. We are eagerly
looking forward to seeing her shortly; and we shall make the best
possible use we can of her for the maintenance and extension of the
work of the Kingdom of God in these islands. We hear the new
ship reached Fiji last month; and we hope she will arrive here ready
for work soon after these lines are in print.
As soon as we heard that the building of the new ship was defin-
itely to be put in hand, I suggested to my colleagues that we should
try to raise a substantial contribution towards her cost. We prepar-
ed a scheme, and put it before all our Churches and people a year
ago, as a great opportunity and a great duty for us all here to do
our very best to help towards the heavy cost of building the new
ship for the work for the Kingdom of God in our islands. I felt sure
we could raise at least £500; I hoped we might reach £lOOO. To
this end we made careful plans, assessing the various islands in pro-
portion to our estimate of what they could raise without undue strain.
I took the precaution of allowing for the fact that it was very improb-
able that all would complete the amount assessed. The people re-
sponded splendidly: some few islands completed or practically com-
pleted their quota of contributions in copra: only a few islands failed
to make a good effort, and these, under pressure from their own fellow
Gilbertese Christians, have promised to make a further effort towards
raising their quota. Cash contributions were unexpectedly good;
our teachers, and the boys and girls at Rohorofio ami Morikao, did
splendidly. Ronoroilo staff and students alone gave a magnificent
start to the Fund by raising over £lOB.
Our shipment of just over 100 tons of copra collected from the
islands by the willing labour of our Ronorono boys, and conveyed to
Sydney on the “SS. John Williams,” most unfortunately struck a
disastrously bad market, and realised only about 60% of what we
should have received for it a few months earlier. But in spite of
that we have succeeded in raising the sum of over £l3OO as
our Contribution towards the cost of the new ship, a really
gallant effort for our people, whose resources are so drastically
limited.


REPORT ON THE WORK IN THE SOUTHERN
AND CENTRAL ISLANDS.
BERL T ISLAND.
Steady if unspectacular progress has been made on Bern. The
numbers on the Church Roll have increased from 495 to 044. Bern
is one of the most barren islands. It lies within the dry belt, and
often is rainless for months when other islands benefit by occasional
showers. The people are not so united nor so generous as in some of
the other islands. The presence of a Roman priest and sisters with
their following leads sometimes to friction; and militates against
whole-hearted and united efforts. Consequently the efforts of the
people to support their teachers are not so uniformly vigorous and
successful as we could wish. Nevertheless, progress has been made
in the direction of self-support. The larger villages usually succeed
in raising all or most of the stipends of their teachers.
NIKUNAU ISLAND.
In 1920 we were able to report the beginning of new life in
the work on this difficult island. I am glad to say the work has
developed well, partly owing to the excellent work done by some of
our young teachers of the present generation of teachers. Church
membership has risen from 194 to 419. Good feeling among the
Protestant people, and willingness to support the teachers and their
work, has certainly increased. In the early part of the decade we
discontinued the Central School on this island as we did not feel it
was doing good enough work to justify the expense of its continu-
ance. The island is the nearest to Bern, so that it is comparatively
easy for scholars who wish to continue their education beyond the
standard of the village schools, to come to our well equipped and
better staffed High Schools at Ronoroflo, Bern.
ONOTOA ISLAND.
The work here prospered steadily until last year, when an
extraordinary outburst of unbalanced religious emotionalism swept
the island. A senior teacher of many years’ experience who was
taking furlough on the island, conducted evangelistic revival services
in the various villages with marked success. Certain sick folk on
whom he laid his hands in prayer were said to make marvellous
recoveries. The teacher began to be regarded as a prophet. He
apparently entered into the role, and made various declarations of
having received revelations from heaven. The people left their
villages and flocked to the village where he Jived, building them-
selves small huts and booths for shelter. Revivalist services and
prayer meetings were held at all hours of the day and night.
Confessions of sin were solicited, and prophecies were encouraged,
with the result that a movement that was at the beginning good and


helpful, got into the hands of irresponsible fanatics. Silly women
declared they had visions and received direct communications from
heaven. One of them prophesied the coming of the Day of Judge-
ment, and foretold the day when the Lord would return and
establish His Kingdom first on Onotoa. A large piece of ground
was cleared as a site for the New Jerusalem or Paradise as it was
to be called. Meetings for prayer and prophecy were held almost
continuously in the Church, whilst many people resorted to the local
graveyards in companies for prayer in the dead of night, places
which under normal conditions they would have been afraid to visit
at such an hour. There seems no doubt that amidst all the hysterical
extravagancies that took place, many persons came under the convic-
tion of sin, and turned from evil living in the expectation of the
establishment of a new order of Society. Quite 90% of the people
of the island are Protestants, hut the Native Magistrate being a
Roman Catholic, and disliked by many of the people, did not help
matters by the way he tried to stop the meetings. Most of his fellow
officials declined to follow him, and the Native Government practic-
ally broke up, even the prisoners being allowed to escape from the
gaol. A movement sprang up to bring pressure upon the Romanists
to join in the revival movement, and many did so. As the excite-
ment grew, parties of women and girls banded themselves together
as “The Sheep” of the Prophet; while a number of youths formed a
company known as “the Swords,” the name being a reference to the
Sword of Gabriel, which it was said had miraculously appeared on
the end wall of the Church, and had been seen by hundreds of the
people. Their supposed function was to smite—not physically, hut
with moral of judgment to come—unrepentant sinners, whether
supposedly Protestant, Catholic, or pagan. Meanwhile the so-called
“prophet” permitted himself to be styled “The Father of God”; and
his son, a lad of not too satisfactory character, “God the Father”;
two women took the names, one of Christ the Sufferer, and the other
of Christ the Saviour. The self-styled “Sufferer” would pose as if
in agonies until the person or persons whose sins she was supposed
to he hearing would confess and repent and ask pardon, which the
other woman then declared to be given, whereupon the “Sufferer’s”
agonies ceased.
The teachers seem to have been swept away by the growing
force of the movement. Some were sceptical and tried to use restraint,
but they were intimidated by “the prophet” and his followers.
When we returned from the visitation of the Northern Islands
by the S. S. “John Williams,” we heard of these extraordinary
happenings, news of which had reached Bern by a schooner which
had called at Onotoa. We changed our itinerary and proceeded direct
to Onotoa, having invited the new white officer of Government in
charge of the Southern District, to accompany us.


On arrival, we found that on the previous day, the gang of
youths known as the “Swords,” headed by “the prophet,” and led by
an excited female “prophetess,” had gone to the Government Station,
to threaten with “the Sword of Gabriel” the hostile Roman Catholic
magistrate who was supposed to be the principal agent of the Powers
of Darkness holding back the Day of the Lord’s return. The “pro-
phetess” declared that she had been told by a voice from heaven, that
the magistrate would be smitten to the ground by supernatural forces,
and would then be carried away in a whirlwind. Most unfortunately,
the magistrate had gathered on the Government Station the remainder
of the Roman Catholics, and these were armed with knives, hatchets,
crowbars, bottles, sticks, stones &c. This crowd of Romanists either
in anger or in fear made a murderous assault upon the procession of
Protestant youths who approached the magistrate singing and gesticu-
lating, but who were entirely unarmed. A number were wounded,
but the tables were quickly turned, and the Romanists utterly routed,
some of the revivalist youths declaring they were endued from above
with the strength of ten. In the melee the Romanist Magistrate was
struck down, but appealed to the “prophet,” who stood over him and
protected him from further harm. A number of each party were severely
in jured, two of the attacking party, one of whom was a Romanist, and the
other said to be a pagan with leanings towards Romanism, being mortally
injuredin the head. It is said that the white Romanist priest who vras on
the island, and who was going towards the Government Station at
the time, was saved from attack by the timely action of two of the
Protestant teachers, who held back men who had been aroused to fury
by the rumour that “the prophet” had been killed by the Romanists.
After this totally unpremeditated skirmish a rumour got abroad that
any Romanists who failed to repent within forty-eight h airs would
be smitten by “the Sword of Gabriel,” Some hid themselves in the
bush in the uninhabited parts of the island; many others professed
conversion to the way of the “prophet”; a party of twenty or thirty
left by night on their canoes for the neighbouring island of Tabiteuea,
which was reached safely by the canoes, though a woman and a child
are said to have died as a result of exposure in the crossing.
The day after these events, of which obviously we had not heard,
we arrived at the island. Anyone with any knowledge of religious
hysteria among native races will realise that we were confronted by
a most difficult problem in mob psychology. There was first incre-
dulity and then angry dissatisfaction that we did not immediately
acclaim the movement as of God, and join in the adulation of the
“prophet” and his satellites. It was no small ordeal to face over
1000 excited people in the great Church, and to try to lead them to
see wherein they had been led astray. We witnessed remarkable
scenes. I was told that several women had died during the service,
after declaring that only I could bring them to life again. I found


them in an extraordinary condition resembling a cataleptic trance,
there being no perceptible pulse nor breathing, but the body remain-
ing warm. Having satisfied myself that the five women were not
dead, I had them laid in a row outside the Church, and amid the
angry protestations of the crowd, I declined to pander to their super-
stition by praying over them, but instead I poured buckets of water
over their heads, with results that satisfied me that the subjects were
certainly not dead, though not a sound escaped any of them, so excell-
ent was their simulation of death. Some of them lay for hours
longer, and in the middle of the night were said to be restored to
life by the “prophet’s” son, and to have prophesied sundry evils that
would speedily be visited upon me for failing to acknowledge the
“prophet” and the movement as heavenborn.
Space forbids longer descriptions of this most interesting pheno-
menon of religious hysteria, or more than a very brief account of
the measures we took to deal with it. First, I tried to disillusion
the teachers, and the members of the Island Council. Then I tackled
the old men of the island, who still possess great influence in
matters affecting the island as a whole. I ordered the irregular
meetings to cease; the Bible to be reinstated in use,- it had been dis-
carded as obsolete!-; the gathering to be broken up, and the people
to return to their villages. Working together with the Government
officer, who was obviously in a difficulty as the Native Government
had practically ceased to exist, we secured the dispersal of the gather-
ing before we left the island, and ordered the disbanding also of
the companies of “Sheep,” or “Shakers” as some were called from
their habit of shaking under supposed spirit possession, and “Swords.”
We w eJe unable to remove any of the teachers as we should like
to have done, as two deaths having occurred from the riot, it was
felt the matter was so serious that no one could be permitted to leave
the island until a full enquiry could beheld. Subsequently a Govern-
ment Enquiry was held, and a number of individuals proved to have
been concerned in acts of violence were sentenced to varying terms
of imprisonment. There is talk of some condign punishment of a
wider scope, but the matter remains in abeyance pending a visit
from the Resident Commissioner. With a view to breaking up the
movement, we removed “the prophet” and his son from the island for
a time till things should quieten down. Later, as soon as it was
permissible, we removed one of the teachers who had been one of the
loaders of the movement. We propose on the forthcoming visita-
tion to remove and replace most of the others. We have sent one of
our sanest senior Gilbertese ministers to live and work on the island
for a time. Latest reports show that the movement and “the prophet”
are thoroughly discredited, though a few still cling to the belief
that they are right and we are wrong in not joining with them to


welcome the new Dispensation and to visit wrath upon its enemies.
We have good hopes that before long the work on Onotoa will recover
from this perilous paroxysm.
ARORAE ISLAND.
The outstanding event on Arorae has been the erection of the
new Church at Tamaroa village, referred to on page 17, which is
illustrated in this Report. It is really a fine achievement, and is
evidence of the deep attachment of the people to their Church and
all that their Church stands for. The work has been steadily main-
tained, and the whole population is nominally Christian and Protes-
tant. Old superstitions and old pagan customs still occasionally
rear their heads, but they are promptly trodden down; and the young-
er generation is growing up more enlightened than their fathers.
Arorae Island provides the largest contingent of scholars for Rohorono,
and has the largest representation in the staff of teachers throughout
the Group. The people have faithfully supported their three teachers,
two of whom are Samoans; and have given generous contributions
towards the Society’s work. Their gift towards the cost of the New
Ship last year exceeded 23 tons of copra; and this was given at a
time when their resources were strained in connection with their new
Church.
As reported in an earlier paragraph, Arorae Island extended
generous hospitality to the delegates to the Conference of Mutual
Help which was held there last year.
TAMANA ISLAND.
The work here has given us some concern in recent years. The
people are loyal and generous, but the Samoan pastors who have
been in charge during the decade have not possessed powers of
spiritual and intellectual leadership equal to those of their immediate
predecessors. We cannot avoid the impression that the school work
in particular is less satisfactory than it was. Wo have taken what
steps we can to remedy this; and »we have it in mind to make an
early appointment to Tamana of a second teacher qualified on the
teaching side with a view to earning the Government grant. The
present Samoan Pastor is assisted in the large School by two or three
untrained assistant teachers who receive a small honorarium from the
Island Church Council.
The people of this island have been diligently collecting funds
for the rebuilding of their new Church. The work is now in hand,
and it is hoped the new building will be completed before the end of
1931, (see page 17). The Church membership is almost coincident
with the adult population of the island. Tamana has a strong representa-
tion at Rohorono, and among the teachers in the Group. Tamana is,
for its size, easily the most generous supporter of the Society’s work,


though its contributions have fallen off owing to the large sums
raised for the rebuilding of the Church. Tamana headed the contri-
butions for the New Ship with a gift of nearly 24 tons of copra,
value about £ 220 in Sydney.
TABITEUEA ISLAND.
This, the largest island of the Group, with a population of
approximately 4000, was one of the islands taken over from the
American Board in 1917. At that time the Protestant cause was
at a very low ebb. Large districts of this extensive island had no
Protestant or Christian teachers at all. A force of teachers trained
at Ronorono was put into the field and has been re-inforced from
time to time as opportunity and means have allowed. This island
has furnished our largest increase of Church members and of adherents,
the Church members having increased from 180 in 1920 to 687 in
1930, and the total Protestant adherents from 914 to 1782. Pro-
gress has been made throughout the whole length of the island, some
50 miles, but “there remaineth yet much land to be possessed.” Two
or three years ago efforts were made to evangelise the isolated pagan
villages in the centre of this large island. Protestant causes were
established and small Churches were built by the Christians of the
villages to the north or south as the case might be. Several fetish
stones were broken down, and a spirited effort has been made to
break down pagan prejudice, superstition and sorcery. A year or
two ago in a circular letter 1 narrated how my wife and I had spent
three weeks making a thorough visitation of this large island from
end to end; and how several “anti” or fetish stones, including one
bearing the .significant name, “The god of the shifting foundations,”
had been overthrown by our Protestant teachers. Progress is still
very slow in the less enlightened parts of this large island. We
need gifts to enable us to locate trained teachers in these villages,
which being still mainly pagan cannot support teachers. £lO or
£ 12 a year, guaranteed for three to five years, would enable us to
plant the Kingdom of God in these needy villages.
NONOUTI ISLAND.
This, the second largest island in the Group, was also taken
over from the A. B. C. F. M. in 1917, and now forms the northern
boundary of our Southern District. In spite of vigorous opposition
from the strongly entrenched forces of the Romanists, who have two
or three priests and several sisters on the island, we have made good
headway, the Church members having increased from 228 to 379,
and the total adherents from 902 to 1221. A central school which
had been closed for some years, has been re-opened, and is doing
fairly good work under one of our senior Gilbertese Ministers. The
difficulty with all these central schools is that the boys go home
every week-end for food supplies, and very often do not come back !


Patience and perseverance are not unknown, but they are not out-
standing qualities of the average Gilbertese; and the schoolmasters
have a difficult task to keep their scholars together. Our cause is
comparatively strong in the south and centre of this island, but is
lamentablv weak in the northern part, which can very rarely be
l ' %)*!
visited, as it is two days’ boat journey each way from where the ship
anchors at the southern end of the island. This is another illustration
of the need for re-inforcement of our staff to enable a missionary
occasionally to visit these extensive atolls and spend a few weeks on
each. My wife and I spent about three weeks on Nonouti about
1921; but as we have been left since 1923 without a ministerial
colleague at the Head Station, it has not been possible again to get
away for work of this description.
Personal.
We rejoice to have been permitted to work throughout the
decade in this corner of the Lord’s Harvest Field, and to have
entered upon our eighteenth year of service under the L. M. S.
Although the conditions of climate and food supply are particularly
trying on these barren sandbanks on the Equator, we have on the
whole maintained good health, and have lost very little time through
sickness. But we have been left far too long, seven years now,
without a clerical colleague to share in the very heavy work of the
Head Station witn its Teachers' Training College, High Schools,
Industrial Work, Dispensary, Mission Press, Wireless Station, &c.,
and its hundred and one daily calls upon one’s time and strength.
Added to this is the visitation of the Group, and the care of the
Churches and Schools not only on Bern, but on all the Southern and
Central Islands; much heavy correspondence and negotiations with
Government, as well as with the Home Board, Australia, and with over
100 teachers in the Group. We do again earnestly plead that the
long outstanding vacancy shall be filled without delay. When the
Foreign Secretary visited the Gilberts in 192fi he realised the need;
and realised, too, that the vacancy appeared to have been overlooked.
Wo understood that he recommended that an early appointment
should be made, but another four years have gone by, and still the
vacancy remains unfilled. It would not have been possible to carry
on as efficiently as has been done but for the fact that my wife does
the work of a full time missionary, superintending the women’s
work, and taking classes not only for the women but also for the
boys and girls. I teach four hours a day in the Teacher’s College,
and have to give many more hours to preparation for these classes
and correction of the students’ work. Consequently I can do very
little for the Boys’ High School, This important section is not
receiving the oversight and personal teaching from a white mission-
ary which it should receive. Nor is it possible to develop the
technical and industrial training as fully as we could wish until a


second clerical-education.nl missionary is appointed. Similarly, with
such constant pressure and clamant needs at the Head Station, it
will be most difficult efficiently to carry out the visitation of the
many villages of the Southern and Central Islands by the new
schooner, as it will almost certainly involve frequent and prolonged
absences from the Head Station. We are not, I hope, growing less
keen. We are not giving less time to the work; but wo are bound
to admit that at times the strain becomes too great. I have been
medically advised that I must ease up a bit if I am to continue at
work out here. It should be remembered that of the very small
staff here, one or more is almost always away on furlough, and the
work of those who are away has to be carried on as well as possible
in addition to one’s own work. For instance, for the past year and
a half Miss Pateman has been away; and before that Miss Simmons
was away for two years long furlough. When Mr. Levett has been
away on short furlough the bulk of his work has fallen as an extra
upon me. Our own Home Furlough is due next year, and we do not feel
that it can be delayed, as owing to short staff and for other reasons,
we are trying to do without the short furlough which we should nor-
mally take, and health will demand furlough next year. We had to
leave our children at Home in 1925, and though we are happy in that
they are at the Schools for Missionaries’ Children, and that we have
relatives to care for them during holiday, yet we feel we ought
not to remain longer separated from them. They were small children
when we left them, and are now growing up, and in danger of growing
out of touch with us, partly owing to the long separation, and partly
owing to the long intervals of many months between mails to and
from these isolated islands. We do not wish to be selfish, or unduly
to press the claims of our small field, but we do most earnestly hope
that the Directors will be able to fill the vacancy by making an
appointment at once if possible, so that the new missionary may get
out here and begin at least to know the language, the people, and
the work, before we leave next June.
Here is a w T ork which God has owned and blessed: a work which
is progressing, but which is being hampered by inadequate staff.
We read much of Missionary Conferences packed with eager youth.
Is the enthusiasm going to end with Conferences and Camps and yet
more Conferences ? I appeal to the men in the Colleges to hear the
call, and to consider prayerfully is there not a call here to one of
them. Will not some one, equipped and ready, volunteer to “come
over and help us ?”
G. H. Eastman.


Southern and Central District.
Island.
Church Members.
Total Adherents.
1920.
1930.
1920.
1930.
Born,
495
044
1502
1783.
Ronorono, Bern.
159
200
273
259.
Onotoa.
403
652
1285
1074.
Nikunau.
194
419
1270
1490.
Arorae.
500
517
1241
1338.
Tamana.
4G8
495
1000
1029.
Tabiteuea.
180
087
1094
1782.
Nonouti.
228
379
1130
1221.
Northern
District.
Abaian.
125
159
432
676.
rn
iarawa.
98
103
502
683.
Marakei.
126
210
511
585.
Butaritari.
35
154
232
400.
Makin.
126
—
242.
Maiana.
54
152
411
462.
Kuria.
35
46
95
105.
Aranuka.
20
60
95
121.
Abemama.
35
90
145
260.
Ocean Island and Nauru.
•
Ocean Island.
172
365 ?
1 1122.x
Nauru, estimated
350
about the same
available.
but no returns
LAUS DEO.
The following comparative Table shows in detail the uniform
and substantial progress which has been made in the individual
islands of the Group.
x This includes Gilbertese indentured labourers from the islands of
the Group.


REPORT FOR 1930
OF
W.A. LEVETT.
The opening of 1930 found the staff of the Gilbert Islands
Mission engaged in the concluding stages of the Visitation of the
Group by the S. S. “John Williams IV.”, which had been rather
later than usual in coming up for the second Visitation of the year.
Christmas Day 1929 had been spent at Arorae Island, where-
after a “special” dinner of Xmas fare provided by Mr. Fraser - the
afternoon and evening were occupied by a novel and interesting
“parlour game” entitled “DISTRICT COMMITTEE !”
The Visitation was concluded at the end of January, and on the
25 th. of that month the “J. W.” left Bern for Sydney via Ocean
Island, taking me as a passenger bound for my second “short furlough”
in Australia. Mrs. Levett and Monica had preceded me in August
1929, owing to circumstances that were reported to the Board by
District Committee at the time; and I was looking forward to
making the acquaintance of my second daughter, whose birth in
Sydney on Christmas Day (while we had been indulging in the
fascinating pastime referred to higher up!) had been notified to me
by radio while I was at Tarawa during the Visitation.
Westerly weather, which had played havoc with the itinerary
of the Visitation of the Group, still prevailed at Ocean Island on the
occasion of our call there, hence my time ashore was limited to three
or four hours only, almost all of which were occupied with business
interviews with His Honour the Resident Commissioner and with
the British 'Phosphate Commission. I was only able to hold a
hurried and informal wayside conference with the Mission Pastors,
and as the Captain insisted on leaving by sunset no meeting was
possible with the Gilbertese “labour boys” or with the Island
Council.
I arrived in Sydney on Feb. 9th.-exactly six months, to the
day, after parting with my wife and family at Beru - and found
them all, including the “little stranger” and Mrs. Levett’s Gilbertese
uurse-girl, flourishing exceedingly.
From then until the end of June we were in New South
Wales on furlough, (the return of the Ship to the Gilberts was
postponed from early May till July Ist., as the Board knows).
During this time I was privileged to speak in many of the
Churches aud Sunday-Schools in and around Sydney (and as far
afield as Katoomba in the Blue Mountains, for even there the
“clutching hand” found me!); sometimes “on my own,” sometimes
in company with the Gilbertese crew of the “J. W.” Among the
latter, during this period, was one of our best young Teachers from
the Ronorono Institution, and his addresses in his own language


(which I translated) made a very great impression in many places.
My wife also managed to give a talk or two here and there, in
spite of the handicap of a new baby !
We were very glad to have these opportunities of serving the
Cause during our holiday and of bringing the friends in the Congre-
gational Churches, and the children in the Sunday-Schools, into
personal touch with our own “small corner” of the Mission Field.
We trust that our efforts were not altogether in vain in this respect,
but that some at least of the friendship expressed to us personally
has been linked up with the work of the L. M. S. in the Gilberts.
I had also many commissions to execute and much business to
transact for the Gilbert Islands Mission from time te time during
my stay in Sydney, and on more than one occasion the usefulness of
the wireless installation at Boru was demonstrated.
We were very glad to meet in Sydney, and to enjoy fellowship
(in some cases, alas, all too brief!) - with brother missionaries in the
persons of Hannah (Nauru), Hoad (Samoa), Bralsford (Rarotonga),
and Chatterton (Papua), who with their wives and families were
either staying in or passing through Sydney; we also met Owen and
Ure, with the Misses Ellis, Beckett, and Milne, and “saw them off”
to Papua. Mr. and Mrs. Hannah, with Georgie, were our fellow-
passengers back to the Gilberts en route for Nauru.
From July Ist. to August 29th. the ship was engaged in its
voyage up to the Gilberts and the Visitation tour of the Group.
This tour - the last in the Gilberts by the old ship - was a special one in
many respects; the holding of the Arorae Conference, and the collection
of some 100-odd tons of copra as the contribution of the Gilbert
Islands Churches towards the cost of the new “J. W.”, for instance;
but no doubt these matters will receive their due emphasis in the
Reports of my colleagues.
At the end of August the ship left Beru for Sydney, calling at
Abaian, Ocean Island (to pick up a Samoan Pastor and his family
returning to Samoa), and Nauru (to land the Hannahs and their
gear).
The next two or three weeks were occupied in the aftermath of
the Voyage and in preparing to take up once again the routine of
Schools and other work in Rohoroho. From the beginning of
September I have been engaged in the secretarial and accounting
work and the usual current work of the Store and Printing Office
which is my own particular responsibility, and expect to be fully
occupied with the same until the end of the year. Committee agreed
to ray relinquishing the small amount of teaching and other work
which I have hitherto undertaken, in order to give all my time to
the bringing up to date of the Mission Accounts.
Mrs. Levett has, since getting her household in order after her
absence of a year, managed to find time to resume most of her former


Classes in the School, taking English, Singing, and Drawing; she
has of course to devote a good deal of time to the care of our infant
daughter, and has now to undertake the task of introducing Monica
(now nearly six years old) to the mysteries of reading, writing, and
counting!
I understand that in this year’s Deport has to be incorporated a
Decennial Review. As I did not join the Mission until the middle
of 1923, my experience only covers seven and a half years of the
last decade; and as my work has been largely specialised and chiefly
concerned with the activities of the Mission Store and Printing
Office, I cannot say very much about the general state of the work
nowadays as compared with 1923. Nevertheless, from what I have
seen during the half-yearly Visitations of the Group, and from the
data with which I have had to deal in the course of my work, it is
evident that much progress has been made. There are more villages
occupied by Protestant Teachers now than then, a greater measure
of self-support has boon attained in a number of villages, and the
work in the Village Schools has been improved and more highly
organised. However, these matters will be more specifically dealt
with in the Reports of my ministerial and educational colleagues.
As far as my own particular spheres of work - viz., the Store and
Printing Office - are concerned, I can report as follows:-
STORE. During the period under review, the Store building
has been re-roofed with fibro-cement, and certain improvements
effected in the internal arrangements; e.g., better bins for the storage
of flour, rice, and sugar: a large drum for kerosene; new scales and
weights, &c.
The number/ of scholars in the Institution, and also the number
of Teachers throughout the Group, having increased, there has been
a larger turn-over and a corresponding increase in the number and
variety of articles sold in the Store and prepared for taking to the
Teachers on the Visitation voyages.
Somewhat akin to the work of the Store is the work of collecting,
weighing, recording, and sending to Sydney contributions in COPRA
for Teachers’ salaries, contributions to the L.M.S., gifts for the sup-
port of scholars in the Institutions, and other Mission purposes.
During the period 1921-1930, some 450 tons of copra have been so
dealt with, and the proceeds, amounting to about £7360, allocated
to these funds, including some 100-odd tons given this year to help
the cost of the New “John Williams.”
Printing Office. This is a factor of inestimable value in the work
of the Mission. Although occasionally it has been difficult to “make
ends meet” from a monetary point of view (shortage of staff and
constant pressure of day-to-day work make it extremely hard for
us to provide grist for the Printing Office mill in the form of material
for books which will provide a profit for the Press), it continues to do


invaluable service, and saves the Mission much expense that would
otherwise be incurred for the printing of registers, forms, school time-
tables, circulars, &c., &c. .
In spite of what I have just said as to the difficulty of providing
MSS for books, the Press has produced during the last ten years the
following books - several fresh editions of the Gilbertese Hymnbook,
introducing in 1926, as a result of Mr. Eastman’s furlough in
England, an edition containing the tunes for the 80 hymns in the
second part of the book (previous editions had contained the words
only of these hymns); a book of Missionary Biographies; a new
edition of a “Physiology”; a Gilbertese Grammar; several books of
short stories and pictures for children; text-books on “Jesus Among
Men” and “God’s work of Redemption”; English Primers for-the
Gilbertese Nos 1 and 2 (two editions of each); a new Reading
Primer for Children (two editions); “Pilgrim’s Progress”; “Ram
Swamp & The Wolf of Attock” (Indian stories of missionary inter-
est and appeal); a Geography Reader; a Manual of Hygiene and
First Aid; and a “Christian Theology for the Gilbertese, Yol. 1”; as
well as several booklets and pamphlets on Protestant Truth, words of
Missionary Demonstrations, &c.; and the Mission Magazine has been
printed regularly in quarterly issues, and a Mission Calendar annually.
A considerable amount of re-binding of old but valued Bibles,
hymn-books, and text-books is also done every year for Teachers,
scholars, and members of Island congregations.
The Colony Government has availed itself of the services of the
Mission Press for the printing of Dance Regulations, Health and
Welfare Instructions, &c.; and local trading-firms have given us the
printing of commercial forms, books, letter-headings, &c.
Several hooks are at present in course of preparation, and it is
hoped will be issued from the Press during the coming year; such as
“Short Lives of Famous Men” (ranging from St. Augustine to
Booker Washington), one by Mr. Eastman on “The Parables of
Jesus”, biographies of Mary Slessor and Khama, and a book on
“Mothercraft and Infant Welfare” by Mrs. Eastman.
The Colony Government also has in view an elaborate scheme
of Education for Village Schools, which involves the production of
many new text-books, and has stated that it looks to the Missions to
provide the latter !
I ought also to add, with regard to the Printing Office, that in
1929 the building was practically entirely re-built, with walls and
roof of fibro-cement and posts of hardwood, to replace the former
native materials and the timber that had became infested with white
ant. All woodwork has now been treated with “Solignum,” and
the building should therefore last for many years without any
further outlay on structural repairs.
W. A. Levett.


NORTHERN DISTRICT.
The islands o£ the northern district in addition to the two large
islands of Tabiteuea and Nonouti now included in the Southern and
Central District, were taken over from the American Board in 1917.
L. M. S. trained teachers were placed on some islands in 1918 but it
was not until 1920 that a survey of the field could be made and
plans evolved for occupying it. In 1921 Rev. H. A. Arnold and
Mrs. Arnold took up residence at Morikao School, Abaian Island,
which had been the American Board’s head station. For some years
Mr. Arnold had to give his strength to the planning and re-building
of the head station. A large Church, schoolrooms, and boys’
dwelling houses wore erected, and the station put in good order.
Later Mr. Arnold was able to pay visits to Tarawa and to Marakei
Islands. Mr. and Mrs. Arnold took their full part in the semi-annual
visitations of their district, but on some occasions, owing to very bad
weather conditions the Captain felt it necessary to leave the Group
before the visitation was completed, and some of the islands of the
northern district were not visited. As it was found possible to do
so, new L. M. S. trained teachers were appointed and the work began
to make progress in the difficult villages of these northern islands.
To the great regret of their colleagues and of the Directors,
Rev. & Mrs, Arnold felt it necessary to resign from the Gilbert
Islands Mission in 1928 in order to provide a home and educational
facilities in Australia for their four children. They left at the end
of 1928, and were succeeded in the oversight of the Northern
District by Rev. J. H. Spivey and Mrs. Spivey, who arrived from
England to join the staff of the mission. Mr. Spivey has written a
report of the work in the Northern District as follows:
REV. J. H. SPIVEY’S REPORT.
The work for the London Missionary Society in the Northern
Gilbert Islands during the last ton years has been one of steady pro-
gress in almost every part. The work which had been to some
extent neglected for a time has been taken up again, new work has
been opened up, and a glance at the statistics between 1920 and 1930
leaves one with a sense of very great gratitude to God and a feeling
of amazement at the wonders of His grace. The District is far from
being satisfactorily evangelised, and the work is sometimes most
disheartening, yet a comparison of today with 1920 fills one with joy
at the progress made, and is sufficient to encourage all who are en-
gaged in God’s work in this part of the world.


MAKIN.
A Ronorono student succeeded the old A.B.C.F.M. teacher on
tins island in June 1920, and although the work was very much
uphill, for a few years he made fine progress. Subsequently a period
of slackness set in with him and the work went back until he was
succeeded by another man from Ronorono 4 years ago. The new
man pulled things together again and in face of strong R.G. opposi-
tion, the work has progressed splendidly until now. There is a hig
school which in its exams gives ample evidence of hard work of good
quality on the part of the teacher. Besides the usual visitations by
the S.S. “John Williams,” I visited this island again in October of
this year. At a week-day service the Church was almost filled by
L.M.S. adherents and Church Members, and a fine spiritual tone
made the service most gratifying.
One the neighbouring islet of Kiebu (reckoned as part of Makin)
good progress is to be reported also. A new man from Ronorono
was left there in July this year with no small task before him. His
predecessor, towards the end of his stay in that place had, unfortun-
ately, got across his people; and instead of attracting new adherents
he became the cause of some of those who were more or less faithful
until then withdrawing themselves from the Chuch. In the short
period since July the new man has won back many of the deserters
and has also attracted a few new adherents. The village school,
which had dwindled almost to nothing, is again functioning well, the
new man having gathered together many children. There are pros-
pects of considerable progress here during the coming days.
Until 1921 the Statistics for Makin were included in those for
Butaritari, but a glance at the returns for 1922 and 1929 will give
some idea of the progress achieved. In 1922 there were 36 Commu-
nicants 3 Seekers and 63 Adherents. In 1929 there were 126
Communicants 10 Seekers and the total of Adherents was 242.
BUTARITARI.
Besides visiting the island at the times of the Visitation of the
S.S. “John Williams” my wife and I were able to spend a few weeks
on Butaritari during October and November of this year. Unfortu-
nately, this being the headquarters of the Sacred Heart Mission in
the Group, there is very strong antagonism between the two Missions
which gives rise to a succession of deplorable squabbles and makes
real Christian work very difficult. Yet even here we have real cause
for gratitude to God in the progress which is being made.
In the northernmost village conditions are very cheering, consi-
derable progress being made by the present teacher who has not yet
completed his second year of service. In this village, which in former
days was the home of the slave population, Christianity readily took


root and lias steadily progressed. The improvement in the quality
of its well-attended services, in bettor singing and more reverence,
and in the quality of school work during the last year is remarkable
and augurs well for the future. In the next village, where the pre-
sent teacher has been in charge only since January of this year, the
Catholic Church has a strong following whilst our cause is somewhat
weak. Here we have recently lost a number of adherents to the
Catholics owing to the firm stand taken by our teacher in keeping
the Sabbath a sacred day; and to the freedom to play games and to go
fishing etc, allowed by the Catholic Church. It is sad that the
number of our adherents has been lessened, hut what has been lost
in quantity seems to have been made up in quality, for almost
without exception during the past few months those of our adherents
who stood firm have been received into membership of the Church.
In the next village we have a few adherents but no settled
teacher or Church. Many years ago there was a Protestant Church
there but later the work was done by the teacher from another
village paying occasional visits. It is hoped soon to settle a new
teacher here. Negotiations are afoot to preserve the land formerly
used by the Protestant Church as a site for the new Church to be
erected, but it is necessary to await the ruling of the Lands Commis-
sioner in regard to our claim. In the two next villages southwards
there is little or no progress to report. In the one case an ordained
man is in charge and in the other a voluntary worker. The most
that can be said is that the few members we have in these villages
are remaining faithful. In the one case we have only a small village
school and in the other no school at all.
In the next/village the R. C. Mission has its headquarters.
Here for a number of years an old faithful teacher has bravely worked
against great difficulties to sow the seeds of Protestant Truth. In
July of this year he was transferred to another island and a new man
took his place. The new teacher is doing well; and although the
work is not making great strides in this difficult locality it is improv-
ing a little.
The work in the Southernmost village has progressed splendidly
until it received a set-back a few months ago by an extensive out-
break of sour toddy drinking when a number of people fell from
Church membership through drunkenness. This evil seems to have
been successfully stamped out by the new District Officer, and the
work is again progressing. The teacher here is a fine type of man.
After he had finished the usual term of service in this village, 7
years, his people pleaded that he should not he transferred hut should
remain with them. The man was agreeable and the request was
granted. He is by no means stale even after so many years amongst
the same people, and under his guidance the Church there should go
from strength to strength.


The Butaritari returns for 1922 show 62 Church Members, 16
Seekers and 165 Adherents. The returns for 1929 show 154 Church
Members, 23 Seekers, and 400 Adherents.
MARAKEI.
Tin sis another island where there is very strong feeling between
_ %/ o o
the members of the Protestant and Catholic Missions. This is only
to be expected since this is the island where for a few years past our
people have been subjected to petty persecution by Catholics in
Government service and their friends behind the scenes. Until very
recently injustice has been rife, two of our teachers having served
sentences of three months in prison which we believe to have been
contrary to British law and to justice, and one of them being also
fined £5 on his release. Not only have L. M. S. teachers been thus
imprisoned but also a number of Protestant Church Members and
Adherents. One man recently served one month in gaol for the crime,
so called, of “sitting amongst Protestant children,” when they were
singing in the Central Protestant Church. He had been forbidden
to take any active part in the Protestant Church, and the K. C.
Native Magistrate was said to be under orders to arrest the man
should he do anything more than attend services in the Protestant
Chureh. Consequently, our Church and other L. M. S. premises
were continually watched by policemen. Continual representations
to the Government made by my predecessor Mr. Arnold and then by
myself, besides various representations from the District Committee
as a whole, for a long time received no satisfactory attention from
the Government. Besides visiting the island in the usual way on
the S. S. “John Williams” I was left there for a few days in Janu-
ary of this year whilst the rest of the Mission party proceeded to do
the Visitation work in Butaritari. Again in March I visited the
island and that time stayed six weeks, whilst Mrs. Spivey remained
in charge at Morikao. Eventually, in July the Resident Commis-
sioner proceeded to Marakei and held an official enquiry. Since
then injustice is no longer rife on the island and it is possible for
natives to become Protestant adherents without fear of imprisonment
or fine. Under the old order some of our people joined the Catho-
lics through fear. During the course of the official enquiry the R. C.
Native Magistrate tendered his resignation, which was accepted, and
he was immediately taken back to his own island. The illegal fine
of £ 5 was returned to our teacher; the man who had been imprisoned
for “sitting amongst the Protestant children” was declared to be a
free man, and various other unjust rulings were put right. On our
visit by the S. S. “John Williams” at the end of July we found a
state of peace, a thing unknown amongst our people for some time
previous.
In spite of the injustices during the last few years, many Protes-
tant Christians stood firm. The village whose teacher was wrong


fully imprisoned and fined is almost, entirely Protestant and has been
all through. In October I was able to spend a day in Marakei when
on my way to Butaritari. I visited a number of villages and found
signs of advance almost everywhere. Since the Government enquiry
a number of people who for a time had joined the Catholics have come
back, especially young people, and increases are noted in the numbers
of our village school children. In one village we have over 60 children
attending our school, whilst there are only 2 children in the Catholic
school. The spiritual side of the work on this island is going on well.
During my six weeks stay at our central village, I was particularly
pleased with the splendid regular attendance every day at morning
and evening prayers.
On this island we have a Church in every village except one, the
work being carried on under two ordained men, 1 trained but not yet
ordained teacher, and 4 voluntary workers. Besides these spiritual
leaders there are two assistant school teachers. In the village where
until now we have had no Church there is only one Protestant, but
there are a number of pagans who have asked that a Protestant
teacher be stationed amongst them. A Protestant and his pagan
brother who own land in this village have offered to give a suitable
site to the L. M. S. for the purpose of building a Church and teacher’s
house there. Permission having just been obtained from the District
Officer the work of building is now in progress and another voluntary
worker has been chosen to be teacher there.
Marakei for some time past has been supplying our High School
at Morikao with some of its finest students, and there are others
ready to enter Morikao when the new A. S. “John Williams V.”
makes her first Visitation of the Group.
In 1920 there were 126 Communicants, 13 Seekers and a total
of 511 Adherents on Marakei. According to the 1929 returns there
wore 266 Communicants, 21 Seekers, and 550 Adherents.
ABAIAN.
Before the London Missionary Society took over the work in the
Northern Gilberts, Abaian was the headquarters of the A. B. C. F. M,
in the Gilbert Islands. The L. M. S. also made it the headquarters
of its work in the north, Rev. H. A. Arnold having settled here in
1920 and being succeeded on his retirement from the Gilbert Islands
Mission by myself at the end of 1928. Here is situated the L. M. S.
High School for boys in the north, which serves as a preparatory
school for boys who desire later to enter the Minister’s Training
College at Beru.
L. M. S. work is carried on in thirteen villages, there being
only two other very small villages where wo have no Church. The
work in the largest village on the island was discontinued from 1921
until 1929 when another attempt was made to win the people there.
We have no teacher available for that village, but it is served as a


preaching station every Sunday hy teachers or students from our
High School and although as yet the numbers of regular worshippers
are not great the results obtained so far indicate that even the little
attention we can give at present is well worth the difficulties of travel
involved. As soon as a voluntary worker can be obtained it is hoped
to have a teacher stationed at this place. The work in the rest of the
island is carried on by the white missionary, one Samoan Pastor and
an ordained Gilbertese in the High School, and 4 ministers, 2 trained
but not yet ordained teachers, and 5 voluntary workers in the villages.
The two northernmost villages stand on little islets, and here the
work is not progressing very much, but the Protestant cause is hold-
ing its own. At the next village, the most northerly one on the
mainland of Abaiafi, the work has gone back a little in recent days,
though not so much perhaps as statistics might indicate, since some
of our people have removed from there to a different part of the
island. It is hoped to make more headway there when a really
faithful man is put in charge. The work has gone back owing to
the unfaithfulness of its last teacher. The next village south has
made splendid progress during the past few months, and there are
indications that progress will continue. As mentioned previously,
the work in the largest village on the island has recently been restart-
ed after a lapse of years and is going on as well as can be expected
until a man can be definitely settled there. The work in the next
two villages southwards, which are both worked by one teacher, is
very encouraging indeed. We are able to see considerable improve-
ment since our first acquaintance with the work hero two years ago.
Roth the spiritual work and the work in the village school are a
splendid tribute to the faithfulness of a hard working teacher. The
work in the next village, which formerly was the American Mission
headquarters, and is now the centre of strong Roman Catholic activity
on the island, is a credit to the young teacher in charge. There is a
strong band of young people there who look to our young teacher as
their leader in most things.
Further south still is the school village of Morikao. Here are
gathered students from most of the Northern Islands, and their school
work is progressing favourably. A number of students have left
this school to train for the native ministry at Ronorofio, Peru. Three
boys have entered the Ministers’ Training Institution from here
during the last year, and there are others who should enter during
the coming year. There are hopes of keeping up a steady supply of
candidates for the native ministry from this school, for we are now
getting a finer type of student here than was previously the case
This is due no doubt to the present generation of boys having mostly
passed through village schools whose teachers have benefited from
the special teacher-training which has for some years been provided


at Bern. The numbers of students at Morikao are not so great as
they were a little time ago, for various reasons, one of which is the
attempt in recent years to raise the standard of work, whereby the
lazy ones have either been sent away or else have left themselves;
and entrance has been forbidden to those who were not fitted to
benefit by the training now provided. What the school has lost in
quantity it has certainly gained in quality.
In the next village there is only one family who are communi-
cants but the voluntary worker in charge lias won a good following
of adherents in recent years. Further south still, the work in the
next village is making slow but, we believe, sure progress. The next
village is making no headway at all, and indeed has gone back owing
to the misfortune of its last few voluntary teachers being unfaithful
in various ways. A new voluntary worker, who has for some time
been a student at Morikao and who seems to be faithful, has just
been settled hero, and there are hopes that under his guidance the
work will again prosper.
The greatest headway has been made in the two most southerly
villages, where, from almost nothing a few years ago, two fine
Churches have sprung up. The work in these two villages is still
going forward very well and there are great hopes for the future.
Abaiah has been noted from the earliest days as a very difficult
island, but that progress has been made during the last few years can
be judged from the returns of 1920 when there wore 125 Communi-
cants, 22 Seekers, and 307 adherents, and those for 1929 when there
were 197 Church Members, 43 Seekers, and 668 Adherents.
/ TARAWA.
Tarawa is another island where the work is very difficult,
Roman Catholicism having a strong hold, some villages being entirely
Catholic. Good work, however, has been done and is still being
done by our teachers. In some cases where a few years ago there
were hardly any people we could claim even as adherents there are
now more or less flourishing Churches. Tarawa is the Government
centre in the Group, there being a large hospital, gaol, and Govern-
ment school. The teacher in the central village does a large amount
of work amongst the prisoners, patients, and students, as well as his
own village work. Fine tributes to his work in the various Govern-
ment departments have recently been passed on to me by various
Government officials. Almost the whole of the large staff of native
dressers and those training as dressers, besides many of the police
staff, are regular attendants at his ('hurch both on Sundays and Thurs-
dav evenings. Mrs. Spivey recently spent a few days on Tarawa
and was able to attend a week-night service in this village Church
unexpectedly, and was very much impressed both by the large
attendance of worshippers and by the quality of the preaching.


In some of the villages further north our work is very weak,
yet one remarkable case occurs to me as I write. About the time
when we first came out to the Group there was trouble with the
teacher of this village, which was by no means all Protestant in its
leanings. The teacher had to be removed, and six months later I
went to settle in a man from another island. Practically the whole
village had either become attached to the Catholic cause or had return-
ed to paganism, and not the slightest welcome was forthcoming for
the new teacher. It was with great difficulty that a few people were
persuaded to enter the dilapidated Church building and to listen to
the service we held and to the introduction of the new man. For a
few months the teacher was left almost friendless, but in the end his
sincerity and faith won their reward, and now almost the whole
village, former Catholics and pagans alike, are gladly seeking his
teaching of the Way of Salvation.
I have not yet been able to visit this island apart from the
hasty visits paid when the S. S. “John Williams” has been in the
Group, but it is my hope to go and stay a few weeks amongst our
people in the various villages there during January and February of
1931, when I hope to get to know the conditions in each place.
As in the case of other islands, in spite of the great difficulties
to be met on this island, the statistics for 1920 and 1929 show that
some progress has been made. In the former year there were 98
Church Members, 29 Seekers, and 404 Adherents, whilst at the lat-
ter date there were 119 Communicants, 46 Seekers, and a total of
762 Adherents.
MAIANA,
This island has sometimes been called the “Island of Darkness.”
Paganism is long in dying out amongst its natives, and the work
done by our few trained men and the larger number of untrained
voluntary workers who try to make it worthy of the name “The
Island of Light” is most difficult. I have not yet been able to spend
more time on this island than is allowed at Visitation time when the
“John Williams” is with us, but on those occasions I have visited
most of the villages where L. M. S. work is being done. There is
on this island a Central Preparatory School in the charge of one of
the former A. B. C. F. M, teachers besides the normal village
schools. The teacher here is a very able teacher of singing and ho
has considerably helped our cause by taking his choir round to the
other villages and so assisting the villagers to learn Christian hymns.
This is no mean work, for the Gilbertese are very fond of singing,
and if they do not know Christian hymns they have only their own
native songs to sing, which in many cases are most obscene. The
love of dancing is very strong on this island; and in the dances,
although forbidden by law, songs seemingly innocent but with a
double meaning to the native mind, are sung.


The work has progressed, however, particularly in those villages
where there are younger teachers who have had Miss Pateman s
special training in how to teach. There is decided improvement in
the standard ot“ village education in some of the schools on this island,
and there are also indications of improvement in the standard of the
spiritual side of the work. Unfortunately, a letter has just arrived
from one of our teachers on Maiana who is filled with disappointment
because during the last few weeks in his part of the island there has
been another outburst of paganism and some of the members of the
Protestant Church have fallen from membership by lapsing into
heathen practices. He says that one of the voluntary workers in
charge of a village Church has also fallen and now is leading some
people in pagan practices. It is believed that the Island Church
Council are taking steps to appoint another Christian to uphold
Protestant witness in that village.
Owing to the fresh outbreak of old practices we cannot indicate
what the returns for 1930 wall be, but the following are the figures
for 1920 and 1929. In 1920 there were 54 Church Members, 26
Seekers, and 411 Adherents. In 1929 the figures were Church
Members 152, Seekers 65 and Adherents 310.
ABEMAMA.
This island, previous to the taking over of the Northern Gilbert
Islands by the L. M. S., had fallen almost entirely into the hands of
the Roman Catholics. There is a strong Catholic following today,
too. The late king of Abeniama who was formerly a Protestant
became Cathode and since ho owned practically the whole island it
became his great object in late years to try and turn our people off
the land which he had leased to them. This was done by attempts
to raise the rents, and since his death a few months ago the attempts
are being continued even more strongly by other members of his
family. Naturally the strong antagonism of the Catholic section of
the community makes the work of our teachers very difficult.
When the work was first taken over by our Society in 1917
there were only two old teachers on the island with very few followers.
It has been the policy of the L. M. S. to staff the villages of Abe-
mama whore there seemed to be a likelihood of gathering adherents,
with well trained men from Ronorofio. The results, although per-
haps not all that could be hoped, have been in most cases very
gratifying. There are now three native ministers and two other
trained men on the island besides two voluntary teachers who are
in charge of village Churches. The work in the central village is
very disappointing, there being very few L. M. S. adherents, but
in the northernmost and southernmost villages we have in each case
a fine native Church.


The increase on this island has not been so great as in the case
of most other islands in the north during the last few years. Yet we
need to record our gratitude that some progress has been made. In
1920 there were 35 Communicants, 22 Seekers, and 110 Adherents.
In 1929 these figures had increased to 70 Communicants, 19 Seekers,
and 2(15 Adherents.
KURIA.
This island has only one village, where an L. M. S. native
minister is in charge. There is a very fine school and the quality
of the worship is very pleasing too. Most of the population are
L.M.S. adheients or members. The cause has prospered during the
last few years. In 1920 there were recorded 35 Members, 5 Seekers,
and GO Adherents. In 1929 the figures were 47 Communicants, 2
Seekers, and 123 Adherents.
ARANUKA.
The neighbouring island of Aranuka is very small, too, and we
have one L.M.S. teacher stationed there. Until 1919 the work on
this island had been deserted, but since then it has made headway
against difficulties. Whereas in 1920 there were 20 Protestant
Church Members, 10 Seekers, and 95 Adherents, in 1929 there were
71 Communicants, 2 Seekers, and 123 Adherents,
J. H. Spivey.


OCEAN ISLAND.
This small rocky island stands by itself some 386 miles West of
Bern. The island is well known and comparatively important
because of its rich deposits of phosphate, thousands of tons of which
are mined and exported annually. The native population of the
island is small, but the British Phosphate Commission employs some
800 or 1000 Gilbertese youths and men, and a large number of Chinese,
in connection with the mining and shipping of the phosphate. The
Gilbertese labourers are recruited from the islands of the Group, and
usually “sign on” for a period of eighteen months, at the end of
which time they are repatriated, and fresh recruits obtained.
The island is also the Centre of the Government of the Group.
The Government officers, and the large staff of the British
Phosphate Commission, and their families, together make up a
considerable white population. For some years the American Board
maintained a white missionary at Ocean Island and another white
missionary at Nauru. The L. M, S., since it took over the work on
these islands in 1917, has aimed at providing one ■white missionary
who should divide his time between the two islands. Unfortunately,
owing to post-war difficulties, even this arrangement has not been
possible throughout the decade. Upon the appointment of Mr. W.
A. Levett to Beru in 1923, Rev. H. P. Bralsford was transferred to
Ocean Island and Nauru, and for some three years he resided at
Ocean Island with periodical visits to Nauru. His short stay was
unfortunately much interrupted by furloughs on account of the
health of Mrs. Bralsford and their small son; and in 1926 Mr. Brals-
ford left the Mission.
Shortly afterwards, on the occasion of the visit of the Foreign
Secretary for the Southern Fields at the end of 1926, a further earn-
est appeal for a resident missionary and an offer of a generous sub-
sidy were made by the Administrator of Nauru. As a result of this,
at the end of 1927 Rev. Percy Hannah and Mrs. Hannah arrived to
succeed Rev. & Mrs. Bralsford. In view of the Government subsidy
and its conditions, they have made their home at Nauru, where a new
Mission House was built for them in 1928. With the exception of
one or two calls and one short visit to Ocean Island, Mr. Hannah
has hitherto given his time to Nauru, but it is hoped in the future he
will be able to do more for Ocean Island.
In spite of these drawbacks the work has made good progress.
Whereas in 1920 we had only two Gilbertese teachers on Ocean
Island, we now have four in charge of the work in the four villages
on the island. We have also a Samoan Pastor in charge of the
large and important work among the Gilbert and Ellice Islands
labourers of the British Phosphate Commission . For a considerable
portion of the decade we had a particularly able man in charge in


the person of Pastor Rimoni. He has recently retired, and has been
succeeded by Pastor Mate, a newcomer from Samoa. During the
ten years under review the number of Church members has increased
considerably and the contributions have also advanced. The Banaban
Churches all pay the stipends of their teachers, and contribute gener-
ously to the general work. The gifts of the labour boys from the
different islands of the Group very materially help the Mission to
make up the deficiencies of the local contributions for the support of
the teachers in the villages in the Group.
The officials of the British Phosphate Commission are always
ready to give courteous assistance to the Mission and its mission-
aries, and the Commission gives an annual donation of £ 50, half in
respect to Ocean Island and half in respect to Nauru. It is a source
of much regret to the Mission that in the absence of a resident white
missionary, so little can bo done for the Europeans resident on this
island. While Rev. H.P. Bralsford was resident on the island, he
conducted services for the Europeans on Sundays, but on the hurried
visits made by other members of the staff—usually when going on fur-
lough or returning to the Group-it is seldom possible to arrange a Euro-
pean service, though an evening service for the labour boys is usually
fitted in somehow. The Chairman of the G.I.D.C. visited this island
in 1920, 1922, 1923, 1925, 1929, and quite recently in March 1931.
NAURU.
Nauru, nearly 600 miles west of Beru, not only stands apart
from the Gilbert Islands Mission geographically, but is separated
from the Gilberts in language, in Government, and in the character
and condition of its inhabitants. Formerly a German possession, the
island was taken by an Australian warship early in the Great War;
and on the conclusion of the Peace, it became a Mandated Territory
under the League of Nations. The present Administration is directed
from Australia, the Commonwealth Government appointing the
Administrator. The island has exceedingly rich deposits of phosphate,
which are being energetically worked by the British Phosphate
Commission, which maintains a considerable European staff, and has
a large number of labourers, chiefly Chinese coolies recruited for a
period of years.
In the old black-birding days of last century the island had an
unenviable reputation. On Ist October, 1888, the German warship
“Eber” arrived at the island, and on the following day hoisted the
German flag and proclaimed it German territory. About the same
time Gilbertese Christian teachers landed on the island, and commenc-
ed the difficult task of evangelising the pagan people, a task
rendered the more difficult by their earlier association with whites
of the beachcomber type. Subsequently the American Board of
Missions appointed Rev. Ph. A. Delaporte to Nauru, and under his
leadership speedy progress was made, and a strong Church was


formed in the principal settlement. Then the Romanists entered,
and brought opposition and division; but the majority of the people
remain adherents of the Protestant Church which first brought the
Evangel to their island. Rev. Ph. A. Delaporte, who was a German,
left the island soon after its surrender to the Australian forces in 1914.
The Church was then carried on by Nauruans trained by him, notably
T. Detudamo, and J. Aroi. Prom the time when the Mission on
this island was handed over to the L. M. S. in 1917, visits were
paid as often as possible by the missionaries of the Gilbert Islands
Mission, but the isolation of the island made it difficult to exercise
effective supervision. In the years 1924 - 192(5 Rev. H. P. Brulsford
visited the island frequently, spending several months there, and re-
organising the work of the Mission. At the end of 1927 Rev. P.
Hannah and Mrs. Hannah arrived under appointment from England,
and took up their residence at Nauru. They have been gradually
acquiring the language, which is considered to he rather more
difficult than Gilbertese, and have been thoroughly overhauling the
work of the Native Church, and recommencing Church services for
the Europeans. Secular education was taken over by the Adminis-
tration some years ago, and is efficiently carried on under a European
headmaster. Rev. and Mrs. Hannah are providing by Sunday
Schools and by special classes for the spiritual needs of the young
people.
A very serious outbreak of leprosy some years ago involved
segregation of a large proportion of the Nauruans, but the energetic
measures taken by the Administration appear to have checked the
spread of the disease, and to he leading to its gradual eradication.
The Nauruans receive considerable sums of money as rents and
royalties for pnosphates mined. This has led to a liking for foreign
food, dress, and amusements, to an extent which threatens their
physical and spiritual well-being. The presence on the island of large
numbers of Chinese labourers, who are non - Christians and who
bring with them their pagan customs and Eastern vices, gambling,
&c,, is not a helpful influence, though they are strictly confined to
their own Compounds out of working hours. It is greatly to be
desired that something should be done towards evangelising these
Chinese on Nauru and Ocean Island. The G. I. D. C. has made the
suggestion that if the Board is unable to provide a Chinese trained
evangelist, at least some effort might be made to secure the recruit-
ment among the Chinese coolies of a Christian man or men, who,
with the support of the white missionary, might have opportunities
of fruitful service for Christ among their fellow r labourers. It is
believed that the heads of the British Phosphate Commission would
sympathetically assist an endeavour along these lines. As for the
Nauruans themselves, both the Administration and the Commission
arc eager to foster their best interests; and now they have also a


white missionary resident in their midst, with no responsibility for
secular education, and only the one small island to occupy his time
for the greater part of the year, there is every reason to hope for
true progress not only material and mental, but moral and spiritual.
No recent statistics are available, but it is believed that, even if the
numbers claimed as Church members and adherents show a slight
decline, the actual strength of the Church is advancing.
Mission Finance.
Although space will not permit of much detail, a review of this
kind would not be complete without some reference to Mission Fin-
ance. The policy of the Board to make all work self-supporting at
the earliest possible moment has been loyally and energetically carried
out by the Gilbert Islands District Committee. At the beginning of
the decade the Committee found itself faced with the problem of settl-
ing new teachers in a considerable number of unevangelised or
deserted villages in the Northern Islands without laying additional
burdens upon the Home Churches. That this has been accomplished
with success is due in the main to four lines of effort :-
(1) The contributions of the already established Churches in
the Southern Islands and a few of the larger Churches in the North
towards the support of their own teachers, have been on the whole
steadily maintained, and in several cases increased.
(2) The contributions of the L. M. S. adherents for the support
of their teachers have been largely accepted in copra, which has been
taken by the S. S. “John Williams” to Sydney, where it has realised
from 50% to 100% more than the local price in the Group. The
proceeds have been credited to the salaries of the teachers, and in this
way many villages have been enabled to raise the whole of the salar-
ies of their teachers, whereas, apart from this help, there would have
been serious deficiencies year after year.
(3) The contributions of the labour boys from the Group work-
ing at Ocean Island, towards the support of the teachers and of the
Society’s work as a whole, have substantially increased; and have
enabled the Committee to make up heavy deficiencies on the amounts
raised in the Group itself for teachers’ salaries.
(4) A number of Churches and individual friends have gener-
ously provided special gifts which have enabled us to appoint and
support teachers in new villages during the years of uphill work
until they have established a cause and won adherents sufficient to
provide their salaries in whole or in part.
The expenditure on teachers’ salaries has grown from about
£9OO per annum to £l2OO, or in the years 1927-28 when as a
result of special efforts a salary bonus of £ 2 or £ 3 per head was
possible, to close on £ 1500. Although some years have shown
small deficiencies, other years have shown surpluses which have more
than compensated for the deficiencies.


The General Contributions for the Society’s work throughout the
world have inevitably fluctuated widely owing to varying local con-
ditions, but taking an average, the Gilbertese Christians, in addition
to supporting their own teachers, have contributed about £ 400 a
year towards the cost of the general work. As stated elsewhere,
some few Churches have raised large sums for new Church buildings,
and the Group as a whole has raised upwards of £l4OO towards the
cost of the new ship. It is still hoped to complete the £l5OO estima-
ted last year, in spite of the calamitous fall in the value of copra.
The sales of Gilbertese Bibles and Testaments during the decade
have reached a total exceeding £1250. The proceeds are refunded
to the American Bible Society, and represent but a portion of the cost,
that Society generously meeting the balance. Sales of Hymnbooks,
Schoolbooks, and other Christian and educational publications of the
Mission Press have totalled nearly £2500, which, of course, goes
towards defraying the cost of materials and plant and the salaries
of the Gilbertese Printing staff.
Towards the cost of the Society’s educational work at the two
central Schools, Ronoroho, BERU, and Morikao, ABAIAN, the
Government has given an annual education grant of £ 200.
The Directors may congratulate themselves that apart from the
costly but essential item of the ship, the Gilbert Islands Mission is
most economically conducted.
Conclusion.
April, 1931.
While the earlier part of this review was in the Press, the new
Schooner “John V.’’ arrived at Bern on Feb. 11th, and
was greeted with enthusiasm by the Gilbertese. It was found that
most unfortunately she was insufficiently equipped with lifebelts and
other life-saving apparatus, awnings &c, to enable the Mission to obtain
a licence from the Government for native passengers, i.e. teachers,
scholars, &c, to be carried. Much delay and difficulty ensued, but
ultimately after the ship had visited three islands to repatriate surplus
sailors from the old vessel, and to obtain some urgently needed native
supplies for the scholars at Ronoroilo, the Chairman of D. C. went on
the ship to Ocean Island, and after negotiations with the British Phos-
phate Commission and with the Government, the Captain and the
Chairman succeeded in purchasing from the British Phosphate Commis-
sion and from another source a sufficiency of life-jackets, and in satis-
fying the authorities that the other requirements of the local ordinance
were either already adequately met or were being provided at the
earliest possible moment they could be obtained.
The Resident Commissioner and others were most courteous and
helpful in the matter, and ultimately a licence was issued to the ship,
enabling her to carry native passengers to a number suited to her


capacity and equipment, which, of course, is considerably below that
of the old ship.
Returning to the Group, it was then possible to take on board
teachers, scholars, supplies &c, and to carry out an efficient Visitation
of three islands, Onotoa, Tabiteuea and Nonouti, before the end of
March. The ship has now gone north to carry out the visitation of
the islands of Rev. J. H. Spivey’s district. On her return she will
proceed to Suva, Fiji. It is hoped this Review will be included in
the mail she will take with lier from the Group. Space does not allow
of any further description of the voyage, the earlier part of which
was carried out in unpleasant weather and under difficult conditions.
In regard to Onotoa Island, Mr. Eastman was able to arrange
with the Resident Commissioner for His Honour to visit that island
at the time of the Mission visitation, and to complete the Government
Enquiry and take the disciplinary action considered necessary in con-
nection with the outbreak of last August referred to earlier in this
Review. His Honour kindly summoned the Colony yacht, and pro-
ceeded to Onotoa, arriving there at the same time as Mr. Eastman
arrived on the Mission Schooner. A special meeting of the Native
Court was arranged, at which both His Honour the Resident Com-
missioner and Rev. G. H. Eastman, as Chairman of the Mission Com-
mittee, were present; and three of the Mission teachers concerned in
the meetings were tried. They were convicted of “unlawful assembly,”
inasmuch as they had not immediately returned to their villages
when the Native Magistrate issued orders that the gathering was to
disperse. In view of their character and standing, they were not
sent to prison but were fined, and immediately released on their fines
being paid by the Chairman of the Mission Committee. Two of
these teachers and two others against whom no charges were made,
were then taken by the Mission schooner to their home islands, and
replaced by four new teachers brought across from Bern. The Resi-
dent Commissioner remained on the island to complete the Enquiry.
We have since heard that the leaders, including the so-called prophet
Barane, his son, and two of the women who were prime movers in
the mischievous part of the movement, were sentenced to two years
imprisonment; a young teacher who had acted as a leader of the
“Swords” to 18 months; and some 30 or more participants in the
march to the Government station and the riot there, to one year’s
imprisonment. Most of them were taken on the Government ship to
serve their sentences on Banaba or Tarawa Islands. The Chairman
pleaded for leniency towards the people as a whole, as they had been
misled by religious hysteria rather than having been deliberate law-
breakers; and it is understood that apart from those sentenced at the
earlier enquiry for specific acts of violence, and these reported above,
the rest of the participants in the meetings are being fined an amount
sufficient to compensate the Government for expenses incurred in the


return of the Romanists who fled from the island, and certain other
charges.
The Mission Committee sent one of its best men, a senior
Gilbertese Minister, to Onotoa some months ago, and he has done
excellent work in bringing back to a sane outlook those who were
still deluded.; It is hoped that now the matter has been dealt with and
new Mission teachers have been appointed, the bad effects of this
regrettable affair will speedily be overcome.
Reviewing the work as a whole, we have every reason to thank
God and take courage. We are not unmindful that in the view of
many the teeming millions of the East have greater claims upon our
resources than the few tens of thousands of these island races. But
God lias called our Society to this work, and as the only Protestant
Missionary Society working amongst these people, we have a special
responsibility for maintaining the Christian witness amongst them,
and for carrying to completion the self-sacrificing efforts of the early
pioneers. That God has blessed and is blessing the Society’s labours
in these scattered islands is abundantly evident. We trust that this
Review of the Progress made during recent years will help to justify
the faith and courage of the Directors and of their supporters in
deciding to build a new mission schooner, and to continue the evan-
gelisation of the Gilbertese and the building up of the Kingdom of
God in the islands of the great South Sea.
sAfj
‘ ; ’Pi ;*j ‘ •
“Hear the tjnord of the Lord , oye nations ,
And declare it in the isles afar off;
And, say , He that scattered Israel will gather him ,
And keep him , as a shepherd doth his flock.”


IN MEMORIAM.
Rev. William Edward Goward.
Missionary of the London Missionary Society.
Born September 19, 1860, at Market Harborough.
Died February 16, 1931, at Worthing, Sussex.
Appointed to Samoa 1887.
Transferred to Southern Gilberts 1899.
Retired 1919.
Rev. W.E. Goward and Mrs Goward were the first Euro-
pean Missionaries of the L.M.S. to reside in the Southern
Gilberts. They established the L.M.S. Training Institution at
Ronorono, Bern; and greatly developed the work of the Mission
in the five islands of the Southern Gilberts. For many years
it was Mr. Goward’s ambition to press on into the Northern
Gilberts, then being worked with insufficient staff and without
a Mission vessel, by the American Board of Commissioners for
Foreign Missions. The American Board desired to transfer
their work to the L.M.S., and in 1917 the Northern Islands of
the Gilbert Group and Nauru Island were taken over by the
L.M.S. Unfortuntely Mr. Goward’s health, which had been
failing for some years, did not allow of his remaining in the
field to take a share in the development of the work in the
Northern Islands, but from their retirement Mr. and Mrs. Goward
watched with deep interest the progress of the work they loved
so well.
“Death is swallowed up in VICTORY .”
I. Corinthians 15:54.




302
NKAMI TAIAN AOMATA.
T. KEX.
IOLD HUNDRED. 8.)
L. Bourgeois.
=n
'irij h+l j t'l 1 i "i -| M
#Sj| 0 j ■— 4-*- -i «14~*
* * * a * S 0 '
irfc
1
Praise God, from whom all blessings flow,Praise Him, all creatures here below; Praise Him above,yeheav’nly host,Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
— * ujJ: i r n
«4
*- JL
4
-i— t
1
Jt
H ;
==tforfo
! - A
PPfa
Nkami, taiun aomata, Ao nkami.kaiui karawa,Karaoiroa te Tama, Te Na-ti, ao te Tamnei
1 Nkami kain aonaba,
Kam na karaoiroa te Uea;
Toro i Kouna ni maku :
Mai, ao neboa arana.
2 Ba boni Naia te Atua
Are te Tia karikira ;
Bon ana tibu naira,
E boni kawakinira.
3 Mai, rin ni mataroana,
Kania ma te kukurei;
Kamoamoa Arana,
B’e bon riai i roura.
4 E raoiroi Atuara ;
E bon nanoanaira ;
E teimatoa koauana
Ma nkoa n aki totoki.
G.H. Eastman.
The Hymn, “All people that on earth do dwell,” in Gilbertese.










