

A *URi./4 ' v
~--A s A
t'VCOLLL-GUOlv,.^




r 2d o Qr'^


Tropic
Capricorn
MIWSASfILI 'JO I (DOSE.
WtgK
Gaynder
J^JtCJCcrveLAc^




PROGRESS OF THE CHURCH
NEWCASTLE DIOCESE,
NEW SOUTH WALES,
AN APPEAL
FOR ITS
SUBDIVISION AND ENDOWMENT.
LONDON:
RIVINGTONS, WATERLOO PLACE.




ITmibon Committee.
The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Winchester.
The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Oxford.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Harrowby, 39, Grosveuor qnarf.
The Ven. Archdeacon Hoare, Godstone.
The Dean op Westminster.
The Hon. and Rev. R. W. Sackville West, Withyham, Las
Grlnstead.
The Rev. Dr. Wordsworth.
Rev. Dr. Russell, Devonshire Square, Bishopsgate.
The Right Hon. Spencer Walpole, M.P., 15, Old Square
Lincoln’s Inn.
Rev. Edward Coleridge, Eton, Windsor.
Rev. William Selwyn, Margaret Professor, Cambridge.
W. F. Beadon, Esa., 9, Stratford Place.
Rev. H. Howarth, 15, Grosvenor Street.
Rev. C. E. Kennaway, Catnpden, Gloucester
Lieut.-Col. Moorsom, Guards’ Club.
Rev. J. B. Sweet, Colkirk, Norfolk.
Richard Clarke, Esa., Netting Hill Square.
Rev. James Atlay, St. John’s College, Cambridge.
Rev. J. V. Povah, 16, Tavistock Square.
Rev. John Wallace, Carshalton.
Rev. S. Smith, Camberwell.
Rev. George Currey, Charterhouse.
Charles Blandy, Esa., Reading.
J. Boodle, Jun. Esa., Putney.
J. R. Kenyon, Esa., 11, New Square, Lincoln’s Inn.
Rev. James Gray, Dibden, Southampton.
Rev. J. M, Rodwell, 7, Whitehall.
Rev. 11. W. Phillott, Staunton-on-Wye.
Rev. F. Poynder, Bridewell Hospital, Blackfriars.
Captain Tyrrell, R.N., Fordbrook, Acton.
T. Tyrrell, Esa., Guildhall.
Henry Hoare, Esa., 14, New Street, Spring Gardens.
Rev. Edwin Palmer, Balliol College.
Rev. Arthur M. Hoare, Calborne.
Rev. William Henry Hoare, Oakfield, Crawley,
Hon. Secretary and Commissary for the Diocese of Newcastle with
the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel.




As some portion of the matter contained in
the following pages has already appeared in the
Colonial Church Chronicle, the Writer begs to
say, that he has the kind permission of the
Editor for its republication in the present form.




APPEAL
SUBDIVISION AND ENDOWMENT
NEWCASTLE DIOCESE,
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Presuming our readers already acquainted
with the history of the Newcastle Diocese, and
with the accounts that have appeared from time
to time in the Monthly Record , the Gospel Mis-
sionary, and the Colonial Church Chronicle (par-
ticularly the numbers for May and June in the
current year), we shall merely touch briefly
upon some more prominent features. And,
first, it may be desirable to call attention, once
for all, to the actual extent of the Diocese,
occupying, as it does, an area more than four
times that of Great Britain and Ireland —larger,
therefore, without exception, than any Colonial
Diocese, including India and Rupert’s Land:
and while the latter extends from lat. 48° to
the North Pole, the Diocese of Newcastle
exceeds this by 130,000 square miles, — the
excess alone being more than the whole area
of the United Kingdom! And all this under
the charge of one Bishop, assisted by thirty


Clergy. The Diocese, in fact, extends along
a line of coast 800 miles long, to the north-
ward of Sydney, and stretches inland 700 miles
—lying, as our map will show, between 24°
and 33° 30' S. latitude—and comprehending
the whole population of New South Wales
north of the rivers Hawkesbury and Hunter
and still increasing as the boundaries of location
extend.
With this enormous charge, it may readily be
imagined that, notwithstanding the utmost assi-
duity on the part of its Spiritual overseer, the
wants of the Diocese have far outstripped the
present means of supplying them. Not that
the ten years of Bishop Tyrrell’s episcopate have
been at all unfruitful of the best results; by
God’s blessing, the Clergy have been more than
doubled, two large Grammar Schools have been
founded and partially endowed, many laborious
Visitations have been made, and the whole inha-
bited extent of the Diocese brought under the im-
mediate personal knowledge of the Bishop. Clergy
and laity have alike learnt to love him, and to
appreciate the value of his unwearied services.
The Reports of the Newcastle Church Society,
which have been yearly published and sent over
to England, testify to these facts; and the steady
increase of subscriptions to Church objects is a
sure sign of the spirit of cordial co-operation
which has been stirred up among the people.


Yet much still remains to be done, and the very
improvement creates the demand for more.
A proposition is understood to be now under
consideration of the Government for separating
the northern portion of what is at present com-
prehended within Newcastle Diocese into a new
Colony, with Brisbane for the new capital. The
Bishop is willing and desirous to avail himself of
the opportunity thus offered of effecting at the
same time a division of the Diocese, coexten-
sive with the limits of the civil provinces.
And under the impression that some such
arrangement may shortly be expected, he is
strongly desirous, preparatorily to it, of securing
some better provision for the permanent mainte-
nance and endowment of such portion of the
Diocese as shall be assigned to Newcastle. The
present income of the See is derived from two
sources ; partly from a portion of the original
Government grant for “ religious worship in
Australia,” handed over to Newcastle by the late
Bishop of Sydney, amounting to £SOO ; and
partly from an annual payment from the Colo-
nial Bishoprics’ Fund of £333 6s. Bd. The
former source of income, however, being of a
precarious nature, from its liability to be at any
time withdrawn at the will and pleasure of any
future legislature ; and the latter by its being
inadequate as an endowment for a Bishopric
—the Bishop, after mature consideration, has


determined on an effort to secure the endowment
as well as subdivision of his See. And, to begin
with his own portion, he proposes to the Council
of the Colonial Bishoprics’ Fund that they should
invest permanently a capital sum of <£lo,ooo*
towards the endowment of Newcastle Diocese,
in lieu of their present annual payment of
£333 6s. Bd. The noble offer which follows shall
be given in the Bishop’s own words :—“ If” he
says, “ the managers of the Colonial Bishoprics'
Fund will place this sum at my disposal, I will
promise to provide, in the course of a few years,
an additional £IO,OOO j so that the capital in-
vested for the endowment of the Bishopric may
he £20,000, affording, at 5 per cent., £I,OOO per
annum. This I should hope to effect by giving,
myself, each year, my whole Government stipend
of £SOO, which would he doubled from Church
funds, if such funds will admit of it. And I
am willing to make the completion of this sum
for endowment the first claim on my remaining
private property, should I he called away before
the whole amount is provided. By this means
I hope to leave behind me some proof of the per-
manent good effected during my episcopate .”
* The Bishop takes this £lO,OOO to represent the
capital amount answering to the £333 6s. B d. yearly
income which he has received. It is found, however,
that the money is so invested that the trustees can only
allow £8,333 6s. B d. on that amount of income.


To the former part of the Bishop’s proposition
the assent of the Council was at once obtained,
with this modification—that they determined to
place £6,000 in the Bishop’s hands towards the
endowment of his own Diocese, and to grant
another £2,333 6s. 8c?. to be the nucleus of a
sum to be raised for the maintenance of the
new Bishopric to the north of Newcastle. This
decision of the Council may eventually prove the
wisest and most effectual means of forwarding at
once the two great objects which the Bishop has
in view ; viz. 1. The subdivision of the Diocese ;
and 2. The permanent endowment of the See
of Newcastle. We therefore invite all friends of
Bishop Tyrrell, and all who have at heart the
interests of the Colonial Church in Australia,
to assist in effecting these two great objects.
I. On the subdivision we need add little to
what has been already said; but we may just
mention a circumstance which recently hap-
pened, and which sufficiently shows the insuper-
able difficulties of the present arrangement. The
Bishop being lately at Brisbane, Moreton Bay,
during a Visitation ride (for he can only go the
distance on horseback ) of 1,500 miles, was asked
to visit the adjoining district, newly formed and
settled in the north. But to do this he found
would entail an additional length of ride of no
less than 1,000 miles; all hope of thus extend-


iug his Visitation had, therefore, to be abandoned.
Such facts surely speak for themselves.
11. We trust that the Bishop’s earnest wishes
for the endowment of his Diocese will not be dis-
regarded. His own sense of the importance of such
a measure is clearly shown by the magnificent
offer which he makes, with a view to its accom-
plishment, of more than half his episcopal income.
We consider this to be an offer, which not only in
itself is an instance of the greatest liberality, and
such as demands the exercise of very great self-
denial, but is also marked with much forethought
and consideration for the best interests of the
Diocese. And viewed in all these lights, we are
happy to say it has given much satisfaction, as
the Bishop expressed his hope that it would, to
the members of the Newcastle Committee; and
it will, we trust, equally approve itself to all who
have at heart the stability of our Colonial Church
in Australia. It is our hope that many will be
induced to record their approbation of such self-
denying liberality, by themselves contributing
towards the completion of the Bishop’s wish
and earnest desire ; the more so, as the amount
from the Colonial Bishoprics’ Fund, though
promptly and cordially granted, certainly falls
very considerably short of what the Bishop had
been led to expect. Independently of which,
the Bishop says, “ I ought to be able to double


my own subscription of £SOO from Church funds
every year ; but my being able to do so must
depend mainly on the contributions obtained by
the hind exertions of my Committee .”
Those who are disposed to contribute to either
or both of the above objects, are referred to the
last page of this Appeal. But while we thus
explicitly state the special objects we have in
view, it may be due to our readers to refer back a
little to the past history of the Diocese, with a view
of pointing out some few circumstances which
seem to render it peculiarly worthy of their help.
(a.) We would notice, first, the application that
has been made of the annual grant of the Society
for the Propagation of the Gospel; and how a
comparatively small sum in itself has served,
under judicious management, to accomplish great
purposes. The grant has varied from £3OO to
£6OO per annum, but has never been less than
£3OO. By good management this has never gone
to the continuous support of any one or more mis-
sions, but having helped to establish a mission in
one place, it has then passed on to another, then to
a third, and so on ; leaving the first-formed settle-
ments to their own independent means, and to
be maintained by those who have received the
benefit. “ Thus,” the Bishop writes, “ I can
truly say, that 1 have used the grant made by
your Society really for the propagation of the


Gospel; i. e., for supporting Missionaries in new
districts which were destitute of all means of
grace. When I came here your grant was
expended in the districts of Brisbane, Moreton
Bay, and the Clarence Elver. The inhabitants
of these districts now support their Clergymen
almost by their own voluntary offerings; and
thus the Society’s grant has been available for
the support of Missionaries in the two more
distant districts of Ipswich and Darling Downs,
which have been reclaimed from the spiritual
wilderness. Besides these, three other new ones
have been settled with most efficient Clergymen,
and this year I hope to settle three more.” Later
accounts inform us that all these stations, thus
successively formed, have become independent
and self-supporting ; while the same fund is car-
ried on to the formation and support of new
parishes, chiefly those of Warialda and the
Gwydir district, on the extreme north-west of
the Colony.
(b.) Another striking circumstance may be
observed in the way in which the laity
been trained to consider themselves bound up in
one common interest with the Clergy, as equally
members of Christ’s Church, having each their
own duties and responsibilities. They are giving
up the notion that everything would have gone
right if the Bishop and Clergy had done their


duty, and are beginning to feel that the Church
is a society in which they are to work in their
measure no less than a priest or a deacon. Men
really in earnest for the welfare of the Church
have a definite work offered them in their own
parishes, and with the exercise of their power
they are beginning to recognise their responsi-
bility. The annual meeting of the Newcastle
Church Society, while it brings before them the
general condition of the Diocese, gives them the
opportunity of discussing any public questions,
which are frequently arising, of interest alike
to all.
(c.) The unwearied assiduity with which the
Bishop has carried out his principle of per-
sonally visiting, and becoming experimentally
acquainted with, every part of his vast charge,
is another thing which deserves to be noticed,
and which the following extracts will abundantly
illustrate. And how striking has been the
result! Look back only a few years, and call
to mind the too truthful picture drawn by
the venerated prelate who was first appointed
to Australia, and whose words were these :
“ Hundreds of miles —thousands I might rather
sa y —of inhabited districts have I despondingly
traversed, in which no holy fabric of the Church
was visible, to put men in mind of heavenly things
by its very external aspect, or to unfold its doors


that they might enter in and be taught ‘the
truth as it is in Jesus,’ and experience the im-
proving effects and humanising consolations of
public prayer, and learn what an encouragement
to holiness is supplied by partaking, in common
sacraments, the pledges of a holy combination
and brotherhood, through the Spirit, under one
Head, even Christ; and be animated to look for-
ward with more ardent hope to an eternal union
in heaven, under the influence of those feelings of
charity and devotion which are fostered in every
heart by the sense of being already upon earth
members of one body.” Contrast this with the
happy fruits of even the earlier years of Bishop
Tyrrell’s episcopate. “ Now,” he writes, “ I have
visited every part of my extensive Diocese, jour-
neyed and preached where no minister of the
Gospel has ever been heard or seen before ; and
my Visitation rides on horseback have been fre-
quently 200, 300, and 500 miles; once 1,000, at
another time 1,200, and last year one ride to the
extent of 1,500 miles, with the same horses. In
three years I have, by encouragement and assist-
ance, freed every church from debt; feelings of
disappointment and anger have been turned into
delight and gratitude, by the completion of works
which had been given up in despair ; and, above
all, throughout the whole peopled portion of my
Diocese, extending 500 miles in length, and
200 or 300 in breadth, the Gospel is now


preached and the sacraments administered by
the Clergymen whom I have appointed. In
three years fifteen have been appointed to their
several districts; and of ■ these fifteen, eleven
have been prepared and ordained by me, and
four have come out from England. Upon the
training of the eleven whom I have ordained
I have bestowed the greatest pains, and have
continued my influence and guidance, by con-
stant communication and correspondence, up to
the present time; and the happy result has been,
that we are working together with one heart and
mind and spirit.”
No one who has watched the Bishop since
will fail to have formed a growingly favourable
estimate both of the character and progress of
his work.
There has not merely been the constant
labour of episcopal Visitations over enormous
tracts of country —to be reached only with
considerable danger to life and limb, over hill
and dale, mountain and bush, as best might
be, on horseback, and with a single attendant
—with often the meanest accommodation, the
occasional accident, the painful fall, the un-
avoidable constant fatigue; but the physical
has been but too faithful a picture of the spiri-
tual need : and the one thought of such great


distances to be traversed, with none at hand to
share the work, must be enough to oppress the
stoutest heart, as well as try the strongest frame.
It is our wish to confine ourselves as much as
possible to a plain statement of those conditions
of the Diocese, which seem to constitute a just
and indisputable claim that something should
be done to place it on a more satisfactory foot-
ing ; but it is impossible to avoid some reference
to the patient endurance with which the Bishop,
as a good servant of Christ, thus goes after the
lost sheep in the wilderness, and diligently and
calmly pursues his way. It is evident that he
feels the greatest reluctance in speaking of his
own work, or in drawing attention in any way
to his own privations, as though they were matter
of personal complaint, “If I ever allowed my-
self,” we shall find him saying, in a letter from
which we hope presently to extract at greater
length, “ to consider anything miserable, I might
certainly call this a very miserable ride, and the
accommodation most miserable at the end of it.”
We now select the following extracts from the
letter's most recently received. To the last of
them, in particular, we beg to call attention,
a's having been in some measure designed by the
Bishop himself to supply the place of such more
regular “ Journal of Visitation” as we hope some
day to receive from his hand.


“ Last Tuesday,” the Bishop writes, “ I was to
have set out by a route which would have brought
me to one of the gold-diggings in my Diocese, on
Saturday, by a journey of 100 miles. It, however,
rained in torrents on Monday night, so that all the
rivers and creeks were ‘ up,’ as it is here called, —
that is, full and impassable. I decided, therefore, to
go by a longer way, 160 miles, instead of 100, having
to arrive each night at places where I was not ex-
pected One night, instead of resting at a
station we had reckoned on, but where none of the
people were at home, I consulted my good groom
Anthony, and we agreed it would be better to give
the horses a little rest and then go on eighteen
miles to an inn, on the other side of the Big Elver,
just at the crossing-place, hoping that by this time
the river would be ‘down.’ We started about a
quarter past four, having about two hours of light ;
for the twilight in this country is always very short
in duration. After about eight miles the road be-
came altogether untraceable, and we were completely
at fault. It was getting quite dark, and if we wished
for shelter during the night, not a moment was to be
lost. After an accurate search, we found the marks
of horses’ feet. We followed the track, and after
riding four or five miles, while it became darker and
darker, I was rejoiced to see the outlines of a stock-
yard, a hut, and a barn. But on riding up to these
buildings, we found that they had been deserted, and
had not been inhabited for some time. Close to them,
however, I could just see an immense volume of
water, which was rushing down. I supposed we
must now be at the proper crossing of the Big River,
and that the inn was probably on the opposite bank.
I told Anthony to shout, which he did manfully


several times, and we thought we heard the crack of
a stock-whip from behind us. At length, after
shouting again, I heard a faint reply, and saw in the
distance the forms of two men coming towards us.
The elder, who could hardly speak from hoarseness
and agitation, said, ‘Are you the Bishop?’ ‘Yes.’
‘ Then thank the Lord ! you are safe. I heard the
shout, and cracked my whip, for I have got so bad a
cold and cough that I cannot speak loud. I thought
you must have been in the water attempting to cross ;
and if you had, nothing could have saved you—you
and your horses must have been drowned. Oh!
how you have frightened me ! ’ I asked how far we
were from the usual crossing of the Big River. He
replied, ‘ It is six miles off, and if you had gone
there, you could not have crossed, and must have
remained on the river-side all night. But pray
come to my house, and my wife and myself will do
all we can to make you comfortable to-night, and
the horses can have as much corn as they like.’
“ The poor man considered all his fright and
trouble amply repaid by my baptizing his little
babe : and I left the house on the following day. As
I approached the crossing, I saw a company of
horsemen just going down tp the river’s edge, who
proved to be the Commissioner and his orderlies.
The Commissioner quite started when the sergeant
told him that the Bishop was just behind, —came to
meet me with the greatest delight and surprise, told
me that the river was still very high, but that he
was going to venture across, and suggested that
I should wait some few hours before I ventured.
I declined any delay, rode through by his side with-
out getting very wet, and rode on with him to the
diggings, fifteen miles. On Saturday night I occu-


pied the Commissioner’s hut, after riding with him
all over the diggings.
“ On Sunday, at eleven, we had a most interesting
service in the open air, and afterwards rode thirty
miles for evening service to the station from whence
I now address you.
“ This Visitation, laborious and fatiguing as it has
been, has given me the greatest gratification ; every-
body being willing to do, for the maintenance and
extension of our Church, ail and more than I ask.”
Another letter* says ;
“ Most gladly would I be relieved from the de-
pressing anxiety of feeling that I have always more
to do 'than I can accomplish. lam never free from
urgent pressing business ; and the simple fact that
this Diocese is in area four times the size of England,
Wales, Scotland, and Ireland together, makes all
other pleading for its division superfluous. There
are seven Clergymen already in the North Moretonf
division, and four more are urgently required. When
I was last at Moreton Bay, I had a most earnest
request from the members of our Church to extend
my journey through their district (the Burnett
district). I found the additional length of ride
I must be prepared for was 1,000 miles. Yes; to
visit and traverse the next parish to where I was
would require a journey of 1,000 miles ! ”
In a letter, dated October 14,1856, to the Rev.
William Hoare, Commissary for the Diocese, and
which is the last we shall refer to, we have the
* Letter to the Eev. Ernest Hawkins, Oct. 17 1856,
t Or Brisbane, which is the chief town.


following interesting account of a fortnight s work
during the Bishop s latest Visitation .
“ October 1,1856, Wednesday.— After being engaged
almost all night in making my last arrangements
before leaving home, I started in the rain about
nine o’clock; my servant accompanying me, and
leading a third horse with my pack. After riding
thirty-four miles in the rain, and some miles of the
way through the bush, with the underwood drop-
ping with rain, I reached Berral, the residence of
the chief superintendent of the Australian Agricul-
tural Company. He was unwell, having met with
a serious fall from his horse ; but I had a conference
of two hours with him, during which I arranged for
the acceptance of tenders for new church buildings
cn the Company's estate at Newcastle. The tender
for the church accepted was for £2,790, to seat 630
persons ; the tender for the parsonage, £930 ; and
the tender for the schools and master’s house, £1,070.
After this, rode on six miles further in the rain to
the parsonage at Stroud. It was just dark when we
reached the parsonage, and at seven o’clock p.m.,
when service was to be held in the church, it was
raining in torrents ; yet I found the church nearly
half full, and preached to a most attentive con-
gregation.
“ October 2, Thursday— During much of the night,
I was writing to settle with the builder about the
speedy erection of the church buildings decided
upon yesterday; and continued writing the next
morning incessantly till thirty minutes past eleven,
when I went for ten minutes to the school, just to
encourage the master by a short visit, and to
promise to examine the children when I next came.
After this we started on our horses for Gloucester


Cottage—thirty miles off—a station of the Austra-
lian Agricultural Company. It rained during a
greater part of the way, and when we reached
Gloucester, I found that the Clergyman from the
next district of Port Macquarie had not arrived. The
Company’s Chaplain, who was with me, began to
fear that the rivers would be ‘up’ from the long rain,
and the road quite impassable. The Clergyman, how-
ever, soon arrived—the Rev. T. O’Reilly—but gave
a fearful account of the road, fearing it would be
impossible to get up and down the banks of the
creeks on the morrow. After our little meal we had
evening service ; and I was very glad to see the
room full of shepherds and stock-men, notwith-
standing the rain ; and their attention proved that
they desired to benefit by my sermon. After the
service I had again much writing, and then enjoyed
my short night’s rest.
“ October 3, Friday. —Up quite early, and finding
it had rained much during the night, was not quite
at ease respecting our journey of thirty-five miles,
along a fearful road, to the river Manning. The
Rev. T. Simms, the Company’s Chaplain, accom-
panied Mr. O’Reilly and myself about ten miles, to
a station under his charge ; and as he has been but
a few months in the Colony, he was somewhat
alarmed at our road. Five or six times in this ten
miles he exclaimed to his brother Clergyman, as we
came to some of the gullies, ‘ Will the Bishop go
down there % ’ ‘ Can any horse or man get up
there ? ’ ‘ Well; if the Bishop rides up such places,
and you also, I must try to do the same ! 5 And
thus he arrived at the end of his ten miles; when,
with a great deal of pleasing concern, he expressed
his anxiety about me, and about the dangers of my
journey, and the joy he should feel when he heard


of my safe return. Parts of the remainder of the
road were indeed fearful; but we were allowed to
reach our resting-place in safety, and most thankful
did I feel to a kind Providence for this protection.
We at last reached the house where we were to
rest, and there I found some of the principal settlers
on the Manning assembled for the evening, to con-
sult with me respecting their spiritual wants, and
the best way of supplying them. Thus, much
pleasing conference closed this day of toil.
“ October 4, Saturday. —A rainy day, so that I
could not leave the house to visit the small settlers
on the banks of the river, but passed the day in
writing.
“ October 5, Sunday. —The excellent settler, Mr.
Croaker, at whose house I was, had fitted up his
new barn very nicely for service to-day; and
yesterday we were afraid the weather would pre-
vent almost all from coming. It cleared up, how-
ever, about eight a.m., and by half past ten all
the near settlers had assembled. It was a goodly
sight—about 190 adults —and much did I enjoy the
service. To this river Mr. O’Reilly comes for two
consecutive Sundays each quarter from Port Mac-
quarie, sixty-five miles distant; and as in my sermon
I alluded to my hope of appointing a resident
Clergyman, or Catechist, on the river, to reside
among them and visit them, and conduct their
services each Sunday, if only they would do their
part to support him, the countenances of many
lighted up, and seemed to say they were resolved to
do their utmost for so good an object. After this
morning service, we rode eleven miles down the
river to Tane, the most central position, where
I was to have afternoon service, and to hold a con-
firmation. To accommodate the expected congre-


gation, the old school-room had one of its ends
taken out, and a large addition enclosed with poles
and the sails of a ship in the river ; and when I
made my way to this building (after stopping for
a few minutes at the house of Mrs. Winter, the
oldest settler on the river), I found the inside
literally a mass of heads; about 200 were seated
there, and at least another 100 were willing to stand
outside, and listen to the service and sermon. There
could not have been a quieter congregation, or a
more profound silence than that which continued
during the confirmation and my address; it was
silence which could be felt. After this afternoon
service I was rowed down the river about five miles
to Cundle, where service was appointed to be held
at seven o’clock. Here upwards of 100 again as-
sembled ; the veranda of Cundle House being very
nicely fitted up for their reception. Here I preached
a third time, and then, after a most hospitable
entertainment, retired to rest, somewhat tired, in-
deed, but feeling that such scenes and services not
only repay an hundredfold all past fatigue, but
strengthen you to support almost anything which
you may hereafter have to undergo. Not only in
relieving the needy, but also in teaching the igno-
rant, and feeding hungry souls, it is assuredly more
blessed to give than to receive. And here my grati-
fication equalled at least the gratitude of my hearers.
“ October 6, Monday. —After breakfast I was rowed
to Tane and back, to see the proprietor of that
estate, and persuade him to give a suitable site for
our church buildings in that most central position.
This I accomplished most satisfactorily, and after
returning to Cundle, rode in the afternoon about
twelve miles to a neat clean cottage, where a small
congregation were assembled for service ; and after-


wards in the dark rode to the cottage of Mr. William
Cross, the excellent son of the old Chaplain at Port
Macquarie, where I was to rest the night.
“ October 7.—Rode fifty-two miles to Port Mac-
quarie.
“ October 8, Wednesday. —Confirmation and visiting.
“ October 9, Thursday. —Examination of school,
visiting, and church meeting in the evening.
“ October 10.—Rode in the afternoon to Rolland’s
Plains (twenty miles), where I had service at seven
p.m., and was pleased to see a much more numerous
congregation than I had seen there before. After
service we rested for the night at a clean little
cottage, where we received a warm welcome.
“ October 11, Saturday. —Rode to Kimpsey, the
chief town on the Macleay River, twenty-one miles.
Got there ten A.M., held a meeting of committee,
and afterwards a general church meeting; after
which I was rowed down the river to Christmas
Creek, where I was kindly entertained by one of the
committee.
“ October 12, Sunday. —Service at Christmas Creek
in the morning—an excellent congregation, about
150—the school-room having been enlarged to admit
it. I greatly enjoyed the service, all present were
so very attentive, and so evidently felt my simple
exhortation. Returned by boat to Kimpsey, and
held an afternoon service and confirmation. About
250 assembled; but the room, arranged as well as it
could possibly be, was but ill suited for service.
After this rode fourteen miles, to reach the house
of Mr. and Mrs. Ducket before dark, where we re-
ceived a most hearty welcome, and had a small con-
gregation for service at eight o’clock.
“ October 13, Monday. —Rode to Wallbro’, a station
eighteen miles up the River Macleay, the day being


unfavourable and rainy; and here I left the excel-
lent Clergyman of this district, the Rev. T. O’Reilly,
who had accompanied me 200 miles through his
district, and wished to accompany me farther, but
the day was so bad I would not allow him. About
two p.m. I left Wallbro’ with my guide in heavy
rain for Towell Creek, a station eighteen miles off ;
and if I ever allowed myself to consider anything
miserable, I might certainly call this a very miserable
ride, and the accommodation most miserable at the
end of it. My bed was a piece of bark, and my fare
dry bread with a little salt beef; and I had the
comfort of being assured by my guide that, if the
rain continued, we could not accomplish, and should
not attempt, our next day’s journey, as no one could
mount the formidable ranges after much rain, and
the rivers would be quite impassable, especially the
dangerous Styx. We had a short service, and then
I was glad to go to my humble bed.
“ October 14, Tuesday. —Such a day’s journey!
Thirty-five miles, including five miles of fearful
ascent. The weather happily improved, but the
toil of the ascent was very great. At the foot of
the range, a servant of my guide was to have met
us with fresh horses; but, alas! no horses came.
We therefore rested our horses for an hour, and
then commenced the ascent. This is the worst
piece of road in my Diocese. When I last travelled
it two years ago, one of my horses quite knocked
up, and lay down in the road as if it would never
rise up again, and I was obliged to leave him behind
at the next station. Now we toiled up the ascent,
and at this moment my muscles testify to the exer-
tion required. We, however, at last reached the
table-land ; then rode ten miles to the next station,
Juggela, passing the formidable Styx, where a dead


bullock in the channel near the crossing proved the
dangerous nature of the river. My guide’s brother
is the owner of the station on the table-land, so we
were very kindly received by the stockman, the
master being away; and after an evening service,
I felt that I deserved a good night's rest.”
With these extracts we might almost con-
clude ; but as it may be the means, by the way,
of bringing a subj ect of much importance under
the notice of those who may be able to help, we
will just add, that if the work be thus arduous
to the Bishop, it is no less so, in proportion, to
the Clergy, In the new districts more especially
the difficulty is great of finding those who, at
every hazard, will encounter the task of so labo-
rious a ministry as in those districts is required.
They should be young, active, and devoted men ;
men who enter into the full spirit of a young and
almost missionary band of faithful and earnest sons
of the Church of England; who, having health and
talents, and cultivated minds, do not think these
thrown away upon a class of colonists who, living
perhaps by the labour of their hands, are not the
less men of the same cultivation, talents, and
regard for the means of grace, which, though in
higher degree, we would seek in those who should
go out as their spiritual pastors and guides. To
such the Bishop is able to offer the highest colo-
nial salary, which is £2OO and a house; and to
such men this is an offer quite in excess of what
their actual needs would be.


Having taken the opportunity of stating thus
much, we have only to add, that if the statement
above made should appear to bear us out in onr
conclusion, we trust many will he found willing
to support the Bishop in his present design.
Here is a Diocese with all the ordinary burdens
of a diocese, and with less than ordinary means
to meet them ; with an income of about £833
per annum, and the greater portion of this
terminable with the present Bishop’s life ; with
peculiar calls upon it besides, such as the pro-
curing of Clergy at every disadvantage of dis-
tance and expense of journey, and with not many
counterbalancing attractions beyond their own
interest in the work; with an extent of territory
demanding more than average strength to cope
with it ; with a growing population and rapidly
extending boundary of location ; —a most pro-
vident and generous offer is made by the present
Incumbent of the See, to put by annually more
than the half of his own episcopal income
towards endowment for his successors :—ls not
here a case which may well enlist the sympathies
of all, and in which every Churchman who has
the means will gladly help, according to his
means, in effecting some arrangement whereby
the labours of this enormous Diocese may be
lightened, and at least some stability given to
efforts which, however praiseworthy and self-


denying, must otherwise expire with the pre-
sent Bishop’s life, and leave little or no trace
behind in the permanent improvement of the
people 1
( d .) While the Bishop would prefer assistance
of the kinds already enumerated, there is no want
of other very pressing objects, in which assistance
would be highly acceptable. The Bishop, October
16, 1856, thus writes :
“ The endowment of the Bishopric, and funds for
the outfit and ■passage of additional Clergymen, might,
in fact, form two great objects mentioned in your
appeal, to be accomplished during the next five
years, with perhaps the addition of supporting one
or two students at St. Augustine’s, if this could be
effected as well students sound in mind and
body, and devoted to Missionary work from religious
motives. In addition to ordained Clergymen and
students at St. Augustine’s, I should be very thank-
ful to receive trained Masters of Schools, or young
men who might act as Catechists, until they had
proved themselves worthy of ordination, and had
been duly prepared for it.”
It may be mentioned, that, with all the wil-
lingness to do their own part, and to contribute
to the utmost according to their means, which,
in response to the Bishop’s call, has for many
years been shown on the part of the colonists
themselves, and which is one of the most pleasing


features in the Church Reports, Newcastle is, after
all, a comparatively poor Diocese, the wealthier
land-owners usually preferring a residence in
Sydney, and leaving the country to be held chiefly
oy shepherds and keepers of stock.
Under all these circumstances, the friends who
have long acted for the Bishop, in connexion
with the venerable Society for the Propagation of
the Gospel, have not declined this fresh call
upon their co-operation and sympathy. They
have set the example of contributing towards
the Endowment Fund proposed. Others have
kindly promised sermons in promotion of the
same object. It is their wish to make known
the Bishop’s wants as widely as possible. To
some they would suggest, that by taking pains
to circulate the present Appeal, —not obtrusively,
but in any quarter where ready access might be
had, or a favourable opportunity offered, —they
might be rendering the same service as if they
were able to contribute themselves. And thus,
by each doing something, and asking the atten-
tion of their friends with such measure of help
as they might be disposed to give, we have no
doubt the object might be attained, and the call
of the Bishop of Newcastle effectually responded
to, without prejudice to any other objects of
charity at home or abroad. Seeking, therefore,


the Divine blessing on the several objects of our
undertaking, we heartily commend the subject
to the favourable consideration of all who take
an interest in the welfare of a very promising
branch of our beloved Church in the Colonies.
In the name of the Committee,
WILLIAM HENRY HOARE,
Commissary to the Bishop.
Subscriptions or Donations are payable to Mr. Fayer-
man, 79, Pall Mall, for “ Newcastle Special Fund,”
to Messrs. Hoare’s, 37, Fleet Street, for ditto ; or to any
Member of Newcastle Committee.
It is requested that all persons desirous of
subscribing will communicate their names, and
the amount of their subscriptions, to
Rev. W. H. Hoars,
Oakfield,
Crawley.


SUBSCRIPTIONS AND DONATIONS
To Christmas, 1857.
£ s. d.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Harrowby ann. 5 years 5 5 0
The Right Rev. the .Lord Bishop of Winchester
ann, 5 years 10 10 0
Theßt. Hon. Spencer H.Walpole, M.P. ann. 3 years 5 5 0
W. F. Beadon, Esq arm. sy. 10 10 0
Rev. William Selwyn, D.D Ist y. don. 10 10 0
Rev. James Atlay Ist y. don. 10 0 0
Henry Hoare, Esq ann. sy. 10 10 0
Rev. William H. Hoare ann. sy. 10 10 0
Rev. E. Coleridge ann. 3y. 5 0 0
Rev. C. E. Kennaway ann. sy. 5 0 0
Captain Tyrrell, R.H ann. sy. 10 0 0
C. Blandy, Esq ann. sy. 5 5 0
Rev. Samuel Smith ann. sy. 10 0 0
Rev. A. M. Hoare ann. sy. 1 1 0
Rev. James Gray ann. sy. 1 1 0
Rev. F. Poynder ann. sy. 2 2 0
J. Boodle, Esq amn. sy. 1 1 0
Rev. G. Currey ann. sy. 2 2 0
Rev. Edwin Palmer 1 sty. don. 5 5 0
Rev. J. B. Sweet ann. sy. from ’6B 2 2 0
Rev. J. Y. Povah ann. sy. 110
Ditto don • 5 5 0
J. H. Wilson, Esq don. 5 0 0
Rev. J. Wallace ann. sy. 5 5 0
W. Cotton, Esq ann. sy. 5 5 0
R. Blencowe, Esq ann. sy. 1 0 0
Rev. T. McCalmont 100


£ s. d.
Rev. H. H. Hughes don. 15 0 0
Ven. Archdeacon Harrison . . . ann. 5 years 5 0 0
J. R. Kenyon, Esq don. 5 0 0
Rev. Dr. Wordsworth don. 25 0 0
Miss A. Hoare don. 10 0
T. Dyke Acland, Esq ann. sy. 110
Dr. Acland ann. by. 1 1 0
Rev. J. G. Smith, Brisley, per Rev. J. B. Sweet . 0 10 0
G. E. Eyre, Esq. . ann, by. 10 0 0
Rev. G, D. Wheeler ann. by. 1 1 0
W. E. White, Esq don. 110
Rev. J. R. Oldham ann. sy. 2 2 0
Rev. F. Martin Is* y. don. 10 10 0


The following Table may be a convenient form for
entering Contributions according to the special object
which Subscribers may prefer ;
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND DONATIONS TO
NEWCASTLE DIOCESE, NEW SOUTH WALES.
For Subdivision op Diocese.
For Endowment of Diocese.
For sending Additional
Clergy.
For General Purposes.






