

HENRY LAWSON MEMORIAL
EURUNDEREE (near Mudgee) 2nd September, 1949
N
V
T
A
T
0
N


“EURUNDEREE”
There are scenes in the distance where beauty is not,
On the desolate flats where gaunt apple trees rot.
Where the brooding old ridge rises up to the breeze
From his dark lonely gullies of stringy bark trees,
There are voice-haunted gaps ever sullen and strange ;
But Eurunderee lies like a gem in the range.
Still I see in my fancy the dark green and blue
Of the box-covered hills where the five-corners grew,
And the rugged old sheoaks that sighed in the bend
O’er the lily-decked pools where the dark ridges end,
And the scrub-covered spurs running down from the
Peak
To the deep grassy banks of Eurunderee Creek.
On the knolls where the vineyards and fruit-gardens are
There’s a beauty that even the drought cannot mar;
For it came to me oft, in the days that are lost,
As I strolled on the sidling where lingered the frost,
And the shadows of night from the gullies withdrawn,
The hills in the background were flushed by the dawn.
I was there in late years, but there’s many a change
Where the Cudgegong River flows down through the
range;
For the curse of the town with the railroad has come,
And the goldfields are dead. And the girl, and the chum,
And the old home were gone; yet the oaks seemed to
speak
Of the hazy old days on Eurunderee Creek.
And I stood by that creek, ere the sunset grew cold,
When the leaves of the sheoaks were traced on the gold,
And I thought of old days, and I thought of old folks,
Till I sighed in my heart to the sigh of the oaks ;
For the years waste away like the waters that leak
Through the pebbles and sand of Eurunderee Creek.


THE CUDGEGONG SHIRE COUNCIL
THE HOUSING COMMISSION OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Cordially invite you and your friends to the unveiling
MRS. BERTHA LAWSON
of the memorial at the site of the boyhood home of
HENRY LAWSON
EURUNDEREE, NEAR MUDGEE,
Friday, 2nd September, 1949, at 2.30 p.m.
R.s.y.p.
August 29. 1949.
A. W. BOSSER,
Box 4013, G.P.0.,
Sydney.
Councillor A. G. BARTON,
President, Cudgegong Shire Council
E. R. C. GALLOP, Chairman,
The Housing Commission of
New South Wales.


The preservation of the historic site
of Henry Lawson’s boyhood home at
Eurunderee has been made possible
through the efforts of the Cudgegong
Shire Council and the Housing Com-
mission of New South Wales, together
with the public-spirited action of the
owner of the site, Mr. L. B. Deutscher.
Owing to past neglect and apathy all
that remains of the home is the fireplace
and chimney. Housing Commission
architects have designed a simple and
dignified memorial which has been
erected under the supervision of the
Cudgegong Shire Council.


UNVEILING OP HENRY LAT/bON MEMORIAL*
Eurunderee, near Mudgee, 2nd September, 19U9*
Tentative Pro; :r.;ai : ao for 2aci aeptociber s 19^-9*
11 a.m. Civic Reception, Town IVII, Mudgee.
2.30 p.m. Unveiling of Memorial at Surunderee, cibout five
miles from Mudgee by Buses will run from the
Bank of N.3.W. corner, iludgee «..t 1.30 and 2.10 p.ra.
8 p.m. Concert in Mud gee Town Hall, featuring works of
Henry Lawson.
Trains
Under the present restricted time-t Vole trains leave
Sydney for Mudgee on Tuesday night at 10.U7 p.m.,
arriving at iludgee at 7 a.m. VodnescL.y. ’Then the
norm. 1 time-table applies trains leave Sydney nightly
at 10.1;7 p#m., arriving at Mudgee 7 a.m. If possible
a special truin or special additional carriages wall
run on Thursday night, Ist September. In this con-
nection an announcement will be um.de as soon as possible.
A ccommod^.tion; Those desiring accommodation at Mudgee should write
AT ONCE to Mr. C. G-. James, Shire Clark, Gudgegong
Shire Council, Shire Hall, Mudgee, stating their
requirements and the length of their stay.
School pupils : Mr. C. G. James (see address above) will endeavour to
.~r range for the accommodation of school pupils with
families in Mudgee. ’Trite AT ONCE to Mr. James,
setting out name, ...go, name of school, and desired
length of stay at Mudgee.
