

Progress
in Soil-cultivating Methods
The
HOWARD
Patented
MOTOR
ROTARY
HOE
Manufactured by
AUSTRAL AUTO CULTIVATORS LTD.
Northmead. Sydney. N.S.W.


Guarantee !
TJ7E GUARANTEE that all precautions which
rr are usual and reasonable have been taken
by us to secure excellence of materials
and workmanship : BUT THIS GUARANTEE
IS TO EXTEND AND BE IN FORCE FOR
SIX MONTHS ONLY FROM THE DATE OF
PURCHASE, and the damages for which we
make ourselves responsible under this guarantee
are limited to the replacement of any part which
may have proved defective. VVE UNDERTAKE,
to make good at any time within six months
any defects in these respects. As motor engines
and transmission parts are easily liable to de-
rangement by neglect or misuse, THIS
GUARANTEE DOES NOT APPLY TO DEFECTS
CAUSED BY WEAR AND TEAR, MISUSE OR
NEGLECT.


The HOWARD Patented
Motor Rotary Hoe Junior
FOR THE CULTIVATION OF
Orchards, Vineyards, Nurseries, Market
Gardens, Sugar Cane and Cotton Fields


A Revolutionary Change in
Cultivation Practice
The Howard Patent Motor Rotary Hoe Jnr.
marks an epoch in cultivation practice—the most
revolutionary change since the days of Adam.
It seems extraordinary that the idea has never
previously occurred to anyone.
It will be acknowledged that the only reason
for ploughing, cultivating or scarifying, and
harrowing is, because to make the soil produce
its maximum, it must be loose and friable in
order to be acted upon by the weather, sun,
rain, frost, etc., and to conserve as much moisture
as possible below the surface. The physical
character of the soil depends largely upon its
humus content, and there are few farmers nowa-
days who do not appreciate the value of green
manure for this purpose.
Hitherto, it has been necessary to plough
under green manure crops and let the land lie
idle until it decays. In any event, when the
green crop has been ploughed In, all the green
material would He in a thick layer, and would
not be mixed up evenly with the soil. It was
necessary to allow it to lie in this condition
until it decomposed, as It could not be cultivated
or harrowed on account of the danger of dragging
all the green material to the surface.
The Howard Motor Rotary Hoe Jnr., when
it goes over the ground, chops up the crop into
small pieces at the same time as it stirs up the
soil to the required depth, and the manure crop
is thoroughly mixed in with the soil. Instead
of laying in thick layers, all the green material
is in close contact with the soil, and rapidly
becomes decomposed and incorporated with it.
There is nothing of the crop left of such a nature
as to catch in other implements and clog them
up or be dragged to the surface.
The effect of this on the increased fertility of
the soil will be apparent to those who have
studied the value of green manure.
The soil begins at once to derive the benefit
of the manuring. Bacterial activity is stimulated.
Aeration is complete. The moisture content is
preserved, and the physical condition of the
soil greatly improved.
Any fertiliser broadcasted over the cover crop
prior to using the Motor Rotary Hoe Jnr. will
be thoroughly mixed with the soil.
The more thought that is given to the matter
the more pronounced become the advantages of
the Howard Jnr. and the different cultural
methods it makes possible, with their saving
in time and labour,


What It Is! —What It Does!
STANDARD WIDTHS.
The Howard Motor Rotary Hoe Junior is made
with two standard widths of cultivators, viz.,
20in. and 24in. For general purposes and in
mixed orchards and gardens, the 20in. machine
has been adopted as the standard, because of
the greater reserve of horse power available, and
consequently the heavier and more varied the
work which can be performed.
For conditions requiring shallower cultivation,
where weed growth and soil are light and friable,
and in straight row crops on flats, such as sugar
cane, cotton, cabbage, pineapples, arrowroot,
peanuts, etc., the 24in. machine is very suitable,
and has the advantage also that a greater area
of ground can be covered in a given time. The
price of the 24in. machine is slightly higher
than that of the 20in.
THE POWER UNIT.
Specially designed for the Howard Junior,
the 5 brake horse power motor is manufactured
by a very old established works, that of Messrs.
Sturmey Archer Ltd., Coventry, England. The
ability of British engines to develop much more
than their rated horse power is well known,
and that on the Howard Junior is no exception
to the rule. It has ample reserve for any work
within its recommended capacity.
THE CULTIVATORS.
The rotor which tills the soil consists of a
number of cutting blades, which operate in a
similar manner to the ordinary hoe. The blades
are attached to a tubular spindle, and are revolved
by chain drive direct from the engine. The hoes
are in a horizontal position at the rear, cross-
wise to the direction of travel, and being made
of first quality air-hardening steel, can be quickly
and easily dressed by anyone in a common forge.
GENERAL CONSTRUCTION.
The mechanical details are perfect. The
engine and all bearings are entirely protected
from grit and dust, and the air supply to the
carburettor is double-filtered through the most
efficient devices known to science.
The roller chain is completely encased in oil,
and the rotor bearing and all other exposed
shafts have felt-packed glands, which thoroughly
exclude the dust. Ball-bearings are used
throughout the transmission.
In design the Howard Motor Rotary Hoe
Junior is a masterpiece of ingenuity and sim-
plicity ; in construction, the highest standard is
attained ; the soundness of the materials can
be gauged from the fact that they are guaranteed
by the makers.
The unique and patented formation of the
hoes make it possible to work in heavy growths
of grass and weeds without clogging, and there
is no danger of damaging the machine through
the blades coming in contact with stones or
roots in the ground.
A SELF-CONTAINED UNIT.
The Howard Rotary Hoe Junior is the logical
successor to the Rotary Hoe attachment for
tractors. Whilst the principle of tillage is the
same, the Junior is a self-contained unit, deve-
loping its own power a great increase in con-
venience, efficiency, and economy.
HOW IT WORKS.
As the rotor revolves, the blades are forced
into the ground, cutting the soil into small
pieces. As the blades rise they pulverise and
mix the soil, creating a fine tilth, which is
neither too coarse nor too fine to promote the
utmost growth of crops.
THE HOWARD MOTOR ROTARY HOE JUNIOR


Showing How the Blades Cut
SUBSOIL.
The illustration shows the manner in which the hoes operate, leaving
a rippled surface on the subsoil. When the Rotary Hoe is in second
gear, the blades take one cut to every six inches of travel. In low
gear, the blades take one stroke to every four inches of travel.
A PERFECT MULCH.
Soil is often bound together with tough roots
of couch or similar growths, leading to heavy
team work and much after-cultivation to disin-
tegrate. The Rotary Hoe Junior goes straight
ahead and makes a job of it in one operation.
Owing to the unique shape of the hoes, all the
ground is cut clean out, without tearing or burst-
ing, consequently no weeds or green manure
are missed. Trash and all cover crops are
completely chopped up and buried.
Thus with one working the soil is turned over,
aerated, supplied with vegetable matter, and
brought into perfect condition more effectively
than if ploughed and cross-ploughed and
harrowed with drawn implements.
Think what a saving in time and labour this
means. As you will see from a testimonial which
we print in this booklet, one owner estimates
that his Howard Junior is worth the labour of
eight men.
IT SOON PAYS FOR
ITSELF.
There is no question about being able to afford
a Rotary Hoe Junior. It soon pays for itself
—in the saving of time, labour, and energy.
Moreover, it puts pleasure into the work that
was formerly irksome.
It plays a vital part in lowering production
costs, and thereby increasing profits. There is
no waiting for the team. Ploughing, planting
and cultivating can be done on time.
Every day and in every way it will be earning
its keep—and more.
Make up your mind to see a Howard Rotary
Hoe Junior at work. That’s all we ask. We
know you will soon determine to buy one.
The engine and machine are so perfectly
balanced that no physical strain is placed on
the operator other than walking and guiding
it—it runs itself.
THE HOWARD MOTOR ROTARY HOE JUNIOR


IN ORCHARDS.
In orchards the Howard Junior is indispensible.
It cultivates right under branches and close
up to butts of trees, making a complete clean
up, and leaving a perfect mulch. No other cul-
tivating medium can perform more than a
small proportion of the work, which is easily
carried out with the Howard Junior.
NO WASTE OF POWER.
Tractors designed to pull tillage tools, either
by wheels or caterpillars, waste considerable
power. There is a perpetual tug-of-war between
the propelling gear and the tillage tools. Not
so with the Rotary Hoe Junior.
The chain drive from the engine to the revolv-
ing hoes relieves the road wheels of a great deal
of pulling strain, whilst the thrust caused by
the resistance of the ground to the blades assist
in propelling the machine forward.
For this reason the Rotary Hoe Junior can be
worked efficiently on loose-natured soil and on
steep hillsides on which no tractor could be
used.
ECONOMICAL ON FUEL.
The unique construction of the Howard Rotary
Hoe Junior, as indicated above, naturally results
in economy in fuel consumption. In practice,
it has been found that an acre of ground can
be cultivated on a gallon of benzine.
HILLING AND CHANNELLING.
The Howard Motor Rotary Hoe Junior is the
ideal machine for rapidly making stormwater
channels or furrows for planting such crops as
patotoes, and is equally satisfactory and labour-
saving for carrying out hilling operations on
vegetables.
SPEEDS.
There are two speeds- 1£ miles and 2$ miles
per hour—controlled by a small lever, and the
rotors are brought into gear in the same way.
The depth of the cut is regulated by an adjust-
able shoe, and can be varied in half-inches to
a maximum of 6in.
On low gear, the machine will cultivate three-
eighths of an acre per hour, and on top gear cover
five-eighths of an acre per hour.
THE HOWARD MOTOR ROTARY HOE JUNIOR


Mechanical Details
The illustrations shown here will enable anyone to easily follow the design and construction of the
Howard Junior Rotary Hoe. The machine is built most substantially, to enable it to perform hard,
continuous work without fear of breakdown. The totally enclosed, dust-proof transmission, and the
great strength of the gearing, can be easily seen. This is a machine as near perfection as possible, and
one which is going to give years of satisfactory service.
THE HOWARD MOTOR ROTARY HOE JUNIOR


SPECIFICATIONS
ENGINE. 5 B.H.P. British Sturmey Archer (600 c.c. capacity), high tension magneto,
Binks carburettor, with main and sl<*W running jets. Air to carburettor double filtered before reaching
engine. Engine air cooled by means of highly efficient aluminium fan.
TRANSMISSION. Through single dry plate clutch and bevel pinion and crown wheel,
then through heavy gears to road wheels and roller chain to rotors. All gears case-hardened and
ground. Transmission bearings are special ball races enclosed in dust-proof cases.
LUBRICATION. —ENGINE ; Automatic feed pump, easily adjustable ; visible feed.
TRANSMISSION : Everything, including bearings, running in oil baths ; dust-proof.
CULTIVATION. —Up to 6 inches deep ; adjustable on depth gauge in half inches. On
ow gear will cultivate three-eighths of an acre per hour, and on top gear five-eighths of an acre per
hour. Machine will work very close to row crops and trees, giving utmost cultivation of ground.
FUEL CONSUMPTION. —About 1 gallon benzine to the acre on high gear.
HOE WIDTHS. —2O inch, 15 blades ;24 inch, 18 blades.
STANDARD EQUIPMENT. —A complete set of tools, including a special spanner
for valve caps and a setting tool for the hoes, is supplied with every machine. Spare jets for carburettor.
EXTRA EQUIPMENT. —Attachments for hilling, furrowing and furrow covering,
special lucerne tines, tine bar attachment and hilling mouldboards, a special non-packing ball-bearing
wheel depth gauge, and a power take-off are available, so that the Howard Junior can be made into an
all-purpose machine. See illustrations on page 8.
DIMENSIONS. —Width between traction wheels, 13 inches ; overall, 19 inches.
Length of hoe blades, 5 inches.
Height, 34 inches.
Ground clearance, 8J inches.
Length, sft. 8 in.
WEIGHT. — Approximately 3 cwt, 3 qrs.
THE HOWARD MOTOR ROTARY HOE JUNIOR


Extra Attachments
SPECIAL NON PACKING DEPTH
REGULATING WHEEL
HILLING ATTACHMENT
AN EXTREMELY HANDY
IMPLEMENT
FURROWING ATTACHMENT
THE ATTACHMENTS
SHOWN HERE VASTLY
INCREASE THE AL-
READY LARGE RANGE
OF USEFULNESS OF
THE HOWARD JUNIOR,
WILL MAKE IT, IN
FACT, INTO AN ALL
PURPOSE MACHINE
FOB ANY PROPERTY.
TYNE BAR FOR HILLING
MOULDBOARDS AND OTHER ATTACHMENTS
POWER TAKE OFF ATTACHMENT
SHAFT RUNS AT 400 R.P.M. ANY SIZE OF
PULLEY UP TO 12 INCHES DIA. CAN BE
SUPPLIED
LUCERNE TYNES
GIVE PERFECT CULTIVATION
WITHOUT INJURY TO PLANT
COVERING ATTACHMENT
All Attachments have been Rigidly Tested and give Excellent Results,
THE HOWARD MOTOR ROTARY HOE JUNIOR


WHAT AN OWNER THINKS
PALMWOODS,
28th May, 1930.
MESSRS. BUZAGOTTS LTD.,
Brisbane.
Dear Sirs,
Re your ROTARY HOE JUNIOR, I must state
that since 1 purchased the HOE it has not caused
me one minute’s trouble, in fact, had I been able
to get a Hoe five years ago, I would have had
5 TIMES THE AREA UNDER CULTIVATION,
as the work it does is beyond description, I
consider the machine in tests has proved IT IS
WORTH THE LABOUR OF 8 MEN OR MORE,
and does better work. I have advised all my
friends to get a ROTARY HOE as soon as possible,
as I consider it is the only way to compete against
the open market. All my boys work the machine,
the youngest being 15 years, and he can do the
work just as well as the other boys.
Wishing the machine every success.
Yours faithfully,
S’GD. C.F.A. ROY.


Globe Printing Company Limited, 57-63 Ann Street, Brisbane.
