

Progress Report on
Resolutions of the
FIRST
SOUTH PACIFIC
CONFERENCE
Nasinu, Fiji, 25th April—5th May, 1950
Issued by
THE SOUTH PACIFIC COMMISSION
Noumea, New Caledonia
January, 1952.


THE SOUTH PACIFIC COMMISSION
The South Pacific Commission is an advisory and consultative
body set up by the six Governments responsible for the administra-
tion of Island Territories in the South Pacific region. Its purpose is
to recommend to the member Governments means for promoting the
well-being of the peoples of these Territories. It is concerned with
social, economic and health matters. Its headquarters are at Noumea,
New Caledonia.
The Commission was established by an Agreement between the
Governments of Australia, France, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
the United Kingdom and the United States of America, signed at
Canberra on the 6th February, 1947, and finally ratified on the
29th July, 1948. Until the 7th November, 1951, the area of the
Commission’s activities comprised territories lying generally south of
the equator from and including Netherlands New Guinea in the west
to the French Establishments in Oceania and Pitcairn in the east.
On 7th November, 1951, an additional Agreement was signed at
Commission headquarters in Noumea on behalf of the six partici-
pating Governments, extending the scope of the Commission to
include Guam and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands under
United States administration.
The Commission consists of twelve Commissioners, two from each
Government, and meets twice a year. The first Session was held in
May, 1948. There are two auxiliary bodies, the Research Council
and the South Pacific Conference.
The Research Council, which assembles once a year, held its first
meeting in May, 1949. Members are appointed by the Commission,
and are selected for their special knowledge of the questions with
which the Commission is concerned, and the problems of the terri-
tories in these fields. The chief function of the Research Council is
to advise the Commission what investigations are necessary. Arrange-
ments to carry out those that are approved are the responsibility
of the Secretary-General and other principal officers.
The South Pacific Conference, which meets at intervals not exceed-
ing three years, consists of delegates from the local inhabitants of
the territories, who may be accompanied by advisers. The first
Conference was held in Suva in April, 1950, and was attended by
delegates from fifteen territories and from the Kingdom of Tonga.
The Commission’s staff includes six principal officers—the Secretary-
General, Deputy Chairman of Research Council, Deputy Secretary-
General and Executive Officers for Health, Economic Development
and Social Development. The Deputy Chairman and the three
Executive Officers are ex officio members of the Research Council.
Further particulars of the Commission’s activities may be obtained
from the Secretary-General, Noumea, New Caledonia.


CONTENTS
Page
Progress Report on Resolutions Adopted by The First South Pacific
Conference .... .... •••• • •••• 5
Action Taken on Resolutions:
Agenda
Item No.
I: PUBLIC HEALTH
5 (A) MOSQUITO CONTROL (Resolutions Nos. i-io) .... 5
5 (B) THE HEALTHY VILLAGE (Resolutions Nos. 11-17) 15
II: SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
6 (A) THE VILLAGE SCHOOL (Resolutions Nos. 18-24) >9
6 (B) VOCATIONAL TRAINING (Resolutions Nos. 25-30) 24
6(C) CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES (Resolutions Nos. 31-36) 29
III: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
7 (A) FISHERIES METHODS (Resolutions Nos. 37-39) .... 33
7 (B) IMPROVEMENT AND DIVERSIFICATION OF
FOOD CROPS (Resolutions Nos. 40-42) .... .... 35
Arrangements for the Second South Pacific Conference (Resolution No. 43) 41


A Progress Report on action
taken up to November, 1951, on
the Resolutions adopted by the
First South Pacific Conference,
held at Nasinu, Fiji, from 25th
April to sth Mai, 1950.


PROGRESS REPORT ON RESOLUTIONS
ADOPTED BY THE FIRST SOUTH
PACIFIC CONFERENCE
25th APRIL - 5th MAY, 1950
At the First South Pacific Conference, held under the auspices of
the South Pacific Commission at Nasinu, Fiji, from 25th April-sth
May, 1950, problems of the South Pacific territories in the fields of
public health, social development and economic development were
considered.*
After discussion of these problems by the delegates, forty-two
resolutions were proposed and adopted. These dealt with the subjects
discussed in all three fields. Seventeen dealt with public health, nine-
teen with social development, and six with economic development.
These resolutions were conveyed through the six member Govern-
ments of the Commission to the Administrations of territories for
which they are responsible. A brief account of the action taken on
recommendations contained in these resolutions is given in the
Progress Report below.* *
I. PUBLIC HEALTH
In the field of public health, two main topics were discussed at the Confer-
ence —mosquito control and the healthy village.
Agenda Item No. 5 (A)........MOSQUTO CONTROL
RESOLUTION No. 1: The Conference has greatly welcomed
the opportunity of exchanging information and views
regarding the problems of mosquito control in the different
territories and the means hitherto taken to overcome them.
The Commission at its Fifth Session noted with appreciation this resolution,
stressing as it does the value of the Conference as a means for exchanging views
and information.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
For a detailed report of action taken in territories, see under Resolution No. 3.
• Vide Report of the Secretary-General of the South Pacific Commission on the First
South Pacific Conference.
** Territories are arranged in alphabetical order.


RESOLUTION No. 2: The Conference recognizes that to
achieve success, permanent collaboration is necessary between
the expert, the administration and the people, each having
its own part to play.
At the Fifth Session, the Commission recorded that it shared the view of the
Conference as expressed in this resolution.
RESOLUTION No. 3: The Conference is convinced of the
importance of ensuring that each Territorial Administration
should have expert advice at its disposal, and urges the
Commission to consider the provision of a team of experts
in mosquito control whose services could be placed at the
disposal of any Territory which asks for such services; full
information should be provided by all Territories and made
available through the Commission.
The Commission referred this resolution to member Governments and the
Research Council for their consideration and advice.
The Research Council did not consider it necessary for the Commission to
provide a team of experts in mosquito control, as expert advice was available
from existing local and world institutions such as the World Health Organization.
The Commission could co-operate with territories in obtaining any advice that
might be needed by them.
The Executive Officer for Health is in touch with entomologists of the School
of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, Sydney, and the Queensland Institute
of Medical Research. Also, it is felt that assistance would be available from
the Department of Medical Zoology, University of Otago, New Zealand, and
from the Institut Fran?ais d’Oceanie, Noumea. The plant entomologist of the
latter institution has co-operated in the Commission’s research activities in New
Caledonia.
The Research Council further recommended that special attention should be
paid to circulating information on existing measures, particularly in respect of
sea and air ports. The question has been investigated and measures that might
be proposed are still under investigation through a study of documentation and
literature. The whole matter will be reviewed and considered in connection
with the drafting of a common code of quarantine for transmissible non-
pestilential diseases having a dangerous epidemic power within the territorial
scope of the Commission.
Information on mosquito control measures being taken in territories, particu-
larly at sea and air ports, has been published by the World Health Organization.
The Fiji Administration has copies of regulations and reports covering the
activities of the medical services in this matter. Additionally, maps are available
showing mosquito distribution in the South Pacific. (See also information
recorded under Resolution No. 9.)
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES;
American Samoa: The Department of Public Health of American Samoa has
designated that the Insect and Rodent Control Team and the Sanitary Inspector
shall have primary responsibility in the territory for the supervision of the local
mosquito control programme, which places particular emphasis on filariasis.
This programme is now in operation, and an interim report on filariasis has
been sent to the Commission. The Control Team, consisting of a Samoan fore-
man and three helpers instructed in field techniques, is equipped with a truck
and portable spray tanks and is available on call for villages requesting its
services. The Sanitary Inspector regularly visits the villages of each district
and is empowered to prefer charges against persistent violators of the established
sanitary code.


On the basis of the recommendations of the Department of Health, the
Government of American Samoa in September, 1951, instituted a programme
for the removal or re-location of pandanus plantations to a minimum distance
of one hundred yards from the nearest human habitation. In the past the
pandanus tree, which is commercially important because it is the raw material
source for the Samoan mats exported by the handicraft industry, has proved to
be a principal breeding area for the filarial mosquito. The fact that the pandanus
and other plants accumulate small quantities of water which stagnate and become
breeding places for mosquitoes has been a matter of serious concern to the
Governments of American Samoa.
In connection with a programme devised for the biological control of
mosquitoes, the Director of Health in Western Samoa assisted the Health
Department of American Samoa in obtaining several larvicidal fish, species
minnow Poecilia sphenops, which were planted in three selected localities on
Tutuila. The imported fish failed to survive and the experiment was not
continued.
Mosquito control teams from other territories would be welcomed in American
Samoa to study the methods being used. The territory would also be glad to
exchange information with others. The Health Department welcomes the
information supplied through the Commission, and hopes to receive more data
on health and medical problems.
Dr. David Lehine, member of the Health Department of American Samoa,
attended the International Conference on Filariasis and Elephantiasis in Tahiti
during August, 1951.
Lt. L. Jachowski, former filarial control specialist on Samoa, is continuing
U.S. Navy Project 005-027, a five-year Study of Control, under the sponsorship
of the Naval Medical Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland. The results of
this project are transmitted to the Health Department in American Samoa
annually.
British Solomons Islands Protectorate: The Administration is considering the
possibility of a malaria survey.
Cook Islands: There are 15 mosquito inspectors distributed among six of the
eight principal islands.
Fiji: The Health Department maintains a Mosquito Control Division directed
by a mosquito surveyor who is a qualified sanitary engineer. Other senior
officers of the Department are also qual.fied and experienced in mosquito control.
The Mosquito Control Division has a school for training filariasis inspectors.
Students are taught how to identify mosquitoes found in Fiji, how to detect
breeding places and what control measures to apply to the various species.
Every province throughout the Group now has a fully-qualified filariasis
inspector. They are given refresher courses at regular intervals.
Consideration of the results of periodic visits by Health Department officers
to the districts for which the filariasis inspectors are responsible, and of the
monthly returns submitted by the latter, determines those who are to be recalled
for a refresher course. Those who do not appear to be fulfilling their respon-
sibilities are given prior selection. If their work continues to deteriorate, they
are relieved of their appointment and replaced by students currently being
trained.
French Oceania: A mosquito control service is in operation in Tahiti, and forms
part of the filariasis campaign. This service trains inspectors who are recruited
from the indigenous inhabitants. In each district, an inspector makes a monthly
tour of inspection, searching for breeding places and advising landowners of
control measures to be carried out. Whenever possible, the inspector is accom-
panied by a member of the district Council, elected by the population. With the
help of volunteers recruited in the district, the inspectors carry out the clearing
and cleaning of communal estates.
The service further carries out systematic spraying against mosquitoes, district
by district. Inside the houses, the spraying is done with 5% D.D.T. emulsion.


Outdoors, it is carried out using a Jeep equipped with a motor sprayer, spraying
a i % D.D.T. emulsion over a radius of 20 metres around the houses.
Unfortunately this particularly efficient campaign is still confined to the Tahiti
districts. It cannot be extended as yet, as the hundred islands included in the
Territory are too widely scattered (they cover more than two million square
kilometres). Papeete and Uturoa each has its sanitation service.
Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony: The Senior Medical Officer considers that
expert advice is not needed, as mosquito control in the Colony is dependent
only upon the co-operation of the landowners.
Nauru: The Department of Public Health uses spraying with D.D.T. and kerosene
to maintain satisfactory control of mosquitoes.
Netherlands New Guinea: The Government employs a malaria expert, Dr. J. C.
van Hell, who has had many years of experience in the tropics. His present
small staff will be increased to enable operations to be extended over the whole
of the territory. Other malaria experts in the South Pacific will be invited to
exchange information, and the Commission has been asked to help arrange these
contacts.
New Caledonia: Mosquito control in Noumea is organised mainly by the
destruction of:
(a) larvae, by applying oil to swamps in the vicinity of the capital (5%
D.D.T. in fuel oil).
(b) adult mosquitoes, by artificial fog. Tifa apparatus is used more par-
ticularly in buildings and places where bush encroaches {5% D.D.T.
in solvacide), while Freon bombs are used inside houses, aircraft and
ships.
A mobile hygiene and prophylactic service has just been formed with the
task, among others, of specialising in control of endemic diseases and their agents
of transmission, particularly mosquitoes.
The Municipal Hygiene Bureau of Noumea, working in collaboration with
the Institute of French Oceania and M. Cohic, entomologist, has carried out
work on the different categories of mosquitoes and the results of the anti-
mosquito campaign.
Niue: The mosquito control resolutions (1-9) were discussed by the Niue Island
Council, and were then taken by members to their villages for consideration.
Reports of these discussions will be made to a special meeting of the Council.
Further action will then be planned, including preparation of an ordinance if
needed.
Papua and New Guinea: The Administration appreciates the need for expert
mosquito control in the territory, and the Department of Public Health has
officers on its staff who supervise and direct the carrying out of these duties. A
great deal of the work is carried out by indigenous people, who are acquiring
knowledge of the techniques.
Tonga: It is agreed that the formation of such a central team of experts on
which all territories could draw is desirable. It is unlikely that Tonga would
wish to make use of them for the time being, as much still remains to be done
in the way of elementary control which the local health authorities are capable
of tackling. However, expert assistance at a later date might be acceptable.
Western Samoa; The Department of Health would welcome the establishment
of a team of experts in mosquito control. The territory has a staff of sanitary
inspectors and rodent control trainees. The latest report records a general
improvement in sanitation and a still further reduction in the number of
mosquitoes around Apia. Regular sprayings with D.D.T. have been continued.


RESOLUTION No. 4: The Conference feels that in order to
enable the populations to play their part, emphasis must be
laid on propaganda, e.g., by means of cinema pirns, particu-
larly in the schools.
Both Resolutions 4 and 13 deal with propaganda and education, and were
examined together by the Research Council. The health and social development
sections of the Commission are concerned with both, and it was decided they
should work together for the purposes of these resolutions.
The Council also recommended that pamphlets, posters, films and other
publicity material should be prepared for distribution in the territories. A colour
film, “Control of Filariasis in Tahiti,” prepared by the Department of Human
Micro-Biology and Parasitology of the University of Southern California (Prof.
J. S. Kessel), has been presented to the Commission, and is now being shown
in Fiji.
Another film on filariasis which covers mosquito control has been made in
Fiji by Sir Philip Manson-Bahr, Consultant Physician in Tropical Diseases.
It is hoped that it will be generally available in the near future. Some posters
on the subject of mosquito control were designed in Tahiti in 1948 for showing
to the Seventh Pacific Science Congress, and no doubt would be available for
possible adaptation and reproduction.
Related Social Development Projects
The Research Council recognized that in the. field of social development,
current Commission projects having some bearing on Resolution No. 4 were
Projects 5.3, 5.9 and S.i 1.
Project 5.3 comprises a study of the best ways for achieving literacy in the
area. The development of this project will be undertaken by the South Pacific
Literature Bureau and the adviser on literacy methods, who is to be appointed
shortly.
The plans for two pilot projects for community development (5.9) include
the provision of film and filmstrip projectors for educational uses.
A special section devoted to visual aids for health education forms part of the
film and filmstrip appraisal services conducted by the South Pacific Literature
Bureau (S. 11) recently established by the Commission. The first issues of a
series of film and filmstrip appraisal lists have been distributed. In each case
the titles include health subjects. The main function of this South Pacific
Literature Bureau is to stimulate the production of suitable literature for the
islands and to promote its circulation.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
American Samoa: Members of the Public Health Department regularly give
lectures to school teachers on sanitation and on fly and mosquito control.
The Government of American Samoa has copies of the U.S. Library of
Congress catalogue which lists films suitable for use in connection with the public
health programme and other programmes on Samoa. Arrangements have been
completed recently to obtain the loan of Army training films on sanitation, fly
and mosquito control from Hawaii (office of the Department of the Army).
The Federal Security Agency has offered to assist the Department of Education,
American Samoa, in obtaining films which will be used as a part of the general
type of adult education programme suggested by the Moore Report (South
Pacific Commission, 1950).
The Office of Education in Washington will send each of the Pacific Territorial
Administrations under the Department of the Interior, including American
Samoa, a copy of the revised Library of Congress catalogue when the publication
is released. The Office of Education catalogue will contain extensive lists of
films available through the prominent governmental agencies and private institu-
tions associated with visual aids.


British Solomon Islands Protectorate: The Medical Department and Public
Relations Section of the Administration are co-operating to provide films and
filmstrips for propaganda work on general hygiene, which will include mosquito
control. The widest use will be made of any material supplied by the Commission.
Fiji: Material being used to show the public how filariasis is transmitted by
mosquitoes includes literature and visual material. A new series of posters
illustrating the spread of filariasis and its relation to mosquitoes is being prepared
and will shortly be displayed. To those living in villages, filariasis inspectors
regularly stress the dangers which may accompany prevalence of mosquitoes.
French Oceania: In addition to the advice given by the inspectors of the special
mosquito control service during their visits, lectures are given in the schools and
missions. The film made in Tahiti on filariasis control has been shown in Papeete
and the districts. Propaganda posters and pamphlets have been published and
distributed.
Gilbert and Ellice Islands: In 1949, the Administration proposed to make
application for a Colonial Development and Welfare Fund grant to permit a
five-year campaign to be undertaken for this and other health propaganda.
However, this scheme was dropped owing to shipping and other difficulties.
Talks on mosquito control are, however, given regularly by travelling Assistant
Medical Practitioners and island dressers.
New Caledonia: The Municipal Hygiene Bureau has presented and distributed
films in the territory concerning the role of insect carriers of disease, particularly
the mosquito.
Papua and New Guinea: The Department of Education is giving increasingly close
attention to the use of films for educational purposes.
Tonga: Cinema films could be shown in some schools and to the general public
through the medium of the Centenary Commemoration Trust Funds Film Unit.
Western Samoa: Films and posters supplied by the New Zealand Health Depart-
ment are in use in Western Samoa, while new films and posters dealing with
Samoan health problems are being prepared.
RESOLUTION No. 5: The Conference suggests that, in view
of the work which is at present being carried on against
filariasis in several South Pacific Territories, the Commission
should arrange for a conference of experts to meet next year,
possibly in Tahiti, where one of these projects is in progress.
This conference was arranged by the Commission as part of its work on
Project H. 4 (filariasis and elephantiasis). It took place in Papeete from
August 21 st to September Ist with the full support of the Government and
Representative Assembly of French Oceania. It was attended by nineteen
specialists in filariasis and elephantiasis representing nations with territorial
responsibilities in the Pacific, territorial administrations and world medical
institutions.
The three main objectives laid down for the Conference were, firstly, to define
the various problems raised by filariasis and elephantiasis, especially in the South
Pacific; secondly, to determine the research work to be continued or undertaken
in order to solve these problems; and, thirdly, to recommend appropriate
measures to be taken for the control of these diseases, taking into account the
social and economic conditions existing in the area.
Main recommendations of the Conference were that the South Pacific
Commission should act as a focal point for the area for the collection, collation
and dissemination of technical information relating to filariasis; that research now
being carried out on the control of both diseases by drugs be continued or
intensified; that the Commission should establish a filariae collection and arrange
for its study by parasitologists, whose findings should be circulated throughout


the area; and that the Commission should act as a clearing house for posters,
pamphlets, and other educational material designed for use in the intensified
campaign against filariasis.
A detailed report on the Conference will be issued in due course.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
New Caledonia: Studies in filariasis have been made in New Caledonia, in
particular by Dr. Merlet, who has published an article on the subject in the
Bulletin of the Medical Association dated 27th November, 1950. Dr. Merlet is
working in co-operation with Dr. Kerrest of the South Pacific Commission.
Two specialists of the territory took part in the filariasis Conference held in
Tahiti last August.
RESOLUTION No. 6: As regards the control of mosquitoes
in villages, the Conference brings to the notice of the Com-
mission the following suggestions: (a) that at least one day in
each month should be devoted to mosquito eradication;
(b) that each village should appoint its own mosquito control-
ler, either voluntary or paid; (c) that in each village a
system of raising funds by means of a voluntary levy should
be put into effect. The Conference recognizes that mosquitoes
are not limited to villages and equal attention should be
given to eradication in townships and larger settlements.
At its Fifth Session the Commission commended this resolution to member
Governments.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
American Samoa: The Public Health Department employs a sanitary inspector
who at least once a month visits each village where the people devote some time
every day to mosquito eradication. The village Pulemu’u is responsible for the
cleanliness of the village. He is assisted by a mosquito control team from the
Public Health Department which sprays each village regularly with insecticide.
The village chief in American Samoa is required, under Section 1002 of the
Code of American Samoa, to make a weekly sanitary inspection within the area
of his jurisdiction and report the results to the county chief. He, in turn, makes
regular inspections and reviews the reports of the village chiefs. The reports
of the village and county chiefs are filed regularly with the Attorney General.
British Solomon Islands Protectorate: The Administration is well aware of the
value of these suggestions, though the system of village levies for this purpose
is not favoured as this would involve taking over one of the functions of the
District Councils.
The Inspector General of the South Pacific Health Service agrees with this
point of view. The villages might be induced to devote one day a week for
cleaning their premises, but it is thought that this should be undertaken under
supervision, with a full explanation as to why the measures are recommended.
Cook Islands: The Administration considers that suggestion (a) would be
improved by instituting a weekly mosquito inspection which would break into
the larval cycle of the insect. With regard to (b), it is felt that as mosquito
control requires trained personnel, village appointments made by persons with
no appreciation of the problem could prove unsatisfactory. In the Cook Group,
a grant is made each year for mosquito control, which is directed by a properly-
trained team. Suggestion (c) is endorsed.
Fiji: With regard to (a), the Fijian Affairs Board Regulations require that one
day per week be devoted to mosquito eradication and village sanitation. With
regard to (b), the appointment of a responsible person in each village to ensure
that mosquito breeding is kept under control has been considered. In townships,


the control of mosquito breeding is a joint responsibility of the Health (Sanitary)
Inspectors and Mosquito Control Division. This programme is working satis-
factorily, and steady improvement in village conditions is apparent.
French Oceania: The Administration considers that periodical visits by specially-
trained inspectors are preferable. Experience has shown that the system of
voluntary levies gives rise to quarrels and difficulties. (The installation of a
water main was an example of this.)
Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony: The Senior Medical Officer considers the
suggestions impracticable in his area.
New Caledonia: A decree of nth March, 1940, applies throughout the Territory
of New Caledonia the decree of 25th February, 1914, creating in Noumea a
service of preventive prophylaxy for the destruction of mosquito larvae.
Niue Island: The Niue Island Council has held discussions on Resolutions 6 and
14. In only four of the thirteen villages have Committees been set up or some
work carried out to tidy the village or attempt to control mosquitoes. In the
remaining villages the opinion has been expressed that the existing system of a
weekly police inspection is preferable to committee control. These villages have
been awaiting visits from the newly-appointed Chief Medical Officer, who has
just arrived on the island. As part of his mosquito control programme he will
demonstrate to them methods of cleaning up breeding places. A mosquito control
ordinance passed by the Island Council in 1950 came into operation on the
arrival of the Chief Medical Officer. In the opinion of the Resident Commissioner,
who has been at pains to bring the work of the conference fully before the
people, it will be some time before control of village cleanliness by means of
committees can be substituted for the weekly police inspection at present provided
for by the Ordinance.
Papua and New Guinea: The Administration agrees with the suggestion made in
this resolution for the control of mosquitoes in villages. Measures of this nature
are included in the programme of the Department of Public Health.
Tonga: The public is apathetic in such matters. An endeavour will be made
to arouse interest through the appointment of a team of Sanitary Inspectors and
by increasing the number of trained medical practitioners available for out-
stations. It is hoped that other measures suitable to local conditions will follow.
Western Samoa: The Administration feels that the organization of mosquito
control is a policy matter. The possibility that it could be operated in a similar
way to the rhinoceros beetle control is being examined.
RESOLUTION No. 7: The Conference recommends that the
Commission should examine the question of training
mosquito control personnel with a view to extending such
facilities as and when required.
The Commission at its Fifth Session noted that provision already existed for
giving effect to this resolution—under Social Development Project S.i, dealing
with the educational training of island peoples. This was the subject of a
comprehensive survey conducted last year by Mr. R. A. Derrick, M.8.E.,
A.M.1.5.E., F.R.G.S., who was lent to the Commission by the Fiji Government
to undertake this project. The Derrick Report (see under Resolutions 25 and 26)
includes a review of facilities existing in South Pacific territories for training
island peoples as medical assistants, including mosquito control personnel.
Recommendations for future training of such personnel in the area are also made.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
Cook Islands: The Health Department advises that mosquito control personnel
are trained in the territory. Expert advice on latest developments in techniques
would be valued.


New Caledonia: The Administration would regard it as valuable for the staff
of the Mobile Hygiene and Prophylactic Service and the Municipal Hygiene
Bureau of Noumea to profit by the experience of the specialists.
Western Samoa: As for Cook Islands (see above).
Note: Training in mosquito control is widely given in South Pacific Territories.
RESOLUTION No. 8: The Conference invites the Com-
mission to consider the possibility of providing or increasing
the supply of Gambusia affinis for Territories where the need,
exists.
The Commission asked territories to indicate either their needs for Gambusia
affinis , or their ability to provide supplies.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
American Samoa: The use of Gambusia affinis has not been possible in American
Samoa because of the absence of large (long-standing) bodies of stagnant water.
Experiments are being carried out, however, with Poecilia sphenops, a larvae-
eating minnow.
British Solomons Islands Protectorate: The Administration of Papua and New
Guinea has undertaken to supply the requirements of this territory.
Cook Islands: The Group is well supplied with Gambusia affinis, and could
export if required. The Administration has suggested the possibility of use in
mosquito control of Anisops cleopatra and the Megarhinus mosquito. The
former, although not so voracious as the Gambusia, is claimed to have the ability
of surviving spells of dry weather by flying to permanent pools, while the larvae
of the latter, which are predaceous, are found in the same territories as Aedes
scutellaris, the vector of filariasis.
Fiji : The Administration has offered to supply Gambusia affinis to other terri-
tories. It has also pointed out that another larvae-eating water insect, Anisops
cleopatra, is very effective in devouring mosquito larvae in Fiji. It is abundant,
and could be exported to other territories wanting supplies.
French Oceania: Generally, permanent bodies of stagnant water where Gambusia
affinis might be introduced are rather scarce in Tahiti. The possibilities of using
this fish in the territory will, however, be examined.
Nauru: Gambusia affinis is widely used. Regular sanitary inspections assist
towards achieving control. The routine work is carried out by a sanitary inspector
and his assistants, directed by the Government Medical Officer.
Netherlands New Guinea: Mosquito-eating fish have not so far proved a success
in view of the unusual breeding places used by mosquitoes in the area.
New Caledonia: New Caledonia has for many years imported Gambusia affinis,
or “Million fish,” which have been distributed very widely in all stagnant waters.
These fish multiply very rapidly, and are usually found in the waters of swamps
or ditches.
Papua and New Guinea: The Administration has advised the Commission that
supplies of Gambusia affinis will be made available to any territory on request.
It has already undertaken to supply the needs of the British Solomon Islands
Protectorate.
Tonga: Witfi regard to the possible use of Gambusia affinis in Tonga, the Chief
Medical Officer’s comments indicate that this would be impracticable. He
advises that water supplies in Tonga are:
(a) Water Tanks. Gambusiae could not live therein when they become dry.


(b) Wells. As these are all polluted, they need chlorination periodically,
which would kill these fish.
(c) Drums. These are too small.
(d) Running Water. This occurs only in ‘Eua. It is not certain whether
conditions there are such as to breed mosquito larvae or fish.
(e) Underground Caves. These are seldom near villages, and would be too
dark for fish.
(f) Swamps. Fish could not make any effective reduction here, as mos-
quitoes are also breeding in tree-holes, etc., nearby. Any kerosene spray
used would kill the Gambusiae.
Western Samoa: The Government advise that there are adequate supplies of
Gambusia affinis in the territory; in fact, supplies for export are offered.
RESOLUTION No. 9: The Conference recognizes the
seriousness of the possibility that dangerous mosquitoes may
be introduced into parts of the area where they do not at
present exist, and urges all concerned to take all possible
steps against such introduction.
The Commission commenced this resolution to the attention of member
Governments. (See also under Resolution 3.)
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
American Samoa: All practical measures are being taken to prevent the intro-
duction of mosquitoes into areas where they do not now exist. Continuous
entomological surveillance is maintained to check that new kinds are not entering
the territory.
The Director of Agriculture attended the South Pacific Conference on Plant
and Animal Quarantine during April, 1951, and is preparing a series of
Quarantine Regulations for American Samoa on the basis of the recommendations
of the Conference. He has been assisted in the preparatory stages by the advice
of Dr. S. M. Fracker of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
In a letter dated 11th June, 1951, the Governor of American Samoa stated
that the establishment of fumigation chambers and incinerators is planned as
soon as the technical details of their construction and installation have been
worked out.
British Solomon Islands Protectorate: The few Polynesian islands which are not
malaria areas are all at least a day’s sea journey from the main infested islands.
However, any advice on steps which might be taken to prevent the spread of
malaria to these remote islands would be welcomed.
Fiji: Strict control of mosquito breeding is maintained at sea and airports.
Special regulations exist in respect of craft arriving from malaria areas. Surface
vessels are inspected for the presence of mosquitoes or larvae, while at inter-
national airports a TIFA fog machine is in operation for the dissemination of
D.D.T. as a mosquito control measure. Additionally, the aerodrome and adjoining
areas are kept free from mosquitoes and larvae by the usual drainage and other
measures adopted against mosquito breeding.
French Oceania: Tahiti is so remote from all countries affected by mosquito-
carried diseases that the propagation of such diseases by sea transport is not to
be feared. In the case of aircraft, the usual measures are taken to prevent the
introduction of mosquitoes in the territory.
Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony: Necessary precautions are taken on the arrival
of the very few ships which come from a malarial or otherwise dangerous area.


New Caledonia: The protection of the territory against the introduction of
dangerous mosquitoes is assured by the decree of 12th September, 1933, applying
in New Caledonia the provisions of the International Health Convention for air
services.
Papua and New Guinea: Measures designed to prevent the introduction of
dangerous mosquitoes are in operation in the territory.
Tonga: All possible steps are taken to prevent introduction of mosquitoes into
the Kingdom.
RESOLUTION No. 10: The Conference has welcomed the
opportunity of exchanging information and views regarding
the problems of the healthy village and the means to over-
come them, and has greatly appreciated the evidence of
interest shoxon by the World Health Organization by the
participation of its Observer at this Conference.
The Commission noted with appreciation this resolution, which stressed the
value of the Conference as a means for exchanging views and information.
Agenda Item No. 5 (B)........ THE HEALTHY VILLAGE
RESOLUTION No. 11: The Conference urges that the
problem of health be regarded as one having economic,
cultural and educational aspects and that all these aspects be
taken into consideration in any programme for the improve-
ment of health in the village.
The Commission recorded that it shared the views of the Conference.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
New Caledonia: The territory shares the views of the Conference on the economic,
cultural and educational aspects that must be borne in mind in the matter of
healthy villages.
RESOLUTION No. 12: The Conference emphasises the
importance of greater attention to preventive public health
measures in villages rather than merely curative measures.
It was established at the Fifth Session that the Commission shared the view
of the Conference.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
Cook Islands: The Administration advises that the trained mosquito control team
includes sanitary inspection as part of its duties, and works in close conjunction
with village health committees to arouse public interest in preventive health
measures.
French Oceania: In overseas territories, preventive hygiene should have a pre-
dominant place, but in actual practice the main resources of the territory are
utilized in the necessary task of attending to patients coming to the hospitals,
dispensaries or first aid stations, leaving insufficient funds to establish a preven-
tive hygiene service sufficiently developed to cater for the widely-scattered
population of French Oceania. It is only in Tahiti itself that it has been found
possible to establish and operate, with satisfactory results, a preventive hygiene
service.
New Caledonia; The role of the Mobile Hygiene and Prophylactic Service is to
undertake preventive as well as curative measures.


Western Samoa: The increase of medical staff in the territory has meant increased
attention can be paid to preventive public health measures.
Note. It will be noted from comments made on other resolutions dealing with
public health that other territories have active programmes of this kind.
RESOLUTION No. 13: The Conference stresses the import-
ance of education and propaganda for public health. Among
the means the Conference hopes to see increasingly used are
films, posters, diagrams and pamphlets. The Conference
itcommends that films suitable for public health education
be made available for distribution to territories.
As Resolution No. 4 also deals with education and propaganda, both were
examined together by the Commission and Research Council. Recommendations
of the latter body concerning both, and a brief reference to projects in the field
of social development having some bearing on this resolution, appear under
Resolution No. 4.
A series of nutrition posters and two pamphlets prepared for use in Papua
and New Guinea following the Commission’s investigations there on Projects Ha
and 5 have been modified with a view to their possible utilization throughout
the Commission area. They have been circulated to territorial administrations
for consideration as to their suitability for local utilization.
A selection of educational films on health topics has been acquired by the
Commission. These are available on loan to territorial administrations.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
American Samoa: The United States has undertaken a study of the educational
facilities in this territory, and expects to recommend increased use of films,
pamphlets and posters for educational purposes. Further details'appear under
Resolution 4.
British Solomon Islands Protectorate: Advice from this territory is contained
in comments given under Resolution No. 4.
Cook Islands: The Administration recognizes the value of visual education in
matters concerning health. However, the posters and pamphlets it has are few
in number and are out of date.
Fiji: The Health Department film library comprises a wide variety of titles
relating to village health and sanitation. These are shown throughout the
colony, some being screened at schools through the co-operation of the Education
Department. A second set of Walt Disney colour cartoon health films has been
acquired, permitting wider and more frequent distribution of these films.
Full use is made of posters and pamphlets, prepared and produced in the
native languages of Fiji. Other health education posters are received from abroad.
Samples of health posters and pamphlets prepared by the Medical Department
in Fiji are sent to all South Pacific Health Service territories. Additional copies
in the language of each territory are prepared in Fiji on request. Health
education posters so produced have been supplied to Tonga, the New Hebrides
and other territories.
French Oceania: The question is being considered, but educational and propa-
ganda material is larking. The territory would be glad to receive educational
films in French from the Commission.
Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony; Comments regarding activities in the field of
education and propaganda for public health are given under Resolution No. 4.
Nauru: The Administration considers that the problem of the healthy village is
best attacked through its housing policy. Different schemes of providing public
health measures are in operation, with good results.


New Caledonia: Public health, educational and propaganda films have been
widely distributed in New Caledonia, both during the Pacific War by the
American authorities, and subsequently.
Niue: The matters raised have been discussed in the Niue Council and in the
villages of the island. The Administration has approached the New Zealand
Department of Health and the South Pacific Health Service for films, posters
and pamphlets. Silk screen printing equipment has been ordered, and two artists
have offered their services.
Papua and New Guinea: The Australian Red Cross Society will assist the Adminis-
tration to produce health posters for native peoples of the territory. Suitable films
and film strips will be shown.
Tonga: Attention is given to this matter in both primary and post-primary
schools throughout Tonga, where hygiene is a compulsory subject on the
curriculum. Tongan medical practitioners conduct courses in public health at
the Teachers’ Training College and at refresher courses for teachers. Posters,
pamphlets and diagrams are used. More use could be made of such material
if it were available. (There are no facilities for printing in Tonga.) Movie and
film strip projectors are in use. Films on public health education would be
welcome.
RESOLUTION No. 14: The Conference recognizes the
important part played by women in the health of the village
and the value of women’s committees as a means of pro-
moting knowledge on and practice of hygiene. The Confer-
ence suggests that those Territories where such women’s
committees do not exist should seriously consider the pos-
sibility of arranging for their establishment.
At its Fifth Session the Commission warmly commended this resolution to
the attention of member Governments.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
American Samoa: Women’s committees assumed an important role in the public
health programme and other local government functions in many American
Samoan villages several years ago. Other villages now are in the process of
forming women’s organizations. At the present time, representatives of the
Department of Health meet frequently with local women’s committees (on the
local scene) to discuss the problems of village sanitation and to instruct the
committee members in the purposes of the territorial programme.
British Solomon Islands Protectorate: The Administration considers that develop-
ment has not reached the stage when women’s committees would serve a useful
purpose in the villages.
Cook Islands: Women’s committees have been established for many years and
their work is regarded as an essential contribution to the health service of the
villages.
Fiji: Women’s committees have existed for many years in most villages, and
their value is greatly appreciated both by residents and the Government.
Women’s health committees, which are an excellent medium for health education,
continue to function, each under the guidance of a district health nurse, some
of whom are European, while others are locally trained.
French Oceania: In Tahiti, women enjoy the same civic rights as men, and are
therefore in a position to play an equal part in the affairs of the community.
Nevertheless, although some of them are nurses or teachers and one is even Chief
of a district, women in fact play only an unobtrusive part in the Tahitian com


munity. An attempt will be made to establish a women’s committee in one of
the districts.
Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony: The Colony’s Medical Department agrees
with the Conference views. Women’s committees already exist in the territory.
Nauru: Women’s committees are not in operation on this island.
New Caledonia: The degree of evolution of indigenous New Caledonian women
has not so far allowed of the organisation of women’s committees. It may be
possible to contemplate this in the fairly near future, since the recent extension
of political rights to the mothers of two or more children must contribute
towards giving them a consciousness of the role they are called upon to play.
Niue Island: The Niue Island Council has held discussions on Resolutions Nos. 6
and 14. (See Resolution 6 under “Action Taken.”)
Papua and New Guinea: Plans are progressing in the territory for the establish-
ment of women’s committees as a means of promoting knowledge of village
hygiene, in both theory and practice.
Tonga: Women’s committees have been established in as many villages as
possible, and are doing good work.
Western Samoa: Women’s committees have been established for many years, and
their work is regarded as essential to the health services of villages.
RESOLUTION No. 15: The Conference asks the Commis-
sion to invite the Research Council to advise the Territorial
Administrations on modern techniques for the conversion of
house and village refuse into compost for the enrichment
of the soil.
In 1950 the Research Council issued a paper dealing with the conversion of
house and village refuse into compost (RC.2/19 dated 26th July, 1950). 'this
paper has been circulated by the Commission to territories. The Council recom-
mended that where possible local administrations should undertake experiments
in composting.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
Papua and New Guinea: The Agricultural Officer will investigate this matter in
the Port Moresby area. His work will refer especially to night soil.
New Caledonia: The destruction of household refuse in Noumea is based on the
principle of supervised rubbish dumps serving to fill in swampy areas (Mont
Ravel night soil dump).
Western Samoa: The Health Department has pointed out that as compost heaps
could form ideal breeding grounds for insect pests such as the rhinoceros beetle,
their construction should be approached with caution.
RESOLUTION No. 16: The Conference brings to the notice
of the Commission that in the low coral islands, further
advice is needed in regard to the protection of wells against
pollution and the best type of latrines.
The Commission referred this resolution to the Research Council for considera-
tion and advice. The Council stated rhat the protection of wells against pollution,
and the best types of latrines in low coral atolls, were subjects that had already
received some attention in various territories.


As a result, an examination of the possibilities of Commission contribution to
this problem was decided upon. Proposals for a combined (health-economic-
social) project on coral island food and nutrition, in which this aspect would
be covered, were discussed at the Third Meeting of the Research Council and
will be further considered at its 1952 meeting, by which time the report on
Project E.6—Economic Development of Coral Atolls —will be available.
RESOLUTION No. 17: The Conference invites the Com-
mission to arrange for an expert study in the different
Territories of the conditions that make our villages un-
healthy and to demonstrate the means of making them
healthy.
At its Fifth Session, the Commission asked the Research Council to advise
in what way the existing work programme should be extended to give effect to
this resolution. The Research Council considered it unnecessary to arrange for
an expert study of the conditions which make villages unhealthy, since the main
facts were already well known to the authorities.
It believed that methods of demonstrating the means of creating healthy
villages were to be found in such Resolutions as 4, 13, 16 and in Social Develop-
ment Project 5.2. This project, which comprised a survey of the use of visual
aids in the education of island peoples, was completed last year. A recommenda-
tion it made that has since been approved was for the setting up of film and
film strip appraisal services. This is being conducted by the South Pacific
Literature Bureau. A special section is devoted to visual aids for health education.
The first instalments of two scries of appraisal lists—one devoted to films and
the other to film strips—have been issued.
II. SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
In the field of social development three main subjects were discussed
at the Conference, the village school, vocational training and co-
operative societies.
Agenda Item No. 6 (A) .........THE VILLAGE SCHOOL
RESOLUTION No. 18: The Conference desires to record
its appreciation of the detailed accounts given by many
Delegates of the educational system in force in their respec-
tive Territories. The Conference feels sure that the informa-
tion thus made available cannot fail to be of value to the
Commission in addressing itself to the common educational
problems of the South Pacific area.
The Commission at its Fifth Session noted with appreciation this resolution,
which stressed the value of the Conference as a means for exchanging views and
information.
RESOLUTION No. 19: The Conference has learned with
much interest from the Member for Social Development of
the projects in the educational field which are already being
undertaken by the Commission on the recommendations of
the South Pacific Research Council, and looks forward xoith
eagerness to the practical results which may be expected to
accrue from the completion of these projects.


A survey of the facilities and needs of territories for the vocational training
of island peoples (Project S.i) has been completed for the Commission by Mr.
R. A. Derrick, Director of Technical Education, Government of Fiji. Recom-
mendations of his report that are now being carried out are summarized under
Resolutions Nos. 25 and 26.
An investigation of the use and possibilities of visual aids in the education of
island peoples (Project 5.2) has also been completed.
Two consequent developments based on approved recommendations of this
report comprise an investigation into the use of visual units in educat on
(Project 5.14) and the establishment of a film and filmstrip appraisal service,
which is operated by the South Pacific Literature Bureau. Lists of appraisals
are being published regularly in the “S.P.C. Quarterly Bulletin.”
Other projects concerned with education include 5.3 (a study of methods of
mass literacy teaching), S.g (Moturiki community development project), S.ll
(South Pacific Literature Bureau) and 5.13 (vernacular teaching), all four
currently being carried out; and projects approved and now in plan such as
S. (welfare centres), 5.16 (community development in a de-populated area)
and S. 17 (Netherlands New Guinea community development project).
Information on education has figured largely in the technical information
services being conducted by the Commission. Over half of the fifty-odd publica-
tions circulated to the territories since the Conference have been of interest for
education in the area. Papers prepared and circulated in the Social Develop-
ment Notes and Committee Circular series included one on “Educational Broad-
casts to Samoan Village Schools” (S.D. Notes No. 5), one on “Film Strip
Projection Without Electricity” (S.D. Notes No. 2), one on “Libraries for
Beginners” (S.D. Notes No. 6) and two concerning new English readers being
prepared for use in the area (S.D. Committee Circulars No. 5 and 10).
RESOLUTION No. 20: The Conference recommends to the
Commission that the maximum encouragement be given to
an exchange of teachers between the Territories within the
scope of the Commission: for example, educational travel for
locally-born teachers in the holidays.
The Commission thought that language difficulties might prevent general effect
being given to this resolution.
The Research Council considered that exchange visits might arise in the event
of the establishment of technical training institutions as proposed in the Derrick
Report on the vocational training of island peoples (Project S.i), now being
published by the Commission (see Resolutions 25 and 26).
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
Cook Islands: Teaching staff already have the chance to gain experience by
travelling on exchange; each year, two teachers are selected to spend a period
of six months observing in New Zealand schools.
French Oceania: The teachers in the territory are eligible, within the limits of
the funds granted by the Representative Assembly, for scholarships enabling them
to go to France for further study. Exchanges of teachers between territories
would not serve a very useful purpose, at least in so far as the French territories
are concerned, in view of the differences in language.
Nauru: Exchange of teachers would not be practicable for the present.
Papua and New Guinea: The Administration considers the language problem
would make the carrying out of such a scheme most difficult. The very few
native teachers who would at present benefit from a period of exchange are,
because of their teaching experience and standard of English, outstanding
members of the staff, and could not well be replaced during their absence. Not
until some future time, when standards of native teaching are generally higher
and when the staff situation allows of more flexibility, could such a scheme
be successful.
20


RESOLUTION No. 21: The Conference recommends that
information on experimental work done and results obtained
be sent to the Commission by the different Territories ; such
documents, translated into the two languages of the Com-
mission, would comprise a pool of information which the
Commission could place at the disposal of any Territory
asking for it.
The Commission at its Fifth Session indicated it would give special attention
to this resolution when considering the wider question of exchange of information
throughout the area.
Information on experimental work in teaching methods is being assembled in
connection with Projects 5.3 (mass literacy) and 5.13 (vernacular teaching).
This material, together with copies of information on education forwarded by
the territories at the request of Netherlands New Guinea and other documents
obtained from the territories, is available on request from the Commission’s
Social Development section office in Sydney.
Experimental work which is of wide interest and can be documented is
circulated to the territories in the Social Development Notes or Committee
Circular series: an example is the paper on “Educational Broadcasts to Samoan
Village Schools” mentioned above.
Funds have been made available by the Commission for association with
community development projects being carried out by the territories. Documen-
tation of these projects will be available through the Commission and will often
be of direct educational interest, as with the Romilly-Purari project for which
Papua and New Guinea has received one such grant-in-aid from the Commission.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
New Caledonia: The territory can see only advantages in keeping the Com-
mission informed of any experimental work done and the results obtained, the
general distribution of such documentation being of the greatest interest.
Papua and New Guinea: The Department of Education considers such informa-
tion would be most valuable, meriting general circulation by the Commission.
RESOLUTION No. 22: The Conference emphasizes the
importance of considering as an objective of education the
conserving of the best in the cultures and languages of the
various Territories and at the same time of giving the people
the best acquaintance with the intellectual tools, the social
concepts and the institutions of the West, to the end that
the people of the South Pacific may maintain respect for
their native heritage and skill in their arts and crafts and
that they may be able to cope with the problems of the
modern world.
The Commission at its Fifth Session invited member Governments to give
this resolution serious consideration.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
American Samoa: The work of the public schools is based directly on this policy,
the educational system being designed to ensure preservation of the best in
Samoan culture.
The goals of the present educational programme in American Samoa are most
comprehensively stated in the Annual Report to the United Nations in 1948,
and these goals have not changed since they were prescribed. There it was
asserted as follows:


“In view of the changing conditions, which are likely to go much further
as time goes on, the objective of education is to conserve the best of Samoan
culture and at the same time to give acquaintance with the intellectual tools
and social concepts and institutions of the West, to the end that American
Samoans may maintain respect for their native heritage and skill in their
traditional arts and crafts, and at the same time learn to meet on equal
terms with other people, the conditions of the modern world.”
British Solomon Islands Protectorate: The objectives stated form part of the
education policy of this Government.
Cook Islands: The resolution is embodied in the education policy of the territory.
Native crafts, games, customs and language are fostered in the schools, while
the educational system is also designed to place a strong emphasis on such
introduced subjects of a practical nature as agriculture, woodwork, sewing,
hygiene and domestic science.
Fiji: Provision is already made in all Fijian schools for the teaching as well as
speaking of vernacular and English, and for instruction in local crafts and the
preservation of local customs.
French Oceania: It has not been possible until now to give an important enough
place to the teaching of local history, customs and arts, but they will form an
important part of new programmes under consideration.
As concerns the vernacular, this is not taught in schools as it is considered
preferable that education be given in French. However, Tahitian remains an
official language on the same level as French, and official publications are issued
in both Tahitian and French. Tahitian is still the current language spoken in
native homes and in the districts.
Furthermore, social anthropologists and ethnological societies are engaged in
a study of the local history and the means of conserving relics of past culture.
Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony: Due to lack of Education Officers, and an
indefinite post-war policy until recently, the standard of education has been low.
Within the next score of years it would be impossible to apply this resolution
to village schools. The ideals of the resolution are, however, being embodied
in a revised curriculum for schools now being prepared.
When the King George V residential school is established at Tarawa, it is
intended that its teaching shall include desirable indigenous culture and practical
work in native crafts. A basic course for all students in manual training will
form part of the curriculum, with a further specialist course for the abler
students.
The teaching of English cannot be extended until many more teachers have
been trained, the standard of village schools raised, and more attention given
to the inspection of non-Government schools.
The Government has recently undertaken publication of a Gilbertese Grammar
by an Administrative Officer, and has also seconded an Assistant Administrative
Officer to the School of Oriental and African Studies in London for the further
study of Gilbertese. The Government is prepared to offer all reasonable facilities
for study of languages.
Nauru: In the schools and missions, Nauruans are encouraged to maintain an
interest in their own native arts and crafts.
New Caledoma: The programme of instruction applied in village schools in New
Caledonia is directly inspired in its fundamentals by the programmes in use in
European schools. Considerable attention is given to local history and geography,
and pupils of village schools are constantly encouraged to keep their ancient
customs, their songs, agricultural techniques and crafts.
Papua and New Guinea: The Department of Education considers this resolution
of outstanding importance, expressing as it does the Pacific peoples’ own desire
to guard the best elements in their cultures. Much has already been done in
Papua and New Guinea. Officers trained in social anthropology are studying


the cultural conditions of various groups and organizing comparative material from
other parts of the world. Special attention has been given to the educational
possibilities of native languages. Dr. Capell, Reader in Oceanic Languages at
the University of Sydney, has made linguistic surveys in a large number of
groups during the past four years.
Social studies work in schools, as well as the broadcasting and film programmes
organised by the Department, play a large part in increasing understanding of
the cultural and intellectual forms of the west.
Every effort will be made in Papua and New Guinea to carry out the sugges-
tions put forward.
Tonga: The Director of Education is in complete and enthusiastic agreement
with this resolution. Indigenous cultures and crafts are preserved and fostered
in the schools of Tonga. The handicraft to be seen in the schools is of a very
high order. Tongan dances and traditional songs form an important part of
school life.
Western Samoa; As in the Cook Islands, this resolution is embodied in the
education policy of the territory. Native crafts, games, customs and language
are fostered in the schools, while the educational system is also designed to place
strong emphasis on such introduced subjects of a practical nature as agriculture,
woodwork, sewing, hygiene and domestic science.
RESOLUTION No. 23: The Conference considers that the
making of English into a second or third mother tongue for
the peoples of the South Pacific area (outside French Ter-
ritories) should be regarded as the ultimate aim in framing
the syllabus of village and other schools. The Delegates
from Netherlands New Guinea, Australian New Guinea
and Papua record doubt whether the suggested policy could
be applied to village schools.
The Commission at its Fifth Session noted this expression of opinion, and felt
sure that the educational authorities concerned would give due weight to it.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
American Samoa: In general, the Department of Education in American Samoa
encourages the increased use of English at all levels and administers the High
School and Vocational School on the basis of a familiarization of all students
with basic English. Within the past two years, the teaching of English as a
classroom subject has been introduced in some activities of the Primary sections
(Grades i, 2 and 3). Classroom subjects which emphasize the translation of
Samoan studies into English become a part of the standard curriculum in grades
4, 5 and 6. By the time the student reaches grades 7,8, and 9, he is able to
receive instruction in English almost exclusively.
Two courses, one in basic English skills and a second in English composition,
are being taught at the Primary level. In the Intermediate and Junior High
groups, English grammar and reading in English constitute approximately one-
third of the basic course work offered in the schools systems.
Approximately 95% of the total population of American Samoa are literate.
British Solomon Islands Protectorate: For comments, see under Resolution 22.
Cook Islands: The standard of English taught enables the best pupils to proceed
from village schools to New Zealand secondary schools with little or no language
handicap.
Fiji: English is taught from class 1 of primary schools, and becomes the teaching
language from class 5.


Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony: Conversational English is at present taught
in the upper classes of the four Government schools, but its teaching could not
be extended for the reasons given under Resolution No. 22.
Nauru: This policy is already followed in Nauru, where, apart from Biblical and
religious translations, there is very little literature available in the vernacular.
In the junior sections of the village-cum-district schools, however, war and post-
war conditions have been a stumbling-block.
New Caledonia: In the territory, the French language only is used as the language
of instruction, for it is considered as the most valuable language not only from
the cultural but equally from the practical point of view, taking into account
the variety of dialects used in New Caledonia.
Papua and New Guinea: The teaching of English is provided for in village
schools. English is dealt with orally during the first three years of the village
school course, and reading and writing in English are commenced during the
fourth year. The aim is to achieve reasonable facility in English by the eighth
year of school life. For the present this programme is regarded as experimental.
Tonga: The Director of Education is in agreement with the Conference resolu-
tion. English is a second language in all schools in Tonga, both primary and
post-primary, with the exception of one school attended by European children,
where English is the first language.
Western Samoa: The emphasis on English increases in Western Samoa as the
pupil advances through the school. Post-primary pupils are taught from text-
books written almost entirely in English.
RESOLUTION No. 24: The Conference invites the Commis-
sion to consider the mass production of reading material,
including text-books for village schools in the South Pacific
area, with translations into local languages where necessary.
This proposal has been covered by the establishment by the Commission of
the South Pacific Literature Bureau, to which an organiser for island literature
has been appointed. The main aim of this Bureau is to promote the publication
and circulation throughout the islands of cheap and simple books, pamphlets
and booklets. Text-books and readers for which there is a widespread demand
will be included. All material will be in English or French, and the Bureau
will also be in a position to advise the territories on suitable books for translation
into the vernacular and on problems of technical production.
Approved auxiliary functions of the Bureau include provision of advice on
village libraries, the establishment of an information service on visual aids, and
the circulation of lists of recommended books. Twelve model village library sets
have been selected and forwarded to five different territories on request; the
first issue of film and film strip appraisal lists has been published in the Quarterly
Bulletin (issue dated October, 1951) and a paper on “Libraries for Beginners,”
which includes lists of books found suitable for village libraries in Papua, has
been circulated as Social Development Notes No. 6.
Agenda Item No. 6 (B) .........VOCATIONAL TRAINING
RESOLUTION A T o. 25: The Conference recognizes the need
for vocational training for the social and economic life of
the people of the South Pacific, and learns with pleasure
that the Research Council has already undertaken a study
of the existing facilities. The Conference trusts that when
this study is completed, suitable steps will he taken by voca-
tional training of students in local, central or overseas
institutions.


A comprehensive report on the vocational training of island peoples of the
South Pacific has been prepared for the Commission by Mr. R. A. Derrick,
A.M.1.5.E., F.R.G.S., Director of Technical Education, Government of
Fiji. It is now being published in book form.
The importance of this survey was strongly stressed to member Governments
by the Commission qt its Seventh Session. It also decided that a specialist be
engaged to investigate the possible costs and other planning necessary for the
development of a prototype centralized training institution for island peoples, as
recommended in the Derrick Report, as a basis for the member Governments’
consideration of the establishment of such an institution (Project 8.17).
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
French Oceania: Technical training on a higher level than that given in primary
schools has been started at the Papeete College, the new buildings of which are
nearing completion. The possibility is also being considered of sending young
students to Noumea, where they could receive a higher technical training in the
newly-tstablished vocational school.
Lastly, the most able young men in the territory have an opportunity, through
scholarships, to go to France to carry on their studies as far as they wish, and
to obtain degrees in whatever branch they choose and to become doctors,
engineers, lawyers, etc.
Nauru: A policy of nominated courses abroad for a few selected students will
be continued. The main vocational training programme, however, will be
related to the curriculum of secondary schools.
New Caledonia: A vocational school has been established in Noumea. It opened
in March, 1951. In addition the farm-school of Port-Laguerre will allow for
the training of agricultural students.
RESOLUTION No. 26: The Conference recommends to the
Commission that an endeavour be made to arrange for the
higher specialized training of men and women, especially
teachers, in one or more centres serving one or more groups
of territories of the South Pacific area.
The Commission recorded that this resolution was being dealt with in Project
S. 1. An important recommendation of the Derrick Report (see Resolution 25)
was that a central vocational training institution should be established in the
area. The Commission approved a proposal that an expert be engaged to produce
detailed plans for the establishment, as a prototype, of such an institution,
initially embracing departments of technology, agriculture and social studies.
The expert who will undertake this task is Dr. F. J. Harlow, M.8.E., Ph.D.,
B.Sc., F.lnst.P., A.R.C.Sc., D.1.C., Principal of the Chelsea Polytechnic from
1928 to 1949, who has done similar work for the British Colonial Office in Africa
and elsewhere.
French Oceania: Within the limits of funds voted by the Representative Assembly,
scholarships are granted to enable the best students to be sent to France.
RESOLUTION No. 27: The Conference requests that the
Commission provide information and assistance concerning
the introduction of mechanical knowledge and tools.
The Commission will give further study to this request.
RESOLUTION No. 28: The Conference recommends to the
Commission that Australia and New Zealand be requested
to allow the South Pacific Territories to make full use of
selected institutions of vocational and professional training
in all necessary fields.


VOCATIONAL TRAINING FACILITIES IN AUSTRALIA:
The Executive Officer for Social Development has circulated to territories
information relating to vocational and professional training facilities available for
island candidates in Australia.
The Australian Department of Immigration has supplied the Commission with
complete details regarding the entry into Australia of Students from South
Pacific territories to further their education. Under the existing policy, non-
European students may enter Australia under exemption for educational purposes,
subject in the main to their attending private and not public schools and to
satisfactory arrangements being made for accommodation and maintenance while
in Australia. Various age limits apply. The Department is willing to co-operate
in any scheme developed by the Commission, subject to certain conditions.
A paper giving these details in full and appending lists of courses available
for vocational training in Australia was prepared from the material supplied by
the Senior Commissioner for Australia, and circulated as S.D. Notes No. 4.
Further relevant information is contained in the Australian Commonwealth
Office of Education’s Bulletin No. 23, “Institutions of Higher Learning in
Australia,” of which copies are being made available by the Commission on
request.
New Zealand Government Policy: The policy of the New Zealand Government
in respect of admission of overseas students to New Zealand in order to attend
educational institutions is outlined below.
It has for thirty years been New Zealand policy to issue student permits to
allow overseas students to enter temporarily in order to take advantage of the
educational facilities available in that country. This concession has been taken
advantage of largely by students from those South Pacific territories with direct
shipping and air communications with New Zealand, and with sufficient popula-
tion for the students on their return to obtain employment either with a
Government or an Administrative Department or in a professional or commercial
firm where their educational qualifications would be of value.
Students other than those from New Zealand territories, to whom different
conditions apply, are granted permission to enter New Zealand to attend primary
and secondary schools and university colleges on the understanding that when
they have attained the standard of education to which they had previously
aspired, or alternatively have failed to make reasonable progress in their studies,
they will return to their homes without undue delay.
A considerable number go to New Zealand from Fiji who arc sponsored and
guaranteed by the Government of Fiji and who enter under arrangements
agreed between the two Governments. Other students from Fiji (including in
the greater part students attending denominational schools, colleges and convents
for secular education) are required to apply direct to the Department of Labour
and Employment in Wellington for permission to enter. Tongan students are
granted permits under similar conditions, and are admitted on the recommenda-
tion of the authorities in Tonga.
There are a number of conditions attaching to the grant of permits, which
include the arranging of security by Deed of Covenant and provision of
appropriate certificates, etc.
Applications made by or on behalf of students from territories represented
at the South Pacific Conference other than those already mentioned are con-
sidered in the light of the circumstances outlined in each application. Should
such a student wish to undergo a course of study or training not rc'adily available
in his own territory a permit is usually granted provided a suitable guarantee
in respect of his maintenance is forthcoming.
With regard to schools, students are at present permitted to attend primary
and post-primary state schools and private schools, as well as technical colleges
and University Colleges throughout the Dominion, with the following provisos:
(1) A permit which has been granted to a person in order to enable him to
attend a primary school will not be extended after he has reached the
age of sixteen years unless thereafter he attends a secondary school.


(2) A permit which has been granted to a person in order to enable him
to attend a secondary school will not be extended after he has reached
the age of nineteen years, or in the event of his entering the school after
he has reached the age of sixteen years, will not be extended after he
has completed three years at the secondary school or reached the age
of twenty-two years, whichever first occurs, unless he thereafter attends
a university, except in special cases where a student is completing a
technical course (e.g., engineering) at a technical college or similar
institution.
(3) Should a permit be granted to a person who proposed attending a private
school for the purpose of receiving elementary instruction in English
and other primary school subjects, such permit will not be extended
after the student has completed four years at school or has reached the
age of eighteen years, whichever first occurs.
(4) There is no age limit at the time of entry into New Zealand for students
who have been accepted by New Zealand University Colleges, and they
may remain until the completion of their courses. Should a student
consistently fail in his examinations, however, or should he commit an
untoward act or behave in a manner generally considered to be unsuit-
able, his permit may be revoked forthwith or may not be revalidated at
the end of the academic year on 31st December. In either case it is
then incumbent upon the student to return to his home.
Students who desire permission to enter New Zealand in order to complete
short courses of commercial training, and whose applications are recommended
and fully sponsored by an appropriate official authority, will be sympathetically
considered provided they are enrolled for full-time study at a reputable school
or college in that country, and that they do not accept employment in any firm
or business. There are virtually no facilities for vocational training in the sense
of trade or technical training, which is conducted in New Zealand mainly on
an apprenticeship basis.
Subject to the usual conditions, girls approved by the Division of Nursing in
New Zealand for training in that country are admitted to selected hospitals,
and students selected for initial or further study by denominational organizations
such as the Catholic Church or the Methodist Missionary Society are admitted
to Juniorates, Convents or Missionary. Schools.
The type of education provided by the Missionary Colleges in New Zealand
includes a restricted course of academic study together with several units of a
technical nature such as sewing, cooking, carpentry, etc., and, for the male
students, elementary agriculture.
Nauru: The Administration has recorded its appreciation of those Australian
institutions which made training facilities available to its people. It would
welcome information concerning any similar institutions in New Zealand.
RESOLUTION No. 29: The Conference requests that the
Commission recommend to member Governments that they
should see to it that initiation into manual training already
existing in the programmes in higher classes of primary
schools should not be neglected.
A review of manual training facilities throughout the area, and recommendations
regarding their future development, are included in the Derrick Report on the
vocational training of island peoples. (See Resolutions 25, 26 and 27.)
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
American Samoa: All students in the High School taking teacher training
complete a course in elementary woodwork. Limited vocational training is also
provided in the elementary and the junior and senior high schools. The vocational
school provides training for adults in woodwork and carpentry, auto mechanics
and machine shop operation and agriculture.


Length of
Course
No. of
Students
Remarks
Auto Mechanics ...
15 months
40
Students are taught in the shop on
a full-time basis. Classes will be
reduced to 15 men on Jan. 1, 1952,
and the programme will terminate
on June 30, 1952.
Agriculture
. i yr. or more
300
Plans call for employment of 150
students in extension work on
government farms, initially on a
half-time basis.
Woodworking
1 yr.
30
Students complete approximately
five projects per year.
In 1950 a United States Government specialist visited American Samoa to
plan a new programme for the vocational school. As a result a one-year full-time
course in basic woodwork was started in 1950. Two additional progressively
advanced courses are also available. Qualified instructors have been placed in
charge of the carpentry and auto mechanics shops.
The Vocational School is attended by 370 students who are enrolled in various
courses of training as follows;
The course in woodworking includes instruction in carpentry, and students
from the High School utilize vocational school courses for instruction in wood-
shop. Courses in home economics and agriculture are offered m the High School.
British Solomon Islands Protectorate: For comments see under Resolution 22.
Cook Islands: As stated under Resolution 25, attention to this type of training
is increasing. A manual training instructor has been appointed and classes have
commenced in Rarotonga and Atiu. It is proposed next year to start similar
classes in all islands of the lower Group.
Fiji: All male teachers at the training college undergo a thorough course in
woodwork, while selected teachers have a further intensive course of one year.
In addition to the centre at Suva, specialized technical centres have been estab-
lished at Vatukoula and Levuka. Two more are planned for Lautoka and
Labasa, and four technical central schools for the island of Viti Levu. An
engineer has recently been added to the staff of the Suva Technical Centre.
French Oceania: See answer to Resolution No. 25.
Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony: For comments see under Resolution 22.
Nauru: This resolution is noted with approval. The importance of manual
training in the higher classes of the primary schools is appreciated.
New Caledonia: The pupils of the Native Teachers’ Training School take regular
courses in practical carpentry and agriculture. In some schools of the Catholic
and Protestant Missions the older pupils receive agricultural training and some
instruction in motor mechanics. Most village schools are equipped in such a
way as to allow the teacher to instruct his pupils in use of the principal tools
and the application of the usual agricultural techniques.
Papua and New Guinea: Manual training in primary schools is at present gener-
ally carried out through the medium of handcrafts, which provide training in
the handling of simple tools and materials.
A comprehensive programme of work in handcrafts for native schools has
been drawn up. A handcrafts officer, accompanied by trained native assistants,
makes extensive tours throughout the territory giving handcraft demonstrations.
At the Manual Training Annex at Higaturu, Papua, training in wood-work is


given special attention, while at the Buin Education Centre in New Guinea,
outstanding results have been achieved, not only in general woodwork but in
cane furniture making.
Tonga: Except in the case of one school, manual training in the higher classes
of the primary schools is not at the moment practicable in Tonga, nor is it
likely to be for some years. This matter will, however, be kept in view.
RESOLUTION No. 30: The Conference requests that the
Commission endeavour to secure agreement as regards the
language to be used as the means of instruction in all
centralized vocational training institutions.
The Commission noted this resolution but deferred further consideration until
the report on S.i (vocational training) had been examined. (See Resolutions
25, 26 and 27.)
Agenda Item No. 6 (C) .........CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES
RESOLUTION No. 31: The Conference notes that the
delegates from Territories where co-operative movements
have not been established have derived great help and
encouragement from the accounts given by delegates from
Territories where co-operative societies are firmly established.
This resolution, stressing as it does the value of the conference as a means
for exchanging views and information, was noted with appreciation by the
Commission at its Fifth Session.
New Caledonia; The territory would be particularly interested in any documen-
tation on the co-operative movement, which in New Caledonia has not yet gone
beyond European groups. There is at present only one Central Agricultural
Co-operative in Noumea, and it does not extend to indigenous peoples.
RESOLUTION No. 32: The Conference requests that the
Commission explore the possibility of establishing an inter-
territorial co-operative buying and selling society in Australia
and for New Zealand. The purpose of such an inter-territorial
organization, which might comprise all Territories partici-
pating in this Conference, would be—
(a) to facilitate transactions between co-operatives in such
territories; and
(b) generally to facilitate their imports and exports.
The Commission and Research Council gave this proposal full consideration,
but it was finally decided that any action would be premature until the co-
operative movement was more securely established in the territories.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
Cook Islands: For comments see under Resolution No. 33.
RESOLUTION No. 33: The Conference recommends that
the Commission should gather at its headquarters full infor-
mation on the functioning of co-operative societies, both in
South Pacific Territories and in other similar Territories.
The documentation might also cover information regarding
Community Advancement Societies. This documentation
should be available to Administrations who might request it.


A “Bibliography of Documentary Material on Co-operation in the South
Pacific” has been prepared and circulated by the Commission. Stocks of all
publications listed in the bibliography are held at the Social Development
Section’s office in Sydney, and supplied on request to the territories. Five
territorial administrations have already obtained co-operative documents from
the Commission in this way.
The publication in recognized journals of four articles on co-operation in the
area was arranged for by the Commission; one article was circulated in the
Social Development Committee Circular series and an account of Rural Progress
Societies in Papua is being prepared.
In addition to information on co-operation within the area a stock of general
reference material on co-operative societies is being built up and copies of the
material are being forwarded to territorial administrations on request.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
Cook Islands: The Administration is interested in the formation of co-operative
societies. Mr. H. E. Maude, Executive Officer for Social Development, recently
visited the Cook Islands and while there investigated the prospects of reorganizing
the co-operative movement in the Group. He made a careful study of the past
history of the movement in the Cook Islands, and is now preparing a report and
recommendations for the consideration of the New Zealand Government.
French Oceania: There are about fifteen co-operative societies in the territory; all
are agricultural in character. The particular objective of some of these societies
is the curing of vanilla. The texts governing co-operative societies are;
1. The order of December 13th, 1932, on the establishment and organization
of Agricultural Co-operatives and Associations —Bulletin Officiel des E.F.O.
1933, page 63.
2. The law of September 10th, 1947, on the statute of co-operation. Journal
Officiel des E.F.O. 1947, page 519.
3. The law of July 24th, 1867, on the societies—Bulletin Officiel 1874, page
141, article 49 of which was amended by the law of March 2nd, 1943,
promulgated in overseas territories by order dated August 14th, 1946.
No. 46.1864 —Journal Officiel des E.F.O. 1947, page 68 —this same article
49 was again amended by the law of September 18th, 1949, now being
extended to the Territory.
Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony: The Government is prepared to assist in the
assembly of material on co-operative societies.
Nauru: The Administration ha? offered to supply the Commission with any
information needed in the functioning of co-operative societies and community
advancement societies.
Western Samoa: The Government has for some time past been collecting informa-
tion preparatory to drafting legislation on this subject. A Co-operatives Bill was
tabled at the August, 1951, Session of the Legislative Assembly.
RESOLUTION No. 34: The Conference submits that the
Commission should make recommendations to member
Governments that they provide facilities for representatives
of other Administrations to study on the spot in South
Pacific Territories the practical functioning of co-operatives.
The Commission considered this resolution at its Fifth Session. It was felt
that any Government which was requested to provide facilities of this nature
would have no hesitation in according them. The Commission has furnished
advice to one territorial administration at its request, on the means for arranging
such a visit.


ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES
American Samoa: The development of rural co-operatives similar to producer
or consumer co-operatives in other areas has been influenced by the system of
communal land and property ownership in American Samoa. As a result, special
types of co-operatives have developed under government sponsorship.
The Copra Fund most resembles a producers’ co-operative marketing agency.
The sale and export of the commodity is handled by the Director of Administra-
tive Services acting for the Government of American Samoa. He receives the
recommendations of the Copra Advisory Committee, which is composed of
administrative and legislative leaders from the Samoan government, and pur-
chases copra directly from individual producers in the village. Surplus credits
from the operations of the Fund, if any, are reinvested in capital equipment
such as warehouses, dock facilities and village storage sheds.
The Department of Samoan Industries acts as a producers’ co-operative
marketing agency for the sale of Samoan handicraft and curio items and functions
much like the Copra Fund under the Director of Administrative Services. The
Department is empowered to enforce fair trade practices to assist the producer
in obtaining fair prices for his products.
Under Section 1520 of the Code of American Samoa, authority is granted
for the establishment of a Commodity Administrator for Co-operative Conserva-
tion with powers to maintain “an adequate control of foods and other critical
consumer items normally stocked for sale by the local merchants, to insure their
conservation, to regulate the supply and price of said items, to prevent hoarding,
and to regulate imports and exports of all goods and merchandise to and from
American Samoa.” Since the Commodity Administrator arrangement is generally
regarded as an emergency proposal, the special organization is not required at
the present time.
Under the Code of American Samoa, co-operatives are encouraged for the
construction and maintenance of village schools. In the past, the powers and
functions of these co-operatives have been along well-defined lines.
For example, upon the approval of the initial construction or upon approval
of additions and repairs to school buildings by the Board of Education of
American Samoa, the village concerned is required to furnish any land needed
for the school free of charge and the procurement of materials and labor is
carried forward on a co-operative basis between the village and the central
government. Technical advice, heavy structural materials, blueprints, and safety
regulations commonly are furnished by the Director of Public Works for
American Samoa. The Director of Education advises the village government
on other matters.
The village government, on the other hand, decides whether a school shall
be erected in the first place, and, if so, where its site shall be, whether it will
service nearby communities, on what basis labor shall be supplied, and other
questions where the consent of the governed and the interests of the consumer
are paramount. Upon the completion of the project, the functions of the
co-operative arrangement cease and the relationship is terminated.
The Government of American Samoa will welcome the opportunity to provide
facilities and accommodation for representatives of other administrations in the
South Pacific area who wish to visit Samoa in order to study the special types
of co-operative marketing agencies which have been developed within the
territory. Wherever possible, advance notice of any visit should be given several
weeks prior to arrival so that appropriate arrangements can be made.
British Solomon Islands Protectorate: The Administration considers that at the
present early stage, it would be preferable if experts on co-operatives from other
Pacific territories could visit the Solomons and give advice after studying local
conditions.
Fiji : The officers of the Co-operative Section of the Department of Agriculture
will be pleased to show any representatives through the Registry of the Agricul-
ture Department’s headquarters in Suva, and to take them out among the


societies. The annual and any other reports on the co-operative societies can
also be made available to those interested.
Officers of the Co-operative Section are mainly occupied in an endeavour
to consolidate the position of societies registered during the past two years.
Progress among the Fijians continues. slowly, the work being still educational
rather than functional. Results are encouraging in areas where communications
are good and educational facilities reasonably advanced.
A society has recently been established by the Ellice Island immigrants now
settled on Kioa Island.
The interest of the Indian people in co-operation is steadily growing as
education in its principles is propagated by Co-operative Officers. Three
resource societies are already in operation, while promising enquiries are being
received and followed up.
A full account of co-operative activity in 1950 appears in the Annual Report
of the Registrar, which will be published shortly.
Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony: Facilities for representatives of other adminis-
trations to study the local co-operative movement will be provided. Enquiries
should be addressed to the Resident Commissioner’s office. Details will be
arranged in conjunction with the Co-operative Societies Officer.
Nauru: Visits by representatives of other territories to study Nauruan co-
operatives would be approved.
Netherlands New Guinea: The Administration considers it would be difficult to
encourage active study of the co-operative movement in the area. However, it
is planned to exchange information through the Commission with experts in
other parts of the South Pacific.
Papua and New Guinea: Representatives of other Governments could visit the
area to examine its co-operatives.
Tonga: There are no co-operative societies in Tonga.
RESOLUTION A T o. 35: The Conference recognizes the
importance of taking all possible steps to avoid risk of con-
flict between newly-established co-operative societies and the
existing Native Authorities of an area.
The Commission noted this resolution at its Fifth Session. Reconsideration
of the project at the Sixth Session resulted in a modification of its terms of
reference.
ACTION TAKEN BY TERRITORIES: ,
Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony: The Government has this problem under
immediate review.
RESOLUTION No. 36: The Conference learns with interest
that the Commission, on the recommendation of the Research
Council, has already included in its list of approved projects
a study of the development of the co-operative movement
throughout the area.
The Commission noted this resolution at its Fifth Session.


III. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
In the field of economic development, two major topics were con-
sidered. These were fisheries methods, and the improvement and
diversification of food crops. The Conference’s views and recommen-
dations regarding both were embodied in six resolutions. These are
given below, together with brief details of action, either taken or
planned, reported by administrations of territories in the Commission
area.
Agenda Item No. 7 (A) FISHERIES METHODS
RESOLUTION No. 31: The Conference, recognizing the
importance of fisheries in the South Pacific area, both as a
source of economic wealth and a means towards improved
food supply of the inhabitants, is glad to know that the Work
Programme of the Research Council already includes the
study of fishery methods in their many indigenous and com-
mercial aspects. The Conference suggests that the following
matters are worthy of special attention by the Research
Council:
(a) marketing possibilities, both within and without the
South Pacific area;
(b) the processing of fish by drying, salting and smoking, and
the preparation of fish meal and fish fertilizers;
(c) the poisonous nature of certain species of fish in certain
areas and in some seasons;
(d) the cultivation of fish in ponds; and
(e) the possibilities of a deep-sea fishing technique capable of
use by the peoples of the South Pacific area.
The Research Council recommended, and the Commission approved, that a
fisheries expert be employed for three years to conduct a survey of the area and
make recommendations relating to future development and research (Project E.y).
Further Research Council recommendations that the Commission also approved
concerned the transport, storage, processing and marketing of fish. The Council
considered that the problem of poisonous fish [raised in paragraph (c) of the
above resolution] was not at present important. With regard to fish-pond culture
[paragraph (d) of above] the Council recommended the establishment of fresh
and salt water ponds in suitable areas. It was suggested that the development
of deep-sea fishing techniques, (e), should be a matter for preliminary investiga-
tion by the Commission’s fisheries expert.
The Commission later decided that it would be advantageous to the execution
of the project if this appointment were not proceeded with until a conference
of fisheries experts had been held, to define more precisely the work which the
Commission should undertake in this field.
A fisheries conference will therefore be held at Commission headquarters,
Noumea, during 1952. Membership of the conference will comprise two delegates
from each member Government, and such other representatives as Governments
may desire to send at their own expense.


ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
Cook Islands: The Administration considers that the fisheries resources of
that territory are not extensive. Except on Rarotonga, there are sufficient
domestic supplies of fish, but little prospect of a large export trade. For this
reason, draft regulations are being enacted to protect local fish supplies.
Cultivation of fish in ponds is practised on a small scale in the Manihiki
Lagoon, part of which is walled off for the purpose. A similar technique is
used in Pukapuka Lagoon. The possibility of introducing deep-sea fishing
techniques has not been overlooked.
French Oceania: Various attempts to find a market for the products of local
fisheries have all failed. The last, made by an American concern from Honolulu,
was abandoned in view of the high cost of operation. There is a small cannery
in Papeete which cans tuna, but production is limited to local requirements.
Nauru: With reference to Section (d) of the resolution, the Administration
advises that only milk fish are being cultivated in ponds, and that other types
for breeding in ponds would be appreciated.
New Caledonia: The Laboratories of Biological Oceanography and Marine
Ecology of the French Institute of Oceania are making a thorough study of the
different points enumerated in this resolution.
Important and well-illustrated studies have been prepared and published, in
particular:
(a) Fishing methods in South Pacific territories.
(b) Present situation and prospects of the fishing industry in South Pacific
territories.
(c) Fishing and fishing industry in New Caledonia.
(d) An example of island economy in the New Caledonian Archipelago.
(e) Preliminary study of the ichthyofaunistic constituents of the main course
of New Caledonian rivers, the nutritional value of certain of them and
fishing methods used.
RESOLUTION No. 38: The Conference suggests that the
Commission should publish a book illustrating the fish of the
South Pacific area and using both scientific and local names.
The Commission has decided that the publication of this book should be
postponed until the fisheries expert has surveyed the whole area.
New Caledonia: The French Institute of Oceania has undertaken a faunistic
inventory, both qualitative and quantitative, and has established a “draft
definition of the different elements in the diagnosis of fish” which has been
submitted to various Pacific ichthyologists.
RESOLUTION No. 39: The Conference has learned -with
alarm that, in some parts of the South Pacific, fishery
methods include the use of poisons and of explosives, and
records the view that, wherever possible, these practices
should be prohibited.
The Research Council recommended that the fisheries expert to be engaged
by the Commission should advise member Governments on the problems of fish
poisoning.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
American Samoa: Section 847 1/2 of the Code of American Samoa, as amended,
prohibits the use of poison and explosives in fishing waters and makes the
violation of this provision a criminal act.


British Solomon Islands Protectorate: The use of explosives for fishing is forbidden
by law, but there is a native method of catching fish by using the poison found
in a bush vine. However, this is not extensively used, and it is considered unwise
to forbid it at present.
Cook Islands: At its 1950 Session, the Cook Islands Legislative Council passed
the Cook Islands Fishing Ordinance prohibiting the use of explosives to catch
or destroy fish in the Cook Islands. This supplements the Cook Islands Fishing
Regulations of 1931 prohibiting the use of poison in catching fish in the islands,
and of legislation passed in 1916 governing the possession and use of explosives.
Fiji : The use of explosives for the purpose of killing fish is legally prohibited.
A fishing organisation which was using methods of fishing requiring the limited
use of explosives to assist with netting, and for which the issuing of special
permits is authorised, has now ceased operations in Fiji waters. The casual use
of explosives continues to be under legal prohibition. No further action has been
found necessary to prohibit the use of poisons and explosives in catching fish.
These two practices are not common locally.
French Oceania: The use of poison and explosives to catch fish has been pro-
hibited since 1930 by the law of February 13th, 1930, amending articles 3, 6 and
16 of the law of January 9th, 1952, on inshore fishing—Journal Officiel dcs
E.F.0., 1930, page 168 —and by the order of July 18th, 1933, regulating river
fishing in French Oceania —Journal Officiel des E.F.0., 1933, page 348.
Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony: The taking of fish by use of explosives is
forbidden by law. The High Commissioner can also make regulations prohibiting
methods injurious to the development of stocks of fish. The use of locally-made
poisons to stun fish is an old native custom that is little practised in the Colony
today, except at Ocean Island.
Nauru: Neither poisons nor explosives have ever been used in Nauru.
New Caledonia: Fishing with explosives and poisons has been prohibited in the
territory by decrees dating from 1912 and 1914. Vegetable poisons were formerly
widely used by indigenous peoples, especially in the Loyalty Islands. They are
now used only very rarely at sea; never in rivers.
Papua and New Guinea: The Administration prohibits the use of explosives for
fishing purposes in territorial waters. As far as is known, no poisons are used
other than those obtained from naturally growing plants, whose use is an accepted
native technique. There does not appear to be any need for concern at their use,
although, if the population increases substantially, the matter would require
further consideration. In any case it would be very difficult to prohibit a
technique which is an inherent native custom.
Tonga: The use of poisons or explosives for fishing is prohibited under Section 9
of the Fisheries Regulation Act, 1923.
Western Samoa: The killing of fish by explosives has been prohibited for many
years. Derris elliptica, the roots of which are used to poison fish, was declared
a noxious plant in 1948. Agricultural inspectors are instructed to root out and
destroy any Derris elliptica seen during their inspections and to take court action
against the occupier of the land.
Agenda Item No. 7 (B) .. IMPROVEMENT AND DIVERSI-
FICATION OF FOOD CROPS
RESOLUTION No. 40: The Conference feels that greater
attention should be paid to research, soil survey and exten-
sion work in order to improve and increase the diversification
of food and export crops and to preventive methods to cope
with pests and diseases, with emphasis on the teaching,
demonstration and extension of improved simple farming
methods; and, where possible, to the introductions of
mechanized cultivation, processing and transport. The Con-
ference recommends that the Commission advise each
Territory to take such steps to these ends as may be beneficial.


The Commission noted that action pertaining to this resolution is already,
being taken in part in certain projects in the field of economic development.
Steps to improve and increase the variety of food and export crops are being
taken at the Introduction Garden at Naduruloulou in Fiji. The Commission is
now concentrating on its development as the one central Introduction Garden
for the area (Project E.i). A grant-in-aid under the 1951 budget for £Stg. 1,450
was made to the Government of Fiji by the Commission. Further assistance in
the form of grants-in-aid up to £5tg.3,500 during 1952 has also been authorised.
The improvement of five major export crops will be undertaken (Project E.a).
Specialists will be engaged by the Commission to investigate the copra industry
and the status of the cacao, coffee and tea industries (and the possible extension
of production of cacao). The rice industry will also be investigated.
The subsistence of indigenous peoples forms the subject of Project E.B. The
Executive Officer for Economic Development is collecting from territories, data
on domestic and wild food materials, methods of processing and preservation of
foodstuffs, and farming tools. Provision has also been made for assistance by
grants-in-aid during 1952 with experiments on the distillation of sea water, using
solar stills.
With regard to preventive measures to cope with pests and diseases, a confer-
ence of specialists on plant and animal quarantine was held in Suva in April,
1951 (Project E. 9). A full report has been issued.
Main objects of the conference were to work out a practical method of
collecting and collating information on pests, diseases and weeds likely to be
spread within the region, and to study the possibility of establishing uniform
quarantine regulations for the South Pacific area.
In accordance with a conference recommendation two committees—the Animal
Advisory Committee and the Plant Quarantine Committee —have been set up,
comprising officials and specialists from both member Governments and
territorial administrations. These will serve as technical committees to advise
the Commission in dealing with plant and animal quarantine matters.
Following a further recommendation by the Conference, the Commission has
approved the appointment of a research officer in the field of plant and animal
quarantine. Applications have been received for this post and an early appoint-
ment is anticipated.
With regard to current research in the South Pacific (Project E. 13) the
Commission is establishing a routine system of assembling and distributing
documentation on research in agriculture, forestry, biology and fisheries.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
American Samoa: The status of extension work has been described in connection
with Resolution 29 above. The Department of Agriculture has, since its estab-
lishment late in 1948, continuously engaged in plant experimentation with a
view towards the diversification of subsistence and cash crops, the control of
pests and diseases and the improvement of marketing facilities for local agricul-
tural products. Contacts have been established with the adjacent administrations
in Western Samoa, Fiji, Hawaii, and other areas to promote the exchange of
information and facilities. As described in Resolution 29, a programme of
instruction in agricultural techniques has been established in the High School
and Vocational School.
Several hundred pods of cacao were recently obtained from the New Zealand
Reparation Estates in Western Samoa and were distributed among interested
Samoans on an experimental basis. On the basis of a survey made by Mr. Colin
Marshall of the British Colonial Forestry Service, the Director of Agriculture
and the Director of the Vocational School have recommended to the Governor
the establishment of a timbering project. A local business firm has undertaken
the timbering operation along the lines suggested by the Marshall report.
A recent experiment with the freezing of papaya indicates that this product
can be shipped frozen. However, implementation of the project is delayed until
freezer cargo space on ships visiting American Samoa becomes available.
Initiation of intensive measures to reduce the effect of the coconut rhinoceros


beetle on copra production has been delayed pending the report of Dr. N. L. H.
Krauss, entomologist for the Territory of Hawaii, who left on June 17, 1951, for
Africa in search of parasites to control the beetle. Dr. Krauss’s expedition was
sponsored by the Government of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands and
the Pacific Science Board and the results of his findings will be transmitted to
the U.S. territories in the Pacific area as well as to the South Pacific Commission.
The Code of American Samoa requires the chief of each village to assemble all
able-bodied males of 15 years and over on a designated day, when a search for
beetles is planned. Samples of the effect of the beetle are sent in and the results
analyzed.
In accordance with Fono Resolution XVI of the November, I9s°j Session, that
Samoan language literature dealing with fruit tree, hog, and poultry diseases
be distributed to the public, steps have been taken to make the information
available.
British Solomon Islands Protectorate: The recommendations contained in this
resolution already form the main part of the policy of the Agricultural
Department.
Cook Islands: The Crop Development Officer for the Group took up duty on
12th July. He has taken over a 44-acre block (17.7 hectares) on Rarotonga and
is developing it as an experimental farm.
The New Zealand Department of Scientific and Industrial Research is con-
ducting a soil survey in islands of the lower Group. The results of this, together
with information which will be available from the census on agriculture, will
prepare the way for a land utilization survey.
The citrus re-planting scheme adopted in 1945 for islands in the lower Group
provides for the re-planting of 325 acres of citrus trees. During the past year
125 acres were re-planted. Mechanized equipment is extensively used in the
lower Group, particularly in connection with this scheme.
Citrus fruit for export is treated with ethylene gas by a method which
improves the attractiveness of the fruit and has reduced wastage through stem-rot
from 50% to from 3% to 5%.
The local Department of Agriculture makes available information on the
control of local pests and diseases, and has stocks of suitable insecticides and
spraying equipment for sale.
An entomologist from the Cawthron Institute visited Rarotonga in 1949 to
make a survey of insects and pests.
Fiji: Under the agricultural policy of the Colony the Department of Agriculture
carries out research work on crop and live stock improvements. The general
standard of farming is being improved by extending the advisory service to
farmers. All matters raised in the resolution are receiving attention.
The Director of Agriculture has published in the Agricultural Journal a paper
entitled “Agricultural Policy and Research in Fiji” which was delivered at the
Seventh Pacific Science Congress.
The projects that are being actively pursued on experiment stations are
reviewed each year in the annual reports of the Department, and the results and
conclusions of completed projects will be published from time to time in the
Fiji Agricultural Journal.
Progress has been made along the following lines:
(a) Plant introduction and quarantine.
(b) Crop selection and variety work.
(c) Fertilizer and spraying trials.
(d) Pest and disease control.
(e) Mechanization.
At the Plant and Introduction Station at Naduruloulou, during 1950, 250
varieties of food and other economic crop plants were established. A list of
these has been prepared and will be followed in the near future by a list of
varieties available for distribution.
During 1951, to date, introductions made at the Station included root crops,
field crops, pasture plants, pulses, fruit crops (citrus cacao, bananas, etc.), oil


seed crops and fibres. Attention has also been given to vegetables and to plants
especially suitable for cultivation in coral atolls. These include varieties of root
crops (sweet potatoes, arrowroot, etc.), coconuts, pandanus and several legumes.
New varieties of rice have been introduced.
(a) Crop selection work: This has been carried out at the principal agri-
cultural station where extensive collections of varieties of food plants
(rice, tapioca, dalo and sweet potatoes) have been brought together.
(b) Fertilizer trials: Fertilizer and manurial trials with grains, root crops
and bananas have been carried out and are producing valuable results.
(c) Pest and disease control: The distribution of beneficial insects for the
control of crop pests, weeds and houseflies continues —and during the
year the Entomologist introduced from Queensland a seedfly (Euaresta
inaequalis) for control of the noxious weed Noogoora Burr.
The use of Dee Dust (2% D.D.T.) for the control of banana scab-
moth has been proved the most effective available and has been intro-
duced to growers throughout the banana areas. Demonstrations on the
control of leaf spot disease of bananas in the field continue.
(d) Mechanization: Mechanization aiming at the improvement of farming
methods has received much attention. Special investigations have been
carried out on stations and several major demonstrations given.
French Oceania: The improvement of subsistence crops, the control of crop pests,
and the introduction of improved farming techniques and of mechanized cultiva-
tion are the very reasons why the Department of Agriculture and Stock was set
up, and the aims to which it devotes its staff and financial resources.
As concerns a soil survey, the territory is expecting a visit from a soil specialist
from the French Institute of Oceania. In addition, an agronomist specializing
in overseas agricultural problems arrived from France in 1948-49 to plan a pro-
gramme of work and resarch to be undertaken in the field of agriculture.
Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony: It is proposed with the help of the Commission
to establish an experimental farm at Tarawa. The Government arranges monthly
meetings of the Island Councils and islanders to discuss land problems. By
encouraging rivalry among villages it is hoped to stimulate the people’s interest
in improving their usage of land.
Nauru: The Administration advises that pests and plant diseases are practically
unknown. Droughts are the biggest problem. Copra production, begun on a
small scale, was discontinued for this reason. Extensive storage of rain water
and the use of semi-brackish well water are regarded as the best solutions. The
Administration would appreciate reports of any experiments in hydroponics.
New Caledonia: The French Institute of Oceania has specialists in phytopathology
and agricultural entomology. They have drawn up an inventory of animal and
plant parasites of plants grown in New Caledonia dealing with crops of an
industrial character, fruit crops, subsistence crops, cereals, ornamental plants,
food in store, worked or stored wood. By frequent contact with the farmers and
by demonstration, the Institute specialists are attempting, in collaboration with
the Agricultural Department, to educate them and initiate them in methods of
control. The work in parasitology also extends to the New Hebrides and Wallis
and Futuna Islands.
Tonga: With the recent arrival in the Kingdom of a qualified agricultural
officer (the Kingdom had been without one for some time) extensive research
and instruction along the lines suggested in the Resolution is being commenced.
The experimental farm already owns some machinery and more is on order.
The machinery is made available for hire to private cultivators. Mechanized
agriculture is taught on the farm attached to Tonga College, which is the
Government Secondary School.


Western Samoa: A soil survey of the territory was carried out in 1946, and a
census of agriculture is being conducted. Last year the Department of Agriculture
was re-established to stimulate improvement of simple farming methods. Fourteen
district plantation inspectors have been appointed to extend the services of the
Agriculture Department throughout the territory.
Attention is drawn, however, to the difficulties which beset attempts to intro-
duce mechanized cultivation and extension work in agriculture in Western
Samoa. These comprise, firstly, the volcanic structure of the territory and the
presence of scoria and volcanic refuse in the soil of most areas: secondly, the
Samoan system of land tenure, which does not tend to encourage large cultivated
areas; and thirdly, the fact that the Samoan still remains largely unconvinced
of the desirability of the European view of economic progress.
In Western Samoa, the New Zealand Reparation Estates are making efforts
to introduce new cash crops in high areas not suited for the cultivation of
bananas, coconuts and taro. An experimental plot of 25 acres at 1,300 feet has
been set aside for the planting of a pepper crop. Tea seed has been introduced
in several areas with the help of the Fiji Administration.
RESOLUTION No. 41: This Conference notes with interest
that the Commission has already before it a project (E. 6)
relating to the economic development of low coral atolls, and
trusts that all possible priority may be given to the project,
and recommends that the project should be expanded so as
to include experiments in the use of hydroponics.
The economic development of coral atolls is the subject of Commission Project
E. 6. It is being executed by Dr. L. R. Catala of the Institut Fran?ais d’Oceanie,
Noumea, who, with Madame Catala assisting, has just completed a six-months’
investigation of the ecology and economic development of coral atolls.
While the survey was carried out in the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony,
the island of Tarawa being selected as headquarters, the results will be applicable
for coral atolls and low islands in many other parts of the Pacific. It is antici-
pated that a full report on these investigations will be presented to the Com-
mission early in 1952.
The Pacific Science Board has had teams in the Pacific studying island
ecology and related subjects. One team consisting of eight scientists spent
several months on Arno Atoll in the Lower Marshall Group in 1950. A second
team of five has spent several weeks on Onotoa Atoll in the Gilberts during 1951.
Their primary interest has been a fact-finding study of soils, water, plant life
and ecology, marine life and ecology, and native relations.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony: Dr. and Madame Catala have conducted the
survey under Project E. 6, which the Government greatly appreciates.
New Caledonia: The French Institute of Oceania, which is also carrying out
work on atolls, has just published a study entitled —“Contribution to the
Ecological Study of Coral Islets in the South Pacific —First Elements of Land
and Sea Ecology in Islets off the New Caledonian Coast.”
RESOLUTION No. 42: The Conference draws attention to
the importance of avoiding waste in locally-produced food-
stuffs by the introduction of improved methods of preserva-
tion and storage, and trusts that this topic will receive
attention from the Commission.
The Research Council drew attention to economic development projects related
to this resolution. These are E. 5, official grading of fruit and vegetables, and
E.B, subsistence of indigenous peoples.


With regard to the former, a project report will be issued shortly on the
grading of copra in the area. Useful information . relating to grading practices
for fruit and vegetables has been received from the territories of Western Samoa,
Cook Islands, Fiji, Niue, and Tonga.
With regard to Project E.B, the Executive Officer for Economic Development
is assembling information on domesticated and wild food materials.
The Australian Government has advised that the Division of Transport and
Food Preservation of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organization has issued a report on this question.
ACTION TAKEN IN TERRITORIES:
Cook Islands: Dry-salting, smoking and baking of fillets of fish, and the drying
and leaf-packing of bananas are amongst the methods of food preservation
practised in this territory.
Nauru: The Administrator advises that the introduction of tropical fruits and
vegetables such as bananas, guava, taro and yams would be desirable. At present
the following tropical fruit trees are grown on the island —paw paw, soursop
and mango, and coconut and pandanus.
New Caledonia: An industrialist with specialized knowledge is setting up a fish
cannery. The problem of conservation constitutes one of the important elements
in New Caledonian agricultural production, and a development plan is being
studied with a view to assuring the conservation of products, in particular by
the construction of silos. Finally, there exists a service for the grading of
export crops.


SECOND SOUTH PACIFIC CONFERENCE
Preliminary Arrangements
At the Eighth Session of the Commission, held from 29th October
to 9th November, 1951, it was decided that the Second South Pacific
Conference would be held at Commission headquarters, Noumea,
New Caledonia, immediately preceding the Eleventh Session of the
Commission, i.e., commencing on a date in April, 1953. The follow-
ing agenda was approved:
SECOND SOUTH PACIFIC CONFERENCE: AGENDA
I. Opening by Chairman.
11. Election of General Committee.
111. Statement by Secretary General.
IV. Statements by Deputy Chairman of the Research Council and
Executive Officers for Health, Economic Development and Social
Development. (Opportunity to be given for discussion later in
the Conference of matters arising from these statements.)
V. Resolutions of the First South Pacific Conference—Review of Report
on Action Taken.
VI. Economic Development:
I. Problems of conserving and improving the resources of the
land and water, e.g., soil, forests, land tenure, crops, stock,
fish.
a. Relation of population to resources.
3. Marketing Problems,
VII. Health:
1. Health education of the peoples.
2. Diet and its improvement.
VIII. Social Development:
1. Role of women and women’s organizations in the community.
2. What should a child have been taught by the time it leaves
school ?
IX. Proposals for the Third South Pacific Conference.
X. Report to the South Pacific Commission.


Territories
Number of
Number of Alternates and
Delegates Advisers
Papua .
4
New Guinea (Australian Trust Territory)
2
4
Nauru • ••■
2
La Nouvelle-Caledonie et Dependances
2
Etablissements Franjais d’Oceanie
2
Netherlands New Guinea
2
Western Samoa
2
Tokelau Islands
—-
Cook Islands v
2
Niue
I
Fiji
2
British Solomon Islands Protectorate
2
Gilbert Islands
2
Ellice Islands
2
American Samoa
2
New Hebrides (Condominium)
2
The Commission further agreed that an introductory paper should be presented
on each of the following topics by a delegate from within the jurisdiction of the
Government indicated:
Australia:
France:
Netherlands:
New Zealand:
United Kingdom:
United States of America:
Role of women and women’s organizations in the
community.
Marketing problems.
Health education of the peoples.
What should a child have been taught by the
time it leaves school ?
Diet and its improvement.
Problems of conserving and improving the re-
sources of the land and water, e.g., soil, forests,
land tenure, crops, stock, fish.
The Commission also passed the following resolution;
The Commission, hoping that the Kingdom of Tonga will accept the
invitation to send a delegation to the Conference, invites one of the delegates
from the Kingdom of Tonga to present the introductory paper on the topic,
“Relation of Population to Resources.”
PARTICIPATING TERRITORIES AND COMPOSITION OF DELEGATES
The table below lists the participating territories and indicates the numbers
of delegates, alternates, and advisers who may attend from each.
By an agreement signed at Commission headquarters on November 7th, 1951,
the scope of the Commission was extended to include Guam and the Trust
Territory of the Pacific Islands under United States administration. The matter
of representation of both territories at the Second South Pacific Conference is
under consideration.


Printed by Bridge Printery Pty. Ltd., 117 Reservoir St., Sydney, N.S.W., Australia.
