

Prohibition
Rational and
Inevitable
Or the Evil of Intemperance:
Its Precise Cause and
Rational Remedy
By
Rev. Frank Lade, M.A.
Adelaide: G. Hassell & Son
1917




PROHIBITION:
RATIONAL AND INEVITABLE
THE tide in the affairs of Temperance Reform
is flowing strongly in our favour, and we
must take it at its flood. tOn the swelling volume
of indignation we must float our super-dread-
nought, Prohibition, into the sphere of practical
politics. In all lands whose peoples are locked in
the death-grip of this world war the liquor traffic
is branded as a pirate and a parasite. It is im-
peached as the deadliest foe of national efficiency,
and the hour is opportune for temperance workers
to familiarize and prepossess the public mind with
the idea of the entire
Abolition of the Liquor Traffic.
Opposition to this project will be offered by two
classes in the community, one of which must be
coerced and the other convinced. Those who are
financially interested in the continuance of this
parasitic trade will oppose prohibition with all their
available resource. How formidable that is appears
from a glance at the situation in the Mother Land.
Although in the hour of her destiny Britannia’s
mighty sword arm is being partially paralyzed by


this traffic, and “the men in the trenches are being
betrayed by this enemy at home,” the magnates
of this trade have so far been able to block any
really adequate legislation.* Fortunately, in Aus-
tralia, vested interests are not nearly so powerful,
but long experience has taught us that as a class
brewers and publicans are willing to see drunken-
ness reduced, but not at the expense of their profits.
It would be unfair to say that they do not grieve
over intemperance, but they would grieve far more
over general abstinence, whether enforced or volun-
tary. On this class of opponents arguments for
prohibition are wasted. We must resign ourselves
to coerce them by the bludgeon of legislative decree.
But Before we can seize and wield this weapon,
there is a large class that needs to be convinced
that as regards intoxicating liquor
Abstinence and not Moderation is the
Rational Ideal.
These people admit and deplore the vast and
varied evils of intemperance, but the hackneyed
comment is ever on their lips that these evils flow
“ not from the use, but from the abuse of a perfectly
legitimate beverage.” The lamentable evils con-
nected with the common sale of liquor they re-
gard as abnormal and incidental rather than natural
and inevitable. They take for granted that
moderation is the true ideal in relation to alcoholic
liquor as it undoubtedly is in reference to food and
* This was spoken in November, 1916.


exercise. They overlook the fact that the normal
effect of taking food and exercise is to close the
gates of desire, whereas the normal effect of taking
alcohol is to excite a craving for more.
‘ The Crux of the Whole Question
is that we have discovered no way of preventing
this so-called moderation from merging into excess,
and science tells us that such a search is vain.
There is no way of securing to the moderate
drinker the right to temperate indulgence in his
favourite beverage without at the same time open-
ing the door to its disastrous abuse by all classes.
Popularize moderation as |a national ideal, and as
a people we shall surely achieve drunkenness.
I am not losing sight of the fact that hundreds and
thousands remain moderate all their days; but I am
dealing with the law of the drug alcohol. And it
is pertinent here to quote the late Dr. George
Harley; “For every real drunkard there are fifty
others suffering from the effects of alcohol.” In
the very practice of moderation in alcohol the
drinker is being thrust towards excess. Now this
is not so with regard to food and exercise. Let the
naturally gluttonous man keep himself sternly
within bounds in the use of food for a month, and
the temptation to exceed will be greatly weakened.
By practising temperance in food, temperance be-
comes a confirmed habit. But the more systemati-
cally you practise what is called moderation in
drink, the less likely you are to be satisfied with it.


You cannot so use your system to moderate doses
of alcohol that it will continue to prefer modera-
tion. The whole difference can be stated in one
sentence,
Alcohol even in Moderation Produces
Morbid Bodily Conditions,
food does not.
There is nothing remarkable in the fact that so
many men find moderation impossible. The
characteristic action of the drug, alcohol, is to
create a craving for itself. Hence it is quite Utopian
to aim at keeping all men moderate by moral in-
fluences. The rational objective is to make all men
abstainers by act of parliament. Let us bear in
mind that whilst the evil of intemperance is multi-
farious in its horrid effects, in its cause it is simple
and susceptible of radical and final treatment. It is
a wide branching upas tree, but it all springs from
One Definite Tap-root.
In this respect it differs entirely from gambling.
The root of intemperance is not in human nature,
but in an external drug. To draw out the evil of
gambling you do not need to add anything to
human nature. The tendency to gamble is innate
and organic. It can be discouraged but cannot be
eradicated. But you cannot get out of human
nature the hideous product of drunkenness with-
out deliberately putting a drug into the system.


Hence if we stop the supply of liquor we shall
have no intemperance.
From this it follows that intemperance is not
traceable to general moral instability for whose
removal we must look to moral and religious
teaching. Some urge us to lend all our energies to
the task of making all men saintly and then they
assure us all men will be sober. But that is only
on condition that all men are abstainers. Modera-
tion is as unreasonable and as dangerous for the
saint as for the sinner. No fineness of spiritual
instincts or thoroughness of education will enable
a man to take intoxicants with impunity. The
practice of moderation in drink is
A Physiological Blunder,
rather than an ethical offence, and consequently
education and religion will cure drunkenness, not
by helping men to walk the slippery slope of
moderation, but by enjoining total abstinence. If we
follow the emphatic teaching of science and classify
alcoholics with morphia victims and not with
gambling, we shall see that access to alcohol should
and can be made as difficult as is access to morphia.
We must get rid of that idea which a misinter-
pretation of Paul’s “weak brother” passages has
fostered—that the man who yields to the craving
for liquor is morally less stable than the man who
remains moderate. The true explanation is that
the man who goes under is physically more respon-
sive to the appeal of the drug. As regards this thing


no one knows whether he is “strong’ or “weak
until he experiments. And this suggestion of
experiment reminds one of the methods prescribed
for distinguishing whether a growth was a mush-
room or a toadstool: eat it, and if you live it is a
mushroom!
The links that intervene between moderation
and excess in the use of alcohol are primarily phy-
siological—almost as purely so as are those which
intervene between the taking of a poison and the
death that ensues. The man who takes strychnine
inadvertently dies*as swiftly and as surely as a man
who takes it wilfully. Similarly if a man is dosed
with alcohol, with or without his consent, he will
be changed into a drunkard.
If the above plain truths were more generally
recognized we should view the dipsomaniac with
less surprise and less scorn, and we should be more
impatient of the folly of the moderate drinker who
dallies on a declivity that shelves ever more and
more steeply to the pit of drunkenness. We should
see that the most rational form of abstinence to
promote is that which flows unconsciously and
inevitably from the absence of liquor, and we
should never rest until the drink traffic—this inde-
fensible relic of a dark age, this waster of our re-
sources, our nation’s chief traitor in the hour of
peril — was brushed from the face of our civiliza-
tion by one vigorous sweep of the legislative
broom.
G. Hassell & Son, Printers, 104 Currie Street, Adelaide
