

PROHIBITION
A National REMEDY for
a National EVIL.
"THE REASON."
"THE MASTER METHOD."
“WHY DELAY?"
A BUGLE CALL
To All Citizens of Good Will
REV. THOMAS DAVIES
League)
(A Vice-President Australian National Prohibition
Wi
2
X
H
o
H ui
W 2
2 x
< h
CQ 2
H
X
>
r H
-X
r 2
o >
< 2
rn
H
o
xX
h
< H
-r lu
X
H
<
DC
H
PRICE TWOPENCE.
Sydney, New South Wales. 1917.
■A. C. WOHtD" PRINT.


Life Members, £5
Membership Active Members, 10s. per annum
' Associate Members, 2s. 6d. per annum
PLATFORM
Total Prohibition by the will of the People
expressed in due form of law, of the manufacture,
importation, and sale of Alcoholic Liquors as beverages.
Everyone desiring to rid our Country of this
great evil should unite with us. Union is Strength.
The Master Method —Total Prohibition of the
Liquor Trafic can only be secured by combined effort
and active propaganda.




Evil
PROHIBITION X
iC AUSTRALIA )
Australian
National Prohibition League
HEADQUARTERS:
430 Bourke-street, Melbourne, Victoria.
Life Members, £5
Membership Active Members, 10s. per annum
' Associate Members, 2s. 6d. per annum
PLATFORM
Total Prohibition by the will of the People
expressed in due form of law, of the manufacture,
importation, and sale of Alcoholic Liquors as beverages.
Everyone desiring to rid our Country of this
great evil should unite with us. Union is Strength.
The Master Method —Total Prohibition of the
Liquor Trafic can only be secured by combined effort
and active propaganda.


ROHIBITION.
A Bugle Call to All.
REV. THOMAS DAVIES.
H if ore wort).
The fight against this indefensible traffic in
alcohol, this relic of a dark age, this heartless tyrant,
this waster of our human and material resources,
our Empire’s chief traitor in the hour of war, bitter-
ness, and agony, cannot cease. It must go on. Win
or lose, but we’ll wjn unless God fails, and truth
dies out, yes, we’ll win out for sure.
For over thirty years the vision of a saloonless
Australia has been before me, a passion of desire
has held my soul. In some feeble way I have
laboured with others in the faith. In pulpit and on
platform my voice has been heard in words of ap-
peal or condemnation. In,the press I have gladly
accepted opportunity for propagandist service, with
some fruit; also taken a share in organisation work-
In the earlier years our work was none too
popular, small encouragement even from friends,
kindly disposed people sometimes indulged in a bit
of banter or benevolent pity for the Temperance
Fanatic* saying, as they did to John D. Woolley, “My
dear Woolley, you are a good man, but you are pig-
headed and fanatical. You have no dimension to


your mind, you are trying to do what is impossible,
to legislate in advance of public sentiment. You are
right in the abstract, but you are impracticable, and
so on.” We have shared in the smooth-tongued pla-
titudes. And at times the fierce opposition of the
trafficers and their friends had to be patiently borne.
Of course the idea of “National Prohibition” was
treated with scorn, regarded as utopian, and its ad-
vocacy as a sort of mental aberration.
It was a time of seed sowing, and I rejoice for
the germinating and signs of harvest now visible.
The minor reforms, Local Option, and Early
Closing, have gone far to show that “National Pro-
hibition” is but the logical sequence.
The widening of the franchise to include
woman’s vote was one of our ideals; its consumma-
tion has brought the traffic to the judgment bar of
the home-keepers, with promising results.
The remarkable progress of Prohibition in the
American States and Canada, has challenged atten-
tion and inspired hope. But probably the awakening
that has come within the Churches is the most
potent factor in the rising tide of prohibition convic-
tion in Australia.
It is a matter for thankfulness that most of the
churches have adopted uncompromising resolutions
declaring for Prohibition, as the only remedy for
the terrible evil of the liquor traffic, and calling for
earnest effort on the part of the Church communities
to hasten the day of its consummation.
All this brings my vision of a real Prohibition
Australia so much the nearer.
I have felt moved to compile and issue this
pamphlet as a small contribution to the propaganda
that must now be more fully and earnestly waged,
in the enlistment campaign for the rapidly enlarging
army of convinced Prohibitionists, who shall fight
victoriously, and to a finish, this age-long entrenched
enemy of mankind. None must mistake the magni-
ture of the struggle, or the forces of the enemy.


The traffic has unquestionable advantages in
the fact of being entrenched behind long-established
habits, and social customs, embedded in ideas of
good fellowship. Probably its greatest hold upon
society is found in its enormous money power; its
goldermtentacles grip scores of thousands of hidden
shareholders. So that the specious cry of vested in-
terests is a potent appeal to selfish instincts, and
those oblivious to the common suffering entailed
upon society as a whole. 1 his brutal money blud-
geon is largely responsible for the pur-blindness of
most of our politicians, leading them to a shame-
less reluctance to listen to the mandates by the
people for legislative action, even in the way of
tightening up the recognised slack strands of regu-
latory laws and administration, and the very appar-
ent fear on their part to trust the people to vote on
the straight issue of State, and National Option.
In the sending out of this little booklet, let me
candidly say, I do not lay claim to special qualifi-
cations or wisdom beyond that of many of my es-
teemed fellow workers. Neither do I claim, for its
matter or method of statement, much of originality.
I am indebted largely to others for thought and sug-
gestion, “I have gathered a posy of other men’s
flowers.” I mav but supply the binding Fur-
ther. I fully confess to its lack of literary polish. I
cannot do more than write in plain and simple terms,
but I do hope to so state the positions whereon I
stand, that the mass of readers may understand,
and the most exacting critic who may do me the
honour to peruse its pages, may read sympatheti-
cally, and without offence. Having thus anticipated
merited criticism, I may claim at least one merit,
y'y. . passion of soul, to help save mv fellow citizens
from the burden of this God dishonouring and man
destroying drink traffic. .
As a preacher of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, I
hear the cry from unnumbered ruined lives and
blighted homes and feel the shame. Wherever strong
drink is found, there comes to me the agony of the


thought “No drunkard can enter Heaven.” Who
can deny that the traffic is the greatest obstacle in
the way of effective Christian work, and so fearfully
potent in keeping souls out of the kingdom of God’s
grace.
Knowing these things how can I neglect the
call to write? As a citizen of our beloved Empire,
now on the very verge of ruin at the hands of the
modern Hun, I feel the blush of shame, that for so
long this tyrant Alcohol should have flogged the
British people as with scorpions, and mocked them
in their agony. With fiendish pertinacity has the
traffic goaded our beautiful England to wasteful
prodigality till the sceptre of starvation threatens.
And what of this fair and fruitful- Australia? The
spell of this traffic ,is evident here as elsewhere.
Surely her heroic sons and lovely daughters will
rise in righteous wrath and expel this shameful de-
stroyer from the Commonwealth. With that end
in view I launch this contribution with the prayer
that it may do some good.
I beg to acknowledge with thanks financial as-
sistance so readily given by a few personal friends
to partly meet the cost of printing. They share in
the possible good.


“THE REASON.”
Why do we advocate Prohibition of the Liquor
Traffic? Because the manufacture and public sale
of Alcoholic drinks directly affects the public good,
and transgresses public morals. It is clearly proven
that the traffic cannot be so conducted, that it will
not affect others than the drinkers; no victim of the
traffic can suffer alone. It produces loafers, vag-
rants, thieves, murderers, disease, want, and misery.
It is a monopoly, the most gigantic, determined, and
unconscionable, that ever dug its fangs into the
vitals of mankind. By its agency vast numbers of
Australian citizens are sunk in sodden degradation.
It multiplies coffins, and empties cradles. It pollutes
the springs of national life by poisoning and sterilis-
ing the people. The social evil, the red plague, feed
on the victims of the traffic. It bars the door against
every movement for the social and spiritual uplift
of the people. It is'the omnipotent menace to the
purity of the home, the character of the citizen, and
the prosperity of the State. This is a terrible in-
dictment, but who will deny its truth? The question
to be decided is; Is the Drink Traffic a crime against
the Citizen, the State, the Home, and the Church?
Does it stand out against the progress, the sobriety,
liberty, and happiness of the people? Let these ques-
tions be faced and answered honestly. Weigh the
traffic in the balance of truth, and experience,'and
we will abide by the result. >
The next point at issue is. upon what principles
ought the people to act in relation to this evil. I can-
not do better than re-state the comprehensive argu-
ment as laid down bv Dr- F. R. Lees sixtv years ago
in his great essav. I know of nothing better to-day.
(A) “That it is neither right, nor politic, for the
State to afford legal protection, and sanction
to any traffic or system, that tends to increase
crime, to waste the national resources, to cor-


nipt the social habits, and to destroy the
health and lives of the public.
(B) That the traffic in intoxicating liquors as com
mon beverages, is inimical to the true inter-
ests of individuals, and destructive to the
order and welfare of society; and ought
therefore to be prohibited.
(C) That the history and results of all past legis-
lation in regard to the Liquor Traffic, abund-
antly prove that it is impossible satisfactorily
to limit or regulate a system so essentially
mischievous in its tendencies.
(D) That no consideration of private gain, or
public revenue can justify the upholding of a
system so utterly wrong in principle, suicidal
in policy, and disastrous in results as the traf-
fic in intoxicating liquors.
(E) That the legislative prohibition of the liquor
traffic is perfectly compatible with rational
liberty, and with all the claims of justice and
legitimate commerce.
(F) That the legislative suppression of the liquor
traffic would be highly conducive to the de-
velopment of a progressive civilisation.
(G) That rising above class, sectarian or party
considerations, all good citizens should com-
bine to procure an enactment prohibiting the
sale of intoxicating beverages, as affording
most efficient aid in removing the appalling
evil of Intemnerance.”
Certainlv no clearer thesis has been advanced
than this. It stands unassailable, a very Gibraltar
of prohibition argument, fully in accord with wise
nrinciples of statesmanship and mutual human liber-
ties. ,
John Stuart Mill, in his Essay on Liberty, says
“That for such actions as are nrejudicial to the in-
terests of others, the individual is accountable, and
may be subjected to either social or legal punish-


ments, if society is of opinion that one or other is
requisite for its protection.”
Herbert Spencer, in “Social Statics” says “To
enforce the fundamental law of equal freedom, to
take care that every man has freedom, to do all that
he wills, provided that he infringes not the equal
freedom of any other man; this is the special pur-
pose for which the civil power exists.”
Judge Pitman, of the Supreme Court of Massa-
chusetts, says, “The law of prohibition does not pro-
pose to deal directly with the personal habits of men,
it lays its hands on a traffic. Sales are public acts,
and ayways within the domain of law. The law, for
sufficient reasons of policy, prescribes the manner
and modes of sale of real and personal property,
makes void what it chooses, regulates what it deems
to be dangerous, forbids under penalties what it
thinks mischievous. If it lays either a regulating, a
restraining, or a prohibiting hand upon the traffic
in intoxicants it does no different from what it does
in regard to adulterated food, unwholesome meat,
dangerous explosives, fireworks, obscene literature,
and so on. The only questions society asks are —
“Is the trade injurious? It is sufficientlv so, to call
for interference?”
I quote thus fully these authorities to show that
the purpose of prohibiting liquor laws is in no wise
to say what a man shall eat or what he shall drink.
They simply aim to protect society from the per-
nicious influence of a traffic. In no respect do they
aim to interfere with private liberties of the indi-
vidual, until those private .liberties create a public
nuisance, and cause disaster to fall upon society, as
unquestionably the liquor traffic does. Because the
evil effects of the traffic, as compared to its benefits
are of excentional magnitude and gravity. And
these evil effects are practically inseparable from the
traffic. And further, these evil effects are by no
means confined to those who particinate in the traf-
fic, either as buyers or sellers of drink, but extend in
a serious degree to society in general.


A little thinking along the line of this argument
will show the utter absurdity of the popular talk
about the interference with personal libertv, should
further restrictions or prohibition come into effect.
In our recent contests that has been the major note
of the trafficers and their friends, and many a
strangely fantastic tune have they produced for the
benefit of the unthinking citizen, but fortunately
they found themselves in the position of the darkie
who stood charged with chicken stealing.
The witnesses offered verv little convicting testi-
mony, so it seemed as though the darkie must go
free, but the Judge settled that as he said, “Prisoner,
the testimony seems to be in your favour, but the
facts are against you, ninety days’ gaol.”
The more the people know of the facts, the less
senseless talk shall we hear about “Personal
Liberty.” l\o man has a birth-liberty either to de-
base himself into a beast, or to deal out drink which
debases others. The saloonist it is true has the
privilege, and the licensed liberty of contributing to
degrade his fellow men, and ruin society. And for
the liberty he pays a certain sum, and “pity ’tis”
that it is true, the shame is ours for allowing such
an immoral contract. But what the law gives in ig-
norance, or moral laxity, it may and will, in know-
ledge and wisdom take away, by withdrawing the
pernicious privilege which has proven so embruiting
to the nation.
But why talk so much about personal liberty
in this particular matter of the license either to sell,
drink, or get drunk as an argument against prohibi-
tion? The word prohibit we know is not a lovable
word; it is often very unwelcome, from our child-
hood it has thrust itself into our experience, but well
we know ’twas for our good, and not evil.
A seventeen-year-old boy stood in the dock,
serious and continuous crime was charged against
him, the sympathetic judge asks, “My boy. why is
it. why?” Listen to the boy’s reply. “Please Judge,
I had nobody to make me.” Yes, that’s the tragedy


for millions of the victims of the traffic, the absence
of Prohibition. The function of the Christian state
is to secure by law the highest good of its people,
therefore are we the subjects of prohibitory laws in
a hundred ways in common daily activities, in sani-
tation, building, trading, speed limits, headlights,
personal behaviour; and so every sane person
(even though it be to inconvenience and possible
loss) recognises the need and good sense of these.
The whole fabric of personal and relative good con-
duct, rests upon a foundation of prohibition, viz., the
ten commandments- In recent days the Federal
Government established a prohibition against a cer-
tain notorious association, and a number of persons
are now in prison, because proven to be members.
Society accepts of these many prohibitions with as
good grace as possible, though at times we marvel.
Take one case in point of very recent date. The
drink traffic is not yet prohibited, but a little book
that only tells the Truth about the doings and effects
of the traffic upon the Empire’s food supply, is pro-
hibited. Truly the ways of politicians are puzzling.
THE WAR AS A REASON.
This is the grimmest tragedy of the ages, a
stupendous interlude of agony, outraging every
canon of civilisation, humanity and religion.
In the fierce light of this awful war, many
ugly features in humanity have been revealed, many
popular idols shattered, and many fair delusions have
come to look intensely despicable. Habits, ideas,
and complacencies are being torn and scattered to
the winds. . ,
Possibly at no point have revelations been made
of so astounding a character, as in relation to the
drink traffic. The eyes of the Empire have been
opened to see in a lurid light the evils of drink, and


fevered attention has been focussed upon its hind-
rance and loss in man-power, munition making, and
destruction of foods. “The Trade” has been weighed
in the balances and found wanting. Ever the cause
of much social evil and Joss in time of peace, it has
proved itself a national danger of the first order in
time of war. The necessary and inevitable results
of the traffic have been proven beyond doubt to the
whole world, to be directly inimical, in the highest
degree, to the very existence of the nation.
Must Face the Facts.
During these critical months “the Trade” has been
arraigned at the bar of public opinion on an indict-
ment containing many counts, and every charge
that responsible Temperance Reformers have made
against it has been more than justified; and it is
only the insidious and often unconscious influence
of personal habit, financial interest, and political
prejudice, which has prevented the nation from fol-
lowing the dictates of its awakened conscience, and
registering a verdict of “guilty” against ‘‘the
Trade,” and calling upon the Government to carry
into effect that final execution which alone can put
an end to the evils for which strong drink is re-
sponsible. '
Britain has been truly awakened to the ravages
of alcoholism. Mr- Lloyd George, who can speak
with authority, said in his great Banger Speech,
“I have something more to say, and it is unpleasant
to say, but let us be perfectly candid; it is mostly
the lure of drink, the men refuse to work full time,
and when they return their strength and efficiency
are impaired by the way in which they spend their
leisure. Drink is doing us more harm in the war
than all the German submarines put together.”
Again when a large deputation of Shipbuilders
waited upon Mr. Lloyd George, and asked for total
prohibition of the drink traffic, he in his reply said,
“Having gone into the matter closely, I must say


I have a growing conviction based on accumulating
evidence that nothing but root and branch methods
will be of the slightest use in dealing with this evil.
I believe that to be the general feeling, the feeling is
that if we are to settle German militarism, we must
first of all settle with the drink. We are fighting
Germany, Austria, and Drink, and as far as I
see, the greatest of these deadly foes is Drink.”
One result of this lurid light thrown over the
traffic and its works is the insistent demand for
war time prohibition, voiced from every corner of
the Empire, but which the British Government has
not yet had either courage or strength to carry out.
The tinsel “Lords of the Beerage” and the “Whis-
key Ring” are too cute in the use of their brutal
cash power to allow that.
“The position is'deplorable, Europe may reel but,
Beer is King. It beats all, it has beaten the King,
Lord Kitchener, Mr. Lloyd George; it has beaten
the Board of Trade, the War Office, the Admiralty;
it has beaten the Church so far as the Church has
dared to interfere with it. The brewers are having
the time of their lives. Beer lays its toll on our
ships and on our land, it robs us of our food and it
destroys our wealth.”
The war-time indictment against drink says: It
hinders the army, it hampers the navy, it endan-
gers our mercantile marine, it destroys our food
supplies, it wastes our financial strength, it diverts
the nation’s strength, it shatters our moral courage.
It has decimated the ranks of our fighters, it is the
agent for deterioration of our army of munition
makers, Mr. Lloyd George declares that we could
by prohibiting drink, add ten per cent- to Britain’s
producing power, truly this is a terrible price for
the Empire to pay, and for what—that this traffic
may continue in this blood-stained way, that the
vested interests may not suffer. For this, the risk of
defeat at the hands of the Hun and the shadow
of famine hovers over England. Can human stu-
pidity go beyond this and who is responsible? Let


it be said, not King George V nor yet Kitchener, or
Beattie, leaders of army and navy. To the eternal
honour of our gracious King, be it remembered,
he saw the danger, he did his duty, for he absolute-
ly banished alcohol from every palace and place un-
der his personal control. He then sent out the call
“To follow the King.” Happy would it have been
had that royal example been followed, but to its
eternal dishonour, be it said, the House of Com-
mons deliberately refused to follow the King’s lead.
Such was and is, the power of the beerage in Eng-
land’s Parliament. She has a Win-the-War Go-
vernment, what she now needs is a stop-the-drink
Government. In Australia the effects of this sui-
cidal policy is seen and felt in another way; here no
shortage of food, but an embarrassing overplus, be-
cause England keeps up the sixty ships of five
thousand tons burden going continuously to carry
her drink materials, and because the Plun is too
successfully torpedoing ships by the hundreds.
Australia must perforce keep her wheat, scores of
thousands of bags rotting at the depots, and an
Egyptian plague of mice overrunning the stores.
People are wanting in England, mice are fattening
here. Then our coming fruit crop has small chance
of export. Even our brave soldier boys cannot get
their Christmas parcels of comforts assured them.
Our commerce and industries are seriously ham-
pered, and prices rising sky high. This is part of
Australia’s price to be paid that “Booze” may pros-
per. However, there is hope for the future, human
progress depends upon self consciousness, the result
of the nations seeing themselves as they really are,
then proceeding from that self knowledge to cleanse
their vision, ennoble their ideals, and amend their
ways. The fight against this indefensible traffic in
Alcohol will now wax all the fiercer.
We have on every hand the cry for Prohibition
during the war and time of demobilisation. With
that commendable movement we heartily agree, but
why the conditional limit? We want to be quite


candid and say our ideal is not war time only, but
Prohibition permanent and complete. Drink is no
less destructive in peace time than in war time, in
its nature and effect no variation can be found- So
then our business is to fight for Prohibition not as
an expedient under pressure of war, but as a policy,
a principle, standing on its own merits for all time.
The Drink Traffic Ought to Die Now.
If it be right to make and sell and use drink,
let it be made, sold, and used everywhere, at any
time, by anybody, without let or hindrance. If that
claim be denied, the opposite only is right, let drink
be made, sold, and used by nobody, nowhere, at no
time —that is, national prohibition. If the nation
ought some day to prohibit the liquor traffic, it ought
to do it now.
If the liquor traffic has a right to live for a
moment, it has a right to live for all time.
If the liquor traffic has no right to live for all
time, it has no right to exist for a solitary day. So
if the right to licence the liquor traffic is admitted,
the right of the liquor traffic is conceded. It must
be national prohibition or nothing.
“THE MASTER METHOD.”
It would appear that after ages of experiment-
ing there are only three courses open for the
nations dealing with Alcohol, and its use as a bev-
erage: (A) Regulation: (B) Nationalisation, or
State Ownership; (C) Prohibition.
Now the first has had a good innings, with what
results? A horrible failure. Certain feather-
brained objectors say,* “Prohibition does not Pro-
hibit.” That has yet to be proven in practice, but
assuredly “Regulation does not successfully regu-
late.” Every Government in the world must con-
fess to defeat in their best efforts to regulate it. The


trafficers are past masters in the science of law-
breaking, in spite of the most stringent systems o
policing and penalties, and the ordinary politician
fears for his skin to tighten up the regulatory laws,
because the creed of the trafficers is delightful y
brief and blunt, “my trade is my politics, and that
means much to the slim politician. So the game
noes on like the rope tug of war, public mteiest at
one end, and the Taffic at the other, the smirking
politician stake holder, distributing his favours ac-
cording to the strength of the pull. It is high time
the game was changed, for it is abundantly proven
that it is impossible to satisfactorily limit or regu-
late a traffic so essentially mischievous.
Nationalisation, State ownership, and elimina-
tion of private profit are boomed up as the correct
way to settle the matter. In a few years m England
the elimination of profit idea has been given a trial.
In some instances good-intcntioned Bishops have
tried their hand at managing the Public Blouse, with
the result that they have discovered they may man-
age the House, but they fail to manage the Alcohol.
So the Bishop’s management scheme is petering out.
War conditions has forced the idea of Nationalisa-
tion into public attention, it is supposed that the
present English Government are seriously thinking
over the vast problem of buying out the traffic at a
cost of from 250, to 300 millions. Needless to say,
that practically all leading reformers regard this
proposal with horror, as being a menace to the hope
of saving the Empire from the curse of the drinking
habit that it will give the doomed traffic a new
lease of life. It also raises the moral issue, because
each citizen must then be a partner and sharer both
in the profits and shame of the national drink traffic.
It is wrong in principle, and will certainly lead to
rottenness in practice. Even if it should destroy
private profit it will create public profit, and this is
more vicious still, it is a monstrous wrong to nation-
alise public iniquities and vices. To lift the traffic
in Drink up to the status of a Governmnet Depart-


ment is to bring about by association a degradation
of present Departments, it would create an army
of public servants to control a traffic that is the most
dangerous and debasing known to humanity. Again,
the advocates of Nationalisation do not indicate or
promise that it will lead on to Prohibition, but on
the contrary make it more difficult to secure.
Think of this in proof. In September, 1915, Sir
Joseph Compton Rickett, M.P., speaking at a war
emergency meeting, said, “I have a plan for raising
money which is not loan, and is not taxation. It is
a system by which the Government goes into busi-
ness, and carries on some of the great concerns
which have hitherto been in private hands. There
are good reasons for doing this, in which case there
will be no injury to anyone. Those who are at
present engaged in these businesses would be pro-
perly compensated, and the Government could make
an infinitely larger sum than the private individuals
themselves. That would develop very considerably
the interest of the country in these particular things
and would lessen considerably the weight of the
nation.”
“One of these things, I may as well tell you, is
the nationalisation of the drink traffic, from which,
to put it mildly, there should be fifty millions per
year to go to the country —not by abolishing the use
of alcohol, nor by discharging anyone honestly em-
ployed in the trade, but by giving the country the
control and the victualling of its public places, so
that the public houses would be a safe place for the
wife and child to go, as well as for the man himself.”
Looked at from every point of view this suggestion
is to be dreaded as likelv to be a menace rather than
a blessing. lam aware that Nationalisation finds a
place in the platform of the Australian Labour
Party, but it is not within my knowledge that any
considerable attention or exhaustive study has yet
been given to the subject by the bulk of the work-
ers. I have an idea that it slipped into the plat-
form without much thought, and we question


whether it would receive much support to-day; at
least, we hope not.
Now there remains the “Master Method, why
not that? One very clear and comprehensive view is
provided by a writer in the American Issue, w ici
I quote in full-
When We Win Prohibition.
When we win Prohibition, the death-rate among
adults will be reduced one-half.
When we win Prohibition, crime will be re
duced three-fourths.
When we win Prohibition, most of our gaols
will be empty and useless.
When we win Prohibition, our poor houses will
become tenantless. . ,
When we win Prohibition, drunkenness will be
seldom seen. ...
When we win Prohibition, most policemen will
not be needed. ’ . , , -n
When we win Prohibition, children will seldom
be seen born with pre-natal weakness and disease
When we win Prohibition, unhappy homes will
be made happy. ... . .
When we win Prohibition, idle working men
will find and hold a job.
When we win Prohibition, men will cease to
waste millions of money that should go to their
families. ...
When we win Prohibition, money will go to tlie
savings bank that now goes into the saloon-keeper s
When we win Prohibition, renters will become
property owners, and their families provided with
better food and clothes.
If you prefer disease, death, crime, pauperism,
prisons, policemen, drunkenness, unhappy homes,
idleness, waste of money, ignorance, child labour
and unfit manhood, all caused by liquor, you will
oppose Prohibition; if you would prevent these con-
ditions you will support Prohibition.”


If you don’t like the drunkard and want to get
rid of him, stop making liquor for beverage pur-
poses, repeal the law by your vote for National 1 ro-
hibition. There is no other remedy that will do it.
All others have been tried and the di unkard is stil
here.
More people than ever before believe it to be the
duty of the Government to protect the weak so
they ought not to issue special privileges which
authorise plunder, oppression, and suffering, as does
the liquor license. Every law with a snake in it
must go off our State and hederal Statute Books-
Thus our licensing laws must be replaced by truth
inspired Prohibition Laws; there is nothing in high
statecraft, morality, psychology, or religion to say
it nay.
“Through all the long dark night of years
The people’s cry ascended,
The earth was wet with blood and tears,
E’er their meek sufferance ended;
This wrong shall not for ever sway,
The many toil in sorrow,
The bars of hell are strong to-day,
But Christ shall reign to-morrow.”
But some will probably ask, how will the
people accept Prohibition as a working law? Will
there be strikes and revolts, because the supply of
Alcoholic liquors has been cut out? INb, we do not
for a moment think so. We have too much respect
for the judgment of the people. The growth of edu-
cation, ordinary and technical on the drink prob-
lem has been so widespread and sound. Then be it
remembered that no such law can be looked for
until it has been demanded in the ballot box by an
effective majority. It is a people’s question, and
must be decided by the people’s vote. So then why
any fear along the line of revolt? This, too, opens up
an interesting question which may be stated in this
way. Do the people run after drink, or does the


drink run after the people? And we will venture to
assert that as a rule it is the drink traffickers who
force themselves on to the people, whether the
people want them or not. This has been abundantly
proven in our own experience- For some years dur-
ing a term of ministerial service pioneering a new
coal field, where several new townships came into
being near the developing collieries, it was quite
pathetic to see the persistent efforts of prospective
salooni§ts to get in early for a conditional license.
Scarcely had a score of decent cottages been erected
when 10, some brewery or other was just aching to
get in and spend two or three thousand pounds
in a palatial grog shop. When the license was
gained by special pleading, and often misrepresenta-
tions, it was so gained in the face of persistent ob-
jections, backed by petitions from people in the
neighbourhood, and ofttimes have we wondered at
the judgment of the licensing magistrates. We know
of what we write, having had a hand in many a hard
fought battle against the unwelcome encroachment
of the traffickers wherever a few workers came to
settle. The same facts are witnessed to all over
the country.
The plain lessons are, men do not naturally
crave for Alcohol. If the open bar is not there they
do not worry, they are content, the temptation is
not there. Of course, this applies to men of normal
clean living, there are always a small section habitu-
ated to the use of Booze, who, of course, hanker
after that which has already undermined the physi-
cal and moral stamina; but the tragedv of the busi-
ness is that as soon as the open bar is forced on the
community, and stands there a daily temptation,
then, unfortunately the new drinkers begin their
course of folly. Then, again, the traffic finds its
preatest ally in the “Shouting” habit. One can
scarcely find words to express the senselessness of
this so-called social custom, when a few friends get
together in front of a drinking bar and begin shout-
ing round, each member of the party in honour


bound to follow suit, to the benefit of the saloonist s
pocket, but to the loss of the pockets of the drink-
ers, leading on to their more or less drunken condi-
tion. Since the war conditions began, this silly busi-
ness has been the cause of disgrace to great num-
bers of our soldiers in camp, also our returned
wounded heroes. So much so that a strong move-
ment is afoot to make it an illegal act to shout drinks
in a saloon. It is difficult to find adequate words
with which to condemn the folly of shouting for
our soldier friends. For we could scarcely do them
greater injury. Even with the best of intentions
it requires almost superhuman determination on the
part of the young man in training who has ample
time on his hands to decline a visit to the public
house and a social drink. But that is the tempta-
tion that is put upon the recruits and the soldiers
when offering to treat them to a drink. Are there
not other and far better ways of expressing friend-
liness, comradeship, and goodwill? Instead of
shouting for them at the public house, why not in-
vite them to our house to a good dinner, or some
other'meal, and to wholesome and health-giving re-
freshments? It is certainly an act of e\ en greater
hospitality and fellowship than taking the men to
the public-house. Where it is not convenient to
take them into the home, why not take them to a
jrood restaurant and serve them with wholesome re-
freshments?
“The Rising Tide.”
In the United States the sweeping conviction
is carrying State after State for bone-dry Prohibi-
tion. The first was Maine in 1846, in 1869 the
National Prohibition Party was formed. In 1872
the narty made its first nomination for the Presi-
dent, the vote was only 5607, but by 1892 the vote
reached 270,740. The party has never succeeded
in carrying its candidate to the White House, but
it has fought a splendid propaganda battle, till by


For National Prohibition . . . .
.. 259,943
Against
.. 205,661
Majority for Prohibition . . .
.. 54,282
1906 three States with a population of 2,600,000,
had carried Prohibition; but in 1916, nineteen States
with twenty-eight million people, had voted them-
selves dry. To-day sixty million citizens of America
are living in Prohibition areas, twenty-four States
having declared for Prohibition. Nine other States
will vote in 1917 and 1918, some of which are partly
dry now. The slogan of the party is “A Bone-dry
America by 1920.” In Canada the tide is running
strong, eight of the great provinces have voted in
Prohibition, and in “Quebec,” not yet dry, 976 muni-
cipalities out of 1158 have voted dry; so every por-
vince save “Quebec” has elected to go dry. The
remarkable changes in Russia since the Prohibition
of Vodka has filled the world with wonder, and but
for the war and national revolution the extraordin-
ary success following the action would have pro-
bably been the most astounding object lesson of
all time.
New Zealand took her first Local Option Poll in
1894, Clutha being the only electorate to carry No
License. Mataura and Bruce followed in 1899. Now
twelve electorates out of seventy-five are under No
License laws. In 1911 a vote was taken on National
Prohibition, and in sixty-seven electorates a ma-
jority was recorded for the National issue, the full
vote being:—
The three-fifths majority handicap alone saved
the traffic then. <
There can be little doubt that after the war is
oyer and matters return to normal New Zealand
will speedilv vote the traffic out of her borders.
In our own States the popular feeling is well
indicated in the sweeping votes for six o’clock clos-
incr. New South Wales gave 347,494 for six, all
other hours carried 209,404 votes, paving six o’clock
a majoritv of 138,000 over all hours.


South Australia and Tasmania have also carried
fix o’clock by big majorities- \ ictoria has also six
o’clock passed and in operation. In the other
States the people are calling lor the oppor-
tunity to follow in the same line. Australia now
waits the opportunity of a referendum on National
Prohibition; when that comes, we have no doubt
as to the result. The days of the Drink Traffic are
numbered, so far as its existence in the Common-
wealth is concerned.
We shall bury the whole traffic under an aval-
anche of righteous public opinion. The battle is
strenuous and in some quarters unpopular, but the
tears of women and children and the indignation of
every manly man has baptised it in a holy faith,
and God’s blessing rests upon it. A martrydom of
bitter criticism, scorn, and revilinp may be ours, but
that is a worthy sacrifice, therefore we cannot fail
if we be but true to ourselves and true to God.
Let those faint hearts who say “You cannot
win” address themselves to cowards or weaklings,
with the free and the brave it will avail nothing; the
verv word “Failure” in its origin literally means
“Falsehood,” there can be no place for this in the
Prohibition ideal. We must create thought, thought
is power, then let tfie thought force of all who be-
lieve concentrate, and thus gender a moral thun-
derstorm, that shall clear the whole atmosphere of
the poisonous inertia that weakens and destroys
society.
“A Bugle Call.”
We would prayerfully sound a battle call. To
the Politicians who honestly wish to reach and
maintain the statesman part and legislate righteous-
lv; to the Captains of industries, who know that
strong drink is the enemy and often the destroyer
of the workman army; to the Labour leaders, be it
known, the wisest and best of the world’s leaders


stand firm for Prohibition, won’t you leaders in Aits-
tralia range yourselves up and go straight for
liberty, fraternity, and brotherhood in your ranks of
labour.
To the Merchant Princes, will vou not see that
the wasted millions of money that flow through the
unholy cofifers of Brewers and Distillers are lost to
clean and beneficial commerce.
To the womanhood, you Home Makers, the
mothers of the race, the guardians of the children’s
heritage in health and character, will you not rise
and use your influence and voting power for the
gaining of a clean home circle, for a noble, virile
race?
Let all these remember Prohibition Propaganda
is not like the seeds of garden weeds, scattered
broadcast by the winds, without labour or intent.
No, the propaganda demands for success, personal
labour, and self-sacrificing passion, every believer
in its good must do his or her bit. We have been
thrilled to see the splendid patriotism shown in
labour and gifts for Empire and Allies in these days
of war, but there is a patriotism in daily duty and
at the ballot box, as well as that represented in war
munitions, which calls just as insistently for high
courage and sacrifice.
But especially do we sound the “Bugle Call’’ to
Christian citizens:
“If all who follow the Master Christ
Cast vote against the wrong,
Then ours the crowning victory
And ours the triumph song.”
We doubt not but ultimately the Church will
rise in her God given power and lead the way to
'National Prohibition. But why delay? Why this
seeming reluctance? Why this enervating indiffer-
ence and lack of initiative among the rank and file
of the Church? Oh think of the tragedy of delayed
blessing, loss of time and opportunity. We would


re-echo the burning words of Norman Maclean, in
his book, “Stand Up, Ye Dead,” “Behind you is God,
the greatest need of our day is the reinforcement
of the soul. Morality can only be based on the
Divine, the only way of salvation for the human
race is that of conformity to the righteous will of
God. Return to God means not only a transfigured
soul, it means also a transfigured National life.”
Does not every trite man say Amen? Yes, but one
pertinent question: Can this transfiguring glory
come to a nation that harbours and takes revenue
from the legal sanction to the Drink Traffic in her
midst, who will dare to say “Amen” to this.
The bugle call is to God’s Church in all her
sections, varied in other forms of thought and ser-
vice. but one in soul, one Lord, one Faith, one call-
ing, will not this Christ unified Church rise as one
mighty army of the conflict?
But we venture to specially speak to our be-
loved Methodism. Our hearts were gladdened when
in May, 1917, the General Conference of the Metho-
dist Church of Australasia, by resolution, sent out
the clarion call as follows:
“That this Conference affirms its conviction
that total Prohibition is the only rational ideal in
reference to the importation, manufacture, or sale
of alcoholic beverages, and urges the Annual Con-
ferences and the Methodists of Australasia to work
for speedy attainment of that end.”
We thank God for this official declaration, but
now. what steps are to follow? Do the leaders of
our Church mean business? Will our Annual Con-
ferences get a real live-wire move on in the way
of translating this resolution into earnest propa-
ganda ?
As one in the ranks of the Ministry, claiming
only one rieht to speak in this manner, viz., Passion
of soul for this consummation, manifested in many
years of personal service, we wish now, in all due
deference, to issue this earnest appeal for immediate
action, such as will give the whole 811,000 members


and adherents of Methodism in the Commonwealth
a real part and lot in the fight.
It is in no boasting spirit that we say, given
such an army of Prohibitionists, organised, alive,
and working, then Methodism holds the key to
speedv victory in Australia.
May we suggest lines of action in each State
Conference; establish a strong Prohibition Execu-
tive, who shall create and work: (A) a lecture
bureau; (B) a press feeding agency; (C) a tract
department; (D) a’children’s training society; (E)
employ one or more capable secretaries, or superin-
tendents, to visit and organise in circuits. Of course
it will be obiected that this all means money, yes,
that is so, but it is necessary for effective organisa-
tion; is it worth while? Does anyone suppose that
this age-long, wealth entrenched, self centred traffic
is going to be dislodged without the expenditure of
both money and labour in the passion of sacrifice
on the oart of the Church? Is it worth while to
turn the tide of twenty-one millions that goes flow-
ing through the coffers of traffickers each year, into
legitimate channels of industry and commerce. What
will the Church eventually gain when Prohibition
is consummated? But after all. the real need is that
every Minister, Official, and Member of the Church
get busy in every corner of the Commonwealth, a
real revival of individual enthusiasm, and faithful
effort. Our scattered units need to be mobilised,
trained, and impassioned, with the truth, that Pro-
hibition is nre-eminently a great moral movement,
based on righteousness. Very well then, the solu-
tion rests with the Christian citizenship, the organ-
ised Christian Church must lead. The State cannot
be expected to initiate, the State will give effect to
public conviction and mandate, when the Church
has vitalised and moralised the issue. So then the
task is upon us that we. by wise educative propa-
ganda bring about a clearer vision and a deeper con-
viction to tackle the problem. In theory the Church
has long been against the traffic, most of our


preachers have sung out denunciations, but now
theory must materialise into action. Theory and
talk alone will not kill the traffic, nor will confer-
ence resolutions have much effect, beyond guiding
and inspiring our own ranks.
The saloon is the champion agent for the devil
on earth, and how well the work is done, let the
unchurched masses, the countless thousands of
debauched humans testify. Isaiah 5, 13-15, is a ter-
rible up-to-date picture in Australia to-day. Who
will nuestion this?
The Christian Church is the embodiment of the
mind and purpose of God on earth, so between the
Church and the Traffic there can be no compromise,
only one right attitude, viz., war, no quarter, no
truce, no sham fighting or mere fooling with words,
but “War,” day and night at every point.
Reader, we urge this “Call” on your attention.
What will you do? Do not say I’ll wait till other
folk move, then I’ll get in at the tide of opportunity.
No, don’t be a waiter for others, rather you be a
leader for others. Somebody said to the old lion
“Cromwell,” “Wait till the iron is hot, then strike.”
The reply came, sharp and clear; “No, I will strike
it and make it hot.” Will you not do that?
“Sound the tocsin for the fight,
Shout the war cry, lead the way.”
Woe and death are all around us;
Oh, the cursed, cursed drink;
Up, for Christ’s dear sake, my brothers,
Count the cost, and do not shrink.
Bore he not the Cross before you,
Bore it up the hill of shame,
Spurned the torture, spurned the anguish,
Fight and conquer in His name-
\NOTE.—If these my earnest words and battle
call should help to rouse any readers to earnest
action, may .1 refer you to the “Personal Word” at
the end of the book to those who are willing to help
in our propaganda.


A FEW PROHIBITION POINTERS.
My Prohibition Creed.
I bear no malice towards those who are en-
gaged in the traffic, but I hate the traffic with a bit-
ter hatred, because I have seen so much of the
evils it creates for society, its physical ruin, its eco-
nomic waste, its mental blight, its tears and its
heartaches.
I hate it for its arrogance, for its callous indif-
ference to suffering, for its greed and avarice- for
its sordid love of gain at any price, for its domina-
tion in politics, for its utter disregard of law.
I doubly hate it with mind and soul, because of
the human wrecks it causes, for its moral degrada-
tion and its spiritual blight, for the damage it does
to the Christian Church, and because of the awful
fact that it prevents millions of souls for whom
Christ died, ever entering the Kingdom of Heaven,
bv robbing them of desire for Christ’s saving grace
and power. I hate it because I can find no compen-
sating good to set over against its inexpressible cata-
logue of evil.
Do you wonder at this my creed ?
Think honestly and earnestly over what you
know in regard to the real character, and fruits of
the Drink Traffic, and if you can stand up and give
it your commendation and blessing, or wish it
man’s appreciation and God’s favour, you do so. If
vou fear to do this, you cannot be neutral, because
vour very silence and cowardice is like a smoke
cloud, hiding the enemy from your own friends, and
possibly ' r our own family. You must be either
“For” or “Against” the Traffic.
Will you not be a declared opponent against
this blighting evil? and a fighting comrade in the
Prohibition Army?
You are needed to hasten on the victory, so link
yourself up quickly.


No Vested Rights.
Men do at times talk of the vested rights of the
Saloon Keepers. There is no such thing, and the
man who prates in that way, talks the sheerest de-
magoguery that ever fell from the lips of a fool.
The saloon keeper pays cash from year to year
to the Government for the privilege of making
drunkards of our bovs, of wrecking the lives of weak
men and erring woman, but the “Right” to do this
is not in the gift of any human power; such a right
does not exist-
LABOUR—LIQUOR—LAW.
This problem of the three L’s gets into every
citizen’s business block. There are a lot more L’s
poking about, for instance, Laziness, Licentious-
ness. Lust, License, Lawlessness; but these are
all closer relations to Liquor. So the three L’s first
named are vital factors in the problem. Have you
ever thought out, say:—
Ist. What is the relation of Liquor to Labour?
Ma ir we suggest that get your brain moving to
answer these queries?
(A) Does Liquor both deserve and rob Labour?
Does Liquor tax Labour without return?
(C) Does Liquor tyrannize over Labour?
(D) Doe= Liquor dethrone Labour?
We saw in the Sydney Eight Hour Day Pro-
cession a banner bearing this device: “Labor
omnia vincit,” which means “Labor conquers
all.” When Labor dethrones Booze, that device
will stand for the truth, but in the same procession
we saw. a glorified exhibit of barrels and bottles of
“Toohey’s Beer,” drawn by six magnificent greys.
We admired the beautiful horses, they certaintly
were not fed on “Booze,” some good sound “Oats”
had something to do with their appea r an:e. They
were certainly in much better cond’tion than most


of the customers who plank down their wage earn-
ings to keep the Saloon and Brewery.
Law comes in as one of the three L’s. What is
the relationship to Law and the other two?
Well, the facts are, Law does not prohibit
Liquor, but provides it with legal perpetuation. Law
does not Defend Labour, but conspires with Liquor
to roT:> Labour. . . ,
Surely there is something wrong in the kind
of relationship. We suggest as Prohibitionists, that
Law should protect Labour as being of first
value.
Law should prohibit Liquor as being the only
safeguard.
Law should protect the homes of Labour.
Law should defend the womanhood and child-
hood. Then
All sober and steady, and willing, and ready
The muscles of labour are quick to command,
Thev man the proud vessel, with tempests they
wrestle.
They win the world’s prizes on sea and on land.
Wealth waits their creation, the need of the nation,
They meet at the forge, in the shops, and the mill,
When sober and steady, then able and ready.
They coin of their manhood, for traffic and till -
So we say, hail to Labour, and Law, when they
wisely cut Liquor out of the partnership.
The Cost of a Boy.
j oe l 3_3.—“They have given a boy for an har-
lot, and sold a girl for wine, that they might drink.”
At a certain slave auction a tall, well-built boy
was offered for sale. Said the Auctioneer. “Good
bargain for whoever gets him .a safe investment, for
he’s bound to grow, and fetch a profit. Now what’s
the offer, are you all done gentlemen; sold at 975
dollars. You have got a bargain, Sir.”
So there is a cash investment in Manhood, from
the lowest motives in human potentiality, and pro-
ductive power.


There is a problem that demands attention, viz ,
Profit and Loss in Man. This awful war is killing
off the Empire’s manhood by the hundreds of thou-
sands. But the Drink Traffic has been killing oft
Britain’s .Manhood by the scores of thousands every
year, yet the traffic is tolerated and some folk think
it would be a serious wrong to stop it.
Prohibitionists believe it would be a very wise
business to put an end to the traffic, and save the
boys as a good investment for the Empire. What do
vou think, reader? What value do you put on that
boy of yours? Which do you prefer to keep going
strong, the Traffic or “Your Boy?” Say now, answer
up quick and straight. If you think most of your
“Boy” you had better sign yourself on as a “Pro-
hibitionist,” and a live one too. Do not forget the
Drink Traffic must feed on the boys. We have been
saving this for many years, but the folk laughed, and
said. “Oh you Prohibitionists are of the fool and
fanatic breed,” but somehow they do not buck up to
the truth that the Traffic feeds on their boys. Who
works out the biggest fools in that light?
The well being of Australia depends upon the
well-being of the Australian boys. Licence breeds
the drinking saloon, the saloon spoils the boys,
every man and woman with a sane head on their
shoulders ought to know that.
Do you know how to keep the saloon, and yet
save the boys?
No. vou do not, be honest enough to face the
facts as they are.
Close the saloon with its ravening cry,
Silence the men for the bar who stand;
Tuft the white banner of mankind high.
Ever for home, with a Christian hand.
Banish the foe of the soul and brain.
Stand for the right as you bravely can.
Go not with robbers for greed of gain,
Cast a clean ballot for “Boy and Man.”


Apply the Remedy.
Every man who regards himself as a Chi istian,
a patriot, or a political reformer, is clamorously
called for by the voices of lost men and women in
the midst of our towns and cities. If these people
were lost in the gloom of wild woods, or dreary
moorland, or in the entanglements of dense foiests,
we should speedily equip an energetic search party.
Is not such a party needed nearer our homes. 1 his
drink evil is no respecter of persons. It creates
day and night wailings in the palace and the cot-
tage; the sighings of distress are like the moaning
November wind, or like the wail of the gieedy
sea,” beneath whose restless waves lie buried, m
needless mortality, many thousands of men and
women who have been slowly “drawn unto death
by the hideous and polluted stream of the murder-
ous liquor traffic. Shall this drink demon devour
for ever? Is there no remedy for the evil? If not,
let us pray for patience to endure. But if theie is
a remedy, it ought to be applied, and in God s name
must be or shall we discredit our manhood and
our Christian character. The argument is com-
plete, but lust for liquor and for gain dominate.
It is Not a Business.
What is business? Business is a service ren-
dered for profit. The men engaged in the grocery
and dry goods and furniture lines of trade are ren-
dering you a service and are entitled to legitimate
profit. You want the goods more than you want
the money; they want the money more than they
want the goods. You exchange values for a legi-
timate profit. That’s business. _ A man can engage
in that without sacrificing his religion, without
damaging his character, and without losing his
self-respect. He does all three when he runs a bar,
And they call it business!


Business is a Service Rendered for Profit;
charity is a service rendered without profit. What
is the liquor traffic? Profit without service, and
profit without service is a crime. The liquor traf-
fic is a crime. It not only takes exorbitant profit
without service, millions of dollars every year,
which would be a crime if it gave nothing in re-
turn ; but it gives to society, in return for the
money it gets, poverty, disease, insanity, idiocy,
impurity, criminality, corrupted politics, wrecked
homes, and destroyed manhood. It takes millions
of money from the pockets of the people, and it
costs the people other millions every year for what
the liquor traffic gives them in return. The liquor
traffic robs a man of his money, and commits an
assault upon his person, his character, his family,
his home, his country, and his God. It is a national
criminal on the highway of this Christian
Dominion.
A Personal Word-
To the svmpathetic reader. We take it that you
have more or less carefully read these pages. We
hope with interest and with some profit. You are
not bound to accept our conclusions as a whole, and
make them your own, unless your matured judg-
ment approves and because your observation and
experience confirms their truth. But if you thus ap-
prove, then we claim you are an appreciative friend
and a fighting comrade. Even should there be cer-
tain features or statements with which you do not
fully agree, you may wisely pass them over, but
do not lose the points on which you see eye to eye,
let us join heart and hand, on the agreements, then
fro to work, use them for all they are worth in the
reaching of our ideals for a saloonless Australia.
We are specially concerned and passionately
anxious for real Educational and inspirational pro-
paganda, this is the essential reason for this book-
let, it is a personal effort; in the cost of its produc-


tion we have no organisation to give of its funds in
subsidy. A few personal friends are assisting, other-
wise we bear the liability.
Our first tesue is ten thousand copies, but we
feel like the disciple of our Lord —when taking the
five barlev loaves and two fishes and saying "But
what are these among so many.'’ So it is in this mat-
ter. Wishing the book to spread throughout New
South Wales and the other States too, how few. We
would the rather send out twenty-five thousand, as
silent messages to win votes, and enlist many for
the army of Prohibitionists.
May we ask, will some warm-hearted friends
and well wishers of Prohibition, to whom God has
loaned adequate means, and good sense to use them,
come to our help so that we may speedily issue the
larger number, if there be such and willing, please
write in good time, givin- us the joy of further ser-
vice. in which you shall share the conscious bless-
ing.
In regard to this first issue we are desirous that
a large number shall go through the mails to homes
in the distant portions of the State. This will involve
considerable cost in postage. Who will help us in
that work bv a donation? Many of our workers
mav be willing to distribute the booklet either by
sale, or gift to people waiting to be influenced. We
will Madly send parcels by post at 7/6 per 100, or
4/- for 50, or 1/- per dozen to any address.
Will you join with us in this Educational pro-
paganda? Be the seed-sowers for the coming har-
vest time, when the White Flag shall float over
Saloonless Australia.
Friends and helpers in either of the suggested
wavs, may correspond either with Mr- W. J. Green.
Angel Road, Strathfield, N.S.W., or with the Rev.
Thos. Davies, Parsonage, Morpeth, N.S.W.
The End.


MaKe Cough Mixture
and Save Money.
The cost of cough mixture usually amounts to a considerable sum
in the average family; but it need not necessarily do so, as
anyone can, in a few moments, make as fine a quality Cough, Cold
and Sore Throat Remedy as money can buy. All that has to be done
to make a pint of mixture is to obtain a bottle of HEENZO (Hean’s
Essence) and dilute it with water and sweeten according to easy
direction printed on the label. A pint of ordinary remedies would
cost at least 12/-. HEENZO (Hean’s Essence) costs only 2/- (by
post, 2/3), and it is obtainable from all leading chemists and stores.
Concerning the Cough Mixture made from Heenzo REV. GEORGE
WALTERS, of the Unitarian Church, Sydney, has written:
Mr. G. W. HEAN,
Chemist.
Dear Sir, — , , ~
I have much pleasure in letting you know that when a severe cold
caught me in its grip last year, nothing was so effective in checking
and finally curing it as a free and constant use of HEENZO COUGH
MIXTURE. I have also found that HEENZO COUGH DIAMONDS
are excellent for the throat, and would not like to be without them.
Please send me a further supply of both the HEENZO and the Dia-
monds. GEORGE WALTERS.
N.B. HEENZO COUGH DIAMONDS are lozenges medicated with
Heenzo. Price, 1/- per tin.
Every Good Templar
is a Pledged Prohibitionist
Every Good Templar Lodge
is a Centre of Prohibition Activity
THEREFORE
Every Prohibitionist should assist
The Good Templar Order
BECOMING
1. A Member of a Lodge
2. A Contributor to our Grand Lodge
Mission Fund
Write the Grand Secretary Baking House, Sydney,


Independent Order of
RECHABITES
N.S.W. DISTRICT, No. 85
Temperance Benefit Society.
THE GREAT LESSON OF THE GREAT WAR IS
EFFICIENCY
INDIVIDUAL AND NATIONAL.
THE AIM OF THE RECHABITES,
PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE, IS I ~‘ rriCiejlC
THE SUPREME TEST.
An Actuarial Valuation is the supreme and all-convincing test of
the EFFICIENCY of a Friendly Benefit Society, Mr. J B. Trivett,
Government Statistician, Registrar and Actuary of Friendly
Societies, in his Valuation of the Assets and Liabilities of this
Society for the five years ended 31st Dec., 1914, reports that —
The MORTALITY RATE is 27 per cent. BELOW Standard,
The SICKNESS RATE is 1| per cent, BELOW Standard.
The INTEREST EARNED is £5 4s per cent, per annum.
The Society has a Surplus of Asset's over Liabilities amounting
to £26,614. Equal to £1 2s 7d in the f.
The SICK FUND ASSETS are worth £1 Is 6d in the f.
The FUNERAL FUND Assets are worth £1 5s 9d in the £.
The Secession Rate is very low, 34 per cent, below Standard,
the Society retaining its members to a remarkable degree.
The Valuation discloses excellent conditions generally. The
position is very healthy.
The Surplus is due to—
(1) The favourable Mortality and Sickness Rates
(2) The High Interest Earnings.
(3) Many years Careful Management.
A SPLENDID TESTIMONY TO THE EFFICIENCY OF
THE RECHABITE ORDER
Akcfiinave ! JOIN THE SOCIETY WHICH SO AMPLY
/\USUUKier& • DEMONSTRATES THAT TEMPERANCE
PRINCIPLES ARE AN AID TO EFFICIENCY.
ALL PARTICULARS GLADLY GIVEN BY
I GREENSTREET, District Secretary,
Rechabite Hall, 85 Campbell St., Sydney.
