

:::
Si
■ a
■ a
1'
■ ■■• l
■ ■■■■■■■■■■■■■Maaaaßaaaa"*
Prominent Australians
if
a a
si
aa
aa
BB
»
u
jj Jmportatu* of Qlmttperfcnum (Emeterij
aa
aa
• a
aa
■a
Si N.S.W.
si
:: ISSUED BY TRUSTEES ::
CAMPERDOWN CEMETERY
Albert Holmes, 178 King Street, Newtown
ii
aa
si
aa




(Eamper&mmt (ttfiuhtmi
jFnretmird
The Trustees are issuing this “Brief History,” and thank Mr.
M. F. King for his kindness in compiling the same. In these pages
you will find a record of many of the pioneers, but time and space
would fail to tell of the long line of devoted lives laid to rest in this
hallowed G-od’s Acre.
Many who read this booklet will be filled with a desire to visit
this sacred spot, which may be likened to a pilgrimage. It is the
desire of the Trustees to carefully safeguard and treasure the monu-
ments, to keep alive the historic sentiment, and inspire reverence
for those pioneers whose self-denying and courageous exertions
securely established the future of our Nation. The Trustees make
an earnest appeal to all readers of this booklet for their assistance
in preserving this historic cemetery, in order that the grounds may
be maintained and the remains of those wdio rest here may be left
undisturbed.
All Saints’ Day,
P. W. GLEDHILL,
Ist November, 1934.
Chairman of Trustees.
3ta SitU
Originally a portion of Camperdown Estate, the land now
known as Camperdown Cemetery was owned prior to 1848 by Sir
Maurice O’Connell. It was formerly part of Rear-Admiral Bligh’s
240 acres grant. On the 27th September, 1848, it was purchased by
the Sydney Church of England Cemetery Company. Twenty years
later (28th September, 1868), the deeds were transferred to the
Bishop of Sydney. In 1872 the land was assigned, under the
authority of the Parliament of New South Wales, to a board of
Trustees, and its affairs have been administered by a succession of
Trustees since that date.
The present Trustees are P. W. Gledhill, Esq. (Chairman),
the Rev. A. E. Rook (Chaplain), F. W. Sfoddart, Esq., and P. A.
Coghlan, Esq.
Mr. Gledhill was appointed in 1923, and has continued ever
since to discharge his duties in a most enthusiastic and competent
manner.
M.F.K.


?£arhj Auatraliana
A PLEA FOR PERPETUAL GRATITUDE.
By M. F. King.
(Hon. Secretary, the British Empire Union in Australia.)
The celebration this year of the one hundredth anniversary of
the foundation of Victoria justifies a further effort to focus attention
on the work of the first British settlers in this great continent of
Australia, and to do something in appreciative remembrance of all
they did in the early stages of its development.
Some idea of the magnitude of their task is apparent in the
fact that it was 54 years after Governor Phillip and his companions
arrived in Port Jackson before Sydney became sufficiently important
to he governed by a Municipal Council. In 1842 a mayor and six
aldermen were appointed to administer the affairs of what has now
become the most important city in the Southern Hemisphere. Real
progress may be said to have begun in that year, during which the
revenue from rates amounted to less than £l,BOO. Ninety-two years
later (19J4), that figure has grown to nearly one million pounds.
To think of the kind of life experienced during those early
years is to reveal a set of circumstances calling for intelligence,
courage, enterprise, industry, and perseverance, as the pioneers
began to convert virgin bush into a settlement for civilised men and
women. 'Without railways, tramways, motor cars, gas, electricity,
wireless, pictures and talkies, or even a road to walk on, the con-
ditions they were forced to endure surely entitled every one of them
to the admiration and gratitude of every generation of Australians
in perpetuity.
If it were possible how good a thing it would be to collect the
mortal remains of all who participated in the spade work of those
early 50 odd years, and inter them in a vast mausoleum in a con-
spicuous part of Canberra. Quite the next best thing to this would
surely be to see that the known resting places of their bodies are
preserved for all time as properly eared for shrines of remembrance.


One such place is Camperdown Cemetery, with its 12 odd acres,
just off King Street, Newtown, and less than 3 miles from Sydney’s
General Post Office. Here are the remains of nearly 18,000 early
Australians who were identified with many phases of pioneer
activity. As a municipality Sydney was merely a child 7 years old
when this land was consecrated as a Church of England burial
ground. This was in 1849, and in the following 18 years 15,734
bodies were laid to rest. In 1867 the sale of further grave sites
was prohibited by Act of Parliament, but from that time to 1920,
2,183 were interred in sites already sold.
Burials have since averaged not more than two each year.
Included in this large number of early Australians are former
representatives of the crown, the church, parliament, the navy,
army, justice, police force, etc. Some particulars of them are given
in following pages, but the Trustees desire to compile and publish
a comprehensive record at a later date, and they invite descendants
of those whose names are included herein to supply such details as
they may possess of the work of their forebears, together with
photographs of them if possible.
The Trustees desire the public to know that money is urgently
needed for the proper upkeep of this historic cemetery, and that
contributions sent to the Chairman, P. W. Gledhill, Esq., 91 King-
Street, Newtown, will be acknowledged gratefully and promptly.
BOOK OF REMEMBRANCE TO EE PUBLISHED.
Descendants of those buried in Camperdown Cemetery are
cordially invited to write to the Trustees, c/o P. W. Gledhill, Esq.
(Chairman), 91 King Street, Newtown.
3


Wm Upgal
Lieut.-Governor Sir Maurice O’Connell.
The first interment at Camperdown was that of Sir Maurice
Charles Philip O’Connell, who first arrived in Sydney in 1801) as
Lieutenant-Colonel commanding the Ist Battalion of the 7.‘lrd
Regiment. He held also a commission to act as Lieutenant-Governor
of New South Wales. Soon after his arrival in Sydney he married
Mrs. Rutland, the widowed daughter of Governor Bligh. Sir Maurice
remained iri Xew South Wales until 1814. He then served in other
parts of the world and returned to Australia in 1818 as officer com-
manding the military forces.
TOMB OF SIR MAURICE O’CONNELL
Sir Maurice O Connell, who was a Knight Commander of tlie
Guelphic Order of Hanover, administered the government from
July 12, 1846, till August 2, 1846, pending the arrival of Sir Charles
Pitzroy. He remained in New South Wales, and died on May 25,
1848. Sir Maurice O’Connell was buried in the old Town Hall
Cemetery, and soon after the consecration of the Camperdown
Cemetery his remains were re-interred there. One of Sir Maurice
O’Connell’s sons was Sir Maurice Charles O’Connell, who occupied
a prominent place in politics in Australia for many years. The
O’Connell vault at Camperdown remained unopened for 75 years,
when, in 1928, there was interred in it the remains of Mr. Richard
Murray O'Connell, grandson of Sir Maurice O’Connell, and a great-
grandson of Governor Bligh.


Arrljbialnijj’B Btstt
From left. —The Archbishop of Sydney (Dr. Mowll), Arch-
deacon Langley and Mr. P. W. Gledhill, at the grave of Mrs.
Broughton, wife of the first Bishop of Australia.
Sarah Broughton, wife of the Right Reverend William Grant
Broughton, D.D., Bishop of Australia, died on 16th September,
1849, aged 66 years, and her remains were laid to rest in the
Camperdown Cemetery. The grave is kept in order by the
Standing Committee of the Diocese of Sydney. On the day
Bishop Broughton left for England, he visited the Cemetery and
planted a tree on the grave, which is still alive.




(Eamp?rdmtm (Enuptmr
TRUSTEES.
1848-1858
1848-1868
1848-1864
1848-1868
1868-1871
1871-1884
1871-1895
1871-1914
1871-1874
1871-1883
1883-
1884-
1885-
1896-1923
1896-1907
1896-1907
1907-1928
1907-1911
1907-1911
1923-1930
1923
1930-1933 Alfred George King.
1930 F. A. Coghlan.
1932 Kev. A. B. Kook, J.P.
John Hamblin.
Thomas Chrichester James Poster,
Alferd Edward Allan.
Frederick William Stoddart, 1907-1911 (Chairman).
Robert Thomas Carter.
Richard Barzillar Trindall, 8.A., M. 8., Ch.M.
Percy Walter Gledhill, J.P., P.S.A.G. (Chairman).
Alfred George King.
Thomas Woolley.
Hon. John Campbell.
Hon. Charles Kemp.
Robert Tooth.
Eight Rev. Frederic Barker, D.T).
Christopher Rolleston, C.M.G.
Dr. William Gillett Sedgwick.
William Crane, S.M. (Chairman).
Thomas Chaplain Breillat.
Stephen Campbell Brown, M.L.A.
Captain Argnimbau, R.X.
William Tnrkington
His Honor Mr. Justice William John Foster,
Edmund William Molesworth (Chairman), J.P., M.L.A
Joseph Cook.
7


(toamatimt Olmmnttij
Extract from “Sydney Morning Herald,” January 17th, 1849.
Yesterday the new cemetery at Camperdown, the property of
the Church of England Cemetery Company, was consecrated in the
usual form by the Lord Bishop of Sydney. Previous to the cere-
mony there was a service in St. Stephen’s Church (which was
crowded), the prayers being read by the Rev. C. C. Kemp. The
proper lessons were the 28rd Chapter of Genesis, and the 4th
Chapter of the Ist Epistle to the Thessalonians, beginning at the
Ist verse. Among the clergy were nearly all the clergy residing in
Sydney and its vicinity. The Church of England Cemetery Com-
pany was established in July, 1848, from funds raised by 200
shares at £lO each. The area of the ground yesterday consecrated
comprised 12 acres 8 roods, and cost Ihe company the sum of
£1,020. It is securely fenced by a close paling fence six feet high,
and the whole will be laid out in plantation and walks (which are
now in progress), on the principle of cemeteries in England. The
soil consists principally of clay and ironstone and the surface
having a gentle fall, and being well drained, the ground is perfectly
dry and well adapted for the purpose intended. No coffins in
graves will be allowed within six feet of the surface, and graves
may be planted with shrubs and flowers, which will he maintained
by the company on the payment of a fee for that purpose. The
cemetery is situated on the right-hand side of the road to New
Town, adjoining the property of the late Mr. Charles Smith, and
about half a mile from the Toll Bar. The purchaser of a site is
entitled to a grant tantamount to Freehold possession. Subject,
however, to the rules and regulations of the company. A plan of
the cemetery is kept at the office, divided into squares of 100 feet
each, with a separate plan of each square, in which will be regis-
tered the number and size of each grave or vault, particulars of
which will be entered in the deed or grant issued. It is intended to
erect a chapel on the ground, in which will be performed that part
of the funeral service appointed thereto prior to the removal of
the corpse to the grave.
JOHN CONNELL.
Historic Connection with Kurnell.
John Connell, died 18th August, 1849, aged 90. A resident
of Sydney for 50 years. Connell received a grant of land in 1828
in the vicinity of where Captain Cook landed at (Kurnell) Botany
Ray. It is stated that the name Kurnell is a corruption by the
aborigines of the name Connell.


The Clipper Ship, Dunbar, wrecked near Sydney Heads,
August 20-21, 1857. Many of the victims ol the disaster
were buried in the Camperdown Cemetery.
Dunbar Commemoration Service, August 23, 1930


The original church of St. Ste])h<‘ri's, Newtown, was situated
in Victoria Street, and now serves as the Parish Hall. The ground
upon which it was built was the gift of Mrs. Elizabeth Bligh,
widow of Ihe Governor. The foundation stone was laid by the Right
Reverend William Grant Broughton, D.D., Bishop of Australia
(the architect being Mr. E. T. Blackett), on St. Stephen’s Day,
December 26th, 1844, and the church was also opened and dedicated
by the Bishop on Tuesday, September 9th, 1845.
The foundation stone of the present church was laid by His
Excellency the Earl of Belmore, Governor of New South Wales,
Stephen’s Church stands in Camperdown Cemetery


on Saturday, November 11th, 1871, and was opened and dedicated
by the Right Reverend Frederick Barker, Lord Bishop of Sydney,
on Thursday, April 9th, 1874. It is a beautiful specimen of Gothic
architecture, one of the masterpieces of the late E. T. Blackett. It
seats 900 people and has a peal of 20 bells, which ring for half an
hour before the services and on special occasions. The organ was
built by Walker Brothers, of England, in 1875.
The first Incumbent of St. Stephen’s was the Reverend Dr. T.
Steele, who was succeeded by the Reverend ('. C. Kemp. In 1872
the district was declared a Parish, and the first Rector was the
Reverend Robert Taylor, who was followed in that position by the
Reverend W. L. Langley (now (’anon and Archdeacon), the
Reverend H. S. Begbie (now (’anon), the Reverend J. Bidwell,
8.A., and the present Rector, the Reverend A. B. Rook.
The tomb of Sir Thomas Mitchell, who for some years was
Surveyor-General of New South Wales
COLONEL SIR THOMAS MITCHELL, Kt., D.C.L., etc.,
Surveyor-General of N.S.W.
An early colonist who rendered invaluable service to New
South Wales at a time when such services as he was professionally
qualified to give were an urgent need to the State. In 1827 he
surveyed Eastern Australia and discovered the Namoi and Gwydir
Rivers. His valuable explorations helped towards the opening up
of new country.
Sir Thomas Mitchell was at the time of his death Surveyor-
General of Now South Wales. The funeral cortege reached practi-
cally from Carthona, Darling Point (Sir Thomas Mitchell’s
residence), to the gates of the cemetery, and was the largest, save
William Charles Wentworth’s, that had ever been seen in Sydney,


®ljf “Smtbar” ®nmb
Historic Anniversary—Dunbar Commemoration Service, 22nd August, 1981
The portion of the old cemetery which attracts the most general
interest is that which includes the remains of the victims of the
wreck of the “Dunbar," which occurred at Sydney Heads 77 years
ago. Some of the bodies recovered from the wreck were recognised
by relatives, who arranged for private interment, but the remains
not identified were buried in a common grave. The Government of
the day arranged for the burial, and the funeral procession, one of
the largest ever seen in Sydney, did not reach the cemetery until
after sunset. Dense crowds lined the route of the procession, and
it is stated that the officiating clergyman (the Rev. C. C. Kemp),
concluded the reading of the service by artificial light. The grave
contains the bodies, or portions of the bodies, of ‘l2 people—some
from the “Dunbar" and others from the wreck of the “Catherine
Adamson.” The tomb bear's the following inscription:—
“Within this tomb were deposited, by direction of the Govern-
ment of Xew South Wales, such remains as could be discovered of
the passengers and crews who perished in the ships ‘Dunbar’ and
‘Catherine Adamson,’ the former of which was driven ashore and
foundered when approaching the entrance to Port Jackson on the
night of August 20, 18A7, and the latter, after entering the port,
on October 24 of the same year."
Within the enclosure is a separate grave, in which Captain
Steane, R.X., a passenger by the “Dunbar," was buried.
Not far from the large tomb are separate graves of members of
the Waller family, who were victims of the wreck, and of William
Butler ’Williams, a midshipman of the “Dunbar." The former is
a square sandstone monument, on the top of which is a carving of
the hull of the “Dunbar.” The inscription states that the wreck
occurred immediately under the signal staff at South Head.
One of the anchors and chains from the “Dunbar" were
presented to the Trustees by the. Valid use Municipal Council. They
were placed alongside the “Dunbar" tomb, and were unveiled by
Bishop Kirkby, Bishop Administrator of the Diocese of Sydney, at
the Annual Commemoration Service on the H)th August, HIT!.
In a remote portion of the cemetery, a headstone marks the
grave of another victim of the “Dunbar"—John Ridley Jerram.


Natml JfontUtea
For many yearn the Camperdown Cemetery was used for naval
interments, the most notable naval grave being that of Sir James
Everard Horne. Bart., who was captain of 11.M.5. “Calliope” (a pre-
decessor of the famous “Calliope” which escaped from the Samoan
hurricane). He was senior officer on the Australian Station, and he
died in 18i).'h There are also buried in the cemetery officers and
men of other well-known warships which served in Australian
waters, including the “Challenger,” “Brisk,” “Esk,” “Havannah,”
“Torch,” “Rattlesnake,” “Pandora,” “Cordelia,” “Curaeoa,”
“Salamander,” “Electra” and “Falcon.”
A monument erected by the
officers and crew of H.M.S.
“Challenger” in memory of
their shipmates, departed this
life 1866 to 1870, being reno-
vated by naval ratings from
H.M..A.S. “ Penguin.”
BOOK OF REMEMBRANCE TO BE PUBLISHED.
Descendants of those buried in Camperdown Cemetery are
cordially invited to write to the Trustees, c/o P. W. Gledhill, Esq.
(Chairman), 91 King Street, Newtown.


ilufoge iomritljnntp
His Daughter’s Sad Romance.
A romantic story surrounds a grave which contains the remains
of Judge Donnithorne and his daughter, Eliza Emily. Judge
Donnithorne was for many years governor of the Mint and a Judge
in the Honourable East India Company’s Bengal Civil Service, and
settled in Australia on his retirement. He died on May 25, 1852,
at which time Miss Donnithorne was 24 years of age. Cambridge
Hall, which formerly stood in what is now King Street, Newtown,
near L’Avenue, was their residence, and Miss Donnithorne con-
tinued to live there after her father’s death. The story is told that
the lady was engaged to be married, and arrangements had been
completed for the celebration of the event. The wedding breakfast
was set in the old-fashioned dining-room, and the arrival of the
bridegroom was anxiously awaited.
Hour after hour passed, and eventually the guests departed.
The bridegroom was never again heard of. Miss Donnithorne
decided not to leave the old residence again, or admit any visitors.
The main entrance wax kept closed by a heavy chain. The wedding
breakfast-table was not disturbed, and remained as it was until
after Miss Donnithorne’s death on May 20, 1886. It is said that all
her communications with the outside world between the time the
wedding was arranged to take place and her death were carried on
by Miss Donnithorne through the servants, the only privileged
visitors being the lady’s doctor and solicitor.
MAJOR LOCKYER, H.M. 57th Regiment.
Historic Inscription on Tomb. Founder of Western Australia.
As Commandant at King George’s Sound, he hoisted the
British flag on January 21st, 1827, in assertion of the first official
claim by the Imperial Government to British possession over the
whole continent of Australia. He died on June 10th, 1860.
HARPIST TO EMPEROR NAPOLEON.
Not far from the Dunbar tomb is the grave of Mr. Nicholas
Charles Bochsa (harpist to the Emperor Napoleon), over which is
a monument erected by Madame Anna Bishop, the eminent operatic
singer. The monument bears the following inscription :
“Sacred to the memory of Nicholas Charles Bochsa, Esq., who
died January 6th, 1856, aged 65 years. This monument is erected
in sincere devotedness by his faithful friend and pupil, Anna
Bishop.
“Mourn him —mourn his harp—strings broken.
Never more shall float such music;
None could sweep the lyre like him.’
15


Di. C. Anderson (President of the Anthropological Society) unveiling
on 22nd August, 1931, the monument over the grave of the Aboriginal
Mogo,” ■who died in 1850.
ABORIGINAL GRAVES.
Mogo, an aboriginal, who died in 1850. Grave covered with
shells from an aboriginal kitchen
William Perry, an aboriginal
midden, at Pittwater.
who died in Pitt Street, Sydney,
in 1849.
Wandelina. Died 7th June,
George Papas.
1860. aged 18 years.
REMOVALS FROM OTHER CEMETERIES.
Pull’s Grave, brought from
Sydney. Headstone dated 1815.
The Tvellick family, from the
The Glissold family, from the
Henry Stndwiek Green, from
the Town Hall Burial Grounds,
Devonshire Street Cemetery.
Devonshire Street Cemetery.
Devonshire Street Cemetery.
Bissland family, from the Devonshire Street Cemetery.
Captain Putland, of H.M.S, “Porpoise,” who had been interred
in a vault under old St. Phillip’s Church, Sydney (which was
demolished in 1857) was removed to this cemetery.
Boulton family, from the Devonshire Street Cemetery.
16


GOVERNMENT HOUSE.
Children of Governor Denison.
Eliza Hazeldene, a servant at Government House. Died 23rd
May, 1850, aged 30 years. Headstone erected by Sir Charles Fitzroy,
Governor of N.S.W,
BANK OFFICIALS.
James Sea. Manager, Union Bank, Hunter Street, 1850.
William Roberts, Manager of Bank of New South Wales,
Penrith. Died 3rd January, 1883.
Alexander Hart, Manager of Sydney Branch of the Union
Bank of Australia.
WIVES OF GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS.
Matilda Hill, wife of W. R. Gullick, afterwards Government
Printer of N.S.W.
Mary Margaret Woolley, wife of John Woolley, D.C.L. Oxon,
Principal of Sydney University.
Lady Jamison, widow of John Jamison, M.D., R.N., K.G.V.
NOTED DOCTORS.
Dr. Sedgwick. Died 17th August, 1895, aged 74 years.
Dr. West.
John Loftus Hartwell, Staff Surgeon.
Bartholomew O’Brien, M.D. Died 18th January, 1870.
Joseph Burgon, M.D., M.R., C.S.L.E., 1864.
MILITARY GRAVES
William Reece, Sergeant, 11th Regiment. Died 12th December,
1850.
Samuel Gonnerman Dalgety, 45th Regiment. Died 15th July,
1852.
Captain I. Hindley H. Gall, of H.M. 99th Regiment. Died 13th
August, 1854, aged 36.
Captain G. 11. Fitzgerald, H.M. 37th Regiment.
Lieut.-Colonel Charles Lewis, of H.M. 80th Regiment, who
served gallantly for 40 years —Peninsular and Moodkee-Ferizeshwa
and Sabroan.
George Henry Bacchus, of H.M. 7th Regiment of Dragoons.
Commandant of Sarawak Rangers and Captain of the Permanent
Artillery of N.S.W. Died 28th January, 1878.
Captain Watson Augustus Steel, of H.M. 89th Regiment on
MAORIS
Acouti Jack (11th July, 1853), Billy Boy (22nd October, 1851),
natives from New Zealand.


CONSULS.
Augustus Dreutlcr, Consul for Bremen and Lubeck. Died
10th April, 1860, aged 46 years.
Simon Wilkinson, of Boston, C.S.A., Acting Consul of America
Died at \orth Shore.
CHURCH OFFICERS, ETC.
Rev. Thomas Wall Bodenham, Chaplain to Immigrants. Died
18')].
Thomas Clarke, for more than 50 years Sexton of the Cemetery
and Verger of St. Stephen's Church. Died 19th May, 1906, aged
87 years.
Joseph Cook, Editor of the “Australian Churchman,” an
Anglican 'Church paper published during the seventies of last
century.
Lucy Harriett Kemp, first wife of Rev. Charles C. Kemp, first
incumbent of St. Stephen’s Church, Newtown. She was the daughter
of Rev. Charles George, Vicar of Wicham Bonont, Essex.
Rev. John Cooch Gryll, M.A.. incumbent of Holy Trinity
Church, Dawes' Point, and Canon of St. Andrew’s Cathedral. Died
241 h April, 1854, aged 61.
William Toogood, whose widow became the second wife of
liev. C. C, Kemp, (irst Incumbent of St. Stephen’s Church, Newtown.
Thomas Goodman, Inspector of Church of England Schools.
Diocese of Sydney. Died 2nd May, 1856, aged 26.
M.’sL.A., M.’sL.C. AND GOVERNMENT OFFICERS.
William Crane, Stipendiary Magistrate, and for 50 years was
connected with St. Stephen's ( hurch. Trustee of the Cemetery
1871-1914.
Stephen Styles Goold, M.L.A., Alderman of City of Sydney
Died 28th August, 1876.
Robert Baylee Reeves, Officer of Survey Office, Sydney. Died
11th January, 1867.
Jaimes Kidd, Superintendent of the Botanic Gardens, Sydney.
Died 15th February, 1867. aged 67 years.
E. W. Eosbery, Inspector-General of Police.
John Me Eerie, Inspector-General of Police for N.S.W. Died
6th October', 1874.
Thomas Watson. Assistant Commissary-General. Died 9th June
185(1.
William Augustas Mills, Police Magistrate and late Commis-
sioner of Police. Died 24th April, 1851, aged 58.
lion. Charles Kemp, M.L.C. Died 25th August, 1864, aged 51.
Edward Broadhurst, K.C., father' of N.S.W. Bar.
Daniel Nesbit Munro, Marine Surveyor. Died 28th June, 1851
Edward Rogers, for many years Clerk of the Peace in Sydney
Died sth April, 1888.
Judge Milford.
William Cummings, of H.M. Customs


OTHER HISTORIC GRAVES.
Ono Earnshaw, founder of the Ancient Order of Foresters, and
sent by the District Court in England. He was the first Chief
Ranger and first District Chief. Died 4th October, 1850, aged 54.
John Evan, a bridge builder. Died Kent Street, 25th April,
1854.
Children of well-known Macarthnr family. Died 1852-5.
Family of Robert Tooth.
Family of Edwin Tooth.
Ernestine, eldest daughter of Ernest Vicomte de Gatge St.
Jean (French Count). Died 29th October, 1804.
Eofe family.
Moffett family.
Elizabeth Foster, who immigrated to this colony in 1818.
Charles Farmer, sixth son of Samuel Farmer, of Worcester-
shire, England. Drowned 14th August, 1858, aged 22.
Thomas Barker.
George Reck, for some time leader of the orchestra at the
Princess Royal Theatre, Sydney, Died 20th September, 1863.
Elizabeth Thompson. Born Ireland 1758. Died 6th August,
1863, aged 105 years.
Moore family.
John and Rebecca Hordern.
Thomas Woolley family.
Holt family.
Thomas Gilbert, youngest son of Anthony and Harriett
Hordern. Died 29th August, 1859.
Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Byron, an Armour Bearer of
Ireland, who died 30th December, 1857. In Latin: OB HI cal. Jan.
A.D. MDCCCLVHI.
Algernon Edward Dumaresq.
Children of Sir Henry Parkes, K.C.M.G
Kingsmill Abbott family.
Coghlan family.
Russell family, of Kent Street, Sydney, 1852
Thomas Rougher, of Hie Volunteer Fire Co.
John Street, resident of Bathurst. Died 13th April, 1853, aged
72. Grandfather of Sir Philip Street, K.C.M.G., Lieut.-Governor of
N.SAY.
McLaren family.
Dawson family. Sydney. Sydney’s first ironworker
Janies Barlow, late Engineer, Gas Co.
The parents of Sir Joseph Carruthers.
Eliza Thompson (formerly Davison), daughter of George
Suitor. First white child to be born at Baulkham Hills on 30th
July, 1801.
Two magnificent vaults with coats of arms bearing the surname
of three famous historical families. The sandstone vault bears the


Rev. A. E. Rook, Chaplain of the Cemetery
Rector of St. Stephen’s Church
20


inscription Dumaresq, and the other, a granite vault, hears the
names of Macleay and Harrington. Lord Gordon, son of the 10th
Martinis of Huntley, is laid to rest within this enclosure.
SHIPPING GRAVES
(apart from Naval and “Dunbar” Graves)
Robert Ashford, Third Engineer of P. & 0. S.N. Co. Steamer
‘Geelong,” accidently killed 10th December, 1867.
Eltaft Gull, Second Officer. P. & 0. S.N, Co. Steamer “Bom-
bay.” Died 22nd May. 1866.
Captain James Piggin, of cutter “James Amelia.” Died 21st
October, 1849.
Captain William T. Fowler.
Died Pith July, 185:5
Captain Thomas Watson, of
hour Master and Pilot of Port
Randwick, 4th October, 1879.
the Marine Board, formerly Har-
Jackson. Died at Cook’s Lodge,
Francis Peat, wife of George
River.
Peat, of Peat 's Ferry, Hawkesbury
Captain George John Kelly,
Pilot of Port Jackson Heads.
John Reeder, Pilot, Sydney Heads. Died 29th July, 1857.
John Charles Hawkes, who was drowned in the wreck of the
Catharine Adamson off North Head in the discharge of his duty as
a Pilot on 24th October, 1857. It is interesting to record that he
was one of the first to discover the wreck of the Dunbar in August
of the same year.
Thomas Raine, a well-known sea captain
Stephen Sampson, late Chief Officer of the ship “White
Adder. ’ ’
Charles Webb Cox, Captain of the schooner “Redjaeket.”
Drowned off Richmond River, 29th November, 1862, aged 28 years.
Henry Francis Baird, Surgeon in steamer “Antelope.” Died
20th November, 18515, aged 24.
Christopher William Finlay, whose father was wrecked at
King’s Island. Bass Strait, in the ship “Cataraque,” August, 1845.
Benjamin Shaw, Assistant Harbour Master.
Captain James Fanner, of Australian Steam Navigation Co.
Lucy Ellen Wilson and Martha Hudson, both of whom were
burned to death on board the barque “Oregon,” on her- voyage
from San Francisco on 29th October, 1861.
Thomas Saunders, who fell overboard from the barque “Sun-
shine” on her voyage from Chile on 51 h March, 1866.


P. W. Gledhill, Esq., J.P., F.S.A.G.
Chairman of Cemetery Trustees


(Eamperbmmt
Annual (Hmmm'mnratnm
Lest We Forget.”
"irntbar (Eontmmorattmt”
Each year, on the Saturday nearest to the 20th August, a
commemorative gathering is held at the “Dunbar” Tomb in the
cemetery at 3 p.m., when special addresses are given by prominent
citizens.
Untmttbraure Wn y k
Service of Remembrance.
A Service of Remembrance of those laid to rest in the cemetery
is held on All Saints' Day, Ist November, at 3 p.m., in St. Stephen’s
Church, within the cemetery.
The week, including “All Saints’ Day,” is Remembrance Week,
when the Trustees seek your practical help, by visiting this sacred
cemetery, by weeding, painting and attending to the graves, and
by being present, or represented, at the Remembrance Service.
You would then be assisting the Trustees in preserving this God’s
Acre as a hallowed spot of affectionate remembrance.
BOOK OF REMEMBRANCE TO BE PUBLISHED.
Descendants of those buried in Camperdown Cemetery are
cordially invited to write to the Trustees, c/o P. W. Gledhill, Esq.
(Chairman), 91 King Street, Newtown.
“ The Trustees would cordially welcome you if you were (o visit
this historic Cemetery.”
P. \V. GLEDHILL,
Chairman of Trustees.
91 King Street, Newtown,
A.D. 1934.
