

I ’ROOFS
NO EDUCATION.
MADAME C.'
COOK.
THREE IN NUMBER.
“Private Teachers and Teachings. —Yesterday evening at the Odd-
fellows’ Hall, in Elizabeth-street, Madame Charles Cook delivered the first
of a series of lectures on Teaching, dividing her subject into three heads—
Manners, Accomplishments, and Literature. There was a numerous and
attentive audience—one that appeared cordially to appreciate both the
matter of the lecture and the mode of its delivery. In the course of her
address (much of which was viva voce), Madame Cook gave many shrewd
and amusing hints on the subject of education, and especially in its more
practical aspect as regards family life. Several of the .suggestions to parents
were decidedly good, and calculated to remedy the present numerous defects
of “ private teachings.” The entertainment concluded with a clever render-
ing of one of Mrs. Caudle’s lectures, which gave great amusement.”—
Sydney Morning Herald, September 1, 1870.
Sglmfg :
LEE & LOSS, “ EXCELSJOR ” STEAM ITHNTIKG WOEKS,
2111 & 233 CASTLEEEAGII STREET.




PROOFS
NO EDUCATION.
MADAME C. COOK.
THREE IN NUMBER.
“Private Teachers and Teachings. —Yesterday evening at the Odd-
fellows’ Hall, in Elizabeth-street, Madame Charles Cook delivered the first
of a series of lectures on Teaching, dividing her subject into three heads—
Manners, Accomplishments, and Literature. There was a numerous and
attentive audience—one that appeared cordially to appreciate both the
matter of the lecture and the mode of its delivery. In the course of her
address (much of which was viva voce), Madame Cook gave many shrewd
and amusing hints on the subject of education, and especially in its more
practical aspect as regards family life. Several of the suggestions to parents
were decidedly good, and calculated to remedy the present numerous defects
of “private teachings.” The entertainment concluded with a clever render-
ing of one of Mrs. Caudle’s lectures, which gave great amusement.”—
Sydney Morning Herald, September 1, 1876.
solmra:
LEE & ROSS, “EXCELSIOR” STEAM PRINTING WORKS,
231 & 233 CASTLKREAGH STREET.




PREFACE
Query, I ask, can there be a good foundation when a man lies
under a mistake—wilfully 1 And such petty mistakes. I like the
man or woman, whatever be their circumstances, to say yes or no.
One cannot be compelled to do anything, much less support a
periodical or book that may be diametrically against theix
principles. To say you are out when the party knows they are
speaking to you, is a meanness, and a great want of education.
In Jersey they get out of such difficulty by saying “ Monsieur est
invisible .” This, to my kind supporters, is my last effort; there-
fore, it will introduce many little colonial matters and v> onderful
anecdotes, without, I hope, passing the rules of society. All that
happened has been in canvassing for this little Avork: If it has
not come up to expectation, at all events, ’tis a bad man avlio is not
missed Avhen he has gone to his last home, and it must be a very
bad book that does not give some ucav ideas.
E. F. COOK.
39 Cumberland Street.




PROOFS OF NO EDUCATION.
In these numbers I have eschewed everything that did not belong
to education. If in this lam truthful, surely it cannot be offen-
sive. The matter I put forth to prove and argue is as open for
one as another, and if this little work does nought else than set
some of the rising generation thinking, I have attained as much as
anyone else who thrusts their opinions —nolens volens. Enemies
can do me no harm ! Being a creature of the past, a friend to
education in every view ; passionately fond of young people;
taking personal pride in their training, amusements and welfare,
I wish to disabuse their minds not only from personalities, but
from colonialisms, which'destroy their Christian professions; old
womens tittle-tattle, and an idea that everything in the tadpole
specie is pre-eminent in the present day amongst us. Who are
the ] Answer—Oh, nobodies ! Then comes tales which
have passed through so many series, they cannot be retailed at all.
Every country, from the beginning, will be found to resemble this
or any other. The cream is never allowed to be wasted, but the
scum is scattered all about, it may go anywhere. Of course, I have
too much respect not to weigh every word I am now writing, and
like all persons who have lived amongst the Saxons any time, I
have a profound respect for 1—a —w, and I fearlessly say with the
exception of Her Majesty’s representative—could those long-timed
officials enjoy the same positions and emoluments in Europe, they
would go by the next mail. We have these last few years had
ample examples of gentlemen snapping, snatching, walking off,
before even their compeers actually understood what was going on.
In fact before the telegram informs us how they looked in their
Court uniform. See how unkind (though a Christian country) the
mere idea of the fact! Some are so vexed that they have been
outstripped, that the fostered individual was stigmatised as an un-
clean, unwashed, member. W T hy ? Because, until a certain number
of autocrats and old servants of the Crown have passed away, and


the rising native-born Australian is permitted sans animus, to rise
equal to the necessities of this beautiful quarter (nearly) of the
world, without being fettered, frightened, and threatened, tilings
will remain as they are.
It is a fact that Europeans cannot help seeing the rising genera-
tion of this very country is not even surpassed by the contem-
porary new race—Americans. Again, have any of you ever
noticed when some casual remark has been made to your children
by some patronising friend, such as “ one can see, my little man,
you are English; ” how disgusted the boy looks, and with a
scornful lip retorts, “lam an Australian ! I was born here ! I
don’t want to be English ! ” Qu’est ce que cela vent dire ? Simply
the language of the pati’iot born. I am what I am. A branch
which, if well-trained, not suffocated and transplanted into old
nurseries with contracted beds,—-when my roots expand they be
not cut off, instead of spreading, and if I can only rise with a
straight stem, without being pruned so that I may take this shape
or that, I will make my branches so tower over all without respect
to specie, indigenous or foreign, my country is the country f r the
futurity. We are the future and the meaning of that problem the
circle. We commence the new world, and all men in future ages
shall say when all is decaying —“ They rise to fulfil their Master’s
words, eternity, eternal, sans commencement, sans Jin."
These sentiments are not the emanation of fiction ; looking over
the list, you will see masse en masse with the exception of nineteen
names. The first masse are the staple of the city, wholesale houses
and tradesmen ; not one that did it out of policy. They were
strangers. As a rule their answers ran pretty much the same—
“ If it does not do any good, it cannot do any harm, and education
is open to much argument.” The othei‘ masse were gentlemen of
education, young and ambitious; all were gentlemen in high
government positions, and understood the task I was undertaking
to be a very ungrateful one ; as unprofitable as it was ungracious ;
for I particularly specified I was only publishing a limited number
to introduce the subjects I have professed to be mistress of. Now
to some of the responses I met with which will clearly prove what
I said in my first number —“ Any fool can make money ; a tailor
can beautify the body ; an university cannot store the intellect.”
There is a grand specimen of architecture in the midst of us ; it
will remind the rising generation of the sketches in Harrison
Ainsworth’s work, “ Old Eondon.” 'Well, into it I dived ; a stout,
comely, respectable old gent received me, courteously ! “ Well,
ma’am, you call on Monday, and my son will put his name down,
no doubt, for six copies ; you see, I never learned to read or write
English, therefore, you will excuse (reciprocal bows). The
visit was renewed, according to request. The son was a fat man ;
not as respectable looking as his father. Old Gent: “ This is the
lady I spoke to you of.” Young Fat Man: “Well, what do


you want 1 ” “ Are you going to put your name down to a
colonial,” Arc., Arc. 1 (Here, I must mention, old gent was literally
shovelling coin and paper money in an iron safe). Fat Man :
“ We do not want books ; we have no time to read them ; you had
better go somewhere else.” There was no reply to such a dismissal.
But, readers, have you noticed that fat men, as a rule, are money
grubbers ; and their head, like their well-cased carcase, all blubber 1
I left York Street, and came out at an association I once belonged
to ; looking at the name, like in the Old Identity, I recollected it
as being one of a clique about twenty-five yeai's ago \ the
“ respectable ” part of the community. I entered this building
society ;“ Is the manager in?” Small man about nineteen years
old, done up to talk to ladies, vei’y fair, small featured; I thought
I x’ecognised the likeness to his father ; he, of course, coxxld not
waste his voice on a lady of a certain age, so he pointed with his
pen to a gentleman writing—the xxsual begging phrase, he politely
said he was “ not in circumstances,” Arc., and added, “ that is the
party, (pointing to the small, light haired boy) ; the words wex'e
scarcely uttered, when this scion of John Kixox put up his little
loquacious, pert head, and said —“ I like to see you if you come to
pay interest, or if you want us for business ; I cannot bear to see
■women coming into our office begging ; we have nothing to give
away.” Poor me, I waited till this mercantile effusion exhausted
itself, then bowed, saying—“ I came, thinking you would subscribe
to anything on manners.” Emerging out of Scilla, I fell light
into Charyhdis. A x’eal Mac “ Please to —, Arc., Arc.
“ Do you know, ma’am, I belong to the league 1 ” and, as if he
really thought to astonish me, continued without interruption :
“ Education, ma’am ; State aid, ma’am ; religioxxs libei’ty, ma am ;
none of your party, designing works ; I’ll not pledge myself to a
pig in a poke; you can send me a number, and if it agi’ees with
my ideas I shall take it.” I bowed very much ala Miss La Creyy
in “ Nicholas Nickleby,” and seeing an immense telescope pose in
the anti-room which divided this important educational phenomena
from the shop of gold and silver, I pretended to be looking through
it; turning sharply round, said, “ I see the moon, I fear you are
moon struck • ” and left to seek a fairer field. Alas ! I must have
alighted that day unwittingly into a poorhouse, for twenty-nine
consecutive answers were made —“ really, I cannot,” Arc., Arc. All
wealthy, well-to-do people, who would give to anything but a free
enlightenment on the ways of the present day j they happened to
get on well, so why should you bother them ? Goold’s china ware-
house, an old establishment; Long’s, the wine stoi’e ; Buckley, of
the Waterloo stoi’e, and twenty such really old and wealthy estab-
lishments, point blank took brevity to be the soul of wit, and said
“No ! ” in an extraordinary repulsive manner. It put me much
in mind of a German proverb, for, like Uriah Keep I was so very
mild and ’umble in my demand, and the gruff grudging replies


brought to mind Mach dick zum schaff im spass, list du der wolfe
frass, (make yourself a sheep in jest, and the wolf will eat you up
in earnest). Some, I feel confident, tried to scare me.
There were those asked who never give to anything ; whether
to further the wants of intellect, country, or creatures? * Earth’s
grubbers ; how these people get patronized when there are many
young men just starting in life, who, if they could get a carriage
or two to call at their door, would, 1 am sure, be more con-
scientious in their dealings, is a puzzle to me.
Next day I found myself vis-a-vis to a land porpoise, well footed,
well gloved. Oh, he was a real native specimen of fungus —weeds
—that had been taken up by dame fortune, his speech comely, his
elocution rather satirical (I suppose he thought I did not know
Avhat education and manners were; I, on the other hand, knew
that he did know the benefit of both ; though he feigned to speak
superciliously of the former, and the latter was ignored par fashion ;
it was quite evident to me and everyone else), his outfit superb,
his carnage both in attitude and brougham—large. He is what
in Europe, they think the Australians are ; he listened ; he ques-
tioned ; he humm’d; he ha’ad ; he sat and I stood ; he cogitated
and I thought—Monsieur, you are astonishing me, you think I
shall put you in print and see if your friends will recognise you.
At last this magnanimous Bede Vaughan in his own estimation,'
said, If you like to send it to me you can, Ido not like to refuse
a woman.” I pertly answered, “Pray do not mention it; I’ll not
send you a copy ; if you want one, they are only to be had at my
residence, because it is not every one I wish to have it. I reside
at Versailles!” He looked at me, asked what I knew about
Versailles 1 “Oh ! do you not know where it is 1 ” replied I, “it
is the fag end of Cumberland Street,” He thought in his turn
that old lady is poking fun at me. I fared pretty well that day.
It struck me all at once Christmas was coming, and illustrations
are always pleasing; I will go to an artist; I will write the
tales, and he shall do the sketches—being a direct pupil of
Cruikshank’s—and from little causes great fun may arise. There-
fore, I have shown how I have been treated in a small way, and I
hope to treat them in return, quid pro quo, by publishing six
fairy stories, illustrated, to be named thus ;
Ist. “ The Red Rovers want-ed to be the Chiefs of the Isle.”
2nd. “ Nursery Rhymes,”
“ A little song,
Not very long,
About our Sally
And her dilly-dally.”
3rd. “The Lords of the Manor, and the Elves of Windsor.”


4th. “ Fairy Plenty Scattering her Christmas Gifts amongst
the Darwinian Tribe.”
sth. “ Nursery Rhymes: Park-Lark-Robinson-Crusoe all
went out to Dinner.”
Gth. “ The Ups and Downs, the Longs, the Shorts of a New
Country, by Peregrine Pickle.”
The above stories shall be strictly historical;
The way they are written—very methodical;
And who shall complain of the genealogical,
When the tree is anything but mythological ?
This is the end. Disappointment sinks the heart of man. The
appended list will show “the turf” is not the only place where
defaulters are to be found. Each person wrote down their names
to a work of three numbers, which, as stated, was not a party
work. Some refused taking it, and showed a book they had just
received, price Is.—thick book ; a good shilling’s worth if it were
only for m aste paper to curl his beard. Another “ wit ” refused it,
stating he “ thought there was nothing to pay; I should like to see
him at a “ dead lock,” when Government had not voted monies for
the public service, and so on. One consolation is left for the
authoress ; she has three hundred copies she can afford to circulate,
giving, as she promised in the first numbers—Honor to whom
it is due.
I was very astonished when the first number had been presented
to gentlemen, to hear them exclaim—“ Is this a number ? Three
shillings for this 1 1 will not take it; it is an imposition ! ”
First, the matter is one that has taken any amount of trouble to
work up, so as to be made palatable. Being a dry and well-worn
subject, it is, in itself, a consideration far more difficult to write
pleasantly on than a work of fiction. Secondly, being all colonial,
it is very much more expensive than the readers are aware. Hav-
ing written the foregoing lectures, I at once proceeded to the
printers, and ascertained their price to produce the pamphlet in a
neat and creditable style, both to myself and themselves, irres-
pective as to how I should succeed in obtaining subscriptions.
However, I feel disappointed to find it is quantity, and
not quality, that was expected. Should I ever venture again, I
shall know what is marketable. One thing certain, anyone can
see I am not afraid of argument—plainness of speech—withal
mannerly; and let all be reminded—valuable goods take little
room ; small people, as a rule, are consequential; and last, though
not least, quality is better than quantity. Good articles always
fetch a price, and the first in the market command the highest
figure ; therefore, as I am the first lady here who is so bold as to
take a standing, il faut payer pour voire moulon.


The following are the hona fide subscribers to my lectures :
Hon. Lady Robinson (2 copies)
Mrs. Cuthbert
Mrs. Taggart (2 copies)
Mrs. Steadman
Mrs. Fay
Mrs. Bardsley
Mrs. Fortescue
Mrs. Ward
Mr. R. S. Hall, Government Office
Mr. M. H. Stephen
Mr. W. Russell, Pitt Street
Hon. Lucas
Benjamin Palmer, Esq., Mayor
Mr. H. Millar, Bank
Rev. E. Rogers
H. Prince, Esq.
Mr. T. H. Mulholland
Aleck Longmuir, Esq. (2 copies)
Allerton, Esq.
Mr. A. Levi
Dr. Alloway
Mr. W. S. Friend
Mr. E. C. Haniland, Queen’s Store
Mr. R. Sim, Flour Mills
Mr. Langford, Grafton Wharf
Mr. McNeigh, Queen’s Store
Mr. Brenand, Queen’s Store
Mr. Donnel, Queen s Store
Mr. E. Chester
Mons. Joubert
Mr. Goodchap, Government Office
Mr. T. C. Neild, Building Society
Mr. T. W. Cliffe
C. Holle, Esq.
Mr. T. S. Bagot (S. M. H.)
Mr. Caffercy, King Street
Mr. Hogan, King Street
Messrs. Alderson & Son
Mr. Hannigan, Wine Depot
Mr. Curtis (Teale)
Pro. Conor, Esq.
Smith Jones, Esq.
Mr, McEleveny, House Agent
Ellis, Esq., Elizabeth Street
Mr. A. Deane, Architect
Mr. G. Wigram Allen
Mr. Robert Oliver, Solicitor
Mr. L. Potter, Govt. Printing Office
C. Thomas Boyd, Esq.
Mr. Collins, George Street
Thomas Wilton, Esq.
Mark Spence, Esq.
Mr, W. A. Simpson, George Street
Joseph Dole, Esq.
Messrs. Callaghan & Co., George St.
Messrs. Fletcher & Son, George St.
G. L. Carter, George Street
Mr. George Myers, Millers Point
Pearce, Esq.
Gordon, Esq.
Mr. Thornby, Architect
Cantor, Esq.
These signed, but refused taking, under the following plea
Mr. Alger (too small for the money; just subscribed to a large book-
only Is.)
Mr. Nash, Queen’s Store (put his name down; did not know he would have
to pay.)
Mr. Hill, Queen’s Store (could not recollect putting his name down.)
Mr. W. H. Duncan, C.HJtook one number; disapproved of the idea; tendered
for the one number.)
Mr. T. Redgrave (in an offhand manner said—“no money.”)
Mr. T. J. Warrington (acted likewise).
Mr. Clark of Harrison, Jones and Develyn (oblivious of his own hand-
writing. )
Ten others, too small to notice, and too unknown to publish
their names.


CHORUS.
I promised honor to all autographs in my possession. Notes are
the furore in the present clay, therefore, gentlemen whose liberality
has surpassed all divination, as a caution to all ladies who are
ladies (not of a generation growth), pray do not throw yourself and
your money away unless you are as old as I (I refer you to an
anecdote in the second number), and as improvident as I am. 1
do not regret the step, though I have been necessarily exposed to
much annoyance. 1 feel I have done good, at all events; you have
the ideas of a party who understands and admires much in the
country. The cat, if roughly treated, hisses and scratches. The
dog, if teazed, will bark and bite. The worm turns upon its
antagonist ; et moi, why do you expect me to be, in these argu-
mentative times, any more or less than the cat, the dog, and the
worm.


